CHRIST'S VICTORY OVER THE DRAGON: OR Satan's Downfall: SHOWING The glorious
Conquests of our SAVIOVR for his poor CHVRCH, against the greatest Persecutors.

In a plain and pithy Exposition of the twelfth Chapter of S. JOHN'S REVELATION.

Delivered in sundry Lectures BY That late faithful Servant of God, THOMAS
TAILOR Doctor in Divinity, and Pastor of Aldermanbury LONDON.

Perfected and finished a little before his death.

Melior causa est little, qui Diabolum persequentem fugiunt, quim qui praeeuntem
sequuntur: quia utilius est, eum bostem habere quam principem. August.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. DAWLMAN, at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL, and others the worthy Inhabitants of Aldermanbury
Parish LONDON: All happiness both in Earth and Heaven.
CHRISTIAN FRIENDS:
I Am (I suppose) a stranger to most of you, unless peradventure you took
notice of me in preaching the Sermon at the Funeral of your worthy Doctor the
Author of this Book: and so I hope you will conceive, that I present not this
Work unto you in mine own name, but only in behalf of the Widow, whose
modesty permits her not to come in Print. To you, her worthy Friends and
Neighbors, she desires to have these Labors dedicated, as to whom she
judges them most properly due: and wishes you the same profit and comfort in
reading, as did her dear Husband in preaching. By faith, Abel being dead, yet
Hebr. 11. 4.
speaks, faith the Apostle to the Hebrews: By faith also, and these works of
Faith, does your late worthy Pastor yet speak unto you: and here while you
read, you may imagine, he still calls to Faith, Obedience, Repentance,
Growth in the Knowledge and Fear of GOD, with all courage, wisdom,
humility, heavenly-mindednes, and unblameableness of living. His reward is now
with the Lord, whose he was, and whom he served. His Name in the Church sweet
and precious, and ever will be while a Church remains on earth, to worship GOD
aright, and to distinguish Believers from unbeleevers, or misbeleevers. The
Instruction is yours, to follow his holy Doctrine and Example. And happy shall
every Soul be, which heedfully follows The Clowd of Witnesses. Hebr. 12. 1.


For the Work it self, I have not much to preface, only our hope is, that
for supply of defects, or connivence at them, the untimely decease of the
Author, and your own ingenuity, will yield abundant Apology. The substance is
the same with his own Notes: the Tables mine: other things the Printers. Let
the benefit be yours, and we have our desire. And certainly, he that falls to
the matter with love and hearty affection, shall reap some benefit: For while
he reads, he will easily understand, that in this life the Church, and
faithful members of it, must ever be encountering with spiritual wickednesses,
(which calls to watchfulness:) and yet is sure of victory, has help enough,
well led by an able Captain, and furnished with armor of proof (which calls
to cheerfulness in 1 Timothy 9. 12
fighting the good fight of faith.) And when he that understands it, shall
carefully address himself to the practice of it, he shall well redeem his
time in reading, honor his Captain who has chosen him to be a Soldier,
perform his vow made against the devil in his Baptism, prepare by smaller
skirmishes for great and fiery trials when they shall come; and so having
striven lawfully, 2 Timothy 2. 5. 4 8.
shall receive the Crown which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give him at
that day, with all that love his appearing. Plentiful Encouragements we have,
both to enter these lists, and hold out to the end. Deal courageously, and 2
Chr. 19. 11
the Lord shall be with the good. Fear not, nor be dismayed: go out against
these your spiritual enemies, and the Lord will be with 20. 17
you. And all hands here may be brought together to the fight: even every one
that is an Angel of Michael: we must strive together for the faith of the
Gospel: Phil. 1. 27.
and our united forces shall be much the more puissant and unresistable:
Especially while we help one another by our prayers; which is my request for
my self, from you all, and I rest

Isleworth. Feb. 25. 1632. Yours in the service of your Faith, and for the help
of your Joy, WILLIAM IEMMAT.

THE ANALYTICALL TABLE OF THE WHOLE CHAPTER: With the several Verses and
Arguments.
The Chapter has six principal Parts:

I. A Description of the true Church, v. 1. 2. Where 1 The Preface: In which 1
What is the Wonder, 2 The Greatness of it. 3 The manner of appearing. 4 The
place whence, Heaven.
2 The Vision, of one of the Combatants: Described 1 By her person, A woman.
Described 2 By her properties, four 1 Her Apparel: Where 1 The Garment, The
Sun. 2 The Application, Clothed.
2 Her Place: The Moon under her feet. 3 Her Ornament: The Crown of twelve
stars on her head. 1 Why Crowned. 2 What the 12. stars. 3 Why on her head.
4 Her fruitfulnes: being with child, etc. 1 Her Conception. 2 Her painful
travel.



II. A Description of the Devil, another of the Combatants, v. 3, 4, 5, 6. Two
ways. 1 By his Adjuncts, five, 1 Magnitude. Verse. 3. 2 Cruelty. Verse. 3. 3
Subtlety. Verse. 3. 4 Power. Verse. 3. 5 Victory. Verse. 3.
2 By his Effests, 1 Against the Stars: He threw down a third part with his
tail. 2 Against the Woman: 1 Assailing, ver. 4. Where 1 His Action, He stood
before the Woman. 2 His Intention: to devour the child, etc.
2 Disappointed, in respect of 1 The woman: described 1 By her childbearing, v.
5. she brought forth a manchilde. 2 By her flight, v: 6. where, 1 The place
prepared of God, In the wilderness. 2 Her sustentation, to feed her there. 3
Her continuance there, 1260. days

2 Her Issue, whose 1 Sex, Amanchilde. 2 Office, To rule the nations with a rod
of Iron. 3 Advancement, taken up to God and his throne.




III. A fierce Battle between those Combatants: verse. 7. Where, 1 The
Battle: And there was a Battle. 2 The Armies: 1 The Actors: On one side,
Michaell and his Angels. On the other, The Dragon and his angels, In both 1 The
General of the Field: Michael, or the Dragon. 2 The Band or Army: The Angels
of either.
2 The Action: They fought.


IIII. The success of the Battle, ver. 8. 9. The Dragons overthrow: 1
Expressed, 2 Interpreted: 1 He prevailed not. 2 He was so prevailed against,
that he had no more place in heaven.
1 In a description of the party overthrown: 1 By his names, and titles: four
2 By his effect, he deceives the whole world
1 The great Dragon. 2 That old Serpent. 3 The Devil. 4 Satan.
2 For the manner of his overthrow, he was cast out 3 The place whither he was
cast, the earth. 4 His assotiats in the overthrow, his angels with him. V. The
Triumph of the godly for this victory, verse 10, 11, 12. Where 1 The Preface:
In it, 1 What Voice this was. 2 Whose. Why loud.
2 The Parts: Two, 1 The Joy of the Church, Whereof 1 The Acts: It sings out,
1 The praises of God, the giver of all victory. 2 The praises of Michael the
General, v. 10. 3 The praises of the Army, or Angels of Michael, ver. 11.
Where 1 The report of the Victory, But they overcame him. 2 The Causes of it: 1
Principal and meritorious, The blood of the Lamb. 2 Isntrumental: 1 The word
of their testimony. 2 Their constancy in martyrdom, they loved not their
lives, etc.



2 The Object: Where 1 The matter; ascribing 1 To God, Salvation, Strength and
Kingdom. 2 To Christ, power: 1. Title, Christ: 2. Relation to the Father, his
Christ: 3. Attribute, power.
2 The Reason: Where, 1 His Crimination 1 What are these accusations. 2 Who are
accused, Brethren: 3 Where, before God, 4 When, day and night.
2 His Dejection, at the tribunal 1 Of God. 2 Of men.




2 The woeful estate of the enemies, v. 12. 1 The woe denounced. 2 The Persons
on whom, the inhabitants of the earth and sea. 3 The Reason: twofold, 1 The
coming down of the Devil. 2 His wrathful Disposition, with the cause: Where
1 How his time is said to be short 2 How he knows it is so. 3 What use he
makes of this knowledge.


VI. The fury of Satan, renewing the assault, v. 13. to the end: where 1 The
new Onset: v. 13. In it 1 The person persecuting, the Dragon. 2 The person
persecuted, the woman. 3 The time and manner, when she had brought forth the
manchilde.
2 The escape of the party assailed, v. 14. Where 1 The Kind: It was by
flight. 2 The Means: Here, 1 The means themselves: 1 What, Wings: 2 Number,
two: 3 Whence, given her: 4 Similitude, Eagles. 2 Whence she did fly with them:
from the face of the Serpent. 3 Whither: into the wilderness, called her
place: 4 To what end. to be nourished and preserved there. 5 How long: for a
time, times, and half a time.

3. Another Device of the Dragon against the Woman's good-name, v. 15. Where 1
The Mischief intended: In it, 1 What the floods of water are. 2 What the
spring of the^: the dragons mouth. 3 What the end: to carry the woman away.
2 The Remedy against it, v. 16.
4 Enmity against her Issue: v. 17 Where, 1 The Dragons wrath and war,
appearing by the 1 Captain. 2 Weapons.
2 The persons with whom: Described 1 By their paucity: the remnant of her
seed. 2 By their property: twofold, 1 They keep the Commandments of God. 2
They have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.




CHRIST'S VICTORY OVER THE DRAGON.
REV. 12. 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven.
THE principal scope of the whole Book of the REVELATION, is to describe
three things:

1 The Malice of the Devil against the Church. 2 The Battles and conflicts of
the Church. 3 The Victory and conquest of the Church.
This Chapter is as it were an Epitome of the whole book, which under a most
sweet and pleasant Type (then which the whole Scripture contains not a more
excellent or elegant) propounds them all in so rich and orient manner, as we
cannot wish to behold a more native face and Image of the Church of all ages,
then is presented to us in this glass held before our eyes by the Spirit of
God; To the end that we should so look on the dignity and proper ornaments of
the Church, as yet to take notice what grievous conflicts she is to sustain by
reason of the malice of the old Serpent, lying always in ambush against her:
And yet so to look upon her trials, as that we may at the same time behold
Gods providence so preserving and strengthening her, as she goes ever away
conquering and triumphing.

The Chapter has six principal parts. Parts of the Chapter.


1 A lively description of the true Church, ver. 1. 2. 2 A description of the
Devil her chief and furious assailant, ver. 3, 4, 5. 3 The fierce battle
between these two parties, ver. 7. 4 The victory of the Church, and the
Dragons overthrow, ver. 8, 9. 5 The triumph of the godly for that victory,
ver. 10, 11, 12. 6 The fury of Satan renewing the assault, ver. 13. to the end
of the Chapter.
This is the natural resolution of the Chapter, and without further curiosity
(by Gods assistance) we will prosecute these parts.

But before them all is a general Preface, making way to them, in these words;

[And there appeared a great wonder in heaven.] In which words are four things.

1 What is this wonder. 2 The greatness of it. 3 The manner of appearing. 4
The place whence: in Heaven.
By wonder, (...), or sign, is meant a new vision; or 1 What is this Wonder.
an unusual type of a strange battle, and marvellously to be wondered at; 1
For the rareness of the combatants: a Woman and a Dragon: 2 For the glory of
the Woman: Who ever saw woman or creature in such glorious attire, as to be
clothed with the Sun, crowned with stars, trampling the Moon under her
feet? But we shall see this woman in a more strange and admirable habit, then
if a woman were so arrayed. 3 For the admirable hugeness of the Dragon, and
power, that with his tail could cast down the third part of the stars of
heaven, ver 4. 4. For the issue and strange event. Is it not a wondrous thing
for a woman to conflict with so hideous a Dragon, and overcome him? Here are
many wonders in one.

2 The greatness is next. It is a great wonder for The greatness of the wonder
in 3. things.
three causes. 1 It concerns the Church the Spouse of Christ, a great
personage. 2 It contains many great and dreadful occurrences concerning her.
3 Many other great things are signified in this type and vision.

3 The manner of the appearance of this vision. The manner of apperance of this
vision.


For it may be asked; How did St. John see this sign or wonder? Answ. God
offered his visions to holy men two ways; 1 To the eyes of their bodies while
they were waking; as to Abraham, Genesis 15. 5. Behold the Heavens, and if thou
can number the stars, so shall thy seed be. 2. To the eyes of their minds,
their bodies being cast into a dead sleep, or trance. This is called a being
in the Spirit, Ezech, 37. 1. And thus the Evangelist John saw his visions, Rev.
1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, that is, by the power and
extraordinary work of Gods Spirit I was cast into a trance: Rev. 20. 4. I saw
the souls etc. which are not visible but by the eyes of the mind.

Ob.But this manner of revelation seems rather to be some uncertain dream,
then a sure and infallible kind of instruction. Ans. No. This was very usual
for the Lord thus to reveal his will to his servants, and for sundry special
ends used by him. 1 That the soul for a time after a manner loosed from the
body, and drawn Sundry ends why God thus revealed himself.
from the senses, might have a nearer fellowship with God, and so be fitter to
receive divine light from the Spirit of God; he strengthening the mind
extraordinarily for the apprehension of such impressions. So he pleased to
bind up all bodily senses, and kept the mind only waking, that being freed
from the fellowship of the body and bodily senses, it might both more freely
and certainly apprehend and retain the divine impressions of things revealed.
2 That Gods servants themselves, and the Church also might receive these
visions, not as inventions of man, but might more certainly know them to be
the revelations of God, considering that themselves had no use of any natural
faculty, invention, or study; no nor of bodily sense, while they received them;
and that, being so extraordinarily attained, they might acknowledge them most
divine and extraordinary.

Ob.But John was waking, because he stood on the Sea shore, Rev. 12. ult. Ans.
This standing was also in the Spirit: As chap. 17. 3. he was led away into the
wilderness, but it was in the Spirit, and so here.

Ob.Satan cast some heathen Priests and Prophets into trances. Answ. 1. This
is from heaven. 2 Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2
Pet. 1. 21. 3. There is a difference in the manner; for The spirit of God
leads and allureth; but the Spirit Spiritus De^ alli cit. Satanae, cogit vi.
of Satan uses violence and compulsion.

4 The place where this great Wonder appeared: The place where this wonder
appears.
[In heaven] Three reasons may be given for this. 1 The visions and appearances
were seen in heaven, but indeed were actually accomplished on earth: they were
showed in heaven and from heaven, but acted in earth. 2. Because God from
heaven does order and govern his Church, and therefore is here heaven
mentioned, that in all her conflicts and tumults she should look up thither,
By heaven commonly in this book is meant the militant Church.
and place her help and hope above the hills, whence her salvation comes. 3.
By Heaven in this book commonly is meant the true militant Church, and the
members of it here upon earth: As this Chapter affords four instances; ver. 4.
Stars of heaven, are Ministers of the Church: ver. 12. rejoice ye heavens,
that is, believers and members of the true Church on earth: ver. 3. another
wonder in heaven, of a Dragon with seven heads; Now heaven properly taken, is
not the place of the Devil, who has nothing to do there; but Hell is his
proper place, and by permission he walks out into the Church, so as by heaven
here is meant the true Church of God on earth: ver. 7 a battle in heaven, that
is, the militant Church; for in heaven (properly taken) is no battle, but
victory, or rather triumph after victory.

Quest.But why is the Church militant called Heaven For 3. reasons.
in this book? Answ. for three reasons. I. Because the whole vision is
mystical and sigurative, teaching all along 1.
one thing by another. II. Because there is not a more 2.
livelie Image and resemblance of that highest heaven (which is the seat of
God, and the habitation of Saints in their Country) then the universal
company of Saints in earth, which is the true militant Church of Christ,
called heaven for resemblance. III. Because the Church 3.
and true members of it have even in earth more to do with heaven then with
earth; and this for three reasons. 1 Her birth is from heaven, for she is borne
of God of immortal and heavenly seed. 2 Her conversation is there and her
meditations where Christ her head is, thither she tends, Phi. 3. 20. 3 Her
inheritance is there; she being but a stranger in earth; her state is there
where she shall for ever reign with Christ: that is her dwelling and standing
house, where as she only passes through the world, and stays but a small
time below; and therefore she is described in this mystical book, as if she
were in heaven already, to which she belongs.

Thus much for the interpretation of the preface:

Now follow the observations.

1 Note how the Spirit of God stirs up our attentions Attention and affection
incited by sundry arguments.
and affections unto this vision, and the great matters and mysteries therein
contained: In that 1 It is no common matter which we might neglect, but a great
wonder and all men are moved at great wonders. If St. John himself 1.
wondered at the greatness of it, well may it drive us into admiration. If it
were a vulgar and trivial matter we might be more careless: but as the Spirit
of God cannot be employed in any such thing; so has he set a special star
over this subject contained in this vision, that he might gain our best
attention, as to an high and admirable argument. 2 It is a vision seen in
heaven, to 2.
excite our diligence as to a caelestiall vision: It is no deceitful slight,
or apparition of any cunning and juggling person (such as the Papists visions
be) to confirm some false doctrine or tradition, without or against the word;
but a vision from heaven revealed by God to his chosen instrument St. John, for
the establishing of Gods people in the faith of the Gospel according to the
Scriptures. 3. It is a vision of great moment, as for matter and authority, 3.
so also of special use to all the members of the Church: seeing whosoever
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer affliction: and this vision
teaches both how to suffer, and how to conquer; how to carry the Cross, and
how to win the Crown. Such things of so great use, so nearely concerning
ourselves, are greatly to be respected.

2 Note in this Evangelist two excellent virtues. 1 His The modesty of this
holy Evangelist.
modesty and humility: He is careful to prevent the ascribing of this vision
to himself; and therefore says he had it from heaven immediately; as elsewhere
(Chap. 19. 11) he saw the heavens opened to receive the vision of the white
horse; and chap. 1. 10. I heard a great voice behind me; and therefore he
brought nothing of his own, for we our selves cannot see the things that are
behind us. So have other the servants and Prophets of God; as Ezech. 1. 1. The
heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

Use. To teach us: 1 modesty and humility, to ascribe nothing to our selves,
to ascribe nothing to our own wit or capacity, especially in heavenly things;
2 nor suffer others to ascribe any thing to us what ever our gifts be, but
reserve for God all the praise and honor; which is due only to him: so the
Apostles did, Acts. 3. 12. 16.

2 His fidelity in his service, 1 to his Lord, in that he His fidelity.
yields to him the honor of illumination; and that it is 1 To his Lord.
his prerogative to reveal his pleasure from heaven to whom he will, and open
the heavens to whom he will; and open the minds of whom he please, and to leave
without vision whom he will; and as for himself he had never seen this vision
had he not seen it in heaven: and if God in heaven (who only can foresee and
foretell things) had not revealed it to him.

Use. To teach us, that for all heavenly visions and inspirations we must
seek unto God; and depend upon the illumination of his Spirit for mediate
revelation, as John did for immediate: And for the understanding of this vision
use the means, but not rest in them; but pray him whose chair is in heaven,
to teach the heart. Natural gifts of knowledge may be by natural helps and
means attained by natural men: but supernatural must be by special
revelation of the holy Ghost; the anointing must teach them, 1 Ioh 2. 27.

2 To the Church is this holy man faithful; he has the 2 To the Church.
visions of God, but he conceales them not, but faithfully imparts them to the
Church of God: Teaching that, All the revealing of mysteries is for the use of
the Church Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

Use. 1 Art thou a Minister? All the gifts thou have received are thy Lords
Talents for the Church: Take heed of hiding them in a napkin, but impart them
willingly and conscionablie.

2 Art thou a private man? All the illumination thou receivest is for others as
well as for they self: to promote the knowledge and fear of God to so many
as thou can, especially those under they power.

Consider here, 1 that no member has any thing impropriate, the eye, the hand
etc. 2 that the poorest and privatest Christian that is faithful in small
things shall be ruler of much.

[In heaven] In that by heaven is meant the visible True members of the Church
are in heaven upon earth.
Church: Note: the true members of the Church are in heaven upon earth: and in
earth have more to do in heaven then in earth Gal. 4. 26. It is called the
Jerusalem, which is above, Now the Church on earth is above, and heavenly two
ways:

1 In hope and expectation: Romans 1. 23. waiting for the 1 In expectation.
adoption of Sons, which has a sweet internal and spiritual, yea and an
eternal joy (like that of heaven) in that expectation. Romans 5. 2. we rejoice
under the hope of the glory of God. and 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom we have not seen,
yet we love him, and rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious.

2 In conformity and inchoation, beginning that 2 In inchoation.
life of heaven; and that in respect both of that they are freed from; and that
they have attained fruition of.

First, the Saints in heaven are fully freed from all evils: Saints in heaven
fully freed from all evils.
As in three instances. 1. From the world it self. They have wholly forsaken
the world, and are gathered up to heaven the house of God, and their own home.
1 From the evil world four ways.
Even so the Saints on earth have in part forsaken the earth: First, by
election. Rev. 14. 3. the hundredth forty and four thousand are bought from
the earth; and living in the world are chosen out of the world, Ioh. 15. 19.
Secondly, by affection: using the world weinedlie, as not using it; and
delighting in earthly comforts, not as their own, but as borrowed for a time.
Thirdly, in habitation: they dwell in the world as in a Meshec, not as
indwellers or inhabitants, but as strangers and pilgrims, absent from home.
Fourthly, in conversation: they meddle no more with the world then needs must;
and in the midst of their earthly callings and business, are still heavenly
minded.

2 The Saints in heaven are fully freed from all the 2 From the corruptions of
the world.
corruptions of the world, and loosed from all the bolts and relicts of sin,
being delivered out of the prison of the body. So the Saints upon earth have
after a sort changed their lives, and renounced the corruptions that are in the
world through lust; and put on a divine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. They have a part
in the first resurrection already, and have bid a long farewell to the follies
of their former times; and hate and loathe their own unfruitful works of
darkness, in which they were sometimes chief actors,

3 The Saints in heaven are finally separate from 3 From wicked persons and
societies.
wicked persons and companies, never to be mingled or molested with them any
more. So the Saints in earth withdraw themselves from the company of
scandalously wicked men, where they can neither do any good, nor take any. And
whereas before their calling, they could run with them to the same riot of
excess, now is no communion between light and darkness: nay, all their
delight now is in the Saints which excel in virtue, and no such grief as to
live with Lot in Sodom, or with David in Meshec.

Secondly, in the good things which the Saints in Conformity of Saints in earth
with Saints of heaven.
heaven are called to enjoy there is an excellent conformity and inchoation
here upon earth; and the saints have in hand, the first fruits of heaven, Romans
8. 23. as

1 Their chief happiness in heaven is to behold 1 In vision of God.
the face of God, and see him as he is, and as they would; his name being
written on their foreheads, Rev. 22.

4. Their chief joy and wellsprings are all in him, in whose presence is
fullness of joy: So the chief joy of the Saints on earth is that they have
fellowship with God, though not so immediate as they. They see not his face but
his back parts. But happy are they that they can see him through grates, and
as they can; though not yet as he is, and as they would. For this vision wants
not an heavenly joy while they are at home in the body; although that fullness
of joy at his right hand be wanting till they be at home with the Lord. And
what they want in the things, is supplied in the desire to be with him, that
they may see his glory, and behold him face to face, and so as they may be like
him.

2 As the Saints in heaven live according to the 2 In framing to the Charter of
heaven.
Law of perfect righteousness, and have attained perfect sanctification, which
is the Law and Charter of heaven: so the Saints on earth set the same Law
before them to rule and direct every particular action by; both aiming and
wishing that all their ways were directed by the word, Psalm. 119. 5. and
begin the same obedience, waighing al they take in or give out by the waights
of the sa^ctuary, which God has sealed for just.

3 The saints in heaven spend their whole eternity 3 In keeping a perpetual
Sabbath.
in the cheerful, constant and perfect praise of God. They keep a perpetual
Sabbath; and in the presence of the throne of God serve him night and day in
his temple, Rev. 7. 15. so the saints in earth imitate them. For, 1. they
delight to be found among true worshippers, and account them blessed that may
dwell in his house, esteeming one day there better then a thousand besides,
Psa. 84. 10. 2 They strive to bring free will offerings to God, and to make
their pleasing of God their principal delight; and in the midst of many
weaknesses they make some progress to the cheerful praise and worship of
God. And this not by fits and starts, but in a sincere, true and constant
endeavor through their lives, most fruitful in their age.

4 The Saints in heaven being in immediate fellowship 4 In fruition of the
presence of Christ.
with Jesus Christ, cleave inseparably unto him as their head; love him in the
highest degree of affection; and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Rev.
144. So the Saints on earth, who are those hundredth forty and four thousand
who are bought from the earth, follow the Lamb where ever he goes. If he go
before them in holy doctrine, these sheep hear his voice, and follow him.
Ioh. 10. 27. If in holy example, they imitate him in all wherein he propounds
himself a pattern to them; as in humility, patience, love, meekness,
obedience, faith, and the like. As for their affection to him: First, they love
Jesus Christ with a strong flame of love, which much water cannot quench; and
with a love stronger then death; and love not their own lives to the death for
his sake. Secondly, they love him inseparably: For as the Saints in heaven
would not for all the world forgo his presence for one day: So nothing in the
world can drive the Saints from their privileges in Christ; as a cloud of
Martyrs do witness: but as Ruth to Naomi Chapter 1. 16. Thirdly, as he loves
them, so they him: Ioh 13. 1. they once loving him, they love him constantly to
the end, and to all eternity.

5 The Saints in heaven enjoy God, the means 5 In enjoying God the means of
their lives.
of all their lives. Jesus Christ is their temple, their light, their tree of
life, their Crystal river, and all: Even so is he to the saints in earth,
Rev. 22. 3. 5. For though they have means, and are tied to them here on earth,
yet do they enjoy God above all means, acknowledging him their life and the
length of their days: and that they live not by bread, but by every word of
God. That it is he that gives them power to get substance, that blesses their
children with increase, that he that clothes the Lilies cloatheth them; and if
all means should fail, yet he would without them, yea and against them,
sustain them, rather then they should want any thing good or fit for them.

1 This as a touchstone tries who be true members Use.
of the Church, and who are not. He that is so, No true members of the Church,
is partly in heaven already, and has more to do in heaven then in earth. And
therefore he cannot be a true member of the Church; First, who has no birth 1
That have no birth but from earth.
but from earth; discerned by hatred or neglect of the immortal seed, of
spiritual parents, of the seed and issue of Jesus Christ, the sons of God;
he is far from heaven that cannot abide any thing that is heavenly. Secondly,
who has no inheritance but in earth; 2 That have no inheritance but in earth.
discerned by minding things earthly, either only or principally. How dce
men delude themselves, that suppose themselves as near heaven as any, and yet
are as far distant thence in affection as in place, having their hearts
drawn down and wedged into the earth as with Iron bars? Their whole study,
pains, and sweat is for things below. The heaven they dream of is not only
upon earth, but earth it self; and angry are they when men would acquaint
them with better treasure or portion. But thus it cannot be with Gods children,
who are minded as good Nehemiah, 2. 3. whose person being in the King of Persia
his Court, yet his heart was at Jerusalem. And as Daniel while he was in the
land of his captivity, 3 That have no conversation but in earth.
yet he opens his windows to Jerusalem. Thirdly, who has no conversation but
in earth; discovered, when no part of the whole course thereof savours of
heaven. But 1. servants and slaves are they to lusts, far from freedom from
sin; nay rather swim with the stream, and drink in with delight the
corruptions of the world, but thoughts of heaven are tedious. 2 converse and
combine themselves with sinners against God, and run with all loose company
to all excesses and vanities. Now would they examine this course; could it go
for current or heavenly? Do the Saints in heaven swear, and swill, and drink,
and rail, and break Gods Sabbaths; and lie, and deceive; and can that life be
heavenly that does so? Fourthly, who has no delight but in earth; discerned in
that, 1 It is an unwelcome voice to call them to delight in the face and
presence of God. 4 That have no delight but in earth. Discernable by 4 notes.
And how can he be admitted to the presence of his glory, that has no delight
in the presence of his grace; but is as heavy to the parts of his worship as to
some punishment: 2 In stead of delight in the Law of God, the rule and charter
of heaven; they make their lusts their Law; and while they profess heaven,
they walk by no direction, but the Magna Charta of Hell. And were it not for
Gods restraining grace, they would be as impious and impudent in sin as Cain,
as Cham, as the damned, nay the Devil himself. 3. In that they rest more
contentedly in the means of their outward good, then either in the means of
grace, or the author of both. The news of the smallest outward profit
rejoices their hearts; but the news of heaven and eternal good things by
Jesus Christ affects them but a little. 4. In that they prize not the life of
godliness nor the state of Saints; nay scorn it in themselves and others. So
much of the trial. Use.


2 This teaches three things. First, that the The Christian is in the world,
not of the world.
Christian though he be in the world, he is not of the world; no more then
Christ himself was of the world, Ioh. 17. 16. for they no longer cleave to the
corruptions and defilements of the world, but are separated from them by
regeneration. Neither can they run with the world, because being in some
measure conformable to Jesus Christ, they also living among sinners, are
separate from sinners. They cannot cast in their lot with wicked men; but are
as Lot, who was in Sodom, but not of Sodom, for his righteous soul was vexed
with their unclean conversation.

Secondly, that the Saints set for heaven may not enjoy the earth as their
portion; seeing their whole estate, their friends, their fathers house, their
treasure is not below. They are here but strangers traveling home to their
country; and therefore by the weined carriage of themselves to these things,
they must (as the Patriarchs Heb. 11. 14.) declare plainly, that they seek a
country.

Thirdly, that the world may not enjoy the Saints as her darlings.

And here, First, the world may not gain our affections The world may not
gain our affections.
and desires, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. Love not the world etc. They must be affected as
mariners in the midst of a rough sea, whose wishes and desires are still at the
haven, and have not their minds and affections where their bodies be.

Secondly, it may not gain our conformity with 2 Nor our conformity.
it in the customs and guizes of it, because it lies wickednesses. Romans 12.
2. Fashion not your selves like to this world. The Christian must be cast into
another form, and fashioned to the manner of the country and corporation to
which he belongs.

Thirdly, it may not gain our strength to defend 3 Nor our patronage.
or patronage it. But as the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 10. 3. though we walk in the
flesh, that is, carry this body (...).
of flesh, as others; yet we do not war after (...).
the flesh: but we fight against the flesh; and are not patrons and defenders
of the corruptions of the world; no nor of the faults, which we our selves are
ready enough to act. Neither can there be more evident badges and liveries of
mere worldly men, that are all earth, then these: 1. to affect and desire only
or principally: 2. to imitate and conform: 3. to justify and defend the
crooked ways of the world.

So much of the Preface: now of the Vision.

[A Woman clothed with the Sunne] In this verse, and the second verse, is the
description of one of the Combatants, by two arguments: 1 her person, a woman.
2 her properties, which are four, 1 her apparel, clothed with the Sun. 2
her place, the Moon under her feet. 3. her crown of twelve stars on her
head. 4 her fruitfulness and pregnansie, being with child, she cried, etc.

First, we must enquire of the person, and who Woman in this mystical book
signieth 3. things. 1 Idols.
this woman is; and afterward to the arguments and parts of the description.
Woman in this mystical book signifies three things: 1 Idols, because 1 they
are as entising and alluring, as wanto^ women. 2 Idolaters go a whoring after
them, as unclean persons after light women; chap. 14. 4. these are they which
were not defiled with women. 2 Women signifies in this 2 City of Rome.
book, the City of Rome, the seat of Antichrist; cha. 17. 3 the Woman sitting
upon the scarlet colored Beast. 1 because in her outward pomp and glory she
is opposed to the chaste spouse of Christ, whose glory is all within. 2.
because with her the great Kings of the earth have committed fornication, chap.
17. ver. 2. 3. because she is the mother of fornications called the great whore
ver. 1. to whose filthiness and Idolatries all other are but punies and
learners. 3 Woman 3 The true Church.
signifies in this book, the true Church; the wife and Spouse of Jesus Christ;
his love, his dove, his undefiled; and so is the word taken in this place.

Quest. If by the woman be meant the Church, whether the Church militant or
triumphant? for it seems this woman is gotten above the earth, and treads the
Moon under her feet, and is decked with wondrous glory.

Answ. This cannot be meant of the Church triumphant, This woman is not the
Church triumphant for 3. reasons.
for three reasons. 1 This woman is in travail and pain. Now the triumphant
Church is past all pains; and all her tears are wiped away, chap. 21. 4. 2
The Dragon makes this woman fly into the wilderness, this chap. ver. 6. but
the Church triumphant is now in her palace, no more in the wilderness, no more
chased with the Dragon; for there he has naught to do. 3 This woman needs
food in the wilderness, and is nourished there by means appointed by God,
ver. 6. But the Church triumphant has no need, no want, no hunger, no thirst,
no means of life but Christ himself, not his two Prophets; therefore it
agrees only to the Church militant.

Quest. But if it be meant of the Church militant, whether of the Church of the
Jews, or of the Gentiles?

Answ. It is a true vision of the Catholic Church in all ages; but is most
applicable to the church of the new Testament, and Gentiles For, 1. John tells
us his Prophecy is of things to be done afterward; even after his trance in
Pathmos, Chap 1. 1. 2. The last words of the 17. verse of this Chapter bring us
down to the times after the Apostles days; namely, to the bloody persecutions
of the Heathen Emperors, and to the rage of Antichrist against them that kept
the testimony of Jesus. 3. This woman was fed in the wilderness when the
outward court was given to the Gentiles; and when the two Prophets prophesied
in sackcloth to feed her by their holy doctrine all the time of her being
there: this is confirmed chap. 11. ver. 2. 3. compared with chap 12. ver 6.

Quest But why is the Church compared to a woman?

Answ. In two respects* First, as simply considered Church compared to a wom^^.
in her self: and this for three causes. 1 Because to the woman was first made
the promise of the blessed seed who was to break the Serpents head; 1 In
respect of her self.
and it is still made good to the Church under the 3 Causes.
same similitude, for to her all the promises of God properly belong. 2 In her
self considered, she is weak and feeble as a woman without her husband. Ioh.
15. 5. without me ye can do nothing. All our sufficiency is of God, even to
think a good thought, or to name Jesus. 3 In her self she is as a pure and
chaste virgin, not defiled with Idolatry, which is a spiritual harlotry, nor
running (as the Romish strumpet) after unchaste and wanton lusts. 2 Cor. 11. 2.
a pure virgin keeps and preserves her self for one husband and no more.

Secondly, as the Church stands in relation to other, 2 In relation to others.
she is fitly called woman. For her relation is threefold.

1 To God, and in this relation she is the daughter 1 To God.
of God, Cant. 7. 1. Oh daughter of a Prince. Psa 45 10 hearken O daughter etc.
and therefore fitly resembled by a woman, whose father is God, and whose birth
is not after the will of man, but borne of God.

2 To Christ; and in this relation she is the spouse 2 To Christ.
of Christ, and so fitly represented by a woman: First, contracted and espoused
to Christ in his incarnation or first coming Cant. 4. 10. my Sister, my
Spouse. And what is the whole book of Canticles, but an holy description of
the holy handfasting and contracting of this holy couple: Secondly, married as
his bride, and taken home in his second coming, to dwell with him for ever.

3 To Christians; and in this relation she is their 3 To Christians.
mother, and so fitly resembled to a woman. For a woman, through the company of
her husband, is fruitful and brings forth children: so the Church by her
conjunction with Christ, and the power of his word, brings forth, and
nurseth, and brings up many children to God, as this woman ver. 2, 5. And
hence was that speech of the Ancient; He has not God for his father, that
has not the Church for his mother.

As this woman is the Spouse of Christ, all the professed members of the Church
must learn to perform the duties of loving Spouses to Jesus Christ. And it
will sort well with this occasion in the one to teach the other; and with one
labor prosecute and urge two great duties: Both to put women in mind what
duty they owe as wives to their husbands: and all of us, as Christians and
spouses of Christ, that the same duties are due from us to our spiritual head
and husband.

Quest. What are these duties.

Answ. They are four. The spouse of Christ 1 must cleave to her husband.


1 To cleave to her husband. For when God saw it was not good for the first
Adam to be alone, he made the woman out of Adams own ribbe being cast asleep,
and brought her and married her unto him, as an undivided companion of his
life, that she might cleave unto him alone: saying, For this cause shall a man
leave father and mother, and clc^ve to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh,
Genesis 2. 24 Even so when God saw that after man's fall it was less good for him
to be alone, he institutes for him a second marriage with the second Adam, whom
he casts asleep by death, and brings his spouse out of his side peirced, and
marries the Church unto him; that renouncing and forsaking all loves and lovers
but him; she migh cleave undividedly to him. And that now as Salomons spouse we
might forget our own people and fathers house, seeing the true Solomon has
vouchsafed to marry us Gentiles to himself, and to lay us by his own side
from whence we were taken

Quest.How must we cleave to Jesus Christ?

Answ. Three ways. 1 In person for 4. reasons.


1. In person. First the wife dedicates and delivers up her person to her
husband alone: so believers 1.
must deliver up their bodies and souls to Jesus Christ; for now we are no
longer our own, but his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Secondly, a faithful spouse as a
chaste 2.
virgin is married but to one man, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Thirdly, 3.
Christ communicates his whole person unto us, and us only; no other are
admitted into his body; he gives his life for his sheep only, prays not for
the world. Fourthly, Christ as a faithful husband 4.
leaves father in heaven and mother in earth to cleave to his wife; and
therefore we must esteem him as father, mother, brother, and sister, as Adam
was to Eve.

2 We must cleave to Christ in faithful affection. 2 In affection.
The earnest love, delight, and affection of the wife must be toward her
husband by Gods ordinance, Gen 3. 16. Thy desire shall be unto him; and to him
alone, because it is the covenant of God; the recognisance of which is kept in
heaven, that both parties keep themselves in pure and chaste love one to
another. So must we as good Spouses love our husband Jesus Christ as our
selves; nay better then our selves, not loving our lives to the death for his
sake; seeing that his love to us was stronger then death, and more to us then
to his own life. This loyal love will be loath to offend him; and having
offended him will not rest till he be pacified again.

3 We must cleave to him in affliction. A wife 3 In affliction
marries her husbands estate as well as his person, for better or for worse: So
we must cleave to Christ in affliction, in poverty, persecution, banishment;
and bear his reproach. The husband and wife must bear one another burden;
must rejoice and weep together. If common Christians must do so amongst
themselves; much more Christ and the Christian. A Kingdom is promised to such.
Luke 22 29, 30.

2. The wife must depend upon her husband as 2 She must depend upon her
husband. 1 For direction.
upon her head, and that for three things.

1 For direction, subjecting her self as owing obedience to all his lawful
commandments Genesis 3. 16. he shall rule over thee, she must hear his voice,
and acknowledge a stamp of God upon it in every thing that is not sin. This
is subjection: and not to be sick or sullen, or answering or replying when she
is crossed in things indifferent. It were monstrous in the body if the hand
should go about to direct the eye, or the foot rise up to rule the head: and
they are monstrous wives that covet rule and command, whom God has made to be
ruled and commanded, and subordinated their wills to the direction and
discretion of their husbands: Even so the Christian must be subject to Christ
in every thing, Ephesians. 5. 24. She is not worthy the name of a wife that will be
subject as far as she list, or as makes for her ease. Genesis 2. 19. all the
Creatures came to Adam to be named by him, in token of their subjection; and as
they, so the woman also was named by Adam, in token of her subjection, that she
should never think of the name woman, but also conceive her subjection. Would
to God women did think, that to lose subjection, were to lose woman head! In
like sort the spouse of Christ has taken her name of him in token of absolute
subjection. What can be more proper for a Christian then to frame to all the
rules of Christ; seeing he is the true light, the sun of right eousnesse, the
pillar able to direct?

2 The wife must depend upon her husband for 2 For protection.
protection. The husband is the veil of his wifes eyes, as Abraham was to
Sarah: Even so the Churches husband is the savior of his body, Ephesians. 5. 23. The
only Phineas that turns away the wrath of God kindled against the Israel of
God. The only Moses that stands in the gappe where Gods wrath had made a
breach. David's wives being taken captives, he rescues them (1. Sam. 30) and
smites the enemies with an horrible destruction: So this Son of David and
David's Lord, redeemes us his wife out of the hands of our enemies, both
spiritual, as sin, hell, death, Devil, and damnation; and corporal also;
so as though they may exercise, yet they shall not hurt his spouse. In all our
troubles and dangers we must come unto him, as Ruth. 3. 9. Spread the wing of
thy garment over thy hand maid, for thou art the Husband.

3 The wife must depend on the husband for provision. 3 For provision.
Whom should the wife depend upon for necessaries, but on her husband? or who
must pay the wives debt, but the husband: so who else but Jesus Christ can
suppply the Church with such things as she needs? who can bestow pardon of
sin, righteousness, life, and salvation, but he? or who can pay such debts
as we owe, but he; both obedience to the whole Law; and satisfaction for the
breach of it? None but he can satisfy either the principal or forfeiture. If
any man should maintain another man's wife, the husband being better able then
he; would not all the world judge them harlots and naught? So seek thou
salvation and righteousness (as the Romish Church does) by any other means
within or without thy self then by the name Jesus: thou art an harlot and no
spouse of Christ.

3 The wife must rejoice to honor her husband, 3 She must honor her husband.
even with her own dishonor. 1 Cor. 11. 7. the wife is the glory of her
husband: and so a good Christian is the glory of Christ. Christ rejoiced to
honor us with his own infinite dishonor. The joy of heaven pleased him not
without our presence and fellowship in it. All the members honor the head: so
must we honor our head though we be losers by it. Such a dutiful spouse was
John the Baptist, who rejoiced because of the Bridegroomes voice. Ioh 3. 29.
and says, ver. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease. Such good spouses
were the disciples that rejoiced, they were counted worthy to be scourged in
the Synagogues for the name of Christ; and were contented to be fools for
Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10. Such spouses were the faithful martyrs, and all those
witnesses that lie under the Altar; who left all, house and home, goods and
name, land and liberty, yea life it self for the honor of their husband. But
how do we take our husbands part, that have no word of defense, or rebuke of
those that highly blaspheme his name by word or deed? Nay, when our selves
join in his dishonor, disgracing our profession, polluting his name by
swearing, lying, drinking, rioting, gaming, and all unseemely behavior?

4 The wife as a good spouse must do all things 4 She must please her husband*
In
to please her husband, herein testifying her love to him: so must every
spouse of Christ herein testify love to Christ. The Apostle prays (Col. 1.
10) that they might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things.

Quest. How shall we please our husband?

Answ. By observing six rules.

1 Never seek to please thy self in any thing 1 Not pleasing her self.
displeasing unto him. A good and loving wife will displease her self, and
depart from her own will to please her husband. A good Christian must deny
himself, his own will, reason, affections, and desires, and much more his
sins and lusts (be they as dear as his eyes) to please that husband. The
Apostle (Romans 15. 1, 2, 3.) both propounds the duty, and persuades it by a most
forcible reason: we must not please our selves; for Christ pleased not
himself; that he might pleasure us. He was not bound, but we in way of
thankful retribution are bound.

2 Never seek to please other men in thine actions; 2 Nor pleasing men.
for then thou can never please Christ. Gal. 1. 10. If I should now go about
to please men, I could not be the servant of Christ. A loving wife looks not
to please other men, but will please her own husband though others be never so
much displeased: so a sound Christian must resolve to please the Lord and not
be plausible to men.

3 A good wife that would please her husband 3 Observing what will best please
him.
will pry into his nature and disposition; and having found what is pleasing or
displeasing unto him, will frame herself unto his mind and honest desires.
Thus Rebe^ca pleased Isaac in providing for him such meat as he loved. Thou
art then pleasing to Christ thy husband, when there is a conformity and
similitude in manners and affections. Therefore see therebe, First, a
conformity in virtues; that thy heart be an holy heart; an humble, innocent,
patient, loving spirit; a sober and temperate mind. For what is marriage
spiritual or corporal, but a conjunction of two bodies and two spirits into
one? Adam had no other but an holy help, made of an holy ribbe, and knew no Eve
but out of his own side: so the second Adam has no spouse but an holy one,
which sprang out of his own side. Secondly, a conformity in will: will nothing
but holily as he wills, and nill what he nilleth. Thirdly, a conformity in
practice: Likeness of manners is very pleasing. See thou cheerfully embrace
and observe what he commands. Herein is love expressed; he that keeps my
words, is he that loves me. Thus must we grow fit for our head; for, First,
marriage requires fitness. God brought Adam a fit help. Secondly, Christ was
like unto us in all things, sin excepted, that we might be like unto him.

4 To please our heavenly husband, we must deck 4 By decking the soul with
graces.
and trim our selves with graces. It is the folly of these times, and foolish
Virgins, to deck themselves not with virtue, but with vanity, pride in
attire, and all foolish and immodest fashions. He is none of the wisest earthly
husbands that can affect his wife for these things. But it is other manner of
attire that makes Christ's Spouse lovely. Psalm. 45. 13 the spouse is all
glorious within; and her clothing of wrought gold. Thou must put on lowliness,
meekness, love, truth, sobriety, watchfulness, sincerity; else the King has
no delight in thy beauty. 1 Timothy 2. 9.

5 A loving wife cannot better please her husband 5 By respecting his friends.
then by loving and gladly entertaining his friends. Every godly man is (as
John was) a friend of the bridegroom. The love of a Christian reaches to
Christ himself; and he that hates the child loves not the father.

6 A good wife to please her husband must show 6 By delight in his presence.
her delight in his presence, and long after him in his absence: so the
Christian must rejoice in the cheerful society of Christ, Isai. 26. 8. when
he absenteth himself, must think much and often upon him; and mourn after
him (as the widow does when her husband is departed) and never be at quiet till
she enjoy his comfortable presence again. Shall Christ's delight be with the
sons of men; and should not ours be much more with him? And as every good
spouse in her husbands absence says in her self, Come: so says this Spouse.
Come. Amen. Evenso, Come Lord Jesus. Rev. 22. 20.

Having spoken of such maine duties as the spouse of Christ owes to her
husband; we will for her encouragement mention some of her privileges by
means of this happy conjunction: by which she may see it is no lost labor
to frame to these duties; and so, as by so many motives, be provoked to the
cheerful performance of them.

The first privilege is, free election: the bridegroom Six privileges of the
spouse of Christ.
has made choice of us, and not we of him. The wife wooeth not, nor chooses
the husband; but the husband the wife. Ioh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but
I have chosen you. Therefore, 1 Neither was he bound any 1 Free election.
way to choose us. As a young man intending to marry is bound to none, nor tied
to any; but out of his free will makes his choice of one above al other: Even
so, the Son of God chooses to himself out of his own free will, being bound
unto none, a wife out of al mankind, and that is his Church, of which we are
members. 2 Neither finds he any reason in us, as other young men do in their
spouses, to set their love upon them. No disposition, no works of preparation,
no freewill, no aptitude or affection toward him; but when we were enemies he
made love unto us. 3 Neither if he had passed by us, as he has many others,
were he bound to give any reason to us, or them, that are refused, why he did
not choose us, or them: Even as a young man free to his choice, having betaken
himself to one spouse, need give no reason why he has passed by all the rest
in the world.

The second privilege is, divine pacification. By 2 Divine pacification.
this marriage all hostility and emnity is removed between God and his Church.
For, as great Princes use to pacify strong emnities between themselves, and
also to stablish true and constant friendship, by contracting some marriages
between them: Even so does the Lord by marrying his own Son to the sons of
men: Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. for he is our peace, who has broken all partition
walls, and abrogated, yea and slain all hatred; Col. 2. 14. he has abrogated
all hand-writings which were against us, and has fastened them to his cross.
Now a full atonement is made; all the bonds of the Law, to the rigor, to the
curse, are all cancelled; all the claims of sin, death, hell, and clamors of
accusing conscience are now stilled and answered; all our obligations are
discharged, and fastened and filed up (as void) on the cross of Christ, for in
no other place in the world could they be cancelled but there. And as while the
enmity lasted, and the hostility was proclaimed between God and us, there was
no commerce, nor no intercourse between us; no more then is between nations
who have proclaimed open war against one another: Now by this marriage and
peace concluded, we have a safe and happy intercourse and negotiation into the
kingdom of God. The way is now laid open between heaven and earth; and God
himself pleases to come unto us, yea into us, and dwell and suppe with us, to
confer with us, to direct us to the advancement of our happy estate. We have
daily entrance and access unto him, not as strangers or ordinary friends; but
as familiars, yea as children, in prayers, praises, meditations, and the like.
See Ephesians. 2 18, 19.

The third privilege is, gracious assimilation and 3 Gracious assimilation in
4. things:
fitness between the bridegroom and his bride. For whereas before was an
infinite inequality and disproportion between these two parties: now by this
contract all this inequality is taken away, and a fitness given by grace to
make the spouse every way answerable to her Husband; as in these instances.

1 The bride was of base parentage, a daughter of the earth; her father an
Ammorite, her mother an 1.
Hittite, Eze. 16. 3. But now she is made a chosen generation, of near
alliance to God, the Daughter of a Prince, yea, of the King of glory.

2 The bride was poor and needy, had no worth, 2.
no dowry to prefer her: But by this contract has an estate made her fit for
a Prince. That as her Lord and husband is heir of all things; so she as the
wife has a right in his whole estate; his love is so liberal as he has
stated her, and made her coheire of his own heavenly inheritance, Romans 8. 17.
Here is the comfort of a Christian, who has no worth in himself (but of
damnation) that he has now a worthiness in mercy and many compassions. See
Hos. 2. 19.

3 The spouse was deformed, without beauty or 3.
comeliness; nay, had no other but an ugly shape of sin and unrighteousness,
far more black and hateful, then the Ethiopisse whom Moses married: But now
has attained a perfect beauty in rightcousnes; and the beauty of her husband
makes her beauty perfect: See Ezech. 16. 14. Thy name was spread among the
Heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through the beauty which I set upon
thee. He makes her like himself, not having spotte or wrinkle, or any such
thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. having washed her with his blood.

4 The spouse in her self was naked, exposed to al injuries; and covered with
nothing but shame, excepting a few rags and figg-leaves, too short and thin
a cover to hide her shame. But now, as mercy has married her, so it has
clothed her: here she is clothed with the sun. Her husband has provided
her costly garments; her clothing is of wrought gold, Psalm 45. 13. that is,
the golden righteousness of Christ, shining as gold, precious as gold, durable
as gold, desirable as gold. A garment as useful as costly, called Garments of
Salvation Isai. 61. 10. This garment serves both for necessity and ornament.

The fourth privilege is, in free and liberal donation 4 Free donation, in 4.
things.
A bridegroom contracting a marriage with a Virgin, gives her Jewels and
Love Tokens, as Isaac sent to Rebecca: so the Lord Jesus does with this woman.

1 What he covenanteth and promises, he also pledgeth with many graces and
love tokens, even 1.
many graces shining as so many Jewels, every one testifying his mindfulnesse
and bounty toward her.

2 He bestows his person upon her, and by becoming hers she becomes his, and
they twain 2.
are one flesh; a gift, then which heaven has no greater.

3 With his person he bestows his goods upon her, that is, all his merits, all
his obedience, all his 3.
sufferings, all his glory, all his prayers.

4 He invests her not only into his goods, but into his inheritance, and in
due time consummates this 4.
marriage, and brings his spouse home to his house of glory, a prepared mansion
for her; and puts her in possession of all the wealth of heaven, and that
celestial inheritance where she enjoys his immediate presence. All which
being lost in the first Adam, is restored in the second; by whom heaven is
restored to us, and we to it.

The fifth privilege is, her high and honorable 5 High exaltation in 3. things.
exaltation and advancement. The whole dignity and honor of the husband is
derived unto the wife, be she in her self never so base and unworthy: As in
Esther a poor captive maid married to Ahasuerosh, made a sharer in the honor
of all his kingdom. And Bathsebe a mean woman advanced to be David's Queen.
But the honor of the Church goes beyond all the honor of all the Queens that
ever the sun saw, or theearth bare, by reason of this marriage and contract:
For;

1 They were matched to men; and laid in the 1.
beds and bosoms of men: but she comes into the bosom, and green bed of him
that is God and man, Cant. 1. 15.

2 They were married to Kings, but earthly and 2.
mortal, who dyed and left them widows and often miserable: But she to the
King of Glory, who only has immortality, her King and husband never dies,
nor can leave her a widow.

3 They were married to consort in some one 3.
kingdom, and part of the earth; and in such honor, authority, glory, and
riches as were as mortal and perishing as themselves, and not long but they
were parted: But she to a King who rules from sea to sea, to whom all Kings are
subjects, and by whom they rule: to a kingdom that is unshaken, not withering:
to an authority, glory, and wealth which is firm, stable, reserved in the
heavens. Neither is there of his kingdom any end, either in respect of extent,
or of durance.

The sixth privilege is, strong and eternal consolation. 6 Eternal
consolation.
In that by this contract a firm and constant happiness is assured, which all
the contracts in earth cannot perform. This undivided conjunction of Christ
with his Church answers al objections which might either prevent or discontinue
the happiness of a Christian.

First, for things which might seem to prevent Answers all objections.
our happiness.

Ob. 1. Our own unworthiness and infinite disproportion. 1 In things which
might prevent our happiness.
He is a divine head, a mighty God: ^ a base worm, and man of earth; How can
he marry himself unto me?

An. We are not knit immediately unto his divine nature; but by the means of
his humanity. Thou can not reach his deity; he can stoop to thy humanity.

Ob. 2 But he is an holy head, and the righteous God; but I want righteousness
and holiness: How unfit to be contracted to him?

An. 1 Christ marries not his Church, because she is holy, but to make her so.
It is not the condition to marry her, if she be pure or holy; but that the may
be so. Ephesians 1. 4.

2 Thy righteousness is much less a cause of this contract; but this contract
a cause of thy righteousness; for he decks thee with a glorious robe in sense
of thy nakedness.

Ob. 3 But alas, my desire is not to him as it should: how can he then desire
or affect me? I desire every thing else, every thing more.

An. 1 He seeks and wooeth, and chooses us, and not we him.

2 Labor thou to know his excellency more, by which thou may prefer him
before al loves and lovers, as surpassing them al in true worthiness, goodness
and perfection. This is a part of the Covenant. Ier 31. 34.

Ob. 4. But I am base and poor, despised among mean men, and worthily: and
how can he affect me?

Answ. Be yet more base in thy own eyes also: and say as David, 1 Samuel 18 18.
What am I, that I should be the son in Law to the King! He chooses none but
the abject; and calls himself the God of the abject. He chooses the
Apostles, who were the of-scouring of all things.

Secondly, it answers all Objections for the discontinuance 2 In things that
might discontinue to our happiness.
of our happiness.

Ob.

1 From the presence of sin. My sin may separate between him and me.

Answ. 1 If it could not hinder the contract; much less the continuance now
the guilt is removed.

2 Every sin offends him; but every sin separates not.

3 The spouse may sin of infirmity, not of wilful stubbornness; and
therefore may fall, but not fall away.

Ob.

2 The desert of sin is eternal separation.

Answ. 1 He has taken the desert on Himself.

2 He punishes not with bitterness and extremity, who has commanded
husbands not to be bitter to their wives; but passes by many, pardons all,
covers all, cures all in his spouse, Ier. 31. 34. Isai. 54. 10.

Ob.

3. Grace is weak, and my sense of righteousness little and small, if any.

An. Grace in the elect is weak, but perpetual; because the covenant is
everlasting. Floods of corruption shall not quench this small spark. Cant. 8. 7

Ob. 4 But he may depart in displeasure. Cant. 5. 6.

An. 1 For a time, and for her good; but she finds him again.

2 A man must leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and much more
will this Lawgiver. There can be no desertion on his part.

Ob. 5 But though he be faithful; I am unfaithful, and may depart from him.

An 1 Neither on her part: For she is confirmed In posse non peccare. In non
posse peccare.
in grace, which has a privilege above that in innocence. That was in a
possiblity of not sinning; but this in a not-possibility of sinning to death.

2 He that with his life purchased her happiness, will now by his glorious
power preserve it.

Ob. 6. But outward force and violence may dissolve this marriage; at least
death may.

An. 1 The gates of hell cannot prevail to dissolve this marriage.

2 Whom God has thus inseparably joined none can put asunder.

3 Death which dissolves all other marriages, is here overcome; and neither
party can dye any more: the death of Saints being but a going home to their
husbands house.

Use. 1. In afflictions; remember thy happiness is stable.

2 In temptation to sin; remember thy honor and advancement.

[Cloathed with the Sunne] Having described and discovered the person; we come
to the properties by which she is described: and these are four.

The first property is, that she is clothed with the Sun. In which 1 the
garment: the Sun. 2 the application: she is clothed therewith. By Sun is
meant Jesus Christ; who, not seldom, is so called in the Scriptures: As Psa.
84 11. The Lord is the Sun and Christ the Sun is there opposed 1. to shadows
of the ceremonial Law.
shield, Mal. 4. 3. To you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness
arise.

Quest Why is Christ resembled by the sun, or wherein is he so?

An. In two respects. 1 in his affects and properties 2 To our natural darkness.
within it. 2 in his effects and actions without.

1 The effects within it are five.

1 Unity. There is but one Sun in the world: and but one Sun of
righteousness in the Church he is the only begotten Son of the Father; Ioh
1. 14. No son else begotten of the substance of the 1 Unity.
Father: no name else etc.

2 Light. The sun is not only an heavenly 2 Light.
light, but the fountain of light; and in it self a body of most shining and
surpassing light: So Jesus Christ is light in his essence; a light which none
can reach; an heavenly light; the light of the world, and in him is no
darkness Rev 1. 16. his face shines as the Solis Jubar in vegore mirid^a^o
oculos intue^lium perstringit, et talis est glo^ia Christi summa et
inaspectabilis.
Sun in his brightness.

3 Purity. The Sun is a pure creature, which looks upon all inferior
creatures; and none can hide them from the sight of this great eye of the
world; and though it look upon all filthiness, it contracts none: Even so
Jesus Christ is purity it self, 3 Purity.
whose all-seeing eye none can avoid: for all things are naked to him with whom
we are to deal. The Egyptians were wont to call the sun many-eyed. (...).
But our Lord disperceth from himself on all sides Multioculum.
infinite beams of light, as so many eyes on all creatures: the which, if they
cannot avoid the view of the sun of the world, much less of this Sun of
heaven. And yet so pure is this Sun, that living and conversing among
sinners, he contracted no stain of sin Although he was borne of sinners,
living with sinners, dyed with, and for sinners, and as a sinner, yet no man
could justly accuse him of sin, but he remained purer then the sun.

4 Power. The sun is a powerful creature, for 4 Power.
though the body of it be in heaven, yet the warm and comfortable beams of it
reach to the extreme parts of all the earth: Even so, although Jesus Christ be
in heaven bodily, as being ascended thither in his flesh; yet by his spirit and
grace he is present with his Church in all parts of the world to the end of it.
And as the sun rising comes forth like a Giant to run his course, and makes
haste in his way, and no created force can hinder him: So this powerful Sun of
the Church makes have in his way to his Church, and as a mighty Giant cannot be
hindered from her by all created power of men and angels united together.

5 Participation. The sun is a communicative creature, dispersing all his
light and comfort to others, not only to terrene Creatures below upon the 5
Participation.
earth, but even to the heavenly and celestial bodies themselves, for all the
stars and the Moon borrow their light from the sun: Even so Jesus Christ
enlighteneth every one coming into the world, Ioh. 1. 9. Whosoever are
enlightened with light of nature or grace, have it from this Sun. And not
only these, but they who in heaven shine in the light of glory, do borrow of
this light, Dan 12. 3. they shine as the stars, which receive all their shine
from the sun. And more, they shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of
their Father, Mat, 13 43. Because they shall participate of the suns
brightness.

2 The effects without are four, and in respect of these also, Jesus Christ is
compared to the sun.

1 The sun drives away darkness, otherwise there would be a perpetual
night: And at the rising Effects of this Sun of the Church.
of the sun, things which before were involved in the darkness of the
night, appear as they are: so 1 Illumination.
this Sun of the Church drives away the darkness of ignorance, the night of
our misery; chaseth away the black and thick mist of our sins, brings back
the light of knowledge and the day of grace, to us, who else had layne in
perpetual night and shadow of death. And now foul things appear as they are,
and sin appears out of measure sinful.

2 As the sun by his beams gives direction to all 2 Direction.
the ways of our natural and civil life: so this Sun by the beams of his
wisdom and grace directs us in all the ways of spiritual and eternal life.
And as a man can do nothing co^mendably without the light of the sun: so,
without this Sun we can do nothing at all.

3 The sun is the most comfortable Creature in 3 Refection.
all the world, warming and refreshing with his beams all living Creatures,
yea (under God) quickening creatures dead in themselves: so Jesus Christ is the
life of the Church, and the quickner of all the elect unto eternal life, they
being in themselves dead in trespasses and sins. He also warmes his Church
with the beams of his love, which reflect back (as the sun beams do) upon
himself both the head and members. He comfort with his gracious aspect all
the faithful in all corners of the world, who had never had life, nor breath,
nor show of grace without his shine upon them.

4 The sun of the world makes and preserves the 4 Distinction of seasons.
several seasons, the Summer, the winter, the spring, the Autumn: Jesus
Christ the Sun of his Church has in his power al times and seasons. He has in
his hand the seed time in grace here, and the harvest of glory hereafter. He
appoints the Summer season and prosperity of the Church: He changes that
season, and brings on her a sharp winter of trouble and affliction. All the
vicissitudes and changes in the Church are appointed and directed by his
wisdom, Dan. 2. 21 Nothing befalls the Church by chance, but by his most
oculate providence.

1. Is Christ the Son of the Church; we are Use.
taught many things; As,

First, to a knowledge our Sun, yea to admire The Sun of the Church
infinitely surpasses the sun of the world in 6. things.
our Sun, as ten thousand times passing the sun of the world. For, 1 That
is a mere creature, though glorious: but this Sun is the mighty God, the
creator of that. 2 That serves the outward man in the things of this life: this
the spiritual man in the things of life eternal. 3 That rises on good and
bad: but this only on the good; only on Jerusalem. Isai. 60 1. Thy light is
risen upon thee. 4 That rises every day, and every day sets: but this Sun
rises and never sets Isai. 60. 20. 5. That obscureth the stars: this
enlightens believers by his presence, who shine as stars. 6 That may be
eclipsed or darkened: but the light and grace of this Sun can never lose or
lessen his shine and glory, it may be a while clouded from us; but never
eclipsed in it self.

Secondly, We are taught to rejoice in our Sun. 2 Rejoice in our Sun.
All creatures rejoice in the sun, but hateful Bats and Owls which fly the
light. All creatures in nature follow the sun, and thrive and prosper in it;
the silly plants, as Marigold, Dazie, Turnsoll: so all that are new Creatures
do follow and prosper in this sun. And if we be so, we will draw near to the
Sun, that we may have the blessed beams of his grace to shine upon our cold
and frozen hearts, that by his spiritual heat we may be revived and refreshed
to everlasting life. We can open our windows to let in the Sunshine to our
comfort; and why should we not set open the doors and windows of our hearts,
that the beams descending from Jesus Christ, may enter in, enlighten, and
comfort us? Oh our little respect of the ministry shows plainly enough, we
would shut out this Sun if we could. Many of our hearers do what lies in
them.

Thirdly, we are taught to be thankful that this 3 Be thankful for our Sun
risen.
blessed Sun is risen unto us who were in woeful darkness How thankful was
Paul, and those in that dangerous voyage with him, Act. 27. 20. when not having
seen Sun, Moon, nor stars for many days, they saw again the desired light
of the Sun? But in so dangerous a tempest of Gods wrath, as we had for ever
been tossed and drowned in, to get a glimpse of this Sun of righteousness,
is a far greater cause of thankfulness to God, which disperseth all clouds
and storms, and brings a most calm and comfortable season. The poor men in
the Gospel to whom Christ restored sight, how glad and thankful were they so
soon as they were able to behold the sun? They leapt for joy, praised God,
and preached Christ; they made it known they had met with Christ: No less
joyful is he whose eyes of mind Christ has opened to discern his change,
that he is turned from darkness to light.

Fourthly, we are taught to imitate our Sun; 4 Imitate our Sun.
laboring to preserve our purity, though we see much foul behavior; and
being conversant among sinners, and in many occasions, yet (as our Sun did)
we must keep our selves pure, and not be plucked away with the error of the
wicked; as Lot in Sodom, abstaining from evil and all the appearance of it.

Fifthly, We are taught to walk beseeming our 5 Walk beseeming our sun.
Sun.

1 Warily, and uprightly: because this Sun discovers those rubbes and perils
by which men fall 1 Warily.
and hurt themselves. In a mistie and dark night to stumble and fall is no
such great disgrace; but at noon day, the sun shining, argues blindness or
heedlesnesse, or some great distemper of body and mind: For Christians now to
sin, against such light, is far more shameful then in darkness of Popery
and ignorance.

2 Watchfully. In the dark night men may sleep; 2 Watchfully.
but in the day and sunshine it is time to awake from sleep, and shake off
security, and walk as in the day. The sun of the world may be seen of all
eyes, but it sees nothing But our Sun sees all things, even the hidden secrets
of hearts which no eye else can see, neither can any deep be hid from his
infinite light and knowledge. This should move us to watch all our ways and
actions, thoughts and speeches; for we may bleare men's eyes, but not his.

3 Decently and comely. When the sun is up 3 Decently.
men must do lawful and justifiable things, because all eyes are upon them.
Let the thief cover himself with darkness; let the adulterer watch the
twilight; let Papists, and Atheists, and profane persons do shameful things
without shame: But let us in so open a light do things comely; let not the
light make us ashamed of any indecent and uncomly or unconscionable action; let
not the sun see our nakedness without shame or holy blushing.

4 Painefully and diligently. When the sun rises, man goes forth to his
labor by Gods ordinance. Ps. 4 Diligently.
104. 25. so while the sun and day and light lasts us, let us walk and work
hard for faith, for repentance, for oil, for the wedding garment, See John 12.
35, 36.

2 A ground of comfort: that this Sun shall never Use.
fall to his Church. The sun may be hid and clouded for a time, but at length
shall break forth The Sun of the Church never sets.
with much brightness and comfort: So Jesus Christ may hide himself, and the
cloud of our sins and corruptions may get between him and us; but at length
his grace and light shall shine forth again, and manifest it self to every
soul to which it ever arose. So for the public estate of the Church. As the
Sun of the world may withdraw and remove it self, and does in winter, so as
all things seem dead and lost; but be the winter never so sharp and tedious,
the sun comes back again, and brings with it a sweet and pleasant spring:
So the Church may sustain a black and bitter winter, be afflicted and shaken
with many storms and blustrings of furious enemies, but these shall blow over,
and it shall see a happy spring again. Our sun is in the heavens; and so long
as the enemies cannot reach him to pull him thence; (whatsoever winter the
Churches abroad do now sustain; whatsoever winter our Church at home may
endure) faith and patience will wait and attain a sweet spring, and fruitful
summer again; which shall make the enemies gnash their teeth, and the Church
sing for joy, as men do sing in harvest. Amen.

We have seen what the garment is: Now of the application, [Clothed] where
consider,

1 How the Son is a garment. 2 How it differs from other garments. 3 How the
woman is clothed with it.
First, Jesus Christ the Sun is in many places of Christ a garment, why.
the Scrpture called by the name of a garment by resemblance; because his
righteousness and meritorious obedience supplieth all the offices of a
precious garment to the Church of God. In observing the use of a garment we
shall see what useful offices Christ performs to his Church his body.

Quest. What are the chief ends of garments?

Answ. Garments serve, 1 for necessity. 2 ornament. 3 distinction. Necessity
of a garment in 3 things.


1. The necessity of a garment is in three things.

1 To cover bodily nakedness, and to hide all corporal 1 To cover the body.
shame and defects: so the Church wrapped in this robe of Christ's
righteousness, has all her sins (which are her special nakedness and
shame) hid and covered from the eyes of God. When Adam had sinned he saw his
nakedness, and sewed figgleaves; but neither they, nor any thing he could
devise could hide it, till God made him a cover: Neither can any of the sons
of Adam by their own reach or power attain a cover; but the Son of God, the
second Adam only can afford a garment to hide sinful nakedness from the eyes
of God.

2 To defend the body from the injury of weather 2 To sense the body.
both of Summer and winter: so only Christ his meritorious righteousness can
save and shelter the soul from the burning heat of his Fathers wrath; and from
the pinching and shaking terrors of a man's self-accusing conscience. Only
Christ can cover his Church from the storms and blasts of temptation by Satan,
and from the raging tempests of persecution by tyrants and enemies. Isai 4. 5,
6. Jesus Christ was the true Cloud and Pillar protecting his people through the
wilderness by day and by night, who makes a gracious promise that upon all the
glory shall be a defense, and a covering shall be for a shadow in the day for the
heat, and a place of refuge, and a cover for the storm and for the rain. He
will for ever supply all to his Church of all ages, whatsoever he did to Israel
by that Cloud, which was but a shadow of his protection.

3 To preserve and cherish natural life for a while 3 To cherish the body.
by keeping in and repressing natural heat, which else would spend too fast:
So does Jesus Christ and his precious merits preserve and cherish spiritual
life and heat in the soul; nay, (which no clothes can) brings in a new and
heavenly heat and life, where was nothing but a cold death; and maintains it,
not for a time only, but unto life eternal: Whence this second Adam is
called, 1 Cor. 15. 45. a quickening spirit; a spirit not changed into a spirit,
but for that his body after the resurrection became and remains spiritual and
glorious; and quickening, not only because his holy flesh is united to the
quickening word, but because by his death he brings life unto the world, dead
and rotten in sins and corruptions.

2 Garments serve not only for necessity, but also 2 use of garments is for
ornament.
for ornament. When Rebecca was given to Isaac to be married, Abraham's servant
gave to her from Isaac (in token of love) not only raiment and garments; but
also Jewels of gold and of silver, and precious bracelets to put on her hands.
Genesis 24. 22. 53. A manifest type of the Church married to her Isaac Jesus
Christ; who endoweth her not with garments only to cover her nakedness; but
Jewels also to adorn her. See Ezec. 16. 10, 11. the Lord covers his spouse
with fine silk; and deckes her with ornaments, bracelets, and chains.

Quest. What are these ornaments?

An. The blessed and beautiful graces of humility, faith, hope, love, good
conscience, laid up in the closet and Casket of the heart within; and the
shining and grace of holy life, and virtuous conversation of Saints; which as a
clean garment adornes the righteousness of faith where ever it is. Because
whersoever the merit of Christ is applied, there the spirit of Christ is
conferred: who effectually works all these shining graces by which the whole
man is sanctified, and the spirits mansion adorned.

3 Garments serve for distinction: as the liverie 3 For distiction.
given to servants shows to whom they belong, and what Masters they serve.
Even so the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is 1 In the external profession of
Christ, a liverie and garment discerning and distinguishing the Christian from
all Heathens, Turks, and Infidels. 2 In the sound application of it, there is
a real distinction of the servants and sons of God from the slaves of sin
and the Devil, not only without the Church, but within the bosom it. A King
is not better known by his purple, then a sound believer is hereby discerned
from all hypocrites, and the profane of the world.

Secondly, how does this garment differ from other garments?

Ans. In the 1 efficient. 2 matter. 3 price. 4 use This garment differs from
other garments in 5. things.
5 durance.

1 The Author. All other garments for the body are made by man: but this could
only be made by God and man He must be God to perform an infinite 1 The
author.
righteousness, and meritorious obedience: he must be man, for it could not
besteed man, had it not been done in the nature of man. He must be man to
suffer: he must be God to overcome. See Ezec. 16. 10. I clothed thee.

2 The matter and manner. All other garments are 2 The matter.
made of dead creatures, God made naked Adam and Eve coats of skins of dead
beasts, Genesis 3 21. But for his soul he made this garment of the life and death
of the Son of God: of his death, to make satisfaction; of his life, to
fulfill the law: thus for the matter. Now for the manner or fashion. Other
garments are made to the body, but we must be fashioned to this our garment.
Christ must not submit to us, but we must frame to him.

3 The price. Other garments are made either of 3 The price.
some homespunne web, or bought with corruptible things, a base and vile
price in comparison: But this is no homespunne piece, nor bought with any other
price then the precious blood of Jesus Christ, nothing in heaven or earth else
could buy these costly robes. And therefore these robes are said to be made
white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14. Other blood stains, and fowls,
and dies red; but this blood makes white, and purges from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.
7 and makes white as snow, Isa. 1. 18. A color of grace, not nature; of faith,
not art.

4 The use. Other garments may cover our bodily nakedness, 4 The use.
but this our spiritual: and therefore are called long white robes that need
no eching or patching with humane merits or satisfactions; for this were
absurd, to set an old patch on a new garment* And for ornament, other garments
can but adorn the body in man's eyes, this beautifies the whole man in Gods
eye, and makes us (as Jacob) acceptable to our Father in our Brothers garment.

The durance. They all wax old and decay. Even 5 The dura^ce
Isreal's clothes in the wilderness by miracle kept from wearing forty years,
yet afterward f^ll to rags: But this is an ever-new garment; for as Christ's
blood is ever new, so is the merit of it. But suppose those garments should
not; yet we wax old and decay, and leave them in earth: but this garment we
carry to heaven with us, which lasts with us to all eternity. Herein also it
differs from other clothes, for those we put on and off at our pleasure, but
this once put on is put on for ever, never to be put off any more.

Thirdly, how is this woman clothed with the The woman clothed with this
Sun.
Sun, that is, the righteousness of Christ, more pure and shining then the
sun in his strength?

Answ. Two ways.

1 On Gods part, by his gracious imputation of 1 On Gods part by imputation.
Christ and his merits unto the true believer. This is a phrase taken from
creditors, who do not impute a debt they mean to forgive, but account it as
discharged, though the party be never able to pay it. So God does impute
Christ's righteousness to the believer, and the believers sins to Christ our
surety. So as in and by faith in Christ made sin for us, we are made and
reputed no sinners, but acquitted and freely discharged. Romans 4. 24, 25. Abraham
believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness; and not to him only,
but to us that believe.

2 On man's part by sound application and acceptance: 2 On man's part by
application.
I say sound application, because application is twofold. 1 Sacramental and by
profession only. Gal 3. 17. all that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. And thus in respect of the sacrament and external profession, good and
bad may put him on: as every man may easily hang a cloak or loose garment upon
himself. 2 Spiritual and by faith also, when a man is not only baptized with
water, but also with the holy Ghost and fire, when inward and outward washing
go together. A man is then truly said to be clothed, when he has put on all
his clothes, one piece as well as another. And this is Augustines distinction
Quidam induunt Christum tantum quoad Sacramenti perceptionem; alij et ad vitae
sanctificationem.
Some put on Christ only by Sacramental washing, some by spiritual
regeneration. This is also the Apostles distinction, speaking to them that were
baptized already: Romans 13 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; so implying
that there was a further putting on of Christ then by the Sacrament.

Quest. But what is required to this putting on of Christ?

Answ. There are five graces especially necessary Five graces requisite to the
clothing of a christian. ^ Repentance.
to this clothing of a Christian.

1 The grace of true repentance and mortification. which bewrays it self in
two things. 1 A sight and most humble sense, and sorrow, and (as Dan. 9. 8)
shame for our nakedness. A daily putting off the filthy rags of our own
sinful nature, and loathsome lusts; for this new garment will never come upon
our old rags of sin Adam casts off his figgeleaves, when God makes him
coats.

2 The grace of special faith which justifies, and so 2 Faith.
incorporateth into Jesus Christ. For what is putting on of clothes, but a
close knitting and uniting them to the body? And what else is our putting on of
Christ, but a near union and conjunction with him? And therefore the Apostle,
Gal. 3. makes the putting on of Christ, and being in Christ, all one, ver. 27,
28. and that this union by adoption is by faith, ver. 26. Now as the man and
his garments are but one man: so Christ and the believer are but one; even as
he and his Father are but one, Ioh. 17. 22. Would thou daily put on Christ
as thou daily put on thy garments; then thou must daily renew and
strengthen thy faith for the strengthening of this union.

3 The grace of fervent invocation and prayer. That 3 Prayer.
Jesus Christ would cloth himself with our sins, that we may be clothed with
his righteousness, for before we can put on Christ, Christ must put on our
sins and wretchedness. 2. Cor. 5. 21. He made him sin for us, which knew
no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him He must
be covered with shame, that our shame might be covered.

4 The grace of true sanctification and holiness. 4 Holiness.
Thou can not put on Christ but thou must put on his graces. For, 1 Christ is
the treasury and storehouse of all graces; which were in all abundance in the
manhood of Christ: he is full of grace, Ioh 1. 14. 2 Christ and his graces are
inseparable; so as without putting on of these, there is no putting on of
Christ; his fullness supplies us, Ioh. 1. 16. 3 Christ is never given for
justification, but his spirit is given to our sanctification; (and with him all
the fruits and graces of the Spirit. Christ covers none with his robe of
righteousness; but he deckes and adornes that soul with his holiness. Never
think thou put on Christ, till thou have put on the new man created after
God; and have attained a new suite and habit, and art changed in thy course.

5 The grace of hope and expectation. Earnestly desiring 5 Hope.
to be perfectly covered, and decked with Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 4. we desire to
be clothed upon. We are already clothed with the justice of Christ, and in
part and imperfectly with his holiness, but yet much nakedness and filth is
with us, and much frailty and sorrow attends us. Now there is another garment,
the garment of glory and immortality which we long and sigh after to be
clothed withal. For if the taste of Christ be so sweet; what a happiness is
it to be filled with Christ? If in his absence he be so sweet; how sweet is he
in his immediate presence and fellowship? None can have the joy of his Lord
enter into him here; but he will wish and long to enter into the joy of his
Lord hereafter. For if in our prison we can so happily enjoy him; what shall
we in our palace? Thus by 1. mortification 2 justification. 3 invocation. 4
sanctification. 5 joyful hope and expectation, the woman comes to be clothed
with the Sun.

Having expounded the several things in this application of the garment, we
come to the observations. Where we will handle three maine duties of 1 Duty
hence to put on this garment is necessary.
the Church and of Christians.

The first duty is; Every Christian in sense of his own nakedness must labor
to put on this garment; Romans 13. 14. but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Considering. 1 The necessity; in that we the offspring of Adam are as naked in
our nature, as ever Adam was: And as the naked infant is exposed to all
injuries and death it self, unless the parents take it from the birth, and
wrappe it in clothes: so were we till it pleased our heavenly Father to
provide us a cover for our souls nakedness. We must not therefore suffer
this clothing to lie in Gods wardrobe; but we must put it on; partly by
faithful application, grounding our confidence on the only merit and
righteousness of Christ, who is the matter of our righteousness; and partly
by imitation of his holy virtues, growing in daily sanctification. 2 The
excellent properties and benefits of this garment should stir up our
diligence to make our selves sure of it: which properties and benefits are of
two sorts: 1 in saving us from evils. 2 in procuring us all good.

1 In saving us from evils, in that, 1 It alone covers 1 To save from evils.
all guilt, being a long white robe, not as the garments of David's servants cut
off by Hanun, which hid all but their shame. 2 It covers from all danger, as
well as from shame. Isa. 4. 6. It alone arms the believer with safety and
protection. It is a commodious garment for all seasons, for summer and winter;
fit to keep out heats and colds, wind and weather. It is commodious for all
estates, prosperity, adversity, sickness, health, peace, or war; to bear
off blows or shot, called both a wedding garment for peace, and an armor of
proof for war, Ephesians 6. Would thou know what to do to be safe in time of
plague, famine, war, sickness, persecution? thou Cant. 1. 7. The Church would
find Christ at noone, in the heat of the the sun of persecution to be refreshed
by him.
must put on Christ, and walk safely in all dangers. Dwell under the shadow of
the almighty. Ruth fearing injurious dealing, gate her softly and secretly to
Boaz, saying; Cover me with the lap of thy garment. chap. 3. So get thou to
Christ; and now let dangers ensue, and death make an assault upon thee, and
take thee away; it shall do thee no more hurt then it did Christ himself; it
shall only lift thee up, as it it did him to his glory. This garment shall be
sure never to shrink in the wetting, neither shall he that wears it. Would
thou know what to do in the buffetings and temptations of Satan? here is a
sufficient cover and strength against all temptations. Satan will object Thou
art a sinner hateful to God.

Answ. In my self I am so; but in this garment my sin is hid.

Ob.But no sinner can come to heaven.

Answ. No, unless he have the wedding garment which I have by faith: and this
brings me into the Bride Chamber.

Ob.But thou art unworthy of any thing but damnation.

Answ. In my person I am, but in this garment I have a worthiness imputed to
me, Rev. 3. 4.

Ob.But sin drives thee from GOD, and GOD from thee; how dare thou pray or
hope to speed?

An. If I came to GOD in my own name I were hopeless: but I am clothed with
Christ in the sight of GOD, and present his merit in my behalf. By fastening on
me this garment, I am one and the same person with Christ, and GOD can no more
deny me then him.

Would thou know what to do against accusations, and cold fears and terros
of Conscience? This garment put on keeps the heart warm and comfortable, as
if a man walked in the warm sun. ^f a man were clothed with the sun, how
could he be cold; It is one of the curses of the Law, to put on clothes and not
be warm: but this garment removes all curse, never was any clothed herewith
exposed to the curse. Never came Christ any where, but if he found not joy, he
left joy behind him as in Lazarus, Zacheus the Iaylor, etc.

2 In procuring us all good, which it does. 1 In bringing 2 To procure us all
good, 2 ways.
us into acceptance with God. Joseph might not come in his prison garments
before Pharaoh, but must change his garments, Genesis 41. 14. So there is no
access or acceptance with God in our own old forlorn garments, till we
change them, casting off our foul and filthy garments, and adorn our selves
with this second vestiment, figured in the beautiful and holy garments of
Aaron, without which (upon painy of death) he might not appear before the Lord
2. In procuring grace and blessing. In this garment only we become heirs of
blessing. For as Jacob could not have got the blessing from his Father, had not
his Father smelled the sweet smell of his brothers garment: so no more could
we, if we were not wrapped in this garment of our elder Brother. Being in this
garment, the Lord pronounces of us, as Isaac of his son; The smell of my
son is as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed, Genesis 27. 27.
Touch but the hemme of this garment, and virtue comes forth. Wear it and hide
thy self in it, and thou have got blessedness. Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is that
man whose iniquity is hid, and whose sin is covered.

Ob. But have we not all put on Christ already, and are baptized into his name:
How can we still put him on.

Answ. 1 The putting on of Christ is a continued act of the whole life. The
putting on of this garment is a continual act of this life.


For the understanding whereof we must know, that Christ is put on either in
regard of his satisfaction, or of his sanctification. Now although we have put
on Christ once for all in respect of his satisfaction, which faithfully applied
to us, is our justification: yet in respect of sanctification, he is put on
eevery day more and more: seeing that the life of believers is a daily
profiting and increasing in spiritual graces unto full holiness.

2 This putting on of Christ in this world is in much And in much weakness for
2. reasons.
weakness. 1 In respect of the weakness of the instrument. This instrument is
faith, which is feeble at the best, as knowledge is, and as all other graces
are; and the more we can increase in knowledge, and stir up our faith, the
more firmly we lay hold on Christ and his righteousness for life and
salvation; and so in respect of us we more certainly and feelingly put on
Christ. 2 In respect of the strength of the opposites. These are the security
and corruption of flesh, which is still working against grace. In the days of
peace and prosperity (as in a warm sunshine) we are willing to hang our
garment loosely and lightly about us, and it is ready to fall off: we must
therefore daily strive against flesh, and fasten Christ unto us. This is done,
when by daily confession of sin, striving against sin, prayer for pardon of
sin, assent of the promises, and purposing to sin no more, the poor
believer fastneth Christ unto him; and by daily renewing faith and repentance,
he lays faster hold on Christ then before. This every baptized person does
not, yet this putting on of Christ should be the work of every day Many co^me^d
this garment, but few put him on. It may be doubted that a little trial will
manifest it in multitudes, that either they never put on Christ, or hung him
loosely in a vain profession.

The second duty. The Church must labor to express the bright shining and
purity of Jesus Christ with whom she is clothed: A man that wears a great man's
cloth, will be seen and made known to others, that he belongs to such a
Master.

Quest. How may a Christian express the shining of the Sun of righteousness.

Answ. First, in purity of nature by regeneration, Christians must express the
bright shining of this garment.
and sanctification of nature, which heals in part and chaseth away native
darkness, and brings a new and saving light. So the Apostle, Ye were
darkness, now ye are light in the Lord. The sun shines 1 In renovatio^ of
nature.
by the lightsomnesse of his own nature: so the Sun of righteousness was in
his nature more pure and shining then the sun: And every one clothed with
this Sun is renewed, and has attained a glorious and divine nature, 2 Pet.
1. 4. yea, the so clothed are newborn of God, and as sons of God shining
etc. Phil. 2. 15.

Secondly, in the purity of the shining and new gifts and graces of the Spirit
within: Such as are; 1 Illumination, 2 In the shine of spiritual graces.
the light of knowledge, Judgment, and discerning. Can a man be clothed and
compassed with the sun, and not be enlightened? 2 Love, which is as a warm
flame showing and shining a far off: such was in Zacheus; such was in the
laylor. 3. Zeal, which is a fervent and fiery affection. He shall want no
heat that is clothed with the sun. We see, how in our Sun Jesus Christ,
the zeal of his Fathers house consumed him: and so in the rest of the
faculties. As the sun shines in every part: so it is not enough to have one
part graced, but grace must be in all.

Thirdly, in shining and lightsome conversation without. The sun shines not
only within, but 3 In shining conversation: Reasons 5.
from within shines outwardly: so must a Christian clothed with the sun
manifest his clothing as well by shining and lightsome actions, as by renewed
nature. 1 The commandment is, Let your light so shine before men: As the sun
shines to men from within his own substance; so did our sun of
righteousness; and so must his be that are clothed with the sun, their life
must be as a light in a lantern; not a glistering on the outside only, as a
civil man's or an hypocrites may, but a light within, shining outwardly on
every side. 2 Jesus Christ shined in all innocence 2.
and graces; and we must labor to shine as he did, that we may appear to
whom we belong. Can any man be clothed with this Sun, and not shine, both in
purity of grace within; and gracious conversation without? His words were so
gracious, as never man spoke so: Do thou express Christ in all thy words, let
them be savoury, fruitful, and for God and his glory; as all his were from
God, and for God; he walked in lightsome paths. 3 His life was wholly
heavenly, as the sun shines from heaven. 3.
If thou be clothed with the sun, thy conversation must be heavenly, thou
must direct all thy thoughts that way, and in all thy actions aim someway to
further that end. 4 He kept himself from the impurity and darkness of the
world and age 4.
in which he lived, though a most wicked generation: So must thou be like the
Sun of the world and of the Church; walk and move as lights in the midst of
a froward and crooked generation. 5 He brought light unto the world, as the
sun does; so must thou 5.
(if clothed with the sun) to thy power, and in thy place enlighten all round
about thee.

How dare men mock at purity and holiness, and cast mire and dirt upon so
precious and costly a garment? Use.
For what is it they scorn, but even Jesus Christ Not to cast dirt upon so
precious a garment.
himself, whom God has given for the clothing of his Church? How do the
Papists and enemies of grace and religion undermine our religion, and make
their advantages on us, but under such titles and imputations of purity,
preciseness, scripturers, and the like? And must we needs learn of them to
blow up our own religion: Let the land of Egypt be dark, there shall be
light in all Goshen. There cannot be a truer note of a false Church then to
shun the light, and love the night of dark ignorance, and fear and scorn
nothing so much as the sunshine upon themselves or others. But against the
scorn of profane ones, hold before thee, 1 The commandment, to be as pure as
the sun, Phil. 1. 10. for the word (...).
(...) is taken from the splendour of the sun, which is called in Greek (...).
This purity must be Not to leave it off for the frown of men. 4. reasons.
from all corruption in doctrine and manners, as the sun is not mixed with
any stain or impurity. Do not thou join with the profane ones, who here
object: We like not this pureness; such strictnes is naught; and to stand so
precisely as not to yield a little to the fashions of the times etc.

Answ. Will they moderate the holy Ghost; set him to school; teach him to
speak; if he overreach bring him to their scantling? But he tells thee; thou
must either be pure or impure without toleration or indulgence of thy self. We
shall be impure enough when we have done all we can, without pleading for it.
Thou must be clothed either with the sun, or with thy sin. 2 Hold before
thee the Lords commendation of the Church, that she is not only fair 2.
as the Moon, which has some specks and defects, but pure as the sun, Cant.
6. 9. that is, both in his own gracious acceptance, and in the Churches
endeavor. What care I to be mis-judged of men, and to have my glory turned
into shame, I stand or fall to the Lord. 3 Hold before thee the danger of 3.
wanting this wedding garment, which is, to be shut out from the supper. If
so, then what shall be to him that rents and scorns it: If they that are ashamed
of this white garment, because it is laced with crosses and reproaches, be shut
out: what shall they be that deride and shame it? Woe be to them that of all
other habits cannot abide white and shining garments; but rent and tear them,
as too precise and pure, and yet can brook drunkards, swearers, and profane
beasts. 4 Hold before thee the promise of 4.
walking in white hereafter; which promise is made to none but such as walk in
white here. Rev. 3. 4. And this; The just shall shine as the Sun in the
kingdom of heaven; but they must be just, they must begin to shine on earth,
wherein we begin the life of heaven; for the first shining must be in the
kingdom of grace. The sun shines still, if never so many Dogs bark
against it.

The third duty is; That being thus clothed, we be careful to keep our
clothes clean and undefiled. We must keep clean this costly garment for 3.
reasons.
This is called in the Scripture a walking worthy of Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 4. 1.
when the whole life of a regenerate man is as a clean garment new washed. And
Phil. 1. 27 only let your conversation be such as beseems the Gospel of
Christ, as if it were the only care of a Christian. Three maine reasons there
are to enforce this duty.

1. Civility teaches men and women to beware 1.
where they sit down, especially in foul and soily places, when they have
their new and wedding garments on. So grace much more, and the fear of God in
the heart will not suffer any one in this garment carelessly to sit down in the
seat of sinners, nor to meddle with the soil and pitch of sin, which cannot
but stain and besmeare their fair and wedding garment. And as no man will
meddle with his ordinary soyling business on the Sabbath while he has his
best clothes on: So thou that art a Christian (to whom every day must be a
Sabbath and rest from sin, which is the ordinary and foul trade of the
world) must not soil thy self with lusts, but avoid the very appearance of
evil.

2 It is for the honor of Christ that we be careful 2.
of our garments. 1 King. 10. 5. The Queen of Saba noted the wisdom and glory
of Solomon in the sitting of his servants, and the order of his Ministers, and
in their apparel: Even so the wisdom and glory of this true Solomon shines
in the shining and glorious attire of his servants. How can a servant express
greater contempt of his Lord, then to take his new liverie and tread it under
his feet, or trayle it through the mire and dirt? But so does he that
professing the name of Christ, lives unsuitable to his profession.

3 As he never had this garment, whose care is not to preserve it pure and
clean: so no man has assurance 3.
of his own soundness in grace, without this care. Rev. 3. 4. In that Church
of Sardi, where the corruptions were great and general, were found a few names
whose soundness was described by this; That they had not defiled their
garments.

Quest. How may we keep our garments clean and fair?

Answ. 1 By making conscience of every sin, and sincerely purposing and
endeavoring to obey How to keep our garment clean
God; for every sin is a polluting of our selves and our garments. True
Christianity stands not in knowledge 3. rules.
or profession; but in uprightness, and in study 1.
to keep a good conscience.

2 By framing our life suitable and tunable to holy doctrine. A Christian then
keeps his garment 2.
clean, when his life is a pattern of the Gospel; and his conversation
witnesses his conversion. Hence (Romans 6. 17.) the Gospel is called a mould or
form; because as a mould or seal leaves behind it a print or image of it
self on such things as to which it is applied: so the Gospel leaves a print
or impression of heavenly wisdom, holiness, and grace in the mind and lives
of the godly; and changes them into it self, as the wax receives on it
self the Image and print of the seal. Not so the Law, it commands or
forbids; but leaves no such print; has no power to change or renew.

3 By keeping our selves free from the contagion of sin in others, no way
allowing or consenting unto 3.
their sin, or communicating in their evil; but preserving a diligent watch
not to be defiled by others, or being plucked away by their errors, so to fall
from our own steadfastness.

1 If this be to keep our garments clean, then Use.
be there but a few names (as in Sardi) in whom we may discover this care in
this so filthy a generation, in which most men (nor regarding the place of
their profession, nor the presence of God and his Angels and servants) go
abroad so beastly disguised, that a man can scarce know them in the rank of
Christians; Yea, so myred and moyled are they in their beloved sins, that
they have soyled all their garments, their profession and name into which they
were baptized. Where can a man bestow himself and cast his eye in this
sluttish age, and not see and hear numbers who profess salvation by Jesus
Christ! But,

1 Renting and tearing this holy vestment by cursing, swearing, blasphemy, nay
some that bow at 7 Sorts of men defile their garments.
the name of Jesus, presently swear by the body, blood, and wounds of Christ.

2 Others bespawling it with brutish and hateful 1.
drunkenness, by which they wash not only religion 2.
out of their hearts, but reason out of their heads, and have scarce left
themselves men, much less Christians.

3 Others bemyre them with worldliness, covetousness, pride, cruelty, deceit,
lying; that many heathens would be ashamed of them and their religion, as
savouring more of earth or hell then of heaven.

4 Others bemoyle their garments with fleshlinesse adultery, fornication,
filthiness, and uncleanness, 4.
in word and deed, which ought not to be named amongst them that name
themselves Christians.

5 Others by apostasy and falling from their purposes 5.
and beginnings of grace, welter themselves and garments as swine in the mire,
and dogs returned to their vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22. Better they had never heard
of this garment, then to wallow in such filthy puddles of lust and former
filthiness.

6 Others that tear off this garment, contemning 6.
the Ministry and all good exhortation, by speaking evil of the good way, and
persecuting the way of God; scorning and reviling such as have care to keep
clean their garments.

7 Others not so foul as these former monsters, 7.
but perhaps having grace in their hearts, and a more (...) profession of it;
and yet not well watch(...) themselves, stand not so fast, but by some fall and
soul offense dishonor at once God and his word, themselves and their
profession. Who although they can say, We are no swearers, no drunkards,
adulterers, nor of notorious profane life; yet by yielding to some lust, do
by some one action (especially if they be of note in the profession) more
dishonor God, then some other men by a thousand oaths and blasphemies. Thus
good David made all Gods enemies to blaspheme God and his religion.

2 Let all of us learn to beware of stayning our Use.
holy profession; and be careful that our Christian Beware of stayning thy
holy profession:
course be the ornament of the Gospel. That which the Apostle requires of all
servants (Tit. 2. 10.) is required of all the servants of God, who must show
all good faithfulness, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in
all things.

Quest. How may we do this?

Ans. By considerations and practice.

The considerations are four. 1 The preciousness of thy garment. The name of
Christ is as a precious 1.
ointment; and will thou cast it into a sink-hole? Will thou occasion the
profane to blaspheme and scoff at Gods holy religion? see thou not the
malice of the Devil and his instruments, who (because they hate God and his
truth) malign not so much the person of a poor Christian, as the light and
truth in him? For though they love nothing more then sin in any one, yet let a
poor Christian tread aside a little, you shall easily perceive where the bile
is. Oh these are your Bible-bearers, your professors, your holy brethren; all
alike, never a better; This is a goodly profession, that gives you leave to do
thus and thus; as if the profession were not of God, because the professors are
men. Seeing therefore all the malice of profane ones lies against God himself
and his truth, let all that profess the name of (...) and his religion, be so
much the more wary.

2 The foulness and reproach of a professor of 2.
the Gospel lights upon Christ both the head and members. What says Nathan to
David (2 Samuel 12. 14) By this deed thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. Rom, 2. 24. The name of God is blasphemed through you. Thou who
gloriest in the Gospel, and transgressest the Gospel; dishonorest not thou
Christ? as ver. 23 And therefore we see how grievously God takes it of his own
people that they should pollute his name among the heathen, Ezech. 36 20 Will
not the profane Atheists and Miscreants say as much of us as the Gentiles of
the Israelites? These are the people of the Lord; these are the professors of
the Gospel, these are the fruits of their holy profession. The reproach of a
professor of the Gospel lights also upon Christ in his Members. For (as
Solomon says) a lewd son dishonors the whole house: so one careless
Christian casts mire and shame on all his household. Woe be to him that offends
the least of these little ones, much more to him that offends and wounds all.
It is a strong argument to keep many wretches from heinous attempts, because
they will not stain their blood, and blemish their house: and much more should
Christians beware of staining the blood of Christ, and dishonouring the house
of their Father.

3 The sin of a professor of the Gospel is a double sin, he sins not only
against his soul, but against his 3.
profession; he sins not only against his own, but against Gods name, which
he prays to be hallowed before the forgiveness of his sin or his salvation;
he sins not against the Law only, but against the Gospel. The sins of
Atheists, Papists, scorners, worldlings, are single sins in comparison; and
bring no discredit to the Gospel to speak of: but for one clothing himself
with Christ his name, to be a swearer, covetous, or drunk, for such to be
profane as Esau was; let it never be declared in Gath, nor published in
Aske^on; let not the uncircumcised laugh at it; let not Papists find such
advantage against our doctrine. O that there were no such Saul's; or if there
were, that they might die in obscurity, and not live in thelight, to dishonor
and disgrace it; who not only fall themselves, but throw down many with them!

4. Saints by calling must be saints in conversation; 4.
if we be called to be Saints, we must live as Saints, Saints by calling be
Saints in conversation.
showing forth the virtues of him that has called us; that our attire and
actions may make men say, surely this man is a Christian as he professes: As
King Ahazia readily gessed by the Prophets attire, that it was Elias, 2 King.
1. 8. Hereby thou glorifiest God in thy self and in others, mooving them to
glorify God in the day of their visitation, 1 Pet. 2.

2. Hereby the enemies, Papists, and profane ones, if thou reclaimest them not
being incurable, yet thou shall convict them in their consciences, stop their
mouths, and get reverence to thy person even in their hearts.

The practices are six. 1 Because we are prone Six helps to keep our garments
clean.
to foul our garments, we must watch our selves narrowly, and with Job suspect
all our ways. Rev. 16. 15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments. In every thing whatsoever we speak or do: what? will this disgrace
my profession, and foul my garments? Is this right, and will it do my
profession no wrong?

2 As in our bodily garments we make daily work 2.
for the Landresse: so in the garments of our souls we make daily washing
work: and that not by a light stain and soil which will easily scour out,
but with deep and grounded filthiness, which requires much rubbing, scouring,
beating, wringing, and rinsing. And therefore we must still have recourse to
the laver of the Church, and purification of the Sanctuary. As the Jews,
touching any thing, by which they became legally unclean, or if they suspected
any defilement in their garments or persons, they must wash their bodies, and
change their garments, and go to be purified according to the purification of
the Temple: So the Christian being defiled with the touch of any known or
suspected sin, must presently have recourse to the blood of Christ, (a
fountain opened to the house of Judah) and wash himself thoroughly: purging
first his heart by repentance, and then (with Peter) his head, hands, and all.
Thus may he keep his garments clean, though he foul them every day.

3 Avoid slipperie ways and occasions of falling; watch against offenses, make
strait steps to thy 3.
feet, lest thou fall and foul thy clothes. Fear of falling keeps us from
falls. Sort not with foul persons and evil works. Psa. 1. 1. and 2 Cor. 6.
17. Touch no unclean thing, but hate the works of them that fall away. 2 Pet.
1. 4. To attain or retain the godly nature, thou must fly the corruptions of
the world through lust. A man that would keep his clothes clean, will not
run into a flaxdressers shop.

4 Soundly reform thy own uncleanness; wash 4.
unto cleanness. An hypocrite may draw out water and wash, but there follows
no reformation or cleanness; he slubbers and sluts up the business, and
leaves the soil in. But sound reformation brusheth off moats as well as
palpable foulness; appearances of evil, as well as apparent evils; nor will
it stay waiting when soil will go off of it self, but will force it off. He
knows it will not leave him, but he will leave it. What himself sees not or
cannot shun, he will be glad if another tell him, and help him to be rid of it.
And from thy self help to cleanse all about thee. Greeve for the abominations
and foulness of others which thou can not help and for the slander of
Gods religion by it. So David Psalm 119. 136. and Jeremy.

5 Observe and make right use of Gods afflictions: 5.
for when Gods children are loath to be at the pains to cleanse their garments,
the Lord himself is feign to play the Landresse: as once when he washed
Jerusalem, he whitens them again by afflictions. Dan. 12. 10. As a Fuller
washes and cleanses a cloth by beating it, so does the Lord. Thou might
save the Lord some labor, and thy self some blows. If we would judge and
cleanse our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.

6 Pray with David: Let no man be ashamed because of me. What a grief were it
to hear the Papists, and scorners to triumph because of thee? What a woe, that
thy pride, covetousness, swearing, drunkenness (which professest goodness)
should cast dung in the faces of all Gods Children? Does not offense of one
bring woe enough; but that with offense of God thou should scandalize all?
And were it their names only, it were a less sin: but the name of God through
their sides is wounded and blasphemed.

And the Moon was under her feet.] Here is the second property of this woman.
Where, 1. the meaning. Property. 2.
2. the doctrine.

In the meaning two things 1. What is meant by Moon; 2. what by under her feet.

1 The Moon is not properly taken, but by a Metaphor or borrowed speech. For,
this elegant Prophecy The world compared to the Moon in 4. things.
of the Revelation is as full of mysteries us of sentences, yea as of words.
The Moon therefore signifies the world, and all earthly things; which are
aptly compared to the Moon in four things.

1 In inferiority. The Moon is the lowest of all 1 In inferiority.
celestial bodies, and between the Sun and Moon is no comparison: So the
world and the external blessings of it are the least and lowest of Gods
blessings: neither is there any comparison between heavenly and earthly
things, as there is no proportion between sublunary and superlunary things.

2 In mutability, and ever-changing inconstancy. 2 In mutabilitie.
If she increases, she decreaseth as fast: if she be now in the full, she is
presently in the wane: if she shine a few nights, that brightness shall in a
few days be turned to black darkness: and never is she seen two nights
together with one face: So all worldly and earthly things are of as round a
figure as the Moon, unstable, and in nothing constant but in inconstancy. 1
Ioh 2. 17. The world passes away, and the lust of it; yea and the luster, that
is, whatsoever is desirable in it.

3 In her spots and obscurity. For the Moon in 3 In obscurity.
her chief shining is clouded and specked with black spots, and a darkness
within her obscureth her: so are all worldly things. The greatest wealth of the
world is spotted with many wants, cares, fears. The greatest glory with sad
adversity, and some sense of misery. The most delicate pleasures are but
bitter-sweet and moth-eaten, and very baits covering mortal hooks. And all
the desirable things the world affords, cannot supply a light and comfort
without some darkness: Not so the sun, and the Churches Sun is a brightness
and blessing with which God ads no sorrow.

4. In the end and use. For by Gods ordinance the Moon is set to govern the
night, as the sun to 4. In the use.
rule the day: So the profits and pleasures and worldly comforts serve for our
use and benefit while we are in the night of this world, and in this vale of
darkness, covered with vailes of sin, and clouded and compassed with the
darkness of calamities the fruits of sin. But, the Sun rising, there is
no need of the Moon: So when that blessed Sun of righteousness shall rise
in his glory upon us, and we shall walk in that blessed light of heaven,
there is no need of the world or worldly comforts. That blessed Sun shall
swallow up, and drown all the lights of these candles, and the Moon it self.
As that holy woman and Martyr going to her death, said, I go now to a place
where money bears no mastery. Rev. 21. 23. That City has no need of the
worlds sun nor Moon, for the glory of God and the Lamb is the light of it.
And chapter 22. 5. There shall be no night there, nor any use of a candle, etc. for
the Lord gives them light. Where the Sun never sets, what need the Moon, Isa
60. 20.

2 In the treading the Moon under her feet. 1. What is meant by feet. 2. What
to tread under feet. For the first. Feet are often taken in Scripture
Metaphorically, and signify the affections, desires, cares, endeavors.
Because as the feet carry the body, and are the instruments of motion; So these
carry our minds to and fro. For the mind is borne about by the affections, as
the body by feet. Ecc. 4. 17 When thou entrest into the house of God, look
well to thy feet, Prove. 4. 27. Remoove thy feet from evil, that is, affect not
in desire, act not in endeavor. For the The treading of the Moon under feet
is the contempt of the world.
second. The treading of the Moon under the feet of this woman, is in one
word, the contempt of the world. And has in it three things in the phrase
employed.

1 A disaffecting of earthly things, and a contempt of things below. For we
show our disrespect and base account, yea a casting out of our affections the
things we tread under our feet.

2 A mind elevated and lifted above the world and all earthly things. The
woman's affections are set above them all; as we stand wholly above the things
which we cast under our feet.

3 A settled and undaunted resolution against the varieties and changes of
crosses and afflictions, swallowing and digesting, yea stoutly contemning the
calamities and adversities, as well as the prosperity of the world; and by no
means will suffer her self to be divorced from her Sun. And this was the
very estate of the Virgin-Primitive Church next after the Apostles (which this
Prophecy aims and points at more specially) which despised the riches,
pride, pomp, and ambition which crept in in the succeeding ages to his bane.
But as yet she endured afflictions, and most violent persecutions, and
contemned both the force and flattery of Tyrants, by which they would have
won her from the profession, and fruition of Jesus Christ the Sun of
righteousness.

The property of the Church and true members of it, is to despise and contemn
the best things, and the worst of the world, in comparison of Jesus Christ.

First, the best of the world is trodden under the A sound Christian despises
the best of the world.
godly man's feet in this comparison. Heb. 11. 24. Moses by faith refused to be
the son of Pharaohs daughter. He was adopted a Kings son, he lived in all
the delights of the Court exempt from all care; he might have had some hope in
time to have attained to the kingdom it self; yet despising all that dignity,
went to visit his brethren the Hebrews, and preferred their oppressed estate
before his own preferment, and joined with them, as one certainly persuaded to
be at length partner in the promise made to the Fathers. The Apostles left all
to follow Christ. The wise Merchant sels all to purchase the Pearl. Paul
accounts not his life dear to fulfill the ministration which he had received
of the Lord Jesus, Acts 20 24. The same Paul esteems all worldly respects,
riches, gifts, knowledge, compared with the riches, and knowledge of Christ, to
be but loss and dung, Phil. 3. 7, 8.

Secondly, the worst of the world is contemned And the worst of the world.
for Christ, Heb. 11. 25. Moses chose to suffer adversity with Gods people,
esteeming the rebukes of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. And
ver. 35. The saints were racked, stoned, hewed asunder, and would not be
delivered, because they looked for a better resurrection. The Apostles rejoiced
to suffer.

Thirdly, both best and worst is trodden under foot, And all the world in
comparison of Christ.
Romans 8. 38, 39. The Apostle proves; that neither life, that is, the pleasures
of life; nor death, that is, the pains and terrors before, as well as the
stroke of death it self; nor things present, that is, evils of sense; nor
things to come, that is, evils in expectation; nor height, neither of
prosperity, nor depth, of adversity, nor any thing else can separate us from
the love of God; neither which he in Christ bears to us, nor we in Christ
unto him.

1 As he that has the Sun, cares but a little Reasons 5.
for the light of the Moon: so the soul that is clothed 1.
with Jesus Christ, can tread earthly things under foot. The bright sunshine
and light obscureth, yea and extinguisheth the light of the Moon and sublunary
things. As soon as Zacheus got Christ into his house and heart, presently
half his goods he gave away, and with the other half he made restitution. If
we could suppose a man to stand in the Sun, how small and insensible would
the Moon be unto him? how would the whole world scarce appear as the prick
of a pin? And indeed so is it to the eye of his mind that is clothed with the
Sun. He is no reasonable man that will not give over a worse title for a
better.

2 Faith is an invincible thing: all things are possible 2.
and easy to it; it is an hold or fort which yet never any tyrant could scale
or win. Nay the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, and much more is
the world too weak to win it. It is the victory that overcomes the world.
One inseparable effect of it, is sound love of the Lord Jesus; which is as
strong, nay stronger then death, much water cannot quench it; no not a sea, nor
a world of waters of afflictions.

3 Where the treasure is there is the heart (as where the carkeis is, thither
the Eagles will resort) and all other things are nothing to the treasure.
Christ is the Christians treasure laid up in heaven; where Christ's home is,
there is his; where Christ's estate is, there is his. And because he cannot
bestow his affections on Christ and the world too; nor serve two Masters at the
same time commanding contrary things (no more then he can with the same eye
look upward and downward at once) therefore he cleaves to the one, and hates
the other.

4 The sound Christian has a right Judgment 4.
restored him, and a spirit of discerning to esteem Sound judgment holds
earthly things good with 4 Cautions.
things in their due place and degree of goodness. And therefore although he
knows worldly things to be good creatures of God, and so in their nature good;
yet with four distinctions.

1 Mutably good, moone-like and not so unchangeably. 1.


2 Good, but to good men only; (as the Camelion 2.
is colored according to that whereto she is applied) but become evil to
evil men; and to sinners the occasions and instruments of much sin. Heb. 11.
25. Honors, pleasures, delights, are called the pleasures of sin; not
because they are so in themselves, but because they are often occasions and
instruments of sin; and are seldom had or held without some sin or other.

3 Good, but in no excellent or eminent degree of goodness, neither in
themselves, as being mutable; 3.
nor in their effect; for they often make good men worse, seldom bad men
better. Those are eminently good things, which are so unchangeably; such as are
saving graces, which always make a man better.

4 Good, but so as in comparison they are not worth the name of good; namely,
in comparison of heavenly and spiritual good things. Hence Solomon esteemed
wisdom above all wealth and pomp, as 1 King. 3. And Paul who acknowledged
these the good Creatures of God, 1 Timothy 44. And profitable helps to perform
duties of piety and mercy. chap. 6. 18. Yet in comparison of Christ calls them
very dross and dung. For as the light of the Moon in it self has a
comfortable brightness; yet compared with the light of the Sun is very
darkness. So all worldly things in themselves are good comforts and helps; yet
compared with Christ, and waighed with his worth, vanish to nothing, yea to
worse then nothing.

5 The true Christian sees and discerns in Christ that worth and excellency
which all the world cannot afford.

1 He sees Christ crowned with honor and glory Why the christian prizeth Christ
above all the world: 4. Reasons.
of perfect wisdom, holiness, victory and glory; in respect of which all
worldly glory is but smoke and windy vanity.

2 He sees and enjoyes in Christ the dignity of his adoption, by which of a
child of wrath he becomes the child of God; and attaines a true nobility in the
blood of Christ; and alliance with the Saints, in comparion of which all
earthly nobility and alliance is but rottenness, as rising out of sinful and
corruptible seed.

3 By Jesus Christ he has attained an happy communion with God the Father;
perfect remission and righteousness by God the Son; sweet and inward
consolation by the holy Ghost; the safe and serviceable attendance of the holy
Angels; a perfect rule of faith and life by the holy Scriptures, a sweet
concord and happy communion with the Saints, with whom he fruitfully
converseth; an harmonicall and musical peace of good conscience within
himself, which passes all understanding; and all needful supplies without
him both for life and godliness.

4 By Jesus Christ he has attained an inexhaust 4.
fountain of Gods love: the wealth and rich revenue of precious faith, love,
and all graces, heaven to be his hope, and also his inheritance: and God
himself to be his portion, in whose love is no lack, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and to be crowned with immortality and eternal glory, the
same with Christ our head.

Now consider, if a thousand worlds can afford any one of these contentments;
or if they all could make a man so rich or happy; or if ever thou saw the
greatest Potentate without Christ so rich, mighty or glorious, as the poorest
and basest Christian, treading all that vanity and Mooneshine under his feet.

1 To reproove many men, who in comparison of Use.
the world despise the privileges in Christ. As unhappy men that prefer the
world above Christ.
such,

1 Who for want of ^ound judgeme^t disesteeme the highest state of a Christian,
weighed with worldly respects and preferments. Every man makes high rekoning of
earthly parentage: but scarce one of a thousand cares a rush for the dignity of
adoption in Christ as if to be the son of a King were more honor, then to be a
son of God. Earthly preferments ravish and affect men, and lift them up above
themselves: but offer the preferments of the kingdom of heaven to most men,
they refuse and scorn them. How does it rejoice men's hearts to see worldly
wealth flow in in abundance; or when an heritage of a piece of earth falls upon
them? But how few are of David's mind, who had more joy of heart in the
cheerful countenance of God, then others when their corn, wine and oil
increased? Few are half so glad to become heirs apparent of heaven.

2 Who for want of sound love of Christ plainly And who refuse Christ for the
world
refuse Christ for the world. As when men lay aside religion, good conscience,
and their duty, to get riches and preferments of the world Such as the profane
Esaus of the world, who are all for pottage, but despise the blessing. And the
graceless Gadarens who as swine still rooting in the earth, prefer their
pigges before Jesus Christ. And wretched Demasses that forsake the truth to
fall to the present world. Oh the days of trial will discover a number such!
But most unhappy of all worldlings are they whose office is to preach Jesus
Christ, but for wealth and preferments cast off good conscience and the
diligent exercise of their callings; the right successors of Judas, who must
have the bag; and the better to fill it, turns against his Master, departs
from his calling; and so runs on to destruction.

Let all of us against this corruption consider; To fortisie our selves against
this profanesse, 6. helps.
1 That our Lord Jesus himself denied to be a King, and was content to be
poor in the world, that we might be rich, and to be despised in comparison of
his office. And must it be better with servants, 1.
then the Master? 2 The saints were strangers and 2.
pilgrims, Heb. 11. 13. If they could not enjoy both religion and riches, then
they chose religion and good conscience, and abandoned honor, wealth,
preferments. Moses esteemed Christ's rebukes above the wealth of a Kingdom.
Paul glories in the marks of Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 17. 3 What will it profit a
man to win the whole world, and to lose his 3.
own soul? This is an unhappy exchange. The world lost may be won again. 4
The promise 4.
is, there shall be no loss in leaving all the world for Christ, Mat. 19. 29.
but great gain and advantage.

5 What a folly were it to be so affected with the light of the Moon, as for
it to neglect the brightness 5.
of the Sun? 6 What a confusion were it in the world, to offer to set the
Moon above the Sun? 6.
Such a confusion were it in Christianity to prefer in judgment or affection
earthly things before Jesus Christ and things of heaven.

2 Let no member of the Church think that he may set the Moon any where but
under his feet. A son of this mother may not set the Moon upon his head, by
placing his chief study how to get and keep the world and wealth of it. Nor
in his Judgment, advancing them above their due place; but with Mary
acknowledge a better part. Neither may he set them on his heart by minding
earthly things, or by affecting and covetous desiring them above better things.
Neither hold them in his hand by base and tenacious keeping them when he may
exchange them for better things; but in this comparison tread them under his
foot, and contemn such bewitching vanities.

The text affords us some motives. 1 Because Motives to keep the Moon under
our feet.
they all resemble the Moon in mutability and everchanging inconstancy. If
they or any of them were to abide with us, or we with them, there were more 1
Al are alike fugitive.
cause or color to allow them an higher place then under our feet: but they
are al alike fugitive and mutable as the Moon; as appears in this short
survay. First, riches have Eagles wings to fly away, Pro. 23. 1 Riches.
5. Job had experience that they were uncertain riches, as Paul calls them, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Solomon calls them riches of vanity, Prove. 13. 11. And the Apostle,
Heb. 11. 25. calls their use, for a season. Secondly, (...).
honors, are as mutable as the Moon. Haman the one 2 Honors.
day was the only man with the King at the banquet, the next day he was hanged
on his own gallows. Nebuchad-nezzar advanced himself in his grear Babel, as
if he were a God; but the same hour he is cast among beasts, Dan. 4 30.
Adoni-bezek, Judge. 17. now a conqueror over seaventy Kings, and now under the
table equal with dogs, and eating their offals. Great Belizarius, the chief
Duke of all the Roman Empire, most potent and glorious in honorable triumphs
and victories; but spoiled of his wealth by Justinian, accused, condemned, and
had his eyes put out, and came to stand in the high ways to beg, saying, give
to Belizarius one token. Thirdly, Date obulum Belizario.
pleasures (Moone-like) go away by post; make love to many, like alluring
harlots; are large in fair promises, 3. Pleasures.
and win many to like them; and adulterate with them, but keep faith with
none. It were a vain thing to expect to hold them, if thou had the pleasures
of Paradise it self. Pleasures for evermore Psalm. 16. 11.
are only at Gods right hand. Fourthly, the life it self 4 Life it self.
passes as a tale, and is in a moment changed; and who can boast of tomorrow?
The Moon risen hasteneth not faster to her West and setting, then man borne
travelleth swiftly to the west and setting of his life. Fitfly, the whole world
passes away, and (as the Moon) 5 Whole world,
is ever upon his speed. This old Moon is in her last quarter; yea in the
hour of her wane, of her change. 1 Ioh. 2. 18. And now why should we depend
(as Pliny speaks of those shelfishes) on the Moon, subject to all her
changes, and not rather set up our hearts and thoughts on things certain and
lasting? Why follow we these false lights which serve to no other end but to
seduce their followers? The ancient nobility of Rome (says Plutarch) used to
wear Moons on their shoes, that by this Emblem of mutability they should
not swell with the glory and greatness of their estate. A shame for Christians
who neither observe that place nor use of the Moon. Let us conclude that God
in mercy has made them all mutable and Moonelike, that we should not rest our
hopes and hearts on such restless things; nor content our selves with things
present, if we may call those things present which are always passing away and
mutable.

2 God has put them under our feet (Psalm. 8. 6. thou 2 God has put them under
our feet.
have set all things under his feet) that we should afford them no place above
our feet. The croppe of the field, the fleece of the flock, the treasures of
gold and silver, the richest mines in the bowels of the earth, the costly and
precious Jewels, and most orient Pearls, all are taken from under our feet,
that we might still afford them the right place which God and nature have
assigned them. Indeed, if they were fetched out of heaven, we might have them
in more estimation. Oh how would we then admire them, that can so advance them
which we see fetched from under our feet? If God had made them our Masters, what
diligent service would we have given them, who can be such drudges to our
servants?

3 God has not put in them any such worth or 3 Has put no great worth in
themselves.
value as the world esteems. If they were of such worth, would the Lord cast
them (as a musse) to all, good and bad? Were they worthy our hearts, surely the
Lord would give them as the patrimony and portion of his children: whereas he
would have few of them encombred with much of them. Nay he gives them as wages
good enough for servants and slaves; as the goods which Abraham gave to the
children of the bond-women, reserving in the mean time the inheritance for
Isaac. And as the Moon shines and rules in the night; so commonly men in the
night of sin have the most, because they have only portion in the world.
Job. 12. 6 The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they who provoke God are in
safety, whom God has enriched with his hand. Secondly, were they so good in
themselves as in men's estimation, most men good and bad would not be worse for
the^ as usually they are. For as the Moon in the full is furthest distant from
the Sun, from whom she receives her light and brightness: so men in general,
when they are at the full of prosperity, are farthest from the author of it.
For evil men who are worse by every thing, no marvel if riches be reserved
for their hurt. What marvel is it that a spider turns all to poison: that a
wicked man abuses his ease and prosperity to slay himself by them? Prove. 1.
32. So wanton children sit and play with fire till they burn themselves. Hence
is it that commonly they who have most rule over other, have the least over
themselves; and the richest Misers in goods, are emptiest of true riches. And
even good men themselves too often resemble Good men as the Moon seldom in
the full but in danger of eclipse.
the Moon; they can no sooner be full and prosperous in the world, but
presently admit a decay and wane of their light, and decrease in graces. Good
David in his chase and low estate was as a dead dog in his own eyes, and very
merciful to spare the life of his deadly enemy when he was in his hands: But
in his full and glory he was not content with all the royalties of his
kingdom, unless Ioab number his people, and tell him how many he may command.
2 Samuel 24. 2. And now in stead of sparing his enemy, he kills his most trusty
friend and faithful servant Vriah. Good Hezekiah in his wane and sickness was
praying, weeping, confessing and humbling himself: but in his recovery and
health (as in his full) he is showing and boasting and priding himself in his
wealth and treasure, which cost him dear. This is the case of many private
Christians, who in their low estate were humble, conscionable in hearing,
reading, praying; now the world comes on them, they are in the full, and all in
gone. And no marvel, seeing even the Church herself, this woman now clothed
with the sun began to decline from her virgin integrity, and departing from
her Sun made way to Antichrist, when pride, pomp, ambition, and wealth came
in request. Now she set the Moon above her head, till the Sun with his glorious
light took his leave; in which darkness those famous Churches sit at this day.

Quest. How may I know whether I have the Signs of him whom the Moon has
under her feet 5.
Moon under my feet, or the Moon has me under foot? 1 A note of him that
is a drudge and slave of the world, not gotten above the Moon, is, to tread
the Sun, that is, Christ himself under his 1.
feet; that despises the Gospel, cares not for his merits, for the promises,
especially the conditions of faith, repentance, obedience. He dotes upon the
Moon: Christ is a tastlesse name; till his soul be a tearing out of his body,
he will part with nothing, lose nothing for Christ. If the Moon be bright, the
Sun is set. 2 He can tread Gods worship under foot; whence the Scripture
calls the worldling an 2.
Idolater. Col. 3. 5. for the service of God and the world can never stand
together. He that has the Moon on his head serves another God then does the
true worshipper; he sacrifices (as the old Idolaters) Ier. 44. 19.
to the Queen of heaven, and not to the God of Job. 31. 26.
heaven, and behold the Moon walking in her brightness. Oh how weary is he
till the Sabbath be over, what a burden is the time of Gods service? What a
tedious time is the new Moon, and when will it be gone, that we may sell
wheat and return to the service of the old Moon, Amos 8. 5? 3 He can tread
religion under his feet, and will if occasion be offered. For till the moon be
under foot, he will enjoy the world, and by all means eschew the cross; he
will not suffer persecution for his religion, but if the sword be but shaken he
will revolte from his religion. Mat. 13. 21. as soon as tribulation comes, by
and by it withers The love of the world has always been a cause of revolt.
The love of the world has made many in these days revolt before tribulation
come. The rumor of trouble is enough to these moonemongers, to discharge and
warn away their religion.

4 The wise worldling, in whose heart the moon 4.
is not set, because he knows not which religion may prevail, will set up the
Sun and moon both together, and make an hotch potch of his religion. Gal. 6
12. false teachers to avoid persecution will make and coin a new Gospel,
join Moses and Christ, justification of faith and works. And many admirers of
the moon can finely join Papists and Protestants religion together, and bind
them together with a rope of sand, can justify and qualify their toys and
inventions; and for advantage like hucksters (for the Apostle calls them
sellers for (...)
gain) blend our wine with puddle waters of men's devices. There are too many
of these patchers that will patch old rags with new garments, and in the
mean time bring in disgrace those that are so strict, that cannot blend as
they do. For what cares he to tread religious persons under foot, if times do
so, that can suffer religion to be trodden down with silence, nay with
approbation: but how impossible is it to have the Sun and moon shine together?
5 He that 5.
makes his gain his godliness, that bestows more thoughts, care, time for
the world then heaven; That can stand in all winds for profit, and by right or
wrong get the world; That cares not for, nor desires, but fears the appearing
of the Son of God, the Sun of righteousness to judgment. Let this man
resolve that the Moon is upon his head, or in his heart, and not under his
feet. To conclude, thou 5 Signs of him that has the Moon under his feet.
that would know that the Moon is under thy foot, and that thou art a
son of this woman: thou must, 1 Magnify Christ, above a 1000. worlds. 2 Set
up Gods service above the world 3 Subordinate the Moon to thy religion. 4 Hate
and detest mixture in religion 5 Esteem godliness the greatest gain; hate
that gain that is severed from godliness; and long for the appearing of Jesus
Christ thy happy and perfect gain.

And upon her head a Crown of twelve starres] The Property 3.
third property follows in the description of this woman; who is set forth by
a Crown upon her head. Where consider three things. 1 Why this woman is
crowned. 2 The matter of the Crown, a Crown of twelves stars. 3 The place
of it, on her head.

1 The Churches Crown betokens four things.

1 The honor of her person, that she is a Queen; The crown of the Church
implies 4. things.
for no women are crowned but Queens or Kings wives. The true Church is no
less, being espoused to Jesus Christ the King of his Church. Psalm. 45. 9. 1
Honor of her person.
upon thy right^ and thy Queen does stand: Salomons wife being a type of the
Church, set upon the right hand of Jesus Christ the true Solomon.

2 Her eminency and glory; for a Crown was ever an ensign of royal dignity;
and crowned persons 2 Eminency above others.
were ever in rank above other ordinary persons. So is the Church of God of
the blood royal, and advanced to partake of the divine nature, raised to the
height of spiritual and eternal glory, which common persons are not; and
therefore the Lord has fitted her with an incomparable ornament, for no
ornament is comparable to a Crown.

3 Her rich and abundant estate; for a crown is the 3 Her rich estate.
richest thing that the world can give. So this Queen partaketh of all her
husbands wealth, and shareth in the riches of that glorious inheritance, Ephesians.
1. 18. And as the crown compasses her head; so the Lord compasses her with
the riches of grace and of glory in all fullness and perfection. For seeing
Christ is hers, so are all things with him, 1 Cor. 3. 21.

4 Her victory and conquest. For crowns are set 4 Her victory.
upon the heads of conquerors, Rev. 6. 9. And to him that overcommeth is
granted to sit on the throne. Rev. 3. 21. So the Church has overcome and
conquered sin, Satan, death, hell, flesh, and all enemies; and has in the
power and right of her husband trodden them all under feet. For as the wife
partaketh of all her husbands victories, so she of Christ's.

2 The matter of this Crown; of twelve stars. Other The Crown of 12. stars
is the shining doctrine of the 12. Apostles.
Princes wear crowns of gold beset with pearls and precious stones: but this
Queen has a Crown of twelve stars. What cares she for gold and stones that
has the Moon under her feet?

Quest. What is meant by this crown of twelve Stars?

Ans. The shining doctrine of the twelve Apostles, here compared to bright and
beautiful stars, by whose means this woman gat this victorious Crown. For
this was the Crown and ornament of the Primitive Church, that she was reared
and advanced by the diligent and personal preaching and sufferings of the
blessed Apostles.

Ob. But if this was the Churches Crown, then The woman is still crowned with
12. Stars, 3 Reasons.
the Church of after ages, and at this time, has lost her crown and ornament.

Answ. No.

For 1 that doctrine is delivered to us in writing, I.
to which while we hold our selves fast, we are not despoyled of our ornament.

2 The substantial ministerial duties which the Scriptures ascribe to the
Apostles, are not to be restrained 2.
to their persons, but are to be extended to all those that are their true
successors, which preach the same Christ and him crucified; and administer the
same Sacraments. And Christ is now with the Apostles in their successors to the
end of the world, as he promised, Mat. 28. 20. And this seems employed in the
number of twelve; which is a number of universalitie and perfection; including
all that purely preach Christ as the Apostles did.

3 The Pastors of the Church as they succeed the twelve Apostles in this
function of crowning the 3.
Church, so also have they the name of stars in many places. So the Church
has still a crown of twelve stars.

3 The place of this Crown; on her head: Some understand by head, the
beginning of the Church of the New Testament; and so it is true she had then
the Crown of Virginity and purity above all aftertimes; when yet Apostolical
doctrine was not so corrupted by humane devices, additions, and traditions as
shortly after it was. But that is not all; for the true Church was never
without this Crown.

But this Woman after the manner of other Queens is said to wear her crown
on her head, To note,

1 That her glory and crown is in and from her The Crown said to be on her
head for 4 Reasons.
head. For as the man is the glory of the woman: so is Christ (the object of
the Apostolic doctrine) the glory of his spouse the Church. 1.


2 That her Crown is not of or from this world, for the moon is under her
feet. The Crown is 2.
not the^ set upon her head when she is rich and glorious to the world; but
when the shining light of heavenly verity is set aloft (as the stars are
above) to direct her in all doctrines and actions. When by the light of the
Scriptures all the firmament of the Church is guided and ruled in all actions
as well inferior as superior, then is she a crowned Queen.

3 To note a note of visibilitie: The head is most conspicuous, and the most
apparent part of a man; and a Crown set upon the head may be seen a far off,
as the stars be, in an infinite distance: So when a company or congregation
of men consent in Apostolical doctrine, and allow this doctrine to be the
guide of all businesses and matters of faith and manners: here is a Church
crowned, and this crown may be discerned by all near and far off. Wherein
the Crown of the Church, being a Crown of stars, differs and gets beyond
the glory of all earthly crowns. These may be seen on the heads of Princes
near hand, but not far off: But this being a crown of stars may be seen
a far off, as the stars may. And yet so surpassing glorious is the crown
of the Church; that as a whole star and the glory of it can never be seen
with humane eye: no more can the glory and crown of the Church. Whereof (as in
the stars) that which we see of them is in no proportion to that which we see
not, nor yet can see.

4 To note a difference between Christ's carrying of the stars, and the
Churches carrying of them. He bears them in his right hand (chap. 2. 1.) as
their Lord, their disposer and defender: But she in the Crown of her head, as
her chief ornament.

1 The Apostles and ministers are as Stars in Doct.
the Firmament of the Church. Dan. 12. 3. and Rev. 1. 20.

The reasons of this doctrine are four. Ministers are as stars in the
firmament of the church.


1 Stars are in high place: the Apostles and Pastors are in highest place in
the Church of the New Testament, Ephesians. 4. 11. above Cardinals, Patriarchs 4.
reasons.
and Priors, Popes, and the greattitles of Antichristian 1.
offices, unknown to the Scripture.

2 Stars are the brightest part of the firmament: 2.
so are the Apostles and pastors of the Church the brightest parts, and shine
or should shine clearest in the heaven of the Church.

3 Stars receive all their light from the Sun: 3.
so these have no light of their own, but receive all their light from Christ
the Sun of righteousness. 1 Ioh. 1. 1, That which we have heard and seen
etc. 1 Cor. 11. 16. What I have received of the Lord.

4 Stars have not light imparted to them for 4.
themselves, but to carry light unto others: so the office of the Apostles and
Pastors is to convey spiritual light to men on earth living in the dark night
of ignorance and error. Which they do partly by the light of holy doctrine,
and partly by their lightsome and unblamable conversation.

Ministers being called stars must resemble stars Use.
1 In humility. Many things in stars teach it. As; And must resemble Stars.
1 In humility for 4. reasons.


First, stars of great magnitude show but small: The Star shows ten thousand
times less then it is. How is he like a Star, that makes ostentation of all,
perhaps more then is in him. 1.


Secondly, they receive all from the Sun: so the 2.
Minister has received all. Thy gifts are the Lords Talents: if thou have
received them, why do thou boast as if thou had not received them?

Thirdly, in their most swift motion they seem 3.
to move very slow: So must the godly Minister in all his course be more active
then seeming; doing his duty, reserving all the praise to God.

Fourthly, the Stars, the nearer the Sun, the 4.
less is their shine: so the Minister who comes nearer to God then ordinary
men; the nearer he comes to God, the more humble he ought to be: as John
Baptist, He must increase, and I must decrease. Why should the Stars pride
themselves, seeing the Sun from whom they receive all, was so humbled, that
being the Lord of all, was yet servant of all? This duty he specially commended
to his followers; Learn of me for I am humble: and has showed us the way to
be great in the house; not ambitiously with Diotrephes seeking pre-eminence;
but to become the least and lowest, is to become greatest.

2 In stabilitie both in their direction and motion, 2 In stability.
both in holy doctrine and conversation. If the stars were not fixed in their
orbs, but erred and wandered up and down uncertainly, how could the passengers
by sea or land be directed by them? So if the Ministers be wandering stars (as
Jude 13.) in their doctrine unstable as reeds, and wavering with every blast
and storm of times: that their word is this year yea, the next nay: or
suppose their doctrine be the same: yet if in their life they walk crookedly
and disorderly, sorting with base and evil men in their evils, and licenciously
fashioning to the loose humors of men and times, how can the passengers to
heaven take direction from them? With what certainty and assurance can he
strengthen others, that himself is a wavering minded man, unstable in all his
ways.

3 In fidelity and steadfastness in their places. The 3 In fidelity.
stars abide in the heavens, and descend to the earth: So the Minister above
all other must have his conversation in heaven, and shun earthlinesse and
covetousness as rocks. For how can he lead men to heaven that himself cannot
be gotten out of earth? Many shooting stars there are that are always
gliding from place to place, posting after benefits insatiably, and when they
have gotten them, as little intend the office as some secular men: such all the
world sees, the world is all they seek. So they may finger the fleece, the
glebe, the tithe, let the flock starve, and sink to hell; and so they, and
their money, and their people perish together.

4 In unity and concord. One star differs from another in glory, in shining,
and in luster: one much 4 In unity.
excels another in beauty and brightness; some are of the first and second
magnitude, some of the fifth and sixth, yet all agree; one envies not another,
nor hinders another: so the Ministers have diversities of gifts in this life;
and this makes them of diverse judgments: but yet ought not to be adverse in
affection, in action. None of the greater or higher Stars are proud, none
envious, none spiteful against another, none study how to cross another
motion. If they should run one against another, or cross one another
motion, the world would fall to confusion. Such tumults and confusions like a
dreadful earthquake have we seen in the Churches by the dissentions and
hateful proceedings of these Stars one against another, forgetting
themselves to be Stars, Brethren, Ministers, or Christians. Many such
Stars were in the Apostles days that shined and preached Christ of envy,
against such as preach him of good will.

5 In constancy and continuance in their office. The Stars never deny their
light to men, nor are ever 5 In co^stancy.
weary of their motion, though infinitely swift: Ministers must never deny
their light, but freely enlighten others, never be weary of doing their duty,
never fall to idleness and laziness, much less cast off their callings,
remembering the woe denounced on him that preaches not, or does it negligently.
A lamentable thing that any preferment should choke a Preacher; or that he
should do less work the more wages he receives. No earthly occasion hinders
the stars either motion or shining.

Motives to these duties. 1 Thou shall uphold the Motives to these duties 3.
Crown on the Churches head by upholding the purity and shine of holy
doctrine. The faithfulness 1.
of Pastors crowns the Church.

2 They self shall be held as a shining star in the 2.
right hand of Christ here, Rev. 1. 16 And this right hand shall surely
protect, provide for, and defend thee in thy faithfulness; then which, what
greater glory and crown can thou desire below?

3 Thou shall by thy faithful shining attain that 3.
unfading Crown of glory: Dan. 12. 3. by turning many to righteousness thou
shall shine as the stars in the firmament. Remember that goad, Be faithful
to the death; and I will give thee a Crown of life; Rev. 2. 10.

2 Seeing the true Church is a Crowned Queen, Doct,
the daughter of God and spouse of Jesus Christ: then must every son and
daughter of this woman partake of this advancement, and be joint heirs of the
same crown, yea in present possession of it. Did men see the high and royal
estate of Believers, they could not so despise and scorn the persons and
condition of Saints: but admire and seek to have part with them in such honor
as have all the Saints. Let us therefore a little set our eyes on this point,
to discern the high estate of the Christian: and we shall behold him not
crowned with thorns only, but with shining stars and glory, which wicked
Princes were never capable of. The point then is, that All Saints on earth have
Kingly dignity.
All the Saints on earth have Kingly dignity: All the Children of this Mother
are crowned as well as she 1 Pet 2. ^. Ye are a royal Priesthood. The
Scripture plainly says, that the Saints are already made Kings unto God. Rev.
1. 6. and chap. 5. 10. And keeping the same resemblance, all the children of
the Church are called Queens, as she is, Cant. 67. There are threescore
Queens.

1 Their birth and alliance is all princely and royal, sons of God their
father the great King of Kings. As Reasons.
all the sons of hereditary Emperors are borne Kings, 1 Have royal birth as
Kings.
and have Kingly dignity: so all the Sons of God much more. Children of a
Queen their Mother, here crowned in the text. All wives and spouses joined in
contract to the true Solomon, and so are Kings wives to whom crowns pertain:
and every one of them having right and interest in his person have title unto
all his estate and kingdom. Thus have they all right to the crown and
kingdom; 1 By their fathers will, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it
is your Fathers will to give you the kingdom. 2 In their mothers right whose
crown descendt to al her seed being the seed of Christ, Isai. 55. 3 By the
pucrhase of their head Jesus Christ, who gives them not promise only but
possession in present. Behold, I give you a Kingdom, even as my Father has
given me a kingdom. Luk 22. 29. but this possession is only in the entrance
and first degree in this life: and the full fruition and perfect possession
reserved to the life to come.

2 They are all anointed as Kings; both in their head, who is anointed with
oil of gladness above 2 Are anoyn. ted as Kings.
all his fellows. Psalm. 45. 7. as also in themselves: for we have received
that anointing. 1 John 2. 27. That holy oil descends from Aarons head to the
skirts of his garments. Psalm. 133. 2. All apparelled like Kings with the
princely robe of righteousness (more shining then Herod's garment, or then the
Sun it self) which deckes the whole man within and without. All attended as
Kings with Angels as a guard: all styled with glorious and princely titles, as
kings; to whom, as the person and merits of Christ are communicated, so also
his name; not called only Christians, but Christ's. 1 Cor. 12. 12. Even so is
Christ. All enthroned as kings, on a more stately throne then Salomon^,
described 1 King. 10. 18. For Christ shall give them to sit with him in his
throne, as himself sits in the throne of his Father, Rev. 3. 21. All rich
as princes, Rev. 21. 7. He that overcommeth shall inherit all things.

3 All the Saints have the power of Princes: As, 3 Have the power of Kings.
1. A commanding power, not so much over others, as over themselves: Stronger
is he that rules himself, then he that rules a City. Prove. 16 32. He lays
laws 1 A commanding power.
upon himself, and binds himself to obedience, and will command (as Abraham
and Joshua) all his inferiors to keep the ways of God.

2. A performing power, to effect greater things 2 A performing power.
then greatest Princes. Mark. 9. 23. To him that believes, all things are
possible. Faith in Christ makes him receive all he can ordinately desire, and
perform all in Christ that he ordinately desires to do; for it can obtain
of God power and strength to do it.

3 A conquering power: Every Saint is already crowned a conqueror in part over
sin, and Satan, 3 A conquering power.
and temptation, and his own lusts, and the world. The devil resisted, flies
him, and he over-takes him and treads him under foot: here is another manner of
conquest then David's was over Goliath. And for the world, Christ promises all
the saints (Rev. 2. 26, 27) power over the nations, to rule them with a rod of
iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Which is a power proper
to Christ, who received it from his Father for himself and his members; and
executes it in his and their name also, and for their common right; and they
also get victory by the help of faithful Pastors.

4 A power of judging: All the Saints shall judge 4 A judging power.
like Princes, not the world only, but the wicked angels also, the authors of
all that unrighteous judgment, which they in the world sustained, 1 Cor. 6. 3.
for Christ's sentence shall be their sentence, and shall be ratified by all the
Saints: And in the mean time they judge themselves by arraigning and
condemning themselves for their sins, and pleading for pardon.

4 All the Saints are crowned already with twelve stars, and express the
bright shining of saving and 4 Are all crowned as Kings.
Apostolic doctrine; and uphold and maintain it to their power, and profess
it, and glory in it, as in a crown upon their heads.

1 To magnify the grace of God, who out of so Use. To magnify Gods* grace.
base and miserable estate and thraldom, out of the chains of hell, and out
of eternal damnation (into which we were all cast by sin) has lifted up his
Saints into so high and excellent glory. Never was poor Hester half so much
obliged to great Ahash^erosh, for raising her from the dust to lay her in his
own bed and bosom: as we are to the Lord for such an admirable advancement
For herein he powered out all his love, that while we were his enemies, he
would not only cast his skirts over us; but crown us; first with compassion,
and then with a Crown of twelve stars here in grace, and hereafter in
heavenly glory.

2 To magnify the state of Gods children; who And the state of Gods children.
are set in such a dignity as all the honor and happiness, crowns and
kingdoms which earth can give, are but chafe, light and worthless. A poor
and despised Lazarus is happier then all Divesses in hell or earth. Did the
greatest profane Monarch in earth know but the happiness and honor of a poor
Saint, and his own woeful estate, he would seek to change estates with him,
and if he had a thousand kingdoms he would give them to boot, and whatsoever
were dearer to him. Let no godly man fall out with his estate because it is
mean in the world; nor any wicked man scorn it. Haman would have been
Mordecaies Lackie still, but must up to the gallows.

3 Let the godly learn to carry themselves as Princes And to demean themselves
as Princes.
so as beseemes such as are anointed and crowned Kings. David in private estate
carried himself as a shepherd; but crowned a King, demeaned himself like a
King. So Saul in private estate followed his fathers Asses, but once anointed
was changed into another man, 1 Samuel 10. 9. So is the Christian.

Qu. How may the Christian behave himself as a King?

An. 1 As Kings we must spend our time and 1 In great affairs.
thoughts, not in base and inferior trades or affairs, but in the great
affairs of the kingdom. If a King should lay aside his Crown, and betake
himself to some handicraft, every body would marvel: and shall Christians
that are crowned as Princes, cast aside this Crown, to bend their thoughts and
endeavors either wholly or principally to the attaining of the world?

2 As Princes sort themselves not with base and 2 With Nobles and Princes.
beggarly company, but with nobles and Princes: So the Christian must not sort
himself with wicked men, that are vile and beggarly in grace; but with such as
are noble, wise, counsellors', and excel in virtue.

3 Be valorous as Kings, and courageous against bold and audacious enemies;
never (out of cowardice 3 With valor and courage:
or timerousnesse) contracting base leagues with professed enemies; but be
still in the field against wicked persons, practices, and wicked spirits. True
valor has two excellent properties. First, to disdain the reproaches of base
and abject persons. A noble man scorns to fight with a peasant, as a stout man
with a boy: so the Christians must scorn to revenge themselves on lewd and
wicked persons, or foul their fingers with them, not holding such fit matches
for them. And secondly a noble and generous mind will contemn the loss of
any thing, goods, lands, and life, before he will be stained in his honor: so a
Christian will suffer the loss of all he has in the world, and of the world
too, before he will basely forsake his Lord. It is truly counted fortitude in
a common soldier to follow his captain through all adventures, yea with loss
of life: and is it not so in a Christian much more?

4 Be armed like Princes, with the armor of 4 Be armed as Kings.
God, and weapons mighty through God against all principalities and enemies in
strong holds; this is stronger then Castles, Guards, and all defenced Cities.

5 Be bountiful as Princes. Christians must be 5 Be bountiful as Princes.
merciful, liberal to distribute: as Solomon gave silver in Jerusalem as
stones, 1 King 10. 27. The godly must be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 18. As
Kings are ever giving or forgiving, and giving to them that can repay them
nothing, so must we.

4 Learn that counsel to the Angel of the Let none take away thy Crown.
Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 11. hold that which thou have and let none
take away thy Crown. Kings stand to the death to defend their Crowns: so must
the believer stand a professed enemy to all the enemies of the Kingdom of
Christ; yea stand out in the extreme peril of his life in the defense of his
Crown.

Qu. May the Crown be taken away?

An. The crown is either; First, of eternal life; which cannot be lost in
respect of Gods purpose and preservation, though in respect of our infirmity it
else might.

Ob* What means the threatening?

An. It is conditional, except thou persevere; but Saints do persevere, by 1.
Gods keeping them. 2. Christ's intercession that their faith fail not. 3. Their
prayer of faith and watchfulness. 4. Their obedience to holy exhortations and
menaces.

Or, Secondly, the Crown is the Crown of holy How a Christian may loose this
Crown.
Ministry and profession, called. Rev. 3. 10. The fast holding of the word of
my patience: And this Crown is especially meant; and will be lost if
Christians hold not fast. But the Christian must stand in defense of shining
and saving doctrine of the Scriptures, which is his crown, and let none take
it away. 1. Not the world must draw thee from the knowledge and practice of the
sound doctrine of the Apostles. What a base thing were it to raise up the Moon
above this Crown of twelve stars? Consider Demas and Judas. 2 Let not
persecution or temptation pull away thy crown; but demean thy self as a
Prince, who with valor and courage will endure all difficulties that offer
themselves, so as he may uphold his Crown: so must thou contentedly digest and
stoutly contemn all tribulations and afflictions that happen for the Gospels
sake: Considering, First, the way that Christ went was from the Cross unto the
Crown; and he was consecrated Prince of our salvation through affliction, Heb.
2. 10. and 12. 2. Secondly, that thou must be conformable unto him. 3. Let not
thy own lusts and strong corruptions make a mutiny or rebellion in thee to
bereave thee of thy Crown. A careful Prince is vigilant to extinguish and
suppress civil wars especially: Do thou bestirre thee in subduing and
resisting the unruly wills, affections, inclinations and passions of thine own
soul; that thy whole man may be brought into the obedience of Christ. He is
not worthy the name of a Prince, who (suppose he had the rule of all the
world) were not able to rule himself.

5 Note what a dangerous thing it is, 1 To strive against and resist the word
and Gospel of To resist the Gospel is to pull the crown off the head of the
Church.
Christ; a note of a rebel who pulls the Crown off the head of the Church. To
pull down faithful Preachers is to pull the Crown from off the Queens head;
and yet this will worldly men do, so ill can they brook faithful dealing*
with their souls. 2 It is no less dangerous to wrong the godly the members of
the Church, It is above scandalum magnatum in Gods star chamber; an high
treason against the spouse of Jesus Christ. What says* Ahashuerosh of Haman?
Will he force the Queen before my face? And then they covered his face as
unworthy to see any more light: So Christ will say of his Queen. And how
dare thou wrong the members of the Church in Gods sight? Thou shall dearly
buy thy presumption.

Thus much of the 3. first properties of the Church. Who so long as she shined
in the clothing of the sun, and held the Moon under her fcet, and carried the
starrie Crown upon her head; so long she continued the chaste spouse of Christ.
But in process of time, when in stead of the Sun she put on and arrayed her
self with purple and scarlet; and set the Moon above her head, affecting,
admiring, and aspiring after earthly wealth and dignity: and in stead of
twelve stars in her Crown, she decked her crown, with gold, and pearls,
and precious stones, Then she became the harlot, sitting on the scarlet
colored Beast; and the mother of whordomes and abominatio^s of the whole
earth. Rev. 17. 3, 4, 5. They are deceived that suppose the glory of Christ's
true Church consists in scarlet and purple, in gold and silver, in pomp and
external honor, in princely Lordship and Popedom. Let the whore of Babylon
deck her self with these enticing tricks: But the spoule of Christ is known
by her crown of stars; and that inward, simple, and native beauty and glory,
which uses to draw not the worlds admiration, but contempt upon it.

Ver. 2. And she was with child, and cried traveling etc.] Now follows the
fourth property, in the description of this woman; namely her pregna^cy and
fruitfulness in traveling and bearing of children. In the verse are two
general parts. I. Her conception and carrying of her child; in that she was
with child ready to be delivered. II. Her painful travel and birth; that she
was pained, and cried to be delivered. In the meaning are three questions to be
resolved.

1 What is meant by this conception and being Quest.
with child of this woman?

An. It is no new or strange thing in the Scriptures Bringing forth children in
nature, and in grace resembled in 5. things:
to find the Church compared to a woman with child. Isa. 54. 1. Rejoice thou
barren, etc. The Church of the Gentiles which before was barren, but now has
more children then the married wife, that is, the Jews who came of Sarah,
opposed to Agar. The reason is, because of the similitude and agreement between
the bringing forth of children to God in grace; and that to man in nature. The
resemblance stands especially in five things.

1 As we had two parents (says Augustine) who begat us to death, Adam and
Eve: so must we have two parents to beget us unto life, Christ and his Church
and these two must be one flesh by the bond of marriage.

2 As a woman becomes a mother by means of 2.
her marriage, and company with her husband: so does the Church by her marriage
and conjunction with Christ bring forth many Children to God. For had she not
been the spouse of Christ, and the Lambs wife, she had been for ever barren*
Sarah was a type of this bride. Therefore as Sarah was of a barren womb and
unfit for conception; but by the word and promise of God brought forth Isaac,
who was therefore called the son of the promise; So the Church was of a
fruitles and barren womb, and had never brought forth children to Christ, were
it not for the covenant and promise of God, by which all the faithful are
formed in her womb; who are therefore also called children of the promise, Rom
9. 8. The children of the promise are the seed.

3 When Jesus Christ the father, the second Adam 3.
and quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. sows the seed of grace and spiritual
generation, partly externally by the preaching of the word; which is called the
immortal seed of Gods word that endures for ever; which therefore carries
life and quickening with it, as being the power of God to salvation. Romans 1. 16
and partly in wardly by the Spirit of God, a powerful agent; without whose
mighty operation all would prove but a false conception: The Church as a
Mother receives and conceives it in the womb of faithful and pure hearts.
So Mary pondred all things in her heart: And Heb. 4. 2. the word must be
mingled with faith, or else it profits not to this conception.

4 As a Woman having conceived brings not forth 4*
presently, but keeps her months and seasons appointed by God, till her very
hour come: so the Church brings not children to God at her own pleasure and
will; but when she has gone out the full time and months appointed by God for
the new birth of every one of them; which is finished by degrees and in due
season: this is in the text.

5 As a mother come to the full months of birth, brings her child into the
light: So does the Church 5.
bring her children into the light by two means; partly by profession of the
doctrine of grace; and partly by the practice of the gifts of grace. Then does
she nurse her newborn babes with the sincere milk of Gods word, drawn out
of her own two breasts, the Testaments of holy Scripture; whereby they
out-grow their infancy, and come to their age in Christ.

2 Why is this woman said now to be with child, Quest. How the Woman is ready
to be delivered.
and ready to be delivered? What, was she barren ever before this time?

An. No.

For first, she had been very fruitful before: as ver. 17. there is mention
of the remnant of her seed. Secondly, all the sons and children of God in all
ages were children of this woman. Thirdly, this vision being to be referred to
the times after the Apostles, before and about the times of the tyrannical
Heathen Emperors, both Scriptures and stories record that there was a
wonderful increase of Christians almost all the world over; so as the Tyrants
were still kept in work, though they slew them by ten thousands and hundred
thousands. Therefore we must distinguish of the Churches travel. This travel
is either, 1 General, in the bringing forth of faithful men to Christ in
general; and this is not directly aimed at here: Or, 2 Special and
particular, of some special Childbirth which now she was payned for, and cried
to the Lord with ardent prayers for, and which was shortly to be borne and
brought forth. This seems plain in the fifth verse: For what she was with
child with, that she brought forth; and that was a particular manchild, of whom
we will enquire in the place.

3 Why she is said to cry in pain ready to be delivered? Quest.


An. For two reasons.

1 To hold the resemblance. For as God has by his inevitable sentence for the
sin of man, annexed How she cried in pain to be delivered.
sharp sorrow to the birth of every Child; Genesis 3. 16. In sorrow shall thou
conceive and bring forth: so the text implies not a little sorrow in bearing
and bringing forth children to God.

2 For a more special reason in the text, which in a word was this. The Church
being now in and under cruel persecutions, and lamentable oppressions; and
being in her self as Woman weak and helpless, exposed to all tyranny and
unjust vexation; sees the want of a protector, and powerful defender of the
Christian faith, and Christian people. And therefore as earnestly desires by
some of her own Sons deliverance from those pains and oppressions, as a
woman in travel does desire riddance from her pains and sorrows.

1. The Church of God is a fruitful Mother daily bringing forth children to
Jesus Christ. Psa. 87. 5. Doct The Church is a fruitful Mother of Children to
God.
Of Sion shall be said, many shall be borne in her. The Church typed by
Salomons wife, has in stead of parents children, whom she makes Princes in
all lands, Psa. 45. 16. Cant 7. 2. The navell of the Church is described to be
as a round bowl or cup: and as a heap of wheat hedged about with Lillies. A
bowl or cup never wanting sweet and gracious liquor: A round bowl, a
capacious figure in sign of fruitfulness; and equally affected (as a round
figure) to fruitfulness on every side. Which fruit is to God as precious and
fragrant as an heap of wheat hedged about with Lillies. Cant. 1. 15. the
spouse has made her bed ready for the sweet embraces of her bridegroom; and
professes that her bed is green for two causes.

First, because of the flourishing of it. It must be Her bed is green, 2.
Reasons.
a green bed in which Christ himself rests and delights. It flourishes
with peace. There is quiet rest in a pure and peaceable conscience; there is in
that bed and heart a sweet repose.

Secondly, because of the fruitfulness of it. It is ever green by many
children daily begotten and borne unto God.

This doctrine is strengthened by three reasons. Reasons. 3.
1 Because she is the Mother of all believers. Gal. 1.
4. 26. Jerusalem which is from above, is the Mother of us all, that is, all
the elect and believers whether in heaven or earth. Hence her name is
Catholic, first, in respect of all ages: secondly, all places: thirdly, all
kinds of persons. And therefore it is that the number of her children are
numberless. Rev. 7. 9. I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could
number, of all nations, kinreds people, and tongues, stood before the throne
with long white roabes, and palms in their hands.

2 She must needs be a fruitful mother, who is mother to all the Sons and
Children of God; 2.
according to that ancient saying; Wheresoever God is the father, the Church
is the Mother; so that, Not borne of the Church, not borne of God. And who but
she is Mother to all that innumerable company of Saints in earth and in heaven?
For there is no entrance into that Jerusalem which is above, but by that
Jerusalem which is from above.

3 She must be a fruitful Mother that does perpetually 3.
bring forth children from the beginning to the end of the world. For as Christ
is an everlasting Father; so has he an everlasting issue. The faithful are
called the seed of Christ begotten by the travel of his soul. Isa. 53. 10,
11. in whom his days are prolonged here upon earth; and himself being
personally in heaven, yet continues here in earth to the end of the world in
this heavenly propagation. Seeing then this is an ever-childing mother that
never grows old, we may conclude that never was any so fruitful.

Never to content our selves with our first birth of our natural Mother;
unless we be borne again of Use. Not to content ourselves with our first
birth in nature. reas. 6.
this Mother.

For 1 Natural birth (suppose it never so royal or noble) is but of mortal
and corruptible seed: but this is of seed incorruptible and immortal.

2 Natural birth is from the first Adam in sin: 1.
this is from the second Adam in righteousness. 2.


3 By the first birth we dye, because we come of 3.
them that have dyed: but by this we are quickened never to dye more.

4 Natural birth can only advance to a natural 4.
happiness: but this to a supernatural and heavenly.

5 By the first birth thou art an heir of hell; 5.
and till thou art borne again can never see the kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5.
by this second to an heavenly inheritance, unfading, reserved in the heavens.

6 The first birth (never so glorious and royal) 6.
shall rot in dust, and consume with time: this (because it is of an immortal
seed) shall never fail, but persevere to all eternity, when time shall be no
more. Nay further, stand not upon it that thou art borne within the Church; no,
nor of Christian parents: for it is nothing to be a Jew without, if not within;
it is nothing to be in the Church unless thou be of the Church; it is nothing
to be the seed of Christians, unless thou be the seed of Christ. The birth of
Ismael was as good for parentage as Isaacks; both from Abraham: But get good
assurance that thou art borne of this Mother; in which is more honor and
comfort, then to be the Son of an Empress. If thou would be assured of
the inheritance, get good assurance of thy legitimation; for the son of the
bond woman shall not inherit with the son of the free woman. Would thou be
assured of safety in dangers, and protection in perilous times? be sure thou
know and acknowledge thy Mother; that under her wing, and in her lap thou
may rest securely: seeing that out of the true Church (as out of the Arc)
is no safety, no salvation.

Qu. How may we come to know this Mother How to know the true Mother Church.
to be our Mother, that we may have comfort of our new and heavenly birth?

An. The true knowledge of this woman stands in two generals. I. To know her
the true Mother, and spouse of Christ in her self. II. To know her to be also
our Mother.

1 The former is so much the more necessary, because the Church of Rome (not
only a stepmother, but a professed harlot) challenges herself to be this
woman; and the Mother of this living child; and by fifteen notes, as
arguments, alleged by her dear son Bellarmine De notis Ecclesiae,
obtrudeth herself as the Mother of all believers in the new Testament. I am
not at leisure to unloose all the bundle; (which perhaps he thought would
prevail by their number, if there should be no weight found in them) but I will
only mention the first five, and by them we shall easily discern the rest.

Bellarmine his first note that the Romish Church 1 Note, because she is called
Catholic.
is the true Mother, is because she is called every where Catholic. But this
is a false note. For;

1 A consequence holds not from being named, A nomine ad rem non valet
consequens.
to being. Christ was called a Demoniacke and Impostor; must he therefore be
so? Rev. 3. 9. Many call themselves Jews and are not: And chap. 2. 2. Some say
they are Apostles and are not.

2 What where the Churches in the Prophets and Apostles days; as Jerusalem,
Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus? Were they not true Churches? yet were they never
called Catholic.

3 They only thus style themselves, because, says Nulla fuit unquam haeresis
quae nolit videri catholica.
the Father; Never was there any heresi, which did not desire to be accounted
and to seem Catholic. But falsely for two reasons.

1 Because they have departed from the Catholic faith.

2 Because it is but a particular Church, if so much; and can no more be
catholic, then a finger can be a hand, or a hand a man. True it is, that the
true Churches do call them Catholic; but how? only Ironically: and so that
note ends either in a jest or Irony.

His second note is Antiquity; which is as deceitful as the other. For; 2 Nor
by Antiquity. 4. reas:


1 What was the Church in the cradle and beginnings 1.
of it? Was it not a true Church and yet had no Antiquity?

2 Antiquity is either in time or in truth. To 2.
plead antiquity of time, and lose antiquity of truth V^tustas erroris.
(as they have done) is but antiquity of error, rejected by the Scriptures and
Fathers. And error was borne into the world the same day with truth, and is in
time almost as ancient.

3 If antiquity in time must carry it, then not 3.
Rome can be the true Church, but Antioch; where we are sure the Apostles
taught, and whence was the first name of Christians. Nay, Jerusalem must be the
Mother Church, because from thence was the Gospel preached to all the
Gentiles. Acts 1. 8.

4 They challenge antiquity as falsely as the former note; for their whole
doctrine (departing from 4.
ours) is a novelty, never heard of in the Church for the space of six hundred
years after Christ. Never was nor will be answered that famous challenge of
the Jewel of Bishops; who calls but for one testimony out of pure and
unsuspected antiquity for the space of the first six hundred years after
Christ, for any one of the seven and twenty points propounded; and never any
such was brought till this day. Neither have they been at leisure now above
twenty years to answer that famous problem of that bless Saint Mr. Perkins;
in which he avoucheth it impossible for any Papist in the world to prove out of
the true writings of Fathers and Counsels and out of the true sense of those
writings; that the now Roman faith wherein it differs from the reformed
Church, is the Catholic faith; and substantially clears it in sixty two
points of difference between us. What a number of points might I allege
wherein they are gone both from the Scriptures and their own writers; and as
many for which they have no Scripture, but the Churches authority. Auricular
confession, the Canon Law says, it is by a tradition of De Poenit. distinct. 5.
the Church; and by no authority of old or new Testament. For the not marriage
of Ministers, Bellarmine De Clericis. l. 1. cap. 19.
and Cassander Art. 92.
confess it to be an humane institution: Cassander and the Council of Trent
Sess. 24.
call it only an Ecclesiastical decree. For the Communion in one kind, their
own Cajetane 3 part. Thom 4. 80. art. qu. 3.
confesses that the contrary custom endured long in the Church; and they had
cups for the nonce to serve the people with wine. For their
Transubstantiation, Tonstall says, No man was bound to believe it till the
Lateran Council, which is not much above four hundred years ago. And
Bellarmine himself says, there is no Scripture to enforce it, but the
Churches determination. Why do they brag of antiquity, and confess so many
novelties?

His third note is perpetuity and duration. Indeed 3 Nor by perpetuity or
durance.
the same note with the former; increasing the number numbering, not the number
numbered. Numerum numerantem augens, non numerum numeratum.
For,

1 Tares must continue with the wheat till harvest, must they therefore be
wheat for their perpetuity? And Antichrist has continued a long time since the
Apostles days, and shall till Christ at his appearing abolish him; does this
make his Synagogue a true Church?

2 Time was when there was a true Church, and yet this could be no note of it:
and time shall be when (by their confession) their Church shall fail, and not
endure to the end. Ribera on Rev. 14. Rome is called Romae dicitur Babylon,
quia ad finem seculifutura est officina omnis Idololatriae, et fedes
Antichristi.
Babylon because at the end of the world she shall be the shambles of all
Idolatry, and the kennell of Antichrist. So as this by their doctrine is no
proper, but a separable note from the Church.

3 The true Church and Mother Church has and ever shall continue in the world:
though not in outward pomp and glory, yet in that inward and spiritual beauty
and glory which she shall not lose, though she be in the wilderness, and sit
sometimes defolate as a widow. When this true Church loses her visibility, she
loses not her being: no more then the Sun cease to be risen when it is hid
under a cloud.

The fourth note to know this woman (says Bellarmine) 4 Nor by multitude and
amplitude.
is multitude and amplitude. As deceitful as any of the former; besides that
it is the same with his first. For what difference between Catholic and
universal? For,

1 That was a true Church of two in Paradise: When also it was in one family
before the flood: In the flood consisted but of eight persons: In the Old
Testament in one little kingdom: In the New was but a little flock, Luke 12.
32. August. says, The Church was in one Abel, in one Henoch. The Papists
Ecclesia fuit in uno Abeli, in uno Henocho.
themselves say that in the time of Christ's passion, the true Church and faith
was preserved only in the Virgin Mary, which is false; but yet a strong
argument against them that hold multitude a sure sign of a true Church.

2 Multitude is a stream that the Church must row hard against, unless we be
sure it be the truly* believing multitude. Satan's number infinitely exceeds
Christ's; must it therefore be the true Church? Multitudo orthodoxa.
That one sect of Mahomet is far more numerous then all the Roman religion:
by their note that must be the true Church, and not they. Time was when the
whole world was made an Arrian, and scare five Orthodoxe Bishops to resist it,
and they also persecuted: Totus mundus factus fuit Arrianus.
shall the general spreading and infection of it prove it no poison?
Antichrist at his coming draws multitudes after him by strength of delusion 2
These. 2. 9. And this is their Roman Antichristian religion, drawing
multitudes, because it is a natural religion; but turns them not from
darkness to light, not from sin to God. We conclude, or rather exclude this
note with Athanasius against those Arrians, They have the multitude, we the
faith. Let their multitudes go in the broad way: we must walk Hi vulgus
habent, nos sidem.
in a narrow way which a few only find.

His fifth note is succession of Bishops. A false and deceitful note, 5 Nor by
succession of Bishops.
For.

1 A false Church may have succession of person 4 Reasons.
only: as Caiphas succeeded Aaron, and yet abandoning 1.
truth and rejecting the head must needs be a false Church.

2 The first Evangelicall Churches were true 2.
Churches, but wanted their succession; unless they will say that Christ and
his Apostles succeeded the Scribes and Pharisees. If a Church may be a true
Church without and before succession; how can succession be a note of a true
Church?

3 Right succession is twofold. First, external, secondly, internal, or
personal; or doctrinall. Where 3.
both succession of Chair and doctrine concur, there is Successio Cathedrae
et doctrinae.
a true succession: But in the Church of Rome is neither.

I Not of doctrine, because they hold not Apostolic Church of Rome has no
succession either of, 1 Doctrine. 2 Seat.
doctrine. The doctrine of the now Church of Rom^ being clean contrary to that
it was when Paul wrote to the Romans; as might appear in a number fundamental
points.

II Not of Seat, First, because they never proved nor can prove that they have
the seat of Peter; or that ever Peter sat at Rome, he being the Apostle of the
Circumcision. Secondly, if they could prove it; Ambrose tells us; They have not
the succession of Non habent haereditatlm Pe^ri, qui non habent sidem Petri. De
poenit. c. 6.
Peter. Thirdly, Platina a Papist notes above twenty scismes which have
disturbed the series and succession of their Bishops.

4 For our Churches reformed, we have the true succession of Apostolic
doctrine, and the right consanguinitie of their doctrine. As for personal
succession (a thing not to be much stood upon) yet we are sure we want not,
though it was not always so apparent; for God never wanted a Church in earth.
There never wanted some in all ages who have made profession of the true faith;
as that notable book of Catalogus testium veritatis, plainly proves. And no
doubt a many more were stirred up in the darkest ages of Popery, whose mention
and memory were prevented from us, while Antichrist ruled both the roast and
records. Now of all these notes and their fellows, which are like these; I
will add but two testimonies of Bellarmine against Bellarmine. The former,
that The Scripture teaches which Scripturam docere quae sunt notae Ecclesiae.
de notis Eccles. c. 1. Cap. 3.
are the notes of the Church; but, The Scripture no where teaches these;
Therefore, These are no notes. The second, that al these notes make it not
evide^tly true, but evidently probable, that the Roman Church is the true
Church. Mark, that for all his braving and coppie he sets on the matter, his
conscience tells him and us, that all these fifteen marks have no certainty in
them to lead us to the true Mother. Even as he fumbled in the great point of
justification by works, flying from all his five books in the conclusion, as
a man who suffered wrack of his cause in the very haven. And the like he did
in the disputing of the Popes temporal authority; which made the Pope study to
suppress all his books. Ye see what confidence the greatest Pillars of
Popery have in their own cause.

Qu. Seeing that by the Popish notes we cannot know the true Mother; by what
sound and infallible marks may we know her?

An. We will propound five fitter notes then theirs. This true Mother
therefore is to be known. The true Mother known by 5. notes.


1 By her face. 2 By her voice. 3 By her qualities. 4 By her marriage. 5 By her
carriage and behavior.
1 The best way to know any person is by the face. The face of a true visible
Church is discerned by; 1 Her face and what that is.


1 The sincere preaching and professing of the word of God. 2 The due and pure
administration of the Sacraments according to that word. 3 The exercise of
government and discipline appointed in the word. The first of these is
absolutely requisite to the being and face of a Church. The two later serve for
the beauty and stability of it. By this face Christ will have his spouse
discerned; Joh 8. 30. If ye abide in my word, ye are ver^ly my Disciples. And
chap. 10. his sheep are known by hearing his voice, and following him.
Besides, all will grant that where Christ is, there is the Church; but where
two or three consent in his name, there is he, Mat. 18. 20. Thus we know our
Mother by her face, because she continues in the doctrine of the Apostles, as
that beautiful Church did, Act. 242. A wart or two, or a few freckles make her
lose some beauty, but not her face. She hears the voice of her wel-beloved,
and a stranger she will not hear. She hears not unwritten traditions, nor
fables and dreams of men, nor Councels, nor Fathers, nor decrees of Popes, nor
the voice of Antichrist; but sticks to the pure word of God, as the only
decider of all cases, and the only umpire in all doubts and questions
concerning faith or life.

2 The second note of this Mother is her voice and 2 Her voice.
speech. She speaks in the language of Canaan. She enjoynes nothing, nor
commands in her family any thing but what she has direction for from her
husband revealing his will in the Scriptures: As the Moon shines only in the
light received from the Sun; So the Church rules in the night of this world
by virtue of her husbands directions. Far is she from challenging a power
above the Scriptures, far from conceit of giving authority to them, who has
all her authority from them. She disclaymeth all the commandments and Canons
of the Church so called; and dares impose no yoakes where her husband has left
her children free. She conceives her self so the spouse of Christ, as that she
still remains the ha^dmaid of the Lord: you shall never hear her disgrace the
Scriptures by calling the^ a dumb Judge, a partial rule, a nose of wax
flexible into any form es and senses, a dead letter; no better then Aesops
fables, unles she give authority to them. This is the voice of the
Antichristian harlot, who preferres her old lecher not only above Councels,
but above the Scriptures: as those two Councels of Lateran and Trent did the
Pope. Who also burn the Scriptures, as Antiochus, or another Maximinus,
calling them the books of heretics, and their readers in their own tongue as
Scripturers and Heretics.

3 A third note is her virtues or qualities: As* 3 Her virtues 2.


First, she is holy in respect. 1. Of holiness of doctrine which she teaches.
The doctrine which 1 Holiness. 1 Of doctrine.
she teaches is Christ's own doctrine; Mat. 10. he that hears you, hears
me. What she receives from the Lord, she delivers. She mixeth not hers with
false or poisoned doctrine: She teaches not Idolatry, nor perjury, nor
filthiness of life, as the shameless strumpet of Rome, that bragges of holy
Fathers, and holy Church. 2 In respect of the better 2 Of persons.
part of the visible Church she is holy, though not in respect of the greatest
part. The faithful are holy, though tares and thorns come up with the good
seed; the envious man does it, but the Church sowes no such tares. 3 Whatsoever
corruption of 3 Of manners.
doctrine or manners may spring up; yet the doctrine remains holy and pure;
and the Church reproves all such corruptions, and urges all holiness of life
and conversation. Not justifying or defending notorious evils, as the Romish
strumpet does: Who defended simple fornication to be but as, aurem scalpere;
tolerating infinite stews in Rome; receiving a yearly pension from whores
called lactis census, of thirty thousand crowns for filth; decreeing in one of
their Councels under Pope Leo the first, that he that had a Concubine or Whore
instead of a wife, should not be expelled from the Communion, if he were
contented only with one. Fie upon the filthiness of that bawdy and filthy
religion. We must spare chaste ears.

Secondly, she is meek, loving, patient, gentle, merciful. Iam. 3. 7. full of
good fruits. Her weapons 2 Meekness.
are prayers, tears, patience; not fire and faggot. Ye shall never hear this
woman challenge the two swords; nor maintain her right by fierceness and
cruelty, by inquisitions and massacres, by blowing up Parliaments and
Kingdoms. These barbarous ferities she leaves to that religion whose chief
City was founded in blood, and to the woman drunk with blood of the Saints.
That religion which is so fiery and fierce must be from the Devil, a manslayer
from the beginning; unknown of Christ and his Apostles, and all their true
Disciples and followers.

4 A fourth note of this woman is her Marriage. 4 Her marriage.
A good way to know one by, is the head; and how can we know the Church better
then by her head Jesus Christ, whose wife she is, of whom all the Children of
the Church are begotten by virtue of the eternal Covenant of grace, as in
Lawful wedlock? Our Mother scorns to be the Popes Concubine; she has
betaken herself only to Christ, and professes of him (Cant. 2. 16.) My
welb^loved is mine, and I am his. Christ is he whom her soul loves; and is in
her eyes the chief of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10. To him she has plighted her
troth, and cleaves only and undividedly unto him in life and in death. The
whore of Rome holds not Christ the head; For 1 By Image-worshiping and many
other Idolatries they are fallen from Christ: this is plain in Colossians 2.
18. 19. 2 They set up the Pope in Christ's place. Bellarmine on the 1 Pet. 2. 8.
by the stone understands the Pope: And Catharinus by head mentioned in Colos.
2. 19. will have the Pope to be meant.

Ob. But they profess Jesus Christ.

An. Union is either Sacramental; so they are joined by profession: or
Mystical; so they are not joined.

The fifth mark of the true Mother, is her carriage and behavior. First, to
her husband, to whom 5 Her carriage.
in all her behavior she expresses four virtues. 1 To her husband.
As;

1 She is chaste and faithful unto him; she keeps herself only to her
husband, and preserves the 1 Faithful.
marriage band. She forgets not the guide of her youth, nor the commandment of
her God; nor plays false with any other lover, any secondary head, or Vicar
general, she thinks it strange that an husband should have a Vicar. She
abhorres that foul and spiritual adultery by gross Idolatry and false
worship, which the whore of Rome impudently acts and defends. Neither
Angels, nor men, nor merits, nor Saints, nor Images does she bow unto; nor any
other alluring harlot can unsettle her from him, whom her soul loves.

2 She is subject to her husband in all things; content to be tried and ruled
in all cases by his will, and 2 Subject.
word in the Scriptures. What will we say to a woman, that lays claim to a
man to be her husband; but rejects and disgraceth his directions, and
cleaves wholly to her own will, and to other men's counsels and decrees? Who
will not suspect and conclude her to be an harlot? But so does the apostaticall
Romish Synagogue.

3 She depends only on her husband and no other for the means of her welfare,
and all needful 3 Depends on him.
supplies. She scorns to seek to any other Advocates or mediators (whether
Saints or Angels) either for redemption or intercession; her husband that can
supply the greater, can the lesser much more. She cares for no pardons nor
merits, but her Lords. She scorns to marry one, and seek maintenance of
another.

4 She honors her husband only, and will give 4 Honors him only.
his honor to none other. If she did derogate from his glory in the work of
redemption, by the doctrine of free will, justification by works, humane
satisfactions, she were an arrant strumpet, and no wife. But our Church
ascribes all the work of salvation to God only from first to last: Teaching
that we are wholly dead in trespasses and sins, till he quicken us; and that
good works are the way to the kingdom, not the cause of it; and follow a
person justified, but go not before to justify him; and are necessary by a
necessity of presence, not by a necessity Necessitate praesentiae, non
efficientiae.
of efficiency. Thus men and Angels are excluded from any part of Gods honor.

Secondly her behavior to her children. 2 To her children.


1 She nurseth them at her own breasts; puts them not forth to suck strange
milk of traditions, Councels, 1 Nurseth them.
Decretals.

2 She instructs them, and teaches her children. 2 Teaches them:
The virtuous woman opens her mouth with wisdom. Prove. 31. 26. Eunica taught
Timothy the scriptures of a child.

3 She provides for her children, as the virtuous 3 Provideth for them.
woman for all her family, Prove. 31. 15. The Church upholds the means of
salvation to keep the believers in good state. She is not the natural Mother
that starves her children, that shuts up the breasts from them, that hides the
Scriptures, and counts it heresy to read them; that corrupts the
Sacraments, that a man can see nothing less then the institution in them. But
Popery leads her children directly to perdition, whatsoever shows they make
to the contrary. For,

1 They run after it whose names are not written in the book of life. Rev.
13. 8.


2 All the children of that mother are without comfort in life and death;
because they are the sons of Agar, and not of the true Mother: and therefore no
inheritance belongs unto them. Galat. 4. 30.


II. Having found out the true Mother in herself: we are now to enquire how or
by what marks we may find this Mother to be our Mother, and our selves her
children. A man may know himself the son of this Mother by sundry notes.
How we may know our selves sons of this Mother.


1 As a child borne comes into a new world, and finds a marveilous change in
the estate of it: So a son borne of this mother comes into a new estate, is
separated from the world and the corruptions of 7. notes. By our change in 5.
things.
it, brought out of the corruption of nature and practice (as out of the waste
and womb of the world) and set into a new condition in grace: and is in all
things contrary to himself in his old nativity. The change especially
appears in five things.

1 Thou wast borne of flesh, and after the will of the flesh: but now thou art
borne of God. This is 1.
called a birth of water and the holy Ghost: because in this the spirit
supplies the office of water in washing away corruptions and defilements of
flesh

2 In thy old nativity thou wast borne in sin: 2.
now being borne again thou sinnest not. 1 John 3. 9. because the seed of God
is in thee, thou can not, sin reigning, sin wholly and finally: thou have
now a new or renewed nature.

3 In thy old nativity thou wast borne dead in sin, 3.
Ephesians. 2. 1. but now (borne of this mother) thou art quickened with a new life of
grace, called the life of God: Now thou live not, but Christ lives in thee:
Now may thou say as Christ himself said: Rev. 1 18. I was dead, but now I
am alive.

4 In thy old nativity thou wast as a dead man 4.
bound hand and foot, without all motion of grace: nay, all thy motion was
downward for nature with contempt of grace: But now a new motion in spiritual
things attends spiritual life. Now thou movest upward toward heaven,
according to the command of grace, whereto thou wast before an open enemy.

5 In thy old nativity thou wast borne an enemy 5.
of God, a child of Hell, as full of venom and poison as a toad or serpent:
But by this birth thou receivest power to be a son of God. 1 John 3. 2 and
the privilege of sons, pardon of sin, the favor of god, or fatherly
affection, and a child's portion in that immortal and eternal inheritance, and
a sweet joy in the assurance of that estate.

2 The second mark to know a man borne of this Mother, is his crying. The
first thing which discovers 2 The voice of Prayer.
the birth of a Child (if alive) is the crying of it, or else it is
still-borne: so the newborn child of this Mother cries in sense of want, of
misery, and of spiritual nakedness. In natural birth is sense of
weakness, and crying after supply: so in supernatural is sense of frailties,
and much grief for sin, and the miserable fruits of it. And as the child in
those wants can do nothing for it self but cry, and by crying it gets help:
so is it with the child, of God when he finds an utter nothing in himself,
but a gulf of misery ready to drown him in despair; yet now he has a spirit
which makes him cry, Abba Father Romans 8. 15. If any of us have never gotten a
distinct and sound knowledge of sins, and the curse of God due to the same,
nor applied to ourselves that wrath and curse denounced and due to our
particular sins, of which we are guilty for the humbling and breaking of our
hard and stony hearts; If we have not out of the sense of an humbled and
terrified conscience seen our need of Jesus Christ; and from thence have not
more earnestly hungered and thirsted after Jesus Christ; and cried as much after
pardon of sin, as a condemned man after the Kings gracious pardon. These
persons may well instruct their conversion, and their birth of this woman. All
thy profession will not make thee a true son of the Church; except thou
cryest in sense of misery after mercy and grace, and this desire be above al
other desires in the world. On the other side; art thou distressed in conscience
in the sense of thy sin. and fear of damnation due to it? Do thou freely
confess thy sins, and heartily bewail them? Do thou cry after Christ
crucified, so as the whole world would not be so sweet as a taste of Christ;
and the more thou valuest grace, do thou the more thirst and desire after it?
Oh, be of good comfort, let not thine estate discourage thee; thou art in a
good way, and a comfortable condition. It is a comfort to hear a child newborn to cry; it argues both birth and life: and so is it here.

3 The third note of trial of one borne of this Mother is sucking. An infant
so soon as ever it is 3 Sucking the breasts.
borne seeks and suckes the breast: and so the newborn babe seeks, and
suckes the sincere milk of the word. 1 Pet. 2. 2. And as an infant is never
well but when it is sucking night and day; and nothing stils the cries of it,
or quiets it but the breast: so the child of God (suppose him but an infant in
grace) hungerly desires Gods word. Gold, silver, honor, pleasure (which
satisfy carnal men) quiet not him; only Gods word can quiet and satisfy the
heart, And as the infant desires the pure breast-milke without any other
blending or cookery: so Gods children affect chiefly the sincere milk of the
word in the plain evidence of Gods wisdom; and care not for blending with
froth of wit or humane eloquence; but as it comes out of the breasts of the
Mother, the two Testaments. And as the infant sucketh the breast to grow
thereby: So by the sincere milk the children of God grow in spiritual
strength and stature till they come to their tallness, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

4 The fourth note is similitude and likeness to the father of this birth.
This mother brings forth 4 Image of his Father.
children to God in the similitude and Image of god. Other Mothers bring
children in their own Image; as Adam begat Seth in his own Image, Genesis 5. 3.
But what is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Joh. 3. 6. Now examine how thou
expressest the seed of new birth. Whom resemblest thou? If God be thy father,
thou resemblest him in quality, though not in equality. Thou art like him in
holiness, in righteousness, and in the whole divine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Our
Savior makes this a sure note of a son of God, or of the Devil. Joh. 8. The
Jews brag they are sons of Abraham ver. 39. Christ says, were they sons
of Abraham they would do the works of Abraham. Then they brag, God is their
father, ver. 41. Christ answers, If God were your father you would love me,
and resemble him: for I came from him, and he loves me. But I will tell you
whose sons you are: ye are of your father the Devil, for his works ye do.
So thou that professest in the Creed, that God is thy Father, and thou
beleevest in him: if in stead of Divine virtues thou expressest impious and
vicious behavior: thou art of the Devil, whose works thou do. He delights
in blaspheming, swearing, drunkenness, filthiness, he hates the word, the
Sabbaths, the Ministers: he delights in fierceness, slanders, and the like:
so do thou. Thou professest Jesus Christ thy Lord and Savior, but how do
thou grow in conformity with Christ? If thou expressest not his humility,
patience, self-denial, holiness, and all Christian virtues in some measure,
thou art none of his; The member will grow in conformity with the head: a good
child will imitate a good father in goodness.

5 The fifth note of new birth is growth. A child 5 Growth in strength, stature.
once borne grows up to strength and stature. A child in nature that still
suckes wholesome milk, stands not at a pitch, but grows every month and
quarter sensibly: so, if thou be borne of this Mother, thou growest. 1 In
understanding and knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. 2 In sound affection, and powerful
1 In understanding.
use of the means of salvation. As a child the more it grows the more it
feeds: so a man new 2 In affection.
borne has daily more love to the word, more reformation by it, and outgrowes
weaknesses, 3. In sound 3 In activity.
practice of holy duties. As a child grows active to natural and civil
actions: so the child of God and the Church, grows strong to prayer, and the
parts of Gods pure worship: strong to endure the labor of the power of
godliness. 4 In strength for the 4 In strength to suffer.
Christian combat. He grows able to bear afflictions, and stand under great
burdens and crosses for Christ and the Gospel. He grows strong in resistance
of temptations, that he is not now carried ordinarily away, neither by the
world, nor by the God of the world from his place. To this mark St. John sends
us for trial of our new birth, 1 John 5. 4. He that is borne of God,
overcommeth the world: and ver. 18. He that is borne of God keeps himself,
and the wicked one touches him not: Keeps himself, that is, grows up in
holy watchfulness, and resistance of temptations: to which care God adds his
blessing, that he abides untouched, that is, of reigning sin; the wicked one
strikes him not deadly, nor can wholly and finally foil him. Examine this
strength of CHRIST if it be in thee; for so it is called. Ephesians. 6. 10.

6 A sixth note is child-like affections. 1 To our Father. 2 To this Mother. The
child-like affections 6 Child-like affections:
to our Father are two.

1 Honor. Is Christ thy Father? how do thou honor him? Mal. 1. 6. The
Apostle Paul's care was that 1 To our Father.
Christ should be magnified in his body by life or Honor.
death, Phil. 1. 20. What obedience show thou to his commandments, and to
his corrections* do thou honor him by trusting in him, and depending upon
him?

2 A second child-like affection to Jesus Christ, is love. The child loves his
father better then all Love.
men else: and can thou be a child, and not love him that begat: and not as a
Creator, but a Father? If thou can do no more for thy parent, can thou do
less then love him dearly? Examine thy love to Christ, and see if thou can
say as Peter, Lord thou know, I love thee. Happy is the soul that dares
thus appeal to Christ as a witness of his unfeigned love. But how can thou
say thou love him, when his commandments are heavy and irksome? when thou will do nothing for his sake? suffer nothing for his name? when thou will part
with nothing for his words? when thou hate his servants, his words and
Ministers, and risest up in arms against him by horrible sins? David may
have a rebellious son, an Absalom: Christ has no such. All his children love
him better then their own lives.

Now secondly, the child-like affections to this mother are also two. 2 To our
Mother.


1 To honor, love, and obey this mother in all her directions, in all her
corrections according to Love.
the word. Good children will honor the Mother as well as the Father, according
to the Commandment.

Ob. The Papist catches at this as making much for him. The Commandments of
the Mother Church must be obayed; and therefore in their Catechismes (besides
the commandments of God) they injoyne a number of the Churches commandments,
which must be obeyed in pain of damnation, as well as Gods.

Sol. To this I answer. 1 That this Mother must be obeyed of her children, as
other parents of their children, namely, In the Lord. Ephesians. 6. For this is the
difference between the commandments of this Father and this Mother; His must
be obeyed simply and absolutely as the Lords: but hers only in the Lord. If
the precepts of this Father and Mother agree, then the Mothers commandments
must be obeyed: but not if they be either contrary or diverse from his. He that
brings another doctrine must be accursed. He or she that adds to his
commandments must be accursed, and all the plagues added to them. And seeing
Jesus Christ the Lord of his Church would deliver no doctrine nor commandments
to the Church, but what he heard from his Father: no more must the Church but
what she hears from Christ. 2 Why should Rome a particular Church rather
enjoyne laws on other Churches then other Churches on her; seeing that, parity
admits not superiority? Par in parem non habet jus.


2 The second child-like affection to this Mother, is compassion. Children of
the Church must be sensible, Compassion.
and grieved in their Mothers sorrow, affliction and oppression. It is an
unnatural child that takes not to heart his mothers misery. Humanity will make
us mourn in the misery of strangers, yea of enemies; as David put on
sackcloth for his enemies: much more will Christianity for the sorrows of
friends, especially friends of God. How have the Papists showed that they have
not a drop of the blood and spirit of Christians, in their late joys, and
triumphs, and braggs before the victory (as they use to do) fatting and
feeding themselves in the savage barbarousnesse of Antichristian Captains
against the Church in Bohemia and the Palatinate? But what other expectation
from such as lay the principles of their Religion in blood and barbarous
inhumanitie, beyond Scithians or Man-eaters? Yea and not a few sorry
protestants there are, who harbor but a little sorrow for the sorrows of the
Church; bewraying the hardness and insensiblenesse of their hearts, by their
poor and penurious relief. Some out of base irreligion sowing scarce so many
pence as they would have done pounds, had they had conscience and affection of
Children. This Mother may wish she never stand in need of such children, so
flinty and degenerate.

7 The seventh note of one borne of this woman, 7 Brotherlyaffection.
is brotherly-affection. Christian love to all that are begotten of God, as to
brethren, 1 John 3. 14. highly esteeming them, as the excellent in the earth.
Psalm. 16. 3. A man borne of this woman respects not men according to their
greatness or baseness in the world; but according to this birth, be they rich
or poor; and according to this present relation, and that future happiness
they are borne unto. A child of this woman cannot disaffect and reproach his
brethren because they be brethren, and think the very brotherhood a sufficient
scorn. He cannot scorn them for frequenting their Mothers house. Nay he cannot
but affect them for the fellowship in the Gospel, and their consanguinity in
this new estate. Now lay these notes on thy heart, try by them thy estate; and
know, it is better to be out of the number of men, then out of this number.

[And cried in pain ready to be delivered]

The Church brings forth no children to God Doct. 2. The Church brings no
children to God without travel. 4. Reas. Reas. 1.
without much travel and pain: For as by an inevitable decree painful
sorrow is annexed to natural birth: so it is in this spiritual birth. As our
Savior applies that Ioh. 16. 21. A woman when she travelleth has sorrow
because her time is come.

I It cost Christ no small travel and sorrow to beget children to God. For he
must become a man of sorrows: and never was any sorrow like unto his. Nay, he
must sustain the sorrows of hell, and be broken to pieces with sorrows of
body and soul, before one child could ever be begotten unto God, and therefore
the Prophet Esai. 53. 11. says, He shall see the travel of his soul: that
is, the seed for which his soul traveled.

And in the preaching of the Gospel, and sowing this seed in the days of his
flesh in his own person, what great sorrows sustained he by the Scribes,
Pharisees, Princes, and wordly-wise men? and was made a butte of contradiction;
all men resisting his person, his doctrine, blaspheming his miracles and mighty
works, preferring murderers before him, and setting him with Beelzebub the
prince of the devils.

II The painful travel of the Church is by the Ministerial pains and
sorrows of her Pastors and Preachers, Gal. 4. 19. Little children, of whom I
travel in birth again, till Christ be formed in you. Elias in his calling was
in so painful travel as he was weary of his life: 1 King. 19. 4. Ier. 4. 19.
The pains of the Prophet Esaias made him cry, His belly, his leannes 29. 16. the
Apostles of Christ what pains they endured appears. 2 Cor. 11. 23. In labors
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison many times, in death often. How
they were resisted in their Ministry, whipped like vagrants, reviled, stocked,
turned out at towns ends like miscreants, see Acts 2. 15. and 4. 18 5. 28. 13.
46. And after, what violent torments they endured in their Martyrdomes, the
Ecclesiastical story shows. And at this day the labout and sufferings of
godly and faithful Ministers is like the labor and sorrows of a woman in
travel. For when we travel to bring forth some Children to God out of the
common track of the world, how are we often oppressed, contradicted and opposed
by timeservers, and libertines? How abased and rejected by the multitude? What
heavy strokes and lashes endure we from the tongues of the basest? What
slanders are raised, and impudently cast out against us by Papists and
Atheists, and inhumane wretches, who fight against us with nothing but witless
lies and falsehoods?

So as it is evidently true as Christ* foretold his Disciples, If they
persecuted me, they will you also, Joh 15. 20. And as evident, that if Christ
were on earth they would spare him no more then they do us, He that refuses
you, refuses me.

III. It is no small part of this travel of the 3.
Church, that her poor babes are so pained, and suffer with her, while she so
hardly brings them forth.

For what child is there that can begin to look into the light of this
spiritual world, to receive the word of God, to embrace the faith by which
Christ may be formed in him: but presently he is pinched with scorns and
taunts, and heavily laded with shameful indignities: even for desiring the
sincere milk of the word, for the maintaining of that life with which he is
newly quickened.

Neither can it be otherwise, seeing whosoever will live godly in Christ must
suffer persecution. And whosoever will be a disciple of Jesus Christ must
resolve to take up his cross daily.

IV. The pain and travel of the Church is 4. Four maine hindrances of new
birth.
more sharp and sorrowful by reason of those mighty lets and resistances of
this new birth, not only without by Devils and all sorts of wicked men; but
even within and nearer us then they, and these are especially four.

1 Natural ignorance: what a let was it in Nichodemus, he must go into the
womb again, Natural ignorance.
else cannot be borne again. Joh. 4. 10

2 Fear of difficulties, losses, and that this birth would prove an enemy
unto their credit, profit, or Fleshly fear.
pleasure, and they see the prejudice and reproach Joh. 12. 41.
cast upon such as are newborn.

3 Too hasty and inconsiderate, and irresolute undertaking of this business,
not casting the costs, and Irresolution.
how many sad throws and pangs they may sustain; many therefore in liking of
the good way have some pangs and remorse as if they would go through the pain
to the birth: But finding more difficulty then they expected, give it over
again: for so did many who came to Christ, and were Disciples a while, but
left him on the plain field. Joh. 6.

4 The presence and love of sin. First, The presence Love of sin.
of sin: there is another monstrous and adulterous birth that hinders,
begotten by the unlawful copulation of Satan and the corrupt will: Satan being
the Father, and our natural corruption the Mother of this issue, and these
struggle with us and get us by the heel, and make the case so difficult, as
that the Saints cry with Paul, Romans 7. Oh miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me etc. Secondly, love of some special sin or sins, which makes
all Gods ordinances inefficacious; Judas his covetousness, Demas embracing the
world: or a secure heart which lets all doctrine run out. Heb. 2. 1. not
cherishing or retayning it to an holy conception and birth.

Now what mervaile is it that there be no small labor to our Mother, when our
selves are not only so helpless to our own birth, but such hinderers of it?

Object. Esaias 66. 7. Sion shall bring forth before her sorrows and pain come
on her, and therefore brings her children without pain.

Sol. The Prophet* speaks not of the same thing, but of a sudden and
unexpected deliverance and restitution of the Church, which before seemed
utterly barren and forsaken. And has respect to the miraculous propagation of
the gospel by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus, which should be so sudden and
unexpected, as if a woman should be delivered before her pains be upon her;
for, how miraculous was it, that the Gospel by so few men, in so short time,
and by so base persons in all outward respects should be published to the whole
world: and that all people should be by their outward calling brought to the
unity of faith: So as this which is spoken in a special respect concerning an
outward calling, and by an extraordinary power of God, infringeth not this
doctrine concerning the inward calling and conversion in the ordinary course of
it, which is not done without much resistance; As neither that of the Apostles
was.

And this concerns the Ministers; and Ministry, and shows 4 things.

First, the honor and dignity of the holy Ministry, Use. 1. The dignity of
the Ministry.
in that it is the only instrument appointed by God, for the bringing forth of
Gods children. Never was a despiser of the Ministry yet borne of God, or a
son of the true Church; no birth without this immortal seed.

Secondly, the end of the Ministry must be to bring children to God. To form
Christ in men, The end of the Ministry.
Gal. 4. 19. and fashion them new creatures like unto Jesus Christ. The aim of
a true Minister is not how many livings he may get and hold, how much money he
may lay up, how high he may climb, how idle he may be and still keep up his
credit; But how many souls he may be under God a father unto; How he may
imprint in men's hearts, the gracious image of Jesus Christ, that in the day of
his reckoning he may with boldness and comfort say; Behold, here am I, and the
children that thou have given me, Esaias 8. 18. And whosoever aims not at this,
or at any thing more, misseth his work, and perverteth his calling, his
reckoning shall tell him so: we must therefore frame our doctrine, that it may
be for the plainness and soundness as Christ by it may be formed; the play of
wit, nor profane strong lines, nor frothy strains of strange languages, will
not do it. The Prophets, nor Apostles, nor our Lord himself never preached so.

Thirdly, the duty of a faithful Minister consists in two things. 1 To
resolve on pains in his calling, as knowing he cannot bring men to Christ
without pains and labor. An idle Pastor that gives up the pains of his
calling, is like a young mother that would feign have children without pains and
sorrow in bringing forth.

2 To love dearly persons won to the faith. For he that knows the sorrow of
winning and begetting any to Christ, cannot but love them as his own children.
And therefore has Gods providence annexed much sorrow to the birth, that the
child might be so much more tendered and loved of the Mother, as she has
dearly bought it. And so in this spiritual birth it is true. And a spiritual
Father may rebuke and sharply reproove his children begotten by his pains, for
just faults, and this is fatherly love; but he that shall reproach the whole
seed of Christ, and nip and blast goodness in them, and the more they prosper
in grace, the more spitefully shall ordinaryly disgrace them; I doubt whether
such a one be the Father of any of their souls. How does a Mother, yea a
tender nurse rejoice in the health and prosperity of the child, and grieve
even unto death if the Child thrive not, nor prosper. And who would abide a
nurse whom nothing so much grieveth as the thriving and growth of the child?

Fourthly, The comfort of a faithful Minister. Howsoever Comfort of faithful
Ministers.
his sorrows and pains be as sure and inevitable as the sorrows of a woman
in travel, yea and as sharp too. Yet

1 The are also short as theirs, a little while will put an end to their pains.

2 They are in the end sweet and turned into joy, as theirs Joh. 16 21. A woman
as soon as she is delivered remembers no more the pain because a man-child
is borne. Their labor and pain passes away and is quite and quickly
forgotten, but the joy is lasting and eternal, and none can take it away.

We must consider that if we be rejected of men, so was the chief builder,
and the Master builders the Apostles themselves.

If we speak words of truth and wisdom out of the book of God, in the name
of God, out of the place of God, some dare say we will lie as fast as a dog
will run. If our innocence were as bright as the sun, some dog will bark
against us. The servant is not above his Master. Our Master, as innocent as he
was, some few said he was a good man, but many that he was a Devil, and was a
very vile man. Well, this is the comfort of faith, it shall break out of all
clouds and darkness, and shine in the faces of all adversaries one day. For,
as it frets the enemy that he cannot withhold Gods gracious blessing from his
faithful servants here; So much more shall it break their hearts, that they
cannot resist the glorious light of it hereafter.

And secondly, to the people of God, to be willing to submit themselves to the
sorrows of the new Use. II.
birth. No infant can avoid the difficulties of birth, nor no child of God can
shun this.

Quest. What are these sorrows?

1 Resolve therefore of sorrows from within, to undertake the pains of true
repentance, sound sorrow for sin, mortification, self-denial; renounce the
pleasures of sin which are but for a season. As Moses, as that of Christ, If
any will be a Disciple, let him deny himself. Is not here a pains and
difficulty to renounce the wisdom of the flesh, a man's own corrupt will, his
affections and passions, which must be stockt up root and branches, his own
natural inclinations, which are nearer to him then his skin, his own habits
and bosom sins of long maintenance, to cut off hands, and put out eyes.

2 Resolve of sorrows from without 2 Timothy 1. 8 be partakers of the affliction
of the Gospel. Take up the cross daily, and, after one, still expect another,
Christ and his cross are inseparable.

God might have severed affliction from the gospel; as he might if he had
pleased severed pain and sorrow from the birth of a child; but would not. For,

First, his wisdom foresaw it stood more with Reasons why God would not sever
Christ and his cross.
his glory, to erect himself a Church in the world in despite of Satan and
all wicked instruments. In no natural thing is Gods power more seen, then in
the birth of an infant in grace, the hazard and opposition is but the
manifestation of his power.

Secondly, The Lord would stop Satan's mouth who would accuse the Saints, as
Job, as if we served God for naught; when we are ready for Christ to endure all
hazards, and deadly dangers.

Thirdly, The Lord tries the truth of his childrens graces, while they abide
with him in affliction. Now we must resolve to go through the pains of new
birth, to difference our selves from, 1 Carnal gospellers, that like not the
gospel, because it teaches self-denial. 2 Wicked men, because the power of
it crosses their whole course. 3 Politicians, who renounce it, because it
requires a change, and they can endure no change, though for the better.

3 Resolve of pains and labor in the means of Travel in the means of
grace. 3. Reas.
grace, in hearing, reading, praying, watching, fasting, and spiritual
combat: for God brings forward his image in his own means. Consider, for
encouragement,

1 The description of Saints Rev. 7. 19. those are 1.
they that come out of great tribulation. Wicked are ever going into great
affliction: as jolly as they are, and as free as they seem to be, but the
Saints are ever coming forth.

2 The worth of grace for which thou suffer; 2.
The least is worth all thy sufferings. Is knowledge worth nothing? Is the
light of the sun so worthless a thing? would thou suffer any hard labor
and peril for money, and a small sum of silver: and will thou be at no pains
for faith, more precious the^ gold: for hope, nor for peace of conscience? are
these worth no pains?

3 The happy estate into which thou come by suffering. Thou art borne to
blessedness. Blessed are 3.
they that mourn. All thy pain in suffering is not co^parable to the gain of
suffering. The momentany afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory in
the life to come, look not on the loss but on the gain. Thou loosest
friends, but have God and Christ, and his Angels near thee. Loosest liberty
of body, but have liberty and joy of Conscience. Hazardest outward peace, but
have peace with God, thy self, and all creatures, so far as they cannot hurt
thee. See our Saviors argument, Mark. 10. 29.

And there appeared another wonder in Heaven.]

Now we come to the description of the Churches adversary and opposite enemy,
under the name and tipe of a Dragon.

To which description is set a preface, as before the description of the woman.
Of which having spoken in the 1. ver. we here omit it, only remember that by
heaven is meant the Church of God militant; for, what has the dragon to do in
heaven in proper acceptance.

The description of the Dragon is by two arguments.

1 His adjuncts, being five. 2 His effects, which are two.
His adjuncts in the text are:

1 Magnitude. 2 Cruelty. 3 Subtlety. 4 Power. 5 Victory.
His effects are 1 Against the Stars, he drew down with his tail the third
part. 2 Against the Woman, stood before her to devour her, etc.


First, Of the dragon himself. By the dragon what is meant.


Quest. What is meant by the Dragon?

Answ. 3 Things.

1 The Devil, for so it is expounded ver. 9. to be 1.
that old Serpent called the devil and Satan. Satan, called a dragon for 4
reasons.


Now the devil is called metaphorically a serpent or dragon.

First, By allusion to that story Genes. 3. because under this form and
representation he deceived mankind.

Secondly, For his poison and malice whereof he is full, and by which he has
stung to death all the sons of men, as was shadowed by those serpents in the
wilderness, which slew all the Israelites that looked not up to the brazen
Serpent.

Thirdly, For his exceeding strength and power to hurt and destroy, whereunto
add his fierceness and bloody cruelty against the Saints, which makes the
dragon dreadful, which is of all monsters the most fell and savage.

Fourthly, For his slinesse, subtlety and craft wherein he resembles the
serpent which is more subtle then all the beasts of the field, Genes. 3. 1.
and this is mentioned ver. ^. which deceived all the world. And this his nature
is couched in his name, drac^, co^ing of a word signifying to see peircingly,
for he is subtle acute and quick sighted to discern a far off his pray and
advantage against us.

2 By the dragon is also meant the instruments of 2.
Satan's fury. For he works against the Church, by Instruments of Satan called
dragons. Why.
wicked men, and external enemies, who are comprised under the word Dragon.
And they having the same nature and disposition of the devil, have also the
same name. Jer. 51. 34. The King of Babell is said to swallow up the Church as
a dragon. And Exek. 29. 3. Pharaoh King of Egypt for his tyranny against the
Church is called the great dragon that lies in the midst of his rivers. Psalm.
74. 13. thou dividedst the sea by thy power, thou brakest the heads of Dragons.
(that is, the pursuing Egyptians) in the waters. And in the next verse he
seems to call Pharaoh by the name of Leviathan; Which as it is the great
destroyer of the sea, and swallows up innumerable lesser fishes; so, he would
swallow up all the Church before him; and was a terror to all nations round
about him.

Object. But here is mention but of one dragon; whereas of devils be many
legions, and millions of fierce and wicked men and enemies of the Church.

Sol. The whole kingdom of the devil may be The whole kingdom of the devil
but one dragon. 3. Reas.
said to be but one dragon:

Because. 1 It is a kingdom not divided against it self, al of it is but one
corporation or society: for, although they be several in themselves, yet they
all join in mischief and malice against Christ, and his Church, as if they
were but one and not many.

2 All the members of that kingdom resemble the nature of their head, which is
the dragon: and all have one common work, and are all fitly comprehended under
one name.

3 As all the company of the faithful bear the name of Christ. 1 Cor 12. 12.
So all the company of the wicked in whom Satan rules, is called by the name of
the Dragon in this place And of the devil Revel. 2. 10 The devil shall cast
some of you into prison: that is, the devils instruments, who all bear his
name. And as well his instruments may be here put for himself; as himself for
his instruments there.

3 Because this vision was properly of things and 3.
persons after John's being in Pathmos, it seems yet to be fitlier brought
lower to some more special instruments who have imbatled themselves against
the Church since Christ's ascension; And then we cannot more properly apply it
then to the persecuting Emperors of Rome while it was heathen, who were
special ministers and instruments of the devils fury against the Church, And
all of them being many Heathen persecuting Emperors of Rome dragons. 3. Reas.
made but one dragon For,

First, They were all one in fierceness and feritie of the it nature against
Christ and his Church; and put forth all their rage in maintenance of their
idolatry, and worship of the dragon, as 1 Cor. 10 20. led by the devil and
ruled by his will.

Secondly, They were all one in place, one in judgment, one in succession,
succeeding one another both in the throne and authority, and in the execution
of it against Christ and this woman his spouse, with the cruelty rather of
fell and fiery dragons, then of men that had retained but one spark of
humanity or pity within them.

Thirdly, All of them gave the dragon for their arms: which does not obscurely
give us to understand, what enemy the Spirit of God would more particularly
aim at, and design unto us. And show that:

The enemies of the Church though they disagree Doct.
never so much among themselves, yet all join against the Church: for they all
make up but one dragon.

As against David rose up Hadadezer King of Zobah, and to his succors the
Aramites of Damesek. 2 Samuel 8. 3. 5. and chap. 10. 6. After them Aramites and
Ammonites and many enemies joined as one man against him: so, against Christ
the Son of David conspired Pharisees, Saduces, Herodians, Essus. Yea Christ
himself was a sign of contradiction to all people: and so is his Church.

Luke 23. 12. Herod and Pilate had their private quarrels among themselves, yet
both agree and are made friends against Christ.

Acts 17. 18. Epicures and Stoiks were as contrary in their sects and opinions
as black and white. One most strict in their way, the other as loose and
libertine. One placed their happiness in virtue and moral honesty; the other
in volupteousnesse and brutish pleasures.

But as contrary as they were between themselves, they all band and join
themselves against Paul and his doctrine. And all wicked tyrants and princes,
whatsoever private quarrels are among themselves, yet all agree and band
themselves against Christ. Psalm. 2.

At this day, all the catholic countries, Spain, France, Italy, Germany,
whatsoever particular quarrels are among themselves, yet all are in holy league
as they call it, against the poor Reformed Churches.

So of all heretics, if they be never so hostile among All wicked men united
against Christ. 4. Reas.
themselves, yet all join against orthodoxe doctrine; And all worldly and evil
men full of emnitie one against another, yet all agree against the profession
of godliness and practice of piety.

1 Because of that irreconcilable enmity put between Reas. 1.
the whole seed of the woman, and the whole seed of the Serpent. Genes. 3. 15.
and therefore be that spawne and seed of the serpent never so poysonfull one
against another, nor will trust another, yet all will easily strike hands
against the godly, as one man.

2 All darkness is contrary to all light, and the 2.
whole kingdom of darkness must fight against the whole kingdom of light,
because all light reproves all darkness alike. Christ is an equal enemy to
Herod as Pilate, and therefore here private quarrels shall give place, that
they may join and befriend one another in mocking and condemning Christ.

3 The policy of the dragon, who well knows 3.
that united forces are strongest, and therefore holds all the kingdom of
darkness together for the overthrow of the contrary power, for if Gods
kingdom should prevail, down goes theirs. It is the voice of them all, If we
let this man alone, the Romans will come to take our nation. It is the
prudence of the captain to keep his band from mutiny, and Satan knowing that
a kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, labors to hold it in peace
against the common enemy.

4 The common corruption and consent of wicked 4.
and unregenerate natures, all are of the same poysonfull nature, all led by
the same spirit that rules in the world. All their wills given up to the
devil, to rule and move at his pleasure All their counsels and intendments
against Gods people, mischievous like the poison of dragons. Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
detestable to God, and dangerous to m^n. All alike flexible to sin: for, by
the infection of sin, one wicked man can soon draw another: and all are as
ready to such motions as gunpowder to take a spark of fire. All their delights
are the same in the ruin and spoil of the Church, so far as they can. They
all eat up Gods people as bread. Psalm. 14. like dragons, who so hate mankind,
as they devour men, not for hunger, but for spite and hatred, taking great
delight in eating his pray. So these delightfully oppress the people of the
high God.

First, See how they are deceived that make unity Use. 1. Unity no note of
the Church.
a note of the Church; Here we see the kingdom of the devil at unity making
up but one dragon, all the devils in hell are one in their aims and ends, in
their wills and endeavors against the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

All the wicked in the world, Jews, Turks, Papists, Atheists, Epicures, all
disagreeing among themselves, yet all join in one against Jesus Christ. The
world ever afforded a general unity against Christ.

How was unity a note of the Church, when all cried crucify him, and were all
with one voice against Christ So, when the whole world was an Arian.

Secondly, See what is the unity and peace we 2. What unity and peace
Ministers must preach for:
must preach for, a unity in verity Ephesians 4. 3. endeavor to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace. It must be the peace of God that must rule
in our hearts. Col 3. 15. It is an idle thing to call for and commend an
unlimited peace, a carnal peace, a peace without, yea against grace and truth:
the dragon can maintain an unity against verity.

And the Scripture every where disclaimeth carnal peace Mat. 10 34. The Angels
sign first glory to God, and then peace with men; but it is not for Gods glory
to run and combine with evil men, follow peace, and holiness. And the
kingdom of God is, first righteousness then peace, Rom 14 17.

Nay, it is an holy, and honorable contention, to contend for the faith, for
truth in doctrine, in manners, against superstition, and corruption, and wicked
men and manners: although the dragon will call it faction, and turbulence, and
daunt men with noise of troublesome make-bates, as truly as Eliah was accucused
to trouble all Israel, when he destroyed the Altars of Baal: Or the Angel
might be blamed for troubling the water, for the curing of men's diseases.

Thirdly, As hatred of truth unites the hearts of all 3. Christians must unite
themselves in the truth.
wicked men against it: So let the love of faith and truth unite our hearts for
it, that we might serve the Lord with one accord and with one mind, and one
mouth we may glorify God.

1 Hereby we shall prevent the dragon, who, Reas.
while he will not suffer his kingdom to be rent in the maine: sowes tares of
dissension, and division in the Lords field; As an old politician, he knows how
much it makes for his party, if he can raise a mutiny in the contrary army.

2 As there is not a greater benefit on earth then communion of Saints, so
there is no greater damage and detriment to Satan and his kingdom, then when
it is carefully and fruitfully preserved: hence he bestirres himself and
prevails with many who would be counted peaceable men, to live in open malice
by seven years together, to the scorning of many of Gods graces, for which
they shall be countable.

3 What a shame that men of wicked opinions, and lewd practices can close and
combine themselves against God and his Son, against his truth and servants;
and we that profess the doctrine of grace and love, and in judgment hold the
same truth, yet in affection, and conversation, break one from another, as if
we had no such bands upon us, as wicked men, yea devils have? Do not birds of a
fether fly together? Do not Atheists, swearers, adulterers, drunkards, thieves,
and all wicked ones sharpen their swords, whet their tongues, and dragons
stings to revile these? Do not devils stand together against the truth? and
shall we speak as the dragon, do as the dragon, be not half so fast for the
truth as they against it? can no Christian bands tie us, as fast as malice and
hatred of Christ does them?

A great red Dragon.]

Now we come to the five properties of this dragon. The first of which is his
magnitude or greatness, which property is expressed for more terror, seeing
the greater the dragon is, the more dreadful he is. He is great in four
respects. Dragon called great in 4. respects.


First, In respect of the head of this dragon; Satan, who is the greatest in
all the world, for power, rule, dominion: in which sense he is called Mat. 12.
29. 1.
The strong armed man, and Ephesians. 6. 12. principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickedness in high places, yea and more, he is called The God of
the world. Some of the Ancients have compared him to Behemoth, Job 41. 33. In
the earth there is none like him, nor any power to compare with him, and, He is
without fear of men.

Secondly, In respect of the members, the dragon is 2.
great, both for

1 Multitude. 2 Quality.
1 For multitude; All the numberless number of wicked men, and devils; are the
body of this dragon. The greatest army that ever was gathered in the world, are
now mustred against the Woman, of all tongues, nations and ages.

2 For quality, They be great and potent instruments, for the dragon has
under his colors, the most, and most potent Monarchs of the world to fight for
him: The most politic Counselors, and Achitophells to plot for him; the
greatest armadoes, and Armories, of warlike instruments and all mortal weapons
to wound and kill for him: The greatest Antichrist and Cham of Rome, that
servant of servants, and all his armies of Priests, Jesuits, orders, Friars,
and sisters, to bless and curse as another Balaam for him: He has great mines
and mints of gold and treasure to command, to supply him with whatsoever may
make him a great and most puissant adversary.

Thirdly, In respect of head and members, he is great in respect both of the
joint desire, will and endeavor 3.
they have to hurt and waste the Church, which is great and inexpressible.

And secondly, of their joint power and authority to execute those fiery and
wicked wits, which is so great, so catholic, universal and unlimited, as no
power in earth is comparable, and only the power of God superior.

Fourthly, The dragon is said here to be great, in 4.
respect of the great seat and City, where this imperial dragon reigned over
all the Kings of the earth. Rome that great and mighty City, as it is called
Rev. 18. 10. 1 Great in splendour and beauty, as set upon seven hills, for which
she is famous in all the world. 2 Great in power and authority. In Jesus time
having command over all the Kings of the earth; the eye of the world, the
Metrapolitan of all the earth. Queen of nations, and Mistress of Monarchs.

The state of Gods people in this world, is beset with great and mighty
enemies, as fierce and potent as dragons. Thus the Church complains Psalm. 44.
^9. Thou have smitten us down into the place of dragons, and covered us with a
shadow. Seeing that the Church is to encounter with great dragons and enemies,
The Church is beset with fierce enemies and dragons.
not flesh and blood only, which are mighty without and within us: but with
principalities and powers, and these not only the members of the kingdom of
darkness, but the head and Prince of all the wicked, even that wicked one,
and then all the band led by him, among whom there is nothing in sight or
expectation, but death and danger.

1 The Church is described to be as a lilly among Reas. 1.
thorns. These thorns are sharp and thick about it, to hinder the rooting,
and the prosperity, and prick the Lilly in the name and profession. And how
weak a thing is a lilly to defend it self from the prickly thorns? And
Christ sends out his servants as sheep in the midst of wolves, weak and silly
creatures in comparison of them.

2 The world which always lies in wickedness, is no changeling, it is a very
Egypt to the Israel 2.
of God: not only oppressing them with cruel burdens and taskes: but a
breeder of fell and hideous dragons, and most poisonful monsters, tyrants,
hypocrites, heretics; partly by secret traynes to infect and poison holy
doctrine and conversation, and partly by manifest assaults to sting and wound
the^ in their names, and profession, yea, and by tyranny and persecution to
threaten with present death every moment. And as the Church was once, so it is
ever, in the world, as in a wilderness, the wicked inhabitants of which are as
so many wild beasts and dragons, among whom is no hope of truce or composition.

3 The Lord will have his Church thus beset with great dangers; That 3.


First, She may be thoroughly tried and winnowed. Rev. 2. 10.

Secondly, Have experience of her own weakness, to be humbled.

Thirdly, Depend upon the strength of God in her combat, to quicken prayer.

Fourthly, To take notice of the work and victory of grace, with the issue of
faith and patience, which can conquer so great enemies.

Fifthly, To make heaven sweet after so many fears, sorrows, and sufferings,
when the enemies whom their eyes have seen, they shall never see more.

4 The Lord sees often just cause in the Church and 4.
members to afflict them with such fell dragons and scorpions: for seldom is
the Church cast into the place of dragons, but meritoriously and justly,
seldom do common calamities, by tyrants, come on the Church, but the
ambition, covetousness, and contention in teachers, or else the earthlinesse,
security, or lusts, and looseness of professors went before.

Object. How stands this with Christ's legacy? My peace I leave with you etc.
And with his promise, My peace none shall take from you.

Sol. Christ never takes away nec suam, nec a suis: that is, neither his peace
nor from his, for, his peace differs far from all worldly and external; and
well stands with worldly affliction; all that will live godly must suffer
persecution. And in the world (says Christ) ye shall have affliction, but in
me ye shall have peace: even at the same time. For not all the tyrants, nor
torments of the world can shake out the sweet peace of God, and a good
conscience, as in a cloud of Martyrs it might manifestly appear.

And therefore first, the greater the enemy is, the greater care and
watchfulness is required on our part: 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your adversary goes about
like a roaring Lion: therefore besober and watch. Ephesians. 6. we fight against
principalities and powers, therefore stand in the armor of God.

And though Christians think it too strict to be tied to a constant watch,
over their life, yet to give up, or be negligent in this watch, is but to agree
with this enemy for thy own destruction. The adversary is great in power, in
wrath, in watchfulness against thee, and thou have no more assured means of
safety then to set a watch about thy self, in all times, in all places, in all
companies, in all occasions, over all thy parts, gifts, affections, speeches,
actions, that thou may be able to defend them all with peace of conscience
against all accusers, and defeat also so great and wrathful a dragon.

Secondly, Against so strong an adversary, wisdom will seek to procure the
greatest helps and succors Use. 11.
that he can.

Quest. What aides may I procure? Aids to be procured against the dragon.


Answ. First, All our help stands in the name of the Lord. Fly to God for
protection: for God therefore does suffer his Church to be beset on all hands
with such multitudes of combined enemies and dragous, 1.
as that she has no way left but to look upward for Gods eye to watch her,
and Gods hand to save her. As Iehosaphat 2 Chro. 20. 12. There is no strength
in us to stand against this great multitude, neither do we know what to do, but
our eyes are toward thee. Get God thy friend to take part against these great
dragons.

Quest. How.

Answ. 1 By faith, James 2. 23. Abraham believed God, and was called the friend
of God.

2 By obedience Joh. 15. 14. Ye are my friends if you do what I command you.
This covers a man with Gods protection, whereas sin lays Israel naked, as in
the Calfe, and the wiles of Balaam. A man that has so many enemies, had not
need by sin to make God his enemy too.

Secondly, Gods Angels are good aids: who 2.
have charge over thee so long as thou keep the way, by whose presence Thou
shall walk upon the dragon, and tread under foot the young Lion and dragon,
Psalm. 91. that is, overcome the strongest and greatest enemies.

Thirdly, Among other parts of Christian armor, the sword of the spirit, the
shield of faith, the breastplate 3.
of righteousness, and a good conscience; and there is great strength in the
prayer of faith. Ephesians. 2 Chro. 20. 15
6. 18. And of the faithful, Acts 12. 5. 7. as for Peter in prison: yea,
prayer is able to muster an army of heavenly soldiers for our defense.

If all wicked members, limbs of the dragon, be Ve ll I.
great enemies, we must be wise to avoid their societies, and combinations;
whatsoever peace and favor they pretend, fly inward fellowship with them, as
from dragons, whose property is to poison a far off before we see them.
Trust not their flatteries and pretenses, Genes. 49, 5, 6. Simeon and Levi
brethren in evil; and instruments of cruelty. Into their secret let not my
soul come. It had been happy if in many passages of latter times, the Church
had been more shye and wary of the fair and treacherous pretenses of
Antichristian dragons, who use to pull on fair gloves on foul and carnal
fists, and paws; And who will trust him that cannot put off the nature of a
dragon, although he may speak as the Lamb?

The greater the dragon, the greater must our Use. 4.
courage and resolution be. For, such potent and dreadfullen enemies are
shadowed out in this title great dragon, not to terrify or dismay us (as all
Israel run away at the sight of Goliath) but to animate and excite us to manly
and stout resistance.

Quest, What ground of courage have we against 5 Grounds of courage against so
great a dragon.

Iste Leo ob feritatem, Christus ob fortitudinem. Christus Leo ad vincendum,
diabolus ad nolendum. August.


so great a dragon?

Answ. First, We have a great adversary, but we have a good cause, in which
we need not fear to die, or maintain unto death.

Secondly, As we have a great enemy, so we have a great and invincible
captain; here is the Lion of Judah against the roaring Lion. Hebrews write
that the Jews painted a Lion in a great banner for their standert. Let us run
under this standart of this Lion, and be safe. Little David under this standart
trampled on the great Goliath.

Thirdly, We have great enemies, but as Numb. 19. 8. God is gone from them,
they are bread for us. great, but naked to Gods revenge, their shield is gone.
Great, but cowardly weak, and flying, to him that resists, Jam. 47. Great, but
conquered, and bound. Mat. 12. The stronger man has disarmed him. He is the
great Prince of the world, but ours is the Prince of peace, and mighty Lord of
glory.

Fourthly, We have great enemies, but more and greater succors, then we have
enemies, both with us and in us. They are spiritual wickednesses that are
against us, but we have the spirit of God and of grace with us. Wicked men
seem great and dreadful dragons, and as great and unresistable as an hideous
dragon by a weak woman. But let them combine in most forcible manner: all that
strength is but as the strength of reeds, in comparison of that with the
Church; see Ezeck. 29. 9. 6.

Besides, they are many against us, but more with us then against us. 2 King 6.
16 and in us, greater is he that is in us then he that is in the world 1 John
4. 4. we have greater power in us then any without and against us. Phil 4. 13.
I can do all things by the power of Christ strengthening me, and while we have
all the might of his glorious power to strengthen us, we are safe. Colos. 1. 11.

Fifthly, Our enemy is great, but thence we are assured of greater glory and
victory, as David the harder task he had against Goliath the greater was his
victory. The more difficult the war the more honor is in the conquest. [A red
dragon.]

It pleases God in the Scriptures under diverse colors to describe diverse
things: As Revel 6. 3. 4. is a vision of three horses of several colors,
which expres the several estates of this woman here in conflict.

The first a white horse, which color notes, in the Revelation, purity, and
innocence of doctrine, and manners, and figureth the virgin primative Church,
upholding the purity of doctrine and discipline of the faith, and worship
appointed by the holy Apostles, before this white came to be speckled and
spotted with black errors, and stains, in doctrine, discipline and worship.

The second, a red horse, ver 4 deciphering the same Church now red with
martyrdom, and persecution and effusion of blood by tyrants.

The third horse is a black horse, noting the estate of the Church, now black
and in sad and afflicted condition by heretics which had horribly mingled the
truth of pure white and lightsome doctrine, with black darkness of heresies
and errors; For it were not hard to show how in the first two hundred years
after Christ, the Church was blacked by the heresies of Ebi^n, Cerinthus,
Valontine, Marcion, and Basilides. In the second two hundred, by Photinus,
Samosatonus, Sabellius, Arius, and Eunomius, etc.

In the third two hundred, by Pelagius, Nestorius, and Eutiches, etc.

But this red color of the dragon, lively pourtreyeth the feritie, cruelty,
and bloody disposition of the dragon against the Woman the Church. The greek
word here used (...) is emphaticall, noting him to be a fiery dragon, fiery
red, set on fire, and all enflamed with an hellish flame of wrath and cruelty
against the Church of God.

Whence learn: The nature and disposition of the Doctr. The fiery disposition
of enemies of the Church.
enemies of the Church (further then they are overruled) they are red and fiery
dragons, whom nothing can content but blood and cruelty.

First, See it in the head of the dragon: Satan quaerit 1 The head.
non quem mordeat vel frangat, sed quem devoret. Chrysostom. He is red,
blood-thirstie, sanguinolent; as a thirsty man delights in blood and cruelty:
affectedly red.

Secondly, He is actually red, imbrued with all the 2.
blood of the Saints, of Abel, and of the Prophets, Apostles, the Son of God
himself: and all his holy Martyrs since his ascension. He is guilty and dyed
with blood.

Thirdly, He is anciently a red dragon, a manslayer 3.
from the beginning. Joh. 8. 44. Who has slain all mankind not in body only,
but in soul and body by our first fall.

Fourthly, he is originally red: yea the author of all 4.
cruelty and bloodshed that ever was in the world, and all the homicide done
by man upon man, it is the proper work of the devil, in whose service homicides
are So Christ to the Jews, Joh. 8. his works ye do, seeking to kill Christ.

Secondly, See it in the members, Pharaoh a red dragon, 2 In the members.
lying in his rivers, commands the midwives to kill all the Males, and makes a
cruel bloody act, that every parent should drown his own child. Haman a red
dragon sends posts into all provinces to kill, but not content with that, to
root out and destroy al Jews, young and old, children and women in one day,
least any place should be left for pity or humanity. Manassah a red dragon,
shed innocent blood till he had replenished Jerusalem from corner to corner. 2
King. 21. 16.

Saul before his conversion, breathes out nothing but slaughters and
threatening, as a dragon that slayes only with his breath.

The like in Antiochus, and Antichrist (typified in him) practiced wholly to
destroy the mighty and holy people, Dan. 8. 24. And the same we see in Herod
who slew all the male children under two years old.

Thirdly, See it especially in the Imperial dragon, 3 In the Imperial dragon.
the bloodinesse and tyranny of those Roman Emperors was matchless, who
poured out the blood of innocent Christians by thousands, and ten thousands
in their streets and territories, like water.

For the first 300. years after Christ, were nine or ten bloody dragons,
that dyed themselves red in the blood of Christians, which they sucked out
greedily, more like hell hounds, then men, that had a drop of pity or humanity
left.

Nero began and flew upon them as a monster, as if they had been incendiaries
of the city, which him self caused to be set on fire only to lay it upon them;
like our incendaries, and Romish powder plotters

After him, Domitian, who cast John the Evangelist into a furnance of scalding
oil, but when he saw he came forth unhurt, he banished him into the I Will
Pathmos, where he writ this Revelation. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 17.

After him, Traian, under pretense, that there must be but one religion in one
Region, persued Christistians with fire and sword, and new devised torments to
chase the name of Christian out of the world. He slew Simeon Iustus, and
Ignatius, the Pastors, one at Jerusalem, the other at Antioch.

After him came Antonius Verus, who slew, with Policarp Pastor of Smirna,
innumerable Christians.

What shall I speak of Hadrian, that in one Mount crucified 10000. Christians
crowned with thorns, and darts thrust into their sides, in derision of the
passion of our Lord Jesus.

Or of the last of these dragons, in one month of whose reign were slain 17.
thousand Martyrs, and innumerable more condemned to mines and slavery worse
then death.

In a word, the dragons were so red, as, the very story seems to be written in
blood; which tell us that no man could step his foot in Rome and not tread on
a Martyr.

Fourthly, See it in the causes. First, God in his Three causes hereof.
counsel has just reason, for as he foundeth his Church in the blood of
Christ, so he finisheth and 1.
perfecteth his work in blood He advances his glory and makes his power
shine in working by contraries, and confounds the adversaries, when they see
their wrath turned to Gods praise: and the blood of Martyrs, the seed and
watering of the Church. Pharaoh shall see he cannot work wisely enough; here
is a more glorious world fetched out of a greater Chaos. Julian shall say
vicisti Galilaee.

Secondly, So deep and inveterate is the poison 2
and malice of a dragon, that no lighter or smaller revenge will serve him then
death. The same poison lighted upon Christ, he was judged unworthy either to
live or dye in Jerusalem. So the enemies of David, when will he die? and of
Paul, he is unworthy to live. The rancorous poison of an enemy of God and
grace is such, as a smaller revenge will not content them. No whipping or
mocking of Christ, but crucify him.

Thirdly, The fury and fierceness of the enemy is 3.
still augmented by reason it finds fuel to feed it. First, the light and
grace in the godly which the more it increases and shines, the more their
malice and hatred burns and boyleth against it. For;

Why did Cain as a dragon slay Abel, but because his works were good? 1 John
3. 12. Why do the godly make themselves a prey, but because they refrain from
evil? Esaias 59. 15.

Dragons can plead many causes. Amos is accused by Hamaziah, that he has
conspired against the King. Daniell, by the envious princes, that he rebels
against the Kings proclamation. Jeremy, if he exhort to go out into Babel
according to Gods word and decree: that he is a confederate with the Caldeans.
Paul, that he is a troubler of the City, and preaches strange doctrine: and
pity it is that he lives.

But the true cause is, if the white horse go forth, the red horse will follow
him at the heels, Psalm. 38. 20. Mine adversaries hate me without cause. Nay,
because I do the thing that is good, that is cause enough to hate to death
Psalm. 59. 3. They are gathered against me, not for mine offense, nor for my
sin.

This doctrine may serve as a glass, to let many see Use. 1.
their own faces, and to what head they belong. There is a generation of men
who are feirce, revengfull, and cruel hearted against the godly, who may here
see what spirit they are guided by. The spirit of God is gracious, meek,
merciful, gentle, but they are not led by him. His they are whose spirit they
resemble in mischief and malice. Joh. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the
devil, for his works ye do. A natural child resembles his father, so do
they theirs, who was a murderer from the beginning. As it was once, so will it
ever be, Gal. 4. 29. He that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was
borne after the spirit, and delighted in scorning the generation of God, and
seed of the promise: these show themselves a bastardly brood of Ismael: who
have no part in the promise, no foot in the promised land.

To let us see whence that religion is that practices Use. II.
and teaches all manner of fierceness and cruelty against the Saints; It is
of the devil of the dragon, and is no religion of God. Abraham makes this
aptitude, and forwardness to homicide a note of a false religion, and proper
to Idolaters. Genes. 20. 11. The fear of God is not in this place, and they
will slay me.

Hence it follows that the Roman religion cannot be of God, for,

1 Her head is that Abaddon, and Apollyon. The great destroyer of bodies and
souls. Rev. 9. 11.

2 Her members resemble the head; for never were any more cruel and fiery
dragons, and homicides, then the Antichristian zealotes, and popish
Inquisitors, which for so many ages have destroyed the bodies of the innocent
Saints with fire and sword: and innumerable souls with divelish and heretical
doctrines.

3 Her principles and positions are bloody and mischievous: and such as the
Heathens and sanguinary Savages would be ashamed of.

4 Her proper color is red, scarlet dyed, and drunken with the blood of the
Saints, which notes her an essential member of the dragon, fiery dragons are
they, furious, and sulphurious: kindling blazing fires not only against the
bodies of men women and children, but laying their fire works under ground,
against the bodies of many kingdoms at once.

This is that generation of which Christ spoke. They shall think they do God
good service in killing you. And the more fierce any man is against good men
the more of this leaven he does discover in himself.

Pray to be delivered from these direful dragons. Use. III.
Psalm. 59. Deliver me from the bloody man; and of all plagues which we have
deserved let us pray we be never stung with these fiery dragons again, whose
rage and fury knows no measure nor mercy. We have by our contempt and
slighting the gospel of grace deserved most sharp punishments. And if our
provocations be so great as wrath must come, Let us humbly desire to receive
it from the hands of a father, that has love and compassion, and remembers in
justice mercy, and not from the hands of scorpions, and enemies that hate us to
death; whom nothing but blood can satiate. Let us take words to us and say as
Israel afraid of the Ammonites Judge. 10 15. We have sinned, do with us as thou will, only deliver us from the Ammonites. And as David. 2 Samuel 24. We are in a
wonderful straight, let us fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies
are great, and not into the hands of men, whose mercies are cruel. Walk
wisely in the mean time, and cut them off advantages.

To comfort the Church beset with red dragons, Use. IV.
fiery and fierce men, implacable in their causeless 3 Grounds of comfort.
wrath: and as much hope of reconciliation as with hell it self, unless God
work a happy change, and make them of Aspes and Cockatrices, Lambs and
sucking Children,

1 We are to conflict with many red dragons: But we have a captain in red
garments coming from Bozra, who walks in great strength, mighty to save.
Isay 63. 2. First, His garments are red with his own blood drawn by the
dragon. Secondly, By the blood of his enemies, whom he treads in the winepresse
of his wrath.

2 The enemies garments now dyed red in the blood of the Saints, shall at last
be made red with their own blood. As in Hered, Nero, Dioclesian, Julian,
Judas, Arius. Take the counsel of Pilates wife, Have no hand against the just
and godly man. There is a time when the great Angel that has power over fire:
that is, all the judgments of God, and revenges of his enemies, and much more
over all fiery dragons, shall cast them into the winepresse of the wrath of
God, and their blood shall come unto the horse bridles 1600. furlongs. Revel.
19. 20. Let us leave all revenge to God, who will avenge the blood of Saints in
due time.

3 The time is not long but we shall be freed from all these dragons and
enemies. Cant. 4. 8. Thou shall come with me my spouse from the d^ns of Lions,
and mountains of Leopards. Exodus 14. 13. Those your enemies whom your eyes
have seen this day, ye shall never see more.

Seven heads]

The third property of the dragon follows; which is his subtlety and craft,
set out by his seven heads.

The head is the seat of prudence and policy: And the number of seven heads,
notes the manifold subtilties, and crafty devises of this Hydra: namely, The
devil and his instruments: and under these seven heads are comprehended all
hurtful arts, and all kinds of wicked imaginations and devises against the
Church of God.

Others by seven heads understand the seven hills of Rome, where the dragon
lived: Or the seven heads, and kinds of governements in the Roman Monarchy.
Which considered may lead us to that special dragon here aimed at, whose
throne was upon seaveu heads or hills; and had seven heads or several kinds
of government, which throne was yielded by the dragon to the Antichristian
beast. chap 13. 2.

Which notes unto us, that Satan and his instruments Doctr. The dragon is as
subtle as cruel.
are as subtle, as cruel, against the woman the Church. For the dragon has
seven heads, a number of policies and fetches to bring forward his mischieves.

Of Satan himself, the head of this dragon: He is the old serpent more subtle
then all the beasts of the field. Genes. 3. 1. A notable instance whereof we
have in his first stratageme by which he overthrew all mankind. In which hell
set all his seven heads to work. So as we may say by woeful experience, we
are not ignorant of his enterprises. For

First, He chooses a serpent the fittest and most 1.
insinuating instrument.

Secondly, Sets on the woman, the weaker vessel, absent 2.
from her husband.

Thirdly, Sets on the man by the woman, the most 3.
fit and loving counselor.

Fourthly, Begins subtily, for God having forbidden 4.
but one tree, he asked if God have forbiden them every tree, and so wronged
them.

Fifthly, In all his speeches and answers along, he speaks craftily, and
Jesuitically, venting as many lies and Amphibologies as sentences: and yet so,
as if they had proved false, he had a double meaning to himself. As,

1 Ye shall not dye, he might say, I meant ye shall not dye presently, but
become subject to mortality.

2 Your eyes shall be opened. And so they were to their shame and confusion.

3 Knowing good and evil. And so they did, but not as Gods, but by a miserable
and experimental knowledge in the want of good, and presence of evil.

4 Ye shall be as Gods. Elohim signifies Angels or spirits, and so they were
in the same state of condemnation with them.

So for wicked men, the limbs of this dragon, they are wise and subtle to do
evil. Jer. 4. 12. Luke 16 8. The children of the world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light.

And for particulers. How did Balaam trouble Israel with his wiles? For,
whereas the King of Moab could not by power prevail against them, nor by any
sorcery or cursing hurt them: He by the care of Moabitish women, brought Gods
wrath, and curse upon them, for corporal fornication first, and then for
spiritual. Numb. 21. 1.

Achitophel his counsel was as the oracle of God, and spoke rather like a God
then a man; but all was against the Church.

Quest. Why does the Lord give such good gifts Why God gives good gifts to
evil men that abuse them.
to such evil men, and agents, that bend it against himself and his people?

Answ. God inverteth not the order of nature, for 3. Reas.
evil men's abuse, but overrules it for justice or mercy, as his wisdom sees
fit. As in the external faculties of the body, so of the mind, he suffers the
powers of nature to be put forth corruptly, as in fornication or adultery. He
hinders not the natural action, but orders it for his own glory: so here.

2 He magnifies his own grace, who is good and bountiful to all, offering not
only common gifts, as the sun, rain, and natural endowments, with wealth
and honor to good and bad: but even the gift of his son in the Ministry of
the gospel, to those who abuse it, and turn all his grace into wantonness.

3 He makes the wicked instruments hereby inexcusable, seeing To whom much is
given, of them much shall be required. Luke 12. 48.

Quest. But why are wicked men subtle against Why do wicked men contrive and
bend their wills against the Church.
the Church?

Answ. First, Because they are of the serpentine seed, and spawne of the
dragon. Acts 13. Paul to Elimas. Oh full of all subtilties, and mischief, the
child of the devil. Wicked men not only serve prentiships 3 Reas.
to the old serpent: but as our Savior is bold to tell the Jews, they were of
their father the devil.

Secondly, They know they shall more easily prevail 2.
and deceive, the more ^lilie and subtily they work. Open enemies are sooner
prevented then secret, and satan has subdued more with his serpents wiles,
then his dragons force. And when he cannot prevail with his Lions pawe, he
puts on the foxes skin, and goes to work with his wiles and subtilties.

Thirdly, God will have his Church every way 3.
tried and exercised to shake her out of security. How was Israel tried.

By Pharaohs policies to destroy them, before his 1.
open force, for

1 He laid heavy taskes on them to weaken them from generation.

2 Cruelly oppressed them, by taking away the straw, and exacting the same tale
of brick.

3 Slaying and drowning the male children as fast as they were borne; And after
assailed them with all the power of his country.

How was David exercised and kept waking by Achitophels counsel, which made him
apply God by prayer to turn his counsel to folly.

How was Joseph and Mary exercised, by Herod's subtlety, who pretended to
worship Christ, but intended to kill him.

First, By this we may take notice of the dragons Use. I.
wiles and subtilties which are as many as his heads. And because the knowledge
of his plots and discovery of his devises is more then half the prevention of
them, we will spend a little time in laying open some of his stratagems, and
secret traynes, laid out of sight, every way reaching to catch and circumvent us

These are reduced to three heads as they concern.

1 Persons. 2 Actions. 3 Assaults.
First, The dragons subtlety concerning persons 1.
is in two things.

1 In dissembling his own person. 2. In taking advantage Dragons subtilty in
dissembling his person.
of ours.

First, Although he be a dragon and devil, and deadly enemy: he comes
commonly as a friend, and in the habit of a good counselor, and though he be a
prince of darkness, he transformes himself into an Angel of light. 2 Cor.
11. 14. that where he cannot force, he may allure.

Satan well knows how the Gibeonites closed and gate within the Israelites, by
dissembling their persons. Joshu. 9. 9 and so he gets in with us. To Eve though
he appeared in the shape of a serpent, yet seems to be more friendly to her
then God could be, God knows ye shall be as Gods. And he that came to Eve in
the shape of a serpent, appears to Saul in the shape of a Prophet, and Samuel
himself could not speak better words, nor truer in the event then this
counterfeit. 1 Samuel 28

He comes to Christ in the person of a friend, Master pity thy self, as if
he had pity on Christ: who kindled and stirred all the dragons in the world
against him to sting him to death.

And who can think but he is a friend of Christ, who can preach him to be the
Son of God. Mar. 1. 24. And who can preach the Apostles to be the servants of
the living God, Acta 16. 17.

The poor lambs of Christ's fold are never in greater danger, then when the
fox preaches. Of all other a preaching dragon is the most dangerous, who will
wind us in by scripture, and by that which is the only preservative against
sin, draw us into sin. As,

To abet coveteousnesse, and earthlinesse, and worldliness, and to bind a
man's hands from doing good: he will put thee in mind of that Scripture, He that
provides not for his family is worse then an Iufidell.

To harden and imbolden men in sin, he has a plain text; Where sin
abounds, grace abounds much more.

To an ordinary Sabbath breaker, he has a comfortable text; The Sabbath was
made for man, not man for the Sabbath.

To him that is not at leisure to repent yet, he can preach upon that text, At
what time soever a sinner repents, etc.

To strengthen the libertine, and loose gospeller, that hates nothing more then
to be tied to the rules of godliness; he has as direct scripture as may be,
Eccles. 2. 7. 18. Be not just overmuch: What can be more plain against these
nice and precise fellows?

Beware also of a friendly dragon. The Crokadile shedds tears, but it is to
shedd blood. To an angry man the dragon as a great friend asks him why he will
suffer himself to be trodden under foot: and tells him, if he suffer this or
this, he shall never live in peace; as if he wished his peace and prosperity,
who never ceases to blow the bellows of wrath and anger.

To a profane and carnal man, What need you trouble your self with religion?
you have a charge, and look to the maine chance. What? is it for you to suffer
your servants to let their time and work to run to sermons, as Pharaoh to
Israel, Ye are too idle. And many are brought in mind, that if their servants
be religious, they cannot possibly thrive. Heathenish Civilists scarce so
heathenish.

Romish dragons insinuate into their proselytes, they lament the estate of
their souls, and persuade like very good counselors, to leave these
heretics, and come to the catholic religion; they can feign Crokadiles
tears: calling heaven and earth to witness that they respect nothing in the
world but to promote the truth, and save men's seduced souls. And it is nothing
but the Catholic faith that makes them venture their lives and fortunes, and a
great number more empty and windy words, and ^ll to ensnare simple and unsettled
persons.

Nay, and which is a deeper plot of the dragon, he can pretend peace,
friendship, amity, marriages, oaths, and what not, and all under pretense of
peace, and clcake of friendship, that he may slay and devour: as France in
that horrible Massacre 1572. had woeful experience.

Nay, if need be he can pretend religion, and support of the Catholic cause,
when he is digging and undermining, and laying barrels of powder, and iron
bars, for the destruction of whole States and kingdoms. Here are religious
Dragons.

A foolish and silly woman shall the Church be, to give any credit hereafter to
the flatteries and fair pretenses of so often perfidious Dragons; who salute
to wound, and never kiss but to kill.

Secondly, He takes advantage of our own persons, setting upon us when we are
weakest. As, Satan assayleth us.


First. In our solitariness; He overcame Eve when she was alone. Cain set upon
Abel, when he 1. In our solitariness.
had him alone in the field helpless. Dinab being alone in the field, was set
upon and foiled. And when set P^tiphers wife upon Joseph, but when they were
alone in the house? A Christian man must never sit alone, if he have no company
of men, be sure of the company of God and his Angels, and then he is never
alone.

Secondly, In our soreness; as, Simeon and Levi set on the Sichemites, when
they were sore, and could 2. In our soreness.
not resist; as in the terror of conscience, and distress of mind, If God lay
on his little finger, now satan lays his heavy loins. Thou art an hypocrite,
a dissembler, have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost. And many he
prevails with to speak in his language. Now to discover satan's wile herein,
is a part of the cure.

Thirdly, He assailes us in our sleep; For then we In our sleep.
are weak and exposed to all danger. The envious man sowes tares while men
sleep. In sleep Iaell easily slew great Siserah with a nail and a hammer.
And the dragon knows how easy a conquest he obtains in our sleep of
security. David in his ease and rest, was soon cast down; wherefore we must
watch and pray.

Fourthly, In our nakedness, as,

1. When we are out of our way and calling. Israel 4. In our nakedness.
by sin had made themselves naked to the darts of the dragon, and of God
himself.

2 When we are impotent and inordinate in our natural desires, cares and
corrupt affections. Solomon 3 Instances.
says, A man that cannot refrain his appetite, is as a City without walls,
Prove. 23. 28. naked and exposed to all dangers; and as a captain, where the
wales are lowest or weakest, there lays his battery: So the great dragon
marks our inclination, and thrusts us down the hill, where we are ready to
run headlong of our own accord. And as he finds dispositions set, he baits
his hook, and fits them with temptations, and objects fit for their ambition,
or voluptuousness, or covetousness: and so finds strength enough in our
selves to overthrow us. Esau by his broth. Lot by his Wine. Judas by money. a
root of evil fell upon many temptations and snares. Hence are those many
exhortations, to take heed that our hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting,
drnnkennesse, or cares of this life.

3 When we are in idle or evil company we are naked and then the dragon has
us at advantage.

When was Peter set upon? Not so long as he was in the company of Christ, and
his disciples, whose presence might have bin means to uphold him; But when he
runs among the high Priests servants, and sits down by a warm fire: Now he
is fit to be wrought upon, he will now be brought easily to deny and forswear
his Lord.

Fifthly, In the day of our death which is most unfit 5. In our death.
for resistance, seeing now the body is sick, pained, and has many other
things to think upon, many fears, many terrors, many things to settle, etc.
To teach us to pray before hand for the day, to die daily, to pull out the
sting of death, bereave our sins of life before hand. II


Secondly, Concerning actions, we shall observe the dragons subtilties:

1 In respect of good actions. 2 Of evil actions.
1 In good actions or duties he sets all his seven 1.
heads on work.

1 To hinder. 2 To blemish. 3 To disgrace them. 4 To frustrate them.
First, Because there is nothing but it stands in the dragons way. He is
restless in hindering all that Satan's subtilty in hindering good actions.
is good: and the better it is, the more buisy to prevent it. As,

1 The greatest work that ever was wrought was that of man's redemption. How
craftily did he seek to hinder this in Peter? Master pity thy self.

2 The greatest duties that the Lord has enjoined us, are those which we are
to perform in his public ordinances, as, preaching, hearing, praying, and
all parts of public worship. Hence he raises persecutions against the
Church, to hinder these and disperse the Saints, Acts 11. 19. And he can hinder
the free passage of the gospel, and stop the Apostles themselves in the course
of their ministry, 1 These. 2. 18. But I speak not here of his force, but see
how finely his heads can contrive it. He can pretend unity, and peace, and
order, decency and obedience, and every thing that is good to stop the course
of the Gospel, and hinder it. So he did in Q. Mary's days.

He can hinder hearing of the word, and reading the scriptures, by undeniable
reasons.

Why, do not you think that men may be saved without all this preaching, and
running to sermons? And is it not unreasonable to urge every common man, to
know the deep points which belong to Divines, to Church men, and book learned
men. but for private and unlettered men a little knowledge is best, and the
heart may be good where the skill is but small.

Besides you have a calling to follow, a charge of children perhaps live of
your labor: how can you spare time for such occasions? And who sees not that
the world was better, when there was less preaching? men were more devote,
less contentious. And one Sermon well learned is better then all this
preaching: and many learned men wish there were more praying and less
preaching: for so much preaching brings but preaching into contempt. Never were
these seven heads more beaten, then in beating down preaching, the only
hammer against the kingdom of the devil: and never were they more busy
working in this subject in man's memory then at this day: never were his
subtilties and wit more applauded, and more approoved then now.

3 He strives subtly against all grace, because it makes us like unto God; As
in Peter, Satan winnowes Satan's subtilty in shaking and holding out graces.
to shake all grace out of our hearts: and to hold it out.

Especially those of faith, repentance, and holiness.

First, Our faith is a sweet morsel to Satan^, because Of faith.
we cannot resist him unless we be steadfast in faith. His incessant work is,
either to hinder us from attaining, or retaining it, for if he can hold off or
wrest from us this shield, he has devoured us already: and this he can
contrive nimbly.

What seeft thou in thy self worthy of the favor of God? a man of so many and
so great sins, for thee to assure thy self of thy salvation, is boldness and
great presumption.

Discernest thou not how many doubts afflict thee, how many crosses are upon
thee? for thee to say thou have faith, is but to feed a fancy; as if sins,
doubts, and crosses, could not stand with faith in our Father.

Secondly, Repentance; for, this cuts him short of all. He cannot persuade that
it is not necessary to 2. Of Repentance.
salvation, where the word is taught; but he will firmly persuade not to
repent yet, but defer it till a more convenient time, for now thou art in thy
youth, and pleasures of the world, or in the profits of the world for thee and
thine: and these thou must now enjoy, and conveniently enough repent afterward.
Old age and sickness is fitter for sad thoughts, and religious exercises are
tedious and unpleasant. And God has mercy in store, when ever thou returnest
unto him, he will put away all thy sins, if they be never so many. And Christ
has store of blood, and merit, and thy sins cannot be so many or heinous as
to exceed his merits. And therefore seeing thou may enjoy both the pleasures
of this life, and of the other, refuse neither.

Thirdly, Holiness and exercise of all good works 3. Of Sanctification:
and virtues; He can tell how to undermine all good duties most subtly.

1 Mountains of fears, losses, crosses, and Of sanctification.
difficulties.

2 What need such care, and watch, and working, does not faith alone justify?
You will live like a Papist, as if you were to be justified by your works.

3 He can make one virtue or duty shake out another, for, he ca^ in hearing
gods word, cast in a serious and good meditation (which were profitable at
another time) to hinder hearing, to distract the mind, and make a man hear
without profit. Or set him on reading, or praying (things good in themselves,
and at another time) but now hurtful and unseasonable.

4 He can cunningly make one of Gods decrees cross another, whereas they are
all dependant and strengthen one another. What needs all this strictness and
study of holiness, and all this business in mortification, sorrow, forgoing
delights, change of life? If God have predestined thee to salvation, thou
shall be saved without all this ado: And if thou be not ordained to life,
do what thou will or can thou shall never be saved; as if God who decreed
the ends, had not also decreed the means. But his seven heads to a carnal
man can by Gods election, overthrow sanctification, whereas the Apostle says
plainly, He has chosen us that we should be holy and unblamable.

Fourthly, He can by one ordinance of God make 4.
void another as Acts 13. 50. Devout women raise persecution against Paul
contrary to Prove. 289. He that turns his ears from hearing the law, his very
prayer is abominable. These ordinances must not be divorced.

11 If he cannot hinder good duties he will do what he can to blemish them, and
this especially two ways.

First, By thrusting them forward by evil means, Thrusting on good things by
ill means.
and causing men to do good things in an evil manner, and then all the grace
of them is lost. He cares not if Saul sacrifice, so he reserve the fat beasts
against the commandment. Peter has a care to preserve himself, but it must
be by lying, and denying his Master. He has a care not to offend the Jews,
Gal. 2. But if he do therefore dissemble and deal deceitfully with the truth:
here is a good matter marred in the handling.

Judas has a care to be rich, but it must be with selling and betraying his
Master. And now men must provide for their families, but with profaning of the
Lords day, lying, swearing, forswearing: they must seek to recover their goods
and health, bfit it must be by running to the devil, and by witches, as, Asa
to the god of Ekron. Ministers must be hospitable, and keep good houses, and
live to the credit of the Ministry, but it must be by heaping up of coins
without measure, ambition, and base arts of flattery, and opposing the truth of
grace, which is the ladder many raise up to themselves to rise by. Servants
would be liberal and charitable, but it must be by deceiving their Master.

Secondly, By propounding to good actions bad and unwarrantable ends: and now
though the thing be Propounding to good actions bad ends.
done, yet all the recompense is lost. Popish persons do a great many good
works, materially good, give alms, and fast, and found hospitals, and
Churches etc. But while they do all this to merit, all is lost.

Protestants, do duties in themselves good, give alms, part freely from their
money to pious and charitable uses, come to Church, hear diligently, speak
feelingly, profess forwardly, uphold the Ministry carefully, if the end of
this be to be seen or approoved of men, as our Savior says of the Pharisees
alms, verily they have their reward.

Absalom is very civil, courteous, and pleasing in his carriage, but it is to
undetermine his Father, and steal men's hearts from David.

The dragon cares not how good thou either art nor how much good thou do, if
it be not for goodness sake.

III What good he can neither hinder nor thus What good the dragon cannot
hinder he will disgrace.
blemish, he will openly disgrace and revile: for he rages against goodness,
so that he never cease to cast false and scandalous reproaches and imputations
against it.

Whether the goodness be personal or, sociall.

1 For personal goodness he can black and stain it, he can charge Christ
himself that he casts out Whether personal.
devils by Beelzebub. And Job, that he serves not God for naught, he is very
devoute, but a very hypocrite; and Annah, that while she prays within her
self, she is drunk: Joseph thinks Mary's conception of Christ to be
adulterous.

He can and does at this day make hateful the very show of religion, under
terms of purity, preciseness and hypocrisy.

He can scorn men for coming to Church, and carrying Bibles, as Pharaoh, ye
are too idle, when Israel spoke of worshipping their god.

He can scorn men for reading Scriptures, prayers and singing of psalms in
their houses: for are not these manifest marks of hypocrites and dissemblers?
for to be zealous against sin and corruption is, not to know what spirit he
is of, or what he would have: nay, he has his teachers to disgrace
forwardness in religion, and warn men to beware of such hot courses, which
only a few haire-brained men take up.

Thus we know hear and see this sect every where spoken against, which is the
sect of Christ himself and the holy Apostles, who for all their holiness
could not avoid the rebukes of holy religion, Much less can we.

2 For sociall goodness, which is the practice of Or sociall.
goodness in society, Here above all the dragon shows himself the accuser
of the brethren: for as in the primative Church, he oppressed the truth with
malicious reports and slanders: that the poor Christians in their private
assemblies were incestious, conspirators, sacrificers of infants; and putting
out candles went promiseuously to all kinds of barbarous lusts: So also in
latter days, the Priests and Friars in their railing Sermons. Anno 1558
persuaded the people that the Lutherans of Paris assembled together to make
banquets in the night; and putting out the candles, went together after a
beastly manner. And the Sorbonists accused them, that they maintained that
there was no God; no immortality of the soul; no resurrection of the dead;
and denied the divinity and humanity of Christ; and all articles of true
religion. Fox page 927.

And at this day, as nothing is more fruitful then the communion of saints,
and holy society, by brotherly fellowship, so nothing is more reviled,
disgrased, censured.

3 The dragon can easily meet with godly Christians if they join in any good
duty, though in their own houses privately among themselves, in prayer,
conference, repetition of sermons, and cry down those as unlawful
combinations. but let never so many combine, in drunkenness, dycing, carding,
swearing, from one weeks end to another, there is nothing made of such
neighbourly meetings.

Nay let hundreds and thousands meet on the Lords day, at footbals, cudgels,
fightings, there is no evil in such meetings; the dragon that draws them
together, makes no complaint; and why should we marvel that he, whose
industry is to hinder every thing that is good, should so far prevail in that
which is contrary, and mightly builds up his own kingdom?

IV He has notable devises to frustrate such good actions and duties as he
cannot hinder or interrupt: Satan's subtilty in frustrating good actions.
so as after sowing of much seed, there is no reaping or joy in the harvest.

First, in general he cares not greatly how many good things thou do, how
charitable, how devote thou art, how diligent and laborious even in that which
is good; so he can keep thee without the care of sound conversion, and from
serious repentance, for he knows that all that is done before conversion is
hateful to God. That of thistles no figs can be gathered: that out of a
reprobate soil can nothing be yielded, but noisome weeds, and poysonfull
plants, what goodly show soever they make; That before repentance the sacrifice
of a man is sin, and his very prayer is abominable: what cares he how much
and often thou pray, so thy prayer be frustrate: But whiles thou regardest
wickedness in thy heart, he knows God will not hear thy prayer.

Neither cares he what good thou do, so thou be proud of it, and say, Lord I
thank thee I am not as this Publican. If he can get thee to thrust thy glory
between thy actions and Gods glory he has frustrated all thy expectation.

More specially, if he cannot hinder thee from hearing the word, nor for shame
bark against the action, he cares not so he may frustrate it, which he can The
word frustrate 3. ways.
do by many slights.

1 If he can make thee receive it without faith; he knows the word is
unprofitable if not mingled with faith, nay hurtful, for he that knows his
Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes.

2 Without love; for if thou receivest the truth without love of it, God will at
length give thee up to strong delusions, 2 These. 2.

3 Without change of heart and life; what cares he if thou hear every hour a
sermon, so all be put into a riven vessel: If thou hear 20. years together
never so diligently, if thou hold thy sin, and abidest a hateful wretch,
spitting poison against the word and preaching of it.

Secondly, He cares not how civilly and soberly thou live, without open
gross breaches of the law, thou art no drunkard, murderer, blasphemer, these,
sodomite, all this pleases him well if so he can make thee hereby reject the
gospel, for all this while Thy righteousness does not exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Nay, if he can make thee stumble at Christ, he knows no fall into hell is
like that: it had been better thou have never heard of him.

Thirdly, He cares not greatly what a religious life thou make show of, what
strong conceit of faith Satan frustrates seemly profession
thou have, how joyfully thou receivest the glad tidings of the gospel: how
resolutely thou professest 3. ways.
the gospel; if he can frustrate all this profession.

Either first, by keeping thee from being beaten down by the law, for then all
the foundation is deceitful. Or secondly, by neglecting the means of faith,
for then he knows thou nourishest but a fancy 2
for faith. Or thirdly, by making shipwreck of faith by corrupt conscience,
while he holds thee fast 3.
in some sin or sins, as lying, cousening, swearing, usury, gaming, or
deceitful courses, or looseness of life: for now brag of faith, and say
thou will never forsake the gospel: I say thou shall never hold it out, for
thou can not favor it and thy sin too, which it favors not; In heart thou
deniest it, and easily wilt with thy mouth.

Fourthly, He cares not how zealous and forward thou art for the time, and how
many things thou suffer for the gospel, so it be in vain: some Magistrates
are good and forward at first for a fit: some Ministers are best at first, as
Saul, Judas etc. but after comes the bad wine, and the lees and dregs are in
the bottom: and many remitting of their first loves, fall to looseness,
contempt and spite of the way. Satan has now frustrated all: true grace
proceeds and holds out, now he knows these were never good.

I^ Now for evil actions the dragon sets all his 2. The dragon as subtle to
thrust on evil as to trust out good.
seven heads a work to thrust them forward, and that especially two ways.

First, Because he cannot make them be good, he can make them to seem good
till they be acted. He can hansomely apparel them, and make them appear 1 By
making evil seem good.
next to virtues.

The eating of the forbidden fruit will make our parents as gods: extreme
covetousness is but nearness or good husbandry, wrath and cruel revenge is
but manhood and spirit, unfruitful wasting of our time is but good-fellowship
and neighborhood.

Neutrality in religion, when a man is neither fish nor flesh, hot nor cold, is
to be moderate, discreet, and a wise man. To neglect the study, and preaching
of Gods word, and to carry men from the simple truth to royes, and froth of
humane spirit and wit, is profoundnesse and depth of learning. Revel. 2. 24.
for how else came schoole-learning to banish the scriptures, for many hundred
years, but under pretext of a deeper learning? To be earnest and an hot
pursuer of these hot and precise fellows, is to be a good zealous protestant.

And to think they do God good service, in killing and burning his Saints, in
stabbing kings, massacring Innocents and blowing up Parliaments, is to be a
resolute Catholic.

Thus skillful is this seven headed beast to wrap up all his poisoned pills in
some sugered pretense, and persuasion or other: he can make them seem near
allied to virtue and grace.

Secondly, If he cannot make them seem good, yet he can so gild, and hide
them, as they shall seem less 2 Or less evil.
evil.

When a man in rude and wicked company has made himself beastly drunk and
swinishly unreasonable: it is no great matter, he would be loath not to be
counted a good and kind neighbor and not disgrace himself so much as not to
pledge his friends health.

When he has in anger and rage cursed, sweared, rayled, and quarrelled with
his neighbors, it is a fault indeed: but no man is a Saint, and it is in some
men's nature to be more choleric then others; and thus comforts and confirms
himself; uncleanness, fornication, adultery, great sins against the
fountain of mankind are slighted: it is but a common error of youth, and age
will mend it. Ordinary oaths, by faith, troth, Mass, Mary, and by God
himself, are but small sins; the custom takes away the sense, but not the
guilt.

Secret sins which other men see not, he can make a man's self not to see them:
and those which dig into the bowels he makes appear but as the scratch of a
pin.

Many sins are practiced by the most and greatest, nay even good men and
professors will card, and dice, and prodigally waste their time, and now they
are privileged sins and vanish into nothing.

The third head wherein we shall see the subtle working of these seave^ heads
against the woman is III. Satan a most subtle engineir against the Saints.
in respect of his assaults, which are most subtle: for never was there such
an engineir so expert to win and hold: as shall appear in some instances.

His first stratagem or assault is to intercept victual from the Christian
soldier: which if he can do, he I. 1 Stratagem is to intercept victual from
the Christian soldier.
need nevet strike a stroke; well he knows that where vision (which is the
Churches victual) fails, the people must perish. In the siege of Samariah.
1. King 6. the famine made them eat one another. And in the siege of
Jerusalem, the pitiful women sod their own children for meat, and eat the
fruit of their womb a spanne long. Lament. 4. 10. And in that by Titus and
Vespasian, more were slain by famine then by the sword: and so this enemy
bestirres himself to prevent victual from us, which he can and does many
ways, while one would think he intended no such thing, as,

1 By hindering the preachers and purveiors of 1 By hindering preachers.
the Lords camp under pretense, as was aforesaid, of unity and the like: Or
stirring up his preachers to preach against preaching, as too much, too often,
or too plain, and too vulgar, and is not Ioabs hand, the dragons hand in all
this? did ever the spirit of God utter one syllable in all the bible against
preaching? did not the Apostles rejoice that Christ was preached any manner of
way, even by evil men? And is that spirit Apostolical that repines at much
preaching of Christ, by good men? is not Christ lifted up in the preaching of
the word? and is he a preacher from Christ that envies his exaltation?

2 By hindering men from coming to the Ministry, 2 By hindering men from
coming to hear.
he can thrust in a number of distractions, which negligence has made urgent,
and then persuade very pleasibly (as he did good Martha) that they shall do
very ill to sit down at the feet of Christ at such times; they must leave
that to such bad huswives as Mary, whom if Christ ^ad not justified that she
had chosen the better part, she had been checked at all hands.

3 If he cannot hinder them from coming, he will come with them to hinder
their hearing: well 3 By hindering the hearing, being come.
knows he, that no man would look for a devil in the Church; at so good an
exercise: and therefore when men think him farthest off, he will be sure to be
nearest. Now he comes to steal away the word, not as other thieves to convert
it to his own use, but to prevent thine.

Quest. How does he steal the Word from He steals the word 3 ways.
Men?

Answ. First, By thrusting in a world of worldly and wandering thoughts of
profits or pleasure which fill up the room, and divert the mind from the word
in hand; and here he mightily prevails, as by his own subtilty, so by Gods
just judgment, upon them who deny God, their heart, mind, and thoughts in his
service; the devil must have them.

Secondly, If bad and idle thoughts be repelled, he can thrust in better
thoughts and meditations, on which while the mind setleth, the business in
hand is unprofitable to them: or he can while they should hear, make them
devout in praying, or diligent in reading, wherein how can they choose but
think themselves well occupied? but are circumvented by the seven heads, who
can overthrow good things, not by evil only, but by good.

Thirdly, By binding up their senses, and casting 3.
them asleep, least they should hear and believe. A fearful sin of many
who seem to have taken some grains of some opiated hellish confection to cast
them asleep.

Or, if he cannot shut and bind up their senses, he can draw them aside to
outward objects, on this or that person or occasion, and set them a tatling or
gazing or some other unfit exercise, and all to divert the mind from the one
thing necessary.

4 If he cannot hinder them from reverent and 4 By intercepting it from the
heart and life. 4. ways.
watchful hearing: the^ he casts about to intercept it from the heart, and
life.

1 He will call the word into question as he did Gods own voice to Eve: And so
not mingling it with faith, he knows it must be unprofitable.

2 Or if he cannot question it, he devises to make men fall out with their
meat if every thing be not to their minds, either it wants latin, and
learning; or it is too tart and personal, it shall go hard but some dislike
shall fall on the man or the matter; John's austerity, Christ's familiarity, all
shall be distasted. Pipe or mourn to froward children all is one.

3 Or if they hear it with pleasure and affection, then he will make them
believe that to hear is enough, without all due meditation in the mind, or
expressing the power of it in the life and practice: he cares not greatly if
they chaw it a little, and turn it over their tongues by speaking of a point
or two, so as there it rot between their teeth, and starve faith and good
conscience.

4 Or if they begin to practice or show any fruit at all, then he has some
agent in a corner to advise him to be wise and be not led away by sermons, he
shall be noted for a favourer of such as will be little for his credit. Thus
Elimas sought to turn the deputy from the faith. Paul spying him catching the
word. Oh full of all subtilty and mischief, child of the devil. Or by open
scoffs and reproaches daunt them who are unsettled, from the profession and
practice of godliness. Thus Satan keeps infinite souls starving and fasting so
as they are never able to hold out in the encounter.

A second stratagem of Satan in his assaults against II. 2 Stratagem, to
disarme us. 2 ways.
us, is in regard of our weapons, and here he attempteth two dangerous plots.

First, To disarme us, to keep us naked, and destitute of armor. If a
captain can keep his enemies from weapons, what needs he more for victory?
The Philistims to hold Israel under their bondage. 1 Samuel 13 19. left never a
smith in Israel, who might help to arm them. And if Satan can keep men naked
without armor he has enough to hold the^ for ever under a hellish slavery.

Quest. But how does the devil disarme the Christian?

Answ. Two ways.

By driving men to sin against God, so as now they are naked and destitute of
Gods favor and protection. Exodus 32 25. Israel making a calfe was naked. And
Balaam could not curse or any way overcome Israel, but by entising them to
commit, first, corporal fornication, and then spiritual, and this made a
fearful breach among them.

2 By persuading men to put off or lay aside their weapons or some part of
their armor for a while. He knows when we lie open in any part, and can there
hit and wound us, as, he can easily persuade to remit prayer; to be weary of
faith, his shield, for the weakness of it; To crack a good conscience and to
strain a little; to dislike the profession for the suit and service of it; to
slight the preaching or reading of the scripture, and so cast away his word; or
in time of peace and security to suffer his armor to hang by the walls rustie
and dis-joynted, not considering that the adversary takes no days of truce:
nor the Apostles precept, to put on the whole armor of God: As good no armor,
as not put on.

Secondly, If he cannot get us to lay aside our armor, then his next drift is
to turn them the wrong way. 2.
If he cannot wrest it from us, he will seek to wrest it against us: it was
the glory of David's victory that How Satan turns our own weapons against our
selves.
he took off Goliahs head with his own sword; and many times and ways does
Satan glory in such conquests over us while we little discern him, For,

1 That he ever conquers us by our own corruptions every man can conceive:
which, what is it else then to fetch his weapons out of our own armory?

2 But, which we less discern, he beats us, and overthrowes our graces, not
by corruptions only As, our graces.
but by our graces. As, if we be sorrowful for sin, he will have us
swallowed up of sorrow. 1 Cor. 27. 11. If we be zealous, he will carry us so
far as the Disciples, who will call for fire from heaven; the fire that should
warm the house, shall burn it: If we be humble, he can make us proud because
we are humble: in maintaining our Christian liberty, he can easily bring us
to licenciousnesse: in hatred of our former prodigality, he can easily draw to
more hatefullc ouetousnesse: and how easily shall we think that to be a
virtue, which is contrary to a former vice?

3 The Word of God, a principal weapon, he And Gods word. 2. ways.
can easily turn in our own hands against our selves.

First, Sometimes by hiding some part of it, which is as a breaking short our
sword, so as it cannot reach to offend our adversary, or defend our selves. To
embolden men in sin, he alleges Ezekiel. 13. and 18. As I live says the Lord,
I will not the death of a sinner, but hides and breaks short the next words,
but that he repent and turn. and 1 Timothy 2. 4. who would have all men saved,
but breaks off the next words, and come to the knowledge of his truth. So, to
bring Christ to presumption, he alleges Psalm. 91. He shall give his Angels
charge and they shall keep thee etc. but breaks off the words in all thy
ways.

Secondly, Sometimes by inferring on words of Scripture diabolical
conclusions, as, Christ died for all, therefore thou may live in sin. He that
provideth not for his family is worse then an infidel, therefore thou may be
covetous, earthly, unjust in word and deed; a remedy worse then the disease; to
avoid infidelity by a greater infidelity; for never can he speak truth but to
deceive, and in nothing can he more plausibly hide his lies, then in words of
truth, and most of all in words of scripture. Thus Satan foyles us with our
own weapons.

A third stratagem of this seven heads is, they are very buisy to break our
ranks, for thus an army is III. 3 Stratagem is to break our ranks in our
duties.
soon discomfited. This policy Ioshuah used against the men of Ai. chap. 8.
20. he set part of the army before and part behind in ambush; who when they
arose, so troubled the enemies ranks, that being disranked and confounded,
they could not stir any way to escape; and thus deals the dragon. The ranks
of Christian soldiers are their callings; which are of two sorts: general
calling of Christianity: and the special calling in which station every man
abides.

If Satan can interrupt or hinder either of these, he has drawn us from our
wall and fort, and soon foyleth us.

1 The duties of our general calling are praying, reading, conferring,
meditating and the like; in 1 Of our general calling*
which we must stand continually, as the Apostle, pray continually, in all
things give thanks. Set the Lord continually at thy right hand; if Satan can
win us to discontinue these duties at any time, he easily wins his purpose
against us.

Example in holy David 2 Samuel 11. 2 he was wont in the afternoones to be
praising God, praying, meditating in the statutes, compiling holy psalms; But
now he must have a nap; after that, he spies a woman washing her, hence was his
adultery, and to hide that sin adds the murder of his faithful captain
Uriah.

2 Our special callings are our ranks, and if he can turn us out of them,
which are our way wherein 2 Of our special calling.
we have the promise of Gods protection; he easily overthrowes us.

Idleness is the devils pillow and anvell; an idle mind empty of good, is fit
to be filled with evil, whereas look as a full vessel can receive no more,
so an heart filled with godly meditations, or an hand full of good exercises,
leaves no room for satan's temptations, nor leisure for his designs or
enterprises. We must therefore abide diligently in our callings, which are a
school and exercise of many graces, as humility, obedience, patience,
faithfulne, experience of Gods blessing, power, and providence, with daily
exercise of the word, and prayer, to sanctify them, all which are notable
bulwarks against the incursions of the devil.

A fourth usual stratagem of Satan is to dissemble IV. 4 Stratagem is to
dissemble a flight. 3. instances.
a flight when he need not, when he does not. Thus Judge. 20. 32. the Israelites
after two foyles drew all the Beniamites out of the City by dissembling a
flight, and by such as were laid in ambush (of whom the enemy was not aware)
cut them off every one. So satan often dissembles a flight for his own
advantage; For,

First, He can and often does depart from vexing and afflicting men at the
command of the loosing witch, nay instead of hurting he will offer his help.
But 1 to bind his servants more obse quiously unto him. 2 To draw the faith of
men from God unto him, and reject dependancie on him, and the lawful means,
and so do homage to the devil; and is not this flight a mighty conquest?

Secondly, He will give a man leave to leave some sin, so he can get him
surer into another extreme: and then he thinks this must needs be a motion of
the spirit, because he concludes it clean contrary to that which he took to
be a motion of the flesh or devil.

Thirdly, After much struggling and resistance he departs and seems to fly,
but his flight is his forest fight; For,

1 He departs but for a season.

2 Never but to renew his forces and assaults, to bring seven spirits worse
then before.

To bring us into the sleep of security, as conceiving both, weakness in
our adversary. and strength in our selves to resist him.


A fifth stratagem of the dragon, he can greatly V: 5 Stratagem, by light
skirmishes get great advantages.
weaken the Christian and much avail himself by light skirmishes, and proves
most dangerous, when he seems to intend least danger, as,

First, He will begin mannerly with one sin, and what great danger can be in
that which is so necessary too as he cannot thrive without it? As, to lie or
swear for advantage, or to take usury to live by, to be a non-resident, a
gamster, or a sociable man, but he knows: 1 One sin never goes alone; one
sin cannot keep it self warm without another. 2 One sin suffered is like
a hole in a ship, which will sink a ship of the greatest burden, somewhat more
slowly but as surely as if a whole side were shattered out. Let thy fraught of
graces be never so rich, one reigning sin will wrack all. One Agag spared
shall cost Saul his kingdom, and his life; one dram of poison is enough; one
swine in a garden to root up all; one dead fly shall make the whole box of
ointment to stink; and one sin reigning and unrepented shall slay the soul
for ever.

Secondly, He can easily prefer and get countenance to secret sins, as, evil
and wandering motions and thoughts to take up the mind by days and months, with
foul and unclean desires, and purposes, yea and practices and actions
suitable: For,

Are not thoughts free, and who sees so much hurt in them as in the pricking of
a pin, et fi non cast tamen caute, He that cannot live chastely, yet if he
can carry it cautelously and charely, all is well.

But the dragon knows, that,

1 If the fountain be corrupt, so are all the streams, Motives to avoid small
and secret sins.
and this is a co^pedious way to poison all that comes from within.

2 That secret sins are stronger snares to hold men faster then more open and
manifest: both because these are more easily contrived, admitted and continued
in. As also because these want those restraints which usually curb open crimes
even in bad men, as shame of men, fear of law, and sting and terror of
conscience.

Thirdly, He gets no small conquest by holding men in small sins, which are so
only in comparison of greater; why, Is it not a little one, and my soul may
live in it? and, The offense, skarr, noise and punishment of a small sin cannot
be great: whereas he knows, that

First, The least and smallest sin, let in, and allowed, will widen and make
room for greater, as a little villain thrust in at a window will soon set
the whole house open to the whole crew of thieves and cutthroats.

Secondly, As a skillful Apothecary he can disperse the poison of sin at
first in so small quantity, as that the conscience be not sick. But it is that
the practice of small sins may grow into custom and habit, and that the
conscience may at length come to digest it, as meat and drink with delight,
because of the sweet taste in the mouth. And then what delight has God in him
whose delight is in any sin.

The 6. stratagem of these 7. heads is, that the dragon The 6. stratagem of the
7. heads.
gains no small advantage by spreading false fears and terrors to dishearten
us in our combat, as valorous chieftaines raise up clouds of dust, o^ kindle
some false fires that in the smoke of them they may help themselves, and
hinder their enemies: Thus Gideon Judge. 7. by 300. persons discomfited a mighty
host of Midianites, by blowing every man a trumpet, breaking every man a
pitcher, and holding up every man a burning lamp, by which policy they seemed
as many bands as they were men, at which the amazed host fled worse afraid
then hurt, had they stood their ground: Even so Satan to discomfit Satan sprea
death false fears concerning men's estates. Four instances.
the Christian, spreads false fears and terrors in their minds to make them
forsake their ground; and these fears may be reduced to 2. heads.

1. Concerning their estates. 2. Concerning their actions.
First, For their estates, he terrifieth them with I.
these suggestions, as,

1 That they never had truth of grace but all that ever they had or did was
hypocrisy, and dissimulation, or presumption; all 'to make them out of love
withgrace.

2 That God never loved them, for then he would not so afflict them, but dandle
them as children; and this is to shake out the love of God from their hearts,
which constrayneth them to duty and obedience.

3 Terrifieth them with their own wants, ignorance, infirmities,
unworthiness, and fear of shameful falls, as such and such of Gods servants,
that seemed well rooted; his scope herein is to make them weary of all.

4 With fear of final falling a way, and withering if the sun of
persecution should arise, and thus causes many to cast away their confidence,
as if he that began the good work would not finish it.

II Concerning actions the serpent spreads many II. And concerning their
actions. Four instances.
false fears to drive the Christian off them, as,

1 In religious actions he objecteth and urges the reproaches and many wrongs
there waits upon forwardness; it is but to purchase general dislike and
disgrace, and expose himself to be a prey; and as many Lions and difficulties
are in the way sufficient to cast off the sluggard, and no fewer losses of
friends, customers, takings in the trade, his credit, respect of great ones,
and the like. Here not a few are circumvented.

2 In common and civil actions he persuades men, that they cannot live by
true dealing without falsehood in word and deed; and if they help not
themselves with lying, swearing, dissembling, unlawful gains by usury, and
the like; they cannot trade or live; And hereby he holds many tradesmen in
the trade of sin; who account nothing evil which may bring them in the goods
and profits of this life.

3 To hinder actions of mercy and liberality, he frighteth men with false
fears, least by giving, themselves come to need, and so they wrong their
family; as if God supplied not seed to the sower, and as if he that waters
should want rain. See Proverbs 11. 25.

4 To hinder actions of justice, especially if against a great man; What know
you what you do? would a wise man raise a Lio^, or take a Bear by the tooth?
will you pull on your selves a needless danger? thus is he skilful by false
terrors to hinder any good; hereby he doubleth his strength and wins ground
on our cowardlinesse. These things have I set down, that we might not be
ignorant of his enterprises. 1. Cor. 2. 11.

Being to deal and to grapple with this seven Use I. Serpentine wisdom is in
fourethings.
headed dragon and all the serpentine seed, we must learn that needful lesson
of our Savior Mat. 16. 16 Be wise as serpents.

Quest. Wherein is the Serpents wisdom? N^mo enim celerius opp^imitur quam
q^irihil aut paru^ timet: hostisque st^enuitatem ignorant.


Answ. In 4. things.

1 The serpent is naturally wise to defend himself from wrongs, to which end he
will wrap up his whole body about his head, to save and defend that from danger:
So must Christians be most careful of their own safety, by careful respect of
their head, namely, the faith and glory of Jesus Christ, and expose themselves
to any dangers to save him, his glory, his holy profession harmless; as the
holy Martyrs did

2 The serpent or dragon who is the old serpent, 2.
and his seed, are very subtle to contrive evil: So Christians must be wise
and politic to contrive and bring to effect that which is good. Romans 16. 19.
Be wise concerning that which is good; but simple concerning that which is
evil: The object of Christian wisdom must be that which is good, and a good
cause wisely handled is very graceful, which made David's face to shine even in
Saul's envious eye; because he behaved himself wisely in his matters. Good
Rebecca willing to save Jacob from Esaus fury, hides her counsel, by
pretending another occasion; because the daughters of Heth were a grief unto
her; she would send him to Padan Aram to fetch him a wife; And so wisely
prevented the intended mischief. Genesis 27. 41. And Paul used a special good
policy for himself amongst his accusers, who discerning that some were Saduces
who denied the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the dead; and
that some were Pharisees that held both, he professed himself a Pharisee, and
cast a bone between the two sects, and so slid away between them. Acts 23. 6,
7.

And thus Christian policy is as lawful in our war against this hellish and
serpentine army, as are those prudent policies of the field in external wars
and martial affairs, squared to the rules of Gods word, and to these
cautions; 1 That nothing be said or done to prejudice truth; 2 Or Gods glory; 3
Or civil righteousness; 4 Or the special calling.

3 The serpent is subtle to contrive evil by evil 3.
means, and this is that wisdom that is earthly, hellish, sensual and
devilish, such are the Machivilian policies and desperate shifts to atraine
wicked ends, by right or wrong, force or fraud, life or death; Thus Ahab and
Iezabel co^trived for Naboths Vineyard, by hypocrisy and murder. Thus Papists
will set up their religion by lies, equivocations, Spanish inquisitions,
gunpouder plots, and such horrible torments as are likest and come nearest to
the torments of hell, whence both their religion and devises to uphold it are.
Thus many Tradesmen are wise to get wealth, by lies, oaths, circumventing and
laying snares.

But the practice of true wisdom from above is, pure, peaceable, gentle, and
by allowed means attaineth lawful ends: the Serpents policy is ever joined
with iniquity: but Christian policy must be accompanied with innocence, and
contriveth good things by good means only, and degenerateth into carnal
counsel, when, even in case of saving the life, unwarrantable means are
undertaken: as when David to save his life fained himself mad: Peter denied
his Lord; a Protestant to go to mass with 1 Samuel 21. 14.
pretense to keep his heart to God, or a Christian for recovery of health or
goods, to go to the Witch.

4 The serpent is wise to stop his ears against the 4.
charmer, and will by no sweet and cunning notes be drawn out of his hold into
danger; So must the Christian be here as wise as serpents by bewaring of men
Mat. 10. 17. Godly men must not commit themselves hastily to every one that can
speak the^ fair, and singing sweetly unto them; but carefully keep them out
of their snares; who are like ponds, the water is clear enough at the top, but
at the bottom foul and muddy. Let us remember our Lord was betrayed with a
kiss; that the Apostles suffered most from false brethren who, crept in to
spy their liberty.

That enemies of grace can make fair weather when they are most stormy within,
that the times Christians must walk as wisely as warrantably.
are dangerous, the persons we have to deal with pernicious, the flights of
the serpent mischievous, and if we deal not as wisely as warrantably, they
will get beyond us; that it is the property of folly to pour out al his mind:
but wisdom reserveth something for afterward.

2 But especially let us not be carried away with their whisperings and charms
that would draw us from our religion, sincerity, true worship; Let no Siren
song draw us out of our hold, as those of Jesuits, Priests, Libertine
preachers, nor prevail so much with us as to taste any forbidden fruit.

Quest. How shall I get this serpentine wisdom to oppose the dangerous 7.
heads.

Answ. 1 Get the fear of God, that is the beginning Means to get this
serptine wisdom, 5.
of wisdom Prove. 1. 7. Psalm. 111. 10. and to depart from evil is
understanding Job. 28. 28. Prove. 3. 9.

2 Use the means appointed, seek for wisdom, dig for it as for treasures
Prove. 2. 4. Minerals lie hid in the bowels of the earth, and are fetched out
with labor and hard pains, wait at the gates of wisdom: that is worth nothing
which is got for nothing: we must seek it as silver, covetously, diligently,
constantly.

3 Make the word thy counselor, there thou meetest with the wisdom of the
spirit, which overreacheth all the wisdom of the flesh; David hereby became
wiser then the ancient, then his Counselors, then his enemies Psalm. 119. The
serpent indeed has a subtilty of many turnings and windings, but in the
scripture is (...) a manifold wisdom against all devises. It is a faithful
guide against all wanderings: it is as was the cloud in the wilderness for our
motion or station; an unerring gu^de that leads us as wise men to Christ: it
is the holy card to direct us in this troublesome sea, to escape all the
shelves, and sands, and rocks, to conduct us safely to the holy land.

4 Pray for wisdom, so did Solomon: for heavenly wisdom thou must go to
heaven. James 5. If any want wisdom he must ask it of God, the encouragement
of the prayer is, 1 The promise of the spirit of wisdom; grace, and speech to
prevent evils, and disappoint enemies. Luk 21. 14. 2 The promise that God will
turn wicked men's counsels to folly, as Achitophels 2 Samuel 15. 31. he will
scatter their devises and bring them home on their own heads.

5 Practice true wisdom: the practice of true wisdom increases it. The
dragon is subtle by long experience and practice, against which we shall well
oppose this experimental and practike wisdom. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. This is your
wisdom.

Quest. How may we practice this Serpentine wisdom.

Answ. 1 In respect of God and the things of God, true wisdom will provide for
it self the best Wherein is the practice of true wisdom.
things. In vain is that man wise that is not wise for God and himself. Prove
9. 12. Sound wisdom will provide the best estate for it self; Wise Virgins
will prepare oil as well as lamps, and the wise Merchant will be sure to
purchase the pearl, though it cost him his whole estate: true wisdom will
first seek the Kingdom and the righteousness of it, then other things: true
wisdom esteems godliness the greatest gain, and is provident for it self.

2 True wisdom is watchful of it self; it will observe what evil it is
most prone unto, and there fence most carefully; as Citizens beseiged do the
weakest part of their wall, and there keep strongest watches.

1 It knows the dragon watches all occasions, and so it does for it self;
and seeing it knows Satan fitteth his temptations to every estate: it will
observe it self, in prosperity to watch against pride, in adversity to watch
against impaciency, it will observe opportunities offered and accept them for
Gods glory, and the good of himself and others.

3 In good duties it contenteth not it self, that they be done unless they be
well done, and in a good manner by good means, to right ends, and in all right
circumstances, as knowing he must not only We must not only do good, but be
wise to do good.
do good, but be wise to do good.

2 It will do all the good it can, if it cannot do all the good it would, for
so the dragon does in evil.

3 It will be in lesser duties and commands as conscionable as in greater.
Psalm. 119. 6. When I have respect to all thy Commandments.

4 In temptations to sin. 1 It thinks not it self gotten ont of sin by
running unto the other extreme. 2 It will abstain from evil and from the
appearance of evil. 3 It will abstain from evil though good might come of
it, Romans 3. and so preventeth the tempter, who ever thrusts on evil under
the color of some good by it.

Comfort to the church not to fear the high reaches Use. 3. Comforts against
the depths of Satan. 5.
and deep devises of the enemies, for,

1 The wise God takes the wise in their craftiness 1.
and breaks the head of the crooked serpent and dragon of the sea, Isai. 27.
3.

2 Though the dragon have 7. heads, our head is 2,
wiser then them all; In him are treasures of wisdom and knowledge; dragons
may hide their counsels from men; but not from him who has 7. eyes to
foresee and prevent all mischiefs from his Church, Zach. 4. He has the 7.
spirits of God. Rev. 5. 6. that is a most absolute wisdom and power, to repel
all the dragons subtilties.

Ob. What is this to us?

Answ. Yes, these 7. spirits are sent into all the world. verse. 5, 6. 2 The
head has wisdom for all the members, and understands not for it self only,
but for them. 3 He is made of God to us wisdom as well as righteousness. 2
Cor. 1. 30.

3 Though Charmers whisper and busily pull 3.
many from the truth, yet by this wisdom of thy head thou may discern
between truth and error; between the voice of a shepherd, and of a stranger.
Let never so many false Prophets go out into 1 John 4.
the world; thy comfort is, thou art of God and have overcome them.

4 Though tyrants and antichristian powers 4.
should draw thee before counsels and consistories, fear not what to say, in
that hour wisdom shall be give^ to thee, as the poor silly Martyrs, to
confound the mighty and learned.

5 Though in the world thou art counted silly and simple, to cross thy self
in the reputation of it, be 5.
content, let others be wise in the world, be thou wise by the word, so shall
thou be wise to salvation, when worldly wisdom shall end in folly and
damnation.

And ten hornes]

Now we come to the fourth property of this dragon namely his power and
strength called, here ten horns: where consider,

1. What those horns be. 2. The number of them.
1 The word horn properly taken is well known 1
to be that part of the beast wherein is his chief strength and beauty: but in
scripture it is commonly taken Metaphorically, and signifies strength, might,
power, kingdom, glory; Sometimes in the Creator. 2 Samuel 22. 3. The Lord is the
horn of my salvation, that is, my powerful and glorious Savior. Sometimes in
the Creature, and thus great Provinces, and Princes, and those mighty Kings and
kingdoms which like beasts with horns, both defend themselves, and offend and
hurt one another, are usually called by this name in scripture.

Dan. 7. 7. The fourth beast (by which some understand the Roman Monarchy, and
others better, the Asiaticall kingdom of the Selucidae) was fearful and
terrible, and very strong, It had Iron teeth and devoured and brake in pieces
all before it, and it had ten horns, and those were ten kings that should rise
successively: and ver. 8. another little horn, that was Antiochus Epiphanes
ver. 24. called little, because he was youngest brother, and had no right to the
kingdom, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked away; that
is, 3. kings who had right before him, but all made away by him, that he might
come to the kingdom. And the Beast, Rev. 13. 1 by which is meant Antichrist,
is said to have 7. heads and ten horns; here in agreeing with this dragon;
both of them are monstrous, and though they are diverse beasts, yet resemble one
another in great correspondency, and those ten horns, are expounded to be ten
Kings, vassals of Antichrist. Cap. 17. 12.

Here by horns I understand.

1 In general the mighty power and strength of What is meant here by ten
horns.
the whole dragon, both head and members, that is, of Satan, and his
instruments, against the Woman the Church in general, thus. Zach 1. 18. The
Prophet saw a vision of four horns, and the Angel expounds it; saying,
These be the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, that is,
the enemies which oppressed the Church, called 4. horns, not in respect of
number, as if there were no more, but of universalitie, because they make waste
and havocke of the Church, in all the four costs and regions of the world; as,
East, West, North, South. As;

1 On the East of Judea were Moabites Ammonites, and Idumeans.

2 On the West were Philistims.

3 On the South Egyptians, and Ethiopians.

4 On the North, Syrians, Assyrians, and Babylonians. So the Church is beset
with these four horns.

II In special the excessive power, and glory of the imperial dragon, or
Roman Emperors, who most of them were successively armed with as much power
as cruelty, to wast and destroy the woman, that is, the first Churches and
Christians of the new testament; to which story the Evangelist John in all this
vision has special reference, as we have already in part showed, and shall
declare further all along as we come to the particular.

The number ten horns, this may be taken two II. Of the number of ten horns.
ways.

1 Definitly, and with limitation and restraint, to a certain number, and so
has an eye either to the ten bloody tyrants, and persecutions under those
Emperors or to the ten Kings and kingdoms of Europe, which were under the
Roman Empire, who made themselves vassailes to that dragon, and gave that
power and horns to him against Christ, and his spouse, this Woman.

2 Or rather, which I think the better, we are to take this number here
indefinitly, for all those Kings and Princes and Captains under them: who
leagued and banded themselves against the Woman, which by the perfect number of
ten, are noted to be exceeding many.

1 Because this number is often so taken in the Scripture, for an uncertain
but a very great number, Numb. 14. 22. they tempted me ten times Job. 19. 3. Ye
have reproched me ten times, that is, very many times Rev. 2. 10. Ye shall have
tribulation ten days, that is, many days; a certain time for an uncertain;
and the whole visible Church is described by ten Virgins, that is, a numerous
multitude of professors, Math. 25.

2 I take in the instruments and agents of Kings and Princes, because the horn
properly arises from the head, and those instruments of violence and fury sent
from their heads and Commanders are aptly meant also by horns.

3 Because of the number here are but seven heads; but ten horns, not so many
heads as horns, and so there are more Executors then Princes, more Instruments
then Captains and heads and Generals, and the title aptly brings them in all.

The Church of God is among the wicked as among so many horned beasts of great
power and Doct Hurtful men to the Church are as hurtful beasts to men.
place to hurt and oppress: See Psalm. 22. 12. Many Bulls have compassed me,
even mighty bulls of Bashan and verse. 16. dogs have compassed me; as a
fearful Hare beset with a kennell of dogs is in great danger: so the weak
Woman here beset with fierce and ravenous beastsand: verse. 21. Save me from the
Lions mouth and from the horns of Unicornes. Hence Dan. 7. the calamity of
the Jews is from the four Beasts; that is, those great Monarchs and Rulers,
described under the name of sundry beasts, which with strong horns fought one
against another, but all against the Church: and every where tyrants are called
in Scripture Lions, Bears, Unicornes, Wolves, for their cruelty in themselves,
and for the oppression of the people of God.

Mat. 10. Our Savior forewarneth his disciples of their condition; I send you
as sheep among Wolves; and these have force and power far above the sheep. To
come to the times here aimed at: how was the Church in the beginnings of the
New Testament pushed and goared with the horns of these beasts, such as Herod
the son of Antipas, who beheaded John; and Herod Agrippa, who slew James with
the sword, and persecuted Peter delivered by an Angel, Acts 12. Such were
Felix and Lysias, and Festus, who used their horns, power and places to
persecute Paul and Christians in those days. And after these, how lamentably
was the Church wasted by the Roman persecuting tyrants, even those ten
Imperial horns, and other savage dragons, until Constantine, who all imbrued
themselves till they were all red with the blood of many thousands of
Christians!

In regard of the wicked themselves, who all of them by nature are furiously
and impetuously like Reas. 1.
bruit beasts carried against grace and piety, and as little restraint have
they in themselves as furious beasts unless God by common grace restrain
them, or by special saving grace change them, and make them of Lions, Wolves,
Bears, Cockatrices; Kids, Lambs, and harmles creatures. Isa. 11. 6. For so
there the Prophet styles men in their nature, because their enemies are so
cruel and sanguinary, more like beasts then men. Godly men go soft pace in the
way of godliness, because they have a restraint in their relics of flesh
present with them; but wicked men, without restraint of grace, as bruit beasts,
rush upon mischief, as the horse into battle; If the godly walk they can
run; if the Saints run: they can fly; if the godly be foot men: they are
light horsemen.

In the Church. 1. The sins of the Church often strengthen and sharpen and
multiply the horns of Reas. 2.
the dragon. Psalm. 81. 13. 14. O that Israel would have walked in my ways, I
would soon have humbled their enemies: through the whole story of Judges so
often as Israel sinned God gave them into the hands of oppressors. cap. 4. 2.
cap. 2. 14 cap. 6. 1.

2 The afflictions of the Church make the Enemies lift up their horns when
they see and hear of their troubles and foyles, when they see that their
prayers and exercises of religion cannot help them, especially when they see
God for their humiliation leaves them as a prey in their hands, this makes
them exult as against Christ on the Cross, He trusted in God, let him deliver
him; want of grace, yea hatred of grace makes them insult where they should
pity; not thinking the same or worse things may be fall themselves. Lam. 24, 5.
and 2. 15.

3 The continual estate of the Church is to be in the world as a wilderness,
wherein what can they look for but to be environed with wild and furious
beasts; that is, evil men, who for their disposition are as wild and fierce as
Tigers, Lions, Leopards, Cockatrises, because both of their power and desire of
hurting and making a pray and spoil of the Church.

The world, in which the Church is a stranger, Reas. 3. How the world adds
strength to the horns.
affords to her natives all her aid and mighty means to furnish them
against the Church, which makes them advance their horns on high, in pride and
fury against the Church, for they have

1 Carnal wisdom, prudence, policy in martial exploits; and whereas a good
conscience can go but one way; they can shift into a thousand by ways which is
their advantage.

2 They have multitudes, power and strength of arm, and flesh, wherein they
boast and glory.

3 They have armories, defenced Castles, Cities, and can want no weapons of
death against the Woman.

4 They have treasures, revenues, wealth, large possessions, gold of India,
which are the sine ws of war.

5 They have friends, allies, confederates, holy leagues, auxiliary forces, and
supplies, and in these they lift up their horns, and are made very strong and
bold, for, those that have no part in God, glory and pride themselves in every
thing, but God.

Quest. But what does the Lord all this while to suffer the dragon thus to
exercise his rage and domineere over the Church? can he help all this, and will
he not step out for his Church?

Answ. The Lord has sundry good ends of this his providence. For,

1 He so orders the matter as that the Church must be conformable to her
head, and the servants The Lord suffers these horns for five ends.
not above their Master; Christ himself was in the wilderness with wild
beasts, expecting the great dragon to set upon him, as he did in three horrible
and hellish temptations: and through his whole life he was beset with these
horned beasts, among whom the principal was Herod Ascalonita; who as soon as
he was borne, sought to slay him, and devoured all the Infants of Bethelem,
hoping he had bin within his net: And Pontius Pilate the Roman President, who
with the Scribes, Pharisees, and chief ^^iests, crucified and put him to
death, and yet who can deny that he was the Son of his Love, and most dear
unto his Father?

2 He does it not to extinguish, but exercise; not to destroy, but try their
faith, patience, and graces: for grace is like gold, the oftener tried in the
fire, the purer. Rev. 2. 10.

3 To acquaint them both with their own danger, and so to stir them up to a
constant watching, as also to let them see their own impotency and weakness,
so to drive them out of themselves, to rely on his strength and power: who is
only able to overmatch these mighty horns in man's eye.

4 To weane them from the love of this world to which we are all naturally
wedded; and to hye themselves through it as through a dangerous wilderness. So
David's soul was weary with dwelling in Mesech.

5 To advance not only the patience of God, suffering his enemies to rise to
such a height; but also to manifest his great care, and provident eye over his
Church, by whose almighty power this small flock of sheep is safe amongst a
drove of wolves Lions, and a whole foxest of foxes and dragons.

Take notice of the perpetual condition of the Use. 1.
Church and her dangerous estate, that we may not marvel or take offense at
the tumults and hostile forces, raised against the Church at this day.

1 Let not the might and power of the enemies gathereed against her dismay us,
nor their great and puissant armies and Captains; nor that royal and
imperial forces are raised against this poor Woman utterly to destroy her;
this is no new thing, that mighty horns, and the highest of all humane power
should lift up themselves against her, she has from the beginning been
acquainted with such trials.

Nor let us startle at the multitudes of enemies and Princes, and armies, that
stand about her; it is not the first time that ten horns at once have
assaulted and pushed her; nay, seldom shall ye see this Woman but in the
midst of these ten horns, al ready to make a present spoil of her.

Neither let the fierceness and savage disposition of them against her be
strange to us: seeing they are the dragons horns, dragons are guided by no law
but by their own fierce and truculent nature, flying upon their prey without
all pity: but no cruel and truculent beast or dragon is so fierce against men,
as wicked men are against the Woman: no law of nature or nations, no bond or
tie, no respect of sex or age stops them, but pitilesly without all mercy,
the dragons seize upon young and old, male and female, high and low, nocents or
innocents, if they fall in their way; whosoever profess the fear of God and
true religion against them they are gathered: See it in one example: Haman,
because Mordecai will not bow to him because he was of another religion,
gets to the King, enformeth against all the Jews, as having a law and
religion of their own contrary to the Kings: and it was not for the Kings
profit to suffer the^: presently without any course of law, no man being heard,
nay no man complaining, but Haman privately slaundering; the King delivers the
whole nation men, women and children some 2. or 3. thousand persons to death
and bloody buchery al in a day (but that God prevented it) a thief or guilty
fellon shall have a due course of law, and shall not be condemned unheard:
sometimes pity spares a seditious and rebellious multitude that have deserved
death, because they are many. After war and hot blood, the most furious
enemies will spare such as are overcome, though they would have spoiled and not
spared them in hot blood.

In sacking and taking cities the Conqueror often Witness the most outrageous
and savage cruelty of Papists against Magdiburge this 1631.
in humanity spares women and children, when their lives are in their hands:
But in this cause of Religion, these horned dragons put off all humanity, and
cloth themselves with barbarous and more then brutish cruelty; no humanity nor
humility, no entreaty nor sex, no age nor place can plead for one drop of pity;
As in plentiful examples both old and new, might be proved, namely, the French
Massacre, 1572. and our own powder Treason.

Quest.But what, shall the Church be devoured by so many and potent horns? how
can a silly weak woman be safe among them?

Ans. No: this Woman was never yet overcome by them, nor shall be, she may be
tired, terrified, pusht, wounded by them; but not overcome: 2 Cor. 4. 9. and 6.
9.
For,

1 The dragons great power is but limited and restrained: The Church cannot be
overcome by ten thousand horns.
as Satan must not touch Jobs wise, and Laban against his own evil intention
is commanded, Genesis 31. 24. Take heed thou speak naught to Jacob save good: So
can they do nothing against Jacob which is not good, or shall not be turned to
good.

Though their power be great, yet there is a greater 1 Because their great
power is limited by a greater.
and overruling power, which curbeth them both in the attempting, proceeding,
and ending of their intentions. Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Gentiles can
attempt nothing against Christ, but what the hand and counsel of God has
before determined to be done. Act. 4. 27. In the execution this overruling
power can blunt their horns at his pleasure, If Esau be come forth with a band
of men to reve^ge on Jacob, this power can turn their hearts to favor his
brother: in the end they are overruled, for whereas they would make no end of
pushing and goaring, he will have them go no further then he please. And the
rod of the wicked shall not always lie on the lot of the godly.

2 The horns of the dragon have great power, but being set all against God and
his Saints, it cannot prosper 2. It is set against God.
Job. 9. 4. Who was ever fierce against God and prospered? their power shall
never effect all their wills, being so contrary to the will and counsel of the
Almighty: their will is to destroy and root out the Saints of the most High,
but his will and counsel is only to chasten them: their will is not only to
destroy the person, but the faith also, and fortitude; but they can do
neither: for though they may prevail against the persons of some members, yet
never against the person of the Woman the whole Church, and those that are
overcome of them in respect of life, are never in respect of faith, the gates
of hell cannot prevail against that: so as though they be slain they are
never overcome.

3 Although mighty horns are raised up against the Woman, yet has God raised
up for her a more 3. The woman has a more mighty horn of salvation.
mighty horn of salvation. Luke ^. 69. Even the horn of David, stronger then
they all, the greatest enemy of the Church is but as Antiochus, a little horn
to him.

Ob. But here are ten horns, what is one horn to so many?

Answ. Christ our Lord and head wants not a sufficient number of horns to
encounter the dragons ten horns, Rev. 5. 6 the Lamb has 7. horns: though
the dragon seem to exceed in number, yet does not; for the number of 7 is a
number of perfection, and argues in Christ perfection of power, which is not
in the number of ten, whether it be taken definitly or indefinitly in the
dragon, and there is not one of these 7. but is stronger then all the dragons
ten. And besides, whereas the dragons horns are confined to his heads, which
they exalt and carry aloft; our Lord Jesus has many horns, coming out of his
hands, Hab. 3. 4. that is, Omnipotent in all his works, especially in his
battles against the dragons ten horns, for he has achieved an admirable
victory over principalities and powers, and made show of them openly as a
triumphant Conqueror on the Chariot of his Cross; and at his ascension
professed that all power in heaven and earth was given to him.

4 Although the dragon has his horns and agents 4 God has 4. Carpenters to
scatter the 4. horns.
every where, so as the Dove of Christ knows not where to set her foot to
rest safe from them; for there be 4. horns which scatter Judah in all the 4.
quarters of the world, Zach. 1. 20 yet verse. 21 God has 4. Carpenters or
workmen with tools and axes to strike off these horns, that is, as the
dragons horns are in all quarters to scatter and wast the Church: so the Lord
has every where instruments to batter them: although the Lord could do it with
any one instrument, or by never a one; yet for the full consolation of the
Church, he described them to be as many, and in as many places to resist, and
suppress them.

5 Though these horns of the dragon be many and powerful, yet God does often
turn them one against another, as the Midianites swords were thrust into their
fellows sides: and shall at length easily 1. Turns them one against another.
and certainly break all their horns lifted against him and his Church, as in
Haman, Herod, Pharob, Judas, Julian, Zenacherib; A proof how he brake in
pieces the Antichristian horn in our Fathers days; some persecutors died
suddenly, as Annanias, some with their guts falling out, as Judas, some with
loathsome excrements finding unnatural ways, by the mouth and nostrils, some
brake their necks, some became frantic, none escaped without repentance,
though for a while they held up their heads and horns aloft.

Quest. But what means may this Woman use against all these horns for her
safty?

Answ. 1 She must know as all humane power We must despair of our strength.
cannot resist those mighty horns, and therefore must utterly dispare of her
own strength, for we fight not against flesh and blood; but against
spiritual wikednesse also in high places, nor against weaklings but against
the strong man armed, Luke 11. 21. Who is resolved to keep his hold; against
the Prince of the world, yea the god of the world, and not against one enemy
or two: but ten horns, an infinite army of principalities and powers, with all
his aids and abettors, which are the great and innumerable worldly horns, all
at his command against the Church, and her Head Jesus Christ: What is the world
but Satan's armorie? and our adversaries are not more puissant, and numerous, as
we are few in number, weak in our selves, weaker in our sins, utterly
unable to resist their horns, and assaults, Impar congressus, as Saul to
David, he is a man of war and the other a stripling; therefore we must despare
of our strength.

2 Fly to the strength of God which will make us And fly to the strength of God.
conquerors: acknowledge that salvation is the Lords; the dragon has his
strength from earth, the Woman has her strength from heaven, by prayer. David
comes to Goliath in the name of the Lord and foyleth him: so let us disparing of
our selves be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 5. 10.
we shall be able to do all things through the help of Christ strengthening
us. Phil. 4. 13. Colos. 1. 11. we are strengthened through him. etc.

3 The dragon is strong by humane confederacies and alliance; we must
confederate with God by As also confederate with God.
daily renewing our covenant by faith and repentance; strengthen our league and
union with God, who will give us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor.
15. 57.

4 Lean upon the promise of God who has undertaken to break for his Church
all the horns of the wicked. Psalm. 75. 10. Even all these ten horns shall be
broken; distrust not the promise but believe and be safe; faith will be an
honorable victory for it apprehends the power which brought Christ safe from
the wilderness, and wild beasts, and shall bring the Saints safe through all

An admonition to the enemies Psalm. 75. 5. Lift not Use II. Enemies not to lift
their horns so high. Four Reasons.
up your horns high.

1 what are they in nature but savage beasts and dragons; nay the wildest of
the beasts retains more goodness in his nature then the wicked man does in
his; Christ was more safe in the wilderness I.
among wild beasts then in the world among wicked men; the beasts in the
wilderness acknowledge their Lord and hurt not him; But if he come among
wicked men, Judas will betray him, the Jews will accuse him, Pilate will
condemn him, the common soldiers will crucify him: Daniell was more safe
among the Lions, then among his enemies: so was Paul too, who had better
escaped the beasts at Ephesus then the men; Lazarus found the dogs more
pitiful then Dives. The beast knows and fears those that do him good:
but these, worse then beasts, neither know nor acknowledge God nor his people,
from whose hand and for whose sake they hold all they have.

2 What are they in Gods account? 2.


Obj. He favors and prospers them.

Sol. Though they seem to carry all before them, and are men of place and
power, and all men stand in awe of them, yet in Gods account they are but
beasts amonst men, their strength and power but as the raving and pushing of
horned beasts.

3 How are they crossed in their own account! they shall never have their wills
against the Woman, 3.
nor shall never destroy her faith and fortitude: their intended mischief
shall effect her good: By tearing with their teeth they would utterly devour
her, but as Ignatius, let wild beasts tear and grind her it is but to make fit
bread for the Lords table.

4 Though now Papists and Antichrists horns be lifted up, God sees and
sustereth, and smileth, he seeeth 4.
and has let his servants see their day coming; the sins of the Church do a
little while put it off, but Gods word is as a hatcher lifted up to knock both
the head and horns, and the strong arm of God shall make good his word, and
ere long these ten horns shall hate the whore and make her desolate. see
Revel. 17. 16.

And seven crowns on his heads]

The 5. and last property by which the dragon is described is by his great
conquest and victories, together with his high rule and authority which he
exercises and usurpeth in the world against the Church.

By crowns or diadems is meant 1. in general, the whole kingdom of darkness
which Satan by the greatness of his power usurpeth, not upon inferiors and
vassalls only: but upon the chiefest Monarchs, and potentates of the earth,
whose crowns after a sort become his crowns.

2 The many victories and great conquests, which partly by fraud, and partly by
force, he has carried away amongst earthly Princes, and carnal professors,
for who wear crowns but Conquerors?

3 Here especially is meant the supremacy or supreme By seven crowns what is
meant.
majesty of the Roman dragon or Empire, subduing under it the Princes,
provinces, nations, by innumerable victories, but especially prevailing against
the Church, and primative Christians, as so many Conquerors.

The number of the crowns are 7. according to Doct.
the number of his heads, and all his 7. heads are crowned because his
subtilties have so often prevailed.

The dragon usurpeth and exercises kingly authority and regal power in earth
by which he often prevails against the Woman the Church. This our Savior
teaches, both in the style that he gives him, and also by the state which he
ascribes unto him; for as great Princes have many great titles which declare
their might: So has the dragon; he is called Joh. 14. 30. (...), the Prince of
this world; and Ephesians. 2. 2. the Prince of the air, Epes. 6. 12. (...), the
Lord of the world, and 1 Cor. 4. 4 (...) (...)* the god of this World. And his
estate is described no less magnificent, then his titles; for he has not
(...), a house, but (...), a Luke 11. 21. (...).
Court like a Prince, not only his palace in hell where he commands the
inferior devils, but one erected here on earth in the hearts of wicked men:
Nay he has not only a Court but (...), a Kingdom, Math. 12. 26. If Satan be
divided his kingdom cannot stand; thus the Scripture speaks of him as a
crowned King and great Monarch.

Quest. But wherein does the dragon exercise his Princedome?

Answ. This kingdom of the devil is partly spiritual, partly corporal.

1 He rules and plays Rex chiefly spiritually and 1. 2 Timothy 2. 26. (...).
inwardly in all the children of disobedience, acting and moving them according
to his pleasure. In all unregenerate men all the dragons heads are crowned, for,
1 He has conquered and subdued their persons, The dragon exercises
Princedome. 1. Spiritually. Three ways.
their minds by ignorance, their wills by rebellion, their hearts by hardness,
their whole man by lusts.

2 He sets up his edicts, his will is their law, and they are moved at his
pleasure, as slaves and captives. 2 Timothy 2. 26. and how just is it that they
who will not be ruled by the will of God in his word to salvation; should be
left to the will of the devil to destruction; his servants are they whom they
obey.

3 As a crowned King is not content to rule according to his own will, but his
subjects must take up arms in defense of his title, and whenever he
commands, must fight his battles: So do and Romans 6. 17.
must unregenerate men give up their members weapons of unrighteousness and
fight for sin against grace; and are ready as voluntaries to maintain abet
strive for and defend the lusts of sin, and bear weapons against heaven and
Jesus Christ in whose name Romans 6. 13.
they are baptized: and this is the forlorn estate of any wicked man; that his
person is in the power of the devil, and he being a slave, his whose life is a
homage to the dragon, and his whose power and strength warreth against God his
Creator. Now the dragons heads are crowned, and he set upon his throne.

II Outwardly and corporally the dragon uses Kingly authority, thrusting on
his counsels by secular 2. Corporally.
power and prevailing with wicked Kings and tyrants to execute all his bloody
edicts against the Woman, and therefore is called (...), the strong man; not
only because he is admirable strong in himself, but because he commands
secular powers and gets their forces and weapons drawn against the Church,
hence is he said to have (...), and (...), vessels, and instruments, and
armor, that is, as Chrysostom interprets, wicked me^ and Potentates that
fight as leaguers and confederates with him. If this great Centurian bid Cain
rise up and slay his own natural brother, Cain must and will do it; against
all laws of God and nature. If he command Pharoh to slay the seed of the woman,
and oppress the Woman her self, he is in pay under the Devil, and must do
it: If he command Nero, Domitian, Trajan, and the rest of the crowned heads
(at whom our text aims) to shed like fearce and sanguinary dragons, the blood
of the Christians, till the streets of Rome ran with blood, as Jerusalems did
in Manasses time: they readily give their crowns to the dragon, and execute
all his designs. If he command Popish Princes and Captains to persecute with
fire, and sword; with bloody Inquisitions, Massacres; with force and fraud, the
holy religion of God; these slaves and tyrants must and will give their crowns
to the dragon, and the beast, and in savage manner make no end of effusion of
Christian blood, but would barbarously wish (as one of them) to ride their
horses to the bellies in the blood of Protestants. Thus the dragons heads are
crowned in all those Kings and Princes, that are enemies to the Church, and
exercise their power in peace or war against her.

From Satan's malice and contrariety to Christ and Reas. 1. The dragons power
contrary to Christ's. Six instances
his Kingdom, and all he claims, as in these particulars.

1 If Christ be Lord of all, the dragon will claim all. Math 4. All these
things will I give thee, for they are mine: Dare he so before Christ's face
challenge his right, and will he not behind his back?

2 If Christ have a kingdom of light which tends to gather the elect and
destroy the wicked: The dragon has a kingdom of darkness clean contrary,
which tends to destroy the elect if it were possible, and to gather all the
wicked to him in his own damnation.

3 If Christ's kingdom be ample and large from East to West, and from sea to
sea, Psalm. 2. 8. and 72. 8 The dragon will compass the earth, Job. 1. and
gets the harvest of the world, leaving but a few gleanings for Christ.

4 If Christ require spiritual worship, being a spiritual King, the dragon
will require the same, Math. 4, If thou fall down and worship me; And that
which he could not obtain of Christ he wins of all the wicked in the world,
who worship the beast and the dragon, Rev. 14. 3.

5 If Christ call his kingdom inwardly by his spirit and without by the
ministry of Angels and men: So will the dragon rule and move his subjects,
partly by inward motions and suggestions, and partly by wicked angels and
wicked men, who are all bad agents and factors for him.

6 If Christ ordain power, and authority, and raise up Kings, and give them
crowns and scepters; that as they rule by him so they should rule for him; and
for the upholding of his title and kingdom: The dragon in special despite of
this ordinance prevails with them to bend their power against Christ and his
Church from whom and for whom they received it.

Is from the subtilty of the Dragon, who knows Reas. 2. Satan's subtilty in
getting his heads crowned.
it is the greatest advantage to his kingdom if he can get all his heads
crowned; for his experience has taught him three things.

First, that if he can get in great ones, he gains in them all their
inferious, who follow the motion of the great wheels: If Rehoboam commit
adultery, all Judah will sacrifice under every green tree.

Second, that his kingdom being of this world, as himself is the god of the
world, so his kingdom stands by secular power, and worldly means; well he
knows that truth needs no secular arm, for it has a stronger power and arm
for it; but falsehood needs worldly power and policy to uphold it: if his
heads be not crowned they cannot long prevail.

Third, if he can get his diabolical edicts once crowned, they shall pass
almost unquestioned, and that generally; and be they never so unlawful and
wicked against Gods pure worship, against Gods holy Sabbaths; yet they shall
prevail not only against the wicked, who shall show themselves good subjects
in their blind and impious obedience; but especially against the godly, who
shall be pursued with all the wrath of such superiors, as rebels, seditious,
disobedient to Rulers and Princes; as Daniel, against whom they could pick no
quarrel, but in the matter of his God.

From the desert of the Church: for her sins Reas. 3. The sins of the
Church often crown the dragon.
crown the Dragon, God in justice appointing them to be the rodds of his
wrath, by whom he whippeth his own children: for whereas the promise is, that
the Church, obeying the commands of God, he will make her the head, and not the
tail, and she Deuteronomy. ^8. 13.
shall be above and not beneath. By her disobedience her adversaries become
chief, and those that hate her in affections, and those that oppress her in
action, get the staff into their hand; and have power as crowned Dragons over
her. Lament. 5. 5. and especially, cap 1. 5.

From the justice of God against the dragon himself Reas. 4.
both head and members, that they may run on headlong to their perdition:
For, the more power and greatness they have, the more they grow in malice and
madness against the woman; and the more victories they attain against the
Church, the more they exult and triumph, and sooner rise to their height, and
fill up their measure that the Lord may awaken himself, and rise up as a
Giant, and pursue and break them, and cast them as rodds into the fire as he
has ever done.

Note the good service that every wicked man Use. 1.
and enemy of God and his Saints do in the world; he is of no other use and
service, then to hold the crown upon the Dragons head. For, as every good
subject must stand to the death to uphold the crown and dignity of his lawful
Prince: So do these rebels, and revolters from Jesus Christ uphold the crown
and dignity of this usurper.

Object. God forbid there should be any such, we are all Christians, etc.

Sol. Yes, the Dragon has a number of good subjects that strongly and mightily
uphold his crown, while they will protest and profess the contrary. Romans 6.
20. Signs of such as uphold the drago^s crown and dignity.


Quest. But how may we know them?

Sol. 1. He is free from righteousness, that is, de sacto, non dejure; he will
have nothing to do with that, let grace woo him and persuade him, it can
prevail nothing at all, let the Spirit of God persuade 1 Enemies to the
motions, and persuasions of the Spirit.
him to humility, obedience, conscience: he is an enemy to the Spirits motions
and persuasions; but let the Dragon instigate him with wicked motions, and
cogitations, he is a ready agent: as Judas rejecting the good motions of the
Spirit, the devil entered into his heart to betray his Lord; and it was soon
done. Let the word persuade him to change his master; and of the slave of the
Dragon, become the Lords free man; He resists the word, the Spirit of God,
which inspired the holy Prophets, and Apostles, moves us to speak the same
word, and the wills of believers to obey it: But the Dragon moves them to
scorn, and contradict our doctrine, and so resist the holy Ghost, as Steven
tells his adversaries: and why? because we light not candles to the Sun,
nor confirm the Kings word by some of the guard, nor prove the truth of Gods
Spirit, by men and humane spirits, Ephesians. 2. 2. These sons of disobedience
walk after the Prince that rules in the air, and being of impure cogitation,
and conversation, how is it possible but they should judge amiss of the truth?
Whose eyes the god of this world has blinded: Can a blind man judge of
colors?

II. They walk according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2. 1. Frame
themselves in religion and manners 2 Walk according to the course of the world.
to the times, to please men, can swear, drink, scorn, rail, speak
filthily, sing beastly songs: for of so wicked a Prince, all the servants are
extremely wicked, the spirit that works in the children of disobedience,
moves, and acts in them, as the soul in the body, there is no service of
sin comes amiss: and when the devil cease to draw his slave from evil
to worse, we may hope better things of them.

III. They are believers of lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 3 Believers of lies.
They that are carried away by the effectual working of Satan, or given up to
believe lies; carried away with Priests, Jesuits, Seducers, to believe all
false doctrines contrary to truth, as transubstantiation, salvation by merits,
purging of sin by penal works, and humane satisfactions, worshippings of
Angels, Saints, images, crosses, and a million of dotages, being carried about
with flattering teachers to believe lies.

IV. Persecuting of godly men, and ministers, there Satan's throne is, and there
the dragon is crowned, 3. 4 Persecutors of godly men.
Revel. 2. 13. Good subjects will not endure him to be spoken against which
they love well, therefore they hate godly preachers, and cannot abide to hear
the abominations of popery, and Antichrist to be detected; but our Preachers,
say they, lie as fast as their dogs run: these uphold the dragons crown,
and resist the crown and dignity of Jesus Christ, what ever they prate to the
contrary.

In beholding the battle of the woman, against so Use II. True Church not
always discernable by external splendour.
many crowned adversaries, learn not to esteem of a Church by external
splendour, pomp, wealth, or glory; which is a note of the Antichristian Church.
Here we see the Dragon has seven Crowns, Dan. 11. 31. 36. Antiochus a
wicked man, that shall magnify himself against all that is called God, and
speak marveilous things against the God of gods, yet he shall prosper, and
have armies stand on his part; and Antichrist typified in Antiochus, who
magnifieth himself above all that is called God, and has on his head written
names of blasphemy, has his armies standing with him, Italy, France, Spain,
and many crowns, to thrust forward his Antichristian laws, and decrees. It is
true, we grant there is an internal splendour and glory of the Church,
consisting in the ornaments of faith, charity, patience, and other virtues, as
also in the purity of sound, and wholesome doctrine: and this splendour, because
it constituteth the true Church, it can never want; and yet even in this it may
be greater, or lesser, as the doctrine is more carefully preserved, or
otherwise.

But that outward splendour, and glory, which consists in peace, wealth, and
multitudes of professors; this may be hid, oppressed and obscured; for,

1 This makes for the good and safety of the Church, sometimes to be hid, and
obscured, for Reas. 3
hereby God preserves his Church, which were it all and always known, all the
horns, and the crowned Dragons would assault it at once to destroy it utterly.

2 The greatest glory and splendour of the Church, is that which appears not to
the eye of flesh, but to the eye of faith, which is patience in afflictions,
and constancy in faith, this is her victory 1. Joh. 5. 4.

3 The greatest splendour of the Church, is not that which the world can afford
her, but that which she has from Christ, and in which she is likest unto Christ,
who had small rest or reputation in the world, Fulget Ecclesia non sua luce,
sed Christi lumine, and splendorem sibi accescit de Sole justitiae: As the
Moon shines from the Sun, Ambr. Hexam. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Christ himself had
neither form nor beauty external to be desired: and the Church his Spouse is
glorious, but within; and the eye of faith can espy glory in ignominy, Christ
crowned on the Cross* and a glorious shining and victory of faith through the
bolts and chains of believers.

Not to disesteeme the Church and Kingdom of Use III. The Church not inferior
to her crowned enemies.
Christ, as if she were under hatches, or inferior to those crowned enemies,
which rise against her; or disabled to make her party good against them: Here
consider the Church, 1. in her person, 2. head, 3. estate.

1. The Dragon has seven crowns on his heads, 1. Not in her person.
but yet a Dragon still: but this Woman is a crowned Queen, as we have heard,
ver. 1. not of noble only, but of divine descent; and crowned, not by men, with
a crown of Gold and Pearls; for so high is her estate, as she treads all
such trash under her feet; but by God himself, with a crown of twelve
Stars, the doctrine of the twelve Apostles, which is more durable, precious,
glorious, and invincible, then all the crowns and kingdoms of the world. 1.
They be crowns corruptible and fading; This is unwithering: 2. In them much
unrighteousness in getting and holding; This a crown of righteousness: 3. they
are dead or dying crowns; This is a crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. which no
death comes near; which all the kingdoms in the world cannot put off for
one day.

2. Consider the Church in her head, and there we 2. Not in her head.
shall see her far more victorious then the dragon, for all his 7. crowns:
indeed the dragon is called (...), Luke 11. 21. but in the next verse Christ is
called (...), a stronger then he. And be it that this strong man has a
strength above all men, as namely of all the wicked angels; yet it is but
strength created: the woman has in her head a creating strength; for, Esaias 9.
6. the Prophet calls him ^ll Gibbor, the strong God.

The dragon is called (...), the Lord and Prince of the world; but Jesus Christ
our head is above and beyond him in infinite degrees, for he is (...), the
Lord of all, and heir of all things, Rev. 18. the dragon is potent, but our
Lord is omnipotent: The dragon has many crowns and kingdoms, but they are
all shaking, and shall be shaken to pieces; one of them prevails against
another, and one of them is eaten of another, but on Christ his crown shall
ever flourish; his kingdom is unshaking, an everlasting kingdom, all the
crowns on earth, and all the gates of hell cannot prevail against the
happiness, neither of the head nor least member.

3. Consider her in her lowest and most afflicted estate, which is most
questionable, even in that she is 3. Not in her lowest estate.
more than a conqueror, Romans 8. 37. Look at her at worst, and then she is
crowned; what if with a crown of thorns, a crown of persecution and
Martyrdom, as Job called his suffering his crown.

1. What other crown can the Saints expect, seeing their Lord Christ wore no
other, and yet even then was he overcome?

2. God is more graciously present with them, as their crown, and they are now
more glorious than if they had a crown of gold. If a man had seen the three
children walking in the fiery furnace, and a fourth walking with them like the
Son of God, was not this a more glorious sight then to gaze upon
Nebuchadnezzars golden crown? faith can see the faith of the Saints conquering
and tormenting the tyrants, while they torment them, as Christ on the cross
tormented the devils, while they tormented and crucified him.

3 The consolations of Gods Spirit are never so near, warm and sensible to
the Saints, as in their sharpest trials, for the Spirit of glory and of God
rests on them, crowns them with mercy, and sustaineth 1 Pet. 4. 15.
their hearts with such cordials and comforts, as all other crowns cannot
procure.

4. The conquest and victory even in Martyrdom and suffering is a most
glorious crown, while by faith and patience they triumph over all adversities,
and overcome most when they seem most overcome; now Christ has crowned their
graces by their fiery trials: crowned his own victory in them, and also their
persons, lifting them up to sit with himself in his own Chariot of triumph. A
ground of patience and contentment establishing the godly mind whether it
look without or within it Use IIII.
self. 1 Without it self, while it beholds the prosperity and advancement of
wicked men, that their wicked designs prosper for a time, and prevail, and
that mischief is so nimble and quick, marvel not seeing it has all the
power of hell and the world to put it forward; many hands make light work.
Psalm. 37. 7. Fret not thyselfe for him that prospers in his way, etc. If a
man would compact with the dragon as they do, he might thrive in the world,
and be preferred as they. Every corporation prefers his own citizens, and
were they of the world the world would love her own. Neither let godly men be
discouraged to see the increase of the wicked, never was the dragon so
victorious; numbers fall to Atheism, numbers to Popery, multitudes to carnal
policy and selfe-seeking. God suffers the dragon to crown all his heads, and
prevail against those whose names are not written in the book of life.

2. Within, the godly mind beholding his own abasement and opposition in the
world; how little of Rev. 13. 8.
Gods work he can do, how little thank he has for that he does, what
reproaches and wrongs he must pocket and put up for doing his duty, might make
him weary and faint if he did not apprehend the true cause of all, namely that
he must strive against many crowned adversaries, principalities and spiritual
wickednesses, wicked Princes, and worldly Potentates, and wicked persons, who
commonly can get the edge of the laws, and of the sword directly bent against
the kingdom of Christ and his members. It were hard if some of these seven
crowns could not fetch in a godly man: for of the innocent Son of God
himself, the Jews could say, We have a law, and by that law he must die, John
19. 7. If they can find none, it is easy for crowned dragons to make one, as
against Daniel, and Haman against the Jews, and Pharaoh against the
Israelites. And the Saints must not be discouraged, though they are to strive
with unreasonable men, that are not guided by truth, humility, charity, or
Christianity; but by fury, railing, pride, pretenses of law, threatening, and
violence; the dragon will show not his horns only, but his crowns to.

See we the wicked of the world giving up their crowns to the dragon, and
with all their strength Use V. We must learn to sit and hold the crown on
Christ's head.
and power, and authority, setting their crowns on the dragons head; we on
the contrary must learn with all our power to set up and uphold the Crown and
Scepter of Christ in our selves and others, for as all the limbs of the dragon
rejoice to see him crowned and domineere to the ruin of the Church; so let all
the children of Sion rejoice in their King, Psalm 149. 2. Shall the Papists
triumph and glory when the Antichristian forces prevail against the reformed
religion, and shall not we when the woman prevails against the dragon?

Quest. How may I uphold Christ's Crown and Scepter against the dragon?

Ans. 1. Cast down thy Crown at the feet of the Lamb, and worship him that
sits on the Throne, as the Seniors, Rev. 4. 10. this is done by 2 practices.

1. If thou deny thy self, and diselaime whatsoever is in thy self, as being
void of all power and 1. Cast 'downe thy crown at his feet.
strength to attain any thing that is good.

2. If thou ascribest all power to God and Jesus Christ of creation, and
providence, of preservation, yea of final victory against all enemies, whom
he will make his footstool, and set his feet upon their necks and crowns,
as Joshua did.

II. Allow thy heart for his throne and chair 2. Set up his the one in thy
soul.
of state, that in it he may sit and command: and beware of resisting his
person or entrance, or peaceable possession in thy soul. Psalm. 24. open thy
gates that the King of glory may enter; avoid whatsoever would hinder his
peaceable entrance, or continuance; especially in four things.

1. Infidelity; for Jesus Christ is no way received but by faith, John 1. 12.

2. Impenitency; he dwells no where but in an humble and contrite soul.

3. Raigaing sinne^, which are as iron gates and percullices to keep out Jesus
Christ out of his kingdom, and hold the sinner in rebellion against his Sove.
aigne and King: where any sin reigns, there Christ cannot reign; and as no
man can serve two contrary masters, being enemies; so no man can be subject to
two kings, enacting contrary laws.

4. Idolatry; what communion between Christ and Antichrist, 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16.

III. Take the oath of allegiance to Jesus Christ to submit to his laws
willingly: David took this 3. Take the oath of allegiance to Christ.
oath, Psalm. 119. 10. I have sworn, and will perform to keep thy righteous
judgments: A seeming subject is most pernicious; such as the Pope and Jesuits
have catechized to refuse the oath of allegiance to our Sovereign, they are
among us, but not of us. Such subjects to Christ are wicked men and hypocrites,
Christians only in name and profession, are counterfeit; are in the Church,
but not of it. 1 John 2. they want all the notes of good subjects; which are,

1. To know and attend to the laws, and word of his King: the word of the Law
and the Gospel, is the municipall laws of this kingdom, called the word of
the kingdom; a good Christian will attend to the word preached, as a good
subject to his Kings Proclamation.

2. To obey his laws, yielding obedience to the whole law, in true endeavor,
so did David have respect to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. and also
faith and repentance to the Gospel.

3. Neither this by constraint, but as a willing people, Psalm. 100 of
unwilling, made willing; drawn by the Father, as the sheep of Christ, to
hear his voice and follow him.

IIII. Resist the Dragons encroachments upon this Kings kingdom: know the
enemies, the Devil, 4. Resist the dragons encroachments upon Christ.
world, sin, Pagans, Papists, Heretics, Atheists; they would pull thee from
allegiance to former slavery: furnish thy self with weapons against all the
enemies of the kingdom, which are the word, faith, hope, love, righteousness,
patience; especially prayer against the kingdom of darkness, and the
proceeding of the enemies of the Church: Hester must stand up and intercede for
her people: let us not fail at this time. Shall the Pope injoyne a fast for the
prosperity of the wars against the Church, and we shamefully neglect it?

[And his tail drew down the third part of the Stars.]

Having spoken of the five properties, by which we have heard the Dragon
described, we come to the second part of the description, which is by two
effects.

The former against the Stars of heaven, in this verse.

The latter against the woman, in the next verse.

For the meaning, every word is mystical; we must stand a while in the
interpretation, in which are four things to be considered.

First, what is meant by the Stars of heaven?

Ans. Fondly do the Papists understand here by the dragon, Lucifer, drawing
down with him in his fall many Angels, which they say are meant by Stars of
heaven, not attending the scope of the place: for I read not in all the
Scripture where Satan is called Lucifer: Calvin calls it a gross ignorance, to
father Satan's name upon Isa. 14. 12. but it is called by this name, Rev. ^2. 10.

1. These Stars fell to earth after John's prophecy, whereas they fell before
man's sall.

2 These stars fell in the Church, when the battle was pitched against the
woman, but Satan fell, and his angels, before there was any Church in the
world, or before there was any mention either of Christ or his Church.

3. Those fell with the dragon, these cast down by the dragon.

4. These stars were cast down by the dragon to the earth; from mystical
heaven to mystical earth: but those Angels were cast down by GOD, from heaven
into hell, where they are reserved in Jude 6.
chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day, and both taken in
their proper acceptance: But this place is an allusion to Dan. 8. ^0 where
Antiochus Epiphanes a type of Antichrist, is said to cast the stars unto
earth and tread upon them: where he calls by the name of the Host of heaven
those who^ our Evangelist calls the stars of heaven, that is, the Ministers
and Pastors of the Church, called by this name, as we have declared verse 1.
Pastors of the Church called stars, why.


1. As they are set in their orbs by God, and receive their light from the
Sun, and move in their certain order and station; so are these set in their
several stations, to keep the watch of the Lord by a perpetual decree, so
long as day and night succeed one another.

2. As they shine in the darkness of the night, so do these give light to the
Church in the dark night of this world; partly by doctrine and partly by holy
example Matthew 5. 14 Ye are the lights of the world, and the light of the
stars is not for themselves.

3. As stars are eminent and in high place above the earth, so the Pastors
and Teachers are in eminency as stars of heaven, both in themselves in
respect of divine and heavenly light and gifts of wisdom and knowledge,
especially of sanctity and heavenly conversation; as also in respect of the
high regard and reverent respect which faithful Pastors have amongst true
believers: for as they have the highest place in the Church of God; so, walking
worthy their place, they have the highest place in the hearts of believers. Now
these stars set by God in their orbs, shining in so high place, are said to
be drawn down, and thrown to the earth.

11. The second thing in the meaning is, How the stars are said to be cast
down to the earth?

Ans. To fall from heaven to earth, here is not to be taken literally, but it is
in matter of religion to fall from Stars fall from heaven to earth, Three
ways.
a heavenly profession and hope, to carnal and earthly counsels and courses,
and then the Pastors are said to fall from heaven to earth, when they fall
back in their 1. judgment, 2. affection, 3. practice and conversation.

1 Then in judgment they fall and fail, when 1. In Judgment.
the light that was in them is turned to darkness; when they turn away from
divine and heavenly truth, to errors, lies, men's fancies and traditions, to
doctrines of liberty, to please carnal minds, and turn from substance to
superstition.

2. When in affection they change the love of the 2. In affection
word into the love of the world; they affect the winning of wealth and ease,
above the winning of souls: in stead of minding divine studies, to save
themselves and others, now they mind earthly things: in stead of the love of
Christ which they seemed to profess and express in feeding his I ambes now
they are carried with self-love, seeking and feeding themselves only: here is
a lamentable ^all of stars from heaven to earth.

3. When in practice they exchange their godliness 3. In practice.
with gain, their piety and sanctimonie into earthlinesse, covetousness and
worldliness; their conversation which seemed, and should have been in heaven,
into earthly, fleshly, and unfruitful courses: This is a woeful fall of the
stars, which have lost their station, as pernicious to the Church, and to
themselves as if the stars in heaven should fall upon the earth.

III But how, or by what means could the dragon cast down such excellent men,
that shined by By the dragons tail what is meant.
the light of holy doctrine, and conversation, as bright as the stars in the
heavens.

Ans. By his tail: by which word are there implied all those base arts, and
wicked instruments, and means Cauda est, 1. Naturalis pars anima^is. Exo. 4. 4
2 Metaphorica, Deuteronomy. 18 15. pro ignobili, imbecilli, vili. 3. Mystica, Apoc 9.
10. and in hoc loco.
by which the dragon casts down the stars, and these are three, which the word
most expressly implies.

1. By force and tyranny: Dragons have more force in their tails than in their
jaws; and therefore this is a figurative speech, befitting the nature of a
dragon, when by the rage of persecution and bitter war, and wrath, by their
fire and sword, and cursed cruelty, the dragon forces many of the Pastors, who
had shined, and ought still to have done in their places, to fall from their
shine from their doctrine, holy profession, holy conversatio^, first to corrupt
and earthly doctrine, then to corrupt and earthly life and behavior, such as
other men of earthly minds and professions, have undertaken and expressed.

2. By flattery and insinuations, by which, as by a dragons tail the Pastors
were beaten down: for as dogs do use to fawn and flatter their masters with
their tail; so the dragon not by open force only, but by secret fraud and
insinuation assaileth the stars; namely by many fair promises, and sugared
persuasions, making offers of wealth and preferment, favor, and what else the
world can bestow on her favorites; by which means he drew many ambitious,
pompous, and c^vetous teachers from their former study, and care in propagating
the truth, and from their diligence and labor in advancing the salvation of
men unto earthly studies and cares how to build their own houses, and feather
their own nests, not caring that Gods house lay waste.

3. By poison and infection: much poison lies in the tail of a serpent, the
dragon poisoned a great number more with heresy, and poisoned opinions,
against the truth of Christian religion, for which end he daily stirs up
heretics, and false apostles, and false teachers, who being furnished with all
arts to deceive, draw a number of the stars away, from sound and heavenly
truth, into the apostasy of earthly and impious doctrines, clean contrary to
the Scripture, and to the person, natures, and offices of Jesus Christ. Thus
the Prophet Isay 9. 15. says, The false prophet which teaches lies, is the
tail: calling him so in four respects.

1. For baseness and contempt: let them bear False Prophets called the Tail
in 4. respects.
themselves aloft in conceit of their wit and learning, and others admiration
of them.

2. For their base flattery and playing the parasites, and sawning upon patrons
and Princes, as dogs on their masters with their tails, for a bone or a crust.

3. For their inconstancy and mobility, as a dogs tail wags and moves easily
on this side and that, so they in their doctrine and conversation are here and
there, and buzzing every where for an advantage.

4. Especially for their poysonfull and hurtful disposition and effects, for
as venomous beasts hide their venom in their tails, by which on occasion they
do much hurt and mischief; so false and corrupt teachers, by eloquence,
sophistry, and base shifts hide the poison of false and erroneous doctrine, by
which they infect and taint the Church of God: for which cause, Isa 59. 5.
false doctrine is compared to the eggs of Aspes, which if they be eaten bring
most present death; and broken, sends forth a Basiliske: that is, is most
pernicious, both Autoribus, to those that invent and devise them; and also
Auditoribus, to those that receive and digest them: it brings eternal
destruction to both as certainly as if they should eat the egg of a
Basiliske, which is most deadly of all serpents, slaying men only with her
sight and poysonfull vapors that sparkle out of her eyes.

In the times next after the Apostles, at which the The best interpietation of
a prophecy i, the accomplishment of it.
spirit of God here more expressly aymeth, how the imperial dragon bestirred
himself, and how many stars he drew down, stories are not silent to relate.

1. Infinite numbers by persecution, as Eusebius. lib. 8 cap. 3. when wicked
Dioclesian commanded the Christians oratories to be demolished and laid even
with the ground, the Scriptures to be burnt, the Bishops to be cast in prison,
and compelled by torments to renounce Christianity, and offer unto Idols; many
suffered death constantly: Sed alij infiniti animis prae formidine perculsi
facile post primum impetum prorsus tandem succubuerunt.

In the seventh persecution under Decius, we read of Serapion and Nichomacus,
who through their tyranny renounced Christianity; and Cyprian de lapsis lib. 2
cap. 8. mentions Ena^stus a Bishop in Aftrike, and Nicostratus a Deacon, who
made shipwreck of faith, and as stars fell for fear from heaven to earth.

2. Many stars were thrown down by the flattery and fair persuasions of
this imperial dragon. How faithful Policar^e was by Ir^narchus Herodes, and
his father N^cetas taken up into the Chariot, going In that fourth persecution
under Antoninus Verus.
to judgment, and persuaded to favor himself and his old age; and swear by
the Emperors good fortune, which he resisted, appears, Eusebius. Hist. li. 4.
cap. 1^. And ^liny in an Epistle to Trajan Emperor, enformeth him that he had a
Libell containing such names as were won from Christianity, and content to
do sacrifice with incense, and wine to the gods, and to Trajans Image, and to
blaspheme Christ: And how infinite a number were won from Christianity, in the
last presecution under Dioclesian, were easy out of stories to recite.

3. Many more were thrown down with the porsonfull tail of the dragon,
namely of heresies and false doctrines: for the horse which was white for
integrity of Apostolical doctrine, was not only red by bloody persecutions of
tyrants against Christians; but was showed to be black for the mournful and
sad estate of the Church, by reason of many and Revel 6. 5.
mighty heretics, who all of them by all their wit and strength obscured the
light and truth of Scriptures, and shook asunder with the foundation of
religion the faith of many: every year of the first three hundred producing
some monstrous heresy or other; amongst which that damnable Arrianisme had so
poisoned all the world, as it seemed but one Arrian; and so prevailed against
the stars, as there were scarce five Orthodox Bishops in the world, and
Athanasius the chief of them ill entreated and banished; yea so poysonfull was
the tail of the dragon, that the ancient fathers that lived in those times,
near the Apostles, had almost been drawn away, and hardly escaped. Witness
Ireneus inclined to Chiliasts, or Millinaries: Tertullian a Montanist, Origin
carried away into many foul errors, much discommended by Jerome, etc.

Fourthly, in the meaning: Is the number of the stars cast down by the Dragon,
not all, but a third part; an indefinite part put for a great number, that
seemed holy men and zealous, and stood in the firmament of the Church in great
shining and brightness, were cast down with the Dragon.

Quest. Why did he not cast down all?

Ans. Not all; because he cannot cast down any of All the stars not cast
down: Three Reasons. Ecclesia est cor mundi, primum vivens, and ultimum
moriens.
the elect or fixed stars: it is impossible to seduce any of them.

Secondly, not all: for then he had cast down the whole Church depending upon
them; for there must be a Church so long as the world continues.

Thirdly, not all: because many of them were held in Christ's right hand, Chap.
1. 16. and none of those can he cast down; for none can take them out of his
hand. But a third part, he cause they were not upheld by Christ, but left unto
themselves and their own strength, and to temptation; and so, soon by the
power of the Dragon cast down: for no man ever stood long against the Dragon
by his own strength: Commit thy self in trial to Gods hand and power: pray
with David, Uphold me Lord, and I shall be safe.

The chief aim of the Dragon is against the Ministers and faithful Pastors
of the Church, that The chief aim of the dragon is to cast down the stars.
he may throw down to earth the stars of heaven.

It is true, he is fierce and furious against all godly me^, of all conditions,
and scorneth not a conquest against the weakest and meanest Christian; but his
special malice is intended against godly Ministers, such as in higher places,
as in their orbs, shine as stars in piety, faith, fortitude, and sincerity
of doctrine and life.

1 Kings 22. 21 He offers himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Abahs
Prophets; and strikes down with his tail 400 at once: Zach. 3. 1. Satan
stood at Ioshuas right hana to hinder him and resist him in his Ministry.

Luke chap. 22. verse 31. the dragon desired to winnow the Apostles as wheat
how he resisted the Apostles in all their Ministry, appears in the whole
Story of their Acts, and in their Epistles, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. we would have come
to you once or twice but Satan hundred us.

How the stars were cast down by imperial dragons, we have showed: in after
ages how the stars were cast down in the church of Rome according to that
prophecy: Revel 6. 13. they should fall as the leaves of a figtree shaken with
a mighty wind.

When their pompous Prelates, Cardinals, Patriarchs, How many stars in the
Romish church were cast down.
and Popes, forsaking and giving up their office of preaching, became earthly
Princes, studying policies and laws, and employed themselves not in Pulpits,
but on seats of justice in disciding men's civil inheritances, and in matters
of state; yea, and whereas they should have labored and confined themselves to
the Gospel of peace; not only maintained, but also often in person acted
civil war and bloodshed, and leaving the simplicity of the servants and
Ministers of Christ, they take on them the state and pomp of Princes, in
Princely Palaces, Princely revenues, Princely diet, Princely attendants,
Princely pleasures of hunting, hawking, dicing, etc.

Now the stars are fallen from heaven, and from their heavenly function to
earth, viz to the seeking and enjoying earthly pleasures, profits and
employments, in which no secular man can be more busy. Carnal things are all
they care for, and all they savor, and now they are become like other
worldlings, called the Inhabitants of earth; and our own experience gives too
many testimonies to this truth, in which the dragons tail has prevailed to
draw away many shining stars, men once of learning, zeal and industry, but
now through their own worldliness, greediness, ambition, or though their
own fear, flattery, or threatening of times, are grown mere politicians and
worldlings, scarce retaining any savor of their former zeal and grace;
perhaps zealous against nothing more than grace and zeal.

The dragon is therefore more especially furious against the stars, because
of their shining and Reason.
light of grace above others. Where grace is more abounding, there the dragons
envy more abounds; the more bountiful Gods hand and eye is, the more
envious is his; the richer the booty is, the more audaciously will the thief
adventure for it. A star of the sixth and smallest magnitude in respect of
place and gifts, if he shine faithfully shall not escape the dragons assault;
but his chief aim is against the stars of the first and second magnitude,
since the Apostles, his tail is most stirring against them, as Luther, Calvin,
Beza, Perkins, men in their times of incomparable light of learning and
sanctity, and yet how now cast down and darkened by the dragon?

Because God has specially appointed the function Luke 10. 17. Reas. 2.
on of the Ministry to batter the kingdom of the dragon, 2 Thessalonians. 2. last.
Joshua 16. 20. and to advance the Scepter of Christ. It is no marvel that
seeing they most hinder his purposes, and kingdom, that he by all means
hinder, cross, and cast them down, as Moses by Ia^^as, etc.

His universal malice to mankind, who, he being the prince of darkness,
would keep in a perpetual Reas. 3
night of sin and darkness, and therefore with the uttermost of his power
would withhold from them all the shine of the Sun, Moon and Stars; he can
afford them no light at all of holy doctrine, or holy example: If he can change
the light with darkness, how great is that darkness?

His despite to God, whom he would have most dishonored by his chief and
next servants, of who^ Reas. 4.
he justly expects most honor and service; if he can bring it about, none
shall betray the Son of God, but his own Disciple, and none shall so much
pull down the kingdom of Christ, as the master builders that should set it up

The hight of the stars: his policy has taught him, that if he can cast them
down he throws Reas. 5.
many down with them; if he can win Aaron, he is sure of all the people to
make and worship the Calfe; they are Leaders, if he can mislead them, he
misleadeth a multitude in every one of them: they are Shepherds, if he smite
them with his tail the sheep are scattered: They are Standard bearers, if he
can cast down the Standard the bands are soon defeated. Cedars fall not alone
but many shrubs are crushed with their fall Besides, he knows their falls are
more scandalous, more exemplary; and that they who in goodness will neither
follow rule nor example, will make their example in evil a rule sufficient.
Besides, he knows that as a man falling from a great hight seldom rises
again, or not without great hurt; so these falling from holy and heavenly
doctrine to humane constitutions, to external ceremonies and worldly
contentments; seldom or never rise to any good service, but prove greatest
enemies of all.

To teach the stars watchfulness against this sly, Use. 1.
busy, wrigling tail of the dragon, which makes the lives of godly Ministers
very troublesome.

Q. How may we prevent the hurt from them?

Ans. 1. By preparing 'for persecution and trial, How the stars may prevent
their casting down, by five practices.
2 Timothy 2. 3. suffer afflictions as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Act. 20.
24. Paul was ready to go to Jerusalem though nothing but bonds did await him.
The star keeps his place be it never so much beset with clouds, and
winds, and tempests; forecast then, the first in any storm against the
Church, is the sincere preacher, he is in the foreward and face of the enemy.

2. Love not the world, deny thy self, let the world be crucified to thee, and
thou to the world, else were thou a companion of the Apostles, as Demas, or an
Apostle or Disciple at the side of Christ, the tail of the dragon will cast
thee to the earth; why else did learned men change with the times?

3. Establish thy self in the truth, and see thou be well grounded and able
to hold the truth against errors, false doctrine, heresies, which are a part
of the tail of the dragon; look into the heresies and errors of the time, as
physicians study the nature and describe the work of poisons, not to teach
them, but to teach how to avoid them. So heresies of Popery must be studied not
to be received and supped up, but to be damned and refuted. Many read Popish
books and erroneous schoolmen, and are turned into that they read, as poison
drunk turns the body unto it self.

2. Settle thy self in love of truth, else may thou easily be given up to
strong delusions; see 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. and Mark 10. 21.

4. Content not thy self to be well read and seen in the Scriptures, nor to
shine in light of knowledge and pure doctrine, nor in seemly, sober and civil
conversation, but labor especially to make thine own Election sure, for the
dragon can cast down none of the elect, no not the weakest of them, whereas he
prevails against strong Cedars of most excellent common graces, who are
called to the means, but not of purpose, Romans 8. 28.

5. Pray unto the Lord to uphold thee, for what art thou to him, whose tail
can cast down the third part of the stars? if his tail be so huge, what is
the bigness and strength of his bulk? or what is the silly woman or any of
her sons to such a monster? pray therefore that Jesus Christ would take thee
in amongst the stars, into his right hand, the hand of protection and safety,
the hand which is stronger than all, out of which hand the dragon cannot take
them.

To hearers, learn hence to pray earnestly for Use II.
their Ministers, and afford them all the strength they can against this
monstrous dragon, whose incessant Prayer for our Ministers how prevale^t.
labor is to throw them down, for prayer is a strong bull warke; a guard of
men cannot make them so safe as the prayers of Gods people: Peter Acts 12 by
this means was saved from the dragons tail, when in likelihood an army of a
million of men could not have rescued him; this made the Apostles every where
beg prayers of the faithful. Fail thou in this, and thou sinnest against God
in ceasing to pray for them.

2. Thou make thy self guilty of the troubles of thy teacher.

3. Thou art often denied comfort in the Ministry, and they that should speak
to the hearts of Gods people, speak often to grieve and gall them, because
thou prayest not for them to speak as they Ephesians. 6. 20.
ought.

Take no offense to see many learned men, once Use III.
zealous preachers, fall ex orb in orbem, out of their orb and heavenly
motion to the world and secular affairs: It was before prophesied by Christ,
Matthew. 24. 29. and Rev. 6. 13. Stars fell unto earth as a figtree casts her
figs in a mighty wind: the blustering storm and wind of temptation shake many
a figtree, and stripeth them of their unripe figs and unsound fruit; when we
see such woeful sights we may say to the^ as Absalon to Thamar, defiled and
defloured by Ammon, Has Ammon met with thee? 2 Samuel 13. 20. so surely the
dragon has met with them, he ought them a spite and paid them, a piece of
his tail has light on them and smitten them to the earth. And much less
marvel if many which seemed good and zealous hearers, and shined in the
firmament of the Church, as stars of lesser magnitude, have fallen from their
beginnings, as weary of the good way: for if the dragon cast down so many
teachers with his tail, what heaps of common professors in the visible Church
may we conceive he throws down from heaven to earth?

To the resisters and opposers of godly Ministers Use IIII.
and good Preachers; what art thou that createst trouble, and art casting down
the stars so far as lies in thy power, but a piece of the tail of the
dragon? Such as Alexander the Coppersmith, and Elimas that resisted Paul,
called by him the child of the devil. And what art thou doing but easing the
dragon; and saving him a labor? art thou afraid the dragons tail cannot cast
down stars enough without thy help? or what a needless labor art thou
about, so long as the dragon is alive?

To comfort the bright shining stars, and faithful Use V. Comfort to the
shining stars. 4. Grounds.
Ministers in their troubles and oppositions.

1. In regard of their adversaries; who are they that fight against the light,
but members of the kingdom of darkness? let a godly man shine as a bright star
in his orb, who be they that oppose and seek to cast him down, but Papists
and favorites of them, swearers, Atheists, unclean and of filthy life and
tongue? what marvel if such spit poison, what other to be expected? A Pot
boyles over with such liquor as is within.

2. In regard of their safety, which is in Gods faithful promise of four
things.

1. His presence with them, I am with you to hide you from strife of tongues,
Psalm 31. 20.

2. His assistance in their calling, so far as is necessary he will take
their part and rebuke the dragon, as in Joshua, Zach. 3. 2.

3. His protection, he will take them into his right hand, Rev. 1. 20.

4. Remuneration, that they shall shine more and more till they shine as
stars in the kingdom of Glory, Dan. 12. 3.

The impotency of the dragon, he cannot throw Doct. II. The dragon cannot cast
down all the ^ars but only (...) part. Rev. 8. 4.
down all the stars, but only a third part, so as two third parts remain
still in their orbs and shining. When the first Angel blew the Trumpet, that
is, when the Gospel was preached by the Apostles, hail, and fire and blood
fell as storms, that is, persecutions and perils, contradiction, exile and
slaughter by the stubbornness of the Jews against them; and by this fire of
persecution the third part of the trees were burnt; that is, the Apostles and
excellent teachers of the Church compared to fruitful and flourishing trees,
for their greennes shadow and fruits, a great part of them were afflicted,
slain, put to deadly torments, but not all, the dragon could scorch but a
third part Verse 8. When the second Angel blew his trumpet a great mountain,
that is, the Roman tyrants, so called for their hight, power and swelling
pride, burning with fire: that is, of fury and fierceness against Christian
religion: was cast into the sea, that is, many people of the world subject to
the Roman power and Empire: and the third part of the sea was turned into
blood, that is, many thousand Christians were oppressed and consumed with the
fire of the burning mountain, but only a third part. And the third part of
creatures dyed, that is, faithful Christians slaughtered and murdered: and
the third part of ships, that is, the Churches, whose Pastors are her Pilots,
and these planted by the hand of the Apostles themselves, oppressed and
subdued. Now this fierce dragon would have turned all the sea to blood, killed
all living creatures, the life of whose faith was manifest in found profession;
would have destroyed and sunk all ships and Pilots all visible Churches and
Pastors, but could only a third part. Verse 10. When the third Angel blew his
Trumpet there fell a great star, that is, the Roman Bishop; for by stars
are meant teachers called absinthiam or wormwood fell from heaven, that is,
falling from purity of doctrine, and declining to taste the bitter morsels of
pride, ambition, pre-eminence, and of humane doctrines and devises it fell into
the third part of RIVERS, and made them bitter, and many dyed of the^; that is,
the same corruption tainted and imbittered the third part of Pastors and
Bishops, by who^ as by rivers, the sweet waters of heavenly doctrine should and
have flowed and have bin derived unto others; but now by that example were
tainted with gross superstition, errors, herisies, earthlines, carnal pomp
and pleasure; But not all, only a third part, for many upheld in themselves
and in others the sincerity of holy doctrine and example.

Verse 12. When the fourth Angel blew his Trumpet, the third part of the
Sun, the Moon and the Stars were smitten with darkness, and the day was
smitten, and the night also, viz. a grievous night of darkness, either of
Idolatry and superstition, as some, or of persecutions, as others, darkened and
obscured the chief ornaments of the purer Church of Christ: the Sun the
Scriptures, the Moon the doctrine borrowed thence, the Stars the Ministers,
the day that is the joy and comfort of the Church in enjoying her happy Sun,
and the night, it reached even to those without the Church, being as in the
night; but the dragon could not darken all the Sun, all the Moon, and all
the Stars, but a third part only.

The fifth Angel blew his trumpet, Rev. 19. 1. the Antichristian Locusts, rising
out of the smoke of Popish rites and traditions are commanded to hurt no tree
or grass, that is, no Pastors or private Christians, which are sealed in their
foreheads.

Cap. 9. 15. When the sixth Angel blew his Trumpet; the four Angels, not by
nature, but by office: some instruments approved of and appointed by God for
the execution of his judgments; they must slay only the third part of men, of
Christians, and can go no further. Those six Trumpets thus explaned have
notably proved the point in hand, namely the dragons impotency.

God for his glory will not suffer the dragon to Reas. 1.
break in sunder his order, whereby he has appointed to teach and call men by
such as are called and sent, Romans 10. 15. the Ministry is Gods ordinance, not
man's; and God will uphold it.

2. The whole government and blessing of the Ministry Reas. 2.
belongs to Jesus Christ, who has undertaken to furnish his Church with
Pastors in all ages, for the edification of his own body, till we all meet
in one perfect man, Ephesians. 4. And look what was the Office of the High Priest,
a singular type of Christ, in the old Testament, the same is the Office of
Christ in his Church. The High Priests was to look to the lights in the
Sanctuary, and to supply them with holy oil, that they might never go out;
and now though the dragon be never so desirous to put out all the lights, yet
he is too weak for Jesus Christ in his care and calling.

3. The necessity of the Church suffers only a third Reas. 3.
part, but not all the stars to be thrown down, for the harvest of the
elect must be gathered in all ages, and therefore laborers must be
successively thrust forth: So long as the Lord keeps house he must have
stewards to dispose his mysteries, and allowance to his family; so long as he
has a flock he will* have shepherds to tend it, and will not suffer them
all to be smitten at once, for then all the sheep should be scattered; so
long as he has a Vineyard he must have dressers, so long as he has a field
he must have husbandmen, so long as the ship of the Church is on the
troublesome sea of this world, he will not suffer her without Pilots to bring
her safely to shore.

4. Christ cannot be so forgetful of his near relation Reas. 4.
with his faithful pastors, as to suffer the dragon to throw them down all at
once; he is their Lord, and they his servants, who is able and willing to aid
them in their faithfulness; he* is the Bridegroom, and they friends of the
Bridegroom, wooing and adorning his Spouse; they are preferred before others
in nearnes to Jesus Christ, as having Mediators not meritorious as Christ, but
ministerial. Nazianzen.
(...), a mediation between God and man, especially resembling Christ; yea and
are Coworkers with God and Saviors, Obed. 21. of men, and stand in the stead
of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 20. Christ will look to their standing, as to his own.

V. Because of the manifold and sundry ways by which the Lord usually sees to
defeat the dragons Reas. 5. Many ways the Lord can and does defeat the dragon.
7. Instances.
projects, that they shall not cast down all the stars; as,

1. He having undertaken to supply his Church, the dragon cannot throw down
one but he raises another; if not in the same place, yet he pricketh down his
faithful servants here and there, so as such as will know them, may by their
pains have recourse unto them. If God take away an Elijah, he raises up for
him an Elisha with his spirit doubled upon him, 2 King. 2. 15. If Herod take
away John, Christ the Bridegroom himself stands up for him: if the Jews
take away Christ, there are twelve Apostles succeed him; and they being
departed and taken away by the dragon, a succession of infinite Pastors is
raised for them, with whom the Lord Jesus is present unto the end of the world.

2. When the dragon is most fierce, he has a secret chamber to hide his
servants in, till the storm be over, Isa. 26. 20. In the storm raised by
Ahab, he has an Obediah to hide a 100 of them, a third part, from Iezabels
rage. If Christ the babe be hunted in Jury, he shall be sent into Egypt.

3. He can withhold the dragon even by that which he most pursues and hates:
God can make the reverence and holiness of a man, which they above all things
persecute, bind their hands; as all men held John as a Prophet, and Herod
feared him and the Jewish drago^s would often have assailed Christ himself, but
feared the people, that admired his holiness and goodness. They that went to
apprehe^d Christ came without him, saying, Never man spoke like this man.

4. He can and does often make the dragons themselves protectors, as Claudius
Lysias, a heathen, to set a strong garrison about Paul, when forty me^ had
sworn his death, Act. 22. 27. He can make Pilates wife and Pilates self
plead for Christ; and King Achish protect David against Saul.

5. He can make the dragon quarrel with himself, and so for a time divert
the fury from the stars; he can make the Mideanites turn their swords one
against another; he can send an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of
Shechem, and a fire shall go forth from Abimelech and consume the men of
Shechem, and from the men of Shechem to consume Abimelech, Judge. 9. 20, 23. And
thus when wicked men fall out among themselves, the godly escape between them,
as Paul between the Sadduces and Pharisees. When a man's ways please the Lord he
makes even his enemies his friends, although often Act. 23. 6. Pro. 16. 7.
against their own intentions.

6. He can make them safer in the dragons paw or mouth, than if they were at
large and liberty: the three children were safer in the furnace, than they were
out of it; Daniel safer in the den than in the Court; and Jeremy 38. 28. was
safer in prison than they that were at liberty, for when they were carried away
and spoiled, he was preserved in safe custody for the future service of the
Church.

7. He can and does make the dragon storm and rage to see and say as Pharaoh
did, that the more he oppresses them, the more they rise and increase.

This serves to dishearten and confound the enemies Use. 1.
of God and his Church, they cannot work wisely enough to cast down all the
stars, all the power of earth or hell shall not effect their desires; they
take crafty counsel against Gods secrets ones, Psalm. 83. 3. Gebal, and Ammon,
and Amilecke, etc. but God with whom is wisdom and strength, overthrowes their
devises, that never did they, nor shall see all their hearts desires.

To comfort the Church of God against the dragons Use II.
power, they must know his power is limited and restrained, so that two third
parts are still saved: the power of God, which is the only wall and fence
against the proud and raging waves of the sea, that they overflow not all the
earth, Psalm. 104. 9. he restrains and breaks the proud and swelling waves
of the dragon, saying, Thus far shall thou come and no further; thou shall
not meddle with my remnant, my third part, these I hold in my right hand, and
thou shall not pluck them thence.

Fear not then the threats of dragons what they No prevailing against the
Saints, till,
can do, what they will do against the stars, they can do nothing, but,

1. What God will permit them to execute for the sins of the Church, which
cast down more stars 1. God permit
than all the dragons.

2. Nor till Gods time be come Christ cannot be stoned, apprehended till the
hour of the power of 2. Gods time is come.
darkness be come; nor any member,

3. Not till the work be done in that place for 3. Their work be done.
which God sent them: Paul being in Corinth resisted and blasphemed, shook his
raiment, and said, Your blood be upon your own head, and purposed to depart
thence, (the case of many a good Minister) but God comfort him by a vision,
and promises his presence with him, and bids him go on, for he had many
people in that city to call; till the work was done he must not go; and so he
stayed a year and six months more, Acta 18. 9.

To stay the hearts of godly men when they see true Use III.
Ministers shining as stars cast down by the dragon, as of late in foreign
parts where the dragon has prevailed; epsy here the dragons malice, who will
do as much spoil in the Church, as God permits him to do: but though he
may prevail against some, yet he cannot against all, God will uphold two third
parts to witness against the dragon; that is, so many as shall serve his
providence in the salvation of all his Saints, wheresoever scattered in the
world; So long as any are to be saved by being brought to the faith, the word
of faith must be preached.

Ascribe all the glory to the power of God and his Use IIII.
Providence, if we enjoy the shine of any star, or see abroad any shining
star standing in his place. It is no thank to the dragon, or the enemies who
weary themselves in casting about to cast them all down, and would, if the
Lord did not uphold the^ to the Churches need: I have heard the railing and
fear on every side, but the Lord is with me as a mighty Ier. 11. 19. Acts 18
10. Ier. 20. 11.
Giant, Psalm. 1 36. 9 he made the stars for the night, he takes special care
of them; men may call them at their pleasure, he calls them all by their
right names?

Object What need we care for them seeing God is so careful.

Sol. Provoke not God to remove them.

1. See the need of stars for illumination, warmth, moisture, refrigeration;
by them discern Stars needful in a dark night.
seasons of grace; guide thy course on the sea of this world: stars were made
not for ornament only, but for use, heat, influence.

2. Make use of their light, some hate the light, as of commets, portending
evil to them, and bless themselves from them.

3. Rejoice in their light constantly, not as the Jews did in John, that
counted him a light for a season; men receive Preachers as new Stars or
Commets, gaze a while, but care not how soon they be wasted.

The second effect by which the dragon is described, is by his mischievous
attempt against the woman, as the former was against the stars; this effect
is set down,

1. By his action, he stood before the Woman.

2. His intention, to devour the child when it was brought forth.

I. In his action observe two things.

1. What it is to stand before the woman. 2. How he stands before her.
1. To stand before the woman is an allusion to the ancient Story both of the
dragon standing before Eve the woman, that is, the mother of the world and of
the Church, to seduce her; as also of Pharaoh called the dragon of Egypt,
watching the destruction of the male children of the Church, so soon as the
mothers should be delivered of them; to which places out of doubt the text
has reference. This standing before the woman implies two things.

1, His readiness and nearness, as one at hand, narrowly watching and
observing to assault and destroy The dragon stands before the woman.
the blessed seed.

2. His instance and diligence in the purpose, he departs not far, nor long,
but stands, and abides, proceeds and persisteth in his mischievous purpose
and intention against the Church and members; he stands still, but not idle.

2. How, he stands before her, and that is two ways.

1. By fraud and secret treachery, he lays trains out of sight for her hurt,
and by flattery seeks to bring and lure her into his snare.

2. By open force and violence to subdue such as by secret trains he cannot
allure.

II. His intention, to devour the child, he seems to do nothing less,
but the Spirit of God uncaseth him, and shows us the true end of all his
counsels and endeavors. Let the dragon dissemble never so much friendship (as
to Eve in eating) his mind is murderous, for he stands not before us to
abridge us of our liberty, or goods, or outward comfort only, but his direct
aim is to compass our death and destruction of soul and body.

Quest. But what had the child done, or when should he devour it?

Sol. He watches the destruction of it before it Satan assaults the child in
the birth. 3. Reasons.
be borne, if the woman miscary not, in bringing forth some abortive birth;
then he bestirreth himself to destroy the young and tender birth, so soon as
it takes breath in the Church. Where in the dragon note three things.

1. The groundednesse and setlednesse of malice in the nature of the dragon,
who out of his wickedness unstirred and unprovoked, carries deadly wrath
against the children of the Church. There is a natural enmity and antipathy
between the seed of the dragon, and the seed of the woman; for what can the
child do against him before he is borne?

2. The policy of the dragon, who will not suffer the woman's children to grow
up to strength and stature, but will oppress them even in the bi^^^, or as
soon as they are borne; while they are tender and least able to resist: he
knows the fittest time to blast grace is in herba, in the cradle, in the
beginnings.

3. The implacablenesse of this savage dragon, whose pitiless disposition
nothing can move; not infancy, not tenderness, not innocence, not
causelesnesse, nothing can plead or prevail for a drop of compassion; nay,
these rather cause and stir up his wrath, and kindle his rage and fury more
against them; and this is the enemy with whom we have to deal, whom Gods
spirit has thus graphycally and punctually described, that we might stand so
much the more watchfully and preparedly against him.

So soon as any child comes to be borne of the Church, Satan watches by
all means to destroy Doct. The dragon hinders good things in their beginning.
5. Reasons.
him. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Satan as a roaring Lion seeks whom to devour. The
principal business of Satan in the world has ever been to take out of the
way, and to destroy vijs and modis, by secret fraud or open force all that
should be spiritually begotten of the Church, especially such as should stand
up to maintain the religion of Christ. How Herod the dragon stood before the
woman seeking to slay the child Jesus so soon as he was borne, appears Mat.
2. 16. he could not hinder his holy conception, his quickening, birth, but his
hope is to devour him being borne; the same fury he shows to the members;
and to come to that our text aims at, how the dragon by the heathen Roman
Emperors and bloody Tyrants Nero, Domitian, Trajan and the rest did by most
cruel Edicts, torments, and unheard of punishments and persecutions, stand in
the whole Empire with the greatest vigilance that might be to swallow up
whatsoever Christian should be borne in the Church, utterly to extirpate all
Christians, and extinguish the Christian faith, is manifest in every leaf and
line of that bloody Story. But especially the dragon by those tyrants watched
and observed most diligently, lest any defender of the Christian faith either
in Magistracy or Ministry, should spring up; in so much that if any President
or Governor was more moderate or less rigorous against Christians, he was
presently devoured by the dragon, as a favourer or child of the woman.

His incessant labor to hinder the glory of God; Reas. 1.
for whereas the glory of a King is the multitude of his subjects; he cannot
abide that Gods glory should be increased by the increase of the subjects of
his Kingdom.

He is the Arch-tyrant, and head of all tyrants in Reas. 2.
the world, and sets up and holds up his kingdom by tyranny and
injustice; and as Attaliah could never think her self stable in her usurped
authority till she had slain all the Kings seed, 2 Kin. 11. 1. so this monster
of tyrants, and scourge of the world, thinks his kingdom can never be sure
and stable if he kill not all the Kings seed, the sons of this woman the
Church.

His extrem^ hatred of the true religion; the true Reas. 3.
service of God amongst the Israelites was an abomination to the Egyptians,
and therefore like dragons they oppressed them. The dragon never cease to
hinder or corrupt the purity of Gods worship, or to persecute whom he cannot
hinder: Let Israel but talk of going to worship in the wilderness, the hellish
Pharaoh presently begins to rage, to augment the burdens and never cease his
unjust vexation, till himself cease to be.

His incurable envy of the happy estate of man, not Reason. 4.
only that of Adam in Paradise, whereof he quickly spoiled him, but especially
that which in the second Adam we are restored unto, for this makes him even
ready to burst for envy, that whereas himself is cast down from heaven his
first habitation, and everlastingly reprobated from God, from his favor,
presence, place of glory, without all hope of mercy; bound in chains of black
darkness to the judgment of the great day; mankind should by virtue of a
Covenant of grace be elected and raised to a fee simple of eternal glory,
purchased by the Son of God, sealed by his Spirit, and apprehended by the
faith of every believer.

His earnest desire and study to hold men in the state of nature, for he
knows there he has them Reas. 5. How many ways Satan windeth himself to
keep men in their natural estate
sure enough; but if there appears any change, he bestirreth himself, and
teareth and vexes the parties from whom he must needs depart; as in the
instances of the Gospel. This appears in that,

1. So long as men are in their natural estate, he knows they are out of
the favor of God, enemies to God, and God to them; but in the beginning of
their change they become friends to God, and no sooner can God be friend a man,
but Satan takes him for his foe and enemy: no sooner can thou have peace
with God, but war with Satan.

2. In the state of nature a man fights stoutly against grace and
righteousness, all his members are given up as weapons of unrighteousness for
the devil and sin; but now in the beginning of this change he takes the
Lords presse-money, renounceth his old Captain, fights under Gods Standard
whom the dragon most maligneth: and now no marvel if Satan advance his flags
of defiance against him, because he stands on the contrary part.

3. While a man is in the state of nature he knows he is a slave to sin and
a bondsman to the Devil, ruled at his will, under an heavier bondage than
Israel under Pharaoh; but let him desire once to get out of this thraldom,
Pharaoh did never storm so much against Israel as the dragon will against him.
The Iaylor is quiet so long as he is sure of his prisoners, but let any of them
seek an escape, or to break prison, then he bestirreth himself, and loadeth
that party with fetters, and uses him with all rigor: so does the dragon so
soon as ever he sees one begin to stir in his conversion.

4. In the natural state he knows a man goes merrily to hell, in which way
he never disquieteth him, as Jacobs sons going into Egypt found no let; but
if he set his face or foot toward the Land of Promise, he shall never want
enemies or difficulties, no more than they did.

Seeing Satan ever stands before the woman, as Use. 1. Satan defireth no
sharper weapon then our own security.
Pharaoh, to surprise the infant in grace, even in the birth; we see how near
we are always to danger, and what need we have still to stand upon our watch;
for shall Satan stand seeking to devour us, and shall not we ^^and in a
watchful resistance? it is the Apostles inference, 1 Peter 5. 8, ^. Your
Adversary seeks to devour, whom resist, steadfast in the faith: for why has
the Spirit of God thus described our enemy and his enterprises against us, but
that we might make our advantage of it, and not being ignorant of his wiles
might be so much the more watchful? What man that knows there lies a
porent enemy before him who watches to murder him, will not be watchful to
save his own life, and defeat his enemy? or what needs an enemy any other
weapon than his adversaries security? as appears in Iael against Sisera,
whose safety had been in the watch of himself.

But in this watch observe these Rules. In watching against Satan observe three
Rules.


See thou stand in thy own rank and watchtower; Rule 1.
thou have a promise of safety only in thy way, the surest fortification is
diligence in the general and special calling, whereas idleness is the devils
pillow and Anvile.

See thou stand armed at all points, seeing Satan Rule 2.
stands armed before thee, never lay off any one piece of spiritual armor.
Men in peace hang up their armor by the walls till it rust and take dust; but
buckle it fast to thee as having still an enemy before thee seeking to disarme
thee as he did Israel, whom he made naked by the Calfe, and by Balaams wyles
laid them naked to Gods vengeance.

Because no strength else is comparable to his Rule 3.
that stands before thee, but the strength of the Captain; stand in his
strength, and be instant in prayer and strong cries for his help. If a man
were in the hand of thieves, meaning not only to rob him but to cut his
throat, how would he cry for help? This is our continual estate, and
therefore we have need to pray continually: the holding up of Moses hands in
prayer is the strength of Israel, and so is it the victory against the
spiritual Amaleck

Note the grou^nd of the dragons malice, and of the Use II.
quarrel of the wicked men, no other cause but that they are children of the
Church, or otherwise causeless in them. Pharaoh killed the Israelites Infants
causelessly, Assure oppresses Israel without a cause, Isa. 52. 4. John 10. 32.
For which good work do ye stone me? they pretend blasphemy; something done
or not done by them: No the quarrel is more ancient, more grounded, more
inward than any thing done by them; they know how Esau striveth with Jacob in
the womb before birth; it is malice bred in the bone.

A wicked man will rail on a good man he never saw nor knew, and if a wicked
man knew that a child in the womb would prove a good man and son of the
CHVRCH, he would hate it before the birth. The just wrath of the dragon
against David, Psa. 35. 19. and against the Son of David in John 15. 25.

Never set thy self to any good course but Use III. No calling or condition
can secure a good man from opposition.
expect the dragon to stand before thee, make account of all his malice, and
whatsoever op position the world his armor-bearer can molest thee withal; no
condition or calling can secure thee; for,

1. Let a Magistrate set himself faithfully for the Lord to uphold the pure
worship of GOD, and zealously stand for GOD, for good causes, and persons;

Now the dragon is grieved that a man is come that seeks the wealth of
Israel, Nehemiah 2. 10. now stand before him Sanbellet and Tobiah, and with
these many accomplices conspire against Jerusalem to hinder him, and hence he
thrusts into the ordinance as many disaffected persons to true religion as he
can.

2. Let a Popish Priest breathe out fury and rage against the truth, and revile
all the generation of them that seek GOD, and cast them in bonds and trouble:
He thriveth and is in as great credit as Saul was in that way, but let him once
see a light shining round about him, and being converted, faithfully preach the
Gospel, which he persecuted; now the dragon stands before him, inwardly
buffetting him with temptations, and outwardly setting a number of dragons and
generation of Vipers to sting him with whippings, imprisonings, stonings, and
all deadly persecutions; and what godly Minister can avoid the winnowings of
the dragon?

3. Let a private man sit as Israel in Egypt, and favor the Egyptian Idols,
he may enjoy the fleshpots and favor of Egypt; but let him once speak of
the true service of GOD, and of departing from those men and manners, Pharaoh
that dragon, and all his people persecute them with all barbarous cruelty: Be
thou never so private, if thou give thy name to God, and take upon thee with
the profession, the practice of sound religion: Look now what way thou can,
thou shall find the dragon before thee; Begin to build thee a spiritual house
for the LORD, and look for as many dragons to stand before thee as Nehemiah
had in the repairing of the walls of JERUSALEM.

Here are two worthy questions. 1. How I may know the dragon stands before
me? 2. How I may stand before the dragon.


1. To know that the dragon stands before thee attempting any good, thou
shall discern it, How a man may discern the dragon standing before him.


1. By secret fraud, or, 2. By hellish and open slanders.
By both these here he stands before the woman; by both he stood before the
seed of the woman, as well in Peter's friendly persuasion, Master pity thy
self, as in Judas in betraying him; and thus also against all her seed; as for
example.

1 So long as he can he will oppress cunningly and craftily as a very good
friend, discouraging the practice of piety, hiding his homes; for so long as he
can he will not be accused of open tyranny; See it in some instances.

1. He comes to a man loking toward religion, tells him it is too heavy a
yoke for him, and it will. not be for his ease to undergo so strict a course,
as will make his life but uncomfortable, and strip him of all his liberty; why
should you not favor your self? as if the dragon whose intention is to
devour, did above all desire the ease and comfort of a man's life; but Christ's
counsel against the dragon is, to bear his yoke for it is easy and light,
and all the ways of wisdom are the ways of pleasure. Now the dragon is
before thee.

2. But what if you should set your hand to the Plough and look back, were you
not in far worse case than before? better you had never known the truth than
to forsake the holy commandment; as if the dragon were an enemy to Apostasy
and backsliding; but the dragon is apparently before thee, in that he would
have thee cast off all care of religion by that argument whereby Christ
spurreth and inciteth it.

3. He would have him show himself a wise man, and not set himself against a
stream; do Rulers and rich men so? and why shall he join to a few poor and
simple men that are every where contemned and condemned of indiscretion,
perhaps of hypocrisy? as if true wisdom were not tied to the perfect way,
whether many or few, great ones or mean ones walk it it; for Christ says,
that for the most part the poor receive the Gospel; and the Apostle, that not
many rich; Now is the dragon before thee.

4. He will have him show himself a peaceable man; oh the peace of the Church
is to be tendered, and turbulent spirits are dangerous, which stand upon such
nice points, and busy themselves with things above their reach; a peaceable
man will take things as he finds them, and will do what he may when he
cannot do what he would; as if the only make-baite in the world were so set
for peace, or as if his whole drift herein were not to separate peace from
truth; which last God has magnified above all things, and therefore above
peace.

5. He has a great care of his good name, he would not have him by any means
undertake or go on in any course that should savor of curiosity, or by which
they should be counted singular, for then he were undone and could never
recover the disgrace and reproach of it; as if himself were not the author and
devisor of all reproaches cast upon the way of God, and the accuser of the
brethren: but the dragon stands before thee to hinder self-denial, which is
the first thing to be done of him that will be a Disciple.

6 He would have him a good husband and thriving in the world, not any where to
interrupt his calling or takings by reading the Scripture, and hearing sermons
on the week days, or by such strictness on the Sabbath, as not to serve his
customers then as on the week days, as if he did not intend in all this, that
by winning the world they should lose their souls. And surely lamentable
experience shows, how that the dragon by such sugared words and persuasions
stood before numbers, who have looked back and run back to the filthiness
of the world, and now embrace such a course as may be fit with the grace of the
times, the favor of men, the furtherance of their outward estates, and their
own ease.

II. But if by fraudulent and underhand means he cannot break off good
beginnings, he turns him to open and hellish slanders and accusations, in
which he shows his blackness against all sorts; for,

1. Let a godly Magistrate persist in his zealous care to reform abuses, the
dragon stands before him as before Moses and Aaron, and says, You take too
much upon you, and perhaps writes a letter of accusation as did Rehum and
Shimshai and their companions, against Iehoshua and Zerubbabel and his
Captains to the King, Ezra 4. 9.

2. Let a Minister proceed in his faithful performance, suppose him a Prophet,
Amos himself shall be accused by the dragon, Amazia that he preached against
the King, and the Land is not able to bear his words, Chap. 7. 9. and Jeremy
is a factious and turbulent man, contentious with the whole earth: suppose him
an Apostle; Paul and Silas must be brought before the Governors, and exclamed
on as men troubling the City; exclamed for preaching ordinances not lawful to
be received, and teaching men to worship God contrary to law. Suppose him the
most Acts 16. 20. 18. 13.
shining light in the Church, the dragon not able to resist the light of God in
him, will fall to plain railing, as the Pelagians called Augustine, Cultorem
doemonum, August. contra Iul. lib. 3. cap. 18.

What execrable and horrible slanders the Popish dragons have spewed out
against our Churches in general, and the famous special instruments of Gods
glory, Wickliffe, Hus, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Tindal, were as infinite as
hateful to recite, and when Satan cease to stand before the woman, such
horrible reproaches of godliness shall cease, and not before. And what marvel
if it be so with the servants when if our Master Christ himself shall cast out
devils, the dragon dare say, It is by Beelzebub the prince of devils.

3. Let a private man hold out the light of grace with courage and constancy,
the dragon stands before him and proclaims him factious, contentious,
schismatical. If he see his actions beseeming his profession, he charge him
with pride, with hypocrisy as Job; and the graces and gifts of God which he
cannot deny in his servants, he can disgrace and obscure, with as dangerous a
mistake as Hanun did the servants of David, whose charity had bin their own
security.

Quest. It being thus, how may we hold out in any good beginnings, and
withstand the dragon?

Ans. Practice six rules.

1. Learn a point of Christian wisdom and experience, never to trust the
flatteries of the dragon, seeing 6. Rules to withstand the dragon.
the Spirit of God has detected his flatteries and fair promises to be but
pretenses for our destruction. Rule 1.
The Romish dragons insinuate into their Proselites as winding serpe^ts; they
lament the state of their souls, and persuade like very loving Counselors to
their religion; and to leave the heresy of the Protestants; they can feign
Crocadiles tears, can call heaven and earth to witness that they respect
nothing in the world but to promote the truth, and save simple men's seduced
souls, and it is nothing but the Catholic faith that makes them venture
their lives and fortunes; and a number more windy and empty words, in all which
the dragons stand before the woman to devour her children; And which is a
deeper plot of the dragon, he can pretend peace, f^ienship, amity, marriages,
oaths, and what not? and all, that under cloak and pretense of peace he may
slay and devour, as France in that horrible Massacre 1572. had woeful
experience. He can pretend zeal, religion, and support of the Catholic
cause, when he is digging and undermining, and laying powder barrels and iron
bars for the destruction of three whole States and Kingdoms A foolish woman
must she be that will give any credit hereafter to the flatteries and fair
pretenses of such perfidious dragons, who salute not but to wound, and with
Judas, kiss to kill.

Never begin any thing that is good but with full Rule 2.
resolution to stand to the defense of it against the dragon, and the better
any duty is, be so much the more prepared for Christian combat.

Be sure thou stand on a sure ground and warrant for that thou do, seeing
the dragon that stands Rule 3.
before thee will sift thy action thoroughly, both for thy calling and
commission, and for the matter, that it be justifieable; and for the manner,
if it be done well, and for the end, if it be good and direct. Remember, in
every thing, that thou stand in the eye of thine own conscience to observe
thee, in the eye of the dragon to accuse thee, and in the eye of God to judge
thee.

Stand still before God in undertaking any good course, not for direction only
but for assistance; he Rule 4.
must begin and he must perfect; do thou begin and go on in him and with him,
get his strength with thee and for thee, which is only able to uphold thee; so
the two Olives, Rev. 11. 4. stand before God the ruler of the whole earth.

As the dragon stands in ambush to resist and Rule 5.
kill the first motions in grace, so stand thou on thy guard to resist his
first motions against it; give no place to the dragon; let him seem never so
reasonable to begin with, his conclusions will be impudent and important; thus
thou shall beat him with his own weapon. As he hates the first show and
sprout of grace, so hate thou the first motion and rise of temptation, where
he begins his assault, begin thy resistance.

Stand courageously and with comfort, knowing that, Rule 6.


1. If thou stand to him he cannot stand to thee, resist the dragon and he
will flee.

2. As he stands to destroy, so thy captain stands before thee to save and
cover thee.

3. When he stood before Christ thy head, he was defeated and confounded, and
his power so broken as thou stand before a conquered enemy, and now he may
stand before thee who art a member of Christ, to molest and trouble thee, but
never to deprive thee either of conquest or crown.

4. The Christian stands now not before the dragon as a single man, but as
incorporated and one with Christ, and partaker of his glorious victory.

[So she brought forth a manchild.] In this Verse the Evangelist returns to
the woman, and shows how the dragon was disappointed of his purpose, both in
respect of,

I. The woman, who is described, 1. By her birth, in this verse. 2. By her
fight, in the next.
II. Her Issue described by three Arguments. 1. His sex masculine generous
a manchild. 2. His Office, to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. 3. His
height of advancement, he was taken up to God and his Throne.

It must a while stay us to enquire who this manchilde was that was now brought
forth, seeing there Meaning.
are sundry and diverse opinions, and the true opening of this point will help
us all along this vision into many proper and comfortable points, which have
not been till of late so dived into by the common stream of interpreters.
Most have thought that by this man-child must be meant Christ, and some take it
of Christ personally, in person born into the world; some of Christ mystically
brought into the world, begotten and brought forth in believers hearts. To
which I grant, that as there are few passages and phrases in this divine
prophecy which do not look back to some former history, passage, or prophecy
(as has been and might be further plentifully noted) so does this verse and
vision look back to the birth of Christ personally into the world, and lively
represents it in many particulars; as,

1. This woman brings forth a manchilde; In fullness of time GOD sent his
Son made of a Some allusion between Christ and the man-child.
woman.

2. The dragon here watches to slay the child so soon as ever he was borne;
so did Herod seek to kill the babe so soon as he was borne.

3. As Mary by divine admonition flies into the desert of Egypt to save her
self and the babes life, so this woman flies into the wilderness with Eagles
wings, the place prepared by God, to save her self and her seed.

4. As Mary stayed in Egypt almost four years, till Herod was dead; so this
woman stays in the desert 1260. days, which is almost four years, for
1460. days is just four years, the time of her danger.

5. As Herod that dragon cast after the flight of Mary an horrible flood of
persecution, slaying all infants under two years old, to destroy the
man-child; so this woman had a flood of waters cast after her to destroy her
flying into the wilderness.

6. As Christ Mary's Son ascended to heaven and sat at the right hand of the
Throne of God his Father, so the son of this woman is taken up to God and to
his Throne.

7. As Christ Jesus the son of Mary most properly rules all nations with a
rod of Iron, Psalm. 2. so this son of the woman in this verse: so as we see a
notable correspondence in the birth of this man-child to the birth of Christ,
that man-child who was figured by all those man-children that first opened the
womb under the law, so as it cannot be denied but that this vision looks
back to the history of Christ's birth, and is first true in the most and maine
passages of it of Jesus Christ; And this be named once for all the vision.

Quest. But is not Christ here directly meant?

Ans. It seems to me by many strong reasons in the text, that Christ is not
properly and directly Christ not meant by this man-child.
meant by this man-child; for,

I. If by this man-child here be meant Christ, Five Reasons.
then by the woman must be meant not the Church (as we have interpreted and
proved) but the Virgin Mary, as some Papists imagine, although even some of
them, finding many parts of the description of this woman not agreeing to her,
conclude, as Ribera out of Methodius, that not Mary but the Church is this
woman.

II. The man-child here borne is the son of the Church; but Christ is not
the son of the Church, therefore he is not this man-child, for Christ is
the Son of God and the son of Mary, but not the son of the Church, nay
he is the Father of the Church, Esaias 9. 6. and the Church is called his seed,
Esaias 53. but no where is he called the son of the Church, nor the seed of
the Church.

III. This woman is said to travel to bring forth this man-child, but the
Church is never said to travel to bring forth Christ. Indeed the Apostle
Galat. 4. 19. says, He traveled in birth with the Galathians to form Christ
in them by his Ministry, but not that he traveled of Christ but of them, to
bring them forth Christians.

IIII. We must remember that John writes here a Prophetical history of things
to come to pass after his time, and not of things formerly passed, and
therefore neither of the personal nor mystical birth of Christ; for first
consider him,

1. Personally, he was before this time, not borne only, but dead, and risen
and ascended to the Throne of God, all this was past, and John had seen it,
and needed no new vision to manifest this unto him which he knew before, and
had so largely described in his Evangelical Story.

2. If we consider the mystical birth of Christ in the hearts of believers by
the preaching of the Gospel, this also had been done formerly in abundant
measure, and was a thing not to come and to be done; but only to be
continued; so as it cannot be meant of Christ either personally or mystically.

V. It will not agree to Christ that is said of this man-child, that presently
he was taken up to God after his birth, without mentioning any of the great
works for which he was borne and came into the world, for Christ was to do
more than be borne and ascend; he must fast, and teach, and pray, and do many
powerful miracles, and suffer, and be buried, and rise, and then ascend;
neither is the word fitly here used to note the ascension of Christ, that he
was caught up to the Throne of God as it were by the power of some other, for
he is said to go up, Acts 1. 19. and to ascend as doing it of his own power:
indeed we weak creatures are said to be (...).
caught up, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. by a mighty power without our selves, as this
man-child in the Text; but it is not so with him in his ascending, who had all
power in heaven and earth, Mat. 28. etc. last.

Object. But there be two things in the Text which seem so proper to Christ,
as that they cannot agree or be ascribed to any other. First, that he rules
the Nations with a rod of iron, and this is Christ's property, Psalm. 2. 9. and
cannot agree to any other.

Ans. All power is Christ's originally and primarily, but we may not forget
that he promises the same power by Communication to his members, Revel. 2.
26. To him that overcommeth I will give power over the nations, and he shall
rule them with a rod of iron: not that the sovereign power of Christ over the
whole earth is communicable to any creature, for none of his Offices can pass
from him to another, but notes that believers have benefit and part in his
exaltation and power, and therefore we must not marvel if we find this
power, which is properly invested in Christ to be communicated and in part
executed for him by others.

Object. 2. But this man-child is taken up to the Throne of God, now who but
Christ ever sat in heaven in the Throne of God?

Sol. In the Throne of Gods right hand, as Mediator and head of the Church in
heaven, properly so taken, only Christ sits and no other creature, man nor
Angel: but the Throne of God in Scripture is taken mystically and figuratively;
for,

1. There is an heaven upon earth, the Church, which is many times called by
the name of heaven, as in this Chapter, And a kingdom of grace, in which the
Lord has set up his Throne, unto which he lifts whom he pleases; now we
are sons of God, 1 John 3. 2. Ephesians. 2. 5. 6. Now we are saved by hope, Romans
8. 24.

2. Heavenly glory is called figuratively a Throne, wherein, howsoever Christ
only sits by his own right and privilege, yet the Saints also by
communication and participation are admitted to sit on the Throne with him, as
members with the head. Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcommeth will I give that he
shall sit with me on my Throne as I overcome and sit with my Father on his
Throne, Thus the twelve Disciples are promised to sit on twelve Thrones, and
the twenty four Elders representing the Church of Revel. 11. 16.
the old and new Testament, sat upon twenty four Thrones, Revel. 11. 26. so
as this is no bar but some besides Christ may be meant by this man child.

3. In the worldly administration, howsoever the kingdom and Throne be the
Lords, and all power belongs unto God, yet it pleases him in the government
of the world to take up Rulers and Princes after a sort, into his own Throne,
and sets Rulers and Princes taken up to the Throne of God.
them in highest place next himself, to rule over the Nations, and puts a
rod of power into their hands, investing them not with his power only, but
with his name also; I said ye are gods; thus he takes them into his own
Throne, and puts on them a part of his own Majesty; whereof their Thrones
and Seats carry a little representation, and in this sense is this phrase here
taken.

Having showed that this man-child is not to be meant of Christ, and answered
the objections that have carried some to that interpretation; let us inquire who
he is, and looking near unto the Text and scope of the place, the series of
times, and dependence of the words with antecedents and consequents.

By the man-child I understand some potent Who meant by the man-child.
Prince or Princes, or some special deliverers, who^ God stirred upto succor
and to relieve the Church against those Tyrannical Romish Emperors and
persecutors; By whom the dragon was defeated and disappointed, whose aim was
to devour all the seed of the woman; for these were,

1. Sons of the Church.

2. A man-child, stout, strong, valiant.

3. Ruled over the Nations with a rod of iron, viz. an unresistable power and
overruling the nations and Princes that were enemies to the Church.

4. Was taken into the Throne of God, that is, advanced unto chief government
for the refreshing and defense of the Church, and curbing the rage of those
imperial dragons.

And running over the story of those times the best commentary of a Prophecy,
I find that in the year 182 after Christ, the Church had tolerable peace
under Commodus the Emperor in whose reign the Gospel was greatly spread,
Hist. Eccl. cap. 21. but he being no Christian or son of the Church, but a
flagitious man, was not this man-child.

In Anno 247. the first Christian Emperor was Philip, of whom we read, that he
submitted himself to the discipline of the Church, Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap.
25. I do not see but now the man child might begin to be borne.

Afterward in 319. after the long and bloody reign of Maxentius, of who^ the
story says, that there was no great City in which 100. Christians were not
daily drawn to execution: God raised up Constantine the Great, an obedient and
loving son of the Church, and took him up to his Throne of government, next
to himself, for under God was none greater than he, and put into his hand not
a scepter of gold only, an ensign of dignity, and regal or rather imperial
authority, but a rod of iron, the strongest of metals, fit to beat down all
before it, by which rod he flew four savage dragons, who stood against the
woman; Maximian and his son Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius, and by the
same won all the West Empire, ruled over Italy, Spain, France, Germany,
Britain, besides his dominion in Affrike, he restored peace to the Church,
abolished tyrannical decrees, commanded that none should injure any Christian,
was himself the greatest protector of Christianity, that we read of in that
story.

To these we may add the two Theodosi's Christian Emperors, and others in
authority sons of the Church, by whom she was succored and protected from
the dragon in these tyrannical times.

Ob. But the Text speaks but of one man-child, but you interpret it of many.

Ans. I tie not the man-child to one individuum Why the manchilde is not to be
meant of one singular person.
or person, but to all such set in dignity as God stirred up as protectors and
nursing fathers to the tender Church and her babes in these terrible times; for
these Reasons.

The manchilde not one individual person, but so many Protectors as Christ
stirs up.

1. The manner of Prophets, in the singular number to set down a series or row
of persons, whereof one chief is still in being, and continued by the
succession of many.

Dan. 7. 17. Four Kings are not the singular persons, but the four kingdoms
and governments in the succession of sundry Kings.

And four great beasts, verse. 3. by every beast is not signified a singular
person, but a State and succession.

1. By the Lion, the Kingdom and successive Kings of the Assyrians and
Babylonians.

2. By the Bear, the kingdom and successive Kings of Medes and Persians.

3. By the Leopard, the Greeks and Macedonians.

4. By the beast with iron teeth and ten horns, the kingdom of Seleucidae and
Fagedi.

2. In Paul's Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. The man of sin is not one person but a
state and row of men, who have been the heads of Apostasy in the kingdom of
Antichrist, all which make up one man or person after a sort,; not one in
number or nature, but one in order, succession, power, will and continuance.

So in the same Chapter the (...), the hinderer of this man of sin is not one
Roman Emperor, but the Empire.

1. The state and succession of Emperors which was by succession, yet the
Apostle says, He that withholdeth.

Even as Saint John 2. Epist. 7. calls many deceivers or Antichrists one
Antichrist, so many men of sin one man of sin, many withstanders one
withstander.

3. In the Revelation nothing more ordinary, cap. 13. 1. the beast rising out
of the Sea is not one person, but the state and succession of Antichrist.

Cap. 17. 9. the seven heads of the beast are so many States and Governments,
as Christ himself confesses, and the whore in verse 1. is not one person, but
the Roman state, departed from Christ to Antichrist, and prostituting her
self to all idolatry and impurity of doctrine and manners, the successors of
Antichrists Kingdom.

Cap. 2. 1. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus not one man or Pastor, but many,
for there were many Pastors and Angels therein, Acts 20. 17, 18.

4. Even in this Chapter we have described the woman, verse 1. not one Church
but the succession of the Church in many ages, yet called but a woman.

And verse 3. the dragon in this vision, the whole spawne and row of dragons
and tyrants raised by Satan against the woman, even ten bloody persecutors, all
called one dragon for reasons you have heard: and there is no reason but the
manchilde may be as well collectively taken according to the manner of all
Prophets and prophesies.

The dragon watches the woman but in vain, for she brings forth for all
that; The Church shall bring forth children to God in despite of the dragon,
especially such children as the Text aims at, Doct.

The dragons watch cannot hinder the woman from bringing forth the manchild.


to serve his Providence in the defense and upholding of his Church, Es. 66. 7.
Acts 7. 20. Moses was borne in despite of Pharaoh, as the circumstance of time
there notes; Christ himself was brought forth in despite of Herod and all
his plots: which appears most plainly in those children of the Church,
excellent instruments, prophesied of many years before they were borne, and
named of God, whom it had besteaded the dragon that they had never been
brought forth, if he could have hindered them; as first Isaac, in whom all
nations should be blessed by that blessed seed that should descend of him,
whereof he was a type, and in whom the birth of Christ was foretold sundry
thousands of years before it came to pass; would not the dragon have hindered
both the type and the truth from being borne if he could? so as all Gods
promises and the Covenant of Grace in them should have been falsified by the
dragon.

1 Kings 13. 2. we read of Josiah named before he was borne 323. years, and
of his piety and zeal in destroying dolatry, and defacing of the kingdom of
the devil; and had it not been much for the dragons kingdom to have hindered
his birth if he could? Esaias 44. 28.

Cyrus was named above a hundred and twenty years before he was borne, and
also his singular care and diligence in building of the Temple, and restoring
Jerusalem to her former beauty and honor, that he should establish the pure
worship of God, and as a vigilant shepherd protect Gods people: now would not
the dragon have hindered the birth of such a son whom he knew should be
borne, if he could? But he cannot prevent the Woman from bringing forth her
sons, especially designed to serve GODS Providence for the good of the Church.

The stability of Gods decrees; the counsel of the Reas. 1.
Lord shall stand, and no power nor policy shall break Gods decree is stable.
off any of his purposes; he has purposed to teach man by man, to rule man by
man, to save men by men, and therefore there must be a succession of Pastors in
the Church, and of Princes in the world, who shall uphold this his ordinance in
the several ages. It is true, the Lord with whom is wisdom and strength, can
by his own hand, without and against all worldly power save his Church; but for
his own greater glory and the confusion of the dragon, he will rather do it
by weak instruments, assisted with his own mighty power, which all the
dragons cannot prevail against.

The truth of his promise; who although he be Reas. 2.
the husband of his Church, and as Elcanah to Anna, Gods truth.
better then ten sons, yet has promised, that she shall have sons and
Princes in all Lands; he will see that she shall not want sons of her own
that shall be as nursing fathers and mothers to her, Esaias 49. 23. and 7.

The power of God is such as cannot be foiled by Reas. 3.
any contrary power, but still raises up some manchilde Gods power.
for the Churches use and service; for as it is in nature, so here with this
mother; It is the Lord that opens the womb, and the dragon cannot shut it,
as Jacob said to Rachel, Am I God to open and shut the womb? so it is God that
makes the Church a fruitful and joyful mother of children, which powerful
work himself challenges, Esaias 66. 9. Shall I cause to travel and not bring
forth, shall I cause to bring forth and shall she be barren? This power of God
so over-ruleth, that not only against all outward contrary powers; but when
the birth it self, or manchilde it self is most averse and repugnant, yet
shall he be brought forth. For example, Moses was most backward and pleaded
many excuses, earnestly entreated the Lord to send any other to Pharaoh, yet he
and no other must be brought forth; Jonah flatly refused to go to Niniveh, but
the Lords power mightily overruled and brought him forth by a strong hand, for
the conversion of the people: No contrary course shall hinder the birth of the
manchilde against the Lords powerful call.

The care of God over his Church, he suffers it not without some manchilde
or other to help it, as Reason. 4.
in the book of the Judges is manifest; he never casts Gods care.
off his people, nor his care of them; he has special feeling of their
miseries, special regard of their prayers and sighs, as is manifest by the
example of Israel in Egypt; he suffers not the rod of the wicked to lie on
the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. but it should ever do so if the dragon
could hinder the birth, and bringing forth of such sons as may prevent and
remove it.

For comfort of the Church, who shall never want such stout defenders, as the
Lord does see fit for her; Use. 1.
2 Kings 19. 7. when Ahab and Iezabel destroyed the Prophets of the Lord, and
made no end of effusion of innocent blood, the Lord had a manchilde in store,
Iehu, who shall revenge their quarrel to the utmost. When the dreadful and
terrible fires were kindled against the bodies of Gods servants and Saints here
in Queen Mary's days, God stirred up that most Noble Queen Elizabeth,
comparable with any manchilde in these last ages, for her noble and heroical
zeal, valor and fortitude; and though many plots were attempted by Papists to
take away her life (for Gardener chafed that they lopped the boughs and
stocked not the root) yet was she brought forth to the kingdom, set upon the
Throne of God, and had an iron rod in her hand, an unconquerable power, by
which she was the glory of her Kingdom, a terror to all Papists and professed
enemies of her religion.

In the days when we see Antichrist prevail, his arm strong, his powers
victorious, his numbers increased, his bulls* blasphemies and masses received,
himself and his in arms, with hopeful successes: Now is the time to expect
some manchild and son of the Church to take him from his top and height; or
rather those ten sons of this woman, taken up into the Throne of God, and
with rods of iron to make her desolate and naked, to eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire, Rev. 17. 16. the Church may say as Joseph, The Lord has made
me fruitful in the land of my affliction.

The dragon cannot hinder the woman from bringing forth children and sons
that shall witness and II.
defend the truth for her being, her birthright and The dragon cannot hinder
the woman from bringing forth sons to defend the truth.
inheritance; for,

1. He cannot want hearts to believe, nor mouths to confess the truth, who
made both all hearts and all mouths.

2. The power of the truth is such as will have witness and testimony to it,
Luke 19. 4. I tell you if these should hold their peace the stones would cry,
as indeed the earthquakes, and rending of the Rocks, and opening of graves did
at his resurrection; hence was it that in the darkest times of Antichrist, and
when their tyranny was at hight, God ever raised some son of the Church, to
witness unto the truth against that abomination, as here in England John
Wickliffe, that preached plainly the Pope to be Antichrist, his
transubstantiation, his masses, his indulgences, his dispensations to be trash
and dung, to be swept out of the Church; and many after him. In Italy, Dantes,
Marsilius Patavinus, Franciscus Petrarke; In Bohemia John Hus, Jerome of
Prague; In Germany, Luther, Melancton, etc. the dragon could not hinder these
sons of the Church in their testimony: and so it shall always be.

III. The dragon cannot hinder the woman to Nor from bringing forth Children in
grace.
bring forth children in grace, although he watch never so instantly; for,

I. The spirit blows where it will, and he can no more hinder his work,
then he can the wind from blowing; and by this spirit the Church becomes
like the Hebrew women, of whom the midwiues said, they were lively, and
delivered before they could come to destroy the birth.

II. Birth in grace is a mighty work of new creation, and no more can the
devil and dragon hinder this work where God will have it, than they can
dissolve the great work of Gods creation; wicked men, as Esau, may strive to
hinder Jacobs birth in the womb, but cannot; where he will have a birth he
leaves them not like Agrippa, almost Christians, but whole Christians.

III. The Antichristian dragons have labored in nothing so much as hiding the
Scriptures and rolling up the little book, that the sound of the Gospel
should not be heard to the conversion of any, they call into question the
authority of the Scriptures, and they must be believed but for the Popes
judgment; instead of opening this they have opened Schoolmen, Sententiaries,
Canonists, Legends, but to read the Scriptures in a known tongue is heresy;
but in despite of them the Angel has carried the eternal Gospel through
the midst of heaven, the Rev. 14. 6.
truth is so co^spicuous as shining in the midst of heaven; and where Christ
will have the door of grace Rev. 3. 8.
open, none shall shut it; Papists now seek to shut that door, and our sins
and ingratitudes has deserved that the Gospel should be shut out, but yet
Christ keeps it open for us.

IIII. The dragon cannot hinder the woman but in despite of him she shall
bring forth many children to glory, for it is not possible,

1. To take them out of the Father, who is stronger than them all, to dissolve
their union with Christ, Romans 8. or to deceive the elect either of their faith
or substance, Mat. 24.

2. The overruling hand of God makes the dragons themselves effect his will,
and serve his Providence both in glorifying his name, and promoting his good
and the salvation of his servants, when they think nothing less, nay when
they bend and aim clean contrary, they shall in despite of them further
their salvation, and can they then hinder it? Romans 8. All things shall be for
their best, and shall bring them to their ways end.

Ob. But does not the dragon often prevail to hold off many from soundness of
grace, and cast many off, as Judas, Demas?

Sol. 1. The dragon never prevails by his absolute power over any, but by
Gods just desertion and permission, saying, Thus far shall thou prevail, but
no further.

2. He never prevails wholly or finally against any whose names are written in
the book of life; but though the Lord suffers them to be molested in the
way, it is, that in the end he might declare in them the riches of his grace,
mercy, power.

3. These yielding to Satan for a time are cast down but not cast off, seeing
they are not elected, jufied, redeemed, called, sanctified and saved for any
worthiness of their own, but for Christ's, which the dragon cannot spot or
blemish.

To abate the glory and hope of the Churches enemies, Use II.
They may spurn and strive against the free passage of the Gospel, but shall
not prevail. Many have striven to root out the Gospel whom God has resisted
and rooted out; the Church shall bring forth for all them.

In that this son of the woman is her protector, Use III.
learn to show our selves sons of our mother by upholding her causes and her
friends; wisdom will be justified of her children, Luke 7. 35. Nicodemus will
defend Gods cause when the Pharisees sit to condemn him, Luke 23. 50. Joseph a
good man, consented not to the fact of the counsel, Ioh. 7. 25. Protect her
person and friends.

1. Get a sound judgment in discerning of things and persons that differ, that
we Means.
knowing who are on her part may embrace them, not calling the churl liberal,
nor passing sentence for the wicked or against the right, for both are an
abomination to the Lord.

2. Stand for the truth her patrimony and brethren, avow it notwithstanding
loss of liberty, means; plead for it, maintain for her the whole counsel
of GOD, which no power of earth may abridge her.

3. Stand for her royalties and privileges, the liberty in which Christ has
set her, and uphold her from Antichristian yoakes and bondage, uphold in our
places the liberty of preaching, of professing the holy doctrine, and the
liberty of al Gods holy exercises and ordinances, that no power do rob her of
them.

Now in that the dragon though he watch to hinder the happy birth of the woman,
yet she brings Doct. 11.
forth a manchilde, that is, not a soft or effeminate, but a stout generous and
masculine child, by whose prowess and valor the dragon in his tyranny should
be repressed and resisted: Learn hence, who^ it pleases the Lord to raise up
for more excellent service, he furnishes them with proportional gifts for
their employment.

When Moses was to undertake an extraordinary function, to deliver the
Israelites out of Egypt, how did the Lord not only extraordinarily preserve,
but furnished him with extraordinary education, vocation, spirit, gifts,
miracles, holiness and power, in which respect he was called Pharaoh, GOD.

When Solomon was to build a stately house for the Lord, he furnished him with
forwardness, zeal, wealth, wisdom, bounty, peace, above all Kings of the
earth before or since.

When that house and City of Jerusalem was ruined and defaced, Gods worship
exiled, and the mighty adversaries of God and his worship scorned to hear the
restoration of the City or Temple, what noble instruments were raised up,
Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, whose wisdom, valor, zeal, and holiness
daunted the enemies, and in despite of them repaired both the City, the house
and true worship of God.

The Apostles were but poor fishermen, unliterate and simple, but set upon an
employment, as if twelve naked men had been set to take and tame all the
dragons in the world; but before they were sent out how abundantly did the
spirit come on them to fit them with knowledge, courage, gifts of tongues,
miracles, zeal, holiness, that in a little time they conquered the world, and
brought it into the subjection of Christ.

Nay further, if the Lord please to call any wicked man to any notable service,
he gives him abilities and indowments answerable; as, Saul anointed by Samuel
was changed into another man, now he had extraordinary signs to confirm him,
he prophesies among the Prophets, and minds not the Asses or husbandry, but
the great things of the kingdom, 1 Samuel 10. 9.

And yet more then so, if the Lord employ weak women to his service, he gives
them masculine gifts and spirits for the work; What a manly and courageous
spirit above her sex did God give to Hester to adventure her life for her
people, when she said, If I perish I perish, Hester 4. 16.

What a masculine and stout courage did the Lord afford to Iael, Judges 4. 22.
that she durst attempt with hammer and nail to kill that great Captain
Sisera, only fallen a sleep, whereas it was a hundred to one the attempt had
not cost her her life.

God has abundance of spirit and more blessings than one, with him are
treasures of grace, and a flowing Reas. 1.
Ocean never drawn dry; he never bestows so much but he can give much more
if there be need of more; If Elisha need a double spirit above Elijah, he
shall receive according to his double need.

Gods wisdom lays not heavy burdens on Reas. 2.
weak shoulders, but first gives shoulders and then the burden answerable to
the strength which he gives.

This wisdom of God we may observe in all his creatures, to every one of
which he disposes gifts and natural faculties according to the need of it,
for the preserving it, and the upholding of it in the being and service of it,
giving to the small, swiftness, and to the great, strength; and much more
dispenses to every one of his servants according to his use and service.

The Lord knows it must be a manchilde, a masculine and generous spirit that
must and can oppose Reas. 3.
the dragon and repress his power; his wisdom knows that no good thing can
be brought to pass without many difficulties and strong resistances; neither
can any great and prevailing evil be hindered without much trouble and tumult,
as in that of the Ephesians for Diana, Acts 19. 32. and therefore he armeth
his servants with courage, fortitude and resolution for both these purposes,
else should they never prevail: The meanest calling has his thorns and
sorrows, according to the sentence, Genesis 3. 18. and much more those of greater
service and difficulty.

It is for the great glory of God to send his servants complete and
sufficiently furnished and fitted Reas. 4.
on her errands; no Prince will send an Embassage by the hand of a fool; so the
Lord for his own honor sends on great services choice and rare instruments,
Job 33. 23. a messenger one of a thousand.

To reprove the effeminate men of our times who are timorous and fearful to
be seen in Gods Use I.
cause against the dragon; these men if any good be to be done, any evil to
be reformed, do cast all difficulties, and their hearts like women faint to
think what may come of it; and now every slight excuse, pretense or suspicion
shall be as a Lion in the way strong enough to chase them as so many fearful
hares, from the undertaking of any thing that is good, and this is the cause
there is such abundance of sin and so little reformation, when fearful
Magistrates, and others in places let down Gods cause, and intend their own;
but consider that,

1. The fearful are in the foremost band or rank of those that go to hell,
Revel. 21. those who fear men more than God, those who have the places of men,
and the faces of men, but the hearts of Hares, and affections of women, without
all true courage for the truth; one look of a dragon makes a nation of them
run away and forsake their standing, as Israel from the sight of Goliath.

2. Whence comes this fearfulness but from a false heart, destitute of
faith, love of God, zeal for his glory, and destitute of the spirit of
strength and fortitude.

3. It is the note of a man carried with carnal affection, who for avoiding of
disfavor, in Gods cause avoideth his duty.

4. An heartlesse and effeminate coward is he, whom every slight fear
casts almost into a swound, whereas were there courage and manliness, every
slight thing would be a keen weapon against the dragon: Five smooth stones
in David's hand shall throw down Goliath; a Taw bone in Samsons hand shall smite
down a thousand Philistimes, An Ox Goade in Shamgars hand shall slay six
hundred enemies, yea a nail in Iaels hand shall destroy Sisera.

Whatsoever calling God has set thee in, express Use II.
thy commission, by setting on work and putting forth with zeal and courage
the gifts that thou have received, 1 Kin. 2. 2. be valiant and show thy self a
man, and know,

1. GOD gives not his spirit to the Saints to fear any more, Romans 8. 15. but
the spirit of courage and fortitude and a sound mind, contemning reproaches
and dangers, profits, disprofits, which would hinder the execution of their
calling; what says Nehemiah 6. 11. Shall such a man as I fly, I will not take
Sanctuary to live.

2. It is the grace of a good action to show a masculine spirit in breaking
through the difficulties (like David's Worthies) which hinder the undertaking
and performance of good duties, and that like the hearty spies gathers
courage from opposition and troubles, which drives others out of heart.

3. It is the manchilde only that quelleth and conquereth the dragon: Moses
will not leave a hoof behind him at Pharaohs request, the dragon is feign to
command him out of presence: Elijah tells Ahab it is he and his fathers house
that trouble Israel, an army of smooth and flattering Prophets durst not say
so: The dragons could not resist the spirit with which Steven spoke, yea, the
dragon sometime is forced to reverence their persons and admire their spirits,
and subscribe to the holiness of the manchilde, and wish their ends like his.

4. This masculine spirit upholdeth the manchilde unto perseverance, for, how
should a Minister who is hated for his love, and is esteemed an enemy for
speaking truth; who is accused of many evils, and pursued with all disgraces,
hold on his holy labors in his holy life, or continue in his uprightness in
so many discouragements, were he not supported with faith to believe, with love
to his Lord, whose sheep he ^eedeth, and with assurance of a better reckoning
and recompense hereafter than in the world or from it he can expect? did not
the spirit afford him these shoulders to carry this burden, he could not but
sink under it; and so of private Christians, who live amongst people of
profane behavior, by whom they are daily baited, scorned, disgraced,
persecuted for their hope, and profession, and holy practice; how could it be
that they living in a nasty place, as still meddling with pitch but yet are not
defiled, nay they hold forth the word of life in the midst of a froward
generation, and embrace still a conversation to which not the world only, but
even themselves were once deadly enemies; how could they carry through such a
course were they not assisted with an heroical spirit to oppose the dragon and
the world? By Felix, qui quod amat (aras videlicet and focos) defendere
fortiter audet.
which they patiently endure the contempt of the world, the lashes of tongues,
the losses of things present, and the labor of their love to God and good
duties.

Quest. How may I come to this courage and masculine spirit?

Ans. 1. Beg the spirit to change thee into another man, as Othniel, Judge. 3.
10. thou art no fit piece by nature to any good service; pray for the spirit,
who is given to them that ask him.

2. Forecast and arm thy self against the malice of the dragon, who the
better any business is, the more busily and basely will he disgrace it; Let
Noah build an Arc, and what difficulties and scorns shall he sustain? let
Nehemiah build a wall, and the Foxes (say the dragons) shall cast it down; let
a man abstain from evil, he makes himself a prey.

3. Be sure of a warrantable calling, that thou art in the Lords work, and in
the way, and then thou need not fear (as Luther) so many dragons as there
are tiles in a fair City: Moses was bold upon his commission; and so may
thou in a good cause and calling.

4. Meditate often, 1. of Gods promise and this will,

First, assure thee of his gracious presence with thee at all times.

Secondly, supply thee with strength while thou go forth, as David against
that great Goliath, in the name of the Lord.

Thirdly, recompense thy labor and suffering, for faithful is he which has
promised: It was a great encouragement to Othniel to adventure himself in
smiting Kiriah-sepher; when Caleb promised he would give Acsah his daughter to
him, that would expulse the enemy thence, Judges 1. 12.

V. Keep a good conscience always before God and all men, for this ministers
boldness, yea makes a man as bold as a Lion; 1 Peter 3. 13. If we do well
who shall fear us or wrong us, this is our fence and safety; 2 Corinthians 1.
12. This is our rejoicing, etc.

Now in that the manchilde is armed with a rod of iron, and advanced into the
Throne of God for the defense of the woman,

We note concerning Magistracy 3. observations, concerning their 1. Power. 2.
Place. 3. End.


That God puts into the Princes and Magistates hand a rod of iron, viz. an
unresistible power. Observe. I.


Their power is Gods, whose the ordinance is, Prove. 8. 15. by me Princes rule,
2 Chronicles. 19. 6. The Reas. 1.
judgment is not man's but Gods.

2. Power is in God to maintain his own ordinances, which if he upheld not the
world must fall.

Beware of mutinies, rebellion and resistance of Use I.
higher powers, Pro. 24. 21. My son, fear the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with the seditious; Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers; Considering,

1. He that resists the power, resists God, as a Giant, Romans 13. 2. for a
man cannot strive against the order of God, but also against the God of order,
as the Lord said of Samuel, they have not cast thee but me away, 1 Samuel 8. 7.

2. Consider the end of rebellion in Corah, Dathan, Abiram, for the end comes
suddenly, and who knows their ruin, Prove. 24. 21.

Ob. 1. But what if they be heathens?

Sol. They were heathens to whom the Apostle commands every soul to be
subject, Romans 13.

Ob. 2. But what, shall Clergy men be subject to lay men, must sheepheards be
ruled by sheep?

Sol. Aaron was subject to Moses, Nathan to David, Zadock to Solomon, the
Romish Bishops to the Christian Emperors; as Princes and Magistrates are
sheepheards in civil things, and Bishops in this respect are under them; so in
respect of spiritual things Magistrates and Princes are sheep, and Ministers
sheepheards.

Ob. 3. What if they be base men?

Sol. Resist not, respect their function not their person, their government is
the Lords, let the Governor be what he will.

Ob. 4. But what if we be Christians, are we not then the Lords free men?

Sol. The Gospel is no enemy to the authority of Rulers, neither does
spiritual freedom fight against corporal subjection, but establish it.

2. Christ himself was subject to Parents, to Governors, paid tribute though
he was free, resisted not when he was apprehended, though he was able, having
struck them down by the power of his Word.

Ob. 5. But what if they be tyrants, oppressors, and offer violence?

Ans. Servants must obey even cursed Masters: In the Primitive Church Christians
suffered under tyrants most grievous persecutions, yet never rose up or by
arms resisted them; indeed subjects may by honest and peaceable means avoid
their fury, as David fled from the fury of Saul; and if they be inferior
Magistrates appeal to the superior, as Paul to Caesar, or take the shelter and
help of Gods laws, but not rebel, nor tumult, nor mutiny against lawful
authority.

And this is the general truth of Gods word, as for any special references
between Princes and people in elective states, it is unseasonable now to
entreat of.

Ob. 6. But what if they command unjust and wicked things?

Sol. In this case says the Homily of obedience, the second part, we must
undoubtedly believe that we must obey no superior, but say as the Apostle
Whether is it meet to obey God or you, judge you: In impious commands we must
obey no Ruler; all our earthly Masters must be obeyed in the Lord, as knowing
we have a Master in heaven; and yet here must be no resistance or
contemptuous standing out, for not to obey impious and unjust commands is no
resistance of power, when they are ready with patience to endure the
punishments unjustly inflicted; as Paul and Silas, Acts 4. 3. and our own
Martyrs.

Let now no Papistor Popish person say our doctrine is an enemy to Magistracy,
but let them carry their own burdens, whose Catechismes are the shops of
rebellion, and whose treatises are trumpets of treason; let English fugitives,
as Absolon, bear armor against their own fathers; let Parsons, Sanders,
Allen, and other Seminary Priests, by word and writing, by persuasion and
printing blow the bellows of rebellion ^ad disobedience to Princes, in ordine
ad spiritualia, yet all the world may know our doctrine by our practice, whom
the Gospel has long since taught, that God has put an iron rod, that is, an
unresistible power in the hands of Princes; and whatsoever Popish persons
prattle, our doctrine puts no knife into any Ravillac or Feltons hand, to
revenge himself either upon the Supreme or any sent from him, for whatever the
Actor was in himself, he was so far theirs, as he was of opinion, that he
might by his own hand revenge either a public or a private quarrel, for this
agrees with Popish positions, as that of Reynolds that Henry the third of
France was justly slain before excommunication, for public sorrows wait no
forms; and with that Pope Sixtus the fifth his Laudators Oration of the same
murder, comparing the fact with that of Phinees, and honoring it with solemn
processions, and it stands with the practices of Romanists, which daily
declare by Popish practices, that the Pope and Popish Religion is the
Arch-rebell in the earth, the one lifting up himself above all that is called
God, Kings and Emperors; the other teaching to despise the persons, depose
their Crowns, and dispose their kingdoms, but they cannot name one Protestant
that ever stained our doctrine by the practice of such traitorous positions.

This concerns their place; all Rulers are by God taken up to Gods Throne, God
himself has set Observe. II.
up the visible thrones of earthly Princes and Rulers, as a dark
representatton of his own most glorious Majesty upon his own most glorious
Throne, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Blessed be God who has set thee on his Throne in stead
of the Lord thy God; she says not, on thy Throne, but on his, where plainly
the Kings Throne is Gods Throne.

Where God is pleased to sit, there is his Throne Reas. 1.
of estate, but he pleases to sit with them, Psalm. 82. God sitterh amongst
the gods.

As their Throne is Gods, so they are gods on the Reas. 2.
Throne, the title Jehovah, being a title of Gods Essence, agrees to no
creature; but the name of Elohim, being a title of his power, is given them,
because in them the greatness and sovereign authority of GOD the high and
supreme Judge of the world clearly shines; and as himself shines more bright
than the Sun in beams of Majesty above all creatures; so in a parcel of his
own Majesty he makes them shine above all other men, for the daunting and
terror of wicked men, be they never so great.

Is the Magistrates Throne Gods Throne, then to Use I.
contemn the Magistrate is to contemn the Throne of God, to which he is taken
up: The Ambassadors of great Princes are honorably respected for the person
they sustain.

Magistrates must resemble the person of GOD, Use II.
in whose Throne they sit;

1. In Piety and holiness; what an unseemly thing is it for him that sits on
Gods Throne to do any thing unbeseeming God, or contrary unto God?

2. In love of Gods house and word; so does God himself, his eye, his heart
and delight is on his own house, and so should his who sits on his Throne: He
that disaffecteth the house of God and the true worship of God, he can neither
prove good Magistrate nor good man, till he change his mind and conversation.

3. In wisdom; knowing what is just and unjust, what he is to do, what to
leave undone, what to cherish, what to punish; God on his Throne is called the
ancient of days for his wisdom in discerning, Psalm. 2. Be wise ye Kings,
be learned ye Judges; and their title of heads must put them in mind of this
wisdom, in which they ought to resemble the ancient of days, for the head is
the seat of wisdom, and understands for all the parts; now whence must they
have this wisdom, but in Gods book given into their hands? for which cause
Rulers were enjoined that the book of the Law should not depart from them
night nor day; and the Kings of Israel in their inauguration had Gods Josh. 1.
8.

Deuteronomy. 17. 18.


book given them into their hands; by this book David became wiser then his
ancients. Now if Magistrates cast off the reading of Gods word at home, and the
hearing of Gods Word at Gods house, Jeremy 8. 9. tells us, that folly must
rule them and others too; they have cast off the Word of the Lord, and what
wisdom is in them?

4. In sincerity and uprightness; God on his throne is described sitting in
garments white as snow, noting the innocence and righteousness of his
judgments, Dan. 7. 9. the seats of Magistrates and Judges should be like
Salomons Throne of white Ivory, 1 King. 10. 18. signifying the purity and
incorruption of Judge and judgment; of a truth God is no accepter of persons,
Act. 10 and he that sits on Gods Throne must avoid the appearance of
partiality, he ought to honor and hear Gods Ministers, love and affect the
professors of true religion; distaste and disaffect the contrary; thus does God.

Are Magistrates taken up to Gods Throne? their Use III.
throne and seat must resemble Gods Throne, and be a counterpaine of that.

Quest. Wherein?

Ans. 1. In true inquisition of cause; Before Gods Throne there is a true
information by opening of books, and his Throne is said to be fiery, both for
his zeal for truth, and for manifestation of the truth of causes; so on the
Thrones and tribunals of men, right information and true evidences must carry
matters.

2. In a just sentence; when that is condemned which God would have condemned,
and that cherished and advanced which God would have set up, Esaias 44. 28. Cyrus
must perform all the Lords desire, not his own, for he is now on the Lords
Throne, Zach. 4. 14. they must be assistants to the Rulers of the earth, as
namely, in looking to his worship, in repressing swearers, drunkards,
gamesters, idle persons, etc.

3. In sound execution of just sentences against offenders; Gods Throne is no
idle scarrecrow, but comes to the life of justice, which is execution; It
has two properties.

1. It is powerful; About the Throne of God goes a fiery stream, noting the
power of his judgment, Dan. 7. which is as unresistible as a stream of fire
to stuble, no sinner ca^ ever escape at this throne; and if the thrones of
Magistrates resemble not Gods Throne: great offenders, or bold and stout
sinners will shift out.

2. It is quick and speedy; Gods throne is described to have wheels, Ezekiel. 1.
for the celerity and speed in execution, before it are no delatory pleas, no
spinning of causes, no stay of justice by any means; Dan. 7. 9. Gods Throne
has burning wheels for celerity in consuming corruption.

4. In powerful protection of the godly; GOD from his throne does so; Psalm.
76. 9. The Lord rises upon his throne, to save all the meek upon the Fulmen
est ubi cum potestate habitat iracundia.
earth; so Rulers must see that they be answerable to the title given them of
God, who calls them the shields of the earth, to shelter not vilde and
vicious persons, sons of Beliall, but the innocent, religious and godly, as
David's eyes were on the godly in the land.

This is taken from the end; Hence note, Rulers are Observe. 3.
therefore taken up by God into his throne, to protect this woman, as this
manchilde, for the good of the Church, Romans 13. He is the Minister of God for
thy good.

1. Earthly kingdoms are especially ordained to set up and uphold Gods
kingdom. 2. Their titles are hedges for the Lords field; a covering for heat,
wind, storms,
Esaias 32. 2. 3. The promise, that Princes shall be nursing fathers of the
Church.
That Magistrates take notice of their duty, which is not only to assist the
Lord in governing and upholding Use I.
the civil state, but to uphold the Church.

1. By professing the religion of God themselves sincerely.

2. By protecting true religion, and that with zeal and courage against all
kind of opposites; David will use his power to cast scorners from Gods face
and presence.

3. By countenancing and upholding the holy Ministry, leading the way to Gods
house and worship, as all godly Governors ever did, and begin the government
always, with manifesting their zeal to Gods holy religion, as David with
joyful bringing the Arc to Jerusalem; Solomon with building Gods house,
Iehoiada with making a covenant with the Lord, and compelling the people to
stand to it, 2 Chronicles. 23. 16.

Nay evil men, what ever they were before, were thus far changed into other
men, as Saul to dissemble religion; Saul though he sought Asses before, will,
so soon as called to the kingdom, prophecy amongst Prophets; so as if
confidence and love of Gods house commanded them not as men, yet shame and
example compeld them as Magistrates.

We that are Ministers must take notice of our duty, to call upon Magistrates
to use their power for Use II.
the good of the Church, be not accessory to the absurd husbandry of them that
pluck up good corn and let thistles and tares grow in their place; and though
they may be stout and will not hear their duty from us, yet we must not
fail in our duty for company, but let them know they shall not fail to be
called upon, and if their sin be not less by it, it shall be the greater.

Thus shall we testify our love to God, to them, to their place; nay, procure
the love of God upon our selves and them; for as an irreligious Governor is
set up by Gods displeasure over a people, so a wise and religious Ruler is a
gift of Gods love, 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. God set Solomon a wise and religious King, on
his throne, because he loved Israel; and this is true not only in the
supreme, but in those that are sent from him.

[And the woman fled into the wilderness.] Some may think it strange that the
woman should now fly, for which fact she seems to have but little reason,
seeing her son the manchilde was in the former words so exalted to the throne
of God, and so able to defend her with his iron rod; this may seem to weaken
the former exposition; but we must knowthere might be sundry causes besides
outward force; even many inward dislikes and distastes that might haften her
out of sight.

2. This verse is here inserted by the Spirit of God, by anticipation, that is;
when a thing is mentioned in a former place, which was done after; for here is
mentioned the thing, but neither the time nor reason, for both which we must
consult the thirteenth and fourteenth verses, to which time and place this
verse does properly belong, for else would follow,

First, that the woman did fly before the battle begun, which all this while
was but preparing, which is not likely.

Secondly, that she flew twice.

3. That she did fly before wings were given her; all which unlikelihood must
needs follow, if the verse be not anticipated; for it is plain by those
verses, that the slight was afterward, that the battle with Michael was fought
after she overcame the dragon, after the new assault of the dragon against
her, and after she had wings given her to save herself by flight.

Quest. Why is this verse so inserted out of his order and due place?

Ans. The reason seems to be this: In the former verse the spirit of God had
showed that the dragon, although he watched to destroy the manchilde, yet he
was safe, being taken up into the throne of God; and now if question should be
made, But what became of the woman? he would presently add, the woman was safe
too, and by what means? as he by his advancement into the throne, so she by
flight, but not at the same time, for many things came between. Now as the
Spirit of God mentions this flight but by the way, so shall we speak of it
as here we find it, reserving the reason of it, and means, and other
circumstances to the fourteenth verse, where we shall more fitly meet with
them.

This flight of the woman seems to be an allusion unto Israel, flying into
the wilderness from Pharaoh, that red and bloody dragon pursuing them even to
destruction; In which flight there are three things considerable.

1. The place where she flies, with a secret reason employed, because that was
the place prepared by GOD. 2. Her sustentation, that they should feed her. 3.
Her mansion or continuance, 1260. days.
I. In the place two things are inquired, First, what is the desert. Secondly,
what is the flight.


1. The desert is not to be understood of a certain place, as the desert of
Arabia, or Libia, or any other set place to which the Church was to be tied to
at that time, as the Donatists dreamed, that this wilderness must be theirs
in Affrike; but a certain state and condition of the Church, opposed to her
high and heavenly condition, wherein she shined, crowned with twelve stars,
as verse the first. The wilderness then is nothing else but an afflicted,
wasted and solitary condition of the woman, excluded from her former glory,
forced now to hide her face from the world, and to live in poverty and exile,
and in a private and solitary condition; and as creatures that live in the
desert fly the sight and aspect of men, so she vanished and disappeared from
the eyes of men, not daring to be seen the same she was before.

2. The flight into the wilderness is not by change of place, but by change of
her state and ornaments; Especially by the flight are noted,

1. The speedy corruption of all things in the Church, for flight is a quick
motion.

2. The dissipation and deprivation of particular and visible congregations; To
clear this, observe, that presently after Constantine had procured peace to
the Church, and put an end to the bloody persecutions of those imperial
dragons, she came under worse tyrants than ever before, which were security,
ambition, wealth and ease; for the former tyrants by their tyranny exercised
and excited faith and piety, but this deadeth and eats out all; the former
made the Church glorious and shining, as fire does gold, but this darkened her
and dusted her, as appears in these instances.

1. Persecution forced them to cleave close to the simplicity and integrity of
doctrine and rites which Christ himself instituted, and his Apostles observed;
but now ease and idleness makes the Pastors at leisure to devise and mingle
pure doctrine with unclean and superstitious rites: they now begin to dedicate
Temples to Martyrs, and proceed to make commemoration of them; after to seek
out relics of Saints; hence Origin and others begin to dispute doubtfully of
the intercession of Saints for us; and Nazianzen, Audi quoque tu anima magni
Constantini, (...), si quis sensus insit; and after in short time grew
impiously to invocate them, and after to pray for the dead; then came in
superstitions as a flood; and this was the beginning of the woman's flight,
namely the sudden corruption of doctrines and rites.

2. Against the former tyrants they contended earnestly for the faith, now ease
and wealth makes them wanton, proud and contentious one with an other for
primacy, praecedency, ambition, prelacy, patriarkhood and motherhood: These
contentions lost and neglected faith, truth and charity.

3. All the time of the persecutions the woman held her foundation, had the
clothing of the sun upon her, that is, the righteousness of Christ; but now
they begin to guard it and lace it with the righteousness and sanctity of their
own merits.

4. Against all Tyrants she retained the crown of twelve stars on her head,
but now she must change them into temporal crowns and glorious titles of
Patriarchs, universal Bishops, and Pastors of Pastors, yea Princes of Pastors.

Now must this woman either appear in the habit of a harlot, or fly from the
sight of men, and so as a faithful Spouse and Virgin of Christ, she chooses
in a mean estate to retain her virginity, purity, faith, rather than enjoy
the pomp and glory of the world, by waxing wanton against Christ: Hence note,

The true Church is not always conspicuous, visible and glorious to the world,
but may be hid, obscured Doct.
and oppressed.

So was the Church of God in Egypt thrust out into the wilderness, than which
no place is more solitary, none more free from the pomp and glory of the
world. What glory and visibility had the Church in Elias time, when he
complained that he was left alone, his life was sought, so that he was feign
to fly into the wilderness to save his life? yet were there seven thousand
that bowed not their knee to Baal: What glory and visibility had the true
Church in the Babylonish captivity, being compared to dead bones, dried and
scattered in the open field, Ezekiel. 37. 2? What visibility had it in the death
of Christ, when the shepherd being smitten the sheep were scattered; or after
his ascension, when all the earth worshipped the Beast, Rev. 13. 12?

Because the Church is a selected company called Reas. 1.
out of the world, a little flock, John 15. 9 as a Park of God paled in from
the waste of the world, and hortus conclusus, Cant. 4. 12. the Garden and
Paradise of God, wherein wild beasts may not enter; Now God has put such a
distance and enmity between them, as that the blind world neither can nor
will abide to see her, but to chase her out from her; how can the world see her
that is called out of the world?

The true Church is such a body as is not always Reas. 2.
visible to man's eye; suppose good men, even Elias himself, for it is Gods
only privilege to know who are his, the foundation being in Gods election,
and the union spiritual.

The Churches desert and merit, abusing peace Reas. 3.
and prosperity drives her here into the wilderness, makes the Lord strip
her naked, and set her as in the day she was borne; and not only sends her
into the wilderness, but makes her as a wilderness, and leaves her as a
dry land, as, Hosea 2. 3.

The Churches safety; as Elias to be safe was sent into the wilderness, so
here the Church provideth Reason. 4.
for her safety in evil times by flying into the wilderness. Hence is shown
hatred to the Dove of Christ dwelling in the Rock, Cant. 2. 19. that is, as
the Doves by the Kites or Hawks are chased into the Clifts and Rocks to hide
them, so the Dove of Christ.

The militant condition of the Church in the Reas. 5.
world suffers her not always to be conspicuous and visible, neither is
she tied to any one estate, or any one place.

Not to one estate, being compared to the Moon, which is sometimes in full,
sometimes in waine, sometimes shining, and sometimes hid and not seen; and to
the Arc tossed with waves and billows, sometimes aloft, and presently down
again in the deepes; and to the ship in which Christ was a sleep, so ready to
sink as the Disciples cry, Lord save us; and this is the continual estate of
the Church in the troublesome sea of this world; The Myrtle trees in the
bottom, Zach. 1. 8. Neither to any certain place, whether Rome or Antioch or
Jerusalem, but forced oft-times to change her seat as well as her state, and
tossed hither and thither, as, 1 Cor. 4. 11. (...), we have no dwelling place,
Heb. 11. Hence are the Papists confuted, who,

1. Affirm the Catholic Church to be a visible company of men under one
visible head, for what visible head has the Church in the wilderness?

2 Denying that ever their Church fled into the wilderness, or that ever she
disappeared from the world, wherein they plainly deny her to be the true
Church, and this no other who fled into the wilderness; and if their doctrine
be true, that the Church must ever be as a City on a hill; the spirit must
be false, and the Scriptures, which affirm she must fly into the
wilderness from the fury of Antichrist.

The Papists object many things against our doctrine, but how impertinently and
vainly, will appear, if we set down the right state of the question between
us, both in their tenants and in ours.

1. They say that the Catholic Church which has always continued has been
always visible; now would I to beat out their meaning ask, what, is the
triumphant Church in heaven visible, or by what glass or spectacle can they
see that glorious company of Prophets, Apostles, Patriarchs, Martyrs and
Saints, which is the chief part of the Catholic Church, as, Heb. 12. 23. Or
is their Church in purgatory visible, when two chief parts of it by their
doctrine are invisible, and the other part in earth, but a handful to them.
Well then they must mean the militant Catholic Church, which is a speech
absurd enough, for as one half can never be the whole, so cannot the militant
Church be Catholic, no more than a finger can be a hand, or a hand the body;
or perhaps they would have us believe two Catholic Churches, whereas our Creed
teaches us to believe but one.

But we will take their meaning, namely, that God has always a Church
consisting of a great multitude, Bellar. de Eccle. lib. 3. c. 13. and de
Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 14.
as conspicuous to the world as any earthly kingdom, part whereof, and always
the head shall be visible at Rome, and the rest visibly subject to the Bishop
of Rome; Now, what we hold concerning the point I will propound in sundry
conclusions, and then examine some of their chief arguments.

By the Church which we hold invisible we Conclus I.
mean the Church mentioned in the Creed, which is but one, and Catholic, even
the multitude of all elect, which are, or were, or ever shall be, and to this
company all they and only they, whether they be in the way or in the Country,
do belong: For we believe according to our Creed, that the Church is holy, and
no wicked person belongs unto it, and that it is a communion of Saints only,
to which belongs remission of sins and life everlasting, and we cannot but
wonder that Papists who mumble up so many Creeds, should so fondly hold that
the Catholic Church should consist of good and bad; for are the wicked the
body of Christ, as they say the Church is? or is not Christ the Savior of his
body? If wicked and reprobates are the body of Christ, why then are they not
saved?

This Catholic Church we say is invisible to the world; for, Conclus. 2.


1. Gods election, the ground and foundation of it, is invisible.

2. The greatest part of elect are not subject to sense; not the Saints in
heaven, neither many true believers on earth, nor numbers of the elect not yet
borne or borne again.

3. Visible things are not believed, but invisible; faith is of things not
seen, and if we believe the holy Catholic Church, we cannot see it: Now
every Popish argument must either prove this to be visible, which none of them
do, or they touch not us or our cause.

Concerning the militant Church, what we hold Conclus. 3.
will plainly appear in these Conclusions.

1. That God will always have a true part of his Catholic Church in the earth
that shall hold and constantly maintain the true faith in their several ages
to the end of the world, and that the true Church cannot fail upon earth.

2. That this part of the Catholic Church consists of men which are visible,
and exercise visible ordinances, of word, Sacraments, government, etc. and
often in times of peace appears glorious in many particular and visible
congregations; for we never deny that particular Churches are often visible.

3. That these visible and particular Churches are not always visible after
the same manner, neither is any part of the visible Church always so
necessarily visible, but it may be discontinued and disappeare, as all the
visible Churches in the old and new Testament ever have done.

4. This number of men in whom this part of the Church consists, may come to
be a few, and by tyranny or heresy their profession may be so secret amongst
themselves, that the world shall not see them, neither can any man point to any
particular Church, and yet the Church is not destroyed; for as the Sun is a
shining Sun in it self, though in the night we see it not, nor in the day a
blind man cannot discern it; so the Church wants not her shining glory in
her self, though in the night we see is not, nor in the day a blind man
cannot discern it, the Church wants not her shining glory, though the blind
world especially in the night of persecution cannot discern it.

5. Although the Church cannot fail upon earth, yet the external government of
it may fail for a time, the Pastors may be interrupted, the sheep may be
scattered, the discipline hindered, the external exercise of religion
suspended, and the sincerity of religion exceedingly corrupted; so as the
members of the Church are only visible to the true members within themselves.

By which conclusions we shall easily meet with the subtilty and vanity of all
their reasons, which ordinarily conclude from the external form to the
failing of it self in the being, and from the invisibility to the blind world,
to the invisibility amongst themselves; as if they would conclude, A man is
hid, therefore he is no man, or, A blind man cannot see, therefore no other
man also; or, because he that is without doors cannot see what I do within,
therefore neither he that is within with me.

Having thus bounded and laid the question, let us see how they bend the force
of their arguments

Ob. 1. The body of Christ is visible, but the Church is the body of Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 27. Ye are the body of Christ, speaking to men, visible.

Ans. 1. They might tell us what they mean by the body of Christ; the
Scriptures make mention of a threefold, and never a one visible to humane sense.

1. His natural body, that is invisible in the heavens.

2. His Sacramental body, that is invisible in the Sacrament.

3. His mystical body, and that is spiritual, and no object of sense.

II. They might allege the Scriptures sincerely, and not as they use
deceitfully to suppress the words of the Text, which would fully answer their
arguments; the words of the Textare, Ye are the body of Christ, (...), for
your part; which words suppressed by them, shows us,

1. That he speaks of a particular Church, which then was visible, but this
is far from proving the Catholic so to be, which is the question.

2. That both parts of their reason be false: the former, because it is not
general, for the whole body of Christ is not visible; and the later, because
the Corinthians were not the whole body of Christ, for the Apostle says, they
were both part of it.

Object. But the Apostle writes to visible men.

Sol. 1. From a particular to a general the reason cannot hold; because I see
some men by me, therefore I can see all men that ever were or shall be; or,
because I can see a particular congregation at Corinth, I can see the Catholic
Church in heaven and earth, borne and unborne, in the way and in the country:
Such fond reasons may be plausible to Romish, blinded and hooded sots; but as
the Sun makes mists to vanish, so the light of the Gospel does these mists
and fogges of subtilty and deceit.

2. They might remember that the Church is a society of men, not as men, for so
a number of Turks might be the body of Christ, or a nest of Arians; but as
believers: and therefore the Church as the Church, cannot be seen, but
believed; which force of words has made Bellarmine himself to confess, whose
words are, Videmus enim coetum hominum qui est Ecclesia, sed quod ille coetus
sit vera Christi Ecclesia non videmus, sed credimus; and what say we more or
less.

3. They seem either not to know or to dissemble the reason, why the Church is
called visible, which is, not because the men are visible, but because of the
external visible form, which being interrupted, the visibility is gone, though
the persons not seen to the world, they remain seen amongst themselves.

4. How absurd is it to define a Church by our senses, and measure them by
flesh and bones, this is as one says, Chirurgum agere, non Theologum; he that
does so would make a better Surgeon than Divine; but these muzes cannot long
hide them: Hence then I conclude this first objection from their own premises
thus;

If the Church be the body of Christ, then it is not visible, because it is not
his natural body, for Christ had not two natural bodies; but his mystical,
then invisible; this being the true difference between a mystical and a
physical body, the one is subject to sense, the other the object not of sense,
but of faith.

Object. II. But the Pastors, and Doctors, the Sacraments, the preaching of the
Word, the building of the Church, are visible, ergo, the Church is visible.

Sol. 1. All this concludes but particular congregations to be visible, which
we deny not; but no reason can conclude hence the visibility of the Catholic
Church, and then it is too short to reach our cause and controversy.

2. Consider the visible Church two ways.

First, according to her external matter, and form, and thus consisting of men
met together to perform external Ecclesiastical actions; so far I say a
particular Church is visible.

Secondly, according to her inward form, and so far as they be of the
Catholic Church by effectual vocation, faith, righteousness and holiness;
thus are the same members invisible; for though we see the men professing the
faith, yet who knows which or whether of them profess in soundness or in
hypocrisy?

3. Although a Church be now visible in eminent Pastors, in numerous
professors, and in their glorious fruition of Christ and his ordinances, yet no
Church in the world, Roman or other, has privilege to be always so visible,
but way and do disappeare and become invisible.

Ob. III. The Church is the kingdom of Christ, but every kingdom
comprehends a visible company, ergo, the Church is visible.

Sol. The Proposition we grant true of the Catholic Church, else it is weak
and false; the Assumption is false, standing upon the foot of an absurd
comparison of a spiritual kingdom with a temporal: True it is that every
worldly kingdom stands upon a visible company of members under one head and
king, but Gods kingdom is spiritual and invisible, for who ever saw with the
eye of flesh a spiritual kingdom, which comes not with observation?

Having cleared the doctrine propounded, and Use. I.
freed it from Popish objections, we will make the first Use of it, to answer
the common and usual Question of our Adversaries, viz. Where was your Church
an hundred years ago, or before Luthers time?

Ans. 1. Our Church was never utterly extinct, as Papists say, nor without
being since the world had being, but was ever the same.

1. In her self; her inward glory was ever the same, her inward graces the
same: the same Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance; the same ornaments: but as a
great Princess in costly robes keeping her chamber, and not coming abroad in
the sight of others.

2. She was the same to God; ever dear to him, and provided for by him for
food and harbor all the time she was hid from the world. As the woman here.

3. She was ever the same to Jesus Christ; the same ship of Christ that ever
she was, and Christ in her present even when she is covered with waves, and
holds her up only undrounded in the tempest: only she was not.

1. In the same state, she was hid amongst themselves, as in a barren and
wild Antichristian wilderness, as a little wheat in a heap of Chafe, and
as a little gold insensible amongst much dross.

2. Not the same to the eye of the world, for the world was unworthy of her,
and although she shined in her self, yet for the sins of the world she shined
as a candle in a dark place.

II. As the Church was ever the same, so was the true religion which we
profess before Luther.

1. In the institution of it in paradise.

2. In the promulgation of it by the preaching of Patriarks, Prophets,
Apostles, and their successors.

3. In the profession of faithful believers, Martyrs, and Confessors of it in
all ages; but the true religion being chased out of sight by the horrible
idolatry and tyranny of Antichrist, who had given to traditions and
Antichristian pollutions wings to fly above the Scripture, and trodden under
foot the purity of holy religion: God of his mercy raised up Luther, whose
holy pains, preaching and writing was not a novation, but a renovation; not a
planting of a new religion, but a renewing and replanting of the ancient and
true religion; not an institution but restitution of the truth of God; not an
introduction but reduction, not inducing a novelty but reducing the true and
holy religion of the Prophets and Apostles.

While we are here below we must make account of the wilderness, and wisely
prepare for all Use II.
estates and conditions; for it is not the lot of the members of Christ still
to enjoy such external peace, such free exercises of Gods Ordinances, and such
multitudes to join in the external profession of Christ and his Gospel, as
we by Gods special grace do now enjoy, and we may be forced to fly into the
wilderness ere we be aware; let us look upon Israel Gods own people in the
wilderness, and make ^ccount to follow the^ in their passage through that
terrible and dreadful desert, knowing that,

1. A wilderness is a place unpeopled, unfrequented; and such is the state of
the Church in respect of the small number of professors in comparison of the
rest; We must not therefore think worse of the truth and doctrine for
theirfew, either faithful teachers or faithful followers of it; as neither
must we esteem the better of the dolaters for their large and numerous
multitudes that stand with them.

2. The wilderness is a place of temptation; Israel tempted by God in the
wilderness tentatione probationis; Israel tempted God in the wilderness
tentatione dubitationis: Is God amongst us? Satan tempted Israel in the
wilderness tentatione deceptionis, we must therefore make account of and fore
cast temptation, and arm our selves; If we were as holy as our head Christ
himself, we shall be led forth to be tempted in the wilderness.

3. The wilderness is a place of journey, and so full of changes; as Israel in
the wilderness had 42. stations, and were ever in their journey; we must not
think this wilderness our resting place, but expect changes of places and
conditions, and, as Christian Pilgrims, be content with the toil of our
travel, being assured that,

1. We have the Lord before us both in his presence and direction.

2. As they, we still journey toward Canaan, as our aim.

3. As they had their eyes and thoughts on their Canaan, so we settle our
affections on heaven our Canaan, and the things that lead and help us thither.

4. The wilderness was a place of war and conflict, in which Israel was
beset with enemies round, Canaanites, Philistians, Amalekites; so we must not
make account of settled peace here, but expect Amaleck and Ogg, and Sehon,
Giants and tyrants; Antichristian Amaleck, Popish Philistims, Romish
Canaanites, bold and obdurate enemies, who will disclame the house of God,
disgrace the religion of God, revile and resist the servants of God for
propounding the truth of God; no expectation of truce or peace till we recover
our Canaan.

5. The wilderness is a place full of annoyances, wants and dangers; the
Israel of God must make account of wild beasts, fiery Serpents, want of bread,
want of water, and never expect any harvest in the wilderness; hence therefore
we must learn,

1. To arm our selves with faith, patience and constancy, without which we
must needs fall short of Canaan.

2. Christian moderation, that we may know with Paul, Philip 4. 11. to want,
to abound, to be full, to be empty.

3. Never to think our selves well till we be hence, where we are out of hope
of any harvest, but of sorrow and danger.

To comfort Gods people who are contemned, Use III.
despised and brought to a few, having not only the whole world against them;
but sometimes in the house of God, where they expect most comfort, are rated
and scorned by those whom God has enjoined to speak peace to his people, and
to whet their tongues against vilde persons, and bold sinners, rather than
harden and hearten them against the generation of them that seek God: But hence
all that fear God may be strengthened and encouraged, yea contented to be
brought into the wilderness; for,

1. It is no new estate to the true Church, but a condition with which she is
anciently acquainted, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
afflictions.

2. Our Lord Jesus himself was content to go into the wilderness and endure
al temptations, wants and dangers, that he might sanctify our wilderness unto
us, and sweeten all our sorrows and afflicted estate unto us, and break for
us and from us all hostile powers which would hinder us in our translation to
his heavenly kingdom.

3. None of the Saints fall by chance into the wilderness, but it is a place
and estate prepared by God himself, (as our Text says) and though men see us
not, but suffer us to sit alone and desolate; God sees his servants in that
condition, and tendreth them as his own first borne, 2 Cor, 6. 9. as unknown
yet well known, as dying and yet behold we live, as chastened and not killed.

The enemies beyond the Sea triumph as if God knew not his Church now in the
wilderness, but God prepared the place for the present.

4. The wilderness being a place of Gods preparing, he will make it convenient
and comfortable to her; for,

1. The more solitary and secret the place is, the more fit it is to hide and
secure her.

2. The more free from the pomp and glory of the world, the fitter it is for
her that is called out of the world, and crucified to the world.

3. The more inconvenient and dangerous it is, the more it sets out his
wisdom and power, who over-ruleth all inconveniences to the Churches good, no
contrary can cross his good purpose toward his Church and people; Nay, here
we see he appoints a fruitless place to feed her, a place of journey for her
rest, a place of danger for her safety, a place of war to uphold her peace,
and a place of temptation to free her from temptation.

Thou therefore that fear God never fear any place, state or condition
prepared for thee by God; if thou be a member of the Church, he will
overrule all anoyances and inconveniences to thy full and assured comfort.

To use warily and thankfully our peace and privileges, Use IIII.
lest we drive the Church from us into the wilderness; we see here the Church
planted by the Apostles themselves flying into the wilderness; In what
wilderness now are the 7. famous Churches of lesser Asia? Those once
flourishing Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica, to whom the
Apostles writ so respectively? We see those famous Churches of Bohemia and
Palatinate now fled into the wilderness, and their countries become a
wilderness, not long since as flourishing, and as famous as our selves; GOD
that has made us yet look on, would not have us idle spectators, but by their
harms to beware and be the wiser.

Quest.How may we prevent this so dismal an estate of the Church?

Ans. If we prevent and bewail the sins and signs of a Church ready to fly
into the wilderness.

Quest.What be the sins which especially drive the Church into the
wilderness?

Ans. I. The sins of the Pastors have been noted the principal cause of the
Churches flight, and indeed Ier. 12. 10.
the reigning sins of Pastors were ever noted the first causes of banishment
and captivity, Lam. 2. 14.

1. Ignorant and blind guides leading the blind, both fall into the pit.

2. Or men of knowledge but corupt in judgment who mingle wheat and chafe,
and mingle the sweet waters of the heavenly fountain with puddle waters of
humane devices; so did the Pastors departing from the primitive simplicity of
doctrine and rites, chase their Church into the wilderness.

3. Or men of parts, but without conscience to use them to God, but to
themselves, pompous, ambitious, flattering men in their sins, crying peace,
peace, when the Lord proclaims war and blood; men that heal the hurt of
the daughter of Zion with sweet words, and harden men against goodness by
putting darkness for light, and bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower; by
justifying the wicked, and taking away the righteousness of the righteous from
him, Isay 5. 22. this hasteneth wrath, see verse 23. 24.

4. Or scandalous persons for intolerable greedines or notorious vices in
themselves, and abetting of them in others, envying and hating all the shine of
grace; these ringleaders to evil chase away the Churches prosperity, and
where such sons of Eli make the religion of God to be blasphemed of Papists,
Atheists, and but indifferent Protestants; the Arc is not far from taking
and leading away into the enemies Country; how may the Lord again complain,
as, Ier. 12. 10. Many Pastors have destroyed my Vineyard and trodden my portion
under foot, they have laid it waste, and it mourns to me.

II. The sins of Rulers who maintain not the purity of Gods worship, but
suffer corruptions and relics of Idolatry to grow up therein as Ivy with the
Oak till it eat out the heart of it; so, many of the Kings of Israel suffered
the remnants of Baal, and the Chimarims, even after some reformation, which
still baned and at last foiled the true worship and sent it away: This we have
noted a cause of the Churches flight in this place; A little leaven quickly
leaveneth the whole lump.

The reason is, because the Lord who requires as pure worship from us as ever,
and hates idolatry and false worship as much as ever; can abide the sent or
least co^porting with Idolaters no more tha^ a husband can endure wanton
behaviors and suspicious gestures in his wife, though she come not so far as
the adultrous act.

For this mingling of idolatry with true worship in Israel the Lord threatens
that he will make her as a wilderness, and leave her as a dry land, Hosea. 2.
3. as indeed after he did.

If after so glorious a liberty of the Gospel, restored and renewed by five
famous Princes, Henry, Edward, Elizabeth, our gracious James; and our noble
Charles, we should in after ages, which God forbid, have Baalish Altars and
Masses manifestly resorted unto, Chemarims, Jesuits and Priests increased; but
thanks be unto God for the vigilance of our now gracious King against this
mischief; If we should I say take up their fashions, be enamoured with their
pictures, and doat after the guise of the Babylonians, as Samaria did after
the Chaldeans, Ezech. 23. 14, 15. this sin would certainly drive our Church
into the wilderness, as Israel was into Babylon, of whom she was so enamoured,
and with whom she contracted and increased so near affinity: This was a
manifest forerunner of Gods justice, who ordained no other scourge for Israel
but Babylon, whom she so affected, and to whose religion she desirously
fashioned.

III. The general national sins against the light and grace of God.

1. General apostasy and falling back more and more, notwithstanding holy
doctrine, powerful preaching, Gods warnings, heavy strokes; the Lord
threatens this sin with the same punishment, Zeph. 1. 2, 8. He will surely
destroy all things from off the earth, and make her as a wilderness, and visit
them that were turned back from the Lord. The falling from the first love
procures the Candlestick to be removed.

Alas! how is it that our love to the Word is so abated? anciently in the
beginning of the Gospel they would measure many miles to a Sermon, we will
scarce step out of doors; nay, we put away the word of subjection, and drive
it away from us, as the Jews did, Acts 13. 26. How lamentably are we fallen
from the honor and high respect of the word bringers; the feet of faithful
Messengers were wont to be beautiful, now entertained with scorn and
reproach, and the more faithful, the more vile and disgraced; such as the
world is unworthy of are thought unworthy to live in it: In good Ieremies case,
since I cried out of oppression and wrong. I am a derision daily every one
mockes me, and the word of God is made a reproach unto me, Ier. ^0. 7. And will
the Lord continue his best mercies which are generally thrust away with hatred
and scorn? How are we generally fallen off from the obedience of the Word?
how few can abide the sincere obedience of it in themselves or others? how many
esteem the most conscionable obedience of it the most odious thing that may
be, terming it by disgraceful names, that nothing is grown more reproachful
in most places than holy obedience.

Now is it possible that the Lord should suffer his privileges to abide with
them who abide not in obedience, nay of all things cannot abide it? Besides,
what a general inclination is in our people to look back and run back to
Popery, to go a whoring after their abominable Idols?

2. National sin hastening the Church into the wilderness is resistance and
opposition of the power of godliness and religion, when men generally content
themselves with a form of godliness, but resist the power and proclaim a
defiance against Christ, plainly in their course, saying, We will not have
this man rule over us: would God this sin were not so plainly, the sin of
the age, as that he that runs might not rea d it; for,

1. How few can abide the power of grace in others, and then is it first
expulsed in themselves? how few can brook that man that frequenteth the
hearing of Gods Word, uses duties of piety at home, that will not swear,
drink, riot, nor be filthy and loose in speech.

2. How is the practice of Christianity growing more reproachful than to live
in any sin, and in many places is more safe to be extremely flagitious, and a
noted vicious person than a godly liver, and would be daily seen, were not
wicked men restrained by good laws?

3. How is the glorious name of a Christian become a scorn and reproach
amongst the basest of men, and the most abject as dogs dare bark and do most
against them, who most faithfully labor to express the power of the Gospel?

4. How do the most like better of profane men than of the most religious,
accounting of such as honest men, fitter companions, than such as unfainedly
fear the Lord?

5. How do men generally dissuade their friends from their strict courses, as
from that which they esteem most prejudicial to their welfare? how do they
pursue and chase godly men as their enemies, as if one world were not made, or
fit for them both, and yet what is the expectation but of wrath when they are
gone and hunted away? would not this drive our Church into the wilderness if
it should not be prevented? thanks be unto God for the means of prevention.

Quest. What are the signs of a Church hastening into the wilderness?

Ans. The withdrawing or abating the signs of Gods presence; as,

1. When the sincere preaching of the word is removed; Gods gracious presence
is not more visible in any thing than in a faithful Ministry, nor a Christian
state is more happy and conspicuous in any thing than in sound and lively
doctrine, in which God has promised his presence to his Church to the end of
the world: Now when God removes this, the Church is going into an afflicted
estate; a sign that Saul is cut off when God will speak no more to him. Every
man in the removal of a sound Ministry may discern the Lord removing himself.

2. When the outward ordinance remains, but without fruit and power, a dead
and sleepy Ministry, under which men remain blind and unconverted, God is
going apace from such a people; for as the inward power of the word is an
infallible sign of Gods presence, who by his spirit warmeth some hearts,
enlightneth some, pierces some, converted some; so has the Lord apparently
withdrawn himself, when his word is without power, that men grow not better,
but worse by it; and if this be general, it is a forerunner of the Churches
flight into the wilderness.

How few hearing judgments denounced fear with melting hearts, but rather as
the Smiths Anvil, the more strokes the harder? How do most fashion themselves
to the licentiousness of the times, and not to the fashion of the Word? how
are many more blind, more deaf, more hardened, apparently more profane in
life, more corrupt in judgment, more resolute in Popery than before? In a
word, so small is the power of the Gospel, that we may fear lest it be taking
her farewell, (where it may expect to prevail more) unless we do prevent it
by our speedy amendment.

3. As all Politicians hold, that a sign of a commonwealth falling and near
the period, isto restore, favor, and increase the number of mutinous and once
rebellious Citizens; so of the ruin of the Church, when the number of ancient
enemies are suffered daily to increase, as the heresy of Arius increased, the
orthodox Pastors and Professors decreased, till the whole world marveiled that
it became an Arrian; and as the Antichristian heresy increased, so dyed the
visibility of the Church, being forced to fly into the wilderness. If Papists
and Antichristian Babylonians increase upon us in numbers, power, in boldness,
who are enraged with fury against us, they will easily grow too strong for us;
if we throw them down and make them hide their heads, whom God honors most,
as in whom his image most shines, how can the Church but go into the
wilderness? where did these Wolves and Lions ever rest but they devoured the
flock of Christ, witness the foreign parts at this day: Lenity to Vipers
destroys commonwealths and Churches.

4. Peace, prosperity and wealth generally abused; this was a forerunner of
the Churches flight into the wilderness in this Text. The Historian tells us
that Foelix no^ est diuturnus, but is either punished of God for the abuse, or
by men for envy, sometimes for fear of their greatness; so it is with the
Church, ease slays her, hurtful riches wound her, security feeds upon her.
If we see our peace generally abused to pride, and wantonness, to boldness in
sinning and going on in impenitency, to neglect and contemn the means of
grace, and hardening our hearts, saying to Prophets prophecy not in that name,
or, we will not hear, Ier. 44. 16. to delight and rest in flattering and
smooth Ministers that may not disturb us, Esaias 30. 10. to dull us from hearing
the rod, not turning to the smiter, to rest in the outward means of good and
not on the Author and blesser; All these fore-runneth desolation and shows
the Church to be near the wilderness.

II. The second point in the woman's flight is her sustentation, that they
should feed her, alluding to the feeding of the Church of the Jews in the
wilderness; this woman is fled into the vaste and desolate wilderness, where
she is sure to be safe, because the Text says, God has prepared her a place;
but now she seems in as ill case as before, what shall she do for food?
there is no tilling, sowing, reaping, no fruits in the barren wilderness, how
shall she do for food? the Text answers, They shall feed her. The word [They]
stands in relation to some persons spoken of before, for it is not said, That
she should be fed, nor that he, that is, the Lord, might feed her, but that
they should feed her. Now who are those that must feed her? The words then have
reference to Chapter the 11. and 2. so that the two witnesses shall feed her,
for the time of both fitly agrees.

Quest.What is meant by those two witnesses?

Ans. The Papists grossly conceive them to be Henoc and Elias, who, they say,
are reserved above in Paradise to return again in the days of Antichrist to
oppose him, whom Antichrist shall slay and trample their dead bodies in the
streets of Jerusalem, but they shall revive the third day, at which miracle
the Jews, say they, shall be converted to Christ, and shall slay Antichrist in
the Mount Olivet, and cleave unto Christ, who shall come again five and forty
days after.

A notorious fable without all color of Scripture, for of Henochs return in
flesh or spirit is not a syllable in the Scripture; and of Elias his spiritual
return it was ^^^formed before Saint John writ this Prophecy, as our Savior
affirms, Matthew. 17. 11. in John Baptist; I forbear to follow or persecute so
manifest a falsehood.

Some also understand them of such Pastors and witnesses of the truth as
assisted the woman and resisted the corruptions of those times; not too
precisely, but a few noted by that number, and by that number because the law
requires two witnesses at least to confirm every truth.

But I do understand the two witnesses to be the two Testaments of holy
Scripture; for,

1. Both witness unto God in his holiness, truth, power, justice, mercy, and
all other attributes; and to Christ, John 5.

2. Both witness the will of God to man in all things to be believed. done.


3. Both witness against the wicked, not the Law only, not Moses only, but
the Gospel, the word that I speak, says Christ, shall judge you at the last
day.

4. Both feed the woman in the wilderness, maintaining heavenly life and
strength, both supply her with a daily shower of Mannah, as was notably
prefigured in that type; to which allusion because the Spirit of God here
looks, I rather choose this interpretation of Augustine, and others.

The words thus unfolded, we may learn,

That God feeds his children even in the wilderness, and provideth for his
own in times of Doct.
greatest scarcity; as here the woman in a place of famine, barrenness,
banishment and persecution is fed and provided for: Never was the Israel of GOD
without a shower of Mannah nor a Rock of water in the dry and barren
wilderness. 1 Kings 19. 6. Eliah flying for his life is fed by an Angel; and
what else would our Savior teach by tho^^ two miracles of so many thousand in
the wilderness; with so small means, Matthew. 14. 18. but that such as follow
Christ and cleave unto his word shall not be destitute of any thing needful,
though in never so vast and terrible a wilderness?

They are first in respect of God, secondly, of Reas. 1.
themselves.

In respect of God for three causes.

1. Because of his gracious promise so often passed, Psalm. 34. 10. The Lions
shall want, but they that fear the Lord they shall want nothing that is good,
Psalm. 84. 11. no good thing shall be wanting to him that lives uprightly,
Psalm. 37. 19. they shall have enough in days of famine; for godliness has
the promise even of this life as well as of that to come.

2. Because of his mighty power who can do what he has promised.

1. He can create food where none is, as Mannah in the wilderness, and water
out of a Rock, the most unlikely means in the world, and out of an Asses
tooth to Samson, as dry as a flint.

2 He can multiply a little and make it supply many, and make it last long,
as, 1 Kings 17. 14. the Meal in the barrel, 2 Kings 4. 3. Oil in the C^use;
we see the like in Christ's miracles, feeding many thousand with seven Loaves.

3. He can by extraordinary means supply his servants, if ordinary fail; if
men feed not Elias, Angels shall, if Angels do not Ravens shall.

4. He can without all means sustain them, if both ordinary and extraordinary
fail them, as Moses and Elias forty days without any food: This mighty power
added to his promise, assures his Church to be fed, seeing nothing can hinder
him from doing them good.

3. Because of the fullness and abundance of grace in God, and fullness of
goodness to communicate it; who can deny him to be the Ocean and full Sea,
even the inexhaustible fountain of goodness? and who can hinder his full
streams from issuing forth, and running abroad in all affluence? or whether
should it flow and issue if not to his Sanctuary? who have the Buckets to draw
out of this deep Well but believers?

In regard of themselves, and in this respect there are three more causes.

1. The right of the Church; for the believer having Christ has in him right
to all things of this Reas. 2.
life, good for them; If Christ be yours then all is yours, whether things
present or to come, 1 Cor. 3. 22.

2. Their relation to God; they are nearer than Gentiles, yet he feeds them;
they are nearer than Oxen, yet God has care of oxen; they are nearer than
sparrowes, yet he feeds them; for,

1. They are his servants: The Prodigal child's father is said to have bread
enough for his servants, much more have Gods servants in his house.

2. They are children: He that provideth for dogs and Swine, will he not
provide for his children?

3. They are the Spouse and wife of Christ: will a loving husband suffer his
dear wife to want food and necessaries if he know her need, and be able to
supply it? therefore so long as the Lord has knowledge of the Chuches estate
and love of her person, she shall not be destitute.

3. Their power and prevailing of their faith procures them food; they trust
in him and commend themselves to his care, and their faith is such as cannot
leave them ashamed; besides, this faith is accompanied with their prayers of
faith, which is the key of heaven, and a powerful and undeniable means of
speeding, because of the promise, that whatsoever we ask in faith we shall
obtain; and shall faith prevail for the greater and not for the less, for
heaven and not for earth?

Of comfort to the true Church and members of Use I.
it, who can never be Orphans or destitute, seeing the Lord can take up any
wilderness, to be as an Inn for her; the wilderness in which they are, may
want means, but they shall want none so long as he has fullness; never
discontent thy self or ask the question; as the Disciples, Matthew. 15. 33.
Where shall we have so much bread in the wilderness? In these hard times of
scarcity set thy faith to work, and it will tell thee as Abraham his son, God
will provide: much less may thou murmr as Israel against Moses, Have thou
brought us into the wilderness to starve us? No, no, God does it to feed thee
as well as them; thou shall want nothing if thou want not faith.

To teach us to acknowledge and depend upon Gods Providence for the whole
provision of our Use II.
lives, because he has a rich storehouse every where, that can never fail, as
rich in the wilderness as in the City.

1. For spiritual refreshing and comfort; Art thou destitute, or fear such
times may come, in which vision may be precious? for God can as easily and
suddenly turn our spiritual plenty into famine or dearth, as he lately did
our temporal; Oh then what should I do? Fly the corruption of the world,
follow the Lord unfainedly; preserve an hunger and appetite after grace, and
even in this barren wilderness thou shall not be destitute of the sound
consolation of the Gospel, which to want, were the most grievous and heavy
famine of all: God will one way or other send his two witnesses, and they shall
feed thee; for as all the world could not hinder the Mannah from falling in the
wilderness; so all the tyrants on the earth shall not hinder from thee these
sweet showers of this heavenly Mannah in thy wandering and wilderness.

2. Want thou earthly comforts, and art thou as in a barren wilderness
without means: set thy faith a while to feed upon the promise, Hebr. 13. I will
not leave nor forsake thee; and this faith will certainly get fruition, thou
shall be fed assuredly. But mark the promise, God promises not always wealth,
abundance, nor any great store of dainties, but that even in the wilderness
thou shall be fed, sustained, comforted; as Israel in the wilderness had no
great variety, but were fed, had no abundance, and yet no want. God that sends
Elias bread and flesh by the Ravens, sent him not a banquet and sweet meats,
for he must drink of the brook running by; and he that gave Israel bread and
flesh in the wilderness, gave not both at once, to teach us to be content
with things present, if we can have bread and no flesh.

Ob.But if we must do nothing but depend on God, we may live easily and
without care.

Ans. I. True faith is never idle but most industrious in the means, and
though labor is no cause, yet it is a means in which God gives us food.

2. The wilderness is a place of labor, for though God gives bread from
heaven, yet he created it not in every man's Tent, or rained it into every man's
hatch, but scatters it abroad without the Tents that they might go forth and
gather it; so where God affords any means we must use them conscionably,
for spiritual food is a labor appointed, John 4. 14. and we must go forth
and draw in the Wels of salvation, Isa. 4. and for temporal, if any idle body
will not labor he ought not to eat.

To stir us up to contentation, if God only feed Use III.
us, though we want abundance and store, as he dealt with Israel in the
wilderness, so now he gives to every man his Omer and measure, according to
the measure of his own wisdom, and with thy measure thou must be contented:
The Physicians rule for quantity of food must stand, and what thou want in
quantity thou have in quality and sweetness.

Nay further, stir up thy self with thankfulness to God thy feeder and
preserver: If a friend should in our distress take us in and give us boade but
a month or two, we think we could scarce be thankful enough unto him; the Lord
in this our wilderness supplyeth all our wants, feeds our souls with
heavenly Mannah, our bodies with daily bread, fills our cups with water out
of the Rock, spreads his own table for us, sets Christ upon it, the
bread of life, covers our boards also and makes our cups run over in the
sight of our adversaries, and is never weary of his cost and charges upon us:
now how should a right ordered heart bestirre it self in thankfulness for so
great favors, and express it in all duties. Let us quicken our selves in this
duty, which both retains old favors, and inviteth new.

III. The third point in the woman's flight in this verse, is the time of her
mansion and continuance in the wilderness, namely one thousand two hundred
sixty days, wherein observe,

1. What is meant by days. 2. What or when were these days. 3. Why this time
is reckoned by days.
I. By these days are meant so many years, for all things almost in the
Revelation are expressed according to the manner of ancient types, as we have
hitherto in this chapter declared. Now to reckon so man^y years by so many
days, may seem strange to him that is not acquainted with the Prophets, and
yet it is observed usually through the whole Bible, except by Daniel, who
reckons not always by days of years, but by the weeks of years,
according to the use and style of the Chaldeans, amongst whom and in whose
tongue he wrote; Ezekiel. 4. 5, 6. he is commanded to lie on his left side 390.
days, for 390. years of their iniquity and idolatry. God had patiently
suffered them 390. years, now shall they suffer sword and famine 390. days,
which is a year and 25. days, or about 13. months, the time of the siege and
straitness. Numb. 14. 34. the Israelites are commanded to walk and wander in
the wilderness forty years, according to the forty days in searching the
Land, a day for a year, recompencing every dram of sin with a pound of
sorrow; so as a prophetical day is a year. And this of necessity every one
must believe; for howsoever Daniel, 9. 24. reckons the prophecy of the
coming of the Messiah by weeks, yet every day of those weeks must be
measured by prophetical days, namely, every day for a year, else the just
time of Christ's coming will not fall right as it ought to do; and accordingly
we read in Scriptures, not of an ordinary week of days, but of a week of
years, containing seven years, Exodus 23. 20. the common week of days
resembling and signifying a week of years; so also, not only of a year of
days, but a year of years, every such year containing 360. years, as the
common years amongst Hebrews and Grecians continued so many days.

II. For the period of these days when they begun or ended,

1. We must remember that we have said, that this is inferred by
anticipation, and is to be referred unto the fourteenth verse.

2. That it is the same time, with times, time, and half a time there
mentioned, the finding out of which will help us to the clearing of this.

3. That it must set in after the second assault of the dragon, mentioned verse
the 13. and is not properly to be handled now, while we are in the first
assault of the dragon by heathen Emperors.

4. It must be the same time with the 42. months, Cap. 11. 2. wherein
Antichrist shall tread down the holy City; for these being months of years,
reckoning to every month thirty days, according to the Hebrews and
Egyptians, are just thirty years in every month of years, and so forty two
months of years, make just the same number of 1260 years here mentioned,
agreeing with the three years and a half, prophesied by Daniel for the reign
of Antichrist, which being years of years, because prophetical, every month
containing 12. months of years, which make 360. which number being multiplied
by three and an half, amount in the total to 1260. years as in our Text.

5. It cannot be meant as the Papists fable of their Antichrist, who, say they,
must reign three years and an half of natural years; we must watch the
subtilty of Papists, who would have us to seek the rise of Antichrist in the
end of the world, after this ruin; but the three years and an half are
prophetical years, and make just 1260 years, all which time the Church is in
the wilderness.

Neither can this time begin, as Iunius and sundry other worthy me^ do affirm,
at the passion of Christ, and determined in the time of Boniface the 8. for it
must be of things after John, and after Domitian, yea, after the heathen
Emperors, after the first conflict with the dragon, which lasted many hundred
years after Christ.

6. Now whether it be a finite time for a definite, as amongst other godly
learned, our late grave and gracious Bishop Abbot demonstrateth, page 108
controversy; or whether we may with proof or probability define some
certain period for beginning or end of it, we will reserve the determination
of it to the proper place in the fourteenth verse, and will not be wanting in
diligence to find out and settle on the truth, as the Lord shall reveal.

Quest. III. Why does the Spirit of God here so strictly and precisely reckon
up the time of the woman's oppression under Antichrist, and the woman's
persecution in the wilderness by so many days, and not roundly and shortly by
so many months and years?

Ans. For four causes.

1. To note the singular watchfulness and Providence of God over the woman,
who is daily and hourly with his servants present, to take notice of every
days sorrow and suffering, which himself appoints and determines.

2. To show that all the children of the Church should take notice of their
daily need of spiritual food, and gather it daily in the means, as Israel
needed daily provision of Mannah in the wilderness, and God gave the^ not an
harvest once a year or month, but a daily harvest to supply their need; they
must continue their dependence on his hand for a daily shower of Mannah.

3. To note the continual use of the Scripture for our strength and comfort,
for these witnesses wait on the daily necessities of the Church, and supply
the soul with daily bread; these witnesses are not like some that come once a
month, or once a quarter, but are in perpetual watchtower to feed the woman
daily.

4. To note the wisdom of the Lords provision, who feeds his Church as
Israel in the wilderness, but by the day, or as Elias in the wilderness,
morning and evening; the Lord allows enough for the day, but is not prodigal.

1. Because he will preserve in her an appetite.

2. To show the price of his food, it is precious, hidden and heavenly Mannah,
sweet as Mannah, or honey, more durable; it makes her live for ever, see,
Psalm 19. 10. etc. 119. 103.

3. To inure her to contentedness in all things with daily bread, and if he
feed her from hand to mouth, she must think it well, he owes her not so
much; he would have all the children of the Church to curb greedy desires, and
be contented with things present.

Note what a long time is set down for the woman's abode in the wilderness
under Antichrist 1260. years. Teaching us,

Doct. That the Church may be a long time under grievous affliction; so was
Israel a stranger, and under strange and strong burdens in Egypt four
hundred years, the Jews in the Babylonish captivity seventy years, the ten
general persecutions lasted 300. years till Constantine; but here is one of
Antichrist beyond them all.

Quest. What is the reason, is not God able to deliver his Church sooner, or
does he delight in the misery of his Church?

Ans. 1. Neither of both, but first, by protracting the war he shows his
continual power and care in preserving her through her assault, and leading
her through the Pikes into safety, and now subscribeth to the truth of his
promises.

2. Shakes her out of security, and forces her to keep on her armor, and to
stand upon her watch, the less hope of rest or truce that she can expect.

3. By continuance of her trial, he will continue her faith and patience,
excite her prayers, and exercise all her graces, especially train her in
humility, while the continuance of her smart holds in her sight the
continuance of her sin.

4. That her deliverance long deferred may be more desired, and sweeter when
it comes; how sweet was Isreal's passage out of Egypt after 400. years?

5. That she may take notice of the severity of Gods justice; and what
continual torments are reserved for his enemies, seeing he lingreth such
heavy sorrows on his own servants; If the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly appear?

Quest. How stands this with those places that say, our afflictions are light
and momentany, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and that God hides his face but for a moment,
Esa. 54. 8. Are 1260. years but a moment?

Answ. 1. The afflictions of the Church are light and short, first, not simply
and absolutely, but in comparison to aeternall glory.

2. Not in themselves or their own nature, but in respect of grace that makes
them light, when sin is repented and pardoned in the soul.

3. Not in the smart the effect of them, for so, often they are long, but in
respect of sin the cause deserving them, they are light and short.

4. Not to sense, but to faith they are short, which apprehends Gods favor,
presence, and promise of a good issue.

5. Not in the glass of the law, but in the Gospel they are short in Christ,
his sweetning them, sustaining us, and shortning them,

6. Not in respect of the term of this life, for so they are long, but in
respect of aeternall glory and rest following them, they are but a moment.

Long and durable sorrows are no signs of Gods Use. 1.
hatred, Eccles. 9. 1. for then the Church could have no certainty of Gods
favor; say not with thy self, none was ever so afflicted with long and bitter
sorrows, and, God is gone for ever and a day, and his mercy is clean shut up
in displeasure; but consider,

1. He left not the Church in this long trial in so dreadful and forsaken
wilderness; the Arc was safe on a world of waters.

2. Whether thy sins have not been long a growing on, therefore they will not
hastily away, but are like spots long settled in cloth, and require much
scouring and rubbing.

3. Whether ever thy heart and joys would be pulled off the world, if the
Lord should not with strong hand force thee out, as Israel out of Egypt,
dealing as the nurse weaning the child, being fond on the breast, lays
mustard on it to make it distaste it.

4. Whether thou have not more cause in durable trials to suspect thy want of
love to God, rather than Gods want of love to thee, and whether thou have not
with thee hard knots that had need of hard wedges?

To terrify Gods own children from presuming either to attempt or hold any of
their sins; embolden Use II.
not thy self to sin, because thou art near or dear to God; for,

1. He looks to have more service from thee, that stand nearer him in
profession than others, his eye is most on his garden, and he will be
sanctified in all that come near him; if thou will grow wild it were good for
thee to stand in the waste, and not in the profession.

2. If thou will hold thy sin against him, thou shall know, that though he
will not take away his grace, so he will not take away his rod.

Comfort the godly in their tedious and durable trials. Use III.


1. Though they belong yet the Lord supplyeth them all the time with needful
supplies and comforts; he sends none into the wilderness to famish, but to
feed them, and what comfort so ever they want, yet they want not the two
witnesses, for if she did she were sure to perish, yet were she not sustained
by the word, the Lord Jesus should be quite cast out of his possession, and so
lose his kingdom on earth, which cannot be.

2. How long so ever they be, they are all determined by God, for entrance,
continuance, and conclusion, there is a certain time which they shall not
pass, for he that sets the bounds to the raging Sea, has set bounds to
the raging of devils and wicked men, and says, thus far they shall come, and
no farther; and then after many days he will bring her out of the wilderness
into a more convenient and comfortable estate, which shall be as an harbor or
haven so much more sweet and desirable, as the waves and billows of a trouble
some sea have been dreadful and dangerous: As there is an hour for the
entrance of power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. so it is appointed for durance,
Exodus 12. 41. we have seen a great part of these years passed, and they
draw to expiration, therefore do the enemies of the Church bestirre
themselves, because the time is but short, yet this time is determined when the
Church shall be eased.

Verse. 7. And there was a battle in heaven.] Having largely described the
combatants in the former part of the chapter, now the Spirit of God comes to
declare the battle it self, unto which there has been such preparation; and
this is no small controversy or trifling conflict, but the greatest battle
that ever was fought in the world, and that in three respects.

1. In respect of the place; other battles are fought on earth, but this in
heaven; not the heaven taken naturally, but figuratively; not in the highest
heaven, which is no place of dragons or quarrels, but in the heaven on earth,
which is the Church militant, called by the name of heaven, as we have showed
verse the first, for many reasons.

2. It is great in respect of the armies, whether we consider the greatness of
the Generals Michael and the dragon, or the valor or numbers of their forces,
for both these Generals come with their Angels, which are great in multitude,
in power.

3. Great in respect of the quarrel and cause, namely, whether Jehovah or
Jupiter be superior, whether Christ or Beliall, whether Christianisme or
Paganism must prevail; whether Christian religion or Idolatrous worship be
more ancient, more venerable, more ample, and of more worthy respect and
acceptance.

This Verse propounds, 1. The battle, And there was a battle. 2. The
armies, Michael and his Angels.


The former part predicteth this feirce fight, where for the meaning are four
Questions.

Quest. 1. Why I call it a prediction or prophecy, being delivered in the time
past, and not in the time to come? it is not said, there shall be a great
battle, but there was, as if it had been past, rather than to come?

Ans. The manner of the Prophets in speaking of future events, is, to propound
them in the time past, Esaias 53. 5, 6, 7.

1. For their more evidence and certainty in themselves, as surely they shall
come to pass, as if they were past already.

2. For the surer confirmation of the faith of the Church, who are bound as
certainly to believe, be they never so unlikely, as if they were past already.

3. That we might more easily conceive of the words of the Prophets to be
true, and the word of God, to whom past and present are both alike, and who
has power to speak unto us in what manner himself pleases.

Quest. 2. Of what battle is this to be understood?

Ans. 1. It is not to be meant of that battle between Michael and the dragon
in the wilderness, for that was past, but this was of a future event after
John's time, and that battle was between the Generals only.

2. Neither is it to be meant of that perpetual war in the militant Church,
between the elect and the reprobates, both men and Angels, which has continued
in the several ages of the world from the beginning, under the conduct of
those great Captains, Christ and the dragon, for this here is of a war not
yet begun when John prophesied, but that was.

3. We properly understand it of some special and notable part of that war,
which in the spring of the Evangelical Church, Satan raised to the overthrow
of the salvation of it. Now whether the Spirit of God had an aim at the wars
of Constantine, that great champion of Christ, who under Christ's Standard made
war with, and overthrew Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licimous, horrible dragons
and tyrants, (as were likely) I will not certainly define; but without all
doubt that was included in this prophecy, if not principally meant, of which
Eusebius. lib. 9 cap. 9. who says, he received from Constantine himself the
narration of the fight and victory.

Quest. 3.

Why does the Spirit of God foretell this battle?

Answ. 1. The Lord would not have his Church conceive, that here she has found
any resting place, or can enjoy perpetual halcion days; but that there
abides unto her many irreconciliable wars in this military condition against
diverse enemies, heretical, tyrannical, and Antichristian.

2. He would manifest his care and wisdom over his Church and children, whose
trials he foretells, that they might not think them come by chance, or God
not foreseeing them, or distrust his favor, while they are exercised by them,
but in these predictions might see him both ordering them for his glory, and
for their salvation.

3. God would not have troubles come on a sudden, or stealing on his servants,
but with warning, that they might arm and prepare themselves with wisdom,
fortitude, and patience to resist them; that the Church might stand her ground,
not discouraged, Iacula facilius ex^ipiuntur si praevide antur.
much less cast away her confidence, that he might abate the smart of them,
if they were sudden, and blunt the edge of them, by providing for them.

Quest. 4.

But why does the Lord ordain or permot this fight and opposition, being
against his glory, his Church, his truth, and his servants? or how can he be
merciful and good to protract and permit so great evils.

Ans. 1. As God is good in his mercy, so he is no less good and great in his
justice.

2. This fight against the Church is not simply evil, but has in it a respect
of good, and therefore God permits it, because,

1. It is partly an execution of justice, and a just correction of the sins
of the Church.

2. It is such an evil as much good is thence produced to the Church, as
hereafter we shall see.

3. It is not such an evil, but that Gods wisdom and power can, and does
moderate, order, bridle, and turn to a good end and issue; the dragon indeed
intends them mischievouslly to quench the graces of God; the wicked agent^
under him directly fight against his glory, and truth, and chosen ones, and
would chase them into the bottom of the sea, to drown them, as Pharaoh; but
Gods mighty power and wisdom, hereby, will chase them to heaven, as he did
Israel to Canaan, being a wise Physician, that can temper hemlock and poison to
a medicine, and remedy; and overruled the poisoned crooked wills of graceless
men, to the effecting of his own most gracious pleasure, and righteous will;
so as we may say to our brethren, when, forgetting nature, grace, humanity,
Christianity, they contrive to cast us into pits, and sell, and send us away, as
Joseph's brethren, to put a little base profit into their own purses, Genesis 50.
20. when they thought evil against me, God did dispose it to my good: You, who
should have been my natural brethren, thought me in too high favor with my
father; you envied his love to me; you thought if you could sell me off, all
should be yours, and therefore wracked on me your barbarous malice; but see,
God over-ruleth your rage; your fierceness could not frustrate the good
purpose of God, who, against all your plots, has raised me to save much
people alive.

Object. But is not the Gospel a Gospel of peace, Gods kingdom a kingdom of
peace, and Christ himself the Prince of peace, typified in Melchisedek, Isa.
9. the professors of the Gospel sons of peace, how will this stand thus with
such open hostility and perpetual war? how is it true, Isa. 9. 7. there
shall be no end of peace, when we see there is no end of war?

Ans. 1. these two are not contradictory, to be at peace and at war at the
same time, because they are not in the same respect; so our Savior teaches,
In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me, at the same time, ye shall
have peace, John 16. 33. the reason is, because those that are Gods consist of
two parts, flesh, and spirit; according to the spirit they are in Christ, and
according to the body they are in the world; therefore when in their spirits
they enjoy the peace of Christ, they are in the body afflicted in the world, a
wicked man cannot so be. He that is wholly in, and of the world, having
affliction, has no conjunction of peace, but are oppressed and overwhelmed
with sorrow, because the true peace of heart is only in Christ, and received
by the spirit of faith.

2. Peace is the daughter of war, and by war the Saints attain and retain
peace; were they not at war with the dragon and the world, they could never
enjoy an hour of peace; I find more sweet in wicked men's malice, than in
their delicates.

3. Distinguish of peace, it is either spiritual, or carnal, the peace of
Christ, or of the world, which the Disciples themselves expected by Christ,
when the temporal dominion should be restored to Israel, and the Jews
delivered from the Roman bondage, supposing they should be great Rulers in
their Countries, but Christ wishes the^ to dream of no such thing; this peace
Christ disclaimeth, as, Mat. 10. 34. Think not I am come to send peace, but a
sword and fire.

Secondly, there is a spiritual and inward peace, which Christ claims to be
his; My peace I leave with you; he brings that peace to the world, which the
world gives not, nor knows not; a peace, not with the dragon or his party,
but peace with God, peace of conscience, and peace with all men so far as
lies in them: This is the peace of Gods kingdom, which is not interrupted by
wars with the dragon and the world, but established.

4. We must with Luther distinguish of war; there is an Active war and a
Passive; Christ, and his Gospel, and servants move no Active war, the Gospel
of peace proclameth peace, not war; the end of his coming, and the Gospel
publishing, is to set all things at peace: But there is a passive war waged by
the Prince of darkness, and discord, against Christ and his people, and the
son of peace by all his skill cannot avoid this war; not that it is a fruit
or effect of the Gospel, or by any fault or cause in in the Gospel, which
persuades peace and concord with God and man; but occasionally, and by an
accidental event; partly by the malice of the devil, that manslayer, who,
being that Prince of darkness, deadly hates the light; partly by the malice
of the world, which yields not unto the truth, and holy admonitions, but
warreth againstit, and chaseth it, so far as they can, out of the world; and
partly out of the wicked concupiscence of the children of darkness, James 4.
1. Now were it not for the enmity of this wicked One, and ones, against the
Gospel, there would be no hurt in all the maintenance of holiness.

Only here note, how wide they are that call for, and commend an unlimited
peace, whereas the Gospel only calls for a well conditioned peace.

1. No peace is good but which flows from peace with God, none against him; defy
that peace that is at defiance with the God of peace; beware of an impious
peace.

2. No peace but joined with holiness, Heb. 12. 14. carnal companionship is a
peace in sin, drunkenness, swearing; the devil divides not his kingdom;
Christians must own no such hellish peace; detest such a profane peace.

3. No peace but with truth, which is magnified above peace against popish
pacification, conversing with Papists; shall we betray the truth of God under
the pretense of peace? no peace without contention for truth.

4. No peace but with good conscience; secure Protestants will have peace in
their sins, let them alone they will let you alone; run with them, they
like you, oppose godliness these precise ways, oh you win them for ever;
but all is against the Gospel; but better is a godly distraction, than a
wicked peace.

The Church and members must be in perpetual Doct.
war, while it is upon earth, as Israel in the wilderness had daily wars
and resistances, so all the Israel of God in the wilderness of this world:
Hence it is, that the Church of God on earth is called militant, because it is
an inseparable adjunct of it, to be in perpetual flight and battle, Ephesians 6.
12. we wrestle against principalities and powers, and that without
intermission; and if we must still put on the armor of God, this implies a
perpetual battle.

God will have us put a difference between heaven and earth, and know, that
this is not our resting place, and that rest is not gotten with ease; he will
have us prize the worth of it in the difficulty, danger, and strife in
attaining it; he will crown none without lawful striving, because none can
overcome that fights not.

The Lord hereby provideth for his own glory, for, whereas if it pleased him,
he might put forth his Reas. 2.
mighty power in preventing all molestation, and overthrowing all his and the
Churches enemies at once, and so procure to his Church perfect peace and
prosperity, even in the world; but he more magnifieth himself in the victory
of his servants, than in their peace, and they are more glorious in their
faith, constancy, fortitude, and patience, than in their peace, rest, and
security.

The state and constitution of the Church is such, as Reas. 3.
none can be servants of Christ but soldiers, for,

1. So long as the enmity of the seed of the woman, and the Serpent lasts,
there is no hope of truce, or cessation of arms.

2. There cannot be spirit but there will be a combat between flesh and
spirit, which, if neither the first Adam, nor the second, both in innocence,
can escape, how shall we expect to avoid it in state of corruption? so long as
there is light, darkness will fight against it.

3. Where any grace is; as is in every true Christians heart, there is
something worth stealing, there the thief lays battery, where he knows
the treasure is; yea, the same men who were quiet enough before the appearing
of grace, are now so raged against it, as, if either inward temptation or
outward fury can prevail, they shall be cast down as Paul.

4. Where there is but an entrance into the profession, an admission into the
family of Christ, a receiving of our Captains presse-money, and a promise to
fight the good fight of faith, that is cause enough of quarrel; and even so
much or so little shall not want keen blows from the dragon, and the world.

5. Suppose a man should want enemies without him, yet he wants no enemy so
long as he carries about himself, himself is exercise enough to himself
all his life long, and the better he knows himself, the better shall he
know this truth.

The Lord hereby provideth for his Churches good, and the furthering of her
salvation, and that Reason. 4.
many ways.

1. He lets her see the great malice and hatred of the dragon against her,
and the extent of his mighty power against her, against which she could no way
stand, but in the power of God; thus he humbles her in her self, shakes her
out of her security, drives her out of her self, and chaseth her to her fort
and refuge, even God himself her rock.

2. He lets her see the desert of her sins in some measure; and so to
further her repentance; for though he have laid the chastisement of her peace
on his Son, yet he, by these wicked instruments, fatherly corrects us as
children, so Job 13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me
possess the sins of my youth. This good the Lord brings out of the evil
intentions of the dragon; he both awakeneth the conscience to find out, and
hunt out secret sins, which before she was not aware of, and as this sharp
water of affliction clears her sight, so she finds that the greatest
strength of the dragon is in her own corruption; she is now more wary to
prevent sin for time to come, as the buffettings of Satan kept under Paul's
pride, and suffered him not to be exalted above measure.

3. The Lord hereby sets and keeps all the graces of his servants in
exercise, and so preserves and strengthens them; as the health of the body is
preserved by bodily exercise, so the health of the soul: Now in conflict they
find the use, and worth, and measure of their faith, hope, patience, prayers,
which before were weak and languishing.

4. The Lord sets enemies perpetually in the necks of his servants, not that
they may be overcome, but that they may not be overcome; he knows, standing
brooks gather dregs, that unused iron gathers rust. David in all his battles
stood unconquered, but in his peace and rest was soon foiled, whereas in this
battle none are foiled but cowards, and none can hold out but are crowned.

Seeing he can be no Christian that knows no combats: let us lay up the
point of wisdom to Use. I.
forecast and make account of the battle, and know we have blows and bullets
to pass through. Holy Job waited when his changes would come, and it was his
wisdom, for time came when he had thrust upon thrust, messenger upon
messenger, yea, changes and armies of sorrows encamped about him in one day,
Chap 10. 8.

Quest. How shall we wisely forecast days of trial and battle?

Answ. 1. Know we have enemies round about, such as will slip no advantage
offered; we say, opportunity makes a knave; our enemies are wrathful,
watchful, and never far off.

2. Labor to stand prepared: Do thou not see an enemy now in the field
against thee, yet be wise, in peace provide for war; a wise Pilot in a calm
stands ready for a storm; the soldiers who are out in the field, because
they know not when the enemy will set out on them, lie night and day in their
armor, lest they be surprised unawares; and we should account it a great
folly, while the enemy is laying on, and wounding, and slashing, that we
should be then to seek our armor, or to buckle it upon us.

3. Be wise to look for one skirmish after another; not for one assault or
two, but many, one in the neck of another; for as Jobs messengers overtooke
one another, and as one wave overtaketh another, so may our assaults; and
therefore after rain we must look for showers; many good men here are blame
worthy, both such as look for no shaking, as David, Psalm 30. 6. who come too
near the curse of evil men, noted, Psalm. 10. 5, 6. who defy all enemies and
say, I shall never be moved, or see danger; as such also as after one trouble
stand not in expectation of any other, as foolish children, having been once
taken up, think they shall be beaten no more that day, do what they will.

If the true Church be ever in combat, then small Use II.
is the comfort of an easy and peaceable life: Are perpetual wars in hand,
and yet do thou neither strike a stroke, nor bear any blows? is the whole
life of a Christian a fight of faith? what comfort can he have, that never
spent hour in the Lords cause or quarrel? To such as will be at rest, I say.

1. It is likely thou have yielded up thy self a slave to the devil, and so
the strong man having the hold, all is at peace, else should thou find him
a Lion, not a Lamb.

2. All is not such peace with thee, as thou pretendest, for thou art at war
with Jesus Christ, and fightest earnestly for lusts, voluptuousness,
idleness, carnal security, because the state of this life admits no
lookers on, but all fight on one side or other; if thou art not with Christ,
thou art against him.

3. The end of such as look for no assaults, is, that the evil day comes
and takes them, as a foul in an evil net, Eccles. 9. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.

4. To such as be the Lords, who have not been so acquainted with combat, I
say, the more is behind: Some Christians lives are like April weather, full of
showers and storms, as Jacobs; some have a sound shower in the morning or
beginning of conversion; some have a sound dash about noone, as Job, some carry
fair till toward night, and then a great storm comes in the evening, as
Peter, when he was old was girt and led whether he would not, John 21. 18.
and suppose thou escape till toward death, shall not then the forces be
redoubled? assure thy self, every soldier that stands behind in the
reareward of this field, shall be led forward to service.

To comfort such as know distress and conflict, being Use III.
beset with evils, both within them, and without them, yea, be it thou find
the breaches and batteries which the enemy has made in thy soul, yet hold
thy resolution, to live and die in the service and quarrel of thy Lord; and
know,

1. It is a note that thou art got out of Satan's power, and therefore he
throws all his fiery darts against thee; what need he fight with his
friends, who have yielded themselves into his power? no, his assault is against
the woman and her seed.

2. There is somewhat worth keeping; a Thief would be loath to assault a man
without a booty, and the robbers care not to rifle an empty Chest; this enemy
plots not but against grace, and where somewhat is to be gotten; a man that
has much money will fight stoutly.

3. Thy afflicted estate is no other condition than that of thy other brethren
and sisters in the world; nay, if the green tree could not escape the brunt,
how shall the dry? Christ therefore says to his Disciples, Ye shall be
hated of all men for my sake.

4. A valiant soldier has cause to glory in his scarres and wounds, which are
signs of his faithfulness and fortitude: Do thou carry the reproaches of
Christ as thy crown and glory, look upon thy gashes and wounds in thy name
and state, as on the marks of Christ, so did Paul, and Moses, who esteemed the
rebukes of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.

The world is ashamed at these marks, as if they were a brand in the hand, or
an hole in the ear, whereas indeed they are the marks of Christ, not only
because the party is a member of his body, but his suffering is a part of
Christ's suffering, not meritorious as his, but glorious as his were, which he
would not put off in his resurrection; Christians must be ashamed of doing
evil, and suffering for evil, not of suffering for well doing, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Now after we have spoken of the battle, we come to consider the armies: On
the one side stands Michael and his Angels, and on the contrary side fight
the dragon and his Angels. In the former are three questions considerable.

Quest. 1. Who is this Michael?

Ans. 1. Christ himself for these Reasons.

1. It is so expounded verse 10. Now is salvation in heaven, and the strength
and kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: he that is there called
Christ, is here called Michael.

2. This place is an allusion to Daniel 10. 13. and 21. where by Michael must
be meant Christ, who is the Prince and Captain of his Church, against the
devil and his host.

3. The composition of the word of three Hebrew particles, Mi-ca-el, who is
like or equal to the Lord; now only Christ thought it no robbery to be equal
to God, Phil. 2. 6.

4. We read no where in Scripture of this name, but Christ himself must be
understood, Iud. 9. Michael the Archangel was Christ himself, that place
alluding to Zach. 3. 2. where the Prophet calls him Jehovah that spoke those
words; which name, Jehovah, is never given to any but God, as other his titles
are.

5. The Prince and General of the Lords war, is the Son of God, Joshua 5.
14 and verse 5. he is called lehovah, and is described, Revel. 9. 11. Sitting
on a white horse, having eyes like a slaming fire, his garment dyed with blood,
his name the word of God, out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, he rules the
Nations with a rod of iron, and on his thigh is writ, Rex Regum, and Dominus
Dominantium. This description belongs to Christ only, not to man or August.
Hom. 9 in Apoc. Michaelem intellige Christum. Also, Justin. Mart. Dialog. cum
Triphone Iudaeo. and Tertul. de carne Christ. the like.
Angel.

Quest. 2. Who are here the soldiers of his band, called his Angels?

Ans. 1. Not only those that are Angels by nature and office, but also such
persons and instruments as stand with them in the defense of Christian
religion, and in war with the dragon, both in Ecclesiastical, and political
states; as godly Princes and Rulers, such as Constantine, Theodosius, and Kings
and Queens that are nursing fathers and mothers to the Church, as also godly
Pastors, holy Martyrs, zealous professors, to all whom sometime the name of
Angel is ascribed in the Scripture.

1. Because they are all sent from him, on his errand.

2. They are called his Angels by special propriety, for he is the Lord of the
holy Angels, wicked men and Angels are retainers, these of his house.

3. Their whole service is due to him, their Lord, as of duty for himself in
his one right.

Ob.

They are called our Angels, Mat. 16. 27.

Ans. They are ours by special commission, and direction from him; ours only
for his sake, our head; and ours by his charge, because we are in communion
with him.

Quest. 3. Why are his Angels here taken in with him, to get victory over the
dragon? does not he tread the wine press alone, or does he need their aid or
assistance? Rev. 19. 15.

Ans. 1. No, he is the strong and armed man, who alone enters into the house
of the strong man, and binds, and spoileth him, neither needs he the help
of any creature, to whom is given all power in heaven and earth; but yet,
quorum opera non indiget, eorum ministerio utitur; he pleases to use their
Ministry, not for his necessity, but for their honor, encouragement, and
remuneration.

2. There is a twofold battle.

1. Of Christian redemption. 2. Of Christian exercise,
In the former only Christ stands against the dragon, and no Angel can
stand in the battle; but in the second, Angels stand, and men fight and
resist, and in the strength of the Lord, repress, and overcome the dragon.

3. Though our Lord overcommeth the dragon alone in plain field, and single
combat, Mat. 4. yet it is not for the honor of the Captain to be without an
army to lead and train.

4. Having an army of stout and courageous soldiers, and Angels in earth, as
well as in heaven, he would leave them some remainders, some tail of the
dragon; some temptations, some sufferings of Christ to be fulfilled in the
members, with which he will have his servants exercised, and their fortitude
tried and put forth; for how unseemly and unglorious is it that an army of such
power, lead forth in the field, should stand idle, and only look on their
Captain fighting, and themselves never come in to strike a stroke.

Here I might enter into a large discourse of the fight of the good Angels
under Michael, against the dragon, but intending duties nearer our selves, I
will wind it all up in this one doctrine.

Seeing that all the godly are included under Michaels Angels; learn, That
every good Christian must join himself unto the good Angels in the Doct.
fight against the dragon, under the Lords standard.

In the prosecution of which, consider,

1. The reasons why. 2. The manner how. 3. The Application.
If the Angels therefore fight against the dragon, because the Church, the
party afflicted and oppressed, Reas. 1.
is, the Spouse of their Lord, and head, and members of his body; much more
ought we to join with them that profess we are these Spouse and members,
seeing that Michael is in a nearer bond, our head, than the Angels; he is
their head by government and confirmation, but ours by union and influence,
having taken our nature on him, and not theirs.

2. If they intend their office and calling in which they abide, and are
confirmed by grace, which is, to take part with the Church in this her military
condition, and come in for her succor in her assaults; much more must we stand
against the dragon, whose cause and quarrel it is; for should they stand in
our quarrel, according to their charge, Psalm. 91. He has given his Angels
charge etc. and shall we leave it? shall they stick to it, and shall we fall
from them and our selves too?

3. Another reason that moves them to fight against the dragon, is, their most
ardent desire to promote the glory of God, and uphold the true worship of God,
which is the beauty and safety of the Church, wherein, as in a glorious temple,
the Lord shows himself glorious; And ought not we much more stand out
against the dragon, who are part of his Temple, assaulted by the dragon, to the
end, that both Gods glory in us, and we our selves might not be dishonored.

4. They thus stand in the fight, because they, not only unfainedly love God
above all, according to the law, even in the most perfect love that the
creature can embrace the Creator withal; according to which perfect love,
their whole will is wholly conformed to the will of God, else could they not be
happy; but also because they sincerely love the Saints, as themselves, because
they see them loved of God, and elected to eternal life, to be partakers of
the same heavenly inheritance with themselves.

The effect of this love, is, to desire and promote the salvation of the
Saints, to rejoice in their attaining it, to be sad in their manner for their
sins, impenitency, and evils, inward or outward. Ought not we, out of our
love to God, and our own salvation, cleave unto God, and resist the dragon,
resisting them both?

II. The manner: How do the good Angels fight against the dragon, for the
Church?

1. By setting themselves as a strong guard round about the godly, and pitching
their tents round about them, where Satan pitcheth his forces against them, to
protect their persons, Psalm. 34. 7. they still by their power and care thrust
aside dangers, Exodus 14. 19. the Angel that went before Israel, when the
Egyptians pursued them, went behind them between the army and them; When
Elisha was beset, a Mountain was full of horses and Chariots, 2 Kings 6. 17.
If Daniel be cast into the den, the Angel shuts the Lions mouths; If Lot
be in danger, the Angel draws him out, and can do nothing till then; If
the three Children be cast in the furnace, the Angel is there as soon as
they, to suspend the fire from burning them, Dan. 3.

2. By assisting the Ministry sundry ways.

1. They delight to be present to behold our order and ordinances, which else
the dragon would soon overthrow, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

2. To assist and relieve the faithful teachers, opposed and resisted most by
the dragon, as the Angeli helped Peter out of prison, Acts 12.

3. In resisting false worshippers, and removing occasions of idolatry; so the
Angel would not have Moses body known where it was buried, Iud. 9.

3. By resisting and crossing the plots and purposes of the dragon, Numb. 22.
22. the Angel resisted Balaam in the way, wherein he came forth to curse
Israel.

4. By supplying the Saints with needful helps and comforts, in their wants
and faintings; so the Angel fed Elias, 1 Kings 19. 5. so the Angel showed
Hagar the Well, and gave her wholesome counsel, Genesis 32. 2.

5. By conveying them safe through the world, and carrying their souls to
heaven at their death; thus the Angel led Israel through the wilderness, and
led them unto Canaan; and that they convey their souls to heaven, is apparent
in Lazarus.

III. To apply this doctrine to our selves; We must learn, not only to stand
with the Angels, but, as Angels in this fight, against the dragon.

Quest. How?

Ans. Resemble them in these things.

I. In acknowledging Christ's principality, who is the only Michael, and that
in two things.

1. As they serve and stand before him, expecting commands from him, subjecting
themselves unto him, as their King, and head of the Church; so must we much
more depend upon his mouth, and, as members, yield free and ready subjection to
this head; the soldier must stand in whatsoever dangerous place and service
his General commands.

2. As they return to give him a reckoning of their service and affairs, as,
Zach. 1. 11. so must we attempt nothing, but what we may bring in reckoning to
him, the Judge of quick and dead: Papists tell us of another Michael, a
created Angel, and of a third a created God, and a Creator of God at Rome, and
all must be subject to our lord god the Pope; but the Scriptures show none,
know none, but Christ.

II. We must, as they, contend for the Church and her causes, which must
manifest it self, and be stirring in four things,

1. In maintaining the faith once given to the Saints, Iud. 3. this truth is
the Churches patrimony, we must not lose a foot of it, if Antichrist, or
Tyrants, or Papist would rob us of it; if heretics, or false teachers, or
ambitious men would blind, or corrupt it, we must stand for it, and hate the
doctrine of the Nicholaitans and Antichristians, which the Lord most hates.

2. In upholding the purity of Gods worship, detesting, and resisting to our
powers, all idolatry, and removing all occasions and relics of idolatry, be
they never so openly guided, and generally approved or applauded: The Romanists
devise many ways to bring in their dragon again, and happy it were if we were
so wise to shut up all ways leading into this Romish Egypt again.

3. We must contend to uphold a true and faithful ministry, delight to be
present in the same with them, and profit by it as they do, Ephesians. 3. 10. the
wisdom of God in the Church is made manifest to them; thus do Michaels
Angels, and they are no Angels on Michaels part that neglect or maintain not,
to their power, a godly Ministry; and whose Angels are they but the dragons,
that resist, oppose, and shamelesly and publicly move, and strive to cast
down, and cast out their painful, and faithful preaching, and preachers of
GODS word from amongst them? there is no one business in which the Devil
bestirs himself so much as in this; and whosoever does this work is, as
Elimas, a child of the devil, whose proper work he does, and an Angel of the
dragon; for where did ever Michael and his Angels plot and contrive against the
word, and the servants of God.

4. We must, to our power, stand out against the opposers, and the resisters of
the Church of God, and the grace of God: If any Balaam come forth to curse Gods
people, Michaels Angel will resist him, and put him to the wall. If we would
avoid the curse of Meroze, Iud. 5. 23. we must come out to help Gods people
against their enemies; Michaels Angels will not abet their enemies, nor are so
subtle, as either to join on the stronger side, or not to show themselves in
the causes of the poor despised Church.

5. As the Angels, we must both aim at the perfect love of God, which will
bring our wills into conformity to his will, for what we shall do in our
Country, we must do walking toward it in the way, as also do all good to
godly men, entirely loving them; the Angels compass them, cover them, comfort
them, help them in the way, and bring them on to heaven; so must we, if we be
Michaels Angels, embrace the Saints with fervent love, every way furthering
their salvation; they be the dragons Angels that scorn them, disgrace them,
cast them out, accuse them; thus does these accusers of the brethren, plainly
bewraying on what part they stand, and that they have abandoned Michael for
their General, to stand in the Camps of the dragon.

Verse. 7. And the dragon fought, and his Angels. Wherein consider two things.

1. The actors, The dragon and his Angels. 2. The action, They fought.
I. The actors are either 1. The General of the field, which is the dragon. 2.
The Army or Band, the dragons Angels.


This dragon the General, is the chief of devils, and head of wicked Angels,
called by Christ Beelzebub, the Prince of devils, and the Prince of this world,
John 12. 31. for there is a kind of order amongst devils, because,

1. God both acts and permits all things ordinate, because he is the God
of order, and hates confusion in any of his creatures.

2. Because of the superiority and inferiority amongst them, expressed in the
relative, his Angels; that is, such as departing from his subjection, whose
once they were, are voluntarily turned away unto the subjection of another head
and Commander.

3. As there is an head and leader amongst robbers and rebels, so of this
wicked rout, whose chief is not Prince of order, but of disorder and rebellion
against God; and an head, not in respect of dignity or excellency, but in
malice or wickedness going beyond all other in the highest sins against God
and Jesus Christ.

II. In the Band or Army are, 1. Persons. 2. The number. 3. The union, all in
the Text.


1. The persons, Angels. 2. The number, Indefinite. 3. Their union, in their
conjunction.
I. Persons are his Angels, who are of two sorts, wicked spirits, and wicked
men.

1. All those wicked spirits that fell with the dragon, who kept neither their
first estate nor habitation, Jude 6.

2. Wicked men are included under the rank of his Angels, for it is usual in
the Scripture to call, not only devils, but men also, who are ruled and led by
them, by the name of Angels, and that wicked men make up this army, as well as
devils, is more manifest than does need proof: And because their Captains or
Leaders are of the same kind with common soldiers, they all often carry the
same name of devils, but see this in sundry sorts of wicked men.

1. Wicked Tyrants and persecutors, that waste and spoil the Church, Pharaohs,
Assurs, Chaldeans, Romans, Turks, Antichrist, all are wicked Angels, for so
Prove. 17. 11. the executors of Gods or men's justice, are called, Rev. 20. 7.
the loosing of the Devil to deceive the people, is, the power given to the
Turk to oppress the world, for the sins of it against the Gospel, Re. 9.
14. the four Angels loosed were the four Turkish or Mohammedan Nations, that
dwelt about Euphrates, Turks, Tartars, Sarazens, and Arabians, who with huge
armies subdued the third part of the world. Rev. 2. 10. The devil shall cast
some of you in prison; that is, the enemies of the truth, lead and put on by
the devil; what they do he does, as what the army does, the General is said
to do.

2. Wicked Teachers, flatterers, heretics, deceitful workers, lead and
taught by Satan to transform themselves into Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
yet called his Ministers, for as Christ has his Ministers, whom he calls
Angels, as the Priests in the Law; Mat. 2. 7. John Baptist called an Angel sent
before Christ, and the Pastors of the Churches, Revel. 1. the seven Angels are
the seven Churches; so Satan has his Ministers and Angels, whom he sends to
deceive, as he was a lying spirit in the mouth of four hundred false Prophets
against Ahab, Zac. 13 2. false Prophets are called unclean spirits, and
Antichrist is called the Angel of the bottomless pit.

3. Wicked men, Atheists, Hypocrites, open swearers, adulterers, resisters of
the spirit and word of grace, as slaves to the devil, and ruled at his will,
using all their members as weapons of unrighteousness, against God and his
grace, all are in pay under the dragon, and fight under his colors, are here
included under the title of his Angels, and called by his name: 1 John 3. He
that does evil is of the devil; that is, if he, as the devil, does it with
pertinacity, and perseverance, and continuance; Judas was called by Christ a
Devil, that is, an Angel of the dragon; and wicked opposers and resisters of
grace are called by the devils name, to show whose Angels they be; in this
Chapt. verse 12. the devil is descended, that is, wicked men stirred up by
him, acted by him, and so lively resembling him, as they having his nature, may
very well carry his name. These are armies.

II. The number is numberless; the plural number argues them to be very
many, an innumerable army, every where laid in ambush against the Church, of
invisible and visible enemies; and were it not for Michael and his Angels, we
should soon know, to our cost, what a number there were; I suppose, of wicked
spirits and men, there might be a Legion to every godly man.

III. As they are strong in the number, so also in their union and league:
United force is strong, and the dragon and all his Angels make but one army,
are all of one mind, one will, of one confederacy, without mutiny or division;
we have showed, that all of them are so banded and leagued against Christ, that
they make but one dragon, and are called all by one name, as if they were all
but one devil: John 8. the devil is a manslayer, by the word in the singular
number understanding all the devils, and all his agents, the sworn enemies of
Jesus Christ.

In this description of the persons, the most unhappy and lamentable estate of
all wicked men, who^ Note.
the Spirit of God, here and elsewhere, rangeth and calls them by the name of
the dragons Angels, and that upon just grounds, especially two.

1. Qua mali, as they are wicked and linked in sin. 2. Qua miseri, as they
are undivided in punishment.
I. The former appears by the comparing of the disposition of wicked men with
the disposition of wicked Angels, in four things.

1. Wicked Angels are utterly destitute of saving knowledge of God, and of
Jesus Christ, therefore they are called lovers of all darkness, of ignorance,
of blindness of mind, and of wickedness and works of darkness; and so do
wicked men, who not only are without light, but are haters of the light: It is
true, that devils know and confess Christ in the Gospel, Acts 19. Jesus I
know; yea they believe and tremble; so a wicked man may repeat all the
Articles of faith, and know and assent to the History of the Gospel, but in
both it is a dead faith and knowledge, which makes to their greater damnation;
howsoever, both of them may know generally what is good and bad, what godly,
what wicked, yet they never come to see their sin as they ought; both may be
Daemones for their knowledge. yet both are Cacodaemones, because they abuse
their knowledge, to the hurt and evil of themselves and others.

2. As their understandings are blinded, so the wills of wicked Angels are
obfirmed in sin, and they sin with pertinacity and continuance; and even so
is every wicked man so long as left to himself, he can do no other, nor will
do no other but sin; there are no persuasions, threats, promises, or means
can win him from his sin, no more than the devils and Angels of the dragon,
who rise up and rebel against all means, as a swelling flood rises higher
and stronger against a stop; oh how do their lusts, as wicked spirits, rage
more when Christ comes near to cast them out?

3. Wicked Angels are unclean spirits, Luke 8. 29. and 9. 42. and 11. 24.
because unclean in themselves, and the authors of uncleanness in others; so
are wicked men as vessels full of uncleanness, Romans 1. 29. no sin but reigns
in a wicked man, howsoever some unrighteousnes may not be practiced by want of
occasion, or restraining grace; also they are as infectious as Lepers.

4. Wicked Angels are hateful, full of enmity, both against Christ the head,
and all the Saints his members; the devil is a manslayer from the beginning,
he is called (...), being a sworn enemy to God, to Christ, to all good and
divine things, to all good and holy persons; and the same is the graceless
course of wicked men of reprobate minds, who are as full of poison and venom
against goodness, in general and particular, (as the proverb says) as an
egg is full of meat.

II. The latter; in that as wicked as in the state of sin, with wicked
Angels, so also in the same state of punishment* if they abide impenitent, as
they do, this is plainly cleared, Mat. 25. 41. where wicked men are adjudged
to the same fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels, both accursed, both
now bound over to the Assizes of the great day, both in chains of darkness,
both going unto execution, both in their execution, finally, separated from
Christ, both cast into hell to abide the torments of devils.

It behooves all wise men to separate from this society betimes; were it not a
dreadful thing to be Use. I.
chained with traitors and murderers in this life? but what is it then to be
chained and joined with devils and wicked angels, as all impenitent and wicked
persons are in their state both of sin and punishment?

Ob. I defy the devil, and spit at his mention, and scorn all his Angels.

Ans. But if thou be unconverted thou art one of his Band and Army, a slave
to this General, and marchest stoutly against Michael.

Object. This is an uncharitable thing, and you deal unchristian-like, to
match Christians with devils.

Answ. Tell the Spirit of God so, who in this Text styles all that fight for
the dragon, his Angels; tell our Savior Christ so, who told the Jews, Ye are
of your father the devil, for his works ye do; would thou do the works of
devils and wicked Angels, and not be one of them? but examine thy self, be
sure thou be not so, but out of reach of it.

Quest. How may I do so?

Ans. By these and the like rules.

1. Wicked Angels hate Christ deadly in his person, offices, and doctrine.

In his person, he would destroy the Tribe and family whence he should rise, by
Attalia, Antiochus; he would slay him newborn, by Herod; he would destroy him
in the wilderness, he would set up himself for Christ in Mahomet and
Antichrist.

In his offices, by innumerable enemies, especially Antichrist, who casts at
all; he is the head, the King of the Church and of the world, the chief
Prophet and Lawgiver.

In his doctrine, he would corrupt his word, and falsify it, as to Eve, and
Christ himself in the wilderness; He is the father of lies, John 8. and the
envious man, that sows all Tares in the Lords field. Do thou love or hate
Christ? God forbid we should hate him, so said the Jews in effect, John 8. 37.
but if his word has no place in thee, thou would kill him, as they would;
if thou keep his commandments, then say that thou love him, John 14. 21.
else the wicked Angels love him as fruitfully as thou.

2. Wicked Angels are deadly enemies to Christ in his members, they are still
accusing the Saints to God, they observe their ways, studies, actions, watch
all occasions, time, places to hurt them: When they can they will afflict them,
in their bodies and goods, as Job 1. and compass all means to hinder their
salvation, were it possible, 1 Pet. 5. Art thou an enemy to Christ in his
members; watchest thou to mischief them, art thou glad of any color to wrong
them by? Thou art an angel of the dragon.

3. They are called Belial, 2 Cor. 6. if thou be a son of Belial, without
yoke, castest off the yoke and discipline of Jesus Christ, as too strict, a
hater and breaker of good laws of God, and Jesus Christ; a stormer at such as
are framed to the rules of Christianity; say what thou will, thou art a wicked
angel, a runner and actor with the dragon, against Christ, whose rules thou
rejectest and scornest.

4 They hinder godly men in holy purposes and practices, Zach. 3. Satan stood
at Joshua's right hand. Do thou hinder preaching, hearing and practice of
piety in thy self, family, servants? do thou dissuade from any Christian
exercise? Christ will say to thee, as to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan.

5. They are Gods executioners, to punish and vex evil men, as Judge 9. Saul
was vexed with an evil spirit, Judas filled with devilish wickedness; they are
full of effectual seductions and temptations, to bring them to sin, and do
them the service to convey their souls to hell; Homo homini Demon Do thou
tempt to uncleanness, drunkenness, and draw to evil? art thou a plague to
any one, to hold his soul in sin; and help him to hell? here is the work
and mark of a wicked angel.

6. They are very wise, and of deep reach to do mischief, both by natural,
and acqusite wisdom; they have a thousand arts to hurt and deceive, they can
transform themselves into Angels of light. Art thou wise to do evil, cunning
to contrive sin, wiser in thy generation than the children of light? thou
can pretend peace, order, unity, and every good thing, when thou intendest
the greatest mischief; here is an angel of the dragon.

Having spoken of the Actors, now to their action and fight.

Doct. The dragon and his Angels incessantly fight against Michael and his
Angels.

Quest.How do they fight?

Ans. Two ways.

1. By open force. 2. By secret fraud.
I. By open force and strong hand.

1. By exciting an hardened and wilful people or person, to profess against
Christ and his members; as the Jews, Scribes, Pharisees professed against
Christ, and every one that professed him; thus do the whole Nations of Jews
and Turks at this day, and so the Papists at this day openly profess for
Antichrist, against Michael and his Angels; such champions are every where
among us, wicked persons, sons of their father, who contest against all the
seed of GOD, and they would not be as they, for a world.

2. By open force and tyranny hunting out the profession of Christ; either by
power Ecclesiastical, by the blast of excommunication, see, Ioh. 9. 22. and
sentence of condemnation, pronounced by the diabolical Synagogue of
Antichrist, against godly Ministers and persons, as against heretics: Or
Civil, by war, fire, sword, exile, massacre, inquisition, imprisonment, or
any other open tyranny, by which the sheep of Christ are scattered or
slaughtered. Lamentable experience we have in Bohemia, France, the Palatine,
and all other Countries where cursed Papists, and captains of Antichrist
prevail.

II. By fraud or secret Stratagems, under-mining the City of God, as the Powder
Saints, and Salt-Potermen did the Parliament House.

Quest.

How do they this?

Sol. Four ways especially.

I. In common wealths and kingdoms, they fight underhand against all good
order, piety, common honesty, and religious life, by setting up Magistrates
that care not for religion, but would love that Parish best that wanted a
Church; And by corrupting Magistrates, so far as they can, animating them to
bend their laws and edge of authority, to the oppressing of the godly, and
discouragement of religion and piety, and making judgment Seats shops of
injustice, Asyles of iniquity, and Sanctuaries for offenders: It was a sore
fight* against Israel, when the dragon prevailed with David to number the
people, it left him fewer to number by 70000. Of all visible wicked Angels, the
Jesuits, who are sworn agents to the Angel of the bottomless pit, do carry
the bell in provoking the Popish seduced Princes to all barbarous cruelties
against the Church.

II. In Churches wicked Angels and men make battle upon Michael, by making
ways and bridges to idolatry, and the corrupting of the pure worship of God;
especially two ways.

1. Either forbidding the maine parts of Gods worship; so Pharaoh, that dragon
forbad Israel to sacrifice; and it was but idleness; so Act. 4. 17, 18.

2. Or permitting occasions of Idolatry, and setting them up even above the
parts of Gods worship, as appears in the contention of the Devil against
Michael, about the body of Moses; and whence are the Idolatries about the
bodies of Saints departed, but from the same adversary that then strove with
Michael?

II. The dragon and his Angels fought underhand against Christ in his
Ministry, and that two ways.

1. By hindering godly Preachers in their course Thus the wicked spirits put
forth their power in Iannes and Iambres, to resist Moses in his Ministry and
miracles; so do now Popish spirits and profane persons every where, who will
be sure the faithful servants of God shall want no molestation. In the
Apostles time there wanted not a Diotrephes, who pratled against them with
malicious words, neither received the brethren, but forbid them that would, and
thrust them out of the Church, 3 Ioh. 10.

2. By stirring up false teachers, flatterers, and deceivers, who insensibly
rob the Church of her treasure, which is true and holy doctrine; The envious
man by them sows his Tares, whilst men sleep, Matthew. 13. Hence we read of
sundrey doctrines of devils, 1 Timothy 4. 12. namely, the forbidding of meats and
marriages; so called, because the devil, who still labors to corrupt the
Ministry, in, and by these fights against Michael and his Angels.

4. Where he cannot hinder the powerful preaching; he fights by making the
truth of the Gospel preached, ineffectuall, sundry secret ways; as,

1. By blinding some that they cannot see the truth shining upon them, 2 Cor.
4. 4. holding them fast in incredulity and contumacy.

2. Snatching the Word from others, who hear it carelessly; so the dragon
prevails against many, as ye heard, Luke 8 12.

3. Thrusting from their practice such as heard with attention, when men hear,
and put not on the new man, it is a giving place to the devil, Ephesians. 4. 27.

4. After the known and professed truth, by pulling away many from the
simplicity of the Gospel, by revolt and apostacy, 1 Timothy 5. 15. many go
back after Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I fear lest as Satan deceived Eve by his
craftiness, so also he deceive you. Thus in all changes of religion numbers
have gone back after Satan.

Now after the manner let us see the reasons of this fight.

Contraries must needs fight, here be two contrary kingdoms, the kingdom of
light and of darkness; Reas. 1.
two contrary Princes, the God of heaven, and the god of the world, the Author
of truth, the father of lies; two contrary bands, no marvel if the whole band
of the dragon would pull down the whole Kingdom of God; how can the kingdom
of sin but fight against the kingdom of grace?

There is a deadly hatred of the dragon against God and Jesus Christ. Reas. 2.


1. All the spawne of the malignant dragon seeks by all means to hinder, and
obscure the knowledge and glory of God, and to set up honor, and yield
obedience to the dragon for God; see we not how Antichrist sits in the
Temple of God, and demeaneth himself, as if he were God? but what moves him?
the dragon acts him with strong delusion, and his coming is by the efficacy
of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the same efficacy of Satan casts down Idolaters at
the feet of antichrist, to receive laws from him to bind conscience; to
worship at his word a breaden god, made by a Baker, in stead of the Maker of
the world, which is nothing but to adore the dragon no other ways than the
Jews, who are said to offer to devils, when they offered to Idols, Psalm. 106.
1 Cor. 10.

2. In the dragon and all his angels, is an unconquerable hatred of Christ and
his members, he perpetually opposes the humanity, the divinity, the offices
of Jesus Christ, that he should not be truly known and believed in the world;
and this reason our Savior gives, why the Scribes, Pharisees, and other
wicked men were so busy against his person and doctrine; John 15. 24. They
have hated both me and my father: and for the hatred of Christ they never
cease to persecute the Church his Spouse, and the faithful his members; so our
Savior says, If the world have hated me, it will hate you also, John 16. 3.
and this they will do to you, because they have not known me nor my father.

The dragon and his Angels fight, to add unto, and Reas. 3.
enlarge, so far as he can, his kingdom and dominion; he would have all the
world his throne to domineere in; he would thrust Jesus Christ out of all his
right; he would bring in all men's souls into his own damnation, and because
he cannot get all, he is restless, and never gives up his quarrel; why else
does the Antichrist of Rome, the chief Commander under the dragon, maintain
and abet such bloody quarrels against the Reformed Churches, but because he
would have small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to receive his mark
in their hands and foreheads? Rev. 13. 16. Haman must have all knees bow to
him, else he is sick of anger, and prepares for the death of every Mordecai
that refuses.

They therefore fight to uphold the dominion he Rule 4.
has gotten in the world, as great Princes go to war to maintain their
rights and territories in every part of their country; even so, if the Gospel
come into any country, to turn them from darkness to light, from the power
of Satan, to God, what tumults and tragedies does the dragon and all his angels
excite and stir up against it? and what else do all the present wars in
this part of the world tend unto, but to hold the Countries subject unto
Antichrist, under the power of the dragon still, and to keep out, and chase
out the sound and mention of Christ, as the truth is in Jesus Christ.

Beware of this note of a wicked man to fight against Use. I.
Christ.

Ob. We profess Christ, and are baptized into Michaels name, have taken our
presse-mony of him, and therefore what is this to us:

Sol. Can. 1. 5. The sons of my mother contended with me, and thus was I
wounded in the house of my friends: Is this Christ's voice? would we know these
dissembled friends? the marks are clear.

1. Those that wilfully resist any of Gods ordinances, fight against God, Acts
5. 39. If this be of God ye cannot destroy it, but be fighters against God;
therefore he that fights against the standard of Michael, that is, the voice
of the Gospel, is a rank rebel to Christ, as he that shoots against the
Kings standard. He that resists the power of the word, which is Michaels
Scepter, will give it no place nor obedience in themselves, and scorn it in
others; that mutiny against preaching, and preachers of truth, and practice of
sincerity, fights as directly against God, as he that would wrest the Kings
Scepter out of his hand. He that resists the holy observation of the Sabbath,
is an ordinary breaker of it, by work or play, that scorns strict and
circumspect walking, is a fighter against God.

2. Those that, in themselves or others, uphold the dragons dominion, these
apparently fight against Christ, not one of their lusts must fall down before
the word; look in what sin the devil did reign, for that they strive and
contend still, and none so great enemies as those that strive against their
sins, they must swear, and lie, and game; they must outface conscience, and
scorn godliness; so also they are loath the devil should lose any ground in
others, and therefore they strengthen sinners, and encourage them in all their
ways, of loosnesse, gaming, wasting out their time, and drunken companionship,
resisting tumultuously a faithful Ministry.

3. Those that strive to enlarge the dragons dominions, and leavy a band
against Michael, by corrupting and ^educing as many as they can; they would
have all as they be, swearers, drunkards, profane and loose; but they defy
all the host of Michael, as Goliath all the Host of Israel; Scribes and Pharisees
will compass sea and land to get a proselyte, and if the wicked can get in one
that has a little begun a show of goodness, to make him drunk as they be, or
abet their lewd courses, they triumph as much as the Philistims when they
conquered Sampson.

Do graceless men perpetually fight against Christ? what marvel to see men
run on to the extremity Use II.
of sin? to hear and see cursed blaspemers, adulterers, murderers, drunkards,
and ^ailers? no marvel if some dare openly plead against the conscionable
observation of the Lords day; ^f some openly disclaim religious exercises,
openly cast down godly Ministers: for,

1. Is it strange for the devil and his Angels to sin in heinous manner?

2. Is it marvel, that he that marches after the devil, should go on to
things unreasonable?

3. Is there any other expectation from wicked Angels, whose hearts Satan-fils,
as Judas, and works effectually in them.

4. Think we their General will be so modest and moderate, as to stick at
any height of impiety? and they being bound, must they not obey? being
captives, must they not be ruled at his will? must not every subject be for
his own Prince and kingdom?

Are all these enemies so infinite in power, number, wrath, plots, against our
peace and salvation? Use III.
Learn,

1. Not to stand idle; are our enemies in continual fight and action, and must
we be bound to peace? if we now bestirre our selves against them, must we be
counted unpeaceable and turbulent? indeed, if our enemies would hold their
hands, so might we: But what a plotte of the dragon is this, that while he and
his Angels are at fight, and in action, we, under a title of peace (worse than
war) must not stir for our Lords right, or our own safety? but we have
learned that political axiom, Hostem, si agere sinas, confirmas; Eliubs
rebuke, I know the pride of thy heart must not stop David's going out against
Goliath.

2. Having so many enemies against us, we need not fight against our selves,
or our own side.

Quest. How do we that?

Ans. 1. By sin against conscience, when our consciences, our brazen wall,
shall be taken away from us, by them, and take their part in accusation and
wounding us.

2. By security and impenitency in sin, the peace of the strong man.

3. By excusing and defending sin, in stead of condemning them, or our selves
for them.

4. By stepping out of our way, and calling, by which we strip our selves of
our own strength, and help of the good Angels.

Verse. 8. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
heaven. Having spoken of the battle and armies, which have joined issue one
against another, now in this verse we shall see the success, and to which side
the victory falls.

The verse expresses two things.

1. That the dragon and his forces cannot prevail.

2. That he is mightily prevailed against, so that his place is found no more
in heaven.

For the first: Whereas the dragon, by himself, and his tyrannical agents,
the heathen Emperors, intended to keep under the Lord of glory, and chase out
of the world the memory and mention of Christianity, and hold the world under
idolatry, blasphemy, and heathenish worshipping of idols and devils, in stead
of God and his blessed Son; yet could they not prevail: For as the Son of
God was mightily raised from the dead* and had now taken his place at the right
hand of his Father, so must he for ever hold his place; those usurped titles of
Deity must now cease, and those excessively exalted powers of heathen
Emperors, advanced against him, must now be broken to pieces, and deposed; now
Christ must be proclaimed in the preaching of the Gospel, King of his Church,
and God, blessed for ever; now Michael and his Angels, Christian Emperors,
faithful Pastors, holy Martyrs and Professors are in the field, have won the
field, with an unresistible power, against which the dragon and all his Angels
could not prevail.

The note is this; the dragon and his Angels (though Doct.
never so likely) can never prevail against Michael No prevailing against the
Church.
and his Angels, Pharaoh was in great likelihood to have prevailed against
Israel, having them at such a strait; and if wise working or power would have
done it he wanted neither; but he neither did, nor could prevail: Haman was in
a fair way to have prevailed against all the Jews, when he had the letters of
death, sealed with the broad seal, and Posts sent forth; but in the issue the
dragon prevailed not. The Jews seemed to have prevailed against Michael
himself, when they had condemned, killed, and buried him, laid a great stone on
him, set a watch about him, and sealed the grave; they thought they had made
all sure, that they should never have heard more of him; but they prevailed
not: he rose again gloriously, notwithstanding all their policy and power.

Look any way* a cloud of strong reasons does compass us, to persuade this
truth.

If we look upwards unto God, we see in him Reas. 1.
five things, against all, or any of which the dragon Five things in God hinder
the dragon from prevailing.
cannot prevail; as,

1. His power; who is stronger than all, and none can take any out of his
hands, John 10. 28. Principalities and powers may be potent, but he is
Omnipotent, and mighty to save.

2. His promise; that he will not suffer his elect to be tempted above that
they are able to bear; that 1 Cor. 10. 13.
he will add to every temptation a gracious issue; and that he will shortly
tread the dragon even underfeet, Romans ^6 20.

3 His wisdom; for he has an eye to foresee all dangers, an ear to hear
all counsels, an heart to understand all devices, and reach beyond all enemies,
to turn all their counsels into folly.

4. Affection and love; so as no curse can prevail against his people Deuteronomy.
23. 5. the Lord would not hearken unto Balaam, because the Lord loved thee;
This love will bring us into the good land, through all enemies.

5. Protection; He is a wall of fire round about Jerusalem; A strong tower is
the name of the Lord, that cannot be scaled, a Buckler that cannot be pierced,
a shield that cannot be broken, a rock that cannot be entered, a mighty
fortress, that can never be surprised.

Now were the dragon only to encounter us, weak creatures, he could not but
prevail; but he must first prevail against the power, promise, wisdom,
affection, and protection of God himself, before he can prevail against us;
and therefore all is safe.

Again, if we look at our Leader and General, we have in him five things
which make us unconquerable; Reas. 2.
for, Five things in Christ hinder him from it. Dan. 2 45.


1. He is that little stone that breaks to pieces the iron, clay, gold and
silver, all Monarchs and powers raised against him; the victorious Leader of
this Army, never could, nor can be overcome.

2. We have in him, not only the virtue of his death and resurrection, but
also the benefit of his intercession, supplying us with unco^querable strength,
by which we fight and conquer.

3. We have by him mighty weapons of proof and power, against which no
dragons could yet prevail as the powerful sword of the Spirit, that
invincible (I had almost said, omnipotent) shield of faith by which we can do,
suffer, and overcome all things, that defensive helmet of hope, a sure and
stable anchor of the soul; these are weapons of Gods making, and cannot fail.

4. We have in him the donation of the Spirit, who is stronger in us than he
that is in the world, 1 Ioh. 4. 5. this Spirit teaches our fingers to fight,
he gives us the anointing, 1 John 2. 20. that we may be Kings and Conquerors as
he is, and communicates unto us Christ's own victory.

5. We have by him a commission sealed unto the Angels, to keep, to fence, and
guard us, to bear us in their hands, Psalm 91. 11. And this comforted
Elisha's servant, that there were more with him than against him, 2 Kings 6. 3.

Further, if we look at the enemies, they cannot Reas. 3.
prevail; for, Enemies are creatures, cursed, captive.


1. They are creatures, and what can the creature do against the Creator? what
can the clay do against the Potter?

2. They are cursed creatures, cursed in their persons, I will curse them that
curse thee; Mat. 25. 41, Go ye cursed: cursed in all their enterprises and
Genesis 12. 3.
purposes against Gods people, against whom the Lord himself has professed
himself an enemy; He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, Zech.
2. 8. cursed in all the means they use against the Church, their fraud,
violence, envying, lying, false accusing, and the like.

3. They are captive creatures; bound, spoiled, led in triumph, pinyoned as
Lions in Grates, or dragons in chains; they cannot lift hand or foot against
us farther than our Captain affords them leave; and what hope have they to
prevail, that shall never have leave to reach above our heel?

Further, if we look at our selves, as weak and Reason 4.
unworthy as we are, yet are they weaker then to Four things in the Saints
that prevent the dragon.
prevail against us; for,

1. They shall not prevail against our cause, the battle is the Lords; the
question between the dragon and us, is Gods glory and our salvation, if he
should prevail against us, God should lose his honor; this was Moses his
argument, Numb. 14. 15. If thou should not stand to this people, the enemies
would say, The Lord is not able to give them the good land.

2. They shall not prevail against our faith, though we have much flesh, yet
there is a little faith, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against so
little as a grain of Mustard Seed.

3. Though we be but unprofitable, yet we are the Lords servants, and
therefore he will uphold us to victory: David thought this a good argument,
Psalm. 86. 2. O save thy servant that trusts in thee.

4. We are members of Christ our head, and must partake in his victory, we must
be where he, is to see his glory: when he can patiently suffer his members to
be rent off his body, when he can endure to be dismembered and deformed, then
may the sound members be pulled away by temptation or persecution, then may the
dragon hope to prevail, but not before.

Here some objections must be answered; for, does not the dragon prevail
against their graces, their persons, their profession? or how may we conceive
of this doctrine?

Object. 1. For their graces; was not Adam in innocence pulled away by
temptation, and Peter by persecution?

Answ. For Adam; the dragon prevailed against the grace of creation, but he
shall not against the true grace of regeneration; the difference between which,

1. Adam was to persevere by his own strength, we, by the strength of GOD, are
preserved to salvation.

2. Adam received grace to persevere if he would, but not to will what he
could, but we have, through Accepit posse si vellet, non velle quod posset.
Aug. de corrept. cap. 11.
Jesus Christ, both power and will to persevere.

3. Adam wanted the confirmation which we have, both in the promise, which
makes the Covenant of grace surer than that of work, Ier. 32. 40. as also in
the intercession of Christ, which continually underproppeth us, and supplies us
with new strength, which makes faith in God far more sure and firm than that
of Adam, against which the dragon prevailed.

For Peter; it is true, the dragon prevailed against the grace that was in him,
first, in part, secondly, for a time, but not wholly and finally. For in Peter,
the leaves faded, but the root lived, says Theophilact; and Augustine,
Confession of the mouth failed, but not belief in the heart, otherwise Christ's
prayers, that his faith should not fail, had been frustrate: the flame of his
faith was suppressed, but not all sparks extinct, for then Christ should have
deceived him, saying, The gates of hell cannot prevail against it.

Object. 2. The dragon often prevails against their persons; Cain prevails
against Abel, and slayes him; thousands of Israelites fall before Benjamin in a
good cause; often are Gods people driven to the wall.

Answ. God suffers the dragon and his Angels sometime to smite and oppress
good men.

1. To correct their sin, and thoroughly to humble them.

2. To bring the dragons to their top and height of pride (while his people are
under) and to fill up their measure the sooner. But here,

1. Though they may overcome their persons, yet not their piety, faith and
holiness, which they specially aim at, and therefore hate their persons.

2. While they kill their bodies, they perfectly cure them from all sin and
molestation; the Lord does it not to lose them, but lest they should be lost,
he takes them from the evil to come.

3. He confounds the dragons the more, in that he increases the Church by
that, whereby they would ruin it, watring his Church with the blood of the
Martyrs, and making them more than Conquerors, when they seem most conquered
and overcome.

Object. 3. But the dragon prevails against whole Churches, and Protestant
countries, and chaseth the woman often into the wilderness; see we not what
powers and forces are raised against the woman, how Antichrist thrusts into the
Countries, expels the Gospel and Professors, and sets up the Idol of the
Mass, and the mystery of iniquity seems stronger, and prevails every where
against the mystery of godliness?

Ans. The dragon may prevail against some particular Churches, and utterly
waste and break them off, as the Jews, Romans 11. and so any national Church
may be broken off. But,

1. Their sin has prevailed against themselves, contempt of the Gospel and
security were the dragons that wasted them, else all the dragons in hell could
not.

2. They may be cut off from Christ in respect of the visible face, and of the
external covenant, and of the outward state and profession in common, but not
in respect of invisible bands and grace in any particular member.

3. They may prevail for a time to molest many members of the Church, but
never finally to waste and destroy the whole Church.

4. They may prevail in temporals, by which GOD will not have the peace and
victory of the Church measured, but can never prevail against the salvation
and sound grace of any member.

5. Let us not be daunted at the forces and winnings of Antichrist, nor stand
amazed at his strength; I say confidently, could we be daunted at our own
sins, (which are his strength) of all enemies we need least fear him; for,

1. He is sentenced to destruction, Gods curse has blasted him.

2. Our Michael has merited and achieved victory over him, and has begun it
in us by detecting him; and though he give us not victory all at once, yet he
will not give him over till he have utterly abolished him.

3 Antichrist is strong and mighty; but,

1. It is but for the time of his reprieve, which time of God when it comes,
Gideon, and an handful of men shall prevail against an host of Mideanites,
lying like grass on the ground, Judge. 7. 12.

2, All his power shall turn against him.

3 The Church is still stronger than he, for they are strongest with whom the
Lord is, who wants no Armies or Hosts of Creatures to save or smite by.

4. Antichrist gets no victory which he shall hold; God may by him bring the
Church low, to teach them duty, and then raise them again; as, Israel can
learn that in Babylon; which they cannot in Sion, but Babel must be destroyed,
and the King of Babel stripped naked to Gods wrath for ever; so of this Western
and spiritual Babylon, and the head thereof, they shall all go into perdition,

Now this is a ground of consolation to all truehearted Use 1.
Christians, both in respect of the Church in general, and in respect of their
own special condition.

For the Church in general, no attemps of the dragon and his Angels can
overthrow the Church of God; Zech. 12. 3. She is an heavy stone to lift at, if
all the people of the earth be gathered against her, Psalm. 129. 1, 2.
they shall only tear themselves in pieces; and how can it be otherwise? for,

1. They have the power and favor of the King for them, and what subject dare
stand out against them? And blessed is that people whose GOD is the Lord, Psalm.
144. 15. for though none be so assaulted, none are so protected, none so
victorious.

2. So long as the Lords counsel must stand, the Church cannot fall, Prove. 19.
21. many devises are in lewd men's hearts, but the counsel of the Lord must
stand, who thinks thoughts of peace and safety to his people.

3. So long as the Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen and enemies, and
rules in the midst of his enemies, we need not much fear the plots, the
power, the pride, the hopes of wicked me^, who wait upon lying vanities; they
may consult against the life of the innocent, but til the time be come, wherein
God calls forth his servants, to glorify him in suffering, they cannot touch a
hair of their heads; they may vow, not to eat nor drink till they have
slain Paul, Acts 23. 22. but they could not touch him; as they did with the
Head, so may they with the body: they took counsel to cast him down an hill
but he made void their counsel, and found a way to pass through the midst of
them all, for his time was not come, Luke 4. 30.

4. In the greatest confusions of the earth, when the very foundations seem to
be cast down, and the wicked seem to carry all, and say, we have prevailed;
yet now while they have the Church under, they cannot hold it under, but now
faith prevails, and gloriously rises unto victory; could they hold under our
Head, or hinder his powerful resurrection? no more can they the happy
resurrection of the Church out of the grave of death and darkness, but after
two days he will revive it, and in the third day he will raise it, Hos. 6. 2.
The dry and dead bones scattered shall live, and be covered with sinews, and
flesh, and skin, which lay dry and dispersed in the open field of their
captivity, Ezekiel. 37 6. and therefore as our Head triumphed gloriously over the
grave and death, so does his Church even in the greatest afflictions; Mica. 7.
8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; though I fall, I shall rise; when I
sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me: The Church denies not but
she may be cast down, but not cast off; she denies not but she may sit in the
dark, but not without all light; she denies not but that God himself may
afflict her, and she feel his wrath, because she has sinned; but only for a
time, till he come to put a difference between her and the enemies, and then
the scoale shall be changed, the enemies shall come into her place, and shall
be covered with shame, and trodden as the mire in the street, that is, utterly
confounded and despised.

How has the Lord commented this our Text and observation in all the Countries
round about us!

What, has the Spanish Inquisition, which has consumed many thousands of the
Saints, destroyed the Church? No, it has but watered it with blood, and the
devilish cruelty of it has made them an hateful nation in all the parts of
the world.

Did their French Massacre destroy all, as they thought, when thirty thousand
Protestants were murdered, against all laws, oaths and promises? no, here
were the boughs lopped, but the root remained, and within few months so
sprouted, that a mighty army in defense of the Protestants drew that mighty
King to such dishonorable conditions of peace, as he never enjoyed?

To come to our selves: In the year 88. when the great Armado came, which the
proud enemy called the invincible Navy, to destroy the mother and children,
and to bring to utter desolation both the Church and kingdom, and take
possession of all, could they conquer, yea, though their treachery was not
less than their power, and their advantage no less upon an unprovided people,
deluded at that time by their pretensed propositions of peace? No, but as they
came out one way against God, so God chased them an hundred ways, and made
their confusion the stupor and admiration of all the world.

In the year 1605. when our Romish Babylonians prepared that infernal
furnace, to destroy the name and mention of our religion, and to turn all into
a popish Chaos and confusion; as near as they were, what effected they? did
not Gods power, and Gods curse upon them, and their wicked counsels overtake
them in their hellish enterprises against his own religion? who ever saw
Hamans device more sensibly falling upon his own head?

When the Egyptians saw Gods power against them in their enterprises against
Israel, they could confess the Lord fought for Israel against the Egyptians,
Exodus 14. 25. and a great multitude of sundry sorts of people went out of
Egypt with them, chapt. 12. 3^. and many strangers seeing Gods power and grace
with his people, returned with them out of Babylon.

Why do not our Romanists so but run out further, and by greater multitudes?
It is to be feared, that God has appointed such to destruction, as Pharaohs
servants said to him, Exodus o 7. Will thou first know that all Egypt is
destroyed, etc. yea, it cannot be in the days of such light, and detection of
Antichrist, especially in these countries so furnished with means of
knowledge, that any can anew be carried quite away with the efficacy of
seduction, but such as whose names are not written in the book of life, Rev.
3. 8.

Now more specially for particular members, the same comfort is specially to be
applied to them; for neither shall the dragon ever prevail utterly against any
sound Christian, be he never so likely, neither by temptation, nor persecution.

I. Not by temptation; for,

1. It is impossible the Elect should be totally seduced.

2. Their head could not be overcome by temptation, and is as able to uphold
them as himself

3. There is an hour for the power of darkness, and after that comes light:
The Disciples may be a long time tossed with waves, and the ship full of
water, ready to sink; but Christ awakes seasonably, and rebukes the storm,
and makes a calm.

4. God leads no child of his into temptation, but he leads him out also.

II. Neither shall any persecution prevail against them; for,

1. No persecution can separate us from the love of God; sin can, no
suffering, Romans 8. 35. nor,

2. Hinder the joy to be revealed, 2 Cor 4. 17. nay, it cannot but further it;
for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him: nor,

3 Frustrate the promise, that whosoever holds out to the end, (let his
sufferings be what they will) shall be saved: nor,

4. Bar out the presence and comfortable favor of God, who in such times of
extremity uses most familiarly to reveal himself, both in the inward
comforts of the Spirit above other times, and in extraordinary outward favors,
answerable to their present estate Oh how had the dragons prevailed, if they
could have bolted and barred out the comforts of God from the Martyrs in their
prisons and flames of fire! The tyrant Nebuchadnezzar could not hinder the
fourth, like the Son of God, from walking in the furnace.

5. It cannot raze out the mark of God, set on his servants before the
persecution come, whom if he save not from the danger, he will save them in
the danger.

Lastly, it cannot deceive their expectation of a happy issue and deliverance,
yea, even in those who are persecuted to the death; their death is to them a
full and final deliverance from all sin, misery, and enemies; yea, their
death is but as a gate of life, and a speedy entrance into the full possession
of their heavenly Fathers whole estate, sooner than the course of nature would
have afforded them. Our Lord and Head might not have the cup of death pass
from him, and yet was heard, for he was passed happily through it into his
glory: and his body is as the burning bush, but not consumed. Let Chafe fear
the fire, but not gold.

This of the first Use.

II. Note here the happy estate of the true Believer, Use 11.
being stable and invincible both in grace and glory: There is never a
Believer, but has, or shall have obtained a noble victory over Satan, sin,
death, hell, the world, even in this life: his faith now treads the dragon
under his feet, and carries in it a power superior to the power of all the
gates of hell: Now our care must be to find this victory begun in us already,
and follow the chase.

But how may we find that we have prevailed over the dragon, and begun this
victory? Quest.


I answer; by these notes. Answ.


First, if we have proclaimed, and do maintain the war against the Kingdom
of Satan and sin, by an undanted profession of Jesus Christ, and by upholding
and renewing the war daily against all unrighteousness, within or without
us: but he is far from victory, that has struck a league with his own
sins.

2. Mark: If we have gained some ground, and beaten out the strong man out of
some part of his holds; and whereas he keeps four holds especially in us,
in our minds by ignorance, in our wills by rebellion, in our consciences by
corruption, in our life by loosnesse and disorder, we may know him in part
ejected, if we daily renew our minds with sound knowledge, if our wills be
altered, and made of unwilling, willing, and pliant to Gods will, if our
consciences be pure, tender, and excusing us in the sight of God; and if our
whole course be changed from the course of nature, to the life of God, and of
grace. Now we may conclude a great victory is achieved against the dragon.

3. Mark: If we have spoiled him of his weapons, or blunted them, or turned
them against himself: Then we spoil him of his weapons, when we crucify the
lusts of the flesh, and mortify our earthly members; then we blunt them, when
we strike upon them rules of Gods Word, and oppose them with the lusts of the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. then we turn his weapons against himself, when our
members are given up weapons of righteousness, serving a renewed mind, our
thoughts are brought into the subjection of Christ, and in our lives we
practice clean contrary to his motions and temptations.

4. Mark: If we uphold and advance the Scepter of Christ in our hearts, that
his Word rule us in all things, as the laws of the kingdom, to whom we
profess our selves now subjects; yea, and if our selves be become, by his
anointing, kings to rule and sway over our thoughts, wills, and affections,
overmastering our selves, and those strong lusts which will be plotting
rebellion, and raising mutinies against grace: If we can call in and cherish
the new aids and succors of grace daily, by the constant and conscionable use
of Gods holy ordinances, the Word, prayer, and meditation, by which we are
strengthened: Now have we attained a greater victory, than if we could command
kingdoms, and such as gives us a comfortable assurance, that we can never be
quite overcome: shaken and molested we may be, but the dragon shall never
recover his power and strength in us, to hinder our salvation; for he that
has begun this good work in us, will finish it unto the day of Christ.

Further, if the dragon and his Angels prevail not Use III.
against any of Michaels Band or Army, we see hence the miserable estate of
every one, over whom the dragon does prevail; who are hereby known and
concluded not to belong unto Jesus Christ, but to be excluded from his colors
and company.

Object. Oh God forbid any should be rejected from Christ; we all profess our
selves his soldiers, and subjects, and hope to be saved by him.

Ans. If the dragon prevail against any of us, and have us under his power, it
is otherwise; we cannot belong to two contrary Captains; we are his, under
whose colors we fight, and to whom we have given our selves to obey. Now
therefore examine this point; whether, or how far the dragon has* prevailed
in any of us.

Rules of examination are these.

First, where Michael cannot prevail, in such persons Rule 1.
the dragon does prevail: Now there Michael cannot prevail, where,

1. His Word 2. His Spirit 3. His arm and hand is resisted ordinarily.
I. That his Word prevails not in many of us, is too manifest.

Did Gods word rule many of our Rulers, they would go through stitch, and show
courage and conscience in Gods causes, in beating down the sins of the
times, and frame their government according to Gods Word, and till they do so,
Christ rules not by them, and if Christ prevail not, the dragon does, except a
lying spirit step out and say, there is a third.

2. How little Michaels Scepter prevails among many inferior men, is evident
by the prevailing of ignorance, in such days and means of knowledge. How the
god of the world blinds a number of infidels, is lamentable to consider, who,
after many years hearing, have still the veil over their hearts, and lie, and
live in gross Egyptian darkness; as ignorant as children, as far to seek
in substantial grounds of Catechism, as they were at their first hearing;
that we cannot say, Christ's word prevails in them, unless we may say, that
the light prevails at midnight.

Oh what a pity it is! How many civil honest men, whose souls out of servent
love we mourn for, are reached by this doctrine! Not to speak of numbers,
who would be thought some-bodies in religion, yet many turn away from it, many
turn against it, yea, hate and abhor it.

3. Add hereto an other infallible conviction of many a one, in whom the word
prevails not, because it works neither reformation nor change, both which it
works where it prevails; In many hearers it reformes not within, the thoughts
are idle, unclean, unsavory, the affections are unruly, violent, passionate
disguised, etc. It reforms them not without; their words are vain as ever, as
unbridled, and unchristian, as swearing, as lying as ever; their actions as
unprofitable, as uncharitable and hurtful; for, who can look for figs of
thistles? their whole life is unchanged; what lust reigned that reigns not
still? In none of these Michael prevails, but the dragon has them fast
enough.

II. That the Spirit of Christ is likewise resisted, and cannot prevail, is
manifest, both in his motions, and graces.

How many good motions does the Spirit suggest, in the night, in the day, as
upon other occasions, so especially in the Ministry of the Word? thou go
away, and hopest to be better by this or that admonition; but either thy
slothfulness lets it die of it self, or thou let in some lust to kill and
quench it, and so thou art much worse than before; for whereas before he was
kept out, now thou have driven him out: and thus many men wear out their age
in purposes, and vain hopes of amendment, and are cut off before ever they
seriously attempt it: So mightily has the dragon prevailed.

Add to these another Band, who finding the word knocking at the door of their
hearts, and the Spirit calling aloud from their lusts and beloved sins, begin
to quarrel and resist the Spirit, and fight valiantly against all such
motions, and all the messengers by whom he moves: there is no persuasion of
the Spirit can prevail; lusts must be served, profits, sports, and carnal
delights must be intended and followed; and who sees not the dragon effectually
prevailing in such men? For where the motions of Gods Spirit are repelled, how
just is it that GOD give over such persons to the efficacy of Satanicall
delusion:

Now for the graces of Gods Spirit, by which Michael prevails; in how many
that come to Church are they resisted, scorned, and blaspemed? Is any thing
made a more common byword at this day, than the light of grace, and the power
and practice of sound grace? and what child cannot see, that the dragon, who
rules in darkness, does there prevail, where nothing is so much chased as the
light, and the glory of the Saints is turned to their shame and reproach? who,
but dogs and dragons, would bark and spet poison against grace?

III. They also resist Michael, that suffer not his arm to prevail; How many
incorrigible sinners be there, whom neither Gods word nor works can bow or
bend? Let God back his word with visible judgments and strokes round about
them, and upon them, yet they harden their hearts still, and still turn to
their old course, going on from evil to worse: Let God curse their trades,
they will break the Sabbath still; let God drown their Boats, their goods,
they will row on the Sabbath still; let God smite by milder rods, they hear
not the rod, nor who appoints it; let God break the staff of bread, they
will still make stones bread; let God bring heavy strokes, they will not
understand, though the foundations of the world be moved, Psalm. 82. 5. how does
Michael prevail, when such sensible strokes make men more senseless? and why
should he smite them any more, who fall away more and more? Esa. 1. 5.

The second Mark or Rule of trial is this, Where Rule 2.
the dragon holds a man under his slavery, there he prevails; but this he
does sundry ways.

1. When he fetters any man as a slave to his own lusts, and the commands of
the flesh, chains him to a blind and rebellious heart, to passionate and
froward affections, and throws him into the stream of corrupt nature: This
prevaling of lusts is the dragons victory, when sins and lusts grow in
number, strength, continuance.

2. The dragon prevails by the world, when he brings men in bondage, either
to the profits or pleasures, or to the fashions of the world: What a number
follow the world with full stream, and their whole strength, who cannot so
truly be said to have the world, as that the world has them? this eager love
to the world signeth a man to have cast out the love of God from his heart,
see, Iam, 4. 4. and, 1 John 2. 15. and that the Prince of the air prevails
in the course of the world, is apparent, Ephesians. 2. 2. According to the course
of the world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience: where is he almost that conformes
not to the corruptions of times, places, and callings? If times be for
Protestants, so be they; if times were for Papists, so would they; if times
throw down the Gospel and Preachers of it, so can they; and in their whole
course frame in religion to their senses, not to their faith, and live wholly by
examples, and not by rules. Who sees not how the dragon triumphs and tramples
on such time-servers, who yet would scorn not to be reputed sound Christians.

3. The dragon prevails by Antichrist, and enthralleth numbers by the
efficacy of his delusions: He that is a slave unto Antichrist, is a slave to
the dragon; for Antichrist comes in the efficacy of Satan, because Satan
works powerfully in him and by him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. who can without sorrow
consider of the numbers that now run a whoring after Popery, and favor it,
and plead for it, after that not the Gospel only has so clearly detected
it, but after it has convinced it self to be the most savage and
blood-thirsty religion that ever was, that would make but one Bonfire of three
kingdoms, and blow up in one moment religion and justice, Church and Kingdom,
Prince and people; nay, after so many good laws enacted against it, wherein
the whole Kingdom has given sentence, and pronounced it guilty of the highest
treason that ever men or devils could devise. Is it not the same religion it
was then? did they ever reverse any of their bloody positions? did they ever
any where prevail, and not chase out (with a sea of sorrows) all that look
toward the truth and holy religion? Well, the sentence was foretold, Re. 13.
Antichrist must prevail among them that perish; A terrible Thunderbolt from
heaven against all professed members of that Antichristian body, especially
against Apostate Papists, among whom the unclean spirit has brought seven
worse than himself, to hasten their perdition.

4. The dragon prevails by false and libertine teachers, like the false
Prophets that prophesied lies, and the visions of their own hearts, to
strengthen, with sinful dawbing, wicked hands, and discourage godly hearts; now
when a people follow such, and love to have such guides and guidance, as, Ier.
5. 29, 30. the dragon has prevailed, to pull them to hell. Michael prevails
by faithful teachers, who bring wholesome and sound doctrine, and causes his
people to delight in them, and follow them; contrarily, the dragon prevails by
such teachers as frame themselves to speak so, as to please all, that seek
unto them in there loose courses, and according to all that they would have, and
so sell the^ to Satan: And what a just revenge of God is it, that a people who
will not suffer the Lords servants to prevail with them, to be brought to the
truth, should be fitted with such Teachers, as with sweet words, and fine
devises shall prevail with them to their destruction? and look how much any
one hates a true teacher, by so much he loves a flatterer, who shall do him
as much mischief, as the other would have done him good. Beware of this sly
reach of the dragon, prevailing against not a few.

5. The dragon prevails mightily in disobedience; Ephesians. 2. 2. In whom does
the Prince of the air rule, but in the children of disobedience? and these
bewray themselves every where.

I. In such as walk in the disobedience of nature, sons of Belial; who
reject all yoakes, and refuse all counsel by Gods word, Gods Spirit, Gods
people, to walk at large, compassing their lusts according to the command of
their own rebellious wills; a Sermon or a Play is all one, only they can sit
out a play with more patience.

II. Such as are wilful in their disobedience against Gods Word, not only of
an unteachable disposition, but untractable; prick their corruption but a
little in sound application, oh how it will show it self in raging, stormy,
and unruly distempers! this festred heart that will abide no searching, is
conquered by Satan: these that will not suffer Christ to rule them are called
his enemies, and called out to execution, Luke 19. 27.

III. These wilful rebels commonly lie in ambush against the faithful, either
to accuse them, to make them hateful to Magistrates, or to slander and scorn
them, to make them hated of others; as Ier. 18. 18. Come, let us smite him with
the tongue; and verse. 23. even some pretensed friends sought to banish him,
nay, to do more, even against his life, if they could have prevailed: No man
can seek sinistrously to prevail against a good man, but the dragon has
first prevailed against him.

6. The dragon prevails by bad society and example; when workers of iniquity
meet, oh how the devil rules their counsels, tongues, actions! many hands make
light work, and rid much work; if any man refuse, or forbear, or scorn to
join himself to Gods people; if any reproach Gods name, truth, or servants,
hate the society of Saints, their persons, their profession, or godly
practices, the dragon has his will on the^, and in them, and where the dragon
thus prevails, the Lord Jesus has nothing to do, but to prepare himself to
war, and wrathful judgment, against such sworn enemies of his Kingdom.

Neither was their place found any more in heaven. We have heard in the former
part of the verse, that the enemies could not prevail against the Church, now
we shall see that themselves were prevailed against, and so conquered and
chased by Michael and his Angels, as they could not ever make their party good
against the woman any more, but themselves were turned into a shameful flight,
so as they could not stand before her. This overthrow of this great Army, is
signified in this phrase, that their place was found no more in heaven.

Where, to find the meaning, we will answer four Questions.

Quest. 1. What is meant by heaven?

Ans. Some understand hereby this heavenly vision, and make this the meaning,
that they vanished away; or the heavenly vision, called before, a wonder in
heaven; which; though it may be true in part (for they did vanish for a time)
yet it is somewhat harsh to call an heavenly vision by the name of heaven; and
beside, we shall see they will appear again in this vision, and renew their
forces and fierceness against the woman.

Some by heaven understand the Throne of dignity and authority, which we have
showed to be a kind of heaven, or Throne of God; and this is true also in
part, that the conquered party was cast from the Throne of God, when those
openly professed dragons were subdued, and cast from the top of Imperial State
and Majesty, without hope of recovery of their strength against the woman any
more.

But by heaven I understand the Church of God, as in many other places of this
Chapter, in which the dragon sat and exercised his tyranny.

Quest. 2. What is it, not to have his place found any more?

Answ. The phrase is taken out of Daniel, 2. 35. where this Michael, the stone
that was cut out of the Mountain, is said to smite the image of iron, clay,
brass, silver and gold, that the place of it was found no more, but they were
destroyed and dispersed as chafe; so the same Michael here did so break in
pieces the power of the dragons, that they had no more place in the Church to
domineere and tyrannize against the Saints, as they had done, but they are now
conquered and expulsed out of heaven.

Quest. 3. What conquest was this, or when was it obtained?

Ans. The conquest of Michael against the dragon, was,

1. General. 2. Special.
The former was, when before this time the dragon was most powerfully conquered.

1. By the death of Christ, spoiling all principalities and powers.

2. By his powerful resurrection, thereby conquering and triumphing over
sin, death, hell, Satan, the world, the grave, etc.

3. By the powerful preaching of the Apostles, in the conversion of the world
to Christ.

4. By the profession, confession, and Martyrdom of the Apostles themselves,
whereby the most potent tyrants were convicted and subdued.

This general overthrow is not here properly meant, but a special victory,
and overthrow of some special dragons that rose up afterward to waste the
Church, because this is a prophecy after S. John's time, the proper
interpretation and accomplishment whereof is plentifully cleared in
Ecclesiastical History: For,

1. What place had the dragon in the Church, when those fierce Tyrants and
tigers, those imperial dragons, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, Trajan, and the
other who shed a sea of Christian blood to abolish the very name of Christ,
were miserably destroyed and extinct by foul and fearful deaths and
destructions, and some of them, as Julian the Apostate, being wounded to death,
blasphemed, and with extreme fury cried, with his bowels and blood in his own
hands, Vicisti Galileae?

2. What place had the dragon in the Church, when noble Constantine had slain
those four savage Tyrants and Monsters, Maximinus, Maxentius; Licinius, and
Maximinian, and became the great Protector of Christian faith; and to signify
that now the dragon was overcome, not without Gods special Providence, he set
up upon the gates of his Palace his own picture, with a dragon lying slain
under his feet, and a Dart thrust through him, as Eusebius Eusebius. in vit.
Constable. orat. 3.
reports, which is a plain demonstration of the accomplishment of this
Prophecy?

3. What place had the dragon in the Church, when by the free preaching of the
Gospel by orthodox Pastors and Bishops, the Idols and heathen gods were cast
down, their worship abolished, their Temples destroyed, Paganism was turned
into Christianisme, and Christ's Kingdom grew so fast, as that it was received
through the world, in the places and countries where the dragons had formerly
cast it out?

4. What place had the dragon in heaven, when those innumerable droaves of
Heretics, such as Valentinus, Basilides, Manes, Marcion, Photinus, and
especially Arrius, who had infected the whole world, and other most deadly
enemies to Christ's person, natures, and offices, were first wounded, and
smitten, and condemned with the sword of the Spirit, (the hammer of heresies)
and after with the hand of God upon them in miserable and wretched deaths, as
Histories are plentiful in observation?

Thus have we seen the truth of this Prophecy, when, and how the dragon and
his Angels were cast out of heaven, and their place was found no more.

Quest. 4. How can it be said, that the dragons place was no more found in
heaven, seeing he returns again and renewes his war against the woman,
verse. 13. and 17?

Answ 1. Our Savior in John 12. 31. says, The Prince of the world is cast
out, and so the death of Christ has cast him out of possession; so as,
although he may come to claim, yet never to possess.

2. He may come to assault the Church and molest the woman, but never to
dispossess her of her heavenly happiness; all the damage he brings her is
but nibling at her heel, he cannot reach her head; Ioh. 14. 30 The Prince of
the world came against Christ, but found nothing in him, that is, had no power,
no advantage against him; and so it is in proportion with the members.

3. He may show himself in temptations, and in raising horrible and hidious
persecutions, as at this day, but without all power or hope of prevailing: He
comes not to stand to it if he be resisted, nor to overcome in the issue, but
to be overcome, and at last so fully overcome, as his place shall never be
found in heaven, nor in the Church, but shall be bound fast in chains of
black and hellish darkness for ever.

Doctr. Note hence, that all the enemies of the Church shall be finally
destroyed, so as their place shall be no more found; Job. 20. 7. The wicked
shall perish for ever like his dung, and the eye that has seen him, shall
say, where is he? Psalm. 37. 10. 36. Yet a little while and the wicked shall
not be, yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be;
and, He flourished as a green Bay Tree, but he passed away, and lo he was
gone; I sought him, but he could not be found.

For why?

1. Gods curse takes hold on them; and is too Reas. 1.
strong for them; Genes. 12. 3. I will curse them that curse thee. This curse
cuts off,

First, their persons, Psalm. 37. 38. They that are cursed of God, shall be cut
off.

Secondly, their plots, counsels, hopes, aims, and wishes, as in the same
place, The end of the wicked shall be cut off and frustrate.

Thirdly, their present jollity, even in this life; often the curse meets them
in every corner, as the Angel with his sword did Balaam; so in Pharaoh, Haman,
Judas, Julian; and almost all tyrants and heretics came to lamentable
destruction.

Fourthly, always their hoped happiness in the life to come; for as GOD
hurles the wicked man out of his place in earth, so he sends him into his own
place (as is said of Judas) that he may dwell for ever in the place of his
iniquity, Job 8. 4.

2. Gods justice pursues and hunteth the wicked man to destruction; let him
seek never so many muses and burrows of craft and policy to hide himself in,
the Lords revenge follows him step by step, till it overtake him, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
6. It is a righteous thing with God, to render tribulation to them that trouble
you; Achan troubles all Israel, and the Lord troubles Achan, Joshua 7. 25.
the enemy makes the Saints drink the cup of affliction, but they taste but
the top, which is medicinable, but the Lords justice reserves for him the dregs
and bottom of his cup of wrath for poison; they chase the Saints unjustly out
of the earth with a sea of sorrow, but the Lord justly casts them out of earth
and heaven, into a bottomless sea of everlasting wrath.

3. They must be covered with shame that war with Sion, Psalm. 129. 5.

First, because she being Gods own Spouse and delight, he accounts her
cause to be his, her sufferings his, her enemies his, and cannot but out of
love and jealousy avenge her quarrels, and execute vengeance on her
adversaries, Deuteronomy. 32. 43.

Secondly, because her sons are the blessed seed: If Mordecai be the seed of
the Jews, Haman shall fall before him, and make no end of falling, Ester 6. 13.

4. The fervent and faithful prayers of the Church are as an heavy Hatchet to
knock the enemies on the head: never could any prosper still that had the
prayers of the Church against them; Hezekiah prays against Senacherib and
Rabshekah, and God sends a blast on them, and shakes all their power in pieces,
2 Kings 16. 6. The like in Haman, Judas, Julian. If this thundering Legion come
against them, they cannot Legio fulmina^s. Tert.
stand against the shower and storm of shot, like Hail that gals them on all
sides, more than all the Horsemen and Chariots, than all the Muskets and Pikes
mustered against them. This was confessed by Marcus Aurelius, Emperor, to the
Senate and people of Rome; the Christians by prayer obtained for him a sweet
shower of water, when he wanted five days, and a shower of Hail, and Thunder,
and Lightning against the adversaries.

The Use hereof concerns both the godly, and their enemies.

1. The godly have hence a ground of patience and contentment, and learn not
to envy or fret at the exaltation of wicked adversaries; consider the end, and
thou shall see no cause; see, Nahum 1. 2. and Psalm. 37. 7, 10.

2. Here is comfort for the people of God, a time comes when the place of Gods
enemies shall not be found; Now they are in place, and hope to prevail, but
they cannot; for,

1. Satan, the head of the dragon, the God of peace shall tread under our feet,
Romans 16. 20.

2. For those spiritual powers which he brings against us, sin, death, hell,
and damnation, they shall be no more, their place shall not be found, Rev.
20. 14.

3. For the world, all that is borne of God overcommeth the world, 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
and it passes away, and the fashion of it shall be no more.

4. For wicked men and temporal enemies, as Moses said to the Israelites at
the Sea, Those enemies whom your eyes has seen to day, ye shall never see
more, Exodus 14. 13. so may we say of these.

5. For Antichristian and Popish tyrants and enemies, yet a little while and
they shall be found no more; in the cup she has filled unto us, shall be
filled double; No man shall buy her wares any more, Rev. 18. 11. all her glory
and wealth, (called fat and excellent things) are departing, and none shall
find them any more, verse. 14. with violence shall the great City Babylon be
cast as a Millstone into the Sea, and be found no more, ver. 21, 22, 23. she
has brewed blood, and blood must be her drink. Our own Babylonians began,
not long since, to prate of the price of Fagots, to show what they meditate,
and that they are of the right blood of their bloody Parents; But I assure
them, fire and Brimstone shall be cheap enough, when that shower appointed
falls upon that filthy Babylon, to revenge their fiery rage against the Lords
servants.

Thus shall the Elect see all their foes their footstool; let us make our faith
our present victory, this shall bring fruition, which is a full and final
triumph.

3. It teaches the godly, seeing the place of wicked men shall not be found,
to make sure of a stable and firm estate; and that is,

1. By repentance and reconciling our selves to God; see, Job 11. 14. and, 22.
21.

2. By steadfastness in faith, and other graces; all our stability is founded
in Gods covenant, as on a sure rock; stable faith upholds the whole estate;
truth of faith and grace is an impregnable hold and fortress, but a wavering
mind, in faith and religion, is restlessely tossed and carried every where by
temptation or persecution from the truth.

3. By joining in Gods worship with Gods people; Job 22. 27. He that is a pure
worshipper, that lifts his face to God, and makes his prayer and renders his
vows unto him, the light shall shine upon his ways; when others are cast
down, he shall say, I am lifted up.

4. By uprightness and integrity, walking conscionably before God and man;
only uprightness and a good conscience can bring in a sure estate; when an
evil conscience rages as the sea, a good and pure conscience has peace, and
confidence, yea assurance in life and death.

The next Use belongs to the enemies of the Use II.
Church; and,

First, to terrify them, in that they cannot choose but work their own woe
and wrack. The woeful condition of persecutors and enemies is, that howsoever
they lift up themselves against God and his truth, they must come down; was it
not a woeful fall of Haman, when he sought his life of Hester, whose life he
had sought?

Now this must needs be;

1. Because they fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb overcomes them, Rev. 17.
14. nay, the Lamb will never leave them till they confess themselves
overcome: Pharaoh with all his power chased Israel as a company of fearful
Hares before him, but was not he forced to yield the bucklers? were not his
Sorcerers forced to say, This is the finger of God, Ex. 8. 19? did not himself
beg prayers of Moses and Aaron? did not his Princes say, Let us fly from
before Israel, for God and the Lamb fights for them? Did not great
Nebuchadnezzar confess himself overcome, when he cast the servants of God
into the fire, but could not command the fire to burn them? when he loosed
those whom he had bound, and was forced to extol whom he had ignominiously
vilified, yea, to absolve, justify and advance those whom he had condemned?
Julian must say, Vicisti Galilaee.

2. Their rage and fury against the Church makes them run headily upon their
own ruin; for it suffers them not take any good counsel, but in pursuit of
their chase march furiously as Iehu, and plunge themselves into such a depth as
they cannot wade out again. Could Pharaoh get back again, when himself, his
Princes, power and Chariots were in the bottom of the Sea? now he found he
was too deep, and he that found a way in, could find no way out; had he
consulted with himself, he might well have thought, that God made that not a
way for him, but for Israel, whose business lay beyond Sea. Could Haman get
back again, when he had laid that wicked plot, without breaking his own
neck? Could Judas, having betrayed innocent blood, get back again without
shedding his own?

3. Their instance and furious pursuit of their purposes carry them so far,
that commonly nothing can be the deliverance of the Church, but their own
destruction, as in the former examples of Pharaoh and Haman. The like we might
observe in that fierce intended invasion of 88. and the same in the Hellish
Powder Plot, wherein the godly came out of trouble, and the wicked came in his
stead. Thus says Solomon, The wicked shall be a ransom for the just, and the
transgressors for the righteous, Prove. 21. 18. Such is the irreconciliable rage
of wicked men, as having the godly at advantage, no ransom will be taken, and
they have no ransom if it would be taken; but the Lord provides a ransom for
him, the enemy himself shall pay his ransom, himself shall suffer for him, he
shall sink and perish, that the other escape: Herod seeks the Babes life, his
own life shall ransom it, and that the Babe may escape, he shall die that
sought the Babes life.

4. The pride of wicked enemies must needs give them a fearful fall: For, if
for the humiliation and scourge of the Church, God suffers him to prevail a
while, the more he prospers in his way, the more he provokes God, and prides
himself against him, till he be at the height, fit to be taken down.
Rabshakeh, because the gods of the Nations could not deliver the people out of
his hands, grows to high blasphemy against the God of heaven, Psalm. 73. 6, 9.
Pride compasses them as a chain, and then they talk presumptuously, and set
their mouth against heaven; so do Papists at this day.

5. As his seed time is, so is his harvest like to be. As a man sowes, so
shall he reap; he is ever sowing iniquity, and cannot but reap affliction.
Prove. 22. 8. his own wickedness takes him by the heel; as he brewes sorrow,
so must he drink; he drinks deep of the cup of sin, and must drink deep
of the cup of vengeance: according to his conception, so is the birth like to
be; he has conceived mischief, and must bring forth wrath; his sorrows are
coming on him, as on a woman in travel, as certain, as sharp, but hopeless
and desperate.

Object. The enemies have a wealthy and flourishing estate.

Answ. 1. All they have is from the wrath of God, and shall in wrath be
snatched away from them, so that their place which knew them, shall know them
no more.

2. Riches shall not avail in the day of wrath, nor can deliver from death,
Prove. 11. 4. However our adversaries would blind their Proselytes, they shall
know, that wealth can never buy heaven, nor release from hell, nor Purgatory
the next chamber to it, as idle Monks have dreamed.

Ob. But they are strong and potent, and prevail.

Answ. 1. They may prevail for a time, but shall not escape.

2. It is enough, they deceive themselves with a conceit of stability and sure
footing, but let not us be deceived for company, but look into the Scriptures
we shall see, that nothing is more vain than a wicked man's prosperity, Psalm.
37. 2. they are soon cut down, and wither as grass; there is a little
flourish, but no stability,; if the flower be not cut down, it withers of it
self; and verse 20. They shall be consumed as the fat of Lambs, offered in
daily sacrifice, which no sooner came to the fire of the Altar, but it melted
and vanished into smoke; so are these; and how the^ are they stable? shall we
compare their vain and unstable stability with any thing more vain? Psa. 1. 4.
see him compared to chafe:

1. Nothing is more vile than chafe, it is good for nothing, so is nothing
more vile than a wicked enemy of God and his Church.

2. Nothing more vain, so nothing more light than a wicked man, he is lighter
than vanity, and can hold no weight, Psalm. 62. 10. let him be waighed as
Baltasar, he will be found too light, and the heavier he is with sin, the
lighter he is to God.

3. Nothing is sooner blown away than chafe, nor nothing more easy to be
blown away out of his place than a wicked man; they may show like Mountains
but are but heaps of chafe; they may seem like rocks for firmness and
stability, but wanting solidity before God, have no stablishment; David did but
look off them, and they were gone, and their place not found.

Object. But they continue long in their fierceness against the Church, and we
cannot hope of any issue or end of their malice.

Ans. For the time of Gods patience they are still, but when that is expired,
they are hurled away out of their places as chafe lies still unmoved in a
calm season, till a strong wind arise, and then it is seen no more; so
wicked men, who are chafe, may be still till the wrath of God, as a storm or
whirlewinde, arise and carry them quite away; see, Hos. 13. 3.

Again, though the Lord seem silent, while he does not tear them in pieces
like a Lion, yet he Hos. 5. 12. 14.
does always, as a moth, consume them: when his wrath blazeth not out in
flames at once, to burn up these thorns, yet it feeds on them, as fire on
fuel, and moulders them away insensibly.

Object. They have many fair pretenses for their practices; they intend the
advancement of religion, the setting up of the ancient Catholic faith, the
suppressing of heretics, the blowing up these apostates and heretics, with
whom no faith is to be kept.

Ans. Iezabel may for a time cover her cruelty, with pretext of piety and
religion, 1 King. 21. but God will ere long show, that piety shall be no cloak
to villainy and murder.

Secondly, let this provoke the enemies to some moderation toward the people of
God; if not for love of grace in them, yet for love of themselves: he that
would not go under continual expectation of sudden ruin, let him cease his
enmity against the people of God; nothing in the world can save a wicked man
from being cast away in his malice: cast not down thy countenance on them, as
Cain, who was therefore cast out of his fathers house; raise not false reports
against them, nor receive any: invent not words against them, as did David's
enemies: Haman was hanged on his own gallows, for such inventions and
suggestions against Israel; Afflict them not by word or deed, by fraud or
force, for this is a token of perdition. 2 Thessalonians. 1.

For the notes of a man whose place shall not be found, but hastening his
ruin; Notes of one whose place shall not be found.


First, one in the Text; he that is a plotter against Christ the Head, or
against his Members, runs upon the point of this heavy curse; Judas plots
against Christ, and presently his place was not found, he went to his own
place, Act. 1. 25. the Jews plotted against Christ, and the Romans came and
took away their place and Nation; The Nation or Esa. 60. 12.
kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish; so he that co^trives against the
members of Christ, hasteneth his own ruin: God gives such over to run riot,
that every one may see the end of their way. Saul when he hunts David, and had
set an envious eye upon him, and watched him mischief, that all David's piety,
and wisdom, and innocence cannot prevail, but he bolts on; GOD gives him up
to run to witches, which himself had condemned, that all might see God gone
from him: Even so, when men contrive against Gods servants, against their own
consciences, and their own protestations, as Saul did to David, and make grace
and innocence their Butt to shoot at, and as much hope to make a league with
hell, as with them, God gives them up to hateful things, condemned by
themselves, to drunkenness, filthiness, usury, base and shameful courses, that
their name stinkes as a Candle sluttishly put out, not after, but before they
are put out, that all men may see them cast out of their place and parts before
hand: and if the wicked servants tale^t be taken from him, what remains but
the other part of the sentence, Cast him into utter darkness, Mat. 25. 30.

2. Another note of a man whose place shall not be found, is he is one whose
place is not found amongst Gods people in his House and ordinances. Cain, as
vile as he was, being cast out from the presence of God, complains of a
miserable case; many outcasts now wilfully excommunicate themselves, and please
themselves in it: their own hatred of grace has cast them out from Gods
people and worship already; Gods house has already spewed them out, as
unworthy of the fellowship of Gods people; and whither are they hastening? he
that will not abide to have his place found amongst Gods people, shall one day
have his wish, his place shall never be found among them.

Thirdly, a man blown about as chafe and dust already, shall never have a
stable estate hereafter; as;

I. If any be carried with every blast of false doctrine, as unrooted and
unsettled in the faith; never was there change of religion, but Satan raised
false teachers and seducers, who did privily bring in damnable heresies, such
as Iannes and Iambres, that resisted the truth, and carried away numbers from
the truth, themselves first carried away by the deceit of Balaams wages; beware
of such Popish Pedlers, that help to sell the people of God into the hands of
the cursed Babylonians; Jeremy describes such,

1. They cast aside the Word of God, and deliver their own dreams, chafe
instead of wheare; they bend and strain their wits to look out vain and
foolish things, causes of banishment, Lam. 2, 14.

2. They are described by their intolerable and Jesuitical lying, fathering
that upon the Lord which the Lord never spoke: where does the Lord in al^ the
Scripture enveigh against the powerful and frequent preaching of his holy
word? Shall we believe he speaks from God, who cries out of too much Preaching?
I must believe, that his eyes are sore or bleared, who cries out of light; how
can a Torch-light be welcome to a company of thieves or robbers? how can the
light of the word be welcome to Atheists, Papists, and Jesuitical spirits, who
would rob the Church of the word of salvation?

3. They are described by hucksterly blending the wine of Gods word, with the
puddle-water of humane inventions; watch them, and disclaim them that would
sow our field with the miscelen of Popery, who, like their Jesuiticall friends,
with one wipe will cast out all the reformed Churches from being the true
Churches of God, with whom we have joined as sisters, ever since the restoring
of the Gospel, as in the harmony of Confessions appears, with another,
overthrow the better half of the fourth Commandment, as their friends cast
out the whole second Commandment, and (as like the Jesuits as may be) cast
dirt and foame upon the faithful, able, and zealous Preachers, because they
see them stand in their light, as the greatest opposites to their Popish
projects.

Well, for giving heed to such deceitful Prophets, the Lord threatens
Jerusalem to wipe her as a maid wipes a dish. If we would not be cast out of
our places and Churches, let us beware of such locusts, whose property is, to
eat up every green thing, Rev. 9. 4. especially beware of the delusio^ of
Antichrist, who is that beast that must go into destruction, and the King of
these Locusts; for how shall they that adhere to him, stand, or be found in
their place, when his place shall not be found?

II. The like of one who is carried away with the blasts of temptation, from
sin to sin, having no steadfastness in a good course: None can be
established by iniquity.

III. The like of them that are carried away with Apostasy, from good
beginnings, without constancy in their hearts, or mouths, or good actions;
such withered leaves are blown away with winds, Psalm. 1. And,

IIII. Of them that run after the world, setting their hope and heart on
earthly things; for how can such a ones place be found, when earth and heaven
flies away, and their place found no more, Revel. 20 11. when all Islands and
Mountains shall not be found, Rev. 16. 20?

Verse. 9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world; he was cast out into the
earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. This Verseis a large confirmation
or interpretation of the former, and in it are four parts.

I. A large description of the party overthrown, the grand enemy of the
woman, and that by two arguments.

1. His names and titles, which are four;

1. The great dragon. 2. That old serpent. 3. The devil. 4. Satan.
2. His effect, he deceives the whole world.

II. The manner of his overthrow, He was cast, not down, but out.

III. The place designed whither he was cast, into the earth.

IIII. His company and associates in this overthrow, and his Angels with him.

First of the description.

Quest. Why is the Spirit of God so large in it?

Answ. 1. That we should not mistake the enemy overthrown, and conceive of
any natural or physical dragon in proper sense.

2. That we should not doubt of the truth of the overthrow.

For the meaning of the names.

I. The great dragon is the arch-enemie of mankind; 1. Name.
who had in all ages, by his instruments, oppressed and outragiously wasted the
Church, but especially (as we have seen in this Text) by the great and
profane power of the old Roman and imperial dragons, in whom he had ruled at
his will, tyrannized over the woman, spreading and upholding all Idolatry,
blasphemy, heresies: and plotting, de^vising, and executing all injustice,
tyranny, and barbarous immanity against her; this dragon is now cast out; of
whom, and his greatness we have spoken at large, verse 3. and will neither
repeat nor add to that discourse.

II. The Title is, The old Serpent: where,

1. His nature, 2. Name. The devil a serpent, why.
2. His adjunct.
His nature, he is a serpent.

First, because he hid and covered himself in the serpent, in his first
stratageme against our first Parents.

Secondly, because of his serpentine disposition, in two things:

1. His poison and malice, both in the fountain and streams; for in his own
nature his poison is always ready, as in a fountain; and in his effects it
runs incessantly, as in full streams; first and principally, against Christ
the Head of the Church, and then against all the members for the Heads sake.

His special hatred is against Christ: for as the serpent carries a most
deadly antipathic and fight against the Heart or Hind, so this serpent against
Christ, who is aijeleth hashahar, the heart or hind of the morning, Psalm. 22.
1. and Cant. 2. 9. My beloved is like a roe or young heart; Christ is lovely, as
the Heart, swift to save his Church, as the Heart, Can. 2. 17. beset with dogs as
the Heart; Psa. 22. 16. Dogs have compassed me, that is, Jews and other
hellish Beagles: And finally, here he is at war with the serpent, as the
Heart.

But this serpent spets out poison, to kill and poison to death every man and
woman, as well as Christ, as indeed he has slain every child of Adam.

2. His other quality is, serpentine insinuation and winding, by his sly
flattery and subtilty, by which, as he did drive our first Parents and us out
of the earthly Paradise, so he never cease to hinder us also of the heavenly
Paradise; this he does especially by deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.
winding himself into our hearts by degrees, till he bring us first to act
sin, then to affect it, then to bring acts to habits, to to a law
unresistible, and to a nature.

3. Again, the devil is called a serpent, for his serpentine and cursed
condition; The serpent is accursed of God above all beasts of the field, Genesis
3. 14. so is the devil and his Angels above all creatures: The curse reaches
the serpent, both in his habitation and sustentation; he dwells in thorns and
bushes, there he lurkes and hides himself; so the devil in the thickets of
sins, lusts, and hateful deeds, flying the light: the serpent feeds on earth
and cursed dust, so do the devils on earthly-minded and carnal men, who lie
under the curse of GOD, careless of the blessing.

The adjunct of this serpent follows, an old serpent.

1. Because himself has been of the same antiquity with the beginning of the
world, who, of old, even then cast us from our happiness.

2. Because his malice is not new-conceived, but inveterate, as ancient as the
world, and therefore no hope of truce or reconciliation.

3. He excels, not only in natural subtilty, but by his experience, ever
since man was on earth, is grown wonderful deep and cunning, like an old
beaten soldier, trained in manifold crafts, and mischievous stratagems, so his
craft is redoubled by his age and experience.

III. The third title or name, is, The devil, for 3. Name.
crimination, accusation, and calumniation: He is that egregious calumniator,
whose incessant delight and practice is, in accusing and calumniating.

1. God to man, of envy, injustice, or the like unkind affections, as, Genesis 3.
3. God knows your eyes will be opened.

2. Man to God, in good, that it is done in hypocrisy, as, Does Job serve God
for naught? in evil, that man is guilty of that sin which himself drew on.
But of this Title, more in the next verse.

IIII. The fourth title is, Satan, for his hostility 4. Name.
and enmity.

He is an adversary, and opposite,

1. To God. 2. To good men. 3. To good actions
I. To God.

1. In his decrees and good purposes of restoring the Elect unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ, by all means striving to frustrate them, though all in vain,
for the counsel of the Lord shall stand.

2. In all the means appointed for the execution of those decrees, as, the
word and truth of God, which he labors to turn into a lie, Genesis 3. 5. Ye
shall not surely dye; by which he brought in sin upon us: he hates that as
the sentence of his damnation; so he hinders the preaching and publishing of
it, as in Paul and the Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. He sends his Ministers
impudently to disgrace the holy preaching of the word, and to cast down, if
they could, all exercises of religion, public and private. For the graces of
faith, love, holiness, wrought by the word, in which are the beginnings of
salvation, he hates and resists them, and disgraceth them, as most contrary to
himself, being an unclean spirit: I have heard many of his Agents openly
revile the grace of GOD, and disgrace holiness in hateful terms, but none of
them but apparently foul and unclean beasts in one kind or other, and how
can contraries but fight?

II. To all good men he is an adversary, because of Gods Image and way; they
have Gods Image and superscription upon them, and so of a contrary kingdom:
And he, who, while we were in our own way, or the way of the world, never
resisted us (for then we were going down into Egypt) now if we be in Gods
way, and set out toward Canaan, never cease his resistance.

III. He is also an adversary to all good things and actions; he watches to
slay all good motions in the womb, that they shall no sooner be conceived,
than abortive: he is an adversary to each good action, either to hinder it (if
he can) by hindering us from attempting good or atchieving it, by hindering us
from feeling the sweetness of godliness, so as having no pleasure in it, it
may go on heavily; by making us fickle, unconstant, soon weary, and then all
is lost: or if he cannot hinder, to corrupt, and deprave it, that though he
cannot make it evil, he may make it seem so to be.

By all this description the Spirit of God would Use. I.
have us become wise, to take knowledge of our enemy, and make our own
profitable use of this discovery, especially that we should never compact with
such an adversary. In his temptations to sin, he comes in the habit of a
friend and loving Counselor, but is indeed a dragon, and therefore fierce, and
a winged dragon, swift to shed blood: Oh that we could think, while he is
intising us to sin, that we have to do with a serpent, who has a natural
enmity against us, and this antipathy, set by God, admits no reconcilement: and
not a serpent only, but an accuser of us to God, for that which himself
intised us unto! In his disswasives from good, pretending our peace, ease,
credit, or whatsoever commodity; happy it were, could we say, Come behind me
Satan; this is nothing but the voice of an adversary resisting me, to hinder
both the work and wages.

2. Again, we learn to beware of such a monster and watch such an
adversary, who is a serpent, 2.
therefore subtle to deceive; a serpent, therefore full of poison and deadly
infection; an old serpent, and therefore by his experience, ever since the
creation, can epsy the least advantage against us, can see all our counsels
and consultations in our secret chambers, and will not slip any such advantage,
but put it forth to the furthest proof and extent for our greatest harm.

Furthermore, we are taught to fence our selves 3.
against his wiles and enterprises.

Quest. How may that be done?

Answ. By three sorts of rules.

I. Against the subtlety of this serpent, we must labor for true wisdom as
a countermine: And that is,

1. By humility, denying our own wisdom, as insufficient to guide us. The
Lord guides the humble in his way, Psalm. 25.

2. By prayer: go to God for wisdom: If any man want, let him ask it of God.
Iam. 1. David prays God to turn Achitophels wisdom into foolishness, and
so it was. God only can make us wiser then this our enemy: therefore as a
child, the weaker it feels it self, the faster hold it lays on the hand of
the father; so let us on our heavenly Father.

3. By sticking to the Word. Psalm. 119. 24. make that the man of our counsel,
which only can make us wise to salvation. By this David was wiser then the
ancient, then the counselors: By this all the serpents stratagems are
discovered and diverted.

4. Grow up in the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom. This
stands not in contemplation, but operation, rectifying the mind, affections,
actions, and is nothing but an upright endeavor to please God in all things. A
good understanding have all they that do thereafter.

II. Against the sting, poison, and biting of this serpent.

1. Let us look to the brazen Serpent, Christ, that we may be both healed and
saved. No other sight Vt san^mur, and salvemur.
but this can ease us, not gold, not silver, not lands, nay not heaven it self
without Christ, nothing but Christ's blood. The Israelites must be cured only
by looking, the Christian by believing.

2. A special preservative is prayer. The policy of the weesell is, that
knowing the serpent will set upon her, and that he cannot abide the sent of
Rue, which we call herbe-grace, she runs and eats of that herb, and so
the sent of it drives off the serpent: so we being sure to be set upon by the
serpent, who is too strong for us, must run to this herbe-grace, and let our
daily and fervent prayer be as Rue against him. Thus are we taught to prevent
temptation, by praying not to be led into it.

3. Daily apply the virtue and power of Christ's death to the cure of thy sin.
The Hearts horn burnt Plin. hist. not. tom. 2. l. 28. c. 9.
is of power to drive away the serpent, and a good antidote against his poison:
Christ is this Heart or Hind, his horn is the power of his death, this horn
burnt or parched on the cross with his Fathers wrath is the only antidote
against the malignity of Satan.

III. Against his satanicall opposition and enmity, be sure to get God thy
friend, if God be with thee, Jesus Christ for thee, the Spirit of God within
thee, who can be against thee? Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against
us? And if Christ be dead, and risen for thee, who can lay any thing to thy
charge, verse 33. 34. Now God is with thee, so long as thou art with him: for
he leaves not those, who have not left him first.

IV. Against his accusation get,

1. The testimony of thy conscience excusing thee, that no sin is unrepented.
2. Corin. 11. 12.

2. The testimony of the Spirit, that thou art the Lords, and in Jesus Christ,
and then is no condemnation. Romans 8. 1.

3. The Lords justification of thy uprightness, Job 1. By fearing God, and
departing from evil.

This of the names.

The second argument, by which the Dragon is described, is his effect, that he
seduceth or deceives the whole world: where four things for opening the words.

I. What is it to seduce?

Answ. In proper speech it is to mislead or draw a man aside from the right way
into some by-way, and is a Metaphor taken from travelers, or passengers, who
being ignorant of the right way, are led aside into error, and wrong ways.
Thus the dragon, after the way of God had been propounded to the world, in the
preaching of the Gospel, and Jesus Christ had been published the only Way,
by whom we can come to the Father, by all means would shut up this way to
heaven, and did draw aside the world from the true worship of God, to idolatry,
and false worship of idols, and heathen gods, and from the embracing of
Christian religion, to Paganism, and Heathen rites, so as the very name of
Christ should be extinct, if it were possible. This is the seduction of the
dragon: which he incessantly labors in, as the participle of the present tense
notes, even a perpetual action of drawing (...).
men from the way of truth, to error and false religion.

II. The persons that are seduced, are the whole world; alluding to his
general seduction and surprising of all mankind in our first parents, as also
the general corrupting of true religion in the days of Noah, when all flesh
had corrupted their ways, and were destroyed by the deluge. But by the whole
world or earth are meant the reprobates or earthly minded men, who intended the
world, and minded earthly things, with contempt of heavenly. These were the
dragons prey, for their multitude called the whole earth.

For first, it is not possible the elect should be seduced. Matt. 24. 24.

2. They are only in the world, but not of the world: they are not the earth,
while they are in the earth, nor parts of it, but citizens amongst Saints, and
of another corporation.

3. The dragon cannot go beyond his commission, which reaches not to any
elect, but only to those who by the just decree of God are given up to his
seduction and their own destruction. Rev. 9. 4. The locusts are sent out with
a limited commission: they are commanded not to hurt the grass of the earth,
nor any green thing, that is, the elect, who have any appearance of true
grace, these are not to be wounded with the keen stings of their damnable
errors, and devilish devises: but only the reprobate, who have not the seal
of God in their foreheads. And Revel. 13. 13. who be they that worship the
beast: but they, all they, and only they that dwell upon earth, earthly men,
who have no part in heaven, whose names are not written in the book of life.

III. How or by what means does the dragon seduce the whole earth?

Answ. He has many ways, some without us, and some within us.

Without us, especially three.

1. He deceives by false doctrines, errors, heresies, and lies: in which
sense Antichristianisme is called the deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness. 2.
These. 2. 9. because under pretense of truth and Christianity it fights against
Christ and his truth. Thus was Ahab seduced by four hundred false prophets.
Thus Elymas seduced the deputy, and resisted Paul's doctrine, and Paul calls him
the child of the devil. Acts 13. 10. and so be all they that dissuade others
from hearing the truth.

II. He deceives the world by impious frauds, diabolical impostures, and
prodigious works, for the confirmation of error. Revel. 13. 14. the beast did
great wonders to deceive them that dwell on the earth; by signs, as to make
fire come down from heaven, and the like. This beast is Antichrist, and that
false prophet, Revel 19. 20. who wrought false miracles, by which he seduced
those that received the mark of the beast. He shall do great wonders, to
confirm a deceivable doctrine, yea even call for fire from heaven. Which
though Bellarmine, to free his Pope from this mark of Antichrist, says, the
Pope never did, yet it is truly verified of him, both in mystical and literal
sense.

1. In the true and mystical sense, (for this book has as many mysteries as
words) by fire from heaven in Scripture is meant Gods wrathful vengeance
executed upon sinners, called the fire of his wrath: In this sense, the Popes
flatterers call them gods of revenge: Hildebrand in an epistle to the Germans,
having excommunicated Henry the fourth, called him afflatum fulmine, smitten
with a thunderbolt. Here we have the Pope confessing, that he brings fire
from heaven. Did they not vaunt, and Kings, and people fear, that being
stricken with the bull of excommunication, they were smitten with a divine
revenge, as with fire from heaven?

2. In the literal sense: boast they not of Zachary the Pope, as he was in
his progress to Ravenna, that in the day he was protected with a cloud from
the heat of the Sun, and in the night armies of fire in the heavens gave him
light? What shall I speak of the fiery streams, which they say have reached
from heaven to earth to point out the lost host, as was wont to be read on
Corpus Christi day? What of the fiery tongues which they fetched from heaven on
some of their Saints, to make them equal with the Apostles? or of the fire
from heaven, to destroy the enemies of some of their martyrs? Their Legend is
full of such fables: but this shall suffice for the pointing of Antichrist of
Rome by that wonder in that text: which is true both in the true mystical
sense, and in their false literal.

But these are called lying wonders and collusions. 2. These. 2. 9.


1 In their original they proceed from the father of lies, who is a lying
Spirit in the mouths of all false Prophets.

2. Their matter is lies, appearances, juglings, at best wonders not miracles,
such as Iannes and Iambres seduced Pharaoh withal.

3. Their end is lying and seduction, confirming lies, idolatry, superstition,
and apostasy, so leading and settling men in error for destruction.

III. The Dragon seduceth numbers by open tyranny and persecution; we see how
the apprehension of Christ drove away all his Disciples for a time, and how the
fan of tribulation blows away the chafe from the wheat for ever. And thus
the whole world was seduced here in special manner, being forced by open
tyranny and rage of the Imperial Dragons to the level and prescript, to the
rites and religion of heathenish and idolatrous Rome.

Thus he seduceth us outwardly.

Within us he has many means and ways to seduce us: as,

1. By exciting and stirring our original sin: blinding our minds with
clouds of darkness, and our understanding with mists of error, working on our
wills to embrace things whith corrupt judgment directs unto: stirring our
affections to rebel against right judgment and will. And thus he seduceth us
by our selves, Iam. 1. Every man is seduced by his own concupiscence.

2. By working on our natural faculties, both our spirits and senses. He
knows how to dull our spirits and make us drowsy, and easily give off in any
good meditation or service. And contrarily, he can refresh and excite them in
evil, to make them watchful, and of long continuance, and constancy in such
objects. And for our senses, he can draw the eye to behold wishingly the
forbidden fruit: the ear to set open it self to receive lies, and slanders:
the tongue to blaspheme, curse, swear, lie, and revile: the smell to wind a
commodity which must be compassed by oppression, wrong, or the like.

3. By finding out our inclinations, and intents, and purposes, that he may
suggest according to those inclinations, as it were hanging his weight upon us,
to force our own disordered motions. Thus he does, and can out of our own
universal corruption, and from observation of our counsels, speeches, and
gestures, lay fit trains for us; first, receiving true intelligence from our
selves, by observing our motions, lusts, affections, and then sits himself down
in counsel with us in our secret chambers, in all our consultations of sin,
himself being the President of our privy Council.

4. By sweetning his allurements, so as no temptation is so bitter or
poysonfull against God or man, but he can guild and sugar it, and then lays
them in secret, and in the dark, so as we easily take, and no sooner take than
are taken, by means the waters are both stolen and sweet.

IV. The last thing in opening the doctrine, is, the reasons why the dragon
seduceth the whole earth; Namely,

1. The just judgment of God upon the world for the contempt of his word, and
the unkind usage of the Gospel, by which the world meriteth to be seduced;
see, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.

2. The desperate wickedness of Satan,

1. Proclaiming open war against God, and withstanding the word of God, the
faith of men, the glory of Jesus Christ.

2. Exercising incessant fury against mankind, all which he seeks to bring
back into his own damnation.

3. Advancing himself in his horrible pride, to enlarge his own kingdom, to
establish his greatness upon earth, and to show himself the Prince of the
world.

In the generality of persons, that the whole earth Use. I.
is seduced by Satan, we learn,

First, how false a note of truth a multitude is: the way of the world, is the
way of error, and of seduced persons to destruction; rather conclude with our
Savior, the multitude walks in the broad way, but strait is the way that
leads unto life, and few find it. The wisdom of a Christian is, not to
number voices, but weigh them, and not to look who go in the way, so much, as
in what way we go; neither to hold it a good plea, I did but as the most did,
seeing the whole earth is here seduced and deceived.

Secondly, marvel not that many be seduced and Use II.
carried away from God and his truth, into so gross and palpable errors,
seeing the dragon seduceth here all the earth.

1. It is a general, but a righteous judgment of God, to give up them that
love seduction, to be willingly blinded and carried to destruction.

2. Heresies, false doctrines, and delusions are just punishments of the
contempt of the Gospel, and word of truth.

3. The world is the Princedome of Satan, he must prevail and command his
subjects, and tyrannize over all earthly and worldly minded men.

Let us not marvel, that Papists are so resolute in such horrible delusions,
not only against the clear light of the Scripture, but against common sense,
as stiffly to maintain transubstantiation, judicial forgiveness of sins by a
Priest, purging of sin by penal works and satisfactions, salvation by
merit of works, worshipping of Angels, Saints, Images, Crosses, crusts,
blocks, stones, and a thousand such senseless dotages; seeing the Lord has
smitten them with blindness, that they cannot see the truth.

Let us not be moved, that Popery does so prevail in all Countries, that
Princes and people, learned and unlearned join to it: For, efficacy of
doctrine is no proof of truth, because there is an efficacy of error, by
which the dragon prevails against all the earth. But, is the doctrine
effectual to turn men from the power of Satan to God? then it is true, not
else.

Nor yet be much dismayed, that among our selves, after the knowledge and
profession of the truth, so many should turn away to Popery, and are seduced
by Priests and Jesuits; for how can a carnal doctrine but prevail among
carnal men? what look they after in their religion, but men on earth, at
Princes, laws, times, persons, and earthly respects? not one of them after God
or his word, or rules of direction from it, but hate the Scripture, as a thief
the gallows; and their Religion then must needs be good: But none are
altogether given up to Antichristianisme, but they they are first given up to
Satan to be seduced: Oh that Papists would hear and lay to heart, that they
are pitifully seduced by the chief seducer under Satan! which is a plain
sign of perdition; for among whom does Antichrist reign, but only them that
perish, Rev. 14. 6? How can they expect to reign in the heavenly Jerusalem with
Christ, who stick in mystical Babylon unto Antichrist? how shall he triumph
in heaven with Christ, that fights on earth for Antichrist?

But well may we with a sea of tears take knowledge of the general sin of
our land, in the hatred and abuse of the light, and bringers of it, for which
the Lord may justly deliver us up to delusion, and efficacy of error; and if
we go on, resolved to give no better entertainment to the light, the Papists
themselves are not more effectually deluded in maine points, than it may please
God many among us may be.

Finally, marvel not that so many great, wise, and learned men in the world
oppose and resist the truth, plot and co^trive against Gods Ordinances and
servants, for how can earth but stand in opposition to heaven? they are but
pieces of earth, and of the world delivered up to Satan to deceive; earthly
affections, lusts, motions, desires carry them away; earthly policy, dignity,
favor, ease, wealth is all they aim at, their way and their end; earth is
their portion, and they the dragons, for the dragon seduceth all the earth, and
only that: Does any resist and oppose heavenly doctrine? he is earthly-minded,
he savours the earth, some base lust or sin is the dragons chain to hold him
under delusion, to destruction.

Thirdly, we learn hereby to beware of seduction, Use III.
and carefully prevent it.

Quest. What means may we use thereunto?

Answ 1. Get out of the estate of nature, into the estate of grace, become a
believer, by faith get into the hand of Christ, and none shall pluck thee
thence, John 10. Give all diligence to make thine election sure, by adding
grace to grace, and bringing forth fruits of faith; the dragons delusions are
only effectual in them that perish.

2. Get out of the world; answer the voice of Christ calling thee out of the
world; for what is the whole earth but a company of seduced and deluded people?
If thou art still in the world, he that seduceth all the world, cannot but
carry thee away from God. Demas embraced the present world, and forsook the
truth: The young man went heavily from Christ, for he had great possessions,
nay, they had him rather. The dragon thought to have seduced Christ himself by
the profer of the world, All this will I give thee. Oh therefore get thee with
all speed out of the world, in affection, in conversation, love it not, live
not after it.

3. Avoid persons and places of seduction. Persons are,

1. False teachers, and false Prophets, that come in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves, Mat. 7. 15. not Priests and Jesuits only, who
study the art of deceiving; but sweet-to^gued Prophets, who by libertine
doctrine or looseness of life, lead the way to wickedness. They are accursed
in the Law, who make the blind go out of the way, and all the people must
say, Amen, Deuteronomy. 27. 18.

2. Perswaders to Popery and false worship, whereof there are not a few at this
day, and such as persuade to any schism or separation from the truth. Let
servants be choice what Masters they serve, and be sure their Masters serve
the same Master in heaven with them; but above all beware of a Snake in the
bosom; our weakness needs a faithful Counselor so near us.

For places.

1. Beware of ignoran tand rude places, which are destitute of instruction and
able instructers; where the eye is blind, that man is misled any whither, and
such a people are led away as a prey to the dragon: a wicked Ministry makes a
naked people. Where do the Frogs and Locusts, Priests and Jesuits, sculke and
croake, bin ignorant and untaught places, where men are taught no difference
between the mists of Popery and the shining light of the Gospel, where the
watchmen are blind, the ambassadors dumb, and teachers untaught need
teachers themselves in the principles of Religion?

2. Avoid infected places, where abominations are set up and maintained; (no
poison kills more certainly or speedily.) Whether they be Popish Countries, to
which the Spirit of God would have us bid farewell, Revel. 18. 4. Go out of
her my people, lest ye partake of her sins and plagues; Or Popish houses,
where deceivers are harbored, idols and lies set up and worshipped, a little
Breaden god adored, true religion reviled, and the mystery of iniquity
embraced.

Avoid these: This is the third means to avoid seduction.

4. Stick close to the word of God, which only can hold us upright, Mat. 22.
29 Ye err, no knowing the Scriptures; Here in cleaving to the word,

First, endeavor to grow up in sound judgment, for the discerning af
doctrines and signs, which carry great pretenses of truth, and by which the
dragon usually seduceth many; 1 John 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they be of God, for many false spirits are gone out into
the world.

Alas, how do the body of our people lie open to seduction, and are ready to
entertain any doctrine, any religion, for want of this ability? They embrace
a religion, because it is established by authority, commanded by the law,
professed by the Prince, embraced by the multitude, freest fr o^trouble; But
ask them a reason of their faith, call them to account in Catechism, you
would think them speechless, you can force no answer savouring of judgment
or reason; is there then no need of this exhortation?

Secondly, grow up in sound love to the Word, for else thou can not but be
given up to believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. it is not learning, knowledge,
wisdom, that can arm or fence us from delusion, but love of the truth, as in
the instances of Adam, Judas, Hymeneus, and Philetus, etc. but love of the
truth will quench in us love of the world, and self-love, and carry us through
fire and water, through Pikes and perils, through thick and thin after it.

Thirdly, stick to the conscionable practice of the Word, and then be sure
thou can not be deceived; hold to the rule of that, for it cannot deceive
thee; the powerful practice of it turns a man from the power of Satan unto
God.

V. Pray for the spirit of grace to perform his Office, for thy establishing
in grace.

Quest. What is his Office?

Answ. 1. He is that Anointing, which teaches all things needful.

2. He is the Spirit of wisdom and counsel, to resolve all doubts; it is
his voice that says behind thee, This is the way, walk in it.

3. He is the Spirit of courage and fortitude, to dissolve the fears of flesh,
and to arm us against tyrants, enemies, changes, trials, and persecutions for
the truth.

4. He is the Comforter, to sustain us with assured comfort in our heaviness,
and to cheer us in our weariness.

5. He is the Perfecter of his own work, for he leaves no work imperfect,
which he begins for salvation; Col. 1. 28. I strive to be perfect, according
to his mighty power that works in me.

VI. Add this to the former; stick to the Ministry, but see that the Spirit
be effectual in that Ministry: for,

1. The Spirit works all those comforts, by means of the Word.

2. As the evil spirit is effectual in such as perish, by false doctrines,
and false persuasions, so the Spirit of God is effectual in the Saints,
especially in the preaching and persuasions of the word of truth.

3. It is just, that whosoever suffers not the Spirit to be effectual there,
shall find the spirit of error effectual in strong delusions. If Ahab will
not hear Gods Spirit in Micah, he shall fall by a spirit of error in the
mouths of his false prophets.

Now to be established by an effectual Ministry, we must observe two rules.

1. Receive not every thing hand over head, but search the Scriptures, and try
the things that are delivered, John 5. 39. and the Bereans were commended, for
examining the doctrine of the Apostles themselves, by the touchstone of the
Prophets, Acts 17. 11. But Papists would not have the Scripture in common men's
hands, because they distrust their doctrine.

2. Having tried all things, resolve to hold all that is good, and continue in
the things learned from the Word, which is an assured fence against deceivers,
2 Timothy 3. ^4.

We are further admonished, to take notice of the Use IIII.
marks and signs of a person that is seduced by the Marks of one seduced by
the serpent.
Serpent, to the end we may avoid them.

One is, in the days of light not to perceive the glorious light of the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them that perish,
in 1.
whom the god of this world has blinded their minds, that the light of the
Gospel should not shine unto them. He is a blind man that sees not the
Sun shining, nor such objects as the Sun discovers; so he is blinded by
Satan, who cannot, or will not see his estate to be damnable and miserable,
but is alive and happy without repentance and conversion; that by the same
light cannot see that a sin in himself, which he sees so to be in
another; that by the light cannot be convinced, but that some sins are good and
commodious; as profitable lies and oaths, some breach of the Sabbath, some
usury, some idle company, and perhaps esteem it virtue or wisdom; that by so
clear a light cannot be persuaded, but that there is more ease and pleasure in
following lusts and sins, than in observing Gods law: here is one led away,
and deceived of the serpent.

2. Another mark of such a one is, not to believe the truth, but to esteem the
Word as a fable, unworthy of our credit. Eve was not seduced, till her faith in
the word was shaken. Thou that beleevest not the promises, as not expecting
salvation by them: that turnest away the thoughts from thinking earnestly of
the threatenings and punishments due to thy sins, that walk in thine own
way, and refusest the counsel of the word; why see thou not thy self
seduced and led away by Satan in great part already?

3. A third mark of such a one is, a departing from the doctrine of faith
received, from the religion and divine worship, planted by the Prophets and
Apostles, and prescribed in the word of God: a giving way and willing ears to
Priests, Jesuits, and croaking locusts. Eve should not have lent her ear to
the serpent against the truth of God. He easily seduceth those that are
willing to be seduced.

4. The fourth mark is, to withstand the power of grace and religion,
accounting the practice of holiness a needless preciseness, esteeming the
care of pleasing God to be hypocrisy, zeal to be rashness and distemper. Who
sees not but the dragon has led these away at his will? For, what other way
does the Dragon himself walk in, but in a perpetual hatred of grace?

5. The fifth mark is noted wickedness of life, and living in lusts; for the
more wicked a man is, the more subject he is to be delivered up by God to be
seduced: and who be they that are given up to the efficacy of Antichrist, but
such as have pleasure in unrighteousness, that is, such as take felicity in
sin, and rather then they will forsake it, trample under foot all the hopes
of the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Who be they that are, or may be noted at this
day, carried away into the delusion of popery, and are a prey to Jesuits,
Priests and deceivers, but such as must have liberty and indulgence to live in
some sin or other? first they resolve upon a beastly life, and then fall to
such a deluding doctrine, as may skin over the gall of their consciences; Of
many such Apostates we may say, it were pity they should profess any other
religion then popery: for no other would befit the wickedness of their lives
so well.

6 The last mark is, when sin is revenged with sin, with hardness of
heart, with brawne of conscience, deadness of spirit, dedolency and
impenitencie. This man is fearfully left by God, and seized on by the dragon:
when neither Law nor Gospel, neither piping nor mourning prevails with him.
Instance whereof we see in many Apostates and temporizers, who having made some
shows of goodness in themselves and good affections to others, falling to the
world and selfe-seeking, have slacked in their love to the truth; and that
sin revenged with hatred, and persecuting of goodness, and that sin
further revenged with hardness of heart, and a dead conscience, not suffering
them to look either behind them or before them, till they have outrunne
themselves in so fearful violence against the grace of God, as commonly
godliness meets not with such enemies any where as those that once made show
of it; And as the dragon most desirously assaulteth these, so Gods revenge
shows it self most dreadful and severe against such revolters.

Was cast out] The second thing to be observed in the overthrow of the dragon,
is the manner of it, namely Satan's dejection, or rather ejection out of the
Church.

Quest. What ejection is here meant?

Answ. 1. Not that after his fall, for that was not by war* as this, but a
just sentence and punishment; that was, because he stood not in the truth:
this because heestood against it.

2. Nor that final ejection in the day of judgment: for after that he never
assaults the woman, but after this he does, after that he is cast into hell,
but here into the earth.

3. Therefore Satan is cast out of heaven these two ways.

1. By the head of the Church.

2. By the members.

Christ our head has obtained a perfect victory over him two ways:

1. By the power and merit of his death, by which he encountered the devils,
and conquered them, spoiling principalities and powers. Col. 2. 15. So as the
Dragons erecting a cross for Christ, set up a gibbet for themselves, as Haman,
and for Christ a chariot of triumph.

2. By the virtue and efficacy of it, daily applied to the elect, through the
power of his resurrection, ascension, and sending of the holy Ghost into the
hearts of the faithful, by whose grace, as by a stronger then himself, Satan
the strong man is ejected, and can keep possession no longer. This is when
faith apprehends the merit of his death, and the efficacy both of his
resurrection, ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God, whence he
sends the Spirit.

But this ejection by the head is not properly meant, for it was done before
John's prophecy, but this was after. This ejection of Satan then is properly
by the members, three ways.

1. By casting out and resisting Paganism, idolatry, blasphemy, impiety, and
all injustice, and immanity against God and man, in which the Dragon ruled and
reigned as the god of the world.

2. By the preaching and promulgation of the Gospel, which is the hammer of
the dragons kingdom, and the utter overthrow and eversion of his whole power.
Luke 10. 18. The Disciples in their The preaching of the Gospel is as
lightning, quick, piercing and unresistable.
ministry saw Satan fall down like lightening.

3. By open profession and maintenance of the faith, and truth of the Gospel,
and lifting up the name and glory of Christ there where formerly Satan's throne
was.

This secondary ejection here meant and aimed at, seems to be, when after the
days of the Romish tyranny by the heathen Emperors, the great and unlimited
power of the old Roman Monarchy (in which the Dragon had ruled and overspread
the earth with all idolatry and blasphemy, and had poisoned and corrupted the
whole known world) was now broken and thrown down, the maintenance of
Christian faith and profession was restored, and liberty given unto Christians
by the manchild aforementioned. Now was the devil cast out, his idolatries
detected, the deceivablenesse of heathenish error discovered, and his whole
power so broken, as he could no longer either hinder the preaching of the
Gospel, or the propagation of Christian religion, nor keep the nations longer
from the truth of the Gospel, as he had long before done by his tyranny. This
I take to be the ejection of the dragon out of the Church, aimed at in this
text.

The note is: that till Christ and his Gospel came, Doct.
the Dragon was not ejected. Wheresoever Christ is not, there the dragon stands
in full state and strength. Matt. 12. 29. the strong man keeps the house, till
a stronger come to dispossess him. This house is the unclean world, the whole
world that lies in wickedness, 1. John 5. 19. Whole mankind in the first
Adam, all unregenerate men: for so the world is taken. Romans 5. 12. By one man
sin entered into the world. that is, the whole world out of Christ, or the
whole world not chosen out of the world. 2. Tim. 2. ult. Before men come to the
knowledge of the truth, namely of Christ, they are all in the devils snare,
taken of him at his will. These snares are errors of judgment, lusts of life,
depravation of manners, or some reigning sin or sins, by which Satan holds
them under his vassallage, as a fowler can hold the bird by one foot, or by one
twig and snare, as well as by the whole body, or net.

For first, as sin has given him possession of all Reas. 1.
mankind, as in Judas his heart, so he never goes out of himself, nay he
is loath to be cast out, and when he is, it is not without extraordinary
reluctation and molestation. Mark. 1. 26. The unclean spirit departs not
without tearing and vexing and throwing him in the midst of them, says Luke;
all signs of extreme impatience.

Secondly, none can cast him out but Christ: for only Christ is stronger then
he: men cannot cast 2.
him out, no not holy men, as that man said, Master, we came to thy Disciples,
but they could not cast him out. Angels cannot cast him out: for they cannot
satisfy sin: only the seed of the woman breaks the serpents head, Genesis 3.
15. Christ only is that Angel which John saw (Revel. 10. 1.) descending
Claves sunt symbolum potestatis.
from heaven. by his incarnation, having the key of the bottomless pit, that
is, power over hell and death: as Revel. 1. 18. and a great chain in his hand,
the strong chain of his omnipotence, which chain has many linkes.

1. The strong link of his passion and death upon the cross, which had more
strength in it then the lives of all men and Angels.

2. That invincible link of his resurrection: for it was impossible for him to
be held under death. The Jews could devise to put him to death, but not to
hold him in the grave, but by his mighty power he opened his own grave, and
all the graves of the Saints.

3. That mighty link of his ascension, by which he opened heaven for his
Church, when the devil would for ever have barred it up against us.

4. That mighty link of sending out the holy Ghost, and sending out the
Apostles and Pastors, with a mighty and unresistable commission for the
conversion of the world.

But what was the end of this mighty chain of so many strong linkes? Even to
bind up Satan: the Dragon described here, and there, in the same words, a
thousand years. The power of Christ's death, published in the ministry of the
Gospel, bound up the devil, by destroying Paganism, and converting the
nations to the faith, as fast as ever any Conqueror bound his enemy in chains,
and restraines him from the execution of his mischievous will against him: for
had not the Dragon been bound, Christianity could not have conquered the world
as it did: but now, says Christ, John 12. 22. speaking of his death, is the
prince of See also Ioh. 16. 11.
this world cast out, though not wholly and fully, as in the last day.

Thirdly, the wicked world is so far from impeaching 3.
the state and power of the Dragon, that it strengthens and establishes it,
by maintaining whatsoever may enlarge the Dragons state and kingdom, and
resisting whatsoever might weaken or impair it.

1. This appears, in that every wicked man gives up himself willingly to
Satan's rule, who reigns like a lion in every unbeleeving heart: there he
enacts laws of evil, there he reigns by sin, there is his seat, his court,
his chair of estate: as for Jesus Christ, he casts off his rule, his laws,
he breaks asunder his yokes, and disclaimes his person, and titles, saying,
We will not have this man to rule over us.

2. He rules not all by himself, but by his confederates, which he convocates
at his pleasure, and they readily obey the summons. He can presently gather
wicked Councels, Synods, Conclaves, and Convocations, to act and decree
whatsoever pleases him against the word of God, and the truth of religion,
only devising in them, what may gall the truth and its professors and uphold
superstition and corruption; he has in store numbers of heretics, false
teachers, libertine doctors, to spread and maintain doctrines of devils. And
by these agents he has in all ages especially upheld his state and power in
blinding and seducing the world willing to be blinded.

3. He has the secular arm and civil states of the world at an hours
warning to set up, and hold up Psalm. 2. 1.
his state, in erecting idolatry and false worship in all corners of the world,
both Heathen, Jewish, and Popish, and this is the ground of all the tumults in
this part of the world, the thrusting out of the truth, and bringing in
idolatry, whereby the Dragon stands in greater state then in any other ordinary
sins against the Gospel; for first this sin is most directly against the
high Majesty of God: secondly, as the God of heaven is present, and honored
when he is purely worshipped, so is the god of the world when he is served:
and as Gods glory is set up in and by true worshippers, so is the devils honor
in and by idolaters, who are therefore said to offer to devils, and not unto
God: Thirdly, as the throne of God is upheld by his subjects; so is the devils
throne by his chief subjects, who are idolaters. Revel. 2. 13. The Angel of
Pergamus is said to dwell where the devils throne was: the reason is, because
that city was most idolatrous, and fierce against Christ and his religion:
Satan's throne was set up in Court, in Country, in Churches, in Palaces, he
ruled all.

Now this is a rule of trial of religion, of persons, of places. Use I.


1. That religion in which Christ is not exalted, in and by that the devil
keeps his hold: which is true, not in the Heathenish only, which knows not
Christ, or Jewish which acknowledges no Messiah come in the flesh, but in the
natural religion of Popery, which thrusts down the Scriptures to set up
traditions, and sets up many mediators for one Mediator, and makes every
man a Savior of himself by his merits: besides their formal idolatry, which
is a worship of devils. And shall we look back to a religion where the
devil rules, where Christ is banished, and Christianity under a pretext of
Christ persecuted to death?

2. For persons: Natural men are still in the power of the devil, very
slaves, because Christ is not yet entered. Sure we are, he held up his power
in us all once, not one of our hearts, but was his throne: if he be not cast
out, he is still in his former state. This is the forlorn estate of all of us
by nature, and if we be not converted, and brought to Jesus Christ by faith and
obedience to the Gospel, the devil acts, mooveth, and rules us at his
pleasure. This shows the necessity of conversion, unless we would willingly
harbor such a Dragon.

3. See we any place set open for drunkenness, whoredom, cursing,
blaspheming, scorning of goodness, or of such hellish resort, where sin is
maintained and upheld, and Christ with the mention of godliness barred out? Be
sure Satan's throne is there, his sign is on every such door, his arms on
every post, there is a house swept for the devil, at least a suburbs of hell,
there is the devil present in prevailing manner with strength of temptation
and absolute command over his slaves, whom he draws to the height of
wickedness. As Solomon gives counsel to go by the house of the harlot, and
not to come near the door of her house. Prove. 5. 8. So let all godly men
avoid all such persons, places, and practices, in which the devil sits in his
chair of estate. Sundry places are permitted to Satan by God to possess,
where he domineireth, and shows himself in strange noises, and frightfull
apparitions, and is powerful in such houses to hurt and destroy, and he that
knows the danger of such hau^ted places will not enter into them: But in such
places as wickedness dwells, although Satan be not sensibly present, yet he is
more powerful; if not more dreadful, yet more dangerous: no wise Christian
that has not a desire to be acquainted with hell beforehand, would come into
houses so haunted and stuffed with young Dragons and devils incarnate: how
miserable to live where Satan dwells: how difficult to serve Christ where Satan
reigns? Use II.


This also teaches us to examine our selves, whether the dragon be cast out,
or keep his state and command in us: where consider, 1. The necessity of this
trial. 2. The rules of trial.

The former appears,

1. Because the greatest part of the world, even in places where the Gospel is
preached, are not brought to Jesus Christ, but are voluntary slaves to Satan,
renouncing obedience to God, and profess obedience to the dragon; and what a
severe, but just judgment of God is it, that they that will not be ruled nor
submitted to Gods will, should become slaves to the Devil, that being
delivered by Gods justice unto Satan, their whole course should tend to uphold
the state of the dragon, with the final ruin of their own?

2. As it is not the presence of the Gospel, so neither the profession of the
Gospel that puts Satan out of state. What a great Professor was Ananias, that
seemed to give away all his lands to the use of the Church? and yet Satan
filled his heart, Act. 5. who was a greater Professor than Judas, the steward
of Christ? yet the devil kept the hold of his heart; there is much more then
profession required to dispossess him, yea, muchmore than preaching of Christ,
for Judas did both.

3. He is certainly concluded a wicked man, under the power of the devil, that
is careless in this examination, whether Christ be in him; 2 Corinthians. 13. 5.
Prove your selves, know ye not that Christ is in you, unless ye be
reprobates? as also who by examination, finds not the Spirit of God, and of
Christ to dwell in him, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
the same is none of his.

Now the rules of this trial are reduced to two heads: The former are such as
demonstrate the presence of the strong man: The latter, such as show the
presence of a stronger than he.

Of the former sort are five.

First, supine carelessness in religion is a sign of the dragons rule; the
Apostle in Ephesians. 2. 2. and 12. sets it down for a note of a man in whom the
Prince of the air rules, that he is as an heathen, or alien without God in
the world, an Atheist, that cares for no religion or covenant, cares not for
Christ and his grace, contemnes preaching, praying, Ministry, Ministers;
prefers pigs before Christ, as the Gadarens; prefers pottage before the
blessing, as Esau; this man is ruled by the Prince of the air: and much more
if thou see a despiser of religion, a scorner of goodness, one that turns
his back on the Ministry, or gives it his presence, but is a son of
Beliall, and will not endure the yoakes of God and Christ; this man is
apparently under the power of the devil: and this cannot but be a sure sign,
for,

1. Where Christ can have no command, the dragon must rule and command

2. Where the Scepter of Christ is resisted, which only casts out the dragon,
there the dragon is not cast out: Were not he a traitor in an high degree,
that should wrest the rod or Scepter out of the Kings hand, break it to
pieces, and tread it under his feet, in contempt of his high authority? yet so
does every wicked man with the Word, the rod of Christ's power.

3. Where Christ is come, he makes communion with God, and a serious seeking
after him; and therefore where is no seeking after God, no fellowship with him,
Christ never came there.

A second note of the presence and power of the strong man is, blindness of
mind in means of knowledge; so says the Apostle; 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our
Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them that perish; in whom the god of this
world has blinded the minds of them that believe not; and, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The
natural man perceives not the things that are of GOD, etc. When a man can
discern nothing of the things of God, and sees nothing in the Kingdom of
Christ desirable or admirable, he is in the state of nature, under the power of
the dragon. The reason is, because the kingdom of the dragon is a kingdom of
darkness, and nothing casts out his power, but the entertainment of the light
and grace of the Gospel. If a man sit in darkness till this hour, that he
shuts out the light, offering to shine upon him, and contents himself with
ignorance of mind, with hatred and resistance of the light, this man sets up
and upholds the devils power in his own heart; and here the dragon is not cast
out.

The third note of a man in whom the devil is not cast out, is, general
disobedience; for, He rules in the sons of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. where
sin reigns, the dragon reigns; He that commits sin is of the devil, 1
John 3. 8. the devil and sin are cast out together: For as a tyrant shows
his power and strength by forcing men to fulfill his laws and Edicts, so this
strong man shows and upholdeth his state, in special manner, by prevailing
temptations and allureme^ts, by which men fulfill the lusts and will of the
flesh, and wicked men are carried, as the swine, into the lake of sin. Now
the dragon stands in his state.

The fourth note of such a one, is, ripeness in sin, when men are not punies
in sin, but old sinners; not bunglers, but active and nimble servants of
corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19. This ripeness discovers it self in many unhappy
men, in whom the dragon bears sway, four ways;

1. By diligence. 2. Hight. 3. Cheerfulness. 4. Constancy in sin.
1. By diligence, following sin as a trade; when a man is at all the
appointments and services of sin, approving and promoting all that is naught,
but disallowing and opposing all that is good, so far as he can; Diligent
servants will break their sleep to do their Masters work, and so will
these, Prove. 4. 16. see Chap. 1. 15.

2. By the height of sin; for as the Spirit of God draws the Saints forward
in the degrees of grace, so the dragon draws wicked men to the height of
wickedness, called (Romans 1.) fullness of unrighteousness; and this without
reluctation or restraint of the Spirit: Thus the devil entered into Judas, and
filled his heart with mischief; whence is it that the foulest sins come not
amiss to many men, but from the power of the dragon, who bids his slave resist
the Gospel, as Elimas, and he must do it, commit murder upon his own
brother, as Cain, scoff his own father, as Cham, swear and blaspheme as many
devils incarnate, they must and will do it?

3. By cheerfulness and delight in sin; our proverb is, He must needs
run whom the Devil drives; so captaine-sinners make haste to evil, and set
their delight on it: how do graceles persons rejoice to promote and compass
sin in themselves, (eating it as bread, and a sweet morsel, Job 20. and
drinking it as a fish drinks in water) and provoke Job 20.
others to sin, to swear, to be drunken, to gaming and plays, etc? were
there a drop of grace in them, it would disallow such horrible sins, and
stand against them; but the stamp of the devil is upon them who rejoices in
evil, and draws as many as he can into his own damnation.

4. By constancy and incorrigiblenesse in sin; He that is filthy will be
filthy still, as the dragons and devils be; and men, as devils, are loath to be
tormented before their time, by the doctrine of repentance, conversion,
mortification or holy life.

This is a sure note of one, from whom the dragon is not cast out.

The fist is; strife to keep out, or cast out the Spirit of God, resisting the
grace of God, fighting against good conscience in ones self and others, when
men aredespisers and evil speakers of the way of God, can contend with his
Saints, and haunt with wicked persons; how can this but be a sure sign of the
dragons holding possession? for what other is his work in the world, but to
fight against the whole kingdom and glory of God? or what is a more manifest
proof of the power and state of a Prince, then to command his subjects to
fight for his title in all his quarrels?

Now if these be sure notes of the state and reign of the dragon, many may
discern their woeful condition, who think well enough of themselves, and
will defy the Devil in word, while in deed and truth he upholds his full
power in them.

1. How many Christians by profession are no better than Atheists, who love not
the presence of God, neither in their thoughts, but abhor all thoughts Psalm.
10.
of God, and bar them out by weeks and months, as most unpleasant; nor in
their souls, which cannot endure the presence of Gods Spirit in his motions,
but resist and quench them; nor in Gods house, the Church, which they care not
for, though God be there specially present; nor in their servants and friends,
who have the promise of his presence, if two or three consent in any good
thing; but hate them and all that love God, or speak of his name; least of all
can they abide his presence, coming to judgment.

2. How many in so great light walk in the dark, worse than the Gentiles, most
of whom were more just in their dealings, more respective of their oaths, more
sober, more temperate, more chaste than thousands of deboiste drunkards, filthy
whore-masters, and foul swines, whose damnation will be heavier than the
heathens? it shall be easier for them than for these in the day of the Lord.

3. What a number stand out against Christ? as,

First, they that stand not with him, Matthew. 12. 30. Those that gather not with
him do scatter, as our neutrals, mungrils, lookers on, who think they can be
of neither part; which is impossible; thou that art not the Kings friend, art
his enemy: Do thou not promote the Gospel, and therein the state and right
of Jesus Christ? thou art then against it; If being called thereunto thou
imployest not thy gifts to win men out of their sins, and to gain them to
the faith, thou stand against Christ, and manifestly upholdest the state of
the dragon.

Secondly, those that stand against him, being opposite to the Ministry, to
the pure worship of God, etc. resisters of the graces of his servants, strong
limbs and supporters of Antichrist, Masse-mongers, Antichristian Captains, and
savage persecutors of true religion.

This is the first sort of rules.

The second is, of such as show the presence of a stronger than the dragon,
which is Michael only.

One trial is repentance, only that loses the snare of the devil, 2 Timothy
2. 26 It is true, that so long as sin is present in us, Satan shall never be
cast out of all power in us; but if once sin by repentance be deposed from
the reign of it, though not from all presence, then is Satan cast out of his
full power, and, as sin can never get the dominion again, no more can the
devil.

Another sure note is faith, which is our victory, and casts out the dragon, as
also brings Christ into the 1 John 5. 4.
soul, who dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians 3. 17. Get assurance of faith,
and the dragon is cast out; and get increase of faith, for the Disciples of
Christ could not cast out devils, Mat. 17. 20. not for want of faith, but for
the weakness of it.

Cast into the earth.] The third thing in the overthrow of the dragon,
assigns the place into which he was cast, namely, into the earth; and that
for two reasons.

1. To manifest and clear the certainty of his overthrow, and the Churches
victory; as Goliath was seen to be overthrown, when David threw him down to
the ground.

2. And more specially to show, who they be whom the devil now tyrannizeth
over; He was thrown out of the bounds of the true Church, and now he
exercises his rage in the earth, that is, among reprobates, carnal, and
earthly minded men; whether heathens, without the pale of the Church, or
carnal Gospellers, who are within her lap, but, rejecting the power of
grace, stick to earthly profits, courses, and affections; amongst all these
the dragon still domineereth, and rules them all at his will, who reject the
rule of God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

Quest. Why was he cast into the earth, and not into hell? if the Lord could
do it, why did he leave his work imperfect

Answ. 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ wanted then no power, nor now does lack might
to do it, but can tread down Satan every moment to nothing: Neither did
Christ leave his work imperfect, but on the Cross performed all that was
required, either for the full delivery of his Chosen, or for the final victory
over all his enemies; but his heavenly wisdom puts forth this power, not
all at once, but by degrees, and in some measure of time, which at length is to
take full and perfect effect; for Christ must tread all his enemies under his
feet, and they must become his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.

2. This place speaks not of an absolute ejection out of the Church, for
Satan was afterward let loose for a thousand years; but of a limited restraint
of him;

First, to a certain time and place, that he could not oppress the young and
tender Virgin of Christ, either by upholding heathenish Idolatry, or by
hindering the free course of the Gospel, and religion of Jesus Christ; and,

Secondly, to a certain measure, for he was not so cast out of the Church, as
that he ceased to molest and tempt the godly, or that he spared to do what he
could to hinder and disgrace the Christian Religion, but he was so far cast
out as that he could not exercise his whole and former power, either in
violence of temptation, or recover so sovereign authority among the heathens,
as a little before he had exercised.

Quest. But had it not been better for the Church, that the Lord Jesus had cast
him down into hell, and confined him there?

Answ. 1. Satan is already cast into hell, and there reserved in chains of
darkness to the judgment of the last day, 2 Pet. 2. and Jude 6. But that is
by the general sentence of God upon him for his first Apostasy, which our
Text aymeth not at, which is a special sentence and judgment in one
particular. Again, that general sentence is now in execution upon him, but not
fully and perfectly till the day of judgment: till which time for the revenge
of the wicked world, God suffers the evil spirits to range as Lions, to the
hurt of men.

2. It is not prejudicial, but profitable to the godly, that Satan is cast
into the earth, and not shut up in hell.

Not prejudicial to the elect: for he prevails only against the wicked
called here the earth, into which he is cast. It is not denied, but that he
may and does molest the godly, but his molestation hinders them not, but
hasteneth them to their happiness.

It is profitable for the Church sundry ways, that God still permits Satan
some power in the earth.

1. That we might see how strong and furious our adversary is, and what need
we have of Gods power to restrain him.

2. To manifest the glory of God, both in the admirable confusion of this
strong enemy, and in the no less powerful defense and protection of the Elect.

3. To shake us out of pride, security and forgetfulness of our selves and our
estate, who are in daily encounter against the Dragon.

4. To quicken and excite our prayers, faith, watchfulness, which we would
easily give over if we had no tempter or enemy.

Note from this, that the devil exercises no dominion, Doct. I.
but in and among wicked men. For he is cast out of the Church into the earth,
and there among earthly and carnal men holds his power still. Ephesians. 2. 2.
The Prince that rules in the air, works among the sons of disobedience. 2
These. 2. 9. Satan works in Antichrist by all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, in them that perish. 2 Cor. 4. 4. The god of this world
blinds the minds of infidels, or unbeleevers.

And why? 1. Satan's reign is in the reign of sin, Reas. 1.
that is his scepter: a wicked heart, in which sin reigns, is his chair of
estate. But sin reigns not in the elect that are under grace. Romans 6. 14.

2. Satan being the Prince of darkness, rules in the kingdom of darkness,
whence wicked spirits 2.
are called rulers of the darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6. 12. The devil is
the father of all spiritual darkness, of lies, heresies, false doctrines,
false worship, and all works of darkness. This is the world of darkness, in
which he rules as a king in his Kingdom. But the godly are gotten out of
this Egypt, out of the reach of this hellish Pharaoh, and are gotten into
Goshen, the Church, where light is: Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were once darkness, but
now are light in the Lord.

3. Satan is the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death, by which
necessary connection appears 3.
who are his subjects, over whom he holds his full and absolute power, to
weet, a world of dead men, dead in trespasses and sins, destitute of the
Ephesians. 2. 1.
life and Spirit of God, and as dead men, laid and buried in the earth: among
these he rules. As the demoniake in our Saviors time lived among the graves
and there tyrannized, so does Satan, being cast out into the earth, which is
as another Golgatha. But the godly are quickened by Christ, being formerly dead
in trespasses, and live now the life of the Son of God, and have part in the
first resurrection, Gal. 2. 20. And so are exempted from the power of Satan.

Which is a ground of comfort to all true hearted Use 1.
Christians that stand in the spiritual combat.

1. Thou fightest against a conquered and bound enemy, who is cast out of all
thy Lords dominions.

2. He is cast into the earth, and keeps state in the world, as the god of
the world: but thou art called out of the world, and brought from the earth.

Object. If he be cast out, how comes it to pass that I am so afflicted with
horrible, hellish, and violent temptations?

Answ. 1. The Dragon is not cast out of all power, till he be cast into hell,
but he is cast out of full power in the godly.

2. There is a reserved wrigling power of the Dragon which may assault thee,
but he shall never hurt thee that art one of Gods chosen, neither by his
temptation, nor persecution. For first, though they may afflict and exercise
thee, yet all the gates of hell cannot overcome or extinguish thy faith.
Secondly, though they may trouble thee, and hinder thee in the way, as the
Moabites did Israel by their wiles, yet can they not in the end of it, which is
life and glory. Thirdly, though they may hinder the sense and comfort and joy
of thy salvation, yet can they not the right, nor assured hope of thy
happiness.

Object. I find these temptations prevai^e in me, and if the devil reign in
sin, I fear he is not cast out of me.

Answ. There is the least fear of that sin that is most feared. The fear of
sin keeps down the reign of it. But for the strengthening of such as are
in combat, we must know, that the best have sin, but sin has not them,
the best slip and fall, but lie not in falls, the best do the acts of sin,
but not habitually: they trade not, nor walk in sins, at least with delight,
as men in a pleasant way: the best have flesh, but walk not according to
flesh. And therefore, although thou find sin present with thee, yet if
thou can find the power of it weakened, if thou sometimes sinnest, but art
so far from tumbling and trading in sin, as that thou hate what thou
do, all is safe, the dragon is cast out for all that.

2. Here is a rule of trial, to know our estate, Use II.
whether we belong to heaven, or are yet in the earth under the dominion of
Satan. If Satan uphold his power and state in sin and unrighteousness
within thy heart, thou art apparently in the earth, and of the earth, Christ
has no part in thee, nor thou in him. Art thou an enemy to grace, to the
doctrine of grace? Art thou a stubborn and obstinate sinner, an enemy to the
persuasions of the Word and Spirit? a son of disobedience, a rebel against
all thou hear? Art thou a lover of thy sins, an hater of them that hate
and discover them? Art thou of the Dragons trade, and walk in fraud, lying,
accusing, and envying Gods children? Do thou cast thy self out of the
Church, and wilfully excommunicate and separate thy self from God, from his
house, and worship, from his Saints and people? Now this doctrine tells thee,
that for these accursed qualities the devil himself was cast out by Christ's
victory, and so shall thou as an enemy of Christ: shall Christ cast him out,
and keep thee in, who resemblest him? no, confounded shall ye be together, and
eternally excommunicate from God and his Church.

3. This is a ground of instruction; if Satan be once cast out, to keep him
out, and let him enter no Use III.
more. When Christ cast out a devil he said, Go out of him, and enter into him
no more. So he never recovereth his power against the Church again, being
once cast into the earth. Apostasy and revolt from the truth once received,
gives him a stronger and surer possession then before. For he never comes
again, but he brings seven worse spirits then himself.

And now seeing that Satan is cast out of our Church into the earth, let us
not turn to worldly rudiments, and that earthly religion and doctrine of
Popery and Antichristian idolatry, which is from earth, set up and upheld by
earthly power and policy, thrusting it self on the world by serpentine craft,
lying, pretenses of miracles, martyrdom, concord of doctors, perpetual
succession from the Apostles, etc. But let the Dragon rage and dominere in the
earth whither he is cast, and in that fleshly doctrine which carries away
earthly and unstable men. Let him make spoil in his own dominion, amongst
Papists, and Idolaters, and hypocrites, and atheists. Let us keep that
precious truth, which is committed to us, and hold fast that which Michael has
won for us; shall we run after the dragon cast into the earth?

Consider hereunto: 1. How can that be a religion of God, that opens a wide
gate to all manner of hateful and unnatural sins, by licenses, pardons,
before and after, sanctuaries, etc. that exempts subjects from laws,
obedience, oaths, and allegiance to Princes: that under pretense of Christ is
a Catholic heresy against the whole foundation?

2. There is but one way to eternal life, by Jesus Christ: stray out of this
way, and you run most assuredly to perdition.

3. Esteem the truth above wealth, peace, or life it self, because God has
magnified it above all things.

4. Consider the force of error, as the secret working of poison, and who they
be that are given up to Antichristian lies and delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

5. Considering the danger of the times, and the business of the limbs and
agents of Antichrist, beware of three things.

1. Of false prophets, who come in sheep clothing, and call themselves
Catholic Doctors: Know them by their fruits, their seditions, wars,
treasons, massacres, stabbing of Princes, powderplots, arming of subjects
against their undoubted Sovereigns, etc. They are locusts, spoiling, invading,
and eating up kingdoms.

2. Beware of the leven of popery, of their impudent and lying books which
they spread boldly, and busily, of curious and alluring pictures, and all false
arts to deceive us.

3. Beware of conversing with such too much, out of desire to please some.
Touch no pitch. In a word, Remember what ye have been taught concerning the
whore of Babylon, how you have been called out of her, what destructions they
have provided for us, and what plagues God has provided for them.

This of the first point.

2. Note this, that wheresoever Jesus Christ, the great Michael, comes, there
the Dragon Doct. II. where Christ comes the devil is cast out.
is thrown to the ground, and cast from his state and power. This seed of the
woman breaks the serpents head. This lion of the tribe of Judah conquers and
casts down the roaring lion, both in himself and his members. This Michael is
he that sits on a white horse, and has a bow in his hand, Revel. 6. 2. that
is, the word of the Law, and Gospel, whence he shoots deadly arrows to wound
his enemies, Psalm. 45. 6. And to him is given a triumphant crown, being the
King of glory, and he goes out conquering that he may overcome.

The proof hereof appears, by considering the two ways of Michaels coming.
He comes, Two ways of Christ's coming.


1. In person.

2. In Spirit.

1. Michael, in the days of his flesh, and infirmity 1.
in his own person encountered all the devils hand to hand, subdued all the
devils he met withal, and healed all that were oppressed with the devil Yea
if there were a legion in one man, he made them come running, and couching,
and begging forbearance. He imposed them silence by a word, and by the same
cast them out of their hold.

2. He comes in spirit, by the powerful preaching of the Gospel, by which
Satan was so bound up, and cast out of his rule, that the exorcists could no
longer practice their devilish arts. Act. 8. 8. when the Gospel was preached
in Samaria, the great power of Simon Magus, which had madded the people,
vanished and came to nothing. Act. 16. 16. The spirit of the Pythonisse was
driven away at Philippi by the Gospel preached by Paul, Act. 19. 18. After the
Ephesians had received the Gospel, they burnt their magical books, and had
no more Puer Hebraeus jubet me, diis beatis imperans, hanc sedem relinquere,
and in orcum redire: jam abito tacitus ab aris nostris.

Nunc mirantur, si tam mult^s annos civitas peste vexetur, cum and Aesculapius
and alij dij long absunt ab ea. Postea enim quam Jesus colitur, nihil
utilitatis a dijs consequi possumus.


to do with those devilish arts. That is famous, which Suidas reports of the
oracle of Apollo, when Augustus Caesar under whom Christ was borne, asked, who
should rule after him, no answer was given but this: The Hebrew child who is
King over the gods, commands me to leave this Temple, and get me to hell: now
therefore go quietly from these our altars. To which we will add that of
Porphyrie, a deadly enemy of Christ, and a scoffer of Christian religion, who
(as Eusebius cites him) has these words: Nowadaies men marvel that our city
is so many years together annoyed with the pestilence; whereas Esculapius and
the other gods are far gone away from it: For since this Jesus is worshipped,
we can get no benefit by the gods.

One reason of the point is taken from the end of Christ's coming, which was,
to dissolve the works Reas. 1.
of the devil, 1. Ioh. 3. 8. to shake down his kingdom, and destroy his
power. All the work and office of Christ is but to cast out the Dragon. The
strong man had bound all mankind hand and foot,

1. From doing good.

2. Unto punishment for doing evil.

3. From helping our selves. Now a stronger then he comes and loses the
prisoners that were bound: his office being, partly to preach liberty to Esa.
61. 1. 2.
the captives by his doctrine, and partly to open the prison doors by his
merit and obedience. 2.


Another reason is taken from the power of his person, who is God and man: as
God he has absolute power and sovereign command over all creatures, even the
same joint power with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, infinite, uncreated,
omnipotent. As mediator ((...), God and man) he is by his office exalted at
the right hand of God above all names, and principalities, to whom the Father
has committed, and by whom he executes all power in heaven and earth: for
the Father rules all by the Son. Hence is his title, Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings, Revel. 17. 14. The Angel said, He shall be great, Luke 1. 32. And
so he was, for he is the greatest in respect,

1. Of his person. 2. Of his office. 3. Of his kingdom and command over all.
Hence must it follow, that the power, armory, and skill of the dragon is but
impotency, folly and weakness, compared to Michael, and must be hopeless to
prevail, unless he could bring also into the field divine power, and
eternal majesty.

The third reason is taken from the powerful 3.
means with which Christ comes armed, and furnished against the Dragon: and
these are five,

1. A powerful death, which is of more strength than the lives of all men and
Angels; Hebr. 2. 14. By death he destroyed him that had the power of death,
that is, the Devil; John 12. 31. Now is the Prince of the world cast out; But
how? by Christ's lifting up upon the Cross, for he says, If I be lifted up.
This Michael has spoiled principalities and powers upon his Cross, That is
the Chariot of triumph; there he tormented the devils, while they tormented
him; there they crucified themselves more than him, and, as Haman, there they
reared a Gibbet for their own execution.

2. A powerful resurrection, wherein he mightily declared himself the Son
of God, Romans 1. 4. a work passing all created power, either to do, or hinder
from being done; for whereas his powerful death was properly the death of
sin, wherein the dragon ruled, so his powerful resurrection overcomes the
world, hell, the grave, in all which the dragon before tyrannized; for hereby
he applies that salvation, which by his death he merited; he maintains
that salvation, which he had formerly procured, and hereby raises up all his
members to eternal life at the last, and great day of his appearing.

3. A powerful Ministry for the conversion of persons and nations, and
casting the dragon out of his holds.

I. In his own person, preaching most divine and effectual doctrine, with
such authority and power, as never man spoke so; For Michael carries a two
edged sword in his mouth, so sharp as that it pearceth and cutteth Leviathan
in pieces: And this doctrine was confirmed, partly with a most holy and
innocent life; so as when the dragon came he found nothing in him, John 14. 30,
no power, no right, no matter to fasten any temptation upon; being pure from
all sin, both in nature and act; partly with most powerful miracles,
evidences of his divine person, because they were performed by his own power,
and such, as the dragon could neither resist, falsify or imitate.

II. In the persons of his servants, whether Prophets, Apostles, or Pastors.
When the Disciples were sent out into Judea to preach, they returned to Christ
rejoicing, because the devils were subdued, and Christ said, he saw Satan fall
down like lightning, Luke 10. 18. How suddenly the sound of the Gospel was
carried into all nations by the Apostles, and the world conquered unto Christ,
appears in the Epistles of Paul? Then went down Paganism, Idolatry,
Atheism, and the walls of hellish Jericho were soon thrown down by the
sound of these rammes-hornes. And at this day, how do the faithful Pastors
hold forth the shining light of truth, to destroy and cast out heretics, and
the numberless droves of false teachers and seducers, out of the Church? for
as the devils were not able to withstand one word of Christ's mouth in his flesh
and infirmity, so the same word is no less powerful in the mouths of his
Ministers, with whom himself is present to the end of the world.

4. He comes with a powerful Spirit, a Spirit of fortitude and unresistable
strength, by which, as he upholds the whole frame of the world in the estate
of nature, so also the whole frame of the Church, and the whole state of grace
in the world renewed, and called out of the world: This Spirit is not powerful
only in the Head, to foil the dragon, but in every member also, who cast him
out, and tread him under their feet, Romans 16. 20.

5. He comes with a powerful arm of justice, to revenge and confound all
enmities spiritual and corporal; this our Joshua has set his feet on the
necks of five Kings at once, and daily casts out the dragon by the miserable
destruction of tyrants and enemies, Neroes, Domitians, Dioclesians, Trajans,
Valences, etc. and at last shall make all his enemies his footstool.

Now seeing only the power of Jesus Christ can Use I.
cast out the dragon, let us make much of the presence of Christ, and rejoice
in it: Magicians have devised many ways of casting out devils, as Amulets,
Words, Characters, but all diabolical; Papists have devised holy-bread,
holy water, salt, herbs, lights, Crosses, the word Jesus, or some part of the
Gospel to charm or ex^rcise devils; of the same diabolical invention, and
intention with the former; but Christ is present with no such sorceries,
neither do they cast down the dragon, but hold him up: Satan is not cast out
by Beelzebub, except by compact and collusion; but the Lord has appointed the
holy Ministry, and in it has promised his presence, and in that he comes
to cast out Satan; the way to keep Satan down, is to embrace, and rejoice in
an holy and powerful Ministry: This is the hammer of heresies, the sword
against his temptations, the touchstone of error, the whetstone of grace, the
rule of prayer, and a whole armory against all the enterprises of the dragon.
He that finds the power of the Ministry casting down the dragons power in
his own soul, will stick to it, as to the arm of God, nothing shall be of
power to pluck him from it, being the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Every man says, he will cleave to Christ, and the power of Christ, for he
only can foil the dragon, but renouncing the Ministry, thou renouncest
Christ, who has said, He that receives you, receives me; and he that
refuses you, refuses me, Luke 10. 16.

Again, note hence the reason, why the powerful Use II.
preaching of Gods Word is so generally resisted in the world, namely, because
all wicked men (whatever they profess) are friends with the dragon, and choose
to be under his power; as for the power of Christ, they renounce it, and say
plainly, We will not have this man to rule over us, nor endure his yoakes; as
for example.

1. Why does Satan so oppose the true preaching of the Word, but because he
feels the power of Christ in it ha^mering down his kingdom of darkness? he
storms not at frothy and foolish preaching; only faithful Preachers bear
the burden of his rage: Christ and his Apostles, and all faithful Pastors, he
opposes, he slandereth, because Christ is powerful in them against his
Kingdom, and not in others,

2. What is the cause that Antichrist cannot endure the Scriptures, but
disgraceth them with vile terms? or that he does prefer fables and devises of
men before them, shut them up and imprison them in Cloisters and unknown
tongues, punish the reading of them in the Mother Tongue with death, etc? but
because, being an enemy to the power of Christ, he finds it the weapon which
has wounded him, and must slay him, and the rod that Christuseth to smite him
down; no wind can so blast herbs, as this breath of Christ blasteth him. The
Arc cannot stand up, but Dagon goes down; Christ and Antichrist cannot stand
together.

3. Why do the Idolatrous countries of Spain, Italy, France, and the rest
stick so fast to the support of Antichrist, and keep life in him, and cast
him not out as other Countries have done, but because Christ is not come among
them? they resist his power, and the rod of his power, they suffer not the
breath of Christ's mouth, the preaching of the Word among them; and where do
Papists increase at home, but in rude and untaught countries, where Christ is
not come in the power of his Word?

4. Why do our Papists, both Recusants and Church Papists, most resist and
disgrace painful and diligent Preachers? these cannot be endured, preach
damnation, are authors of faction, enemies to authority, etc. but the very
reason is, because these coming in the power of Christ, are the greatest
enemies of Antichrist, their good father and friend; for if there be idle or
corrupt Preachers, they like well, because they know these are special friends
to their friend; for if the Spirit of Christ breath not in him, who stands in
the room of a Minister, Antichrist may, and does stand in full state and
strength for all him.

5. Why do many formal Protestants, that say they will be saved by Christ, so
directly and manifestly resist the power of Christ to salvation, and do the
dragon so good service, as none more? as,

First, by spurning against wholesome doctrine, and turning the back
contemptuously and professedly on the house of GOD: This man plainly speaks,
that he will not suffer the dragon to be wronged, or dispossessed out of his
hold and heart; but, like an old Gadaren, he had rather have a Legion of
devils nestled in him, than endure the presence of Jesus Christ.

2. By resisting the holy Ordinances of Christ, and endeavoring to cast out
Christ in his Gospel; proclaiming hereby, not only that the devil is not
cast out of his own soul, but that himself is an open enemy to the power of
Christ; for he that would hinder or stop the breath of Christ's mouth in the
mouths of his Ministers, or that furthereth not the Gospel by all his power,
is an open enemy to the Kingdom and Scepter of Jesus Christ.

3. By making the Preachers of the Gospel (by whom the Lord Jesus casts out
the dragon) their Buts and marks to shoot their poisoned arrows of despite
and bitterness: Well may they know, that the strong man keeps the hold of
their hearts, and that Christ, a stronger than he, is not yet come to
dispossess him; for therefore hate they the servants, because they hate the
Master, which is the very same office that the dragon injoynes them, and the
very proper work of the dragon.

This being so, let so many as would show themselves friends of Michael, submit
to his power, holding it a singular privilege, that we may be employed in
upholding the power of Christ's Kingdom, and the rod of it. One of the chief
privileges of the Church of the Jews, was, to keep Gods Oracles in the
letter, Romans 3. 2. but it will be our pre-eminence above them, to lock up the
true sense of the word in our hearts, by which Christ's power puts forth it
self in our hearts; so we shall provide for our selves (with Mary) that good
part, which, when the outward Ministry may be taken from us, or we from it,
shall never be taken from us, nor we from it.

3. We learn hereby, not to despair of any man's Use III.
final estate, be he never so wicked; for though the strong man have him
never so fast, a stronger than he may come, and rescue him out of his hands:
the Demoniacke, whom none could tame, but in his fierceness and fury brake all
bands and chains, as Sampson did the green cords, yet Christ by one word
tamed him, and brought him suppliant to him; so men that are possessed with
lusts, as with so many devils, that break through all laws and yoakes of
Christ, as if they were Spiders Webs; the threats of the Word are as the flax
on Sampsons arms, the promises of the Gospel are tastelesse and despised, as
the blessing was by profane Esau; yet time may come that Christ may meet with
these, his powerful Word may tame them, and bring such out of their fury and
madness.

They are then impudent and shameless in their slanders and false assertions,
who say, We say they are damned, or they are reprobates, etc. We say, he
that is an Idolater in his heart, or is an hinderer of Gods Word, a slanderer
of the faithful Preachers of it, a scorner of godly persons or exercises, a
defier of the duties of holy religion, a persecutor, to his power, of innocent
men; this man is for the present a wicked man, and in the way of destruction,
and all Gods curses hang over his head, and, if he repent not, he shall be
surely damned: But do we therefore exclude him from repentance? do we
shorten the arm of God, or stint his mercy, that he may not recall such a one
at his pleasure? may not this man, who is a Saul to day, breathing out nothing
but slaughter, threatening, scorn, and slander against the Saints, become a
Paul to morrow? Who can intercept Christ in his way, but he may meet with such
a man, and unhorse him, and strike him down and tame him, and make his Scales
fall off his eyes, and bring him to say, O Lord, what would thou have me to
do? Can he tame and cast out the dragons and devils, and cannot he tame and
subdue wicked men at his pleasure? Far he goes (we say) that never
returns, but we know not who it is that goes so far.

Whosoever therefore casts such scandalous and reproachful falsehoods against
godly Preachers, bewrays, either want of understanding of that he hears,
or desires maliciously to accuse; a fearful guiltiness of conscience, which
it will be time to look unto, lest, while it accuses it self for want of
other accusers, the Lord say one day, Evil servant, out of thine own mouth
thou shall be judged.

4. As Christ, wherever he comes, destroys the work of the devil, so
every Christian, Use IIII.
wherever he comes, must stand with Christ in this great work, and every
where according to his calling and gifts, cast out the works of the devil:
for why?

First, every soldier must stand with his Captain and General in his wars;
and our very name of Christians shows, with whom, and under whom we must take
part.

Secondly, the promise of our Baptism, and our vow openly and solemnly made,
binds us to stand out against Satan; for therein we have taken our
Presse-money, and are ledd into the field.

Thirdly, we are furnished with power, and covered with the armor of God from
Christ, that we might share in his victory, that as he did tread Satan under
his feet, so must we.

Fourthly, we are anointed, as Kings, to maintain war, and to conquer
Satan, and plant our battery against the walls of hellish Jericho.

Fifthly, the same Spirit that is in the head, is in the members, the head and
members have but one spirit, Gal. 4. 6. Christ breaths the same spirit on all
his members, Ioh. 20 22. and the same spirit works the same things in the
head and members, being the spirit of courage and fortitude in them both.

Sixthly, we never want just cause to be at defiance with the dragon, being the
greatest enemy of God, and of us, continually seeking to cast down his glory,
and us from our happiness.

Now the duty being enforced by so many reasons, it will be asked, But how may
we be most fruitfully conversant in this service? whereto I answer.

1. If we cast him out of our own souls.

And 2. If we destroy his works without us, in our several places, according
to the power and calling that God has given us.

Within us we shall cast him out, first, by getting Christ to come into us: for
it is Christ's presence that 1.
casts out the Dragon.

And how may I get Christ into me?

Answ. 1. Hear him knocking in the ministry, attend to his words of promise,
of threatening and direction, for these are his knocks (by which he knocks at
many a deaf man's door) Revel. 3. 20.

2. Open the door unto him, to receive him in. We open our hearts to Christ by
faith. As he dwells in the heart by faith, so also by faith he is received
in. Ioh. 1. 12.

3. Receive him by humility: He dwells in an humble and contrite spirit, Esaias,
66. 2. Thou must therefore confess with that Ruler, that thou art unworthy he
should come under thy roof. Mat. 8. 8.

4. By purging away sin, by sweeping and sweetening the rooms of our hearts
for him. Think not now that Christ will lodge any more among the beasts in a
foul stable: Prepare him therefore a room in the Inn of thine heart.

5. By loving obedience to his Commandments: On this condition Christ comes
in, as he promised, Ioh. 14. 23. If any man love me and keep my word, my
Father and I will come in and dwell with him.

Secondly, we cast the Dragon out of our selves by proclaiming war against
our own corrupt nature, and ruling over affections. We can never overcome him
within us, till we have conquered our selves. As this is the greatest, so it
is the first victory, to get under feet our own unclean lusts, motions,
thoughts, and actions, which are the harbors and burrowes of wicked spirits,
(these serpents lie in these thickets;) to cast out envy, malice, drunkenness,
uncleanenesse, to ruinate and batter down these holds of the dragon, and bring
every thought into the subjection of Christ, that when he comes, he may find
nothing in us.

Thirdly, we cast out the Dragon by careful fencing, and watching our
strongest forts and faculties. The Dragon keeps hold especially in ignorance
of mind, in rebellion of the will, in corruption of the conscience, and having
these forts, he can command the whole man at pleasure. Now to cast him out of
these our most inward and highest forts, we must deliver them up to Jesus
Christ to be informed, strengthened, commanded, and defended by him. He only
is able to keep what we commit unto him.

Fourthly, we shall cast out the Dragon by suffering Christ still to draw us
to himself by the power of the Gospel, and to fashion us daily unto
holiness, Ioh. 12. 32 The prince of this world cannot be cast out, till Christ
draw us unto himself: who as he draws by his word which is called the arm
of God, and by his spirit moving in those means, so must we give up our
selves to be ruled, and moved by his Word and Spirit. These motions and
directions cast out, and keep out Satanicall motions and temptations, by which
he holds up his rule and state.

Without a man's self, every godly man must strive II.
to cast down the power of Satan every where: both by Christian profession,
and Christian conversation.

By Christian profession, manifesting it self in four maine practices.

1. Upholding to his power wholesome doctrine, which is the rod and scepter of
Christ, and by the zealous maintaining an holy Ministry in which Christ
casts down the Dragon. Shall Jesus Christ seek in the ministry to cast
out the Dragon? then woe to those that oppose ministry. Shall Jesus Christ
strive by holy and sound doctrine to subdue the power of the devil, whose
kingdom stands in lies and errors? Woe then unto those unhappy men that shall
seek to bring in the Dragon again, by broaching or defending false doctrine,
heresy, popery, idolatry, or Antichristian delusions: who instead of the
ministers of Christ would bring in the vassals of Antichrist, Priests,
Jesuits, locusts, and impostors

2. In promoting piety and the reign of Christ by grace in others. For true
religion practiced, promoted, encouraged, propagated, casts out the Dragon,
and only that. What unhappy men are they, and apparent limbs of the Dragon,
who disgrace and discourage godliness every where? who plot to cast out piety,
religion and all godly men? Is this to join with Michael in casting out the
Dragon.

3. In forwardness in doing good, which glorifieth God, and honors our
profession. The Dragon would set up his kingdom by pretenses of great works
of mercy, charity, building of Churches, and Hospitalls, etc. And Antichrist is
bold to outboast all professions in such pretenses. But we must bestirre our
selves, that neither papists nor hypocrites put us down in works of mercy,
love, or charity: that we may honor our profession, by a readiness to every
good work.

4. In readiness constantly to suffer for the truth, and fearlesly to stick
to the Gospel: that, as our Lord subdued the Dragon by giving witness to the
truth, so should we by maintaining the same truth to the utmost of our power,
and the last drop of our blood Ler Ephraim divide his heart between two Hos
10. 2. Ephesians. 2. 5.
religions: let the fickle Galathian change his judgment in maine points: let
the Ephesian fall from his first love: let profane dogs, and swine fall back
to general revolt and apostasy, 2. Pet. 2. 2. As none are more serviceable to
the Dragon then these, so none give him a greater blow then constant witnesses
and martyrs, none so much cast him down.

By Christian conversation also must every Christian join with Michael in
casting out the Dragon: and this, partly at home, and partly abroad.

I. A man can never be good abroad, that promotes not piety at home. He that
has cast the dragon out of his heart, will also cast him out of his house:
which is done,

1. By setting up the service and worship of God in his family, that he and
his house may serve the Lord. He whose heart is a Temple of God, his house
shall be a Church and a little Bethel: there shall be no room for swearers,
drunkards, riotous persons, scorners, nor sons of Belial: for these are the
brood of the Dragon.

2. By preventing and wisely resisting the special sins of the calling; all
crafts and deceitful mysteries, by which the Dragon over-reacheth most men in
the carrying of their special calling. A godly Christian in these will not, as
others, do what others do, but what himself has warrant to do: he will not
make his calling a service of the Dragon, but subordinateth it to his general
calling, wherein he acknowledges himself a servant to Jesus Christ.

3. By waching narrowly those lusts, in which the Dragon thrusts himself on to
disturb and throw down Gods worship in the family, as anger, and wrath, which
hinder prayer; worldliness or unfruitful 1. Pet. 3.
employments, which thrust out or ingrosse the times of family duties. When the
Dragon had drawn David from his watches, it was easy to employ him in strange
services of sin.

II. Abroad a Christian must take his Lords part against the Dragon: Both in
respect of good men, walking fruitfully, and watching good occasion in the
communion of Saints, instructing some, comforting others, guiding others in the
way, lovingly counselling, reproving, encouraging, etc. And in respect of evil
men:

1. If corrigible, and hopeful, helping them out of the snare and power of
Satan: saving some with meekness, and pulling others out of the fire.

2. If wilful, or scornful, either avoid their company and all needless
society with them, because the Dragon mightily prevails in infectious society:
and it is an unequal yoking, 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. Or if thou be cast into
their company, be undaunted in good causes, and give them no place, nor fear
their forces in thy Lords quarrel; nor basely stoop to honor ungodly persons
for private ends: nor show a willing mind to repent of any thing well done.
This daunts the Dragon and wicked men, and brings much honor to our honorable
profession,

And his angels were cast out with him.] The fourth general in this verse is,
what company was cast out with the Dragon, namely his angels. By the angels of
the Dragon we understand:

1. All those wicked persons by whom the devil puts forth his power against
the Church, as wicked angels, wicked tyrants, wicked teachers, and all wicked
men and agents.

2. All wicked means and instruments, by which he had executed his malice
against the woman, as the power of his Cesars, the policy and counsel of his
prudent Senators, the sophistry of his heretical teachers, the sorcery of his
idolatrous priests, and oracles. All these and the like means, by which the
Dragon set up, and held up his rule in earth, were cast into the earth whence
they were taken.

And by casting out of them, we mean not a total ejection from all
molestation of the Church, but such a breaking of their power as they could
never prevail against the salvation of any member of the Church, neither
against the happy proceedings of the Christian religion in the infancy of the
Church, at which age our text aims.

Where the Dragon is cast out, all his angels are Doct.
cast out with him. 1. Ioh. 4. 4. Little children, ye are of God and have
overcome them: whom? every spirit that confesses not Christ, every enemy of
Christ.

1. If the head be cast out, how can the members Reas. 1,
think to stay? If the General of the field be cast to the earth, how can the
confused and straggling army hope to prevail? When David overcame Goliath, he
foiled the whole host of the Philistines, so as Israel fell upon them, and slew
them: so this son of David, overthrowing the hellish Goliath, chased all his
angels and forces with him.

2. The same justice lays hold on principals and accessaries. In the Dragons
angels were, first the 2
same enmity against the woman that was in the Dragon, Genesis 3. 15 I will put
enmity between thy seed and her seed, as between thy self and her. Secondly,
the same desert and merit: for the angels fought against the woman, as well as
the Dragon, verse. 7. The messengers of Satan cease not to buffet the Saints.
as Paul. Thirdly, the same sentence and execution against the angels, as
against their head, the Dragon Matt 25. 41. -- prepared for the devil and his
angels, both issuing from the justice of God, who spares not the Angels that
sinned. 2. Pet. 2. 4.

3. The perfection of Michaels power cannot but 3
encounter and conquer as well the angels and agents of the Dragon, as the
Dragon himself. The power of his Godhead is a full storehouse to minister
unto him all fitness and furniture to encounter all the agents and angels of
the Dragon. The truth whereof we shall easily discern, if we cast our eyes
upon the chief organs and instruments of the dragon, called his angels, whom
our Michael has cast out and made his footstool.

The first are heretics, and false teachers, and these angels of the dragon
transform themselves as if they were Angels of light: but Michael the true 2.
Cor. 11.
Doctor of his Church casts them out, and raises up Pastors according to his
own heart in their stead, so that the elect shall not be seduced by them.
This is a fruit of his powerful ascension, Ephesians. 4. 10. 11.

The second sort of the dragons angels are tyrants and wretced persecutors of
the truth, and these stoutly and incessantly fight against Michael. But Christ
the true King of his Church resists and confounds them by the rod of his
power, and instead of them raises us Kings and Princes to be nursing fathers
and mothers to the Church.

Thirdly, wicked men and hypocrites are angels of the dragon, and under the
name and colors of Christ fight against Christ, but cannot prevail, for
Michael is the true Sampson, who with the jaw bone of his own mouth smites
them down, heaps upon heaps.

Fourthly, the great angel of all under the dragon is that great Antichrist,
who now sits at Rome, and has many years furiously fought against the whole
Kingdom of Christ: but our Michael is well appointed against him: for he
blasteth him with the breath of his mouth, and will consume him with the
brightness of his coming, and the time hasteneth wherein he shall be cast
out of the Church, as dung of the earth.

4. The perfection of Michaels victory argues all the angels of the dragon to
be cast out, as well as 4
himself. For first, otherwise the little stone had not broken to pieces all
the kingdoms opposite to it self, as the prophecy is. Dan. 2. 45. But it
has broken the whole kingdom of the dragon, by setting up, and upholding a
kingdom of grace, the least, lowest, and weakest of whose subjects are too
strong for the whole gates of hell to prevail against. Secondly Michael had
not perfected our salvation, had he not perfected his own victory in the
total abolition of his enemies, and in leaving no hurtful thing in all the
mountain of his holiness.

But do we not see many angels of the dragon unconquered, many false teachers,
tyrants, persecutors, Object.
haters of the truth, papists, and the great Antichrist, that scarce afford the
Church any good day, nor never cease her v^xation? how then are all the angels
cast out with him?

I answer, 1. They are all cast out already in respect of our head, whom they
cannot reach now sitting Answ.
at his Fathers right hand: and as to him actually, so to us the members
virtually, and potentially, who must needs partake of his victory and triumph
over them all: but we must for the time rest in his most gracious ordination,
who so communicates his victory unto us, as we must receive it, first, by
faith, and then by fruition, first in hope, and then by sense; first in part,
and then in perfection.

2. They are all cast out already, in respect of the sentence which is past on
them all; but he waits a fit time of execution, when the just and full time of
the ripeness of sin and judgment is come, when he will be sure to
recompense the flownesse of his coming, with weight of revenge; and if any of
the dragons angels escape freer in this world than other, a greater vexation
belongs unto them hereafter.

3. The Lord has cast out all enemies, so, as may stand both with the freedom
of his justice, as also with the time of his patience and connivence; both to
clear his righteousness in revenging, and to make them inexcusable; the
former in that he was so slow to wrath; the latter, in that they foreslowed
their amendment.

4. Michael has cast out all the dragons angels, in respect of the Church, not
from vexing, but from hurting it in matter of salvation, and so as may stand
with his Churches profitable exercise and excitation.

In these four regards they are all cast out, with their Head.

Here is terror for all the angels and agents of the dragon, who hence may
perceive, that Jesus Christ has Use I.
already got the same victory over them, as over the dragons and devils
themselves, and duly waits a fit time for full execution and manifestation:
Consider what a fearful thing it is to be a wicked man, a servant of sin,
an enemy of grace, a scorner of religion, or religious persons or exercises, a
Sabbathbreaker, a drunkard, a vicious person, an unbeleever or impenitent
person, here is an angel of the dragon, who, if he persist in this estate, is
as certainly cast out into destruction by Christ, as is the dragon his head and
mover; what else does our Savior teach, Mat. 25. 41. but that the dragon and
his angels are equally accursed, and wicked men sunk down in the same curse
as they, all of them being equally against Christ, and Christ against them all?
Our Savior, for the comfort of the Elect, says, John 12. 26. Where I am,
there shall my servant be; so in proportion, where the dragon is, there must
his angels, and agents be.

Object.But I hope for salvation by Christ, I am baptized, and come to Church,
and hear the Word, and love God above all, and my neighbor as my self, etc.

Answ.

Many shall come to Christ at the last day, and profess as much, or more, and
yet, being angels of the dragon, are cast out with him, Mat 7. 22. Thou art not
an open enemy; yea, but art thou a covered and secret enemy of Christ? No
pretense or conceit of a good estate can hinder thee from being an angel of
the dragon, or from being cast out with him

First, if thou discernest not the things of God, but art incapable,
unteachable, savouring the things of the flesh, not of the Spirit, and find
most sweetness and contentment in the things of this life, thou art apprently
cast out as yet with the dragon, without the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, if thou hear never so much, and blessest thy self in thine
iniquity, if thou hear for fashion, without conscience or desire after Gods
ways, if thou secretly loathe or fret at the Word powerfully preached, or
hold any sin against it, it is a deadly favor to thee, thou art cast out
with the 2 Cor. 2. 16.
dragon, to whom also it is a sentence of damnation.

Thirdly, if thou avoidest the society of godly men, and in heart love not
such as be truly religious, but hate them, because they follow goodness,
and hauntest with wicked and profane persons, and delightest in them, runnest
with them, and chusest them for thy companions, thou art as yet in the same
darkness with the dragon, 1 John 2. 11.

Fourthly, if thou speak evil of the way of God, and despightest the truth,
revilest such as more openly profess it, disgracest the public or private
exercises of religion, or discouragest such as undertake them; thy profession
keeps thee not from being cast out with the dragon; Michael has cast thee
out, having said, He that is with us, cannot lightly speak evil of us, Mark
9. 39.

2. From this glorious victory of Michael over Use II.
the angels of the dragon, note the vain and bootlesse enterprises of the
angels of the dragon against the Church: They rage, and brag, and plot, and
fret, and all to cast the Church out of the earth, but cannot prevail; for,

First, themselves are cast out into the earth, their power and liberty is
only to hurt earthly minded men, that prefer earth before heaven, and
contemn the heavenly truth preached; but in regard of the Saints they have
short horns, they can hurt none marked, sprinkled, or sealed.

Secondly, the Church cannot be cast out of the earth, unless the angels of
the dragon were stronger than Michael; they may chase the Church out of one
corner into another, but out of the earth they cannot, because his Kingdom is
everlasting.

Thirdly, they are but angels of the dragon, and their Head being spoiled of
his power, what hope have they to prevail? Did the Papists consider, that
being angels of the dragon, cast out already by Michael, they are in extreme
danger, it would abate something of the bragging, pride, hopes, and insolency;
did they think, that the great angel of the dragon, the Antichrist of Rome,
were already cast out by the sentence and power of Michael, it would abate
their hopes: If it do not lessen theirs, let it raise ours, that however they
may afflict some particular Church, yet shall they never obtain their purpose,
as they hope and desire, but shall be cast out by Michael, as the dung of the
earth.

Consider three grounds hereof.

First, that they fight against Christ the Truth, and the truth of Christ; they
fight against the Lamb, but the Lamb must overcome; and against the truth of
Christ, which is of that nature, that the more it is opposed and oppressed, the
more it rises and increases.

Secondly, consider how Michael has already cast them out in their projects
and designs; all deliverances of Christian Princes have been from this
victory of Michael; our own country, and Princes abroad, are instances
enough, as in 88. 1605. etc.

Thirdly, against all the angels of the dragon oppose our Archangell, described
in Rev. 10. 1. etc.

1. A mighty Angel, protector of his Church.

2. Coming from heaven, in a gracious and powerful presence, to help his
Church.

3. Clothed with a Cloud, once of flesh, now of divine Majesty, as in the
wilderness.

4. A Rainbow on his head, a league of grace and peace, first, with God, then
from the rage of Antichristian enemies.

5. His face as the Sun, enlightening his Church, dispersing clouds and
storms, bringing fair gleames of warm comfort.

6. His feet as Pillars, of power and might to sustain his Church; and of
fire, to consume the enemies as Chafe and stubble.

7. In his hand a little book open, Christ opens it to the world, and holds it
open, though Antichrist would shut up the truth, and did a long time.

8. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the earth, that is, now
takes power and dominion upon the Continent and Islands, and raises Christian
Emperors and Princes, by professing the truth to restore him his right
detained by Antichrist.

9. He cries with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth; the more that tyrants
and Antichrist roar, and rage against the truth, with their Bulls, the more
does this Lion of the Tribe of Judah put forth the mighty voice of the Gospel,
and, as with rams horns, casts down the walls of Antichristian Jericho.

10. He swears, in verse 6. that time or delay shall be no more, namely, not
so miserable and mournful as they were under the six Trumpets, when
Antichrist domineired, and none durst resist, who would not be presently turned
to ashes; but better times should follow, both for the respiration of the
Church, and the overthrow of the tyranny of Antichrist.

Lastly, the mystery of God shall be finished, namely, in the seventh
Trumpet; an end shall be of the tyranny of Antichrist, and the Church shall
obtain happy days.

Our Papists think not of this Time, Vial, or Prophecy; let us rejoice in
the near approach of it, which shall take them, as Birds in a Nett, in the
evil day.

3. Note the unspeakable happiness and comfort Use III.
of the Saints, who are free from all the hurt of all the angels of the dragon;
so as neither things present, nor things to come can shake them from their
happy estate; for thus does the Apostle (Romans 8. 38.) boldly both glory and
conclude from this perfect victory of Michael over all the angels of the dragon.

1. For things present; they are either within us, or without us.

Within us is a remainder of the power of the dragon, a bosom enemy, as
Dalilah, ever ready to betray us, our own flesh; and the dragon often ploughes
with our own heifer: But as near and wily as it is, Michael has cast it out
among the dragons angels; not that it be not, but that it reign not in us: Our
Michael has destroyed the body of sin in us, and now, though there be many
damnable sins in us, yet there is no condemnation to Believers; Romans 8. 1.
sin may cast us down, but cannot cast us off so long as Michael puts under
his hand: The blood of Michael cleanses from all sin, and is never dry.

Without us is a remainder of the dragons power, partly in evil spirits,
partly in evil men, both of them cast out by Michael.

Evil angels will ever be molesting the godly, because they weaken the
dragons Kingdom; but to little purpose; they may pluck at us, but cannot
pluck us away; they may reach at us by temptation, but Michael, that saves us
not always from their tempting, saves us ever from their tyranny and dominion:
We are not free from trial by them, but from the efficacy of error we are
free; they may reach at us by accusation, by collusion, by delusion; they will
be filching the Word from us, and sowing tares and errors among us, but by no
means can hinder the salvation of the Elect, nay, they cannot but further it;
for the case is not now with us, as it was in the first Adam, from which height
one apostate angel could cast us down; for that happiness was in our own
hand and keeping, without a Mediator; but this in the hand and keeping of a
Mediator, and therefore all of them cannot cast us down from it; the gates of
Hell cannot prevail: They perhaps may (because they cannot hinder us in the
end) molest and vex us in the way, by witchcraft, by possession, or the like;
as Paul was buffeted by a messenger of Satan, and a daughter of Abraham was
vexed eighteen years, and Christ's blessed body was afflicted and transported,
by the devil, from place to place; but Michael has foiled all of them, and
made this,

1. Only a bodily and external annoyance, by which he has leave to win
the wall without, not the castle of our hearts within, not the wealth of grace,
not the center of good conscience.

2. A temporary chastisement to the Believer, which shall determine in death at
farthest; but in wicked men it is taking of eternal possession.

3. Michael has left a strong remedy of fasting and prayer, and covered us
with the armor of God, that we may be more than Conquerors, even of this
molestation.

Evil men are malignant against the Church, and raise up many a storm, and
tedious persecution; but all these angels of the dragon cannot hurt or
prejudice their salvation; nay, as Joseph's brethren, while they intend evil,
God will turn it to good: for, while they would chase them out of the earth,
they chase them to heaven, as the Egyptians did Israel to Canaan: for,

First, our Michael has made persecution a fire burning the Bush, but not
consuming it, or, as a stout General, besieging the City of God, but not
taking it.

Secondly, he has made the Church persecuted, as a bush of sweet wood, the
more scorched, the more fragrant and sweet-sented.

Thirdly, he has made the persecutors his scullions, to make bright his
Vessels, his Fullers to whiten his children; his Goldsmiths, to melt his gold,
and purify it, not to consume it; his Threshers, only with this flayle to
beat out his Wheat from the Chafe

Fourthly, he makes the persecuted as his Worthies and Champions, placed on the
Theater of the world, in whom he puts forth his own power, and makes them
more than Conquerours.

Fifthly, he sets himself a companion in suffering, and they bear but the
marks of Christ, and are set in the right way, in which Michael himself went
to the Crown. Now because the sword cannot cut asunder the union between
Christ the Head, and his members; nor the world (the dragons sworn
armor-bearer) can foil their faith and graces, but, as Saul and his
armor-bearer, who fell together, therefore are they also truly said to be cast
out with their Prince and Captain.

2. The things to come are those quatuor novissima, death, the grave, hell, and
judgment, but all these are cast out likewise.

1. Death in his nature is the devils weapon to murder all mankind; but
Michael has made him, of an enemy, a friend; of a gate to hell, a Gate to
heaven, (to Believers) Death is as a Drone, who has lost his sting; and, as a
fiery serpent, seems to sting deadly, but one look to the Brazen Serpent is a
ready cure. This son of David draws out this Goliahs sword, to cut off his
own head; yea, out of the eater, this Sampson draws meat; he makes death
determine all the battles between the spirit and the flesh, and to conjoyne us
nearer unto himself; so as in the dolours of death, the Saints, who only
taste of death, rejoice and triumph, as Moses on his Pisgah, when he got the
first sight of Canaan.

2. The grave, which is a Cave of death, and a dreadful dungeon of
rottenness, and a dark vault of oblivion, is by Michael changed into a sweet
bed of rest, and the darkness makes it but fitter to sleep in, in which the
body lies without sin, or sense of pain, a member of Christ, retaining for
ever an happy union with Christ, as well as the soul, of whom the whole
believer being a member, the grave can no more hold him under for ever, then it
did the head himself, who having gloriously risen again, by the same power
will raise the members, which raised himself the glorious head.

3. Hell in it own nature is the appointed prison of the soul, separated from
God. But Michael has shut up the mouth of it, and suffered the sorrows of it
for all believers: and now it is only prepared for the dragon and his angels.

4. The last judgment is as the day, in which Pharaohs baker was hanged up,
and his butler lifted up to his honor again. The judge is Michael, the Judge
of all the world, the Churches husband: himself was condemned for believers,
and will not condemn them for whom he shed his blood. He carried not their
sins to lay them again on themselves.

Lastly, here is a ground of trial, to know whether Use IIII.
the dragon be cast out of any man. If he be, then all his angels, and all his
power is cast out in part with him. When Saul was converted, and the dragon was
cast out by the voice of Christ, see how all Act. 9.
his powers and angels were chased with him. Ignorance and blindness of mind
flies away: The scales fall off his eyes. Pride of heart, and pharisaicall
righteousness goes after; he is struck down to the ground. Disobedience and
the command of sin is gone; Lord what will thou have me to do? Wicked
fellowship goes after; he returns no more to his companions, the Jews, but
joins himself with the Apostles and believers. Likewise in the Gaolor
converted, Act. 16. mark how all the dragons angels were chased out with him:
Of a proud rebel he becomes an humble soul, Sirs, what shall I do to be
saved? Of a despiser of the word, he hungers after the counsel of it. He that
had reviled Paul and Silas, now reverenceth them. He that had inflicted
stripes on them, now washes their wounds. He that had cast them into the
dungeon, brings them out into his house, there he sets meat before them, sets
himself to hear the word from them, to be baptized of them, and all his
carnal joy was changed into joy that himself and all his household believed;
Where we see all the holds of sin demolished, all the dragons studs and
posts pulled down at once; This through-change must thou find in thy self,
in whom the dragon is cast out. For first, where the Lord Jesus comes, he
smites all thy sins with his great sword, as Esaias 27. 1. He rebukes them
all, casts them from their power and reign, and dissolveth all the works of
the devil, not in regard of their presence, but of their rule and command.
Secondly, as a Prince or General may hold a fort as well by any of his
Captains, as by himself, so is it here: the dragon is not cast out where any
of his angels are entertained: for as Christ said of his Ministers, He that
receives you receives me, so may the dragon, of his angels, he that
harbors you harbors me. Thirdly, our rule is, to harbor no angel of
the dragon, Ephesians. 4. 27. Give no place to the devil, no not in any inordinate
affection, as that of anger, which is mentioned, Fourthly, thou can not
entertain one angel of the dragon, but thou invitest a number with him, every
one will bring seven spirits worse then himself, No sin can prosper alone,
nor keep it self warm, but lets in a number more, even a chain of many
linkes.

Now therefore go to the rule and note of trial. If thou have cast out all his
angels, the dragon is cast out, otherwise not.

1. If the dragon be cast out, then the tares of gross and fundamental
errors and heresies are cast out with him, so are atheism, irreligion,
hypocrisy: If the dragon be cast out, he leaves thee not an atheist, an
hypocrite, an idolater, a contemner of godliness, a scorner of religion, a
reviler of Gods servants: these forts, and turrets are cast down after him.
But how are all the angels of the dragon welcome among ignorant and
superstitious persons, wilful Recusants, open contemners of the holy
exercises of religion! etc.

2. If the dragon be cast out, so is profaneness of life, and corruption of
manners. If the dragon be cast out, he leaves thee not a swearer, a drunkard,
a filthy person, a lier, an usurer, a railer, a worker or lover of iniquity. If
thou servest any unrighteousness, the dragon still rules, and holds up his
power in thee to destruction.

3. If the dragon be cast out, so are his temptations, that they rage not, nor
prevail as formerly. It is true, the dragon will be still buffeting
believers, as Paul, and will compass them with temptations, and lay many
trains and stratagems for them. But Michael makes them withstand them all, and
strenthens them to stand in the evil day, where others are cast down, and
with every temptation opens a door for issue. Tempted may the believer be,
but not led into, nor left in temptation. The ordinary prevailing of temptation
in many, argues many angels of the dragon not cast out.

4. If the dragon with all his angels be cast out there is no more sorting
nor conversing with the angels of the dragon. The most apparent angels of the
dragon are wisards and witches, limbs of the devil, and devils incarnate. To
consult or consort with such as are in immediate confederacy with the dragon,
is a mark and infallible brand of a man in whom the angels of the dragon are
not cast out. An ordinary sin in those who profess good things; but for all
their profession are in compact with the devil; who without a covenant with
himself, and faith in that covenant on the seekers part, does nothing.

More secret angels of the dragon are wicked men, and a note of the dragons
ejection is separation from wicked society and company, from idolaters, from
atheists, and scorners of goodness, from filthy drunkards and fornicators,
from liers, and blasphemers, from gamesters and idle persons, in a word from
all vile persons in whom the image of God bewrayes not it self. Whom to
forsake, consider.

1. The commandment of God, Prove. 23. 20, and 1. Cor. 5. 11.

2. Can we safely run among them that have plague-sores? or converse with
thieves, and not be robbed one time or other?

3 Thou must either commit or consent to their sins, if not by act, by
silence. Thou that can brook all company, how is thy heart vexed at their
sins, as Lots?

4. Thou do indeed harden and countenance them in their sin, and shall be
undivided in punishment. Therefore depart from the assembly of sinful men:
esteem them angels of the dragon, as they are.

Verse. 10. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation,
and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for the
accuser of our brethren, is cast down, which accused them before our God night
and day,

After the great battle between Michael and the dragon, the event and issue
whereof was Michaels victory and the dragons ruin and his angels, now follows
the song of victory and triumph: In which,

1. The preface. 2. The parts: which are two.
The first contains the joy and glory of the Church, verse 10. 11.

The second, the woe and sorrow of the enemies, verse 12. Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, etc.

In the preface consider,

1. What voice this was. 2. Whose. 3. Why loud.
I. The holy Evangelist saw in spirit, and predicted a great and cheerful
noise, not of men wishing for good, but of a multitude chearing themselves, and
congratulating together, in the victory of Michael, and the ruin of the
dragon. For this preface is a prophecy foretelling something to come, although
delivered in time past, after the manner of Prophets.

II. Whose voice was this?

Answ. Sundry of great learning and piety hold this voice to be the joy and
acclamation of angels in heaven for the happy victory of the Church, because it
is said verse 12. Rejoice ye heavens, etc. But this seems not to be so, for
two reasons in the context. First, they say, The accuser of our brethren is
cast out: but the angels are not our brethren, they are our fellow servants,
Revel. 22. 9. and chap. 19 10. where the same Greek words shut out the word
(one) in our English translation, which the new translation observes. This is
plain in that opposition, Heb. 2. 16. He took not the seed of Angels, but
of Abraham, that he might be like his brethren, as the angels were not.
Secondly, these are said to overcome by the blood of the lamb, and by the
blood of their own testimony, or martyrdom, which cannot agree to angels, who
can be no martyrs.

Others hold it to be the voice and joy of the Saints in heaven, who
acknowledge us their brethren, and rejoice in our joy, and in the overthrow of
the Churches enemies. But this being an exultatio^ arising out of a particular
victory, namely the first great victory of Michael against the imperial
drago^s, it is not so easy to conceive how the particular passages of the
Churches affairs may be known or revealed to the Saints in heaven: For the
brittle glass of the Trinity, blown by the Papists, is long since broken. It
is out of doubt, that they do most perfectly rejoice with us in the general
victory of Michael against the dragon, and in the final conquest of the
Church, and ruin of all the enemies, which they know well enough, and by
better experience then our selves; But that they rejoice in the particular
passages of the Church on earth, we may either doubt, ordeny it. Neither can
it be cleared, why they should more see the particular comforts of the Church
then her particular combats and sorrows; which if they should see and not
sorrow for, how could they be in perfect charity? and if they should see and
sorrow for, how could they be in heavenly happiness?

I expound it therefore to be the cheerful noise of innumerable citizens of
the Church militant, provoking themselves to sound forth the majesty and praise
of God, for his great mercy to his Church, and his great judgments against the
dragon and his angels.

III. Why is it called a loud voice?

Answ. For four reasons.

1. For the multitude of them that join in this 1 From the multitude.
victoriall and gratulatory verse and voice: the consent of many is called but
one voice, even all the Saints in those times were knit in one consent, all of
them enjoying the benefit of the deliverance, as well as they that got the
victory.

2. For the magnitude of the joy for so great a victory. It is fit the joy
should be correspondent to 2 From the magnitude.
the blessing; which indeed was an heap or bundle of blessings, both
spiritual and temporal.

3. Because this victory was to be audibly proclaimed to the whole world, and
not in a corner: every 3 From the latitude.
where shall these devout and divine notes testify, how Christ and Christians
have prevailed against all profane paganism, idolatry and tyranny.

4. From the faithful and sanctified persons it was very loud, for it was
beyond a voice: whereas 4 From the quality of the persons.
in the slow and formal thanks of men without godliness, there is nothing be
young a voice, which can scarce get without their mouths, that either God or man
may hear them. But this voice was joined with faith, and feeling, and issued
from fervencie and love, which were as wings to lift up and mount it to heaven,
and make the earth ring again* from which warm and stirring affection if this
voice of praise did not proceed, it were still-borne, dead, without life and
motion.

All the faithful whe^they see the overthrow of the Doct.
enemies of the Church, must break out into the joyful praises of God. Psalm.
58. 10. The just shall rejoice when they see the vengeance, and shall say;
Verily there is a God that judges. Exodus 15. 1 When Pharaoh and his host were
drowned, Moses and Miriam solemnly sung out the praises of God. So did Deborah
and Barak in the overthrow of Iabin and Sisera, and appointed a song of
triumph, to be publicly sung in Israel, to keep in mind and memory that
honorable victory. Judge. 5. 1. And as here all the band of Michael triumph in
the overthrow of the dragon and his kingdom: so was it always the use of the
Church, to sing out the praises of God for the overthrow of the enemies. Thus
did they sing to Saul his thousands, and to David his ten thousands; when he
had slain Goliath. 1. Sam. 18. Thus in Hesters time, in testification of the
praise of God and their own duty, was instituted a feast to be annually kept
for the destruction of Haman, and the Jews joyful deliverance. Hest. 9. 31.

But is not this contrary to Christian and brotherly charity, Object. 1.
which ought always to wish, desire, and delight in the salvation and
prosperity of men, rather then to rejoice in their ruin and overthrow? and
that hateful sin, (...), is condemned, as most unbeseeming Christians.

I answer: so long as it appears not to us, that any Answ. 1.
enemy of God is destinated to destruction, we ought to pray for his conversion
and salvation, always attempering our prayer to the glory of God, the justice
of God, and the amplifying of his kingdom. But where God has revealed his
justice, and now hope of amendment is cut off, in such persons we must rejoice
that they are fallen. But with two conditions.

1. With holy affections, not as they are our enemies, but as they are Gods
enemies, not rejoicing in the evil that has overtaken their persons, but in
the good that befalls the Church by the overthrow of their state, power, and
courses, which were directly set against God.

2. With mixed affections; consider them as men, so humanity bids us sorrow in
their ruin; consider them as men in whom the will and justice of God is
revealed, and now piety steps in, and makes us rejoice in the righteousness of
it

Object. 2. Oh but it is said in Prove. 24. 17. Be not glad when thine enemy
falls, and let not thy heart rejoice when he stumbleth; how will this stand
with this doctrine?

Answ. The answer will be plain, if we consider the enemies, and the
affection here meant.

1. Solomon speaks here of private enemies, (thine enemy) such as have done
wrong to us: We may not rejoice in any evil befalling our enemies, as ours:
But our Text and doctrine speaks of Gods and his Churches enemies, public
enemies, who through us, wound Gods glory.

2. There is a twofold joy: Some rises of private affection, by which men are
glad their injuries are revenged by God; and this is an unwarrantable
affection: The other rises out of public affection, and zeal for the glory
of God; and this is free from troublesome passions, and affections of private
hatred, impatience, wrath, and private revenge; and this the godly do, and may
exercise, when they see Gods revenge upon the wicked, still retaining the
graces of meekness patience, charity, and the like Christian virtues: This joy
arises out of spiritual causes, as the other out of fleshly; and these causes
are especially three.

1. The manifestation of Gods glory, which seemed to be obscured in the
oppression of the Saints.

2. The manifestation of his justice upon uncurable enemies, whose conversion
rather they had desired.

3. The deliverance of the Church, arising from, and joined with the
destruction of the enemies; and the former is the proper matter of their joy,
not the destruction it self properly and simply.

Having now cleared the point by this explication, we come to the confirmation
of it by sundry Reasons.

1. The Lord, who needs no praise from us, being Reas. 1,
eternally happy in himself, yet binds his Church and people straightly to
the duty of thankefulnes for taking their part against the dragon: For

First, it is the condition on which he conferreth this mercy, Psalm. 50. 15. I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Secondly, he will have us to acknowledge no merit, no desert, or power in our
selves to help our selves, that all our rejoicing, dependence, and glory, may
be in his love and mercy.

Thirdly, it is his rent and tribute, due from us for all his mercies and
deliverances: It is the only recompense we can repay, to give him the honor
and glory of his mercy, who can give him nothing else. In what estate soever we
be, the Lord expects a sacrifice from us: if we be in affliction, and under
any oppression: now the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart is above all
sacrifices, Psalm 51. 17. If in prosperity, now he expects the sacrifice of
praises to wait for him in Sion.

Fourthly, it becomes the just to be thankful, who feel the benefit sweet
and comfortable, which ungodly men, and they that are without, pass by and
taste not; so as if the Church should not praise God, he should lose all his
honor. Thus the Lord expects it from them, not from the other.

2. The godly must most excite themselves to joyful praises where they see
Gods glory most manifested; 2
but the overthrow of the dragons kingdom is a work wherein the Lords glory
shines out above the other ordinary works of his providence, especially in the
manifestation of his two Attributes, justice, and mercy: His powerful justice
is seen in breaking Satan's power to pieces; he makes himself known, by
executing justice, and by getting himself a name upon such dragons as Pharaoh,
Nero, Haman, Julian, etc. his mercy is magnified in his Church.

First, in that the overthrow of his and her enemies, is a sign of his
presence and good favor toward her, who now rejoices in the light of his
countenance.

Secondly, it is a fruit of his everlasting Covenant, made with his people,
whereof he now shows himself mindful.

Thirdly, it is an effect of his special grace, hearing the sighs and prayers
of his people, under their Exo. 2. 23, 24.
enemies oppressions; whereby he is now excited and risen up for their
seasonable salvation.

Fourthly, the taking part with his people against the dragon, argues his
sympathy and near affection, who is troubled in all their troubles, and
undertaketh their cause as his own, and feels after a sort, and accounts
their sufferings as his own; In thy great glory thou have overthrown the^ that
rose up against Exodus 15. 7.
thee; that is, the Egyptians, who rose against Israel, and accounted of God
as risers up against himself.

3. The overthrow of the dragon, and thrusting down the power of wicked men,
carries in it abundant matter of joy, to kindle the hearts of the Saints 3
unto zealous and abundant praises: for, as Solomon says, (Pro. 29. 2.) When
the wicked bear rule, the people sigh; but when the righteous are in
authority, people rejoice: and there is great cause in both; for,

1. When the wicked bear rule, Gods worship is trodden under foot, and the
Kingdom of Christ is hindered: Now contrarily, when wicked men are foiled, and
good men come in their places, the true worship of GOD is erected, which is the
soul and life of the world; Christ is declared King, ruling in the midst of
his enemies, and the bounds of his Kingdom are enlarged: these will know their
duty out of the Word; these will do their duty according to the Word; these
will uphold the Arc and glory of God, will encourage his servants, and rule in
the fear of God.

2. When wicked Rulers are in place, civil justice is neglected, as, Judges 5.
6. in the days of Shamger and Iael, the highwayes and towns were unoccupied;
there was nothing but danger and spoil to him that went out and in, for
robbers and oppressors; Wicked men, like themselves, may do what they list,
but when religious men are advanced, civil justice and peace, which is the
maine stay and life of the world, is maintained; the sword is not suffered to
rust in the sheath, but is drawn out to the terror of evil men, and suffers
not every man to do as he list, as Israel did, being without a King.

3. When wicked men bear rule, there is abundance of all high sins against
moral and civil laws, and increase of sinners, which, like weeds and
vermines, can scarce, by greatest iudustry, be destroyed or kept under; but
when good men bear rule, they will compel men to the keeping of the
commandments of God, they will seek and take up to just correction,
drunkards, that lie swilling and swearing, and dicing, and carding, by days
and nights; they will gather up such as lie and wallow, like swine, in the
streets, who, had they not better help than their own, would be buried alive
in the mire. Under such government, as wicked men would be nipt and kept under,
so would righteous men increase, as under a fair gleame of encouragement, Pro.
28. 28.

4. Where wicked men bear rule, as all sins are suffered, so is Gods justice
let-in in all kinds of plagues, public and personal: They bring evil on the
place; sometimes infamy and disgrace, sometimes poverty, and want, and a
general curse upon men's callings and estates, for want of reforming open
abuses; sometimes the fire of contentions, quarrels and frivolous suites, like
that which came out from Abimelech and consumed Sichem, and from Sichem and
consumed Abimelech; sometimes by driving away the light, and removing the
Candlestick from an unhappy and unworthy people to some that will bring forth
better fruit: whereas, where godly men are exalted in their stead, Gods plagues
are removed, and turned into all kinds of blessing. Use I.


The custom of the Church is every private Christians instruction; we must
therefore provoke our selves to rejoice in the overthrow of the dragons
kingdom, and that both in respect of our selves, and others.

First, when in our selves we see our spiritual enemies thrown down by the
power of the Word. None of us but professes his part in that great victory of
Michael from those dreadful enemies, sin, Satan, hell, death, and damnation:
as this is the highest raised mercy that ever God gave us, so ought it chiefly
to raise our spiritual joy, to sing the Song of Moses the servant of the Lord,
and of the Lamb, as it is penned and pricked for us, Revel. 15. 3. Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, O
King of Saints. Are we delivered from the leprosy of sin? let us not forget
to go back, as the nine Lepers, to give praise; but challenge our own
dullness, who can as soon forget such good turns, as Pharaohs butler did the
good turn of Joseph. Genesis 40 23.

So likewise when we see our temporal enemies, who want no will nor malice to
do us mischief, but are muzled, hampred and fall before us; now we ought to
lift up the voice of thanksgiving, as Psalm. 9. 1, 2, 3. I will praise the Lord
with my whole heart: I will be glad, rejoice and sing to thy name, for that
mine enemies are turned back, and thou have maintained my right. Psalm. 22.
Save me from the mouth of the lions, and I will declare thy name to my
brethren. But with this pure affection; only as they are enemies to Gods
Kingdom, and so far resist us as we seek to uphold the same.

Secondly, without our selves we must break forth into praises, when we see
the powers of the dragon cast down in others whether spiritual or temporal.

When we see the holds of ignorance, error, wickedness, overthrown by the
preaching of the Gospel: when we see the walls of hellish Jericho battered by
the sound of the rams horns of the Gospel: when we see countries or
persons converted, and yield up themselves to the obedience of the word: Here
is matter of joy and praise, that the tents and curtains of the Church are
spread out and enlarged, and the kingdom of Christ prevails against the power
of the dragon Thus the seventy Disciples, having been sent out, return to
Christ with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subdued unto us: nay our
Lord himself rejoices, that Satan fell down like lightening from heaven.

Or if we see the temporal enemies of the Church overthrown: if we see
Amalec stricken down before Israel, Hamans devise broken, Antichrists power
weakened and lessened, Popish forces repulsed: Do we see Pharaohs chariots and
his hosts cast into the sea, and his captains drowned in the red sea? Exodus
15. 4. Do we see the winds blow, and the sea cover them, that they sink as
lead in the mighty waters, as our enemies did in 88? Do we see hellish
powder-plots, dug as doepe as hell, prevented, and the diggers falling into
their own pits? How should we now take up the songs of praise and triumph,
that the Lord has done so great things for us whereof we rejoice! Psalm. 126.
4.

Now for the better performance of our duty herein, consider three things,

1. The conditions of this praise. 2. Means to attain it. 3. Motives to it.
I. For rules of direction, our text has four conditions.

1. That all the praise and honor of victory belongs to God, as in the next
verse. For God only can overthrow the devils kingdom: he only has power
above the dragon: the Churches victory is the work of his finger, as the
Church acknowledges, Exodus 15.

1. I will sing unto the Lord, for he has tryumphed gloriously. Judge. 5. 3. I
will sing unto the Lord, I will sing unto the Lord God of Israel. Salvation is
the Lords, Psalm. 3. 8.

2. So soon as we see the victory, so soon should we sing out the Lords
praises, as the Church here. We must not put off our vows, nor suffer the
blessing to grow stale before we have performed them. Israel on the shore,
seeing the Egyptians dead on the sea bank, Then sang Israel, Exodus 15. 1. So
soon as the Jews had obtained victory over their enemies, Ester 9 17.
they consecrate the very next day after the victory to the public praise of
God; so while the sense of mercy affects us, and while our hearts are warm
with it, we must praise the Lord.

3. As here is a loud voice for this great victory, so according to the
greatness of the benefit our praises must be. A great victory calls for a
great voice of many. The blessing conferred upon any part of the Church is the
blessing of the whole, and the whole must joy. In so common mercy none must sit
out, none must say, what is it to me?

4. As the Church here, so must we sing out the majesty of Gods name, not with
a cold affection, but with a mighty fervencie and ardor of spirit, to stir up
and kindle in others the fear and love of God. For this hearty and spiritual
fervencie is the lowdnesse of the voice which God requires, and how can he
kindle or inflame another, who himself is not warm or kindled?

II. Means to help us in this duty are these.

1. Earnestly to affect the prosperity and welfare of the Church, as feeling
members and sharers of her joys and sorrows; preferring the joy of Jerusalem
before thy chief joy. Sound affection will imprinta sound notice of blessings,
which else pass away as nothing concerning our selves

3 Not to forget but remember Gods merciful deliverances. Psalm. 103. 1. My
soul praise the Lord and forget not all his benefits, as if he had said, If
thou forget thou can not praise, and if thou praise not, thou will forget
them. To this end write and register them: make a day-booke of the noble acts
of the Lord. Psalm 102. 18. Let it be written for the generation to come, that
the people not yet borne may praise the Lord; and that thy self, looking back
upon one, may find out and epsy many other.

3. Often speak of them, and raise monuments of them in thy heart: as the
stones in Gilgal, the setting up of Altars, and imposition of names in the old
Testament. Tell the children of the acts of God, that they they may tell their
children. The Passover was instituted among other ends for this, that the
children in times to come might know how God destroyed the Egyptians, and
passed over Israel. Exodus 12. 26. So must we tell our children of 88, Of the
powder treason, and other deliverances, and make much of their monuments, to
the perpetual glory of God, shame of Papists, and comfort and instruction of
the Church.

4. Often recount the great benefits redounding to the Church by Gods execution
of judgment upon the wicked enemies of it. For,

1. By these overthrows the most desperate enemies are daunted for a time, and
by the terror of judgments discouraged from their mischievous enterprises
against the Church. Did not Gods plagues on the Egyptians stop their
unreasonable violence against Israel? yea, however the kings heart was hardened
to destruction, yet the people were overcome, so as to do them all the good
they could, leaving themselves bare and naked, to adorn and enrich them with
their Jewels. And how has the heavy hand of God, felt by our enemies, made
them less bold to attempt the like mischiefs, yea rather inclined them to be
at a kind of peace with us?

2. By the dreadful overthrows of wicked men the Lord sets up his Church, and
makes even the enemies themselves submit and stoop to her. Psalm. 18. 44. When
David's sword prevails in the Lords battles, strangers shall be in subjection,
though dissemblingly. The proud Aramites were forced to submit themselves wiih
halters about their necks, to the King of Israel, 1. King. 20. 31. 2. Chron.
32. 22.

When that memorable judgment was executed against the King of Assure and his
proud army, many are said to bring offerings to Jerusalem, and presents to
Hezekiah, who was magnified thenceforth of all nations. So by the fearful hand
of God against proud Herod, the Lord made his word to prosper, and believers to
multiply. Act. 12, 23. 24.

3. By the judgments of God powered out upon wicked men, they themselves are
convinced in their consciences, and forced to acknowledge themselves in a wrong
course, and that the state of the godly whom they persecute, is far more
happy then their own. If Balaam in his prosperity wished himself in the
number of Gods people, what did he when the sword came against him in the
slaughter of the Midianites? Numb. 31. 8. And when the Egyptians were hurled
among the waves, did they not wish themselves in the state of the meanest
Israelites? And shall not all wicked enemies, who now brave it out against the
Saints, do so also, when the waters of Gods wrath arise, and begin to return
forcibly upon them?

III Motives to this duty are these,

1. The end proposed by the Lord, of all his actions, is the setting up of his
glory, but especially, when in overthrowing the dragon he shows forth all
his glorious attributes of power, justice, hatred of sin, revenge of sin,
as also of mercy, care and love of his Church, the over-mastering of her
enemies, for the terror of all proud adversaries, and the encouraging and
confirming the faith of the Saints.

2. As this is the Lords end, so we cannot disappoint him of this end without
our own great prejudice. For as thankful praises for old mercies, invite new,
so ingratitude being a bundle of many sins, hinders the course and current of
Gods blessings unto us. If we would continue and perpetuate mercies to ourselvs
we must not deprive the Lord of his due praises.

3. The Lord has manifested his pleasure, and that he is well pleased to have
the mindefulnesse of his mercies toward his people to dwell with his Church,
to beget in them more love of himself, and a greater desire of promoting his
kingdom. Hence himself pleased to be the institutor of feasts, and special
services for perpetual memory of mercies and delivera^ces: as the Paslover to
perpetuate the memory of the Angels passing over the Israelites houses, in
slaying the first born of Egypt, and saving the^ from the revenging Angel. And
in their entering into the land of Canaan he appointed the feast of
Tabernacles, in remembrance of all that providence and preservation of them and
theirs from all enemies, while they dwelt not in walled towns, but in
Tabernacles forty years in the wilderness.

4. The very Heathens themselves after their victories would institute public
solemnities to their gods in way of thankfulness, and dedicate days and
temples to them for remembrance: and shall Christians come behind them, and
(as the manner is) after victories eat and drink, and brag, and swear, in
the mean time forget their songs to the Lord?

5. We cannot better, or liker to our life of heaven, exercise our selves on
earth when all the Saints shall solemnly and tryumphantly sing and sound out
the glory of God for their final deliverance from the Dragon and all his
Angels by Jesus Christ, when the Angels, Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and all the blessed company of heaven shall join in the
song of Moses and the Lamb: Now the Saints on earth must resemble and begin
this life of heaven, and seeing all other services and spiritual duties shall
cease, and only this shall remain in heaven, our care must be, that it cease
not upon earth.

This doctrine casts out of the society of the Church, Use 11.
such as grieve and repine at her prosperity and happy victories; for he cannot
be a member of the Church, who rejoices not in her joy, nor a son of this
mother, who is not glad in her prosperity: Is it a note of a righteous man, to
rejoice when he sees the vengeance? Psalm. 58. 10. what is he then that
pineth when he sees Gods revenge powered on the heads of his adversaries?

1. Such as grieve when Antichrists kingdom is shaken, when they hear any
news of defeating his forces, and cannot contain or conceal themselves, but,
by magnifying the Catholic Captains, and contemptuous discourses against the
Protestants forces, bewray what they are, and on what part they stand; good
subjects must they needs be while they bewray such sure affections to the
enemies of GOD, our religion, our Country, our King, and our Kings Children;
and good soldiers to Christ, and trusty, who are sorry when their General
gets a victory: I cannot tell whether to impute their boldness more to want of
grace in disclaiming the truth, or want of wit in such discovery of themselves.

2. Such as rage and storm against the power of the Word, which discovers the
nakedness of Popery: So shameless and foolish are some ignorant sots, and so
earnestly set for their Popish Dagon, that if they hear any thing against the
doting doctrines of Popery, they are ready to tumult, as the Ephesians, for
their Diana: It is nothing with them to revile the Ministers, and give them all
the lie, and charge them with ignorance or falsification: But what need clearer
evidence to cast them for treachery against Christ his truth, and holy
religion, established by the laws, in regard of which, if folly it self did
not lead them, they would forbear?

3. Such as cannor endure our solemnities, and days of public joy for our
deliverances against the bloody Papists, but as Vipers, swell with poison and
grief, that their mother has any cause of joy, and that the Church and
Kingdom was lifted up by God from such destruction, as never came into the
heads of any wretches, but Papists or devils. The barbarous heathens could not
express their joy sufficiently in their triumphs and gratulatory rites to
their gods for the deliverance of their Countries and commonwealths from
danger; but many among us (who yet must go for good subjects, else all is
marred) rather express the contrary in the miraculous deliverances of their
Prince and Country, and cannot be brought to share in the joy of
sound-hearted and loyal subjects.

4. Such as will not endure the sound application of doctrine, which casts
down the strong lusts, and advanced sins of men; they would blunt the edge
of the sword of Christ's mouth, or wrest it out of the hand of his valiant
Captains; they will break the Scepter of Christ, rather than it shall get any
victory against the sins of men; and no man shall stand up to build
Jerusalem, but they are grieved, as was Sanballet and Tobiah, against Nehemiah,
that such a man was come, who wished the prosperity of Jerusalem, Neh. 2. 10.
but these that-will not endure this powerful voice of Christ, shall hear
another, uttered by himself, Those mine enemies, who would not suffer me to
reign over them, bring them hither that I may destroy them.

Now is come salvation, etc. After the Preface, we come to the parts of this
triumphant song, which are two; The former contains the joy of the Church,
verse. 10. 11. the latter, the woeful condition of the enemies, verse, 12. Woe to
the inhabitants of the earth and sea, etc.

The joy of the Church sings out,

1. The praises of God, the giver of all victory.

2. The praises of Michael the General, verse. 10.

3. The praises and due commendation of the army, the angels of Michael, who
had valiantly and courageously demeaned themselves in the conquering of the
dragon and his angels, verse. 11.

In singing forth the praises of God, are, 1. The matter. 2. The reason.


The matter of praise is the ascribing,

1. To God, salvation, strength, and Kingdom.

2. To Christ, Power.

The reason, For the accuser, etc.

All these Attributes ascribed to God and Christ, are amplyfied by the
circumstances,

1. Of time, now. 2. Of place, in heaven.
Of the first Attribute, Now is salvation in heaven.

By heaven is meant the Church militant, whose conversation is in heaven, and
which is the heavenly part upon earth: So the Word is used through the whole
Chapter.

By salvation is meant two things in Scripture:

1. The happy deliverance of Believers from the state of perdition, and
eternal damnation; called therefore the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. this
is spiritual and eternal.

2. The safety and external security of Gods people, by their deliverance from
cruel tyrants, who sought the overthrow and destruction of their bodies; so,
Exodus 14. 13. Behold the salvation of the Lord, that is, the deliverance from
Pharaohs Army. This latter, a fruit of the former, is here especially meant.

The particle (now) has great light in it to clear the Text; for it may be
objected, Was not salvation and power Gods before? or were they not in heaven,
that is, seen in many singular victories of the Church before

Ans. As these Attributes were never wanting in God, so the Church never failed
of needful salvation: but we must know,

1. That the Scripture uses to say, a thing is done when it is manifested so
to be, as, John 17. 5. Glorify thy Son with the glory I had before, etc. so
now salvation is declared and manifested in this victory against the first
assault of the Imperial dragons: Before, while the heathen Emperors raged
against Christian religion, for the upholding of Paganism and heathenish
Idolatry, iniquity reigned unto death of souls, and tyranny to the destruction
of bodies, by thousands and ten thousands: But now salvation is wrought in
heaven, Christian Emperors have brought in the Prince of peace, in stead of
those tyrants, the Gospel of peace, a word of salvation, received by faith,
the end of which is salvation; and the peace of the Gospel, by which the force
of the tyrants is abated, themselves confounded, and happy safety procured.

2. Whereas before the Lord put forth his salvation for his Church, his praise
seemed suppressed, or by a few, in silence and in corners confessed, now is
salvation his, the praise of salvation is with a loud voice openly admired and
extolled, in the public congregation of all the faithful, and by the
overthrow of the dragon shines as the bright beams of the Sun in all eyes.
Now is salvation manifested by God, magnified by Gods people.

God is the sole Author and worker of salvation to Doct.
his Church and members; for this is the voice and song of the Church here;
Which words seem to be taken out of the mouth of the Church elsewhere, on the
like occasion: This was the foot of David's song of deliverance, Psalm. 3. 9.
Salvation is the Lords; and of Ionahs Psalm of praise for his miraculous
preservation, Chap. 2. 10. Salvation is of the Lord; and of the Churches song,
Exodus 15. 2. The Lord is become my salvation; and of Habakkuks song, Chapter 3. 13.
Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed; where the Lord, as a powerful General, is said to make an
expedition against the enemies of the Church: And to show that there is no
Savior besides him, the deliverance of the Church, by way of appropriation, is
called Gods salvation, Exodus 14. 13.

1. God alone has promised it, and he alone can Reas. 1.
perform it; his promise is in Esaias 46. 13. I will give salvation to Sion, and
my glory unto Israel; and he alone can perform it: for,

First, the Church cannot save her self, such is her impotency and weakness,
no more than a flock of sheep can fence themselves from the droves of Lions,
Wolves, Foxes or dogs.

Secondly, neither can other men help her, Es. 59. 16. and 63. 5. there was
none to help, none to uphold, therefore his arm did save it, and his
righteousness did sustain it.

Thirdly, no other creature can save her, for it is only his privilege that
made her, to save her, Esa. 44. 24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, that
formed thee from the womb; and Chap. 45. 18. 21. He that created heaven, and
formed earth, proves himself thence to be the only just God and Savior, and
commands his people, Look unto me all the ends of the earth, and ye shall be
saved, verse. 22.

2. God is only Savior of his Church, by reason of that affection and
relation which is between 2.
him and his people: for,

First, they are his flock, and he, as a good shepherd, will save them, as
David did his sheep from the Lion and the Bear.

Secondly, they are his Children, and as a mother carries her child in her
arms, to save it from knocks and dangers, so does the Lord his firstborn.
Both these are expressed in Exodus 15. 13. by two Hebrew words, nacha, and
nahal, the one taken from the tender care of a shepherd, the other from the
indulgent care of a parent.

Thirdly, the Church is his inheritance, his choice, his habitation, in which
he has promised to dwell for ever; which how could he do if he should suffer
Tyrants either to destroy it or throw him out of Psalm. 132. 14.
possession?

Fourthly, the Church is his kingdom, which must have no end; but if he should
not save it, the enemies would soon bring it to an end.

3. It is a part of Gods glory, which cannot pass in any other, to be the
Savior of his Church; 3.
because,

First, he alone will be known the only GOD that hears prayer, to whom all
flesh must resort, Psalm. 65. 2.

Secondly, he to whom the glory of the greater belongs, to him belongs the
glory of the lesser; but he only has the glory of saving his people from
spiritual, hellish, and eternal danger by Christ, and he only will perfect
his salvation by adding temporal and external.

Thirdly, for his glories sake he will be seen the only Savior in such times
and manner, as none else can save, as in many miraculous deliverances, which all
the world must ascribe only to his hand. Israel must be saved out of Egypt by
an Outcast, drawn out of the waters; and the sea must make them a way, and
become a wall to them, and a Well to Pharaoh and his followers; To bring them
along, Jordan must run back; To feed them and save them from starving, heaven
must afford them a daily harvest, and a rock must yield them water forty
years; To save them from their enemies in battle, the Sun must stand still,
and the Moon stay her course, as in the days of Joshua; in which all the
world must behold the Lord fighting for Israel. How miraculously was Jonah
saved, when he was buried in a double grave?

Twofold instruction arises hence to the Church Use I.
and people of God.

First, we learn in the greatest dangers and needs to wait for the Lords
salvation; in the depth of danger, if we be beset as Israel at the sea side,
or if we be chased into the bottom of sea, now to stand still and behold the
salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.

Quest. How may we wait aright for the Lords salvation?

Answ. 1. Become Believers, members of the Church; for it is said, The Lord
will save Sion: stablish thy faith in this promise, give God the glory of
truth, and when thou art beset with sorrows, pains, perils, when thou art in
the valley of death, in the hands of death, in the house of death, now say,
Salvation is the Lords, and as Job, If the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in
him.

2. Beware of sin; for that which thrusts thee from the Lord, thrusts
away the Lords salvation from thee; but sin separates between God and us,
and may suspend his salvation from his Saints longer than is for their ease:
Bewail thy sin, remove by repentance that partition, which thou have thrust
between God and thee; salvation is far from the wicked, because they are
far from God, Psalm 119. 155. It is never so far from the godly; yet often
not so near them as they desire, because they are not got so near God by
faith, repentance, and invocation, as he desires; Dan. 9. 12. All Israel have
sinned, and therefore the curse is powered out against all Israel; and, Josh. 7.
11. 12. Israel has sinned a sin, and cannot stand before their enemies; If
we would have the Lord to put forth his salvation, we must put away our sin,
which makes him seem sometimes as if he could not save his people.

3. Fix the eye of thy soul directly upon the Lord, and look not a squint at
men or means, nor think all lost if they set not in for thy help; for,

First, the Lord (whose salvation is) needs them not to work by.

Secondly, all means are put in his hand, and by his appointment are what they
are; and if he do use any men or means, as in this Text he did the Christian
Emperors, yet the Church must sing, as here, salvation is the Lords.

Thirdly, no means may share in his glory, nor obscure or darken it.

Secondly, it teaches to ascribe all honor of salvation to the Lord, as here
the Church does: for, Esa. 38. 20.


First, there is great reason that he who is our salvation should be our song:
the Church here makes the author of her salvation, the matter of her song: so,
Exodus 15. 2. gnozzi vezimrath Iah, The Lord is my strength and song. It is
equal that the honor of salvation be returned to the Author of it.

Secondly, the office of the Church is, to give knowledge to the world, by
whom, and by what means she is delivered, that after-ages may repair in like
dangers to the same hand, in which only salvation is; see Psalm 102. 18. and
Esa. 38. 19.

Thirdly, for our selves, we above all people have just cause to sing unto the
Lord our salvation, and say, Now is salvation the Lords.

Time was in the days of the fathers, when our nation lay in darkness, in
Idolatry, in the midst of Images, and teachers of lies, worshipping blocks,
and stones, and crusts of bread: The blindness and darkness was palpable,
like that of Egypt, wherein no man could stir out of the place where his
ignorance had set him; But God in his due time took pity upon us, and took
possession of us, as his people, possessed our Kingdom, our Princes and people
with light, truth, and the blessed Gospel of salvation; now was Antichrist
detected, darkness dispelled, Idols displaced, Masse-mongers and god-makers
cast out; now was salvation the Lords, when he swept out that Antichristian
vermin, frighted away those unclean birds, pulled down their Cages over
their heads, and made the happy restoring of the Gospel as a birthday to our
Country, and this English Nation.

In the year 1588. when that invincible Navy, as they termed it, advanced it
self with a Catholic strength to swallow up our Nation at one morsel, they
wanted not his Holiness help, to curse and excommunicate our Prince and
people; they wanted no Engines of torture and cruelty, no cut-throates to
exercise them; they brought over heirs for our Lands, were provided of choice
men designed to Bishoppricks, our Baronries, our dignities, our livings, our
Offices of Council and State, all was their own: But no sooner they appeared
in our Coasts, but now salvation was the Lords, who would show the Romish and
Babylons Balaam, that there is no sorcery nor cursing against Jacob, and make
his Ambassadors know, that there is neither power nor counsel against the
Lord, and that he had no pleasure in such cursed cruelty and covetousness.
The Sun, the Moon, the Elements, fire, water, and winds fought against
proud Sisera; but salvation was the Lords. In the mean time, what did we but
look on, while the God of our salvation made the confusion of that Armado the
stupor and admiration of the whole world?

Add to this the hellish Powder Plot, when the neck of our King and all his
three kingdoms was upon the block, and the stroke lifted up on high for the
terrible blow, when the fire was a giving to their diabolical Engine; then was
salvation the Lords; now was the Lord seen our strong Savior: for although
our salvation was then sent us in a royal vessel, yet then was salvation the
Lords.

At this day, other Countries (few or no Protestant Countries excepted) sit in
the dust, nay, in goareblood; there lamentable spectacles are fire, sword,
blood in streams, and rivers shed like water in the streets, in the fields, in
the houses; here meets them death of Parents, of husbands, of brethren; there
overtakes them orbity of Children* deflouring of wives and daughters, with
shameful villainies and cruelties, beseeming Popish forces. Their noises are
frightfull alarmes, roaring of great Ordinances, tumbling down of Towers,
towns, and houses over their heads, unhappy tidings of burning, spoil and
slaughter: But we enjoy peace, plenty, the Gospel of peace, safety and happy
Protection under our own Vines and figtrees: our noises are sermons, Psalms,
songs of triumph for many miraculous deliverances. At this our happiness
Papists chafe, and fume, and plot, and curse that there is no sorcery against
Jacob, and are enraged that no plot succeeds, but falls upon the heads that
devise them: and whence is all this, but that salvation is the Lords? And, were
it not for our sins, salvation would be the Lords still for us; all the
power of Antichrist, nor all Popish forces, nor all the devils in hell could
drive Christ out of his place, if our sins did not grieve him, and drive him
away from us.

2. This is a reproof both of Churches and persons.

1. Use II.
This doctrine casts out the Church of Rome from being the true Church of
God; which I prove thus: The true Church sings salvation only to the Lord;
the Romish Church sings not salvation only to the Lord; therefore, the
Romish Church is not the true Church. The latter part, or assumption, I prove
thus; That Church which seeks or assigns salvation to any thing within
themselves, or without themselves, sings not salvation only to the Lord;
but, the Church of Rome seeks and assigns salvation, both to things within,
and without themselves, besides the Lord; ergo.

Within themselves they seek and assign salvation to the merit of their own
works. The Rhemists, on Heb. 6. 10. say, that our works are meritorious, and
the very cause of salvation, so far, as God should be unjust if he rendered
not heaven for the same. Andradius says, that heaven is not given freely,
Orthodox. explic. lib. 6.
but is due to our works, and that God has set forth heaven to sale for our
works; and it is as due as a penny for a peny-worth. Suarez also says, A
supernatural work from grace, within it self, and of it own nature, has a
proportion with the reward, and a sufficient value to be worth the same. The
reward is not given for Christ's merit (says he) the merit of Christ cannot be
made our merit, neither can our merits have the power of meriting from Christ's
merit, or any more worthiness than they be ordained to have of themselves;
yea, our merits are true merits, and have an inward worthiness, proportionable
to the reward; in the same manner as if we conceived a man to be just without
the merits of Christ, as many think of the Angels, and Adam in innocence. So
Suarez, a Pillar of that Church, Tom. 1. in Thom. 3.

1. Here is a Church built upon another rock and foundation than Christ. A
heap of Blasphemies.


2 Here are Christ's merits thrust under board, reward is not given for them.

3. Here is salvation affirmed without Christ, as the Angels, and Adam in
innocence.

4. Here are our own merits, without all power or merit from Christ's.

5. Here God crowns man's merit, not his own gift, contrary to Augustine de
great. and lib. arb. c. 6. Nil Deus in nobis praeter sua dona coronat.


6. Here merit is magnified, and grace quite excluded, contrary to Paul, If it
be of grace, then no more of works.

7. Here our own performances, which are all due, debt, sinful, damnable,
and, when we have done all we can, unprofitable, (Luke 17. 10.) yet are more
profitable, more honorable and beneficial than all Christ's.

Away henceforth with S. Paul's doctrine, that eternal life is either a gift of
God, or a free gift: No, far be it from us (says the Deane of Lovaine)
Explic. art. Lovan. tom. 2. art. 9.
that we should look for eternal life, as a poor man does for his alms, but
as the Garland, which by our labor we have deserved.

Here is every man a Jesus in himself, without respect of the death or merits
of Jesus: in a word, here is a damnable abrogating of the whole Gospel, a new
establishing the Covenant of works: Here is no longer a Christian faith, nor a
Christian Church; cleave to it who will or dare; in this faith is no salvation;
they are abolished from grace, and cut off from Christ Shall we after such
light suffer our selves to be led away from the truth to an heresy that leads
us from Christ, and salvation merited by him? Let them say, salvation is not
the Lords, and seek it in themselves, their own merits, meanings, and
observances; let their own arm save them; let them disclaim the Churches
acclamation, who sing, that salvation is the Lords, in whole, and in part, for
beginning and perfection: But let us disclaim our selves; for, why should
thistles boast of figs? and let him that glories, glory in the Lord.

Without themselves they seek and sing salvation to many things; I refer
them to two.

First the Host of heaven.

Secondly, the host in earth.

1. The Popish Idolaters run to the help of Angels; Every one has his
special Angel, to whose protection he must daily commit himself, and all
his affairs; yea, and we are bound to invocate the Angels for help and
salvation; so say the Rhemists, on Col. 2. 18. because they are our advocates
for mercy; and on 1 John 2. 1. contrary to the very words; We have but one
Advocate with the father, because we have but one Head, and one that can plead
his own justice for mercy.

2. They run to the Saints departed, as their tutelary patrons, and defenders
of themselves and their Cities, who^ they invocate to help and save the^, not
as Mediators only (which were too much) but as meriters and bestowers of
mercy. It were tedious to show, how every country, City, family, every man,
every state of men, every art, every disease, every beast have their peculiar
Saint and Savior. Some Saints rule the Sea, some the Land, some the Countries,
some the Cities, some the Elements, some the arts, some the trades, some the
beasts, some the birds, and every Saint knows his charge. The Student must
pray to Saint Gregory, the Sayler to S Nicolas, the Painter to S. Luke, the
Physician to S Cosmas, the Lawyer to Saint Juno; so Smiths, Taylers, Hunters,
horsemen to S. George; the very harlots have S. Afra, and Magdalen; nay every
beast and bird has a saint to pray unto, geese Gallus, sheep Wendelin, horse
Eulogius, hogs Anthony, etc. Oh abominable sink of Romish Idolatry! the true
Church does not sing salvation to Saints, living or dead, but says of Abraham
and Jacob, They know us not, Es. 63. 16. and here, Salvation is the Lords; this
the Church of Rome does not, therefore it is not the true Church: But,

3. Above all their hateful Idolatry, they exceed themselves and all other
Idolaters, in worshipping the Queen of heaven, and depending on their Lady;
and where the true Church sing salvation to the Lord, they sing salvation to
the Lady. The Psalter of Bonaventure, which they call the Ladies Psalter, is a
witness beyond exception or credit; where in every Psalm, whatsoever is sung
to the Lord, they change into the Lady; Psalm 3. 1. O Lady, why do they
increase that trouble me? Psalm 6. 1. O Lady, correct me not in thy fury; so in
all the rest, all prayers, all confessions, all the praises of Gods salvation
are turned wholly upon her. Add to this, that they turned Athanasius Creed into
our Ladies Creed, Whosoever will be saved, must above all things believe
firmly concerning Mary, which, whosoever holds not firmly, cannot be saved;
and so on; and concludes, This is the faith of our Virgin Mary, which
whosoever, etc. They have, and do sing to her the Song of Simeon, Now let thy
servant of Mary depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen the salvation of
Mary, which thou have prepared before the face of all people, a light, etc.
They sing to her the Song of Zachary, Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the Lady, and the
Mother of my God of Israel, who by thee has visited and redeemed his people,
and raised up an horn of salvation: And Mary's own Song, My soul does
magnify my Lady; and the Song of Ambrose, We praise thee Lady, we acknowledge
thee to be the Lady, etc. The same Bonaventure in his Ladies Psalter, lately
imprinted, prays to her thus, Coge illum peccatoribus misereri, Enforce
Christ to have mercy upon sinners; and in his Treatise called corona B. Mariae
Virginis, Iure matris impera tuo dilectissimo filio; Command thy welbeloved
son, in the right of a mother, to turn our hearts from the love of earthly
things unto heavenly: And in their Mariall, the name of the Lady is a strong
tower, the sinner flies unto her and is saved, as is said of God, Prove 18. 10.
Is not this to sing salvation to their Lady, not to the Lord?

Biel upon his Exposition of the Canon of the Mass, says, We fly
principally to the Queen of heaven; for it is signified in Ester the Queen,
who coming to appease King Ahasuerus, had this grant, It shall be given thee,
though thou ask half of my Kingdom; so God the Father, having his justice
and mercy, as the chiefest goods of his Kingdom, keeps his justice to
himself, and surrenders his mercy to the Virgin Mary, and so makes her (as
Bonaventure calls her) the chief corner stone.

Bernard de Busti, in his Marial tells us, Velocior est nonnunquam salus,
memorato nomine Mariae, quam invocato nomine Jesus filij ejus; A man may be
sooner saved by mentioning the name of Mary, than by calling upon the name of
Christ her son. How then is salvation the Lords? Christ says, I have trodden
the winepresse alone, and there was no man with me, Esa. 63. 3. but (says he)
there was one woman, etc.

Bozius de signis Ecclesiae, says, By the two Cherubins covering the Arc, are
signified Christ and Mary, through whom God is merciful, and hears our
prayers; and as Hevah was the mother of the living that filled earth, so Mary
was the mother that bare all men to heaven.

That vision, believed of the^ above the Canonical Scripture (of the two
Ladders set up, the red Ladder, on the top of which Christ stood, the Friars of
Francis could not get up by; but the white Ladder, on the top of which the
Virgin Mary stood, by that they easily gat up) shows, to whom that heretical
Church sings their salvation.

The heathens would rend their garments, and pull their hair off their head,
to hear such blaspemies against their so reputed gods; and we Christians can
comport with such hateful, blaspemous, Idolatrous people. No marvel if the
Gospel take her to her wings, when such vile seducers are taken into our
bosoms, and such Preachers as withstand them, cast out of all request.

But Papists expect not salvation only from the Host of heaven, but from the
host in earth. (Not troubling you with their Crosses, Relickes, Images, all
which they invocate for help, with most religious devotion:) They all expect
the very same salvation from the broaden god, as from Christ himself the very
God; for it is very Christ's body, blood, bones, flesh, Boots, and spurs, and
all. Their detestable prayers to their breaden god, are infinite in number and
sacrilege; I will not stir that sink now. But can we sufficiently detest,
or be too opposite to a religion, whose god may be stolen away, as Labans,
(Why have thou stolen my gods? where Chrysostom says, Art thou not ashamed of
the speech? what, can they be stolen and be gods too?) whose god may be
burned in the fire, as the bread even after consecration; whose god may be
eaten by dogs, mice, worms, yea, by his worshipper. Avernoes, after his long
travel and experience of many religions, detested, as worst and fondest of
all, the Christian Religion, because (said he) they tear him with their
teeth, whom they worship as a god.

Can we be too far from that religion, whose god may poison him that eats
him, as in many instances I could show in their host? and whose god may be
broken to pieces, and some of them reserved for relickes? shall we be so
senseless as they, to expect salvation from that, which cannot save it self
from worms?

The second reproof (after Churches) lights on many persons that seek and
expect salvation, not from the Lord, but from the devil, seeking to Witches
and sorcerers; a common sin even of hearers of the Word. Consider some
reasons, showing the wickedness of it.

1. It is against Gods Commandment, Levit. 19. 26, ^1. Ye shall use no
enchantment, the soul that turns after such I will set my face against, and
cut off. God by his Law pronounces death on the Lev. 20. 6.
Witch, and the seeker to him; see, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.

2. All commerce with the devil, directly or indirectly, mediately or
immediately, is condemned.

First, the open compact with Satan by the Wisard, who openly invocates the
devil, and for his help renounceth his Creator, his Baptism, Jesus Christ,
and his redemption, worships the devil, executes his commands, etc. It is
absolutely wicked, to require this of them which they cannot do without their
own destruction, and wraps themselves in the sin; for, not principals only,
but accessaries are worthy of death Romans 1. 32.

Secondly, for the secret compact on thy part thou seek them; for thou
gettest no cure, but by faith in that diabolical means, nor farther than thou
bewrayest distrust, infidelity, contempt, and rebellion against God, as Eliah
said to Ahaziah, Is it because there is no God in Israel, that thou go to
Baalzebub the god of Ekron? 2 Kings 1. 3.

3. It is a sign of a man or woman in a woeful estate, that seeks to
witches.

First, he is an unbeleever; if the word had prevailed to heal his
infidelity, he would not seek to Witches; faith makes no such haste.

Secondly, he is one that carelessly or maliciously rejects the Gospel, and
therefore God gives him over to manifest and open contempt of him. Pharaoh
despising the Word, is given over to be deluded by Sorcerers; Saul, for
disobedience to the Word, is given over to seek to Witches; he did it not
before God was gone from him, see 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11.

Thirdly, he is one whose sin and judgment is ripe, as we see in Saul,
Pharaoh, and Manasses, who for conspiring with devils (named in the Text as an
outrageous and transcendent sin,) was deprived of his Kingdom, bound in
fetters, and carried to Babylon.

4. The help thou c^n^^ get from them, is not comparable to the hurt by them;
for*

First, the devil seldom cures the body, but he kills the soul: is he not a
devil, as well curing as killing?

Secondly, he seldom removes the evil either far or long, but sometimes
returns it again in some other kind, or person, in children, servants, or
cattle: Hence is the common observation, that such persons never thrive after
it, but all goes back with them.

Thirdly, if thou should get good by the^, yet know,

1. Thou must not judge of an action by the success, but by the rule.

2. Thou may not do evil, that good may come of it.

3 It were but as a robber should rufsle and live gallantly by taking of purses.

5. Consider this, never did good and religious man in Scripture seek to a
Witch; and what a madness is it, to forsake the Author of life, and follow the
author of death? and if he be of the father the devil, that does his works,
what art thou, or what can thou think of thy self?

Lastly, here is a use of consolation. If salvation be Use III.
the Lords, the Church shall not perish, but endure safe so long as the Lords
salvation indureth.

1. The rock of salvation is founded in heaven, not to be shaken by the
forces of earth and hell.

2. We have a strong city; salvation has God set for walls and Bulwarks, Esa.
26. 1. He that must scale these walls, must first scale heaven it self; and
seeing the Lord has promised to be a wall of fire round about Jerusalem,
(Zech. 25.) how can the enemy make an inrode or incursion?

3. All Satanicall and Antichristian forces must combine and plot in vain to
root out the people of God from the earth: they can as soon hinder the Sun
in his course, and turn back the whirlewinde into his place, as turn away the
Lords salvation from his Church.

Oh but we see many potent enemies, and mighty Object.
forces, and strong armies levied by Antichrist, and his Princes, against the
little flock of Christ, and we see no help, no likely power to keep from
making havocke of all.

I answer, I. Salvation is the Lords, who is more Answ.
mighty to save than they to spoil, else would they soon prove too puissant
for the little city of God.

2 Thou see no help, yet is it not far off, Psalm. 85. 9. surely his
salvation is near them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our Land.

3. It shall be put forth seasonably, and shall not tarry; Esa. 46. 13. The
time hasteneth when the Church shall sing, Now is salvation in heaven; now has
the Lord manifested his salvation in his Church, in the overthrow of Antichrist.

And strength, and the kingdom of our God.] These are the two other
Attributes, ascribed to God the giver of victory.

By strength is meant the mighty arm of GOD, which has two properties of
power: the former, to sustain and bear up all things, so long as he will
have them to be: The latter, to subdue all contrary things to his will and
power: For this strength must prevail against all adversary power, and can be
overcome of none. The right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass,
Psalm. 118. 16. partly in the world, partly in the Church called out of the
world; of which latter our Text properly speaks.

By Kingdom in Scripture is meant two things.

1. The absolute sovereignty of God over all things, to whom appertain all
kingdoms: this is called the kingdom of power, and appropriated to God; The
Kingdom is the Lords; that is, originally and in Psalm. 22. 28.
his own right, all other in the creature is sovereignty derived, and
delegate, Dan. 2. 27.

2. That special administration and government, Prove. 8. 15.
which he exercises in setting up, and upholding his Church, at which our
Text aims.

The difference between this and the former, is, In that, we are all by
nature; in this, only by grace; in that we only live and enjoy the benefit
of creatures, in this we live happily, and enjoy the benefit of new creation,
in redemption and sanctification.

Now whereas this special kingdom is either of grace here, or glory
hereafter, the former is here meant, even that kingdom of grace which the
dragon specially opposes, who resists not so much the kingdom of power, nor
at all the Kingdom of glory, but most fiercely assaileth the kingdom of
grace; as is plainly convinced by the particle, Now is strength and the
Kingdom of our GOD in heaven.

In that the Church rejoices, that now the Lord Doct.
has put forth his strength in the overthrow of the enemies, and set up his
own kingdom where the dragon and his angels had ruled in darkness, Idolatry,
cruelty, and tyranny, we learn, that this Saints ought to rejoice when they
see Gods Kingdom set up and prevail against the dragon and his angels. Rev.
11. 15. When the seventh Angel blew the Trumpet there were great voices in
heaven; that is, the milita^t Church, saying, The kingdoms of this world are
become our Lords and his Christ's. These were loud voices of joy and praise,
that the kingdoms of the earth were converted to Christ, and because Christ in
his Gospel reigned by the Princes among his and their subjects: And indeed a
good heart, seeing Jesus Christ manifesting his royal administration, and
thereby taken up with sense and feeling of Gods goodness to his Church, cannot
conceal nor contain this joy, but must vent and express it; as Iethro (Exodus
18. 9.) rejoiced for all the goodness the Lord did for Israel; he inwardly
rejoiced, he confessed it with his mouth, verse. 10. and afterward offered
sacrifices to God for his mercy in delivering Israel from Pharaohs bondage;
which mercy he twice expresses. And David seeing the forwardness of the
people, offering freely to the Temple, rejoiced exceedingly, and blessed God
before all the congregation, 1 Chro. 29. 10. And when the Arc was brought home
to the City of David, he was so over-carried with joy, that he could not
contain himself, but he danced before it, 2 Samuel 6. 14.

1. A good heart cannot but esteem it the greatest cause of joy, where God is
most honored: But God Reas. 1.
is most honored, where his Kingdom is most advanced; for here he glorifieth
his power and grace far above all that is in the kingdom of power.

First, his power is more admirable in setting up the Church, than in setting
up the world: no less is his power in conversion, than in the Creation of men:
The power of his Word converting souls, is no less than the word (fiat)
framing bodies and substances. Neither is his power less admirable in
upholding his Church, then in upholding the world; putting forth it self daily,
both in removing the stops and impediments reared against him by Satan,
tyrants, heretics, wicked worldlings, man's corruption; as also by advancing
the powerful means, by which his kingdom is erected, continued and enlarged.

Secondly, his grace is magnified by setting up the Kingdom of grace.

1. In gathering himself a choice people out of the world, by a means so
contemptible to the world.

2. In freeing them from the dominion of sin, from the curse of the law, and
the power of Satan.

3. In bestowing on them the free grace of righteousness, joy, peace of
conscience, and sanctification.

4. In their final salvation.

2. Sincere love and affection to our mother the 2
Church, and to our brethren the children of our father, cannot but bewray it
self in rejoicing in their joy; seeing this only affection will show a man to
be of the house and blood of Christ, and his seed. How do men rejoice, when
their near kindred, as Parents, brethren, or children rise up in earthly
wealth, honor, and happiness? Even so will a godly man, when he sees any
advanced in grace, which brings ever a rich revenue with it, desirable above
wealth; besides honor and favor of GOD, to which all earthly honor and
favor is wind and vanity, and all rejoicing in any man or gift, without this,
is carnal, unseasoned, and unsound. And contrarily, he is signed to be out of
the communion of Saints, who rejoices not in the grace of every one; seeing
every grace in every Christian, is every Christians grace; neither can he be
a lively member, whose welfare is shut up in himself, seeing the health of the
whole body stands in the welfare of every part.

3. That must be the greatest cause of joy in earth, 3
which is next and likliest to the joys in heaven: But, to see the kingdom
the Lords, is the next and likest to the joys of heaven. Therefore,

1. This makes way and entrance into that Kingdom of glory.

2. That Kingdom of glory is but the perfection of this: For here is a daily
subduing of enemies, and that is a conquest of all enemies subdued and
vanquished; this a gathering of subjects into the kingdom, in that all
subjects are gathered; here the King of glory rules his subjects mediately, by
Princes, and Pastors, in Magistracy and Ministry; there he rules all by
himself, immediately, and is by all acknowledged, all in all; here is a
communion of Saints absent from the Lord, striving against sin, there is a
communion of just and perfect men, present with the Lord, freed from sin, and
triumphing over it; here the subjects have begun a cheerful and free
obedience, ceasing from sin, and have attained peace with God, joy, good
conscience, and sweet fellowship with God, which is an heaven upon earth; there
they attain a perfect obedience, a perpetual Sabbath, and rest from sin, an
heavenly joy in the happy and immediate fellowship with God, seeing him as they
would: So as indeed the setting up of this Kingdom is the setting up of that,
and is the seed-time of that full Harvest of joy, which eye has not seen.

This condemns such as whose eyes are filled with envy at the prosperity and
proceedings of the Use I.
Gospel, by which the Kingdom becomes the Lords, and gather matter of grief
and wrath, where they should most rejoice: As,

First, graceless and irreligious people, who express open contempt of Gods
House and Ordinances, clean contrary to holy David, who rejoiced to hear the
people say to him, Come, let us go to the House of God: And, whereas grace
would teach them to count the feet of godly Preachers beautiful, they cast
mire and dirt in their faces, and what disgraces the times will afford the^; an
earnest of the full wages they would pay them, if times should prove for them.
Nothing so much grieves them as a man who is suffered to uphold the Lords
Kingdom, as Sanballat and Tobiah were exceedingly grieved, that Nehemiah
sought to build the walls of Jerusalem.

Secondly, profane Ministers, who above all men should rejoice that Christ is
preached any manner of way, and prefer the work and prevailing of the Gospel
above their chief joy, yet are full of envy to see Gods blessing given, and
the Kingdom of the Lord more set up by others than themselves. So were the
Pharisees exceedingly troubled, to see the people follow Christ himself, See,
all the world goes after John 12. 19.
him: And their Ghosts walk in the world in numbers of their successors, whose
hearts rise against those, to whose Ministry God gives a better report than to
theirs: A sign of a proud and unmortified heart. Thus did not Moses, Number. 11.
28. he did not presently shove and thrust at Eldad and Medad,, to thrust them
out of the Congregation, because they prophesied, but was glad, and wished more
of them.

The true Apostles were glad that Christ was preached by false apostles, though
it were of envy; but they are false apostles, that envy Christ preached of
good will. John Baptist was glad that Christ increased though himself,
decreased by it, John 3. 29. Oh that the Angels of the Churches on earth would
resemble the Angels in heaven: They sing glory to God when Christ appears, and
the poor shepherds preach him; so would these, were they as free from pride
and vainglory as they, and would frame their high spirits to the lowliness
of our Lord himself, who rejoiced in spirit, and blessed his Father, that he
had revealed the things of the Kingdom to Babes.

Thirdly, others dissuade and discourage such as are coming on to Christ, and,
were it not for them, would show themselves subjects to this Lord, by
frequenting his House and Ordinances; Oh you must not hear such nor frequent
the Lecture, you shall get your self a blot, etc. O unhappy men, not only the
persuaded, whose lot is to light into such mischievous acquaintance, by whom
they are intised away from their allegiance to their Heavenly King; but most
unhappy such perswaders, who keep away, with themselves, all they can fall in
with! what is their work, but the same with the dragons, Verse. 4. to slay
every manchilde so soon as he is borne unto Christ? and what is their wages,
but that of Elimas, who, when he could not hinder the Deputy from hearing Paul,
nor Paul from preaching, sought to pervert him from that he heard, for which
Paul calls him the child of the devil, the enemy of righteousness, that
ceased not to pervert the strait ways of God. It is a fearful sin of a
Pharisee, not to enter into the Kingdom of GOD himself; but to hinder such as
would enter, is most damnable.

Fourthly, many others sin against this truth, who cast their taunts upon no
sort of men so much, as those who run after Christ, and flock to Sermons;
these are yet no subjects of Christ, but as the unbeleeving Jews (Act. 13. 45.)
who were enraged to see the Gentiles so ready to receive the preaching of Paul.

2. Let this provoke us to testify our joy, wheresoever we see the kingdom of
our God prevailing. An heart zealous for Gods glory, and thirsting after man's
salvation, esteems it the greatest earthly happiness, to see the subjects of
Christ multiplied, by the daily addition of souls to the Church, Act. 2. 41.
and to see Satan fall like lightning from heaven, sin mastered, sinners
co^verted, enemies stopped, or revenged: for,

First, this is a due debt, and we ought to be thankful, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2.

Secondly, Christ has commanded us to pray, that his Kingdom may come;
therefore also we must thankfully acknowledge it, when it does come.

Thirdly, they shall prosper that love Jerusalem, and prefer it to their
chief joy.

But especially our joy must abound, when our Lords Kingdom is set up near
us; as,

First, in our Country and Kingdom. We should pray to see, and rejoice in
seeing our Prince and Rulers casting down their Crowns and Scepters at the
feet of the Lamb, keeping themselves bounded within that commission, which
they all receive from Him, whose the Kingdom is; opposing by all their power,
tyrannical enemies, who delight to spill the blood of Saints, as water;
advancing the Word, Sacraments, Ministry, and means of salvation, sincere and
undefiled; cherishing godly Pastors and Ministers; upholding holy discipline,
to reform or cut off evil members; encouraging the religious and
sincere-hearted Professors of piety; shunning evil men, chasing Idolaters and
profane persons out of presence, and resisting the underminers and resisters of
Christ's Kingdom, whether by secret fraud or open force. All Scepters that
uphold not Christ's Scepter, must be broken to pieces; the which if it be held
up at Court, will be the easier held up in the Country.

Secondly, in our Cities and Towns. If an eminent and conspicuous Town (as
this is) yield to Christ, it is as a Beacon to the whole country round about,
as a mother City once opening to a Prince, is a President to the whole Land.

What a joy were it, if Gods Ordinances had prevailed in this Town, that the
Governors had led the way to Gods House, as they were wont formerly; that Gods
Sabbaths were sanctified, which none looks after; that the love of God and his
servants appeared among you; that we might not say truly, that scarce the
meanest Village about you but would give both more countenance and more
maintenance to a Lecture, than this corporation does? What a comfort were it,
that you were patterns of concord and agreement to all the Country, and not
the spectacles of unquencheable discord and faction to all the kingdom? What a
joyful thing were it, if we might see good men encouraged, vicious persons
corrected, incorrigible outcasts cast out, and all men brought at least
outwardly to the obedience of Ghrist?

Thirdly, in our own houses. What an unspeakeable joy is it, when Gods
Kingdom is come into our family, when our house is a Bethel, the wife is a
ioynt-heire of the grace of life with the husband, the children are the
Children of God by adoption, and sing Hosanna to Christ; cur servants Gods
servants, and our kindred of the blood of Christ with us? We need not bid men
rejoice, when their children thrive and prosper in the world, the most of which
joy is carnal: But where be the hearts fearing God, who more rejoice when
they prove godly and religious; when they see their children walking in the
truth, etc? How is the Kingdom of God in the family, when the husband checketh
his wife, because she is the Spouse of Christ; the father frowneth on his
son, because he is bookish, and diligent in reading, and good exercises; the
Master will not endure the servant, that will be a Saint, in his service? O
hypocrite, how can thou rejoice in the Kingdom of God in the Kingdom, and
hunt it out of thy family? know, thou not only want grace, but hate it.

Fourthly, in our own hearts especially; to see the kingdom of God set up,
there will be matter of assured and lasting joy: Matthew. 13. 44. He that
finds the Pearl, goes away rejoicing, and sells all to purchase it. The
Eunuch converted, goes away rejoicing: No man can have Christ, but he has
also Christian joy, unspeakeable and glorious; For that kingdom within us
stands in peace and joy, Romans 14. 17.

Quest. How shall I know that Christ reigns in me, and that his Kingdom is
within me?

Ans. 1. If our enemies be daily weakened, Satan foiled, the flesh mortified;
if we stand with our Lord in his wars, he reigns over us.

2. If laws of evil be reversed, and the Laws of Christ obeyed; now led out
of Egypt, we live by the laws of Canaan.

3. If in stead of reigning sin, grace reign in us, as Romans 5. 21. Christ
reigns by grace: This is, when we leave our sins, and live unto God and
seek in all things to please our last Master best, as servants do.

3. If we must rejoice, when we see the Kingdom returned to the Lord, then
must we mourn Use III. Mourn for the not prevailing of Christ's Kingdom.
to see the Lords kingdom win so little ground in the Kingdoms of the world.

I. What a lamentable thing is it, to see the greatest Potentates of Europe to
war against this kingdom of the Lord, and yield their Thrones, Crowns,
wealth and power to the Beast, that is, to Antichrist, the chief adversary of
this Kingdom? In stead of the laws of Christ, which are the Scriptures of
God, unto which all the subjects of Christ ought to submit themselves, they by
all their power thrust upon the world the laws of Antichrist, who, because he
cannot stand by the word of God, must stand and be upheld by the secular
power; and in stead of gathering and cherishing the subjects of Christ, the
godly Professors of his Word and Gospel, they persecute them with fire and
sword, with proscription and banishment, as men only unworthy to live in their
dominion. How should our hearts mourn, when such as should be nursing
fathers, and nursing mothers to the Church, are as fierce dragons, tyrannizing,
and wasting the little flock of Christ? and those that should be assistants
to the Ruler of the whole earth, make most resistance against him, chasing the
Scriptures out of their Countries, to receive in humane traditions, thrusting
down the pure worship of God, to set up horrible Idolatry, blasphemy, and
sacrilegious worship of stocks, stones, and the breaden god; persecuting to
death the faithful and godly Preachers; and taking into their bosoms
shavelings, Baals Priests, fabulous Friars, Jesuiticall Kingkillers, and
Antichristian god-makers?

What a grief is it, to cast our eyes abroad into the world, and consider what
a small part of it is come in, as subjects to this King? In the Eastern part
of the world we may see Gog and Magog, Turks, Jews, and Sarazens, to hold out
this Kingdom of Christ, and set up Mahomet against him, the god of that part
of the world. In the Western part we may see Antichrist, Apollyon, his
Holiness, the Arch-enemy of the Churches of the Gentiles, holding out by power
and policy, by force and fraud, this Kingdom of our God in the most of this
Western world, and none may buy or sell, no nor breath or live, but such as
receive the mark of the beast in their hands and foreheads: So as we must
believe Jesus Christ to be the great King. For if we should trust our senses,
he seems, in comparison of the world, to be as Ishbosheth, a King without a
Kingdom.

II. To come nearer to our own Country; If we turn our eyes home, we may
find matter of mourning, that this Kingdom of the Lord has gotten no more
ground in this Kingdom, or rather has lost much ground of late years; sure
it is, God never gave more excellent gifts, nor more furnished lights to his
Church in any age since the Apostles, then in this last age, since the
discovery of that Antichristian darkness, nor in this age unto any nation more
than unto this nation; and where he gives much, does he not require much? But
oh the misery that is come upon his Church, that,

1. Whereas we should have been generally settled on our Rock and foundations
without wavering, we are now calling our grounds in question, and must dispute
against deniers of our principles.

2. Whereas Antichrist and Popery was a dead stinking carkeise, detestable to
every man of any nose or judgment, now the dead bones seem to reunite
themselves, and flesh and skin to come on them, and begin to revive and take
heart, and contest, yea, iustle again with the truth, which once gave it the
deadly wound, as if it had brought seven spirits worse than before, to take
possession again.

3. Whereas painful Preachers have been worthily honored, and Gods graces
admired in them in former times, when the Word of God had free passage, and was
glorified; what a grief is it to see them now disdained, and in stead of them
to behold those Locusts, the Priests and Jesuits, (fighting under their King
Abbaddon, and consuming the green grass, and prevailing against so many, high
and low, in these days of light?) to see these set by.

4. Whereas the doctrine of the Sabbath was described plainly out of the Word
of God, and practiced (unless in very rude places) in holy and commendable
manner; now the holy observation of it is rather accounted a kind of heresy,
and all the days of the week afford not so much profanesse, as that day,
wherein all the subjects of the Lords Kingdom ought only to attend upon
himself.

5. How did the Lord Jesus mourn when he saw the Jews without able Teachers
as sheep without shepherds? Mat. 9. 36. And what a mournful sight were it, to
see a goodly field ready for the harvest, but never a man in the Country to
gather it in, but there it must rot! So, what a lamentable thing is it* to see
so many Churches and Parishes without able Ministers, and some countries
utterly barren of means to gather them into the Kingdom! whose Ministers, in
stead of feeding them, either sterve them or poison the^; in stead of directing
and comforting the poor Church, smite her and wound her, and shame her by
taking away her veil from her. What a case was the poor Church in, when the
Pharisees made a Canon, that if any did sincerely profess Jesus Christ, he
should be excommunicated? John 9. 22. and afterward, when Diotrephes cast men
out of the Church for receiving the brethren? 3. John 10.

6. How did David mourn, and his eyes gush out rivers of tears, because men
kept not the Word! The same cause have we, to see men generally cast off the
regiment of Jesus Christ, and led by the devil and their own lusts: The
desperate profaneness against the means, is most damnable: The Trumpet of the
Gospel calls them to subjection, but they say, This man shall not rule over us.

7. We have cause of mourning, to see the Gospel going away, and the Kingdom
a taking away from us, that is, The Word of the Kingdom, and the means of
grace. Who does not see the Word of the Kingdom gone in the power of it? For,
where may a man see the power of it, (but in a very small remnant) so far
from the power of converting, that it cannot prevail against open sins, nor
trifling vanities? And who sees not the kingdom going away in the presence of
it, as well as in the power? Will Christ stay where he is so unwelcome? May we
not hear the same voice as the Jews did, Mat. 21. 43. because they refused
the Corner stone, therefore the Kingdom should be taken from them, and given
to a Nation that would bring forth the fruits of it? Or is it not a refusing of
the Corner stone, to trample upon the Preachers and Professors of holy
religion, and prefer before them, Priests and Papists, and to fall in love
again with Antichristian Idolatry, and Masses, and Breaden gods, which reverse
our Corner stone, and cannot stand with the presence of the Arc? So long as we
have the Bridegroom with us, we may rejoice, however other things go with
us; but if he go, then our sorrows come in as an unresistable flood.

III. To come to our own places: It will set grief to every good heart, to
see how little ground the kingdom of the Lord has gotten a long time: If we
shall see, that after thirty or forty years constant preaching, Magistrates,
professing religion, are careless of religion, as Gallio; let religion run
as it will, so that their aims may succeed, and projects prosper; and not
seldom turn the edge of authority against religion and religious persons: If
we see, that Magistracy will not be won to join with the Ministry, to
set an edge, and add a point to holy doctrine, to make our weapons the more
mighty and piercing against sin and sinners.

Well knows Satan the Kingdoms of the world would be the Lords, if these his
two Ordinances should shake hands; if David and Nathan, or God, stand together,
Josias and Huldas; and therefore labor to divulse them, and prevails so far
as we seldom enjoy their happy conjunction.

What a grief is it, that when we call for the sanctification of the Sabbath,
according to Gods special Commandment, and year by year urge the
reformation of notorious abuses, yet after many years nothing is amended?
there is no less working, no less playing, nay, more open profaneness than
before; that strangers from foreign parts admire to see the disorder of this
place, and the open profaneness, which has had a name of good teaching and
government.

And as in this, so in other things our comfort must be this, that we can
grieve at what we cannot amend; and that the peace of your open profaneness is
proclaimed by your selves, and disclaimed by your Preachers.

What a grief is it, that while we preach the word of peace, we are all broken
into pieces, and waste out our time, wealth, thoughts, in frivolous quarrels,
and willingly part with our peace with God, with charity to our brethren, with
inward contentment, and outward credit and reputation?

And to conclude this point, if we shall see Christ a loser amongst us, and
that men are so far from growing according to the means, as they grow more
froward, more wilful, more weary, and apparently lose the good things they
have begun: They were diligent hearers, men of good example, and earnest
affections, but now turned away, either by Popish perswaders, or by the
persuasion of their own deceitful hearts; how may we grieve at the apostasy
of such persons, as if the Word of God were not the same, of the same savor
and sweetness as ever it was; and if it be, they cannot be the same. Well
were it for them to consider, that righteousness departed from shall never be
remembered.

In all these evils, if all our pains, study, and counsel cannot prevail,
we must turn us to sorrow and tears and mourn over you, as Christ over
Jerusalem, who wept and said, Oh that thou had known the day of thy
visitation! but now these things are hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 42.

IV. But most just cause of grief and sorrow we have, when we see that the
Kingdom of God gets no more ground in our selves, and in our own hearts, than
it does: as,

1. If we can find, that Christ has long and many a day knocked at the door
of our hearts, and sought entrance, but we have not opened our everlasting
gates, that the King of glory might come in unto us, Psalm. 24. We make show of
receiving him into the Porters lodge, by a formal and livelesse profession,
but we cannot afford him a room in the Inn of our hearts, nor allow him a
rest there, as those that rest in him, as our chief good; we cannot esteem
him our Jewel, and other things dross in comparison of him.

2. When we find the word tastlesse and powerless in us, which is the Scepter
of this Kingdom, by which it is upheld; when it is not so sweet unto our
taste, as honey in our mouths; when we do not account our it treasure, above
all pearls and precious things; when our hearts are not set upon it, our lives
not framed by it, our selves not delivered unto it, or changed by it into the
fashion of it. So much place as the Word has in thee, so much place has
Christ himself. If the Word have no place in thee, no more has Christ nor his
Kingdom.

3. If we find not our lusts tamed, and the enemies of the Kingdom not
subdued in our selves, our former corruptions unmortified, not crucified, our
love to sin no less then formerly; the love of the world not conquered;
ourselves not denied, nor can deny our profits and pleasures: Now may we
justly mourn, that the kingdom of darkness stands so strong in us, that all
the battery and means planted against it, cannot demolish and cast it down.

4. If we find the Spirit of grace and fortitude foiled, and grieved in us;
that we grow not stronger and more cheerful in good and holy duties of piety
and mercy: that we are not stronger nor stouter in affliction and sufferings:
when we cannot endure losses and reproaches for the name of Jesus Christ, nor
be cheerful in other trials; when the Spirit brings not this Kingdom of God
within us, which stands in peace, joy, love of God, which is an heaven upon
earth; this Kingdom of grace set up in the heart of a Christian, is indeed an
earthly Paradise.

5. If we have made some way toward this kingdom, but grown heavy and weary;
if we be fallen from our first love; if we have set our hands to the Plough,
and looked back to the world, to Popery, to carnal counsels, we cannot be
fi^ for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62.

And the power of his Christ.] The Church having sung out the praises of God,
the giver of her happy victory, in these words, with the same loud and fervent
voice, proclaims the due praise and honor of Michael the General. In whom
we have,

1. His Title, Christ. 2. His relation to God the Father, his Christ. 3. His
Attribute, power.
I. The Title (Christ) signifies one anointed, or the Messiah, whereof ye
lately heard, both the things wherein it chiefly consists; namely,

1. In the ordination and separation of his whole person, to the Office of a
Mediator.

2. In the plentiful effusion of all gifts and graces, fit for the Head of the
Church; as also the differences of his anointing, from all the legal anoyntings
of their Kings, Priests and Prophets; they by men, he by God; they with
external oil, he with internal; they ceremonially, in shadow, he truly and
substantially; they to a small measure, he beyond all measure; they for
themselves, he for his members: Therefore here only consider, that this
unction has special reference to his Kingly Office, and is so far here
properly considerable.

II. For the word of relation; he is called his Christ, or the Lords Christ.

First, for distinction; for other Kings were anointed, and set up by men; but
none else thus immediately set up by God; Psalm ^. I have set my King upon
Sion.

Secondly, for eminence; all other Kings were anointed as members of the
Church, though heads of the Civil Kingdom; but Christ only, the Lords
Christ, was anointed as Head of the Church.

Thirdly, for near relation; they were (some of them) sons of God by
adoption; but Christ was his own natural Son, and had the divine nature
dwelling in him, not only vertually and powerfully as they, but substantially
and bodily after a sort, Col. 2.

III. The Attribute here ascribed unto Christ, is power: The power of Christ is
twofold.

One, as he is the Son of God.

Another, as the Christ of God.

The former is potentia creationis, which he has Theophylacti est distinctio.
equal with his Father, over all men and creatures.

The other is potentia conciliationis, as he is Mediator, whereby he rules
in the Church, among Saints, who are in special subjection and confederacy
with him. For further explication we must inquire,

1. The difference between these two.

2. Which of them is here meant.

The difference between these two is in four things.

1. One of them is essential, called (...), even the same essential
Omnipotence with his Father and the Holy Ghost, as God. The other is official,
the power not of Essence, but of Office, as Christ.

2. The former was before all time, this given him in time.

3. The former incommunicable to any creature; for finite is not capable of
infinite; the latter communicable to Christ himself.

4. The former is unchangeable and everlasting, but the latter given up again
to his Father, of whom he received it, 1 Cor. 15.

Quest, Now which of these is here meant?

Ans. The latter, which is the regal power of Christ, the Mediator, which
puts forth it self two ways.

1. In preserving and defending his Church against all enemies, spiritual and
temporal, whether wicked spirits, or wicked men tyrants and persecutors.

2. In the conversion or eversion of his enemies, breaking to pieces such
Princes as will not bend, and be bowed, and dashing to pieces like a Potters
vessel, so Psalm. 2. 9. 12*
many as will not kiss the Son of God to testify thereby their amity and
subjection.

And now sings the Church, Here is this power of Christ the King of his
Church manifest; the dragon was potent, but Michael is Omnipotent; the dragon
was powerful in earth against the Church, but Jesus Christ has all power in
heaven and earth, whereby he has gloriously overthrown him.

The power of Christ, as Mediator, is superior to Doctr.
all other created power: Not his essential power only, as the Son of God,
but even the power of his Office, as the Lords Christ, and as the royal King
of his Church, is superior to all created power besides: Phil. 3. 21. --
According to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself. Heb. 2. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet: In
that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under
him.

1. His is a full power; a plenitude of power, Mat. Reas. 1.
28. 18. All power is given to me in heaven and earth. Other creatures have
much power given them, but he has all power; power in heaven to pacify his
Fathers wrath, to open heaven which was shut by sin, and to crown the Saints
his members, with heavenly glory. He has also all power in earth, to choose out
of the world a people where he will, to gather and call by his voice those
whom he has chosen, to perfect and keep in his name those whom he has
gathered, to repress, tame, and overcome all their enemies. In all which is a
plenitude or fullness of power, not agreeable to any creature.

2. No other creature has either right or capablenesse 2
of this power. The firstborn only had a right and power over all the rest of
the brethren, and none of them over him; so has Christ, as Mediator, the
firstborn of many brethren.

Again, other creatures may have great power, some by usurpation, as Satan the
god of the world; some by commission and permission, as lawful Princes and
Magistrates, but Christ by right of inheritance has all power, and this
grounded in the love of the Father; John 3. 35. The Father loves the Son,
and has given all power, and all things into his hand: No creature can have
all things in his hand. Here is a just right and undoubted title.

Again, as the Father only can give it, so the Son only can receive it;
because it is a power attending the hypostaticall union of the two natures, and
therefore proper to Jesus Christ.

Finally, not any one member, nor all put together are capable of the gifts of
the Head; but the Father has appointed him head of all things.

3. By Induction we shall see this power of Christ above the power of all
creatures; and how can it be 3
other, seeing he that sustaineth all things by his mighty Word, must be more
powerful than they all, Hebr. 1.

First, his power is above all created power in heaven. For he is the Lord of
the holy Angels, and even these glorious creatures that excel in power, attend
and worship him, coming into the world to save the world, Heb. 1. 6. and also
coming again to judge the world, is attended with all the holy Angels; who
are therefore called his Angels, because to him, as their Lord, the Angels and
powers are subject, 1 Pet. 3 ult.

Secondly, his power is above all humane power; for his is absolute, men's power
limited: All humane powers are held of him; by him and for him Kings reign, he
holds off none, but has a sovereignty in Prove. 8. 15.
his own right. All their power concerns things on earth, and can go no
farther but to bind the outward man; but his chief power is spiritual, in
things heavenly, ruling in the hearts and consciences of men; of which the
tribunals of men can take no notice.

Thirdly, his power is above all the power of wicked creatures, be they neverso
desperately contrary.

The Devils and wicked spirits obey him, and cannot resist his Word, as we see
every where in the Gospel: And wicked men shall one day confess with Julian,
Vicisti Galilaee, Jesus of Galilec has overcome us.

Fourthly, his power is above all the power of unreasonable and senseless
creatures, be they never so fierce and raging; Mat. 8. 27. Who is this, whom
the winds and seas obey? Also fire and water, as in the Furnace a fourth was
seen like the Son of God, restraining Dan. 3. 25.
the flames, who afterward walked on the waters. Also diseases obey him; he
says to the Leper, Be clean, and he is so; to the lame man, Take up thy bed
and walk, and he does so; to the blind, Wash and see, and so it is. And what
marvel, seeing death it self obeyes, and delivers his prey, at his word? John
11. 44. at that Word Lazarus came forth, bound hand and foot.

This concerns the enemies of Christ, and of his Use 1.
Kingdom; to terrify them, seeing such is the power of Christ, as will make
them all his footstool; and though they carry matters with strong hand against
him, they shall not do so always: for,

1. This power will reach them, and they shall feel it one day.

2. It will bridle them, and they shall not resist it as now they do.

3 It will prevail against them, to bend or break, to save or condemn them.

4. The greater they be, it will get it self more honor upon them, as
Pharaoh, and they shall see and say, it is hard to kick against the pricks.

More specially;

1. Every natural man is an enemy of Christ; every one till he be regenerate
and reconciled, every sinner going on in his sin. Let this power of Jesus
Christ shake thee out of thy sins; for, was it such in his low and base
estate, as all the devils in hell could not resist, but with one word were
quelled; and do we dare to provoke him now in glory? are we stronger than he?
1 Cor. 10. 21. How desperately do wicked men go on in sin, as if they were
able to make their party good against him?

2. They are his enemies who will not suffer him to reign over them, (Luke 19.
27.) but cast off his yoke, and tread his Scepter under foot: Enemies to his
Word are enemies to himself; as.

First, such as forbid to preach the Word, as the enemies of Jeremy, chap. 11.
19. and the Rulers, to the Apostles, Did not we charge you to preach no more
in this name? Acts 4. 17. and 5. 28.

Secondly, such as consult evil against the Preachers of the Gospel, under
colcurs and pretenses; like those who said they were Abraham's seed, yet went
about to kill Christ; why? because his Word had no place in them, John 8. 37.
Violencing of Christ in himself or his members, is a sign of an enemy of
Christ.

Thirdly, such as snuff and murmr at holy and wholesome doctrine, and
conceive wrath where they should apply the truth for their own reformation;
John 6. 41. They murmured, because he said, I am the bread that came down from
heaven. Why, he preaches himself and has his own ends, and what has he to
do with us? what calling has he to be so busy? But what, is it not the
truth that is spoken? can thou hate the truth, and not be an enemy of
Christ? Oh what a fearful thing is it to stand thus in enmity against Christ,
his Word, or servants! the power of Christ one day with one word shall smite
them to the earth, as all his apprehenders, Ioh. 18. 6. and thou that wilt not
be subject to the rod of his mouth, shall be crushed with his rod of iron. Ps.
2. 9.

3. That great Antichrist, and all his deluded armies, regular, and secular,
are the greatest enemies to the whole Kingdom of Christ; whose whole doctrine
and religion is but a disthroning of the Son of God from his power and
regency. And now they fight with all their power and politic plots: Abroad
their forces are every where prepared, with death and destruction in all their
way; at home their friends fight with lies, slanders, and such other weapons as
beseem their lying and slanderous religion: were their religion truth, and
from truth, it would not need such weapons to support it. But can they prevail
against the power of Christ? no, the breath of his lips shall slay both the
Captain and the troops led by him, whose names are not written in the Book
of life Re. 17. 14. They shall fight with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall
overcome: and, Will not God avenge his Elect who cry night and day, and whose
blood Luke 18, ^.
they have shed like water, and there with watered all the earth, as a flowing
Sea,

4. Enemies of Christ are such indifferent men, as having power, place, and
calling, out of policy and selfe-seeking are content and silent to see Popery
prevail, and do not stand out in these times to help the Lord and his people
against his enemies; I mean especially those Ministers that do not their
uttermost to detect the frauds and impostures of Antichrist, nor to confirm
their people in the truth against the same. For, as he were no other then a
Traitor to his King, that shall see and suffer any other to thrust himself
upon the Kingdom, and claim all royal authority, and make Edicts to draw all
the subjects to his faction; so is he to Jesus Christ, who can patiently
digest, that the man of sin should thrust himself upon the Church; as the
Head of it, and take on him to pard on sin, to make laws to bind
conscience, and make new Articles of faith, and proclaim himself King of the
Church and by fraud and force compel men to take his mark in their hands and
foreheads. Surely as the power of Christ shall shortly overtake this son of
perdition, who exalts himself above all that is called God, and takes on him
in the Temple as if he were God, so shall it meet with all those that take
part with him, as they do that discover him not, nor discover themselves
against him.

5. They are enemies to Christ, who are enemies and rebels against the power
which he has committed to Civil Princes. The Arch-rebell of the world,
against Christ and Christian Princes, is Popery; neither can those Papist,
which hold the Principles of Jesuited Priests at this day, but be rebels to
Christ, and to our Christian King; For,

1. They must hold our King a slave and Vassal to the Pope, and under his
power to be King or not: for the spiritual power may depose Princes, and place
other in their stead, when necessity requires, says Bellarmine, l. 5. c. 7.
and Suarez Defens. fid. l. 3. c. 23.

2. They must hold, that the Pope may command other Kings to punish him, if he
please to call him Heretic or Schismatike; and if they do not, he may
constrain them by excommunication. Bell. ibid.

3. They must hold, that subjects may depose their Princes, if Heretical or
Tyrannical; and although Christians did not depose Nero, Dioclesian, Julian,
etc. it is because they wa^ted force, for by right they might, if they had
power enough. Bell. ibid. Neither did they use cunning when they wanted power
(as now our Catholics and honest Powder-traytors) because it was fit for the
foundations of the Church to be laid in patience and suffering: Neither was it
expedient in those times to do all that law and right admitted, Mariana de
Rege l. 1. c. 6. But in all memory of men, such as have undertaken the killing
of Tyrants, have been in high estimation, says he; and commends the person
and fact of Clement on Henry 3.

4. They must hold, that although S. Paul says, Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers; Romans 13. 1.
yet S. Paul never added, That every one should be subject to powers
excommunicate, or deposed by the Pope; neither can the one he inferred from
the other, being mere contraries; for a deposed King is no longer an higher
power. Suarez Defens. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 5. And this is the reason that
Bellarmine against Barclay, c. 3. introduces the Pope answering the people
which would continue in the obedience of the deposed King, thus, I do not free
thee from the natural or Divine commandment, when I absolve thee from the tie
of obedience; for I do not permit thee thou should not obey thy King, which
were against the Divine law, but I make him that was thy King, to be so no
longer, as a servant set at liberty is bound no longer to that Master.

5. They must hold, that Clerks are no subjects, and that the King has no
power over them, either in spiritual or temporal things. So says the
Cardinal: It cannot be proved, that the Kings of Bellarm. a^ Clericis, c. 30.
this age are lawful Superiors and Judges of Clerks, if by the same mean it
be not proved, that Children are above their fathers, sheep above their
Pastor, temporal things above spiritual: and, Not only in spiritual things,
but in temporal, is Cap. 28.
the Priest to be governed by his Ecclesiastical Superior; and it cannot be,
that in temporal things he should acknowledge the secular Prince; because no
man can serve two Masters. And (says Suarez) It is a general rule, that
Ecclesiastical persons are exempted from secular jurisdiction, not Defens.
fid. l. 4. c. 15. 9. 16.
only in Ecclesiastical crimes, but also in civil; which cannot be denied
without denying a principle of faith. And another, The rebellion of a Clerk
against his Prince is not treason, because he is not E^^an. Saaphor. tit.
Clericus.
his subject.

6. They must hold no great difference, whether they kill their Prince with
poyso^ or steel; for there be many examples (says Mariana) both ancient and
modern, of enemies killed this way; but he denies that he may be justly
poisoned, who may otherwise be killed by fraud; for it seems inhumane, to
present him with poison in his meat or drink, because it makes him an
instrument of his own death; but yet a remedy hereof is, to apply it
outwardly, by poisoning the robe or seat, etc. as has been used by the
Moors* to some Princes. Thus conscionably has the great and conscionable
Jesuit Mariana resolved this great case of conscience; l. 1. c. 7. per totum.

Now tell me whether these be not sound traitrous doctrines, and if any higher
treason can be higher then the lowest of them. Whether these be not fit jewels
to admit into a kingdom: Whether these men are to be magnified in our Pulpits
above Calvin, Beza, Luther, Bucer, etc. Whether their books are so fit to be
studied, being shops of rebellion, by novices or others, or to be turned to
ashes in some happy Bonfire, that the memories of such firebrarnds, as their
Authors, might perish from off the earth? Whether a Jesuited Papist be any
other than a rebel in an high degree, only quiet till he have opportunity, and
till he can conquer his Master according to their doctrine? All which I
propound, to exhort all that would not be poisoned, and diverted from their
allegiance to Christ and our Christian King, to beware of Popish doctrine, and
above al of Jesuitical principles, which are the Catechismes of high Treason:
and to exhort all Christians to submit to the power of Christ, put by him into
the hand of his Anointed, in all lawful and indifferent things; and to stand
far off from the Tents of these Corahs, and to stand far off from the Tents
of these Corahs, and Conspirators, remembering that of Solomon, Fear the Lord
and the King, and meddle not with the seditious.

2. This pertaines to the members of the Church, for consolation, instruction,
and examination. Use II.


1. It comforts the poor Church, beset with mighty enemies within, and
without, and on every side, and being in it self as a silly woman, or worm,
weak and destitute of all help and means, may say as Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
20. 12. There is no strength in us in respect of this great multitude. But here
is comfort; the name of our Head is Vcall, Pro. 30. 1. of a verb that
signifies power.

Object. What is it to us, that Christ has power?

Ans. Yes, because he has it not for himself, but for us: The power of a
Prince is for his subjects, and the power of the head is the strength of the
members.

Ob. But if he have such power for us, why does he leave us in such weakness,
and as sheep ready for the slaughter?

Ans. It is not because he has not such power as might make us stronger than
all adversary power, even in outward means; but therefore he leads us through
weakness, that himself may be glorious in being seen our strength: for he
uses to perfect his power in our weakness.

Ob. But if Christ had such power, why gave he way to his enemies, not only
bodily, to apprehend and crucify him; but spiritual, death, the grave, sin
and Satan to seize upon him as an ordinary and impotent man?

Answ. Not because he then wanted power; but,

First, by his Fathers dispensation, for the time of his abasement, which was
not the time of manifesting his power: But even then he told Pilate he had had
no power over him, but by his Fathers permission, John 19. 11. and he could
have commanded more than twelve Legions of Angels.

Secondly, by voluntary resignation, as he said, I have power to lay down my
life; and, I give my life for the world: which made his death not impotent, as
other men's, but a powerful death.

Thirdly, in respect of necessary satisfaction, having undertaken our cause and
condition; we were fallen into the power of sin, death, hell, the grave, and
all miseries; this very condition must he undertake, and bear away for us that
which we should have lain under for ever: For as a man cannot carry away a
burden which he takes not up, so could not Christ have removed our burden, if
he had not undertaken it. He could not overcome death, but by dying; nor the
grave, but by entering into it; nor heal us, but by his own stripes; nor
enrich us, but by his poverty.

Fourthly, in respect of commiseration, and compassion; He was touched with
infirmity, that he might be a merciful high Priest, Hebr. 4. 15. He would
know our miseries by his own sense, that he might affect them, and be
pitiful unto us.

Fifthly, for his own greater glory and exaltation; and that both in respect of
his person, and of his work.

The power of his person shines brighter than the Sun breaking out of a
Cloud, in that he enters the lists with these enemies, within their own
precincts, and there gives them the overthrow, conquers Satan in the
wilderness, Death in his own den, principalities and powers not in heaven,
but on the Cross.

The power of his work shines, in that he works the greatest work that
ever was, by contraries: To bring life out of death and to save the world from
death, by death, is no less power then that which made all things of nothing,
and brought light out of darkness. To bring us to heaven by his descending
into hell and heal us by his stripes, this is a powerful work indeed.

Now this ground being laid, that Christ never wanted fullness of power, when
he was weakest and lowest, and much less now in his glory and exaltatio^ we
may build assured comfort on his foundation.

I. We shall not fail of needful supplies of all things pertaining to life
and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3.

His divine power affords all needful things for life: He can prepare a table
for us in the wilderness, Psalm. 78. 19. No Father is so able to provide for
his children, as he is for his, in whose hands are all the corners of the
earth: He is of power to supply us with all good means for his service: He
is able to give wisdom, and the Spirit to them that ask him: He is able to
feed and cloth us, and to fill up our Gomer, and enable us to all liberality.
If our beginnings be small, or our losses great, he can (if he please)
double our portion, as Jobs, at the latter end.

Also for things pertaining to godliness, and a better life, we have strong
consolation, in that Christ has power,

1. To merit. 2. To apply. 3. To uphold. 4. To perfect our salvation.
1. He has power to merit our salvation, because he has power to satisfy
wholly by himself the justice of God, without any piecing or patching to his
merit and righteousness. He has power to pay the whole debt, and to cancel
the bill and hand writing that was against all Gods chosen. He is of power to
pardon sin: Mat. 9. 6. that ye may know the Son of man has power to forgive
sin on earth, and he has power to fulfill the Law.

2 He has all power to apply his merit to our salvation: because to this end
he did mightily raise himself from the dead by his own power; and ascended
into heaven, that by a powerful intercession he might apply his sacrifice to
the Saints. From thence he has power to send his Spirit, to acquaint us with
the things given us of God. And he is of power to work faith in the hearts of
the Elect, whereby they may apply to themselves his whole merit and obedience,
while they are here below.

3 He is of power to uphold our salvation, diverse ways: By setting us upon a
strong foundation, and a sure rock, not to be shaken by any contrary power: By
strengthening us by a powerful word, which is a mighty organ and a strong arm
able to save. 2 Timothy 3. 16. By comforting and strengthening us by the Spirit of
strength and power, 2 Timothy 1. 7. God has not given us the spirit of fear, but
of power. And by making us invincible in suffering, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all
things by the power of Christ assisting me: Yea to sail by hell to heaven, and
to pass by the cross to the crown.

4 He is of power to perfect our salvation, and has engaged this power to this
purpose: 1 Pet. 1. 5 We are kept by the power of God to salvation. And why?

First, He is of power to make our imperfect duties pleasing to God, hiding all
the imperfection of them under the mantle of his mercy.

Secondly, He has a superior power to al enemies; that none of them can
separate us, or pluck us out of his hands: for he has the keys of hell and
death, Rev. 1. 18.

Thirdly, He has power to lead us through death and dust into his own glory:
so as we have assurance of a glorious resurrection by the working of his mighty
power, Phil. 3. 21.

Fourthly, He has power not only of preparing mansions for us in his Fathers
house, but in the last day to descend from heaven to fetch us up to himself,
that we may be ever with the Lord. Our Joshua has power to bring us into
Canaan.

II. Here is a ground of comfort and encouragement in all well-doing, and to
go on fearelesly in good duties; wherein commonly we have the power of the
world against us. For why?

First. He is of power to strengthen us, and of weak to make us strong. Of our
selves we are able to do nothing: that we have any power to any thing that is
good, it is from his power: His grace alone is sufficient for us, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Without me ye can do nothing.

Secondly, He is of power to reward our least labor of love to his name or
Saints, and all the power of the world cannot hinder him.

Thirdly, He is of power to clear our innocence; to disperse the fogs and
clouds of calumny and reproaches, and to make our righteousness shine as the
sun at noonday. He can and will make our darkness light.

Fourthly, His power encourages our prayers; because he is able to receive
them, and do abundantly above all that we ask or think.

Fifthly, He is of power to make us perserve: for he is able to perfect his
work: and this power shall uphold a poor Christian, if the truth should fail
from the Church and Kingdom.

Object. I am weak, and oftentimes careless in keeping my ground and grace.

Answ. Quicken up thy self: become a member of Christ, and if thy faith be
weak, that thou can not comprehend him, his power is strong to comprehend
thee: yea the weakness of God is stronger then men. 1 Cor. 1. 25.

Object. But the enemies are strong and powerful, Jesuits and other seducers
subtle, and sundry adversaries armed with power, grace of times, cruelty, etc.

Answ. Yet this power of Christ lays such hold on every true Believer, that no
seducer can deceive him, nor no power pluck him out of his hands. No power can
dismember this Head, nor reach their graces.

6 He that is of power, and gave us strength when we had none, is of power even
in death and in our dust, when al strength is gone, both to keep faithfully
for us what we commit unto him till the last day, and also to renew us with
strength as the Eagles, and change our vile bodies to be like his glorious
body; like it in quality, not equality; in strength, shining, agility,
incorruption; fitted as a glorious member to be united to so glorious an head,
and that for all eternity.

III Another ground of comfort is, that out of this power of Christ we may
conclude the stability of the Church, which is his Kingdom. This power has
upheld the truth these many hundred years, against the devil, the world, the
Turk, Antichrist, Popish Princes, and forces; against tyrants, massacres,
inquisitions, torments, pouder-plots; against false brethren and hypocrites;
that against all the gates of hell it is not only taught and preached, but
triumphs and conquereth, so as all the world may see a mighty power
protecting it. The Church is an heavy Zech. 12.
stone to lift at, because it has all Christ's power for it: and therefore, if
all nations rise against it, they shall be torn in pieces. The truth is
stronger then all, and must prevail at last: it may be smothered as fire under
ashes, extinct it cannot be, so long as Christ who is truth, has power to
uphold it. The promise is strong, that all the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. For as Christ is truth that uttered it, so he is Omnipotent to
accomplish it. This power shall ever keep this Arc upon the waters from
drowning.

Hitherto of the consolation.

Instruction also arises from this power of Christ: and,

1 To Ministers, that they preach Christ the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. that
is, not only by preaching to acquaint men with the power of Christ, but so to
preach as Christ's power may be put forth in the Gospel, which is the rod of
his power; and so as to bring in subjects daily under this power of Jesus
Christ, Preaching a man's self will not do it, nor preaching of men will not
do it, nor every learned, nor every idle discourse of Christ: but to speak
from the spirit, and in demonstration of the spirit, that men may say, Christ
is here indeed, I feel his power 1 Cor. 14. 25.
quickening, counselling, comforting etc.

2 To Magistrates, that they put forth all the power they receive of Christ,
for the glory of Christ, and the good of the Church; as knowing,

First, that all powers are of God; and therefore for God and his causes.

Secondly, they are his Ministers for the good of the good and them that do
well.

Thirdly, those that honor God, God will honor, and contrarily. And who sees
not, that those that extraordinarily oppose this power of Christ in his
Ordinances, God extraordinarily opposes them? they cannot so openly contemn
him, and despise his word, but God as manifestly powers contempt upon them, and
makes them extraordinary spectacles of disgrace and contempt. For how can a man
set himself against God and prosper?

Fourthly, All the power in Christ's own hand was set against sin and the
devils kingdom: what better example to a Christian Magistrate?

3 To every Christian: three ways.

1 We are instructed to submit our selves to the royal power of Christ our
King, as willing subjects, acknowledging him the great Centurion of the world.
For this was prophesied of us in the New Testament, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people
shall come willingly at the time of holy assembling. And otherwise we shall be
worse then wicked angels, or the unreasonable creatures who all obey his word,
as we saw before.

2 To depend upon this power of Christ, as our sovereign King, who has all
power to do us good. Want we heavenly things? he has all power in heaven, and
for heaven: he has power to call, to justify, to sanctify, to beautify, to
glorify. Want we heavenly graces and riches? he has treasures of wisdom and
grace. Want we earthly things? he has all power in earth: he can bestow, not
dews of heaven only, but the fat of the earth. Isaac had but one blessing: but
he has more blessings then one: and if he be rich, being our husband, we
shall not be poor.

3 To acknowledge this power of Christ in all our receipts of blessing or
comfort.

1 Find we the work of conversion and sound grace? this is not by free will,
or preparations, or operations of nature: but here is a creating power put
forth by Christ, a power divine working many miracles, making a blind man see,
a deaf man to hear, dispossessing a man of many devils, raising a dead man,
and quickening him that was dead in trespasses and sins.

2 Find we not only our peace made up with God, but that now we are
lovingly affected to Gods people for Gods image and goodness? Here is a fruit
of Christ's mighty power, who has reconciled the wolf and the Lamb, the child
and the cockatrice, Esa. 11. 6.

3 Find we any work of holiness begun, any presence of grace, any beginnings
of heavenly motion, in faith, hope, love, joy, zeal, constancy? Here is a
great power of Christ our head, by whose power all these are purchased: here is
a power making a Blackmoore white as snow.

4 Find thou any strength against sin, any temptation foiled, any lust
given over and hated which thy nature inclines unto? Oh here is the power of
Christ above the power of nature. Never was sin foiled but by Christ's power:
never was any a Conqueror in the spiritual combat, but by the presence,
power, and strength of the General.

5 Find we our prayers heard, our defects covered, our duties accepted? All
this is the virtue and power of Christ's prayer, and by the merit of his
obedience.

Thus must we with the Church here sing out the power of the Lords Christ.

And this also of the Instruction.

Next, this serves the members of the Church for examination: namely to try,
whether we feel this power of Christ put forth in our selves; else all is
unprofitable and uncomfortable to us. Phil. 3. 10. the Apostle counts all other
knowledge and privileges but loss and dung in respect of knowing in himself
the virtue and power of Christ's death and resurrection. This is more then to
hear of Christ, of his life and doctrine, of his death and passion. It is a
lively feeling in his own soul the power and virtue of his death, in the
death of sin, and of his resurrection in rising from the grave of sin. This
is more then to preach of Christ's life and death, and goes beyond all eloquent
discourses of the actions and passions of Christ, if the Preacher (as too many)
only know the virtue of Christ's death as the Physician knows the virtues of
herbs and simples, only by his reading or relation, without his own
experience. This knowledge of the power and grace of this Solomon must be like
the knowledge of the Queen of Sheba, 1 King. 10. 7. It was a true word which I
heard of thy sayings and wisdom, howbeit I believed not this report, till I
came and have seen it with mine eyes: neither can half the power and glory of
Christ be attained by reading, or report, except our selves by inward feeling
and experience come to discern it. That is an happy knowledge of the power of
Christ not which is speculative or discoursive, but which is experimental,
such as the Samaritans, Ioh. 4. 42. They say to the Woman, Now we believe not
for thy relation, but because our selves have seen Him.

Quest.How may I discern the power of Christ in my self?

Answ. It may be discerned by four special marks, or evidences.

I By the power of the word, which is his powerful arm to salvation. So much
as thou find the power of the word, so much of the power of Christ may
thou discern in thy self. Now examine:

1 Have thou found the word commanding light out of darkness in thy soul, as
in the first creation? has Gods powerful word created a new saving 2 Cor. 4.
6.
light in thee, that whereas thou wast blind, now thou art sure thou see the
face of God in Jesus Christ reconciled unto thee?

2 Has the word in the Ministry been a powerful voice of Christ calling
thee as Lazarus out of the grave where thou wast by nature under the dominion
of death by sin? has it brought in a new life of God, and grace? What word
besides the Omnipotent word of Christ can raise a dead man? If the word of God
has inspired a new breath of the Spirit, and wrought heavenly motions in thee,
thou may plainly see the power of Christ in thy self.

3 Has the word been powerful as a mighty engine to cast down high and
strong holds, and 2 Cor. 10. 4.
bring every thing unto the subjection of Christ? has it taken thy highest
holds, and now sits as a Commander there? If it have an inward command, the
understanding conceives, and is convinced in the certainty of things which be
contrary to nature and sense: it will shut the own eyes, and yield to things
foolish and absurd to reason: The will easily denies it self and worldly
wisdom, reason, profits, pleasures, liberty and life it self, to submit it
self only to the will of God: The affections are wrought by the word,
earnestly to embrace things which they most deadly hated. Oh what a mighty
power of Christ is in that word, whereby thou now love Gods word and
Ministers, who most bend themselves against the swindge and stream of thy
natural desires and customs? whereby thou art now wrought to
heavenly-mindednesse, who wast so wedded and hand-fasted to the world as thou
did think thou could never be divorced? whereby thou can now hate sin
and works of the flesh, which before were as meat and drink, and as
delightfully drawn in as the fish draws water, and held fast as sweet
morsels under thy tongue, not to let them go? who can deny this to be a
prevailing power of Christ, casting down such Turrets and Bulwarks of nature,
of corruption, which would have yielded to no other force or battery? The blast
of the ramshornes seems a weak and foolish thing; but nothing else can cast
down the walls of Jericho, but this.

4. Have thou found the power of the Word outwardly reforming thy life? has it
been of power to call thee from thy bad customs and companionships? does it
order thy speeches with grace and wisdom? does it work a redress in thy
ways, and make all thy steps right and clean? does it change thy course into
it self, and make it graceful to thy profession, and fruitful to thy
brethren? Here is the power of Christ attending his Word, and the work of his
Spirit changing us into the image of it from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But
what power of Christ is in him that is a sot, without understanding of the
Word, after so long hearing, or that shuts his eyes lest he should be
enlightened? or in him that will not believe beyond that he sees with his eyes,
or may touch with his fingers? or in him who is not a whit altered from
himself when he was at the worst, not quickened with the life of God? Has the
Word been too weak to stir in thy conscience, to change thy heart, to
reform thy speeches, but thou must rap out oaths at pleasure? to conform thy
life to it, but thon must drink and game, and do as the company is,
accounting holy obedience but a needless strictness and preciseness, and
exemptest thy self from obedience farther than thou listest? To thee I say,
the regal power of Christ has no place in thee, who art as yet no subject,
but a rebel, and resister of it.

II. Know the power of Christ in thee by the power of faith. The work of faith
is a work of mighty power; a work of such power, as neither man, nor Angel,
nor the bare Ministry can effect; it is 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
the Arm of God, and the operation of him that raised Christ from the dead,
Coloss. 2. 12. Find in thy self the power of faith, and thou have found the
power of Chrst; for faith makes Christ, and all his power, to become ours.

Quest. How may I find in my self the power of faith?

Answ. 1. The power of faith bewrayes it self in powerful and fervent prayer;
which is powerful, and prevailing with God himself, who suffers himself to
be overcome by the wrestlings of faithful prayer, as we see in Jacob and the
Canaanite.

2. In cheerful obedience to the will of God. Faith cannot but work by love to
God and man; and therefore the obedience must be both general, having respect
to all Commandments, and cheerful and ready in all, even the most difficult
and dangerous; as holy Abraham was in leaving his Country, circumcising his
family, offering his son, all done by faith, Heb. 11.

3. In patient enduring and suffering Gods will and pleasure revealed: for
faith is powerful to enable and undershore the believer under a great burden;
it is (...), a strong post or stud to stand under and bear up a man in
grievous temptations; it is our victory against the world; it will wrestle with
Jacob till he have never a limb left: It is a powerful fence against Gods
keenest weapons, yea against death it self, as Job said, If the Lord kill me,
yet he shall not kill my faith, I will still trust in him.

Now what power of faith is there, when a man cannot, or cares not to pray, or
if he do, his prayer is without life and motion, dead and formal? when he
has no respect out of conscience to any Commandment, but occasionally can
swear, or lie, or deceive, or break the Sabbath, etc? When a man will suffer
nothing for Christ, no not the breath of vain men, nor part with a grain of
his name, or estate for Christ, and in his sufferings, and sorrows is
impatient, murmuring, despairing?

III. This regal power of Christ is discerned by the power of godliness; and
this both in public and in private.

The power of godliness is discerned,

1. By the ground, which is true love of God with all the heart, which is the
marrow of the first Table. Christ loved his Father with all his heart, and his
neighbor as himself, nay, above himself; and where his power comes, God is
loved for himself, above all.

2. By the subjection of the will to the obedience of the Law. A mighty work
of Christ's power was his perfect fulfilling of the Law; if thou partakest of
this power, thy will is persuaded, and bowed to Gods will; thou aymest at the
perfection of the Law, and set it before thee as the rule of thy life; and
if thou esteemest it not necessary to thy justification, yet is it necessary in
sanctification.

3. By sincere affection and exercise of holy things; when a man makes Gods
Ordinances, his Sabbaths, the Ministry and worship of God his delight; he is
a true worshipper in the House of God; one day in GODS House is better to him
than a thousand besides.

4. He is a Jew within as well as without, in the spirit as well as in the
letter, and in his own house as well as in Gods house; he will walk wisely in
the midst of his house, and make that a little Church, by upholding the
worship of God there; yea in the midst of his heart he will walk with God, as
Enoch did.

But if a man place his affections below God; if the laws and discipline of
the Word be too strict, he must have more liberty than the rule of Christ
allows him; if he content himself with a form of godliness, and deny the
power, nay hate the power of religion in himself and others; if Gods
Ordinances be a burden to him, and he as heavy to them as a Bear to a stake;
if he come to Church to pray, but pray not at home, nor sets up religion in
his family; what is the power of Christ in such a one? none at all.

IV. Christ's power in us is discerned by powerful prevailing against
spiritual enemies in the Christian combat. The principal enemies to be
resisted are,

1. Satan in his temptations.

2. Sin in his allurements.

3. Afflictions and rebukes for the Name of Christ, and for well-doing. All
overcome by the power of Christ in his members.

1. A mighty work of his power was, that he was able to foil temptations, and
stand against all hellish powers, so as when Satan came he found nothing in
him: Even so the power of Christ, wherever it is, puts forth it self against
Satan's kingdom; the strong man is cast out by a stronger than he. Do thou
chase Satan before thee, and the whole band of his temptations, so as though
thou can not be free from the molestation of his assaults, yet thou art free
from the seduction, and persistest in thy goodness? here is the power Christ;
if Satan be trodden under our feet, it is the God of peace that does it. These
adversaries are so mighty in strength and subtilty, that no power but the power
of Gods might can resist them. But where the devil triumphs and holds a
man captive at his will; when, as the great Centurion, he says to his slave,
Do this, and he does it, swear, and rail, and whore, and drink, and lie,
and deceive, and men do so, the power of Christ is far off, unless for
revenge.

2. Another enemy is our own sins and lusts; in the subduing of which we
may epsy the power of Christ. Can thou find the evils of thy heart and life
conquered, infirmities vanquished, the power of sin daily weakened and foiled,
sin cast out, if not in respect of presence, yet of power, that the reign
and dominion of it is gone? here is the power of Christ, for no other power can
put sin to death, but the power of Christ's death. Contrarily, where sin is
not disarmed, but the body of it stands united, compacted, not wounded to
death; where secret sins are allowed; where lusts are alive and cherished;
where worldly pleasures, profits, fashions are followed with a full strength;
where men willingly cast themselves into the occasions of sin; here is no
saving power of Christ in conversion and change; for all Christ's power is set
for the overthrow of sin: it set himself free from all corruptions, and
sinful infirmities, and so his members.

3. The last enemy are afflictions for Christ and well-doing. Can thou bear
the worst troubles for Christ, and be baptized with his baptism? can thou
esteem the rebukes of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, as
Moses, Heb. 11? can thou account losses for Christ thy greatest gain? do
thou not account thy life dear to thee, so that thou may finish thy course
with joy? Is not all this a divine power, that can make thee rejoice in the
Cross of Christ, and joyfully endure the spoiling of thy goods, and carry the
reproaches of Christ as a Crown on thy shoulder, all which formerly thou
fearedst as hell it self? But where is the power of Christ, when every shadow
of change is of force to drive men from the profession, every damsels speech
can terrify so great a Professor as Peter, even to the denial of his Lord; a
slight reproach or nickname can keep many away from Christ, and make many go
away? Were the power of Christ present, it would endure the Cross, and despise
the shame, and nothing could separate.

Now have I discovered the trials of the power of Christ. If any man have this
experience of the mighty power of Christ, praise God for it: if not, pray to
have thine eyes opened to see the exceeding greatness of this power of Christ in
thy self, Ephesians. 1. 19. both in weakening the power of sin, that it may not
have dominion over thee; and in weakening the presumption Psalm. 119. 133.
of thine own power and strength, which overthrows great graces, and casts men
headlong into fearful falls, as we see in Peter; (but let him that stands take
heed lest he fall) as also in stablishing the mighty work of grace in thy
soul, and whatsoever virtue may accompany thy salvation, as knowing, that this
mighty power of Jesus Christ is put forth, first for holiness, and then for
happiness.

For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our
God day and night.] These words contain a reason, why the Church has with a
loud voice ascribed the honor of salvation and kingdom to the Lord, and of
power unto Jesus Christ; namely, because the accuser of the brethren is cast
down. Where we have two things.

1. His crimination. 2. His dejection.
In the former part are four things.

1. What are these accusations. 2. Who are accused, brethren. 3. Where, before
our God. 4. When, night and day,
I. These accusations are the objecting of things true or false, to the hurt
and disgrace of the godly.

First, in true things Satan accuses them; he espieth their infirmities, and
notes even in the best many sins and errors, which they are guilty of; and
these he urges and amplifieth against them before God, and pleads from them
their unworthiness of mercy; yea, the sins which in them are of weakness,
he amplifieth as if they were sins of wickedness, and reigning sins, and
makes them seem unpardonably heinous, and claims the justice of the Law, and
the execution of the curse upon persons so unworthy of life and salvation.

Secondly, these accusations are also of false things; For Satan, alyer from
the beginning, devises many false calumniations, lies, and slanders, and
casts them upon the Saints. In those Primitive times, what an heap of
horrible lies did the devil and his instruments raise against the Saints, to
incense the Emperors against Christian religion? as namely, that they were
seditious, rebellious against government, sacrilegious, incestuous; that they
ate raw flesh, and used libidinous co^mixture in their meetings by night; that
they worshipped the head of an Ass, adored the Sun, and a number more
execrable villainies imputed to those poor and innocent lambs, led away for
such monsters to the slaughter, as appears in Eusebius and Tertullian. And to
the same purpose, Lib. 6. c. 3. Apologet.
he being still like himself, has falsely accused the godly in all ages, for
seditious meetings, nightly and unlawful conventicles, rebellion against
Princes, unchaste conversings, and the like.

II. Who be the persons accused? Our brethren. We have showed it to be a
voice of a multitude of members of the Church militant, upon occasion of a
particular victory, who stood in near relation to the afflicted Saints, and
therefore called them our brethren.

Brethren are either by birth, of the same parents, as Cain and Abel; or by
affinity, of one root or stock, as Abraham and Lot; or by Nation or
Country, as Paul and the Jews, Romans 9. 1. or by profession and communion in
one faith and worship, as here.

Quest. Does Satan accuse none but the godly who are brethren, or does he not
also accuse the wicked and unbeleevers?

Ans. He accuses the godly to get them condemned; but what need he stand
accusing those whose infidelity has already condemned them? as Impios ^am
victos contemnit, necinsectatur. Cypr.
the wicked are, Ioh. 3. 18. He need not trouble himself with those whom he
is sure of.

III. Where does he accuse?

Ans. Before our God; bewraying three things.

First, the impudency of this Accuser, who dares accuse them before God, who
knows their uprightness and innocence, and is their only Patron and
Justifier, as of Job.

Secondly, his malicious end in accusing, which is to break off the relation
and union that is betwixt God and his people; for whereas God is our God, being
reconciled unto us in Jesus Christ, and entered into an everlasting covenant
with us, that he will never cease to do us good, Satan impudently accuses us
before him, to make him not ours, if it were possible.

Thirdly, the loss of his labor, and how frustrate he is in his
calumniation; he is indeed an instant and spightfull accuser; but, seeing it
is before our God, he can avail himself nothing, nor prejudice the Saints
any thing at all; he comes too late, for all the matter of accusation is
answered already, and taken up between God and us; so that he remains our
GOD still, when Satan has done the worst he can.

IV. When does he accuse? Night and day; which argues his instance and
importunity in accusing; that he is restless, and incessant, and far beyond
all other accusers in his accusation: For,

First, other accusers sometimes cease accusing; for if they accuse all the
day, they must rest at night; but he is restless, and needs no sleep; he
is busy day and night.

Secondly, other Accusers and Plaintifes have their times and terms to put in
their bills of complaint, and afterward have their vacations; but this Informer
keeps a perpetual term, without any vacation at all; he applies the bar
perpetually, night and day.

Thirdly, other Accusers knowing their cause to be naught, carry it close, and
shoot their Arrows in the dark (as it were in the night) and fly the light
as much as they may; but this Accuser, although he knows his accusation
false, yet, transported with malice and impudence, will accuse in the day,
as well as in the night, even in the light and Sunshine, as not caring where he
may do mischief, nor how openly.

We come now to the instructions.

1. Note hence, that all that profess Jesus Christ, Doct. 1.
are brethren, and so to be esteemed, Mat. 23. 8. One is your Master, even
Christ, and all ye are brethren: But as in nature there are brethren in common
nature, as all men in the first Adam, though never so remote, as also brethren
in ne are and special kindred, of the same next parents; so ingrace, there is
in the second Adam a common brotherhood, and a special fraternity. The former
is only by external vocation and profession, and fruition of common grace. The
latter is by special grace and inward conjunction, which is a nearer and surer
band than any in nature; of which our Text speaks. These are near brethren.

1. They have all one father, and mother, and elder Reas. 1.
brother: God their father has begotten them all of immortal seed, and
adopted them into the number of his sons and daughters: The Church is their
mother, the free woman, the mother of us all; which nurseth them up on her
breasts, the two Testaments, Gal. 4. 26:
whence, as newborn Babes, they suck the sincere milk of the Word, to grow
by it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. They have all one elder brother Jesus Christ, who is not
ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2. 11. Mat. 12. ult. All of them have the
same language of Canaan, all the same affection to Gods house, all opposed by
the world; As concerning this sect, we know it is every where spoken against,
Acts 28. 22.

2. They have all one and the same provision as 2.
brethren; the same garments and livery, Christ's right ousnesse, their elder
brothers coat put on them by baptism; the same diet and table of the Lord;
the same bread and Manna that came down 1 Cor. 10. 3.
from heaven; the same water out of the Well of Life; the same servants to
attend them, the holy Angels, Ministers to all the heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.
14.


3. They have all the ^mage of God their Father 3.
renewed upon them, and they all grow up like their heavenly Father daily, holy
as he is holy, merciful as he is merciful, and perfect as he is perfect, in
quality not equality, as a child is like his father not in greatness or
dimension, but resembles him in proportion feature and similitude.

4 They have all one faith, one hope, and expectation, and one inheritance in
the kingdom of heaven, 4.
a patrimony purchased for them before the beginning of the world; whereof they
are all heirs and fellow-heires with Christ. Romans 8. 17.

Which teaches us to love all the Saints and people of God with brotherly
love: Heb. 13. 1. Let Use I.
brotherly love continue. 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love as brethren, be pitiful and
courteous, 2 Pet. 1. 7. join to godliness brotherly kindness.

1 It is a lovely thing for brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133. 1.
And as it is a shame for Motives to love our Christian brethren.
Brethren in nature to be separated in affection, so is it much more uncomely
for those whom grace 1.
has joined, whom one heavenly Father, faith and religion has coupled, to be
disunited and make a breach in the body of Christ, in the house of God.

2 True love of brethren is the first fruit of faith, and the first bud and
blossom which discryeth a 2.
tree of righteousness: and by this it is discerned, that we are translated
from death to life. For by nature every man is a lover of himself, and an
hater of his brethren; but grace obeys the new commandment of love, which
commandment being before antiquated, is by the new work of the Spirit renewed
in those that are renewed, and shows us borne of God, 1 Ioh. 4. 7.

3 Our Lord Christ in his example preferred the spiritual kindred, by ^aith
and the new birth, before 3.
his natural, Mat. 12. 44.

These considerations would cut off many contentions and quarrels, and be as
water cast into the fi^ry hearts and hands of brother against brother: as Genesis
13. 8. I pray thee let there be no strife between us, for we are brethren:
and Act. 7. 26. Moses said to the striving Hebrews, Sirs why strive ye? ye
are brethren, both Hebrews, of one family, and one faith. So should Christians
say, what do I striving with such a one? does not common nature join us? does
not common profession, yea and grace too? and cannot all these prevail against
my passion?

This consideration would answer all Objections incensing us.

Object 1. One says, oh he is a man of bad qualities, an ill natured man.

Answ. Yet account him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother, 2 These.
3.

Object. 2. Another says, oh he has much wronged me.

Answ. Yea but a brother must cover his brothers faults: brothetly love will
cover a multitude of offenses: a brother must bear, forbear, not often take
forfeits, nor notice of small things, nor every great. It is for an enemy, not
a brother, to be unnatural, to retain stomach, to grudge, envy, revenge, etc.

Object 3. Oh but I have often forborne and forgiven.

Answ. How often? have thou forgiven seventie times seven times? so is the
commandment: and he is still thy brother.

Object. 4. But in this case I cannot bear him, the wrong is so great.

Answ. Intwo cases a man may and must be more strict, even with his brother.

1 In reteining his own innocence.

2 If his brother will not see and confess his offense. But if thy brother
come and say, I pray thee forgive me, then, though the wrong be as great as
that of Joseph's brethren against him, as he was readier to offer pardon then
they to ask, so must thou, Mat. 18. 33. Should not thou have had compassion
on thy fellow servant? much more on thy brother.

Quest. What are the conditions of this brotherly love?

Ans.

1. It is universal to all Saints. 2. Sincere, not in tongue, but in truth. 3.
Fruitful in effest, as in affection. 4. Constant.
2 It reprooves such as scorn this title, and think it an high reproach to be
of the holy brotherhood. Use 2.


First, these persons disclayme all kindred with Christ: they are of another
house, and blood: their speech bewrayes them.

Secondly, they scoff at Christ himself, who was the chief of this
brotherhood, our elder brother, and was not ashamed to call us brethren: it
was no reproach then.

Thirdly, They set the Holy Ghost to school, as not knowing how to speak in
the Scripture, who every where calls the Saints brethren, and holy brethren,
Heb. 2. 1. Let him that dares despite the Spirit and scorn his language, know
he shall be shuffled out of this society, and pronounced a brother of the devil
and damned ones.

It also reprooves such as wrong the brethren of Christ; like the brethren of
Joseph, seek to cast them into pits and prisons, buy and sell them in their
good names, and intend evil against them while they are yet a far off. Let
them consider that in Mat, 25 40. In as much as ye did it unto one of these my
brethren, ye did it unto me, Go ye cursed. And mark, Christ disdaines not
after his resurrection, to call us brethren. Mat. 28. 20. and dare thou wrong
them whom he so honors?

3 Here is a ground of true and just dealing with all men. Be not fraudulent,
deceitful, cunningly by lies, oaths, false weights or measures to deceive thy
brother. Let no man defraud his brother by any M^lac. 2, 10.

1 Cor. 6. 8.

These. 4. 6.


means: the Lord is the avenger of such, namely in special manner. What, will thou deceive thy brother, be unmercifull to thy brother, hide thine eyes from
thy brother, fall from thy brother in his distress? was not a brother made for
adversity? and do thou add to it?

4 Superiors learn moderation, humility, and Use. 4.
mercy. It is a good meditation, every way to look at the case of an
inferior, as the case of a brother.

First, To work humility. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. The King must not puff up himself
above his brethren. Great scholars must not puff up themselves above them of
meaner gifts: for, one is your Doctor, and ye are all brethren, Mat 23. 9.

Secondly, To work moderation: the husband must moderate his authority,
because, though he be superior, yet the wife is joint heir of life. 1 Pet. 3.
Masters must moderate themselves toward their servants, because they have the
same Master in heaven, to whom they are with their servants fellowservants. Job
contended not with his maid, because he that made one, made both. c. 31. 13.
Onesimus a converted servant must be received as a brother.

Thirdly, To work mercy to the poor: this poor man is not a beast, but a
brother: not as a dog ranging for hunger, but a poor Christian, a poor
brother: and I must not turn my eyes from my poor brother, mine own flesh.
This sick man is not a sheep, sick of the rot, but one of Christ's field:
this poor servant is not my horse or Ox, whom I feed and tend, and if they be
sick I ask counsel and drench them, but my brother made in Gods image as I
am, a member of Christ as I am, whom I must tender in sickness and health, and
show my self a brother made for adversity.

5. This may comfort poor Christians. A brother is a name of equality. The
poorest Christian has the Use. 5.
same Father, Mother, alike precious faith, and the same common salvation with
the richest. Christ's Kingdom is not political, which stands of superiors and
inferiors, but in Christ all are one. Thou poor man effectually called, have
not such favor of great men, but have as great share in Gods favor, and in
the death of Christ as the richest. Thou want gold and silver, but that did
not purchase life, but Christ's precious blood, and that thou enjoyest at full.
Great men have privy stayres in their palaces: but thou go up the same
stayres to heaven, by the same Word, Sacraments, Faith, Prayer of faith, etc. a
rich man's prayer is no beter then a poor man's. Thou can not fair so
daintily, nor cloth thy self so costly in purple and silk as the rich: but
God at his table feasteth thee as plentifully, and arayeth thee with as costly
a robe of Christ's righteousness as the highest Potentate.

2 Those that are in spiritual fraternity with Christ Doctr. 2.
and one with another, lie open to all manner of wicked accusation. Who was
ever a more faithful and trusty servant then Joseph? yet was not he accused
of incontinency, and for that cast into prison a long time, and could never
come to due trial? Genesis 39. 9. Job by the Lords own testimony a peerless
man, and most upright before God and man, yet was not he accused before our God
of hypocrisy, not only by the great Accuser, but by his friends? David whose
conscience smote him for cutting the lap of Saul's garment; was still accused by
the Courtiers of high treason against him, and one that sought his life,
crown, and Kingdom. The Prophets who were holy men of God, and mirrors of
piety and grace, were all accused of most heinous things; Daniel of
disobedience, Elias of troubling all Israel, Amos of conspiracy, Jeremy of
revolting, etc. The Apostles, who shined in holiness and innocence as stars
of the first magnitude, were accused to be authors of sedition, troublers of
Cities, raisers of tumults, contemners of laws, trumpets of rebellion,
preachers of ordinances not lawful to receive, Act. 16. 19. Was not Paul
accused by Tertullus (Act. 24. 5) to be a pestilent fellow, a moover of
sedition among the Jews through the world, and one that taught every where
against the law of Moses? And whence were those rackings, and mockings, and
scourgings, and stonings, and slaughters, and torments of those whom the world
was not worthy of (Heb. 11. 36.) but from the same original of wicked
slanders, and keenest darts of false accusation?

Quest. Why does not the Lord protect innocence and holiness, but suffer it to
be the butt and white to receive all the arrows of wicked calumniation?

Answ. Ask also why the Lord suffers the clouds to beset and darken the Sun,
or the darkness of the night to succeed the light of the day. He is not bound
to give thee a reason of his ways and works, and yet in his great wisdom he
works them all. For;

1 As in the beginning he set a fight between light and darkness natural,
and separated between them, not that darkness should prejudice the light, but
rather should make the benefit and comfort of it more perspicuous and
discernable: so has he separated from the beginning light and darkness
spiritual, and maintains this fight and separation, not that light of grace
should be extinct by that darkness, but be made more manifest and shining.
See 1 Cor. 11. 19.

2 God will have the^ strive that must be crowned Were there no combat, there
were no conquest: were there no conquest, there were no crown: but the greater
the conquest, the more glorious is the crown. How should the faith, fortitude,
patience, or any grace of the Saints be tried, either for the soundness or
measure; if there were nothing to exercise them? Not peace, but war tryes the
metal of a soldier.

3 God will also by this fight show the madness and malignity of wicked men,
left by God, who must grow from evil to worse, (2 Timothy 3. 13.) to fill up
their measure. And therefore the holiness, wisdom, grace, and innocence of
godly men, which should be a fence and shield to keep evil men off them, is
but an invitation and bayte for their mischief and malice to work upon. Which
is most apparent in our Lord himself, the innocent Lamb of God, who taught
the truth without mixture of error or respect of persons: Could his wisdom,
innocence, or holiness fence him from being a butt and sign of contradiction,
or a subject of accusation? Was he not said to be a sorcerer, a Samaritan, a
drunkard, a glutton, a deceiver, a devil, an enemy to Caesar, a disturber of
public peace? Oh what a deadly poison lurketh in a wicked man left to
himself, that as a spider from the sweetest herbs swells up with poison, so
thence and there he acts his mischief, where he should admire, love, and
imitate!

The reasons of the doctrine are taken from,

1. The godly. 2. Satan. 3. Wicked men.
1 The godly are members of Christ, and members Reas. 1.
must be comfortable to their head. If they call the master Beelzebub, will they
spare the servant? was the green tree accused of rebellion and disobedience to
Caesar, and may not the dry trees expect more then the green? Again, godly
men shine as lights in the midst of a crooked generation: the light of their
gracious course actually condemns their vile conversation: the shining
holiness of the one really refuteth the foul corruptions of the other. Now so
long as this enmity lasts between the seed of the woman and of the serpent,
and so long as light and darkness remain unreconciled, the godly must make
account of accusation and unjust molestation.

2 Godly men cannot avoid accusation, in regard 2
of Satan the great Accuser. For,

First, his malice is restlesle against Christ who has broken his head: but
Christ being now in person out of his reach, he expresses it in two things,
wherein he reaches as near Christ as he can.

1 Against the truth and holy religion, both in the doctrine and practice:
Hence is it, that he can get all the good way of God called and accused for a
notable heresy, Act. 24. 14. and the sincere walking in this way no less.

2 Against his members, for as he accused the H^^d in his time, so now the
members in theirs, for the Heads sake. As he accused our elder brother, so also
for his sake the rest of the brethren, yea for being brethren, as our text
implies.

Secondly, Satan has wicked men's tongues to command, who are ruled at his
will; and therefore godly men must not look to be free from calumniation, so
long as they can either devise false things, or deprave true.

Thirdly, Satan has experience of the strength and force of this weapon of
false accusation, and that by it he has got no small advantage in all ages:
He knows he got the Son of God to death by false accusation; he got
thousands, and ten thousands of the Primitive Christians to death by the same
weapon. He knows how in all ages he has brought thereby holy religion into
suspicion and disgrace: He knows how such as are not of the truth, but guided
by his spirit, love lies, and are taken with them as a bait, and by Gods just
judgment given over to be hardened against the truth: And therefore, according
to his own ancient practice, he has taught his apt scholar Machiavel,
Calumniare audacter, aliquid saltem haerebit, Belie the man confidently, and
some dirt at least will stick upon him. Well he knows, that as such
calumnies make easy entrance into corrupt minds, so are they hardly
dispossessed of such prejudice: and if he can do nothing else, he pleases
himself in troubling them in their way, whom he cannot deprive of the end.

3. Wicked men cannot but accuse the brethren: First, because of their
ignorance of God and of 3
Christ; John 15. 21. These things will they do unto you for my names sake,
because they have not known him that sent me; and, John 16. 2. They shall
excommunicate and kill you, because they have not known the Father nor me.
The eye of the mind being blinded, how great is that blindness? This is the
foundation of accusation.

Secondly, as they are grossly ignorant in the things of God, so are they most
subtle in covering their own pretexts and practices. As no sin desires to
go naked, and seen in his own color and skin; so no sinner would walk in
his own shape and habit, but will sew himself a garment of some figleaves or
other, to mask himself in; that, whatsoever he is, he may seem no sinner.
Now there be 4. maine sins of wicked men, which have ever been mischievous to
the godly, but all masked and hid with this large cloak of false accusation.

1. Pride. Haman cannot get honor from Mordecai; for how can godly Mordecai
honor such a vile person? now Haman cannot for shame accuse Mordecai directly
for not kneeling unto him; but he can make good another accusation against
him, and his people, by which he covers his pride.

2. Covetousness. Now to hide their covetousness they have ever devised
accusations under pretense of peace, and standing against innovation. The
Apostles preach ordinances not lawful to receive, Act. 16. 19.
and trouble our City; but that was only a cover, for the Text says, When
they saw the hope of their gain was gone, they caught Paul and Silas; Why did
Demetrius and the Crafts-men make that disorderly Act. 12. 25.
tumult against Paul, but because they saw their craft must fail by Paul's
preaching of Christ? but they cunningly cover their covetousness with another
fine pretext of religion stablished through the world, and make it a dangerous
State matter, verse. 27.

3. Revenge. The heart of every wicked man lusts after envy against Gods
people, and yet they must go for the only men of peace, and only
peacemakers: Now in the midst of revenge, that they may retain a vizard of
peace, they can weave some false accusation out of some stuff finely spun, by
which they can easily blind the eyes of those in authority, that they may
usurp their name and authority, their power and forces, to vex Gods people;
thus, Dan. 3. 8. the Caldeans envying the advancement of the Jews above
themselves, devised a means of revenge; but finely hide themselves in a
grievous accusation; they come and flatter and pray devoutly for the King, O
King live for ever; then the King must believe, that they are the only men,
observant of his Laws; O King; thou have made a decree; then they charge the
Jews with rebellion, for they will not worship the Kings god, newly set up.
And thus do the Romish Catholics deal with those among them, who will not
frame to their Idolatry and superstition.

4. Their hypocrisy. Enemies of sound goodness they are, but must not seem
to oppose goodness; and therefore must they accuse things well done, and
repute them as faults justly punishable; now must they call good evil. Neither
may they seem to vex and prosecute good men, as good men; therefore they must
traduce them, and make them seem malefactors, and enemies to peace, and order,
and government; and then, they being so few in number, of small ability, and
smaller grace in the world, they may despise them with privilege. Thus
cunningly can they weild this hellish weapon, and make it serve to all their
purposes.

Note hereby the old practice of the devil in the Use I.
general sin of these days. How often do we hear the whole religion of God,
by the enemies thereof, traduced, disguised, accused to be factious,
heretical, turbulent? What is the sincerity of religion to many but hypocrisy
and vainglory? what the power of religion but giddiness and distemper of
unruly spirits? what the Preachers thought, but as Paul and Silas, troublers of
the City, teaching things contrary to Law? Good Jeremy ever sought the wealth
of the City and people, both temporal and eternal; yet was charged to
discourage the people, and weaken the hands of the men of war, and that he
sought not the wealth of the people, but the hurt, Ier. 38. 5. Holy Daniel whom
they could not touch by all their prying and devising against him, but in the
matter of his God, yet how did they combine against him? What a thanklesse
office is it to be a faithful Preacher to a wilful people? how are things
depraved, which ought to receive a good construction? how does every one act
his part in devising and receiving devises against him? Why, he has nothing to
do here, no calling, what has he to do to meddle with us? etc.

2. Learn a point of wisdom; not rashly to condemn or censure every one
that is accused, which Use II.
were often to condemn the innocent. Consider well both the person and the
cause, and then judge with righteons judgment. If accusation had made a guilty
person, Christ himself had not been innocent; for he was accused to be an
arch-deceiver of the people. And the greatest fault that has been usually
objected by the wicked, against the godly, is the doing of some part of their
duty. Therefore avoid this sin of credulity and rash judgment; be Memento
diffid^re. Epicharmus.
slow of belief; Charity believes all things, but all good things, and
thinks not evil.

3. Let good men, coming to Gods service, prepare 1 Cor. 12.
themselves for accusation; for, Use III.


First, Satan will practice betimes upon thy goodness, even in the tender
years of thy grace; so he did against Joseph, being very young.

Secondly, thou have the true cause of false accusation, if thou have any
goodness, that is assigned the cause; 1 Pet. 4. 4. Because ye run not with
them to the same excess of riot, they speak evil of you.

Thirdly, the enemies, Corah and his accomplices will mutiny against Moses, though
Gods rod be in his hand with never so many mighty signs, nay, though the wrath
of God be on their neck, to make the earth open and swallow them. The greater
grace, the greater is their resistance; the more report God gave to his
Apostles, the more wretchedly do they assault them

4. Let the godly not too much afflict themselves Use IIII.
when the dragon be wrayes himself in false accusation; for,

1. It is the same affliction that has befallen our brethren in the world, and
our elder brother; it is no new thing.

2. Our Lord Jesus has sanctified all our sufferings in this kind, and
sweetened them.

3. It is before our God, who is witness of our innocence, and watches over
our name and innocence. The Lord was with Joseph in prison.

4. Truth and innocence is strongest, and may be hid, but not extinct, and
shall break out as the Sun at noone day, Psalm. 37. 6. A godly man shall be
found best at last; his graces shall be as the Stars, which the black night
does but show more bright and shining.

5. If thou suffer evil speeches falsely for righteousness sake, blessed art
thou; Gods measure and man's do differ; he measures truth of heart, and grace
of life with another measure than the world does; these deserve favor amongst
men, but find it not; but the Lord will justify and testify unto them, and
remunerate them with an unheaped measure of righteousness and mercy.

This of the second point.

3. Satan and his instruments are impudent, and instant Doct. 3.
in false accusing the godly; for they do it before our God day and night,
Genesis 39. 14. how impudent was Potiphers wife in accusing Joseph? for although
she set adulterous eyes upon him, and impudently entised him with alluring
speeches, and instantly solicited him by unshamefac'd behavior; yea, although
he harkened not unto her, nor would be in the company of her, as one that
would avoid all occasions, yet she both impudently and instantly accused him,
first to his servants, and then to the Master, and then maintained her
accusations all the years of Joseph's imprisonment, which was about three
years in all.

Dan. 6. 4. The impudency and instance of Daniels accusers, appears, in that
to the King himself, with whom Daniel was in great favor, they durst accuse a
man in their own conscience so innocent, as they could find nothing against
him, except concerning the law of his God, and follow their accusation so
subtly with envious and false suggestions, as also so instantly, as, though
the King himself labored to deliver Daniel till the Sun going down, yet
either he could not, or would not, Daniel must die that night, lest the King
should perhaps remember his good service, and change his mind ere morning.

How impudently and instantly did Ieremies accusers pursue him? The false
Prophets and Priests accuse Jeremy to the Princes and all the people, saying,
This man is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this City, as ye
have heard with your ear, Ier. 26. 11. He is charged, that he sought not the
wealth, but the hurt of the people; that he discouraged the people by his
preaching, and weakened the hands of the men of war. But when they could not
by slandering and false accusing, impeach his innocence, nor get the law pass
upon him, they come basely to the King, and besought him to put him to death,
Ier. 38. 4.

1. This comes of extreme hatred of grace, and incessant Reas. 1.
wrath against the light, whether in doctrine or in practice: for all wicked
men are carried by the same wicked spirit and Prince of darkness; and all of
them plot and contrive how to disparage and discourage both the one and the
other. This extreme malice makes them shamlesse in accusing; as in Satan, whose
malice against God made him accuse GOD himself to Adam. There is no light so
bright and shining, but they will darken; no conversation so clean and
unspotted, but without all shame and fear they can traduce. Now what an
impudency is it to bark aganst the Sun?

2. Tyranny of sin where it reigns, carries a man beyond all humanity, and
all bounds of modesty, to act and pursue whatsoever graceless fact the devil
moves, against all laws of God and nature. It carries Cham away to deride
his own fathers nakedness, and Absolon to rise in rebellion against his own
indulgent natural father, and to take his wives in the sight of Israel,
putting off all shame and forehead, and all but the name of a man. The reason
hereof is, because a slave must not contest with his Lord, nor stand reasoning
the case with himself, but must do what the devil will have him to do, he
must be ruled at his will; beside the similitude between the devil and a man
given up to this sin of accusation: for many other sins men have common
with beasts, fierceness, craft, indociblenesse, filthiness; but this sin
men have peculiarly common with devils, and participating with his sin,
participate in his name, called Diaboli, 2 Timothy 3. So as when the devil
grows modest and moderate, and out of the goodness of nature is ashamed of
any sin, which he can either act, or get acted, then may wicked men cease to
be impudent in accusing, but not before.

3. Satan and his instruments have always bad causes in handling, and
accordingly must bring them 3.
about by bad and wicked means; such as most shameful lies and slanders, and
most impudent accusations, which the less ground or color of truth they have,
the more clamor, impudence, and instance must they thrust them forward withal.

If so, then take no offense against the truth or true Use
religion, because it has been and always is exposed to false accusations by
the father of lies, and his lying offspring; who all know, that if the Gospel
succeed and flourish, their kingdom cannot stand; if the light approach
darkness is chased away. So long as may be verified of Satan and his
fellow-accusers, what is said in Ier. 3. 3. Thou have an whores forehead and
could not be ashamed; so long the Church must be, as it has been in all
ages and times of the world, stiffly and instantly accused of rebellions,
insurrections, seditions, treasons, and the most grievous scandals that hell
can devise.

Here, for the better proceeding, consider three things.

1. The marks of impudent accusers and accusation.

2. Motives to beware of this sin.

3. Means by which godly men may fence themselves from the same.

I. The marks are sundry.

1. It is a diabolical impudency to accuse of that, whereof the accused are
not only guiltless, but to which they are clean contrary. Were it not an
high impudency, to accuse the Sun of darkness, or piety it self of the
highest wickedness? to accuse the godly of that, which their whole course
actually confuteth? How black was the devil feign to appear in the days
after the Apostles, when the Heathens cried out of Christians, as the causes
and authors of all public calamities and plagues? If Nilus overflowed not
their field; if earthquakes, pestilence, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 8. Hist.
or famine came on them, presently the poor Christians were cast unto the
Lions.

How like unto those Heathenish cries are those of this day, that godly persons
keep no laws, disobey Princes, are seditious, enemies to the State, etc. But
is not all clean contrary? for if there be any true peace in any Land, it is
for and by the Gospel, which is a Gospel of peace.

How like unto those were those horrible slanders cast upon the Protestants of
Paris, to make them odious? Priests and Friars in their Sermons persuaded the
people, that the Lutherans met at banquets in the night, and putting out the
Candles, went together, Jacke with Jill, after a beastly manner. Other
Sorbonists accused them, that they held there was no God; that they denied the
humanity and divinity of Christ, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection
of the dead, and the whole body of religion; and all this, when the confession
of their faith was extant to the contrary.

How is the government of Jesus Christ thrust away by most impudent pretexts,
that Christian policy is an enemy to civil policy? whereas the Kingdom of
Christ, not being of this world, incroacheth not into matters of civil
government, and civil policy is so far from being abated or abolished, as
that it is strenthened and stablished by the preaching of the Gospel.

The Romanists, to show their brood and offspring, and the Jesuits, the
firstborn of Satan, are attained to such an impudence, as they may teach
their Tutor to accuse.

1. In that they fasten impudently on us hundreds of wicked doctrines, which
our religion is a flat enemy unto; as, That we require only faith to
salvation; That we condemn all good works; That we say the Church has failed
many hundred years till Luther and Calvin; That we teach God the Author of
sin; That we wrest the sword out of Princes hands, etc. and infinite more,
which they write and print with such invincible impudency, as shows them to
have lost, with truth, all forehead and blushing.

2. In their devilish devises and accusations of holy and godly men,
bothliving and dead; That Calvin called upon the devil; That Bucer at his
death denied Christ to be come; That Master Perkins dyed in despair, of whose
gracious and happy end my self was an eyewitness. What marvel if they could
devise such Cart-loads of slanders after their death, who could not stay till
they were dead? Of Beza they wrote a book, that he dyed a Catholic, with
many strange stories of his death; which book, himself, being alive, confuted
with great zeal. Of Luther they published an horrible miracle, of his foul
See Whites way to the Church, p^g. 430.
death and damnation both in soul and body, with many passages after his
burial, and stir of the devils about him; which coming to Luthers hands,
he answered. Of Queen Elizabeth they spread in foreign parts, some years
before she dyed, that she was dead, and had reconciled her self to the Pope.
John Husse, yet alive, was accused that he affirmed a fourth person in
Trinity; who, when he desired the author or witness to be brough forth; and
could not obtain, cried out, O miserable man that I am, who am forced to bear
such blasphemies and standers!

2. Another note of an impudent blasphemer and accuser is, to accuse in things
wherein himself is most guilty. With what impudency did Potiphars wife accuse
Joseph of incontinency, when only her self was unchaste, and the solliciter?
Satan accuses Job before the Lord, that if he touch Job a little, he will
curse and blaspheme him to his face; whereas nothing is more usual with Satan
himself, than to curse and blaspheme God perpetually. Nero to pick a quarrel
against the Christians set Rome on fire, and charged Tacit. ^nnal. li. 5.
the Christians with it; hence were they apprehended, clad with skins of
beasts, and torn in pieces with dogs; and many crucified, and heaps of them
cast into blazing fires, as if they had been common burners and destroyers of
men. The most treasonable massacre that ever the Sun saw, was laid upon the
pretended treason of poor innocent men, drawn into the shambles as sheep,
thirty thousand of whose throats were cut in one month. At home the Parliament
House must be blowneup, and the fact laid upon the Puritans, with extreme and
ridiculous impudence; whereby also Papists charge us with heresy, with
corrupting the Scripture, with Idolatry, etc. and as impudently do gross
Recusants accuse conformable men of inconformity; some of faction, being most
factious themselves. Athaliah cries, Treason.

3. The impudency of accusers appears, in that when they can prove nothing,
they lay many heinous things upon the godly, to oppress them with multitude,
and make the world think something must be true among so many: and whereas one
such crime would bear action enough, if true, they lay on load with all
manner of crimes. Daniels fellows were charged with,

First, singularity, they alone stand out against the Image of the King.

Secondly, Irreligion, they will not worship the Kings God.

Thirdly, rebellion and sedition, they rebel against the Kings commandment.
Mar. 15. 3. the High Priest and Pharisees accused Christ of many things. And
Christians must expect from this impudence all manner of evil sayings for
Christ's sake falsely, Mat. 5. 11.

4. To accuse all the godly for one, is a note of an impudent accuser. Haman
thought it too little to destroy Mordecai, but all the seed of the Jews also.
For the quarrel is seldom private, or personal, but general against all the
persons of them that fear God: Satan would root out all the godly. The same
cause that stirs up his wrath against one, does inrage him against every one,
that is, Gods grace and Image. Hence it is, that no one good man can be falsely
accused, but so is every good man in him; for they are all alike, all
dissemblers, hypocrites, never a good, etc. See Satanicall impudency.

5. A trick of Satanicall impudency is, for some persons sake to accuse the
whole religion it self: for it is not enough to throw down the persons, but
the worship and religion of God also, being so contrary to them: which is
apparent in a number of graceless men, who never take offense against a godly
man, but presently fly upon his religion. Will thou impudently rail on the
Sun, because a man stumbles in the Sunshine? here is a more hateful madness

6. Another is, to seek occasions of accusing, and not finding occasion, yet
to accuse; as they, Ier. 18. 18. Come, let us devise against this Jeremy, and
smite him with the tongue; Dan, 6. 4. the impudency of Daniels accusers is,
that they fought an occasion, and will not stay till occasion be offered; and
they confess Daniels innocence among themselves, saying, We shall find no
occasion but in the matter of his God, and yet contest against it, to the King
himself; Luke 6. 7. The Pharisees watched Christ to get accusations against
him. Let watchers and devisers of plots against innocent men, see with whom
they run.

7. It is high impudency in accusing, that when they cannot for evil, they
will for good; Daniel for praying, Christ for healing on the Sabbath, the godly
for the matter of their God, for tenderness of conscience, for going to hear
Sermons, for singing Psalms in their houses, for carrying Bibles, for care in
keeping the Sabbath, for repeating Sermons at home, for exercises of religion,
for not swearing, for not being gamesters, tosse-pots and Taverners: his
impudent accuser can make it more easy, and seem more graceful to be
manifestly profane and vile, than sincerely good, and a resister of evil.

8. It is shameful impudence to accuse where special respects bind to
defend, honor and imitate. But a shameless accuser casts off, with all shame,
all bands and respects. 2 Samuel 16. 3. Ziba will not spare, but falsely and
villanously accuse his raiser and Master Mephibosheth, and that of no less
than high treason, that he stayed in Jerusalem to be made King; and so got his
lands. 2 Samuel 15. 13. Absalon spares not his own father, There is no man to
do justice. Not the nearest band of nature can stay an evil heart from
accusing where it should honor and defend: It will neither acknowledge him
from whom it has received benefits, nor yet being in the world. The sin is
likest Satan, when it is most ungracious and unnatural.

II. Next, the motives or disswasions from false accusation, are so much the
more to be urged, because of our great pronenesse and inclination to this
sin: For,

First, slipperinesse of the tongue, a nimble member, casts many headlong
into this sin unawares, especially in persons addicted to loquacity, and
garrulity or chatting, who, as empty vessels, give a loud sound, but no
soundness, or savory matter, or choice discourse can be heard from them; and
wanting matter in themselves will find it upon others.

Secondly, lying and false accusing agrees best with the corruption and
depravation of our nature; which being at first corrupted and spoiled by a lie,
we lean that way ever since, and as a vessel keep the smell of our first
liquor; yea, our whole nature is degenerate into a lie.

Thirdly, we have self-love in abundance, and pride of heart, by which we
set up our selves, and contemn and tread upon others. This admiration of our
selves makes us disdain others, and according to this distemper we speak, and
fill our mouths, and others ears with detraction and false accusation, lest so
much be detracted from us as we hear or see added to another.

Seeing therefore we are so prone to drink in this puddle water of detraction
and false accusation, as the fish does naturally river-water, we have so much
the more need to be called back from so dangerous a sin: and indeed we want
no bridles, if we be not too head strong; for,

1. God has provided by his express law, as well for the good name of his
servants, as for their goods or lives; Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor: wherein the Lord upon pain of death binds every soul
to truth and justice in all his speeches, the uprightness whereof must
demonstrate the uprightness and sincerity of the heart, as a chaste daughter
of a chaste mother. And this Law of God wraps him in the curse, as well that
steals and wounds his good name, as the thief that steals his goods, or: the
murderer that assaults his life: And as far as the good name is far in
estimation above gold and silver, ( Prove. 22. 1.) so much more hateful and
mischievous is the false accuser above a thief or burglary.

2. Nothing can be more contrary to God, nothing comes so near the devil:
He is a creature most degenerate from God, both in respect of his nature,
judgment and practice.

First, God in his nature is truth essential, and truth original, the Author
of all truth, and truth it self in all his decrees, in all his works, in all
his words, which all agree with the truth of his essence: But this man suits
with Satan the father of lies, who stood not in the truth, John 8. 44. God in
his nature loves truth; the devil speaks truth sometimes, but never
lovesit; God is called a Justifier, Satan here an accuser. If we see this
image or superscription of false accusing on any, say it is Satan's coin, a man
molded in his mint, and give unto Satan what is Satan's.

Secondly, nothing can be more dissonant to the judgment of God than rash
judgment, and false accusation of good men: God approves the ways of his
servants, highly esteems of their graces, accepts and remunerateth weak
endeavors: Now what can be more contrary than to accuse the ways of God to
be hateful purity, and a strain beyond discretion, and the graces of God for
singularity, hypocrisy, dissembling? know, thou have not now belied men, but
the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, the Lord in his course pleads for his Saints, acquiteth them,
answers all accusations for them, and pronounces a righteous sentence upon
them; the false accuser impudently impleadeth all this. God calls Nathaniel a
true Israelite; no, says the accuser, he is an Ismaelite, a dissembler: God
pronounces Paul an elect Vessel; no, says the accuser, he is a murderer, (a
thief, vengeance will not suffer him to live, Act. 28. 4. God pronounces of
his own Son, This is my beloved Son; no, says the accuser, he is a
deceiver, an impostor, a blasphemer, in saying he is the Son of God. Now what
can be liker Satan, who would have all men in his own condemnation, than these
vile persons, who would have all thought as vile as themselves? Hence our Text
makes Satan and all accusers, but one accuser.

3. Whom do thou accuse or revile? Thou accusest the brethren.

First, the brethren of Christ, and in them Christ himself; Matthew. 25. In that
ye have done it to one of these my brethren, ye have done it to me. Would
thou in the day of the Lord be brought in a false witness against Christ? And
yet there is a nearer relation; these brethren are members of Christ. Would
thou for a thousand worlds have that sin of the Jews lying upon thy soul,
that thou had thrust a spear into the body of Christ? but what was that
sin to this? they knew not who he was, nor what they did; beside, his body
was dead first; but thou thrustest the sharp spear of false accusation, and
by it tearest and rentest the living body of Christ* which is his Church; and
this wilfully, and of set purpose.

2 Thou sinnest against the sons, not of God only, but of the Church whom
thou professest thy Mother. The Spirit of God amplifies the wickedness of
false accusation by this circumstance, Psalm. 50. 20. Thou sit and speak
against thy brother, and slaunderest thy mothers son: showing the
unnaturalness of these wicked men to their own flesh, and the bowels of their
own Mother. Were there a dram of nature or grace in them, they could not
violate such near bands. Godly Sem will cover his fathers nakedness, though
unnatural Cham discover it. Charity would cover a multitude of offenses, Prove.
10. 4. But wanting both, they are rightly ranked with thieves and adulterers,
verse. 18.

4 A false accuser is a most irreligious person: and commonly such are the
greatest enemies to true religion: Observe, and you shall find them either
Atheists, or Papists, or Libertines, or worldlings, given over to some foul
sin or other. For, according to the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. If the heart swell with malice, envy, and bitterness, how can the
mouth but run over with cursed speaking? A bitter fountain can send no sweet
water. The shop is supplied with such wares as are in the storehouse. Besides,
true religion which purifieth the heart, would order the tongue, I am. 1. 26.
If any seem to be religious and orders not his tongue, that man's religion is
in vain.

5 Consider the fearful evils awayting this sin so contrary to God:

First, It casts a man out of the sanctuary of God ( Psalm. 15. 3.) unless the
Church of God could consist of a generation of devils: but it is the spouse of
Christ, the communion of Saints.

2 It casts him into the judgment of God, and damnation of hell; for God has
appointed a day to give judgment of all cruel speakings, which wicked sinners
have spoken against him, Jude 15. Then shall their measure be filled to the
brim: they shall have accusation enough. God does even here admonish of that
day, and sit in judgment on some, even in this life: What got Haman by false
accusation, but hanging on his own gallows? What got Ahab and Iezabel by
false accusing Naboth, but a possession of wrath? In the place where dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, must they lick Ahabs: and Iezabel was eaten with
dogs in the valley of Jezreel, 1 King. 22. A dart shot against a wall, or an
arrow shot upward, rebound, and fall upon the shooter. Daniels accusers were
devoured by the Lions to whom Daniel was cast What got Amaziah by accusing
Amos? chap. 7. 17. Thy wife shall be an whore etc. Let men take heed of touching
Prophets, and slaundering godly Ministers. Eusebius in his Church History Lib.
6. cap. 8.
shows how Narcissus was falsely accused by three false witnesses: one wished,
if it were not true, he might be burnt: the other, that a foul disease might
eat him: the third, that he might else be blind: And accordingly they
perished, the first by a spark of fire from heaven, the second by a loathsome
disease from top to toe, the third seeing this, repented, but yet lost both his
eyes with weeping for his sin against the good Bishop of Jerusalem.

III Now we come to the means by which godly men may fence and arm
themselves against this keen weapon of false accusation.

1 Accuse and judge thy self daily, yea night and day before God. Thou
preventest the accuser by accusing thy self. 1 Cor. 11. 13. If we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. Be careful above all to stop the mouth of
three accusers.

First, make sure that God accuse thee not: Let nothing stand between him and
thee, whereof thou have not already judged and accused thy self. Hereunto
believe in Jesus Christ: against all false accusation get Christ to justify
thee: be once in Christ, and he shall answer all crimination: and if he
justify, who shall condemn? Romans 8. 33.

Secondly, see the word of God accuse thee not: stop Moses his mouth, Ioh. 5.
45. There is one that accuses you, even Moses: not his person, but his
doctrine. Hereunto repent of thy sin, confess and forsake it, that is the
way to mercy. Evangelicall obedience stops Moses mouth.

Thirdly, avoid and stop the accusation of thine own conscience, that thou
may have a witness within thee:

First, of thy sound peace and reconciliation with God.

Secondly, sense of grace and sanctification.

Thirdly, carfulness in Gods service.

Fourthly, innocence and uprightness in the most sincere endeavor of heart
and life.

2 Walk circumspectly, avoiding occasions and appearances of evil. False
accusers can make of gnats in good men, elephants, and of mole-hils mountains
as big as the globe of the earth. If thou esteem any error small, or sin
little, so will not they. Oh that all Christians would or did so walk, as that
all accusations might prove shadows and pretenses! Oh that all the keen
weapons of wicked men were thus blunted with innocence, and that all prooved
but the doing of their duty.

3 Let the righteous smite thee: for this may keep thee out of wicked hands.
Take counsel, endure rebukes from the godly, hear with willingness loving
admonition. For else it is just the wicked fall upon thee. Some have been
publickely instructed by the word, and privately persuaded by godly friends, to
avoid occasions of scandal, to avoid the company of loose and riotous persons,
and to watch narrowly over themselves for their professions sake: but they,
unconscionably rejecting the counsel of Gods word and servants, and rather
quarrelling with the counselors then following the counsel, have been given
up to themselves, and led away till they have become a byword to all the
profane in the country; who flout and triumph over them and their profession,
as if the Philistims had got in another Sampson. Had it not been better, to
have borne the wounds of friends, then these gashes of the enemies?

4 Defend and plead Gods cause against false accusation, and he will plead
thine. When truth is gainsaid, or his name or servants evil spoken of, if we
would bestirre our selves for him, he also would be ready to defend our names
and innocence. A wretched Council it is, in which al cry, crucify Christ, and
not a man to speak a word for him. Many such wicked Councels there are, in
which bold and impudent accusers do stand against God, and his worship, and
servants, and throw down and tread on not only the innocence of good men, but
the worship and service of God, and not a man to speak a word for God or good
men, or causes: But never was there such a council set against God, but God
set against them, and brought that dishonor on themselves, which they sustered
to be cast upon him and his name. We need not go far for examples.

5 Do to another name as thou would have thine done by. He shall dwell in
heaven, who neither Psalm. 15.
raises nor receives slanders. Generally, when we hear accusation and
reports of out brethren, we receive them, believe them, laugh at them, add to
them. But, what measure thou measurest to others, shall be measured to thee
again: thou shall be paid in thine own coin: look what entertainment
another man's name finds in thy house, the same shall thy name find in another
man's house. We must therefore open our mouths for the dumb, for the absent,
for the innocent. The difference between the slaunderer and receiver, is this:
the former has Satan sitting in his heart and tongue, the latter in his heart
and ear.

6 Another means is, resolution never to depart from thine uprightness, but
to keep thine innocence (as Job) though with infamy and false accusation. Job.
27.

2 Cor. 6.


So did Joseph. So the Apostles resolved to pass on their way by honor and
dishonor, through evil report and good report. Never leave off to do good,
nor give over any duty, to avoid false accusation. Hazard rather thy name and
credit, then thy faith and piety.

7 Another is, appellation: so walk ever before God, as thou may appeal
from all unjust accusation and sentences, to his most just and righteous
sentence; that thou may boldly expect and call for both his testimony and
assistance and clearing. For the first, David appeals to the Lord, Lord thou
know whither Psalm. 7.
I have done this, thou know they lay to my charge things that I know not.
John Husse appealed to Jesus Christ, from the wicked sentence of the Council
of Constance; Jobs witness was in heaven. For the other, is that in Psalm. 119.
123. Answer for thy servant in that which is good, and let not the proud
oppress me: as if he had said, Lord I am slaundered where I am not, where I
cannot answer for my self, do thou answer for me; besides, I crave only thy
protection in an honest and good cause; thou that art goodness it self,
maintain it, and me in it. And for clearing thine innocence, wait, God will
one day discover it. Consider the story, how God cleared Athanasius from the
villainous accusations of the Arrians.

First, they suborned a lewd woman to exclayme upon him in open assembly, that
he would have ravished her, the night before, against her will. Which slander
he shifted off by sending Timotheus, Presbiter Eusebius. lib. 10. c. 17.
of Alexandria, in his room; who asked her before the synod, whether she would
swear that he had ravished her: she answered, she would swear and vow he did
it, thinking he had been Athanasius whom she never saw. So the Council,
perceiving the matter, quitted his innocence.

Secondly, they accused him to have slain one Arsenius, whom themselves kept
secret, and that he carried one of his hands about him, by which he wrought
miracles and enchantments. But Arsenius, touched by God, stole away from them,
and came to Athanasius, who brought him before the Judges with both hands, and
confounded his accusers.

8 The last means is apology and necessary defense of our words and facts
against false accusers: which Christ used always for himself and his
disciples. And as necessary it is for his Ministers and Members. For,

First, we may not lose our innocence, if by good means we may maintain it.

Secondly, we may and must cut off the vizards of envious obtrectors and
slaunderers, if not for our persons yet for the truth.

Thirdly, impudent accusers abuse the patience and modesty of good men, and by
their silence make themselves more audacious to slander.

Fourthly, a good man may be as bold in defense of innocence and goodness, as
they are impudent in disgracing them. Samuel did not boast or preach himself,
when, rejected by the people, he asked, Whose Ox or Ass have I taken? Our
Savior Christ many times asks, Which of you can accuse me of sin? If
Papists or Atheists make it the discourses of their table, and sauce of their
meats, to belie and slander Preachers of the Gospel, a Preacher may, as I do
this day, challenge all Papists, scoffers, enemies of the truth which I preach,
etc. if the Roman law were in force, which Eusebius and Nicephorus Lib. 5. cap.
21.
speak of, that he that had falsely accused his brother, and not able to prove
it, should have both his legs broken, what a number of criples should we have?
I wish them better, that God would break their hearts with godly sorrow, and
break their malice rather then their limbs, that embracing the truth they may
acknowledge the bringers of it.

The accuser is cast down.] The second part of these words, is, The dejection
of the dragon.

He was cast down, not utterly expulsed or destroyed: for he will ever stand
up as an accuser before Dejectum dicit, non pretritum.
Gods tribunal, and men's, but he falls in his accusation, and is cast in his
cause.

Quest. Wherein stands this dejection of the dragon?

Answ. In two things.

1 In regard of Gods tribunal he is foiled, because Christ is risen for the
justification of Believers, and is ascended into heaven to clear all
accusations, and now reigns and triumphs over all enemies, whom he has
made his footstool.

2 In regard of man's tribunal, at this time, which our text aymeth at, the
heathenish power which had long oppressed the Church, being subdued, and
Christian religion stablished by Christian Princes; those horrible accusations,
by which the poor Christians were daily brought to death by hundreds and
thousands, were stayed, and in great part cut off; and the Christians were
cleared and acquitted from those hateful and impudent accusations laid against
them: And now the innocence both of their persons and profession appears.

1 The holiness, innocence, peaceablenesse, and godliness of their persons
began more and more to break out* the book of their Adversaries false
suggestions was as an honorable crown upon their heads: now God gives them
favor and honor in the sight of their Adversaries.

2 That which is more, now the profession and religion of God and his Son
Jesus Christ, as odious as it was formerly made by hellish blasphemies, begins
to be received, advanced, spread abroad, and lifts up the head above all
heathenish and idolatrous religions; in a word, grace and glory, comes unto it,
in stead of former infamous imputations cast upon it.

This is the casting down of the Accuser.

Note hence, that there is a time when the accusers Doct. 1.
of Gods people shall be cast down and put to silence. Though Joseph a long time
lie in the place of the Kings prisoners, his mistress is impudent in accusing,
his master credulous in believing, cruel in putting his feet in the stocks,
and laying irons on him, and himself hopeless of favor or deliverance; yet
the Lords time came, when he came out of prison with honor, and much more
grace then all his disgrace came unto. Mordecai and his people may be accused,
condemned, a day of execution appointed, no hope nor help appears: but ere
that day comes, the Lord brings forth his innocence, Haman his accuser must
honor him, and proclayme him the second man in the kingdom, and quickly after
hansell his own gallows. There was a time when the den and furnace were
thought too good for Daniel and his fellows: so grievous are the aceusations,
and so heinous their facts: but soon after they are raised to honor and high
advancemet, and their accusers cast into their room. There was a sad and
heavy time, in which the poor Christians bare the burden of ten bloody
tyrants and monsters, their names blacked, their goods spoiled, their blood
shed as water: but afterward a Constantine came, who acquitted them, honored
them, cherished and protected them.

1 This must needs be in respect of God: in whom if we consider four things,
we shall see it cannot Reason 1.
be otherwise.

First, his knowledge and clear discerning of the innocence of his servants.
Now their righteousness and innocence is denied and derided, enemies would
bury it in the grave of everlasting oblivion, and take deep counsels to roll
great stones of infamy and reproach upon it, that it cannot rise in the
after-ages of the world. But all things are naked to him, with whom we have to
deal: who preserves the bones of Heb. 4. 13:
innocence, and will raise it out of the ashes, and bring it into a clear and
glorious light. See Luke 12. 2.

Secondly, his justice. The righteous judge of all the world cannot always
hold his peace at wrong, nor always suffer justice to be turned into
wormwood, nor truth to be always covered with sackecloth and ignominy. He
must show himself a patron of truth, and a revenger of wrong. Be it far from
him, the doing of this thing; that the righteous should be even as the wicked;
that be far from him; shall not the judge of all the world do right? Genesis
18. 25.

Thirdly, his promise: in Psalm. 37. 6. Commit thy way to the Lord, and he will
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as at noonday;
implying, that righteousness may be hid with darkness, and covered with the
black night of impudent slanders; but yet after darkness it shall see light;
the longest and darkest night that ever was, saw a morning, and the sun rose,
and chased away darkness and mists, and revealed all that was hid in
darkness: And so God promises it shall be to all his disgraced Saints. Does
he promise, and does he not mean to perform? is he not able? is he not
willing to accomplish? is not he truth? are not his promises so, both from
truth, and for truth, and those that are of the truth?

Fourthly, his affection to innocence. The righteous Psalm. 11.
Lord loves righteousness. What a man loves he will maintain; much more the
Lord, though he tarry long, yet at last will step forth and plead for truth,
and will not suffer it always to be smothered with smoke and mists of lies
and falsehood.

2 It shall so be, in respect of Jesus Christ, to whom the Saints must be
conformed, and by whom they are 2.
confirmed and upheld.

First, as the Saints are conformed to Christ in his cross, so in his crown;
as in his combat, so in his victory. And therefore as the Head was accused,
accursed, crucified, buried, and a great stone rolled upon him, and a sure
watch about him, and all to keep him under for ever, but yet the third day he
arose gloriously; so there is a third day for his members, wherein they shall
rise from under all the infamies and reproachful slanders of evil men, as
out of the graves. For if the Head be risen, so are the members.

Secondly, the spouse of Christ cannot be cast into such a deep, but he whom
her soul loves, has his hand under her head, Cant. 2. 6. so as the Lord
never suffers his servants to be so far cast down, but his hand under the^
at length shall lift up their heads. Let what floods and waves of reproaches and
persecutions rise against them, they cannot sink, Christ is with them in the
ship, he will seasonably rebuke the waves, still the winds, stay the
blustering storms, clear the heavens, and make a calm for them.

3. So it shall be in regard of the godly; whose graces 3.
and holiness must be exercised, but not extinct; whose glory and happiness
may a while be suspended and obscured, but not prevented or hindered. The Sun
of the world may be set with clouds, covered, shut in, and hid for many days,
Acts 27. 20. but yet clouds will be dispersed, and the dark mists and fogs
will be scattered, and the Sun will recover his shine and strength; even so
the shine of grace and innocence may be clouded and darkened many days; but,
when God has exercised his Church a while, he will over-blow the tempest
again, the Sun of grace shall rise and disperse these black clouds, and
cause them to vanish unto nothing. After darkness (says Job) I shall see
light. And suppose the Saints walk in black a while, yea, all the while they
are here below, yet they shall walk in white, Rev. 3. 4. when their mourning
garments shall be taken from them, and they clothed with whiteness of
holiness and glory.

4. It shall so be, in respect of the wicked accusers, who must not always
have their will and 4.
force; their rod must not lie always on the lot of the godly; but when the
Lord has by them whipped and corrected his Children, they must be cast into
the fire, as Ashur was.

Object. But we see the godly haled to death and destruction by false
accusation, as Naboth, as Christ himself, as the Christians and Martyrs in all
ages, executed as traitors, heretics, and wicked men. Besides, how go the
godly hanging down their heads, as men only despised, and carrying the scorn
of the times, as men only worthy of hatred; and thus they go heavily to their
graves, and their innocence is buried with them.

Answ. All this impeacheth not this truth; For, First, this promise is made
good so far as the Lord sees good for his servants.

Secondly, often in this life the innocence of those who die as guilty, is
restored them; as Naboth, whose innocence is recorded to all posterity; and the
Martyrs in the ten persecutions, after-ages honored their memory and
sufferings, though they dyed as the greatest malefactors; and the poor
Christians in Queen Mary's days, who were cursed to hell, and burned in the
flames for most accursed heretics and traitors, God stirred up Master Fox to
clear their innocence, to honor their memory, and cause all ages to glorify
GOD in their grace and constancy.

Thirdly, many wrongs must be reserved for the brightness of the great day to
reveal, and some things perhaps never come to light in this world; but then
the Saints committing their cause and names in well-doing unto the Lord, he
will keep faithfully that which they commit unto him; and for his own name is
jealous of theirs.

Fourthly, in the Courts of men the day goes against truth and innocence, so
high as from which in earth is no appeal, and so the matter must rest; yet
there is a day, and an high Court of heaven, which is without corruption of
Judge or witness; this shall right all errors of inferior Courts, there
innocence and innocents shall stand in trial, and the righteous shall there
shine as the Sun in the firmament, Mat. 13. 43. if not in the kingdom of the
world, in the Kingdom of the Father.

And for the godly, whose grace and innocence appears not here, nor
themselves in this strange Country are known what they are, When Christ who
is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear Col. 3. 4.
with him in glory: and if Christ be contented to be obscured here, so may we
also.

This doctrine serves to terrify the enemies of Use I.
the Church, whose tongues are now their own, none may control them, they
privilege themselves to devise and disperse what lies they list: But they must
know,

First, that the mouth of wickedness shall be stopped.

Secondly, that truth is strongest, and will prevail, though they may outface
and smother it for a while. Could they hinder Christ from rising? can they
hinder the day from dawning, or the Sun from his rising, or course? no more
can they bury innocence and grace so low, but it will rise again.

Thirdly, they must be called to reckoning for all wicked speeches, and false
accusations of the Saints; when they would esteem it their happiness to lie
ever in the dark cave of their rottenness, but they must be fetched in to
carry the shame and perpetual reproach which they would have cast upon
innocence.

Again, this may comfort the Saints, who hear Use II.
there is a day when their righteousness shall be brought forth; they shall
have their desire: As falsehood and darkness fears nothing but to be
discovered, so truth and light fear nothing but to be hid. Now they rejoice in
the day of manifestations of things rolled in darkness: Now shall their
innocence triumph, when shame shall* cover the faces of all accusers, as they
did Hamans before his hanging. In that day shall men and angels see, that they
were not seditious, factious, rebellious, proud, hypocrites, and worst of all
men; but humble, peaceable, obedient to the good laws of God and men, sober,
fruitful, sincere, gracious, and holy. Oh how sweet and honorable shall that
sentence of absolution from Christ's own mouth be, after all the unjust
sentences of wicked men!

3. This teaches us a rule of wisdom, to judge Use III.
not according to outward appearance, but with righteous judgment, John 7. 24.
Judge of persons as of coin, by the touchstone, not by hearsay. We judge of
a great heir, not as he is in minority, but according to his livelihood and
future great estate. Labor to esteem of Saints, not as they are here
besmeared, but as they shall appear like Christ in glory. See thou one for
Christ made like unto Christ in reproaches, and suffering ignominy and
rejection? now conclude, this man must be like him in glory, though the world
cast a sea of shame upon him; 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him.

4. This is a ground of patience and constancy in Use IIII.
well-doing, and suffering evils: Grieve not to see the dark night shut in the
day; go to thy rest; a few hours will bring the Sun and morning, which
shall discover all things again. Commend thy cause in well doing to him that
judges righteously. Fly not on men to be revenged, but fly to him, and wait
for two things:

First, Gods time; Joseph lay in irons till the time appointed came, and the
counsel of the Lord had tried him, Psalm 105. 18.

Secondly, Gods means.

Object,I see none; all ways of clearing my self are shut up.

Ans. Yet God has ways enough.

1. Angels; Mary had innocence, but no way in earth to discover it; Joseph was
putting her away, but the Angel from heaven acquites her. God watches in the
night over our innocence, as over hers.

2. Good men hold themselves made by God keepers of their brothers credit:
Jonathan will speak for David, though a spear be thrown at him.

3. Evil men themselves: Saul shall preach David's innocence; and Pilate the
Judge condemning 1 Samuel 24. 18.
Christ, shall acquit him.

This of the first point.

2. In that the Saints here praise the Lord for that Doct. II.
the accuser is cast down, we learn, that when the Lord has scattered the
clouds and mists of false accusation for us, and made our innocence appear,
we must by all means show our selves thankful for it. The eighteenth Psalm
is a Song of thanksgiving in the day that God delivered David from the hands of
Saul, who accused him of treason, and aspiring, and affecting the Kingdom; see
verse. 43, 46, 48, 49. Hest. 9. 26. the days of Purim were instituted for a
perpetual and public praise of God, both for the clearing of the Jews
innocence, falsely accused by Haman, and the overthrow of the accuser.

1. As God does all things for his own glory, so Reas. 1.
especially here his glory shines in much brightness: for,

First, he rises up in righteous judgment, and manifests the whiteness of
his Throne, whiter than Salomons, which was of white Ivory, demonstrating the
purity of the Judge and judgment; and here advances his Throne above all the
thrones of the world, which cannot clear themselves from corruption.

Secondly, he advances his power above all enemies, they are potent to
suppress the truth, but he is omnipotent to support it.

Thirdly, he magnifieth his wisdom in preventing all the cursed policies and
counsels of his enemies against the Saints, and either turns them to folly,
or brings them on their own heads, as Achitophel and Haman.

Fourthly, he expresses his affection to his people; in turning the enemies
curse into a blessing, as in the instance of Balak and Balaam, Numb. 23. 11. I
called thee to curse mine enemies, and lo thou have blessed them. The more
Pharaoh oppressed the Israelites, the more they increased.

Now as the Lord puts forth his glory, so he expects that his people
should declare it, and ascribe the same unto him; considering, that if they
honor him not, he loses all his honor upon earth; for wicked men shut their
eyes against it: and further, how well it pleases him, when the Saints go out
of themselves, and ascribe al their safety only to his mercy, disclaiming
their own strength, merit or goodness, and only glory all the day in him,
whom they acknowledge the Patron and defender of truth and innocence.

2. After all victories the Saints used to praise the Lord, when they saw him
rise up for them against 2.
his enemies: But in casting down accusers, is an happy victory, wherein many
hellish plots are overthrown, many stratagems discovered, and armies of
diabolical enterprises chased; the fury and force of enraged enemies is
defeated, themselves turned back, and clothed with confusion. The heathens
would not carry a victory without sacrificing to their gods; and shall the
Saints deny the Lord this sacrifice of praise, when their enemies are cast
down before them?

3. When the Lord hears our prayers, he is greatly to be praised: Psalm. 28.
6. Praised be the Lord, 3.
for he has heard the voice of my prayer. And how can a godly heart, who has
commended his cause and innocence unto Gods clearing, and finds that the
Lord, who seemed to have been departed, and not to respect him or his
righteous cause, is now returned, and manifests his presence in stopping and
restraining the fury of the enemy, and bringing forth into light the innocence
of his servants; how can a good heart now but return with praises to God, who
has heard all his prayers, and brought about all his hearts desire?

4. The benefit it self, to have slanders and evil 4.
surmises dispersed, is not so small and worthless, as it is not worth
thanks. How thankful would we be to that man, who, when we could not tell
what to do in a great cause concerning our estate, would step in as a
faithful witness on our side? but how much more when the Lord vouchsafes to
witness for us, seeing we can neither deserve this favor, nor repay any thing
else for it?

Therefore let us not deprive him of his praise, Use.
which is his tribute, Psalm. 50. 15. I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And it is the end of all Gods intention in the donation of mercy,
and ought to be our end in the fruition of it.

Again, it is a note of an evil man to be more ready to pray for supplies in
his straites, then to praise God for supplies in his liberty and enlargement.

Finally, it was ever the constant practice of the Saints, Psalm. 59. 16. I will
sing of thy power and praise, for thou have been my defense, etc.

Quest. How may we express our thankfulness for this mercy?

Ans. 1. If God honor or preserve our names, we must much more honor and
uphold his; referring all our credit and reputation to maintain his name and
honor; contrary to those, who know not how to wield honor and greatness, but
in swearing, cursing, gaming, and the like.

2. This we shall do by careful and watchful upholding the holiness and
innocence of our own lives. For the end of our redemption from our enemies is,
to serve our God in holiness and righteousness all our days, Luke 1. 15. And
it is the end of our justification, both before GOD and man, that we should
shine out in holiness, and walk beseeming so great salvation.

Verse 11. But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony, and they loved not their lives to the death. AFter the Church
in this triumphant song, has sung out the praises of God, the giver of all
victory, in the former verse; now in this are set forth the due praises and
commendation of the army, or band of Michael, who had valiantly stood with
their General in the conquering and subduing the Dragon.

In the words are two things:

First, a report of the victory, and that the Saints were masters of the field,
But they overcame him.

Second, the reasons or causes of this victory, and they were of two sorts.

1. The meritorious cause and principal efficient, The blood of the Lamb. 2.
The isntrumental causes; and these were two. 1. The word of their Testimony.
2. Their constancy and Martyrdom, They loved not their lives to the death.

In the report of the victory are two things.

1. Who overcame, They.

2. Whom, Him. They, that is the Angels of Michael, verse. 9. Him, that is the
dragon and his army, who being all one in will, in work, in mischief, are all
one in name, in state, in ruin and overthrow.

Note hence, that not only Christ himself does overcome the dragon, but all
Christians also; even all the Doct.
godly now overcome the devil, and al wicked ones, and all wicked powers: 1
Ioh. 2. 14. Ye have overcome the wicked one: 1 Cor. 15. 57. -- Who has given
us victory; namely, over sin, death, the grave, and whatsoever would separate
us from Christ: here he speaks in the time past. Romans 8. 37. Nevertheless we
are more then conquerours: here he speaks in the present time.

Quest. How do Christians now enjoy victory?

Ans. 1. In their Head all Believers have now overcome the devil.

2. In beginnings of their own victory; they have got some holds and
advantages.

3. In assured hope and confidence, which shall not leave them ashamed: So as
every Christian may say as Lucullus, who having in the beginning of the fight
got an advantage against the Army of Methridates, cried, Vicimus, that is, we
are as sure of victory as if we had it in our hands: so may we the Lords
Captains, cry cheer to our soldiers, We have overcome in our Head, we have
won the strongest holds, we have an hopeful victory in our hands, the maine
battle is routed and discomfited, a few straglers remain, with whom we shall
make short work; The God of peace shall tread Satan under our feet shortly,
Romans 16. 20.

Quest. Why must Christians overcome? was it not enough that Michael did?

Ans. No, every Christian must overcome the dragons, as well as Michael?

1. Because of his strait union with his Head: every member is advanced in the
head; if the head be crowned, so are the members. And it is the will of God,
that all that are given to Christ, not only behold, but partake of his glory,
John 17. Some Generals are so ambitious, as they would have all the glory of
victory result upon themselves; but this General will have the meanest
soldier to share in the honor as well as in the labor.

2. Christ fought not his own battles with the dragon, 2
but ours: The quarrel was not his, but ours; and the victory was not for
himself, but for us: So as he fought as our Mediator, and overcame as a
Mediator, susteining the cause and persons of his members; so as indeed the
victory is properly ours;

1. By imputation; faith which makes him ours, makes his victory ours, and it
is our victory, by which we now overcome, for the present. 1 John 5: 4:


2. By inchoation; giving us power, and making us Kings and Conquerours, Rev.
1. 5. here in part, and perfectly hereafter.

3. By merciful acceptance; For though we be so far from overcomming in our
selves, as that we cannot think a good thought, and of his own we must give
him, yet for our encouragement he is pleased to call his own works in us,
ours, as in the Text, They overcame. And though we do nothing but by him, who
is our sufficiency, yet his grace ascribes to us that which himself effects
in us; and though our beginnings be weak, and endeavors poor, yet he
pleases to esteem his servants by the truth of grace, not the measure. Where
he sees a willing 2 Cor. 8. 12.
mind, he accepts the will for the deed, soundness of weak grace for
perfection, and true beginnings for accomplishment. Thus having begun to
overcome, grace accounts us Conquerors.

3 Every Christian must therefore overcome, both 3.
for the greater confusion of the dragon, who is as unable to stand against a
despised member of Christ, as Christ himself (every woman, and child of God
believing, foyles him) and the greater consolation of the Saints in this
battle, who must be daily flesht and hartned by the first fruits of victory,
and stand here below as it were upon P^sgah, and see the good land, and
happiness of perfection, and vision of full peace a far off, in the sweet
beginnings of it, while the enemies begin to turn their backs, and dare not
stand out the resistance of the meanest member of Christ.

This serves to discover the delusion of many, who say they lean upon Christ's
victory for salvation, but Use I.
never examine whether they themselves overcome or no: But Christ overcomes,
not only in himself, but in every member of his. Has he not made thee a
Conqueror? then what is his victory to thee, not being in thee? True it is, he
imputes his victory to the Christian; but first he begins it in him.
Feel thou the mighty power of Christ effectually working in thee? discernest
thou the power of faith, which is thy victory? has the word a mighty power to
throw down high holds of lusts? Does the power of grace lead thee in upright
courses, of piety and equity? Here is a good sign of a Conqueror with Michael.
But do thy lusts sway? does sin rule? followest thou thy violent affections
against Gods Word? rather then thou must not have thy unjust will, thou will
tread down the word of grace, and the work of grace in others, etc. A slave
then thou art to the devil, and have as yet no part in Christ's victory. What
little victory Christ has won for many men, appears in that little victory
he has in them: whose only study and bravery is, to throw down the power of
God, the Ministry, and servants of Christ; the great and unanswerable sin of
these times, as will be shortly convinced.

2. Here is comfort for godly men: They have Use II.
many enemies, but none of them can prevail, as before, Verse. 8. for,

First, the Believer is upon an impregnable rock in the sea, which, let it be
beaten without intermission with billows and waves tossed by the winds
against it, yet it abides unmovable.

Secondly, he stands not single in the combat, but incorporate into Christ;
if the enemies can seize again to conquer Christ, then may they him.

Thirdly, he is sure of victory, and therefore may come with courage, and
stand with confidence; as Gideon with his three hundred stood it out against
the mighty host of Midian, because he was assured of victory.

Fourthly, he has victory in great part already, over all enemies: Sin
sticks to him, but reigns not; sin is in him, not he in sin: Death is
busy, but has lost his sting: The Law accuses, but in our surety is
performed; the debt paid, the bill cancelled, and one debt is not to be paid
twice. Hell is shut, and now there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus
Christ, the devil and his instruments are chained Lions.

Fifthly, no combination of enemies can support them; though hand join in hand
they cannot escape Sin is chained to punishment in all: The same sin deserves
ruin in all: Gods justice is impartial: And the same destruction belongs to
the devil and wicked men, seeing they all make but one dragon, who is here
overcome.

They overcame by the blood of the Lamb.] Here is the principal and
meritorious cause of this victory: Where three things must be opened.

1. Who is this Lamb. 2. What is meant by his blood. 3. How the Saints
overcome by this blood.
I. This Lamb is Michael, called a Lamb, especially for two reasons.

1. Because he was resembled by the Lamb sacrificed in the Law.

Object Other beasts were sacrificed, and were types of Christ, as the
Bullock, Goat, Ram, and the like; but he is not so called.

Ans. True, because those were not in continual sacrifice as these, neither
did so ordinarily represent him as these: for these were offered, and held
Christ's sacrifice before their eyes:

1. Annually, as in the Passover.

2. Monthly, as in the Calends of every month were seven Lambs offered, Numb
28. 11.

3. Weekly, for every Sabbath they must offer two, Verse 9.

4. Daily, the juge sacrificium, or continual sacrifice, which let the fire
never go out, was of two Lambs every day, Verse 13.

2. Christ is called a Lamb, because he did resemble those Lambs in
qualities, especially two.

First, innocence and harmlesnesse, he was the innocent Lamb of God, without
spot, no guile was found in his mouth.

Secondly, obedience and meekness, he was obedient to the death, and as a
Lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Esa. 53. 7.

This comfort us in beholding this Lamb, our sacrifice; who was, Use 1.


1. The Lamb of God, that is, set a part by God, not by men, as the other
Lambs in the old Testament were.

2. A Lamb from God, not rising from the earth as they, but descending from
God, and coming from the bosom of his Father.

3. A Lamb that was God; for, God shed his blood, Act. 20. and therefore the
dignity of the person of this Lamb, giving worth and sufficiency to his
sacrifice, it takes away the sins of the world; with difference from those
in the Law.

1. It really took away sin; other Lambs did did but shadow and represent
it.

2. The sins of the whole world; other Lambs expiated sin but in one
nation, but this is of validity to redeem the whole Church in all nations.

3. It took them away perfectly by one oncemade oblation, and needed not
repetition yearly, monthly, weekly, and daily, as theirs did.

Again, this teaches us to imitate this Lamb, especially in these two
gracious qualities. Use 2.


1. Of holiness, purity, innocence of life and conversation; that we may be,
as much as is possible, blameless and without spot in the midst of a froward
generation: He was fairer then the sons of men, all fair, and no spot was in
him, neither in nature nor practice. We cannot be so, but yet we must part with
our spots, and come so near as mortality will suffer us.

2. Of obedience; both Active, he was willing and free in all his obedience, it
was his meat and drink to do his Fathers will, and to fulfill all
righteousness; so we must aim at perfection, set all the Law before us, and
in all obedience offer free will offerings. And Passive, meekly, contentedly,
and patiently enduring the greatest wrongs and evils for his sake, as he did
for ours.

II. What is meant by this blood?

Ans. The whole sacrifice of Christ, which includes his whole obedience,
especially his death, with all the antecedents and consequents; his whole
passion, visible and invisible, in soul and body; none was in vain; for this
is an ordinary figurative speech in Scripture, that the whole obedience of
Christ is ser down by a part; no part of which may be divulsed or rent from
other, seeing he obeyed in suffering, and suffered in obeying.

III. How do the Saints overcome by his blood?

Answ. It seems to be an allusion to the Israelites, who being sprinkled with
the blood of the Lamb, escaped the revenging Angel, as also the revenging
Egyptians, and by that blood (a type of this) overcame them all; even so this
blood of this Lamb is the victory of all the Israel of God:

1. In regard of acquisition and merit: Christ's blood is the Wellhead, and
full spring of all benefits to the Church: The Fountain flowing out of the
side of Christ, is the fountain of all favor flowing unto us, and
consequently of our victory.

2. In regard of donation; in that it actually works a perfect reconciliation
between God and us, and stops all enemies mouths that were open against
us; in which sense it is called the blood of atonement.

3. In regard of obsignation; in that it seals all the Covenant of grace;
called therefore the blood of the Covenant; because it ratifieth unto us the
cancelling of that handwriting of the old Covenant, which we had transgressed,
and wiping off all old scores and debts, it confirms our entrance into the new
Covenant of grace.

4. In regard of application, by the instrument of faith, which is our victory
whereby we overcome the world, and our shield by which we vanquish Satan.

Quest. How can faith be our victory?

Answ. Not for the worthiness of it (which is at best weak and feeble) but,

First, by entering us into the Covenant of God, espousing and marrying us unto
Christ: for faith only makes Christ ours, and all his victory.

Secondly, by drawing virtue from Christ, as the branch suckes from the root:
for we having no power of our own, faith fetches power from Christ, and
draws down strength from him, and such strength as the gates of hell cannot
prevail against.

Thirdly, by receiving as an hand, all from God and Christ, especially the
promise of the Spirit, the presence of the Spirit, and graces of the Spirit,
which makes the Christian invincible. For greater is he that is in the
Believer, then the spirit that is in the World.

Object.But can one be strong and victorious by another strength and victory?

Answ, No, but faith makes Christ a man's own, and Christ and the Christian are
no more twain, but one flesh. Root and branches make but one tree, foundation
and building but one house, head and members but one body. So as Christ being
his own, his strength is his own strength, his victory his own victory.

The Christian then, on whose heart this blood is Use 1.
sprinkled, is in good case. This victorious blood, both foyles all enemies for
us, and answers all objections for us.

The former appears by induction of eight enemies.

The chief is the devil: but he is spoiled by this blood of the cross: see
Col. 2. 15. and Heb. 2. 14.

The next is sin: but this Lamb of God has taken away the sins of the world.
Ioh. 1. 29.

Thirdly, the curse of the law follows sin at the heels: but this Lamb,
shedding his blood, was made a curse for us, to redeem us. Gal. 3. 13.

Fourthly, death seized on us in the day we sinned: but this blood of the Lamb
is the death of death, who is swallowed into victory. Hos. 13. 14.

Fifthly, the wrath of God pursues sin infinitely: but here is a
propitiatory, sprinkled with blood; and as the propitiatory did cover the Arc,
in which the law was laid, so Christ our propitiatory hides the law from the
eyes of Gods justice, and stilleth the accusing clamor of it against us,
freeing us both from the rigor, and malediction of it.

The sixth enemy is sting of conscience, and restlesnesse: but this blood
raseth the handwriting there also, both pacifying it in sealing remission of
sins through his blood. Col. 1. 14. as also purging it from dead works. 9.
14.

The seventh is enmity of the creatures, which all take their Lords part
against us: but this blood reconcileth all things, Col. 1. 20. saves from
revenging Angels, Heb. 11. 28. changes Lions into Lambs, seals the
covenant, not only between the Creator and us, but the creature also.

The last enemy is hell and hellish sorrows: but this blood has shut hell,
and opened heaven. Our high Priest has carried his own blood into the holy
place, and there pleads for us better things then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.
24. It has merited, and now prepares us entrance, and mansions in the Holy of
Holies.

Next, this blood answers all objections; so as by this blood the members must
overcome all enemies, as the head did,

1 The world gives many a blow and thrust against godly men: But be of good
comfort, this Lamb has overcome the world.

2 In sense of the grievousnesse of sin: this blood is more efficacious then
the blood of bulls and goats, to pacify wrath. Heb. 9. 13.

3 Oh but my heart is infinitely hard and rebellious.

Answ. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, by pardoning and
purging it.

4 Oh, but I lie open to the adversary, and am prone to sin and fall away.

Answ. The destroyer had no power over those houses that were marked with the
blood of the Lamb: and this blood has more safety and protection.

5 But my own conscience follows me with live and cry.

Answ. This blood in earth cancelled all bonds, and now in Heaven speaks
better things then Abels.

Secondly, the Saints overcome, but in overcomming Use 2,
must be humble, being in themselves weak and unequal to such a battle; and
must conquer by the blood of him that loved us, Romans 8. 35. Here we are taught
to disclayme all merits and strength of our own. By nothing but by faith in
this blood can we prevail. 1 Ioh. 5. 5. Who is he that overcomes, but he that
believes?

Thirdly, Christians so overcome, as all the glory Use 3.
must be the Lambs. We must give the honor of victory to the Lamb, and say,
Th^^ art worthy, for thou wast killed, Revel. 3. 9. No man nor Angel must
share in the glory of this victory; they never fought this battle for us: they
never shed blood for us. Woe unto them that ascribe any part of this victory to
any but the Lamb, who paid so dear a blood for it. Let Papists consider it,
who ascribe the victory to merits, satisfactions, pardons, etc. It is said in
Revel. 14. 11. The smoke of their torment shall ascend continually, who
worship the beast, or receive his mark.

Fourthly, highly value this blood. Nothing in the world can conquer the least
enemy, or sin, but this Use 4.
blood; which only is of infinite price. If all the seed of Adam had shed
their blood for sin, yet had no enemy been conquered, no sin satisfied.
This blood is opposed to all corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1.
18. This is the treasure of the Church, to which all things else are dross and
dung. Phil. 3. 8. Never did they know the price and power of this blood, that
will eeke it with the merits, or passions of Saints, Martyrs, Traitors. Highly
do all they sin against this blood, that despise the grace of the covenant in
the blessed means of it: or the word of grace, which is the book sprinkled
with this blood, Heb. 9 19. or the people of God, the remnant of grace, bought
and sprinkled with this blood. As also fearfully do they tread this blood
under foot, who lie in their unbelief and obstinate impenitency: and they that
by swearing, by blood and wounds, by the death and passion of Christ, cause
this blood to cry for vengeance against their souls more loud then the blood
of Abel. And time comes, when this blood of Christ so despised and trampled,
shall lie heavy on such men's consciences.

Fifthly, did our Lord by resisting unto blood for us obtain victory? we must
also get victory by resisting Use 5.
unto blood, Heb. 12. 4. striving against sin, and looking unto the author
and finisher of our faith. He without sin resisted sin unto blood, and
shall not we, who are pressed with sin, in way of thankfulness resist unto
blood, seeing our resistance and suffering tends daily, to the weakening and
consuming of sin in us.

And by the word of their testimony.] Now we come to the secondarie and
isntrumental causes of the victory of the Saints; the former of which is the
word of their testimony. This word is the faith and doctrine of the Gospel
concerning salvation by Jesus Christ. Where are two questions.

1 Why is it called the word of their testimony, seeing it is called the word
of the testimony of Jesus verse. 17. and chap. 1. 2. the Testimony of Jesus
Christ.

Answ. It is both in diverse respects.

1 If we respect the author, it is the testimony of Jesus, whose all truth is:
or if we respect the matter, or subject of which it treats, Christ is the
matter to whom all the Gospel testifies.

But 2. if we respect the subject in which, it is also the testimony of the
Saints: not because it is the word of man, but because it is witnessed unto by
men: for God does so far honor his Saints, as to admit them witnesses to his
truth.

2 How do the Saints testify to the Word, or Gospel?

Answ. Four ways.

1 By preaching, publishing, and declaring Christ to be the Messiah and Savior
of the world: and this, either by word or writing. For the former: the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, or gift of teaching: so
preachers are called witnesses, Act. 1. 8. In the latter sense John calls
himself a witness, testifying these things, because he was the penman of
this prophecy concerning Jesus Christ to the Churches.

2 By profession and confession of Christ; declaring and witnessing with the
mouth, what he believes in his heart concerning Christ and salvation by him. 1 Timothy 6. 12. and have professed a good profession before many witnesses.

3 By holy life and conversation; expressing the virtues of Christ, and the
power of Christian religion: this is an actual witness.

4 By passion and suffering Martyrdom; when they are ready to give testimony
to the truth of God with loss of their lives, and do so indeed when they are
called unto it. Revel. 2. 13. Antipas my faithful witness was slain.

The point is this: The Saints overcome all hellish Doctr.
powers, and adversaries of salvation, by the word of God. 1 Ioh. 2. 14. Ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked.

1 As Michael overcame, so must his army. But he overcame by the word, Mat. 4.
in all the temptations, Reas. 1.
though he might have oppressed and confounded the dragon with power; yet he
would, for our example, and to point us who want power, to a most powerful
weapon and means, overthrow him by the word.

2 The promise of God is a sure confirmation: 2
Prove. 4. 6. 8. uphold the word, and it will uphold thee: exalt wisdom, and
she shall exalt thee: for sake her not and she shall keep thee.

3 The word is of the nature of God, invincible, 3.
and whosoever abides in this word of truth, is stable and cannot be cast
down.

4 The parts of the word have their special 4
strength, and show us that the whole is a complete armor, or rather a
furnished armoury, to fetch thence all weapons for our fence and safety. For,

First, the Law chaseth us to Christ who is our strength, and is a rule of
life, and an hedge to bound us in the way of safety.

Secondly, the Gospel exhibiteth Christ a glorious conqueror, and works
faith in us, which is our victory. The promises make us more then conquerors,
in which we see the Lord fighting for us, and engaging himself to us for
victory. He has bound himself not to fail us, nor forsake us.

Thirdly, the precepts and explications of both furnish us with truth against
error, with counsel against false suggestions, with sound wisdom and
direction against all secret stratagems. Psalm. 119. By thy word I became wiser
then the counselors, or the ancients.

Fourthly, the examples store us with experience; and shows us where, and how
and why such and such were foiled, how they rose again, and how they held
their advantages, and achieved victory. They show, how by the skill and use of
the word they have wounded their enemies, and fortified themselves.

5 By induction of enemies we may see, that none 5.
of them all is able to stand before this two-edged sword of the Spirit
proceeding out of the mouth of Christ, Revel. 1. 16.

First, it is the smooth stone that prostrates Goliath, the wicked one: 1 Samuel
17. the Son of David made choice of no other weapon against the Devil.

Secondly, sin is foiled by it: Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy word in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee.

Thirdly, wicked men are slain by it, Esa. 11. 4.

Fourthly, Antichrist, that wicked one, is slain with the breath of his mouth.
2 These. 2. 8.

Fifthly, persecutions and afflictions thrust sore at us: but the word upholds
us, Psalm. 119. Had not thy word been my comfort, I had perished in my trouble.
And for inward affliction, if the combat be with God himself, the word at
length speaks to him that is weary.

Now if the Saints overcome by the word, then see Use 1.
the wickedness of Papists, who betray their people by disarming them, and
turning them naked among their enemies, and into satanicall temptations. For
they take away the word from them, and hold it heretical to have the
Scriptures in a known tongue. An high wickedness, against common sense: as if
they should say, you have a multitude of fierce, strong and subtle enemies
before you, and your danger is very great: now if you would drive away the
enemy, and come away conqueror, you must cast away your weapons, and lay aside
your armor, which is as un fit for you as Saul's armor was for David: but yet
for a show you may take with you some conjuring spells, or charms, some
terrible crosses, some holy relikes, or so me holy water; that is, leave your
sword and take a straw or rush in your hand; cast away your shield and take a
feather; leave Gods weapons, and take one out of the hand of the devil; shoot
in the devils own bow, and you shall do well enough. Oh how has the spirit of
madness and giddiness effectually prevayled, both upon such wicked seducers,
and such seely souls so unreasonably seduced, and left naked to the devil by
them!

2 We see hereby, that the only way to be safe, is, to get the word close nto
thee, nay into thee. It is Use 2.
no fence to thee, to have the word in the Church and Ministry only: no nor to
have it in thy book and bible at home: nor to have it in thy mouth and speech,
unless thou have it in thy heart, working thee to soundness and integrity, as
David, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. Prove. 2. 10. 11. When wisdom enters into thy heart, and
knowledge delights thy soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and
understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the evil way.

3 Note the reason why Satan prevails in the world, and tramples upon wicked
men, drawing Use 3.
them to all height of wickedness: namely, because they reject the word. If
we cast our eyes upon the most flagitious sinners, and the worst of evil men,
as blasphemers, swearers, drunkards, scoffers, atheists, contemners of the
Sabbath and the like; mark if they be not such as never care for the book of
God in private, and but for fashion for the word preached: the word is
rejected, and the devil has them where he would.

Who be they whom Antichrist prevails against, to make them his slaves and
vassalls, to receive his mark in their hands and foreheads to destruction, but
such as hate the word and Scriptures, as a felon does a gibbet? and such as are
ignorant sotts, fit for their knowledge to make Jews or Turks as well as
Papists. The Fawkner knows he can better rule his hawk on Tassell, when he has
hooded him, so do Papish Fawkners, Priests and Jesuits, and therefore keep
their people in the dark.

Who art thou, now converted, that see not how while thou wast in thy
natural course, and could swear, and lie, and game, and scorn, and do
whatsoever was naught, as thy company was, that then thou caredst not for the
word, nor the Scriptures and counsels of God? A Play had more taste then a
good Sermon: and therefore the devil carried all, and ruled thee at his will.
And what adoo had thou before thou could settle thy self to the constant
reading and hearing of the word? from which could Satan with all his power and
policy have kept thee, thou had never meddled with them: for he knows how
easily a Champion trained in wars may overcome and bind a blind man. And
till thou medledst with them, thou never conqueredst one sin or lust, much
less the body of them.

4. Note the reason why Satan and Antichrist are Use. 4.
such enemies to the Word and Scriptures of God; namely, because it is the
hammer of his kingdom, and the means of the Saints victory against them. They
know well, that nothing can conquer error but the truth, and nothing can chase
away darkness, but light: And their own experience, by Gods blessing upon the
means, at this day tells them, how sound doctrine has and does win ground
and victory over their Antichrist, whose armed Princes cannot long support him
against it. Truth is strongest, and shall prevail.

Marvel not that our Country-Papists hate to death sound and faithful
Preachers, while they can endure well enough frothy and loose doctrine; they
have reason, they feel these by the sound application of the Word shaking
their tottering kingdom; so do not the other: Marvel not if they malign and
scorn zealous Professors; but formal Protestants, that hover as meteors in
their religion, they brook well enough; for those hold out the word of life
and light, which is the ensign of victory, over them; so do not the other.

5. Seeing the Word is so powerful a means of Use 5.
victory, let it be the word of our Testimony; and let us learn to give
testimony to it.

First, in word and profession; speak boldly for the truth, and that in the
day, and where thou may be heard; not as Nicodemus, in the night.

Secondly, in holy life and conversation; see it be a counterpaine of holy
doctrine.

Thirdly, in passion and suffering for it whatsoever awaites so holy a doctrine.

Consider hereunto,

1. Christ himself was a faithful witness of the truth; shall not the
servant stand where the Lord stands?

2. The end of every Christians coming into the world must be the same with
the end of Christ coming into it; but that was to bear witness unto the
truth, Ioh. 18. 37.

3. Consider the dignity of truth, it is Gods own; therefore the Apostle was
not ashamed of it. And the truth of God is the Pillar and stud of the world, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Not to uphold this Pillar, is to let the world fall to confusion.

4. The impudency of men against the truth; Esa. 3. 9. they are not ashamed to
invent and abet lies, and open injustice against the Word and bringers of it;
and are we ashamed to testify to the truth?

5. Christ will confess such hereafter, as confess him here, Mat. 10. 32. but
will be ashamed of them that are now ashamed of him; when the unbeleevers and
fearful shall be cast into the lake, Rev. 21. 8.

6. It is the honorable office of the Spirit of God; John 15. 26. He shall
testify of me, and ye shall witness also.

And they loved not their lives to the death. This is the second isntrumental
or adjuvant cause of the conquest of the Saints, namely, their constancy, and
valorous Martyrdom: Where to open the meaning, we have many questions to
resolve.

Quest.

1. Whether may not a Christian lawfully love his life?

Answ. The love of a man's life must be considered,

1. Simply. 2. Comparatively.
In the former respect it is simply lawful for a man to love his life; for,

First, it is a natural instinct which God has put in all creatures for their
own preservation; and it is an unnatural sin for a man to sin against his
own life.

Secondly, the law of God which binds us not to kill our selves or others,
binds us also to preserve our lives, and the lives of others: And the same law
that binds us to preserve the life of our enemies beast, binds us much more
to preserve our own lives.

Thirdly, in the Gospel the Apostle says, No man ever hated his own flesh,
but nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians. 5. 29. and even the body is a member of
Christ, and a temple of the Holy Ghost.

But in comparison it is not lawful, as, to love a man's life more than God, or
the truth of God, or above Christ, and the faith and religion of Christ, to
love the natural life and means of it above the spiritual and heavenly; this
is sinful; for,

First, we must buy the truth, but not sell it at any rate; all the lives of
men and Angels are not to be valued with God and his truth.

Secondly, the wise merchant sels all for the Pearl, that is, for Christ and
his Gospel, and goes away rejoicing.

Thirdly, in this comparison, not to hate father and mother, and wife, and
Children, yea, and his own life, is, to renounce Christ, Luke 14. 26. but this
hatred is not single, but comparative and respective: In which comparison our
Savior says, He that saves his life loses it, and he that loses it
saves it; as he that spares his seed loses it, and he that sows it saves
it: And thus are the words here to be meant; that the Saints preferred the
faith and truth of Christ before their own lives, and loved death more than
their lives, when by it they could more glorify Christ: For so the word (...),
is put for (...), that is, they fleighted, contemned, yea, despised their
lives, and rather exposed them to hazard and loss, then to be removed from
their holy profession. Thus are they said not to love their lives, that love
Christ and his truth more.

Quest. 2. Can none overcome but Martyrs, and those that die for Christ?

Ans. Many that give not their lives for Christ, overcome and conquer; for God
calls not all to that honor and service of Martyrdom; but even in such as
give not their lives to the death for Christ, must be three things.

First, preparation and disposition; they must be ready to give their lives
for Christ, if he please to call them to it; as those that prize Christ and
his grace above their lives, and, in way of thanfulnesse to him that gave his
life for them, do sacrifice theirs to him.

Secondly, affection; of which our Text speaks, They loved not their lives to
the death: The love of their lives must be subordinate under Christ. This will
follow the former; where Christ is prized, he will beeloved; and victory which
always implies not the action of Martyrdom, implies ever the affection,
rather to die than deny the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, expectation; to be Martyrs in action as well as in affection, if the
Lord please so to employ us, Romans 8. 35. All day long are we counted as sheep
for the slaughter.

Where these three are, the Lord who esteems of men not by events, but
affection and the ready mind, accounts of them as Martyrs; as Aquila and
Priscilla are said to lay down their necks for Christ, Romans 16. 4. their
readiness is reckoned for the deed.

Quest. 3,

It seems then a man may not fly in persecution: May he?

Answ. Yes, some flight in persecution is lawful, For:

First, Christ himself allows his Disciples to flee, Mat. 10. 23. If they
persecute you in one City, flee into another.

Secondly, we have good examples; of Patriarchs, Jacob fled from Esau, Moses
out of Egypt, Elias from Iezabel, David from Saul: of Apostles, Paul escaped
from Damascus, being let down through the town wall by night in a basket,
Act. 9. 25. Nay our Lord himself sundry times withdrew himself, and escaped
out of his enemies hands. A Lamb naturally flies the fierceness of the wolf:
and the lambs of Christ may fly from men of fierce and woolvish disposition.

But the cases when a man may fly, are worthy the consideration,

As first, if authority send him into banishment, as John into Patmos.

Secondly, if the persecution be present, not feared, or a far off, and
personal, against that special person; that person may for the heat of
persecution depart for a time, with purpose to return to his office again,
when the fire is quenched,

Thirdly, when hope is cut off, it is apparent, that our presence can do no
great good or service there where the persecution is raised; a man may reserve
himself somewhere else, for the presentand after use of the Church.

Fourthly, if upon examination a man find himself not sufficiently armed
against the temptation, and that he wants gifts, strength, and courage for such
a trial, he may step aside, till he can gain the^ of God: for as the Lord
lays nothing upon his servants above their strength, so they must not
undertake any thing above their power, if they will not tempt God,

Fifthly, if God open a door, and make way for our safety, that without
scandal, or violence, or public wrong we may avoid: when we see lawful
means offered to help our selves; then not to fly may be a tempting of God.

Now the cases which make it unlawful to fly in persecution: are,

1 When a man is so bound by his calling, as he cannot step aside without the
hazard of Gods glory, and detriment of the Church. And therefore Magistrates
and Ministers must see they have a special loose from their callings, ere they
fly: all the Saints must seek the Kingdom of Christ before all things: if it
make to that, to fly, a man may fly: if that may be a greater ga^er, to abide
by it, then he must stay.

2 If a man fly with intent to avoid his calling, general or special. Christ
would allow his disciples to fly from wolves and danger, but not from office:
Mat. 10. 24. they may fly, but so as they must disperse the Gospel to other
Cities. The flight of the faithful, is the seminary of the Church and Kingdom
of Christ: not to make the truth a loser, but a gainer.

3 When a man aims principally at saving himself; as when Gods glory, the
good of the Church, and the victory of the truth are small things to him in
respect of his own safety: whereas no man must fly, but with resolution rather
to suffer then deny God, if the time be come.

4 When a man is in hands, and God has shut all doors of escape: now the time
is come, he is called to suffer: the Apostles being in prison would not break
prison by force, which is to resist Magistracy; but when the Ange'l opened the
doors and made them way, they thankfully accepted the providence of God for
their safety. Our Lord Jesus, who often fled because his hour was not come,
when his hour was come, fled not,

5 When a man has received the Spirit of strength and fortitude, he may not
fly to avoid the trial: Act 20. 22. I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem,
knowing that nothing but bands abide me every where.

Object. But to fly out of flesh and fear is forbidden in 1 Pet. 3. 14.

Answ. 1 Some flight may proceed from other warrantable causes, as namely to
fly idolatry, to go where means of religion and the pure worship of God is,
to enjoy means of salvation, and glorify God elsewhere. Therefore all is not
caused of fear.

2 All fear is not unlawful, but only inordinate fear: no more is al
flying, but inordinate. The sin then is not in the flying it self, but in the
inordinate and distrustful manner.

Object. To fly is to deny Christ.

Answ. No: but to fly in the right conditions, is,

1 A secret profession of Christ, a denial of a man's self, a leaving of wife,
children, goods, country, and dear things for Christ, and an undergoing a
great deal of trouble for him.

2 As confession is open or secret, so Martyrdom is bloody or unbloody; this
confession is an unbloody martyrdom, and no true Martyr is a denyer of Christ.

Quest, 4. But how can the Saints overcome by Martyrdom and passion, which
apparently overcomes and destroys them.

Answ. This is strange, and in bodily battles unco^ceivable: but in this
spiritual war and fight it cannot be but that they most overcome when they
are most overcome. When did Christ most overcome, but when he was most
overcome, and where made he his greatest conquest, but on the cross?

The reasons are:

1 The nature of the Christian war is diverse from other war. In other fields
the enemy is without, here the strongest enemy is within: there the enemy is
another person from the soldier, here the enemy is the same person with the
Christian soldier: and therefore then is the field won, when themselves are
most overcome: the Christian soldier has more adoo to conquer himself, then
all his enemies beside, and is then the greatest conqueror.

2 The maine battle of the enemies without is not against the bodies and
outward estates of men, but against their souls and their eternal state of
happiness. And in this they never conquer so apparently, as when their bodies
are most conquered. Rom 8. 36. We are all day as sheep for the slaughter but
yet more then conquerors. Then persecutors hasten the Saints to happiness,
when they most conquer their bodies.

3 The persecutors quarrel is not so much against their persons, as against
their cause, even the truth it self, where in they are sure to carry victory
whatsoever become of their persons: for they are well appointed to answer all
arguments: which are of two sorts. First, such as are drawn from reason,
reading, learning, or the like. All these arguments of humane persuasions, and
forces out of subtilty and wit, they overthrow by the word of their testimony;
the sword, by which the two witnesses conquer. Another sort of arguments is
drawn from the block, such as fire, sword, persecution, inquisition,
interdiction, excommunication, abjuration, etc. All these fierce and furious
arguments they overcome with tears, prayers, patience and Martyrdom. And even
in the death of their persons are most glorious conquerors in their cause: in
their deepest sorrows they rejoice and glory, as in an happy triumph,
clapping their hands and singing Psalms in the Flames, yea sometime professing
the fire to be as a bed of Down or roses: so as they are conquerors of their
Adversaries, when they most conquer and destroy them.

4 The persecutors lay their great ordinance and battery against their graces
rather tha^ their persons: which are so far from being overcome by external
violence, that when their persons are most down, their graces are most
victorious and invincible, even in the eyes of the enemies themselves: for,

1 Can they seaver them from the truth, and faith of the Gospel? no, they will
not live without it, but will dye that it may live: they will water the furrows
of it with their dearest blood, rather then it should not grow they will rake
it out of the fire, into which the enemies cast it.

2 Can they sunder them from the love of God and Christ, as they intend by
torment? No, they see their love stronger then death: all the waters in the
sea, nor all their seas os sorrows and deadly torments cannot quench it.

3 Can they cast them out of the favor of God, and possession of happiness,
as by their degradations, excommunications, anathemaes, and great curses they
desire? No, but the Lord is apparently with them in six troubles and in
seven, in the fire and in the water, and never leaves them till they be with
him in his immediate presence chamber, as wheat laid up for ever in his garner.

4 Can they overcome their patience, fortitude, or constancy? No, but by the
undaunted resolution of the Saints in their torments, the minds of the
persecutors themselves seem rather overcome then the Martyrs that suffer them.
Even Iulians fury was conquered by the patience of the Martyrs. Roman Tyrants
in the first ten persecutions were even tired with the steadfastness of the
Saints in suffering.

Thus are they in their weakness most strong: as dying, but behold they live:
afflicted on every side, 2 Cor. 12. 10. and 6. 9. and 4. 8.
but not overcome This is the privilege of their estate, of their cause, of
their graces, that they are never less overcome, then when they seem most
overcome: and as the text says, they most gloriously overcome when they love
not their lives to the death.

The point of doctrine from these words thus expounded Doctr.
is this:

Godly men must contemn their lives, and not love them to the death, in
respect of Christ and his truth. Luke 14. 26. He that hates not his own life,
cannot be my disciple, that is, he that is not ready to bring his life in his
hand, and offer it up in sacrifice when my cause and the Gospels calls for
it, cannot be a good Christian. Act. 20. 24. Afflictions and bands abide me
every where; but I pass not, neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may
finish my course with joy. Heb. 12. 4. Ye have not yet resisted unto blood: as
if he had said, Howsoever ye have endured a great fight in afflictions, while
ye were made a gazingstocke to the world, and while ye were companions to them
that were tossed too and fro, Chap. 10. 32. yet ye are not come so far as
you must make account of in the profession of Christianity; because ye have
not resisted unto blood: Revel. 2. 20. Be thou faith full unto the death, and
I will give thee a Crown of life.

1 Because of Christ's merit and desert; he loved Reas. 1.
not his life to death for us, nay he was earnest to die for us, Luke 12. 50.
I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I grieved till it be ended!
how then should our thankfulness bind us to give up if we had a thousand
lives for him? shall the just sufter for the unjust, and shall not the unjust
hold himself bound to suffer for the just?

2 The worth of truth binds on all Christians this 2
duty, to despise their lives for the truths sake: for the truth of the
Gospel is far more worthy than all that we can give in exchange for it. God
has magnified it above all things, Psalm. 138. 2. The Son of God magnified it
above his own life; it cost him dear, he bought it with his life and precious
blood. Ioh. 18. 37.
The Saints of God (the cloud of witnesses, He. 12. 1.) were prodigal of their
blood, and would, and did spend it till the last drop, rather then by any
torments they would be removed from the truth and faith of the Gospel: and we
are enjoined to buy the Prove. 23. 23.
truth at any rate, even with our blood, (if God call us to it) but not to sell
it for any thing in the world.

3 Our near relation unto Christ binds us not to 3.
love our lives to death for his sake: For,

1 We are his redeemed ones; we are not our own, but bought with the price
of his blood, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and therefore we must glorify him in our souls
and bodies, whose we are.

2 We are his soldiers, pressed under his colors; and if a soldier sell his
life every day for a base pay, how much more ought the Christian soldier in a
far more honorable war, esteem his life at a small rate, in the cause and
quarrel of his General? and if a soldier must stand in the place his
General sets him in, and must not remove though he dye for it, how much more
ought we, being called to stand fast in the faith of the Gospel, keep our
ground, unremoved from our holy profession, though it be by the loss of our
lives. Thus then must a Christian soldier animate his own resolution; Shall
any fouldier more fear or more love his Commander, than I my Michael, my
Christ? shall I more fear a Tyrant threatening death and torments, then my Lord
requiring my faithfulness and constancy? does a man of valor fear the
dishonor and shame of a cowardly flight above torment and terror of present
death, and should such a man as I fly, who prefer in true judgment an
honorable and happy death above a thousand base and disgraceful lives?

3 We are not only soldiers, but household servants unto Jesus Christ, and
therefore must show all good faith fullness to our God, Tit. 2. 10. And herein
a faithful servant is differenced from a slothful, a sincere Christian from
an hypocrite: the hypocrite may be a great Professor, and call Christ Lord,
Lord, and in the peace of the Gospel will say with Peter, Master, I will dye
with thee before I will deny thee; but if Christ be in hands, and called into
question, the voyee of a Maid will make him turn his copy: But it is proper
to the Elect to stand fast, and to hold that he has, and maintain against
all challengers to the death, the profession of truth committed unto his trust.

4. We are yet nearer, even members of Christ; and the member naturally lifts
up it self, and will lose it self to bear off a blow from the head; and it
does but the duty: And much more ought it to be so in the mystic all body,
wherein the union is far more strait then in the natural.

4 Our service to our fellow members puts us in mind of this duty, which we
owe much more to 4
our head. If for the edificatien of the Church we are bound willingly to lay
down our lives, much more for the glory of our Head. Phil. 2. 17. Paul was
glad to be offered upon the sacrifice and service of the Churches faith; even
so every good shepherd, after the example of Christ, should be ready to give
up his life for his sheep. The salvation of souls, and confirmation of faith
must be dearer to us than our ownelives: Col. 2. 24. Irejoyce in my
afflictions, and fulfill the sufferings of Christ in my flesh for his bodies
sake. The Apostle rejoiced in suffering for the body of Christ, not for the
redemption, reconciliation, or expiation of sin, (for so only Christ the
Head suffered for the body) but for the profit and edification of the members:
And if thus the Apostle sustain all things for the Elect, that they may
obtain salvation, much more must we sustain all things for the glory and
honor of our Head. If Priscilla and Aquila shrunk not to lay down their
necks for Paul, how much more cheerfully must every private Christian for
Christ? Romans 16. 4.

This shows, that Christianity is no soft and easy Use I.
life: Is it easy to take up the Cross daily, and to wear a crown of
thorns continually? is it easy to leave all for Christ? is it easy to be
killed al day long for his sake, that is, always to be ready to endure death it
self for our profession? Is it an easy thing to carry always about with us
the dyings of the Lord Jesus, and the marks and brands of our profession? Which
I speak not to discourage any that look toward the ways of God; but to
admonish all that undertake Christianity, to make account of the costs and
expenses of their profession, left they deceive themselves in their reckoning;
for it may cost thee the sweetest thing which God has given thee in earth,
even thy life. It is in our nature to conceive, with the Disciples in the
infancy of their faith, to make our selves great gainers in earthly privileges
by Christ, as they dreamed of great earthly honor, glory, plenty, and ease,
and the largest share of worldly happiness, by following him; in the mean
time they thought not of the troubles, persecutions, bands, stripes, leading
whither they would not, and cruel Martyrdom which they met withal afterward.
But was the life of Christ himself led at ease? or shall the servant look for
ease where the Master cannot expect or meet it? was the end of Christ's coming
to bring peace and security, or fire and sword, war and enmity, not only
between strangers and enemies, but between nearest kindred and dearest
friend? Mat. 10. 34. What other was the promise and prediction of Christ, but
that in the world we must have affliction? John. 16. 33. and that by my many
tribulations we must enter into heaven? Act. 14. 22. And therefore, whosoever
thou art that soundly professest the Gospel, shift off the sufferings of the
Gospel as long as thou can; or if God hold them off a while, left
discouraged in thy first entrance into the profession, thou should look
back to the former thraldom, yet be sure to meet with the Cross of Christ,
and afflictions for the Gospel, ere thou be a Conqueror and gettest
possession of Canaan. If thou be in a fair way of ease and credit among
men, suspect and mistrust thou art wrong; and if thy way be rough, thorny, and
strewed with crosses, be not discouraged, for so must the way of heaven be:
here be right marks of the right way.

2 This teaches us that many dainty Professors of Use 2,
the Gospel are far from soundness in Christianity. Here is a note of
soundness, not to love the life to the death for Christ and Christian
profession: And this will cast out a number of our Protestants, who only have
a name they live, but are dead, and like Ciphers in Arithmetique, fill up a
number, but themselves are not in number or any value; as,

1 Such as value their reputation above Christ and his profession in sincerity:
To come to Church and hear, and receive the Sacrament sometimes, and make a
formal profession, none will blame them; it were disgraceful to be Atheists,
unprofitable to be Papists, or Recusants: But to be a forward man in
religion, or noted for preciseness, or a favorer of such, to be seen or heard
to stand for Gods glory, or good causes and men, with zeal and courage, oh
beware, this will draw on reproach and scorn of men, oh I am undone if ever I
hear that voice but from a Damsel, Thou art one of them: Now is thy name
dearer unto thee than the name and profession of Christ: May thounot love
thy life in this comparison with Christ, and do thou prefer a little blast
of vain men before him? never think thou can give thy life to death for
Christ; thou may like heaven well, but yet love earth before it.

2 Such as will be at no loss nor cost for Christ and his Gospel, are far
from soundness: A base sin of base minded men, who say, they will have the
wealth of heaven by Christ, but for Christ or any good cause of Christ, for the
upholding of his Word and Gospel, will not diminish a grain of their wealth.
Be there not many in this place that will cast away more at one cast at Bowls,
or dice, than they will part with to the servant of God, that labors with them
in word and doctrine all the year long? Be there not many of our chief men,
and most able, that do not hold Christ in this exercise worth a brass
farthing for many years together? Assure thy self thou will never part with
thy life for Christ, who wilt not part with thy penny for his sake and
profession.

3 Such as will not part with any sin for Christ, nor his Word, but against
the voice of Christ retain envy, malice, injustice, Sabbath-breaking, deceit
in trading, swearing, gaming, reviling Gods servants; nothing is reformed by
the Word. Will thou suffer thy body to be slain for Christ, when thou will not
suffer one sin to die, or be slain at his Word, and for his glory?

4 Those that will not endure the pains of godliness, the tediousness of
mortification, the labor of love, the diligence required in Christian duties,
are far from this practice. Can thou endure to go to prison for Christ,
that wilt not be at pains to go to Church to meet him? Can thou endure the
pains of death for Christ, whose sluggishnesse denies the pains of obedience
to his Commandments? He that will not disease himself in active obedience,
will much less in passive.

3 If we must not love our lives to death for Christ, then we must change the
corrupt love of our selves Use 3.
to the sound love of Christ and his truth: This sound love of Christ flows
from the love of Christ unto us, and is but a reflection of his own beam upon
himself; and therefore of the nature of his love to us, which seeing it was to
the death for us, it calls for our love to the death for him.

Quest. How may I know that I have sound love of Christ, which is like to hold
out to the death?

Ans. The love that is unquenchable, stronger than death, ( Cant. 8. 6.) may
be known by four excellent properties.

1. It casts out self-love, love of the world, and all desirable things of it,
in comparison. The woman at the Well, having met with Christ, forgets her
water-pot: Zacheus his love will express it self in despising and thrusting
off the world, as fast as ever he pulled it in: the use of the World will stand
with the love of Christ, but not the love of it.

2. It looks wholly out of himself upon Christ, and sees in Christ three
things which it desires above life.

First, the favor of Christ, which is better than life, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

Secondly, the glory of Christ, which it wishes rather than this life, yea
rather than the other. Paul for the honor of Christ could wish to be cut off
from Christ, if it were possible.

Thirdly, the presence of Christ; this makes a good man wish with Paul, that
he were dissolved to be with Christ, Phil. 1.

3. It rejoices in nothing but in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. No
soldier can so glory in his scars and wounds, sustained for his Prince and
country, as he does in his chains and sufferings for Christ: All the glory
and happiness of the world is but dung and dross in comparison of it.

4. It will be busy in meanest and hardest services for Christ. Mary will
kiss the feet of Christ, and wipe them with her hairs, and refuses not the
hardest services: Jacobs love to Rachel makes seven years of hard Apprentiship
and service but as a few days: and Peter's love will show it self in being
clearfully led where he would not, John 21. 18.

4. Labor for this Christian resolution, rather to Use 4.
dye than deny our Lord: it being our duty, we must aim at it, and being
difficult we must get good arguments and helps to undertake it.

Quest.How may we further our selves in this so difficult a resolution?

Ans.

1. By meditations. 2. By practices.
The meditations are sundry.

1. Consider seriously of such Scriptures as foretell persecutions for the name
of Christ, all which 1.
make the suffering of the Cross inevitable; set a star over such
predictions, and hold thy mind upon the^, as things concerning thy self, if
thou mind to live godly in Christ Jesus: and with the predictions ponder the
examples of those, who have in this fight valiantly endured loss of goods, of
lands, of liberty, and life it self for Christ and his Gospel: And when thou
see the Prophets, Apostles, faithful Pastors, and Martyrs wracked, hewn a
sunder, slain with the sword, and would not be delivered, ( Heb. 11. 35.)
will thou save thy self with base and dishonorable conditions which they
refused?

2. If thou look up to God, consider, that all thy passion and suffering,
both for the time, persons, measure, 2.
manner and all circumstances, is appointed by Gods eternal decree, without
whose special appointment not an hair of the head can fall, and much less
the head it self: For the lives of the Saints are not in the hands of Tyrants,
but in the hands of God; neither is their death casual and accidental, but
determinate: Psalm. 116. 15. Precions in his eyes is the death of all his
Saints. Now as thou prayest daily, that Gods will may be done, so must thou
practice; and, if the will of God be so, that thou suffer, let thy will
concur with his will which is just and righteous, 1 Pet. 3. 17.

3. If thou look upon Christ, here is no want of 3
motives to suffer extreme things in his cause and quarrel.

First, consider, our sufferings are called the sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor. 1.
5. the affliction of Christ, Col. 1. 24. the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. the
reproach of Christ, Hebrews. 13. 13. the rebuke of Christ, Heb. 11. 26.

The reason is, because Christ is he for whom we suffer, and we are his
Martyrs and witnesses.

2. Because Christ suffers in us, whatsoever is done to one of the little
ones, believing in him, is done to him; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

3. Because Christ suffers with us, and in all our troubles is troubled, Esa.
63. 9. as the head of the natural body suffers with every member, by consent.

4. And because our sufferings conform us to Christ; fellowship in his
afflictions makes us conformable in his death, Phil, 3. 10.

Now who would refuse to be a Simon, to help Christ to carry his cross,
seeing Christ is at the other end, and a partner in suffering?

Secondly, to give up our lives for Christ, is an honest duty of thankfulness
to Christ our benefactor: A grateful part it is to stick to him in trouble,
whom we have followed in prosperity: For shall I be such a Swallow in my
profession, as to take my summer with Christ, and not the winter? Beside, how
is it but most just, that we should maintain his cause to the death, who
maintained our cause to the death? and to stick to him now before men, who by
his death does now plead our cause before God?

4. Consider the suffering it self, and in it we have great encouragements;
in that it is, 4.


First, an honorable and glorious service to suffer for righteousness: Paul
will glory in nothing but in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6. 14. and rejoices in
nothing so much as his chain: And indeed the chains and irons of the Martyrs
are far more shining Martyrs sunt clariores and honora^iores Ecclesiae
cives. Aug. 10. de Civit. Dei, cap. 21.
Ornaments than all the golden chains of the world.

Is it not more glory for a stout champion and man of Arms to be in a battle
than in a Bath? The marks and scarres of a soldier, received and sustained in
his Princes and countries cause, are his true glory; and so are wounds,
stripes, bands, imprisonment, or Persecutiones Christi animum nobiliorem po^ius
quam debiliorem reddunt. Nazian.
any suffering for the profession of the truth.

Secondly, it is a safe and saving service; for it has many assured and
precious promises, whereof the LORD will be faithful for performance; as
namely of wisdom to answer, Matthew. 10. 19. patience to endure, the Spirit of
glory, and GOD to rest on them for comfort, 1 Peter 4. 14. strength to conquer,
and in every temptation a gracious issue, 1 Cor. 10 13.

And lastly, a measure of mercy upheaped and running over, Matthew. 5. 10, 11.
Great is your reward in heaven.

Beside, it is the only way to save the life, thus to lose it; as the way for
Abraham to keep his son, was, to offer him to GOD when he called for him;
so the only way to save the life, is, to give it to GOD, and to offer it unto
CHRIST, and for CHRIST, whenever he pleases to call for it: For as he that
spares his seed, loses it, but he that sowes, saves it, and finds it
returned with advantage in the harvest; so he that saves his life loses it,
(says our SAVIOR) and he that loses it on this condition, saves it.

Thirdly, it is the only gainefull service to thy self above all other. Thy
body thou give to his mercy, who might command it to punishment. Thou
offerest it weak and sinful, to receive it sinlesse and glorious. Thou give
it for a while to dishonor and abasement, to receive it for ever glorified.
Thou walk here a while in black, that thou may ever walk in white
hereafter. Thou suffer a short pain, but gainest joys long and weighty, 2
Cor. 4. 18. A bitter breakfast (said our Martyr) but a better dinner. In a
word, what is there but clear gain in exchanging a miserable life for a
moment, into an eternal happiness which eye never saw nor heart of man can
think? As there is no loss in serving God, so much less in suffering for
Christ. Be faithful to the death, thou shall have a crown of life, there is
gain enough.

5 Look at the enemies, they are no way so much 5.
disappointed as when a godly man loves not his life unto death, but willingly
forgoeth it for the name and profession of Christ. For whereas they intend
nothing but evil (as Joseph's brethren) God turns all to good, yea to the
best, as appears in these instances.

1 They hope to bring Gods people to a very few, Vitis illa tanto pullulat
amplius, quanto uberiore Martyrum sanguine rigatur. Aug. de catechis. Rud. c. 23
and work wisely to keep them under, as Pharaoh. But how are they
disappointed? for the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church: the more
they are oppressed, the more they increase. This camomile, the more it is
trodden under the feet of tyrants, the more it spreads, rooteth, and
increases. This palm tree cannot be so oppressed with the weight of bloody
decrees, but it shall more apparently rise up from under it.

2 They hope and intend to bring infamy and ignominy on their names for ever,
by devising the most opprobrious and exquisite torments for them. But how are
they disappointed? for as sweet drugs, stamped and pounded, cast the sweetest
smell, so the Saints pounded in the mortar of affliction: sweet incense is
never so sweet, as cast into the fire: so is it here.

3 They intend nothing but their death, the chief of all evils which they can
inflict: but are disappointed: for they suddenly deliver them from all evils,
of sin and punishment, and send them speedily to the fruition of their chief
good, which is, God himself and all the pleasures at his right hand. While
they devise to kill them, they do but cure them. While they think to banish
them out of the earth, they call them out of their banishment. Pharaoh by
tyranny will chase Israel out of his land, but it is but to thrust them on to
their Canaan. They intend by their furious fires to burn and consume Gods
golden vessels: but they shall only purge them from their dross. The
heaviest flayle of affliction shall but cleanse and sunder Gods wheat from the
chafe. Never were the three children so glorious, as in the midst of the
furnace: never was the tyrant so pusled, so confounded, so conquered.

From the Meditations come to the Practices, which may help us in this great
resolution and performance.

1 Labor daily in subduing and mortifying corrupt lusts. Get daily power to
dye to all sin: else can thou never dye in the quarrel of grace. And of
all lusts beware of three, which are strongest lets.

First, self-love; he that cannot deny himself, can never take up the
cross. Self-love makes a man's life so sweet and dear unto him, as he cannot
abide to hear of heaven it self in exchange: so that he that has not power
to deny himself, let him be never so wise, learned, civil, yea or religious,
he will at last dishonor God by backesliding and denial of Christ.

Secondly, love of the world, which will not harbor with love of Christ: this
easily makes him look back, whose hand is on the plough. Demas forsook the
truth to embrace the world. And if thou do not master this lust, though thou
were as near Christ as Judas, thou will turn from him, yea against him.

Thirdly, pride and applause of men: which will never endure the shame of the
cross. To batter down this high turret, the Apostle ( Heb. 12. 2.) bids us
look on Jesus who endured the cross and despised the shame. He not only
sustained, but sanctified to us the mockings and contradictions of sinners.

2 Another practice is, to labor for sound judgeme^t in matters of faith. This
only produces a threefold action, which must necessarily go before undaunted
profession.

First, a sound apprehension firmly and distinctly to believe the truth of
religion, For we must first believe with the heart, and then confess with the
mouth, Romans 10. 9. 10. and 2 Cor. 4. 13. I believed, and therefore I spoke.

Secondly, from sound judgment issues an high estimation of Christ and his
truth above all the world, or life it self. All things are doung in comparison
of him, both in themselves, and in the judgment of a sound Christian. And as
the Lord himself has magnified truth above all things, so does sound judgment
framed to his.

Thirdly, from sound judgment issues a wise and advised resolution to hold the
best fastest, and keep this whatsoever we let go for it; and not to shrink
from the truth for saving our life, no more then our Lord himself did. This
sound judgment will keep out a treacherous purpose of saving thy self by
betraying the truth, either by silence, policy, or open denial.

3 Another practice is, to get sound affections to Christ, and his truth;
especially two:

First, love, that is truths keeper; every Apostate knew the truth, but never
any loved it. And only love of Christ is stronger then death.

Secondly, sound joy; by which we are made not only contented, but joyful in
sufferings for Christ, which is indeed a matter of true rejoicing: Act. 5. 41
The disciples were glad, when they were counted worthy to suffer. 1 Pet. 4. 13.
Rejoice in that ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings. Hence the Martyrs in
the Primitive Church were so forward to offer their lives up to Christ, as the
woman of Edissa came running with her child in her arms into the fire, lest
the Christians should be burned ere she came, and not she with them: the like
of Blanditta, a peerless woman, of Accolus, a mirror of patience: so our own
Martyrs, who sang in the midst of the flames, and had more joy then their
torme^ters. This joy none can take away.

4 Because to lay down ones life is not the past of man's weakness, but of
Gods goodness, and to Animam ponere non est humanae infirmitatis, sed divine
bonitatis. Ambros. in Luc. 22.
suffer for Christ is a work above natural strength, and the holy Ghost only
can stablish men to this trial; we must not presume of our own strength as
Peter, but pray for the mighty power of the Spirit, to make us of weak,
strong, and that he who has given us to believe, would also give us to suffer,
and strengthen us to all patience with joyfulnesse, Col. 1. 10. Phil. 1. 29.
Consider that none have more cowardly lost the field, then those that presumed
most of their strength and valor at home. Go out of thy self, and pray that
by his strength thou may be able to all things.

Verse 12. Therefore rejoice ye Heavens and ye that dwell in them Woe to the
inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto
you, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.
AFter the victory achieved over the dragon, and the due praises both of
Michael the General, and of his band and army, sung out in the former
triumphant song, now in this verse is described a twofold fruit of the former
benefit.

1 The joy of the Saints, therefore rejoice ye heavens and ye that dwell in
them.

2 The sorrow and extreme grief of the wicked, called the inhabitants of the
earth, and sea, in opposition to the former: with the reason of their sorrow,
For the devil is come down, etc.

For the joy of the Saints; it is invited by an Apostrophe, or conversion to
them: in which are two things.

1 The cause or reason of their joy, in the word of inference, therefore:

2 The titles of those that are called to rejoice, ye heavens and ye that dwell
in them.

The cause of their joy is in the word, therefore: because the Church, both in
the Head and members has got so happy a victory over the dragon; therefore
they are to rejoice.

Note hence, that godly men triumph after victory, not before. Israel
triumphs when Goliath is Doctr.
slain and lies dead. 1 Cor, 15. ult. Thanks be 1 Samuel 17. 52.
unto God who has given us victory. Revel, 7. 14. Who be they that say Amen,
Praise, glory, wisdom, thanks, honor, power and might unto our God for
evermore, but those that are come out of great tribulation?

1 Christ our Lord triumphed after his victory, Reaf. 1.
Col. 2. 15. He made a show, and triumphed over the principalities and powers,
when he had spoiled them. This was for our example.

2 The nature of a triumph is ever after victory, and before is as unwise as
unseasonable. For the event 2
of war is uncertain, and falls sometime on this side, and sometime on that.
And therefore the counsel of the King of Israel to Benhadud (assuring himself
of victory, from the multitude of his army, which was so numerous that the dust
of Samaria was not enough to give every one of his followers an handful) was
grounded on wise policy, 1 King. 20. 11. Let not him that girdeth on his
armor, boast as he that puts it off.

3 All the true triumph of Saints is grounded in 3.
Christ's victory soundly applied to themselves. No flesh must rejoice in it
self, that according as it is written, He that rejoices let him rejoice in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 31.

Which serves to thrust down all carnal and ungrounded Use.
triumph, and boasting before the victory: as,

First, Many formal Protestants defy the devil, have a strong faith, and
ever believed, and it were pity he should live that doubts of his salvation,
and of all men they are surest to be saved. But here is a foolish triumph
before victory: all this while they come not in Christ's victory or strength:
they mean well, and deal justly with men, are sober, civil, chaste, not
adulterers, drunkards, thieves: they come to Church, and hear the Prayers and
Sermons, and yet are none of these forward and precise fellows. But all this
while the enemy has the^ fast enough, and is well pleased they should so
delude themselves. For they are without faith, which should be their victory
over the world, without repentance and mortification, which should be their
victory over their sins and lusts, without sound fruits of faith, the only
ensigns of victorious conquerors.

Secondly, Papists, glory and triumph, but before victory: for,

1 Final victory stands with Christ, not Antichrist.

2 Sound victory is founded in the victory of Jesus Christ, and not in
prevailing against Christ and his Kingdom, as all theirs is.

3 Sound victory glories first in truths victory, and not in treading down
the truth, and Professors of it, as theirs does.

4 True victory gloryeth in the lawful, just, and Christian means of
obtaining it. But how overcome they? In their fight against spiritual enemies,
they will overcome by their good deeds, and merits, by their own holy water,
holy relickes, holy crosses, by buying Masses, pardons, trentalls, and
indulgences, by round sums to avoid Purgatory, and the like. Here be
conquerors: whose safety and salvation lies in despair. For, whom have they
enemies in all this, but God and his truth? such conquerors as Saul and his
armor-bearer, who dyed on their own weapons. And for their temporal enemies,
by what means carry they victory, but by stabbing, throat-cutting, burning,
Massacres, powder-plots, perjurie, treasons? Is this to be victors, to be
superiors, in fury, fierceness, slaughters, and effusion of Christian blood?
Let Papists thus conquer, and glory in their shame: the more such victories
they carry, less cause have they to triumph, unless they triumph justly in
making themselves and their religion the shame and infamy of the whole world.

2 The persons that are called to rejoice, are the heavens and they that dwell
in them. By the heavens we understand not the heavens or any of them literally
or naturally; nor by the inhabitants, the Saints and Angels dwelling in the
third heaven (though even these have a share in the general joy of the Church
militant. For as the cause of this joy properly belongs to the Church
militant, as we have heard, so the word of inference therefore, calls on
them as whom it most concerns to rejoice in their own happiness. By the
heavens and those that dwell in them are meant the Church on earth and the
Saints and Believers, the members of it; which is not usually in this Chapter,
nor in this book, chap. 18. 20. O heavens rejoice over her: where the company
of the godly in earth are called to rejoice in the destruction of Antichrist
and his Kingdom.

Now to the former reasons elsewhere, why the Church militant is called by the
name of heaven, we will add these:

1 Because there is not a more lively resemblance of heaven in the world, then
the universal company of Saints in the militant Church here upon earth: as
might appear in many things. The inhabitants of the Church here below dwell
together in an holy communion of Saints, enjoying the presence of God, separate
from the world and the wicked inhabitants of it, knit among themselves by the
inward band of the Spirit, and the outward means of association, the word,
sacraments, prayer, and other more private helps: in which heavenly society
they resemble that immediate and perfect fellowship which they expect in
heaven, both between God and his people, and mutually among themselves.

2 Because of the high estate and condition of the Saints on earth above others
uncalled: who are advanced beyond them, as the heaven is higher then the earth.
For hence the dragon in this verse is said to be cast down into the earth,
where he was before, but into a far lower condition.

3 Because the Saints by holy profession and godly conversation testify the
glory of God, as the heavens do, Psalm. 19. 1. and therefore as their house and
inheritance is there, so are their cogitations and conversation.

4 They have a taste of heaven, and beginning of heavenly joy and gladness, for
the victory and salvation which in part they have already obtained by Christ
against enemies, spiritual and temporal; which is pointed at in this text.
For as in heaven is a perfect and unmixed joy for a full deliverance, and
perfect salvation, so here is a taste and resemblance for a deliverance in part.

None are called to rejoice in Scripture, but only Doct.
godly men, who are said here to dwell in heaven. Psalm. 32. 11. Be glad ye
righteous: and Psalm. 40. 16. Let them that seek the Lord, rejoice. Now by joy
I mean not any natural joy, arising from things pleasing to nature, which
wicked men and reprobates, yea the beasts have in abundance: but that heavenly
and spiritual joy, which is called the joy of the Spirit; both because it is
wrought by the Spirit of God, and also has spiritual and heavenly things for
the object of it: as,

1 The joy of reconciliation with God, and remission of sins.

2 Joy of heavenly graces, faith, love, etc. called joy of faith, Phil. 1. 25.

3 Joy of heavenly glory held in certain hope: this is called joy unspeakable
and glorious. 1 Pet. 1 8. and joy of salvation. Psalm. 51. 12. This joy is
limited in Scripture to the faithful, and therefore is called the joy of Gods
people: and all other are barred out from it, Prove. 14. 10. The stranger
enters not into Psalm. 106. 5.
his joy.

1 The godly are only qualified persons, and fitted Reas. 1.
for holy rejoicing. For,

First, they only have Christ, who merited this joy, and therefore it is
called His joy, Ioh. 15. 11.

2 They only have the Spirit, the immediate worker and preserver of sound joy:
whence it is called a fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5. 22. and the oil of joy,
because it flows from that anointing. Psalm. 45.

Romans 15. 13.




3 They only have faith, which is not of all men: and therefore they only
have joy of believing, having with Christ gotten all things: they have
purchased the field, and go away rejoicing. Simeon rejoiced when his faith had
got Christ into his arms.

4 They only are such as mourn, and only such are called to joy, Mat. 5. 4.
It arises out of sound sorrow, and a broken heart, as the Lute is tuned to
sweet music by wresting the strings as if we would break them to pieces.

5 They only have attained victory in part over enemies, and are delivered
from the dragons power. As Israel having escaped the sea, and mountains, and
Egyptians, so the Israel of God being set free from hell, sin, sinners, and
the curse of sin, have just cause of joy and gladness, and all but they want
it.

6 They only are in heavenly state and condition, and have taste of the joys
of heaven, which differ not in kind from those they expect in heaven, but only
in degree.

2 Wicked men are never bidden to rejoice, nor 2.
are capable of this joy. He never enters into it, nor it into him: for,

First, he is at war with God, a stranger to the covenant, without Christ,
without the Spirit: What joy where is no life? what joy can man dead in sin
have, separate from Christ the fountain of life, and wanting the quickening
Spirit?

Secondly, what joy can he have, on whom sentence of condemnation is passed,
and he going on to execution? If such a man laugh. every one will think he
has little cause: It is a laughter in the face, not in the heart.

Thirdly, what true joy can he have, who neither has the Well, nor can abide
the Bucket, by which he should draw out of the Wels of salvation and
consolation? Esa. 12. 3. Gods Word which only has the joyful tidings of
salvation, he has no part in; it is a bill of indicteme^t to him. The
Sacraments to him are Seals set to blankes, seal nothing to him: His prayers
are abominable; he has no joy in any service; all the duties of his calling
are sin to him: He rejoices indeed in the creatures of God, but as a thief
in a true man's purse, and that joy which arises out of the creature, perishes
with it.

Fourthly, wicked men need not be bidden rejoice; for,

1. What hinders or pincheth such? his sin troubles him not, it is his
delight: Temptations of the devil vex him not, he runs out to meet the
Tempter: His conscience troubles him not, that is brawned up: The world vexes
him not, but dandles him as her darling.

2. They are surfetted already with carnal joy, and are called from such joy
to mourning and howling, Iam, 5. 1. and Luke 6. 25.

Note hereby what a miserable estate a wicked man is in, who cannot find one
syllable in all the Use 1.
Scripture to ground any comfort in, and so has no warrant, nor cause to
rejoice in any thing: For God has covenanted nothing but woe and wrath, with
them: Esa. 65. 13. My servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed: my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
howl for vexation of spirit.

Consider a little.

1 What good thing is there in heaven or earth, good as in it self, so to thee
that art an impenitent person? Look at God the chief good, he is thine
enemy, a consuming fire: what joy has stubble and chafe in the fire? Look
at Christ, the Savior of his body, and he is thy Judge, and he whom thou have
pierced. In stead of the sweet Comforter thou have the spirit of bondage and
fear: a sound of fear is ever in thine ears Job. 15. 21. Look on thy self,
thou art a man in the devils fetters, ruled at his will: and within thee a
wicked conscience, either following thee with hue and cries, vexing and
accusing thee, or else dead and benumbed, which has given thee over to all
sin, to swallow it with senslesnesse and greediness. Look without thee,
thou swimmest in a stream of outward contents and fullness, and herein thou
reioycest too much: but thou have thy portion here, and to the impure all is
unclean, thy table, meat, drink, wife, children, all are a snare to thee, all
upheapeth thy sin and vengeance; thou have nothing out of Gods love, because
thou have nothing in the Son of his love. Look beyond thy self and the
present? what have thou to joy in? what hope has the wicked in death, when God
takes away his soul? A few mooveables God sends thee away with, but the
inheritance is reserved for the sons of the freewoman.

2 As thou have no cause of joy, so thou have no hold of thy joy, who have
grounded it in perishing things; Well says Job, the rejoicing of wicked men is
but for a moment, because the best of it is in momentany things: the rich man
in riches, the wise man in wisdom, and some sots in the boasting of wisdom as
if wisdom were to dye with them; many in their callings, and every carnal man
has some carnal joy to feed his heart with: but all of it shall not lift thee
an inch above earth, here thou find it and leavest it, here it rises and
here it rests, as it rises no higher so it reaches no higher.

3 If thou have no warrant for thy joy in lawful things, what warrant or
answer have thou for thy joy in unlawful things? if thou have no reason to joy
in natural things, what will be the issue of thy sinful joy? of thy joy in
iniquity, which chaseth God and his Spirit away? Solomon says, the fool
makes a pastime and merriment of sin, Prove. 14. 9. when men excessively
rejoice in sports and games, some in swearing, drinking, unclean and filthy
speeches, some in cursed and blasphemous language, some in wantonness and
whoring: this is the devils mirth and music, and the joy of hellish spirits.
All this joy in the works of the flesh is sure to end in sorrow, and every
dram of it to be repayed with a talent of woe. The same of such as rejoice in
revenging, quarrelling, treading underfoot, and oppressing their brethren:
every sheafe must bow to theirs, and every man's will must fall down before
theirs, be they never so unjust, else there is no living near them. The like
of those that rejoice in railing, reproaching and disgracing Gods children, and
the profession of holy religion. Here are a rabble of reioycers, who cannot
rejoice but when God is farthest off, out of sight and out of mind, none can
be liker to Satan, then in this sin of rejoicing in evil: their only joy is,
to go merrily to hell.

2 This quite overthrowes the conceit of carnal Use 2.
men, who hold the state of godly and religious men the most uncomfortable, and
that they must bid all mirth and joy and pleasure of their lives farewell, if
once they look toward religion. But we see no other have any cause of true
joy, but they, none in the Scripture called to rejoice but they, none but they
are in league and friendship with God, none but they have assurance of pardon
of sin and deliverance by Christ, none else know their names written in heaven,
none else have peace of conscience which is a continual feast, none else have
part in the glory of the Sons of God. Yet carnal men think they want joy
and comfort: Why?

1 Because they cannot now rejoice in carnal things, as before: wordly joy is
now unsavorie to them in respect of spiritual.

2 Because themselves cannot enter into their joy.

3 God brings it ordinarily out of sorrow.

4 Wicked men do all they can to disquiet them, and chase away their joy.

5 They see not how the joy of Christ and worldly grief can stand together.
But as far are they deceived, as if a blind man should say, there is no
sun or shine, because he sees it not, or because the sun is clouded,
therefore it is not in the heavens. No: there is nothing but joy in godly life,
and most joy in the greatest afflictions of it. If there be any sorrow, it is
because they cannot be godly enough. And all that sorrow is mixed and concluded
with joy. Have any such cause of joy, as inhabitants of heaven?

3 This teaches all the godly to be sure that all their joy savor of heaven,
and be such as beseems Use 3.
the inhabitants of heaven, and such as never entered into a carnal heart.

Quest. How may I know it so to be?

Answ. When it resembles the joys of heaven: namely in these things.

1 As their persons, so their joys are quite taken from earth and earthly
things: they never more joy in momentany things of this life; but in eternal
and unvaluable excellencies: So our joys resemble heaven, when they are lifted
up above earth: when they are remooved from the worthless trifles of earth,
and are set on solid joys of heaven. 2 As their joy is suitable to their place
and condition, so must ours. 1 They are in heavenly places, so we are risen
with Christ and set in heavenly places with him; and should our joy be in
earthly drudgery, and not seeking things above? How uncomely were it for a
Princes son for some base hire to spend his time in serving hogs, or to
scullion in a kitchen, or run upon errands at the command of every slave? and
is it not much more base for sons of God, heirs of heaven, and co-heires
with Christ, to run and go at the base beck and call of sin, and Satan,
and worldlings, slaves to the world, forgetting the privileges to which they
are borne.

Those heavenly inhabitants, being so high in place, judge these things small:
the earth is contemned, and as small to them as the point of a pin. And, could
we get up our minds aloft, and fix them in heaven, we would think the
greatest things on earth as small as mites, and motes of the sun, unworthy of
our joy.

2 Those heavenly inhabitsnts, with perfection of place having attained
perfection of estate, have a clear judgment to discern and choose their joys,
and to judge them only worth having. Even so must we labor to get our
judgment cleared, to prefer the joys of that fruitful Canaan before those
of this desert and barren wilderness. What is it but want of judgment and
experience, that makes children affect childish trifles before matters of worth
and moment, to prefer an apple before a Lordship, a top and scurge before
their patrimony? which they laugh at in themselves, when they come to a riper
understanding. And what is it but want or weakness of judgment, for men
professing godliness not to put away such childish things? How would i^
beseem a man of years to ride upon a stick, as when he was a child, or to
make clayhouses as children do? If a man should see a great fellow delight in
such toys, he would think that either he is out of his wits, or was never in
them. Even so for men in the Church, that should be past children, to remain
babes in affections, and follow inferior trifles, with neglect of the manly
business of heaven, is foolish and ridiculous.

All which is said, to help our joys to be heavenly, beseeming our state and
condition, which they cannot be if they be earthly.

2 See thy joy be heavenly in the rise and ground of it: so is theirs. And then
is it so:

First, if it be from the Lord, as the author and fountain of it, and taken up
in those pipes which himself appoints, See thou have it by hearing the
joyful voice of the Gospel: Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness.
It must come by hearing. Wait then on the word, both for the obtaining and
increase of it. The Scriptures are the wells of consolation, whence it must be
drawn The wise men rejoiced exceedingly in the star which led them to
Christ: the word is this star, a wise Christian will rejoice in it.

Secondly, if it be a receipt from Christ. The inhabitants of heaven above have
no joy but from Christ, and in Christ. No part in Christ, no part in this joy.
See it be thy Masters joy: Then is it so, when it is a Mat. 25. 21.
fruit of justification; Romans 5. 11. We rejoice in God through Jesus Christ,
by whom we have received atonement: They rejoice that they enjoy Christ by
sight, we that we enjoy him by faith; they that they are married unto him, we
that we are contracted; both happy, that we both enjoy him, and that he is
all in all: With this only difference, that our Masters joy is entered into us,
and they are entered into it; we comprehend, they are comprehended.

3. If thou would have thy joy resemble the joys of heaven, the matter of
it must be heavenly as theirs is: The maine matter of heavenly joy respects
three objects:

First, God. Secondly, the communion of Saints. Thirdly, their own happy
estate.
I. The inhabitants of heaven place their chief joy in the Chief Good; partly
in his presence, wherein is their fullness of joy; and partly in his glory,
which is shining and set up; partly in the perfect prosperity of the Saints,
and partly in the utter confusion of all enemies: Even so the Inhabitants of
heaven upon earth must have for the object of their joy, God in himself, and
God in Christ Jesus, which is eternal life: For, Whom have I in heaven but
thee, or whom on earth in comparison of thee? Psalm 73. 25. Were it not for the
presence of God and Christ, earth, yea heaven it self were an hell; and as God
is the chief good, so his glory is the chief aim and joy of the Saints in
earth: We must rejoice when we see his glory set up, when the Church enioyes
prosperity, when Christ's Scepter is lifted up, and the Gospel has free
passage. David preferred Jerusalem before his chief joy, Psalm. 137. 6. and
rejoiced when men said, Let us go up to the house of God, Ps. 122. 1. so also
when the dragon is cast down, as here, when the enemies fall before Michael;
we must rejoice when Antichrist and Popery is disappoynted, their Captains
foiled, their armies mastered; Exodus 18. 9. Iethro rejoiced at all the good
which God did for Israel, in overthrowing the enemies: This is joy like the joy
of heaven:

II. Another object of heavenly joy next unto God, is, the communion of Saints:
Their joy is perfect in their perfect charity, and in the perfect fruition of
one another perfections; so must we, all our delight must be in the Saints
that excel in virtue, Psa. 16. 3. Moses would choose to suffer adversity with
the people of God, rather then enjoy treasures. How should we joy in the gifts
and graces of every one, and account our selves as happy in them as in our own
measure? so do they. But they are far from heaven, who envy, fret, slander,
or obscure the graces of God in his children, etc.

III. The third object of heavenly joy is the happy estate of the Saints: which
happiness consists in the absence of all evil, and the presence of all good.

Heavenly Inhabitants are perfectly freed from all evil, so are the Saints in
earth; with this difference, we from the destruction, they from molestation;
For,

First, they sin no more, and if Saints now sin, it is not they, but sin
in them, Psalm. 119. 3. surely they work no iniquity.

Secondly, they are beyond the curse of sin; so are we, for Christ was made
a curse for us: They are without cross, we without curse.

Thirdly, they can dye no more, but are passed from death to life; even so we
are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. Christ is the
death of our death, the sting is gone.

Fourthly, they are beyond the reach of all enemies; those enemies whom their
eyes hay seen, they shall never see more: Even so are we; with this
difference, none can assault them, none can prevail against us.

Beside, there is the presence of all good things; the Saints above have no
good thing absent, so they that fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good,
Psa. 34. 9. But the chief good things wherein the Saints rejoice, are three.

1. The happy vision of God; and our chief joy here below is, to see God in
Christ Jesus, which is eternal life: They are happy to see his face, we happy,
as Moses, to see his back-parts; they are happy to see him face to face, we to
see him in a glass: They are happy, as Salomons servants, to see and stand
ever before him as household servants, we for the time happy to be as
retainers, wearing his cloth, and in his service somewhat f^rther off.

2. They joy in Gods blessed Image, to which they are wholly conformable: For,

First, the chief part of their joy is, to have their chief faculty, which
is their understanding, to be satisfied with the chiefest objects; for they
know all things that the glorified creatures are capable of: Even so the joy of
Saints is, that scales of ignorance are fallen from their eyes, and that we
see the same face of GOD, though as in a glass, and we know all things that
new creatures are capable of, and we know the same things in our measure as
they do: For our knowledge here differs not in kind from that, but in degree.
For God and Christ is the same we now see, as then we shall see, as the Sun
is the same under a cloud, or in a mist, as in a clear day, and our eyes the
same by which we see the Sun in infancy, which we see it with in man's
estate, but stronger now and more perfect: And as children hear of the same
King, State-matters, Emperors, Parliaments that men do, but understand them
not, but after a weak and imperfect knowledge; so we know now in our
childhood but in part, and afterward have the same understanding in further
growth and manly perfection.

Secondly an happy part of Gods Image is, that their wills are perfectly
conformable to Gods will, and confirmed to be unchangeable in willing what God
wills: Even so our joy and prayer must be, that Gods will may be done of our
selves and others; and our wills once renewed are unchangeable, because of Gods
confirmation of them in goodness: Oh what an heavenly joy were it, if so
perfectly Gods will might be done of us in earth as it is in heaven! And though
power often want to believers, to will is present.

Thirdly, Gods Image is happily apparent in their affections. The Saints in
heaven hate all sin and we hate that we do, Romans 7. They love God
perfectly, and Jesus Christ better than themselves; and so the Saints on earth
love not their lives to the death for Christ and his glory.

Fourthly, so perfect is Gods Image on them, that the inhabitants of that
heaven are without all spot and wrincle, that is, in full sanctification; and
it is the joy of Saints here, that the Church is all fair, and no spot is in
her, both in respect of inchoation, and acceptance.

3. Another chief good thing, the mover of their joy is, their happy
privileges with God; a taste and beginning of all which the Saints below have
to feed their joy: As,

1. They are in heaven, and Inhabitants of heaven; so are we.

2. They reign as Kings; are crowned, and have conquered as Kings; so we are
made Kings to God, Rev. 1. 6. are crowned, Re. 3. Let none take away thy
crown; and are conquerours, yea more than conquerours, Romans 8. A conqueror
may be conquered, but so cannot we: Only this, they are conquerours in their
Country, we in the way thither.

3. They are sons of God, and heirs of the Kingdom; so are we now the
sons of God; only they appear so to be, we not yet, 1 John 3. 1, 2.

4 They drink of the waters of the Well of life, and so do we; only they
drink at the Fountain and Wellhead, we at the streams somewhat below.

5. Their joys are perpetual, the Well is never drawn dry, it is a lasting
and everlasting joy from an everliving Fountain: No more shall the Saints in
this heaven ever lose their joys; My joy shall none take away from you.

Now have I propounded the joys fit for an Inhabitant of heaven What an happy
thing is it to be free of such a City! All other privileges are chafe to it,
all other joys bitterness to it.

Quest.May we not rejoice in any thing else?

Answ. 1. Godliness denies no lawful delights, but gives both allowance and
sweetness to them.

2. No joys are lawful but such as are moderated, guided and subjected to
these.

3. None but such as are received and used as pledges of these.

4. None but such as uphold these in the due measure of their goodness, and
uphold a proportional affection in us toward these. And,

5. Are referred unto these as our Chief joy, and only beseeming heaven upon
earth, and heaven above earth.

Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, etc.] Now follows the latter fruit of
the former victory, namely the most grievous plagues and evils inflicted upon
the wicked world. Where are three things:

1. The woe denounced.

2. The persons on whom, the inhabitants of the earth and sea.

3. The reason, for the devil is come down, etc.

Woe: It is a Particle in Scripture,

1. Of lamentation, Lamen. 5. 16. Woe unto us that we have sinned.

2. Of commination or threatening, and prediction of some woeful imminent evils
and events; so in this Text it threatens the judgment of God upon the wicked
world. In this use it threatens sometimes temporal judgments, Mat. 24. Woe
to them that give suck in that day: Sometimes eternal damnation, as to Judas,
Mat. 26 24. Woe to that man, it had been good for him that he had never been
borne: and sometimes spiritual plagues and judgments, the ordinary
forerunners of that, and so it does here: This Text therefore is like that
Volume spread before Ezekiel, Chap. 2. 10. which was written within and without,
and there was nothing written but lamentation, and mourning, and woe

Which compared with the former part of the verse teaches, that the Ministers
of God must as Doctr.
faithfully deliver the voices of woe, and legal threatenings out of the world,
as the voice of joy, and glad tidings of Evangelical promises and comforts.
Aarons sons in the Law must blow the Trumpets of the Lord; to siguifie unto
Evangelical Ministers, that they must sound an alarm against all Gods
enemies, and be at defiance against all sin; according to the Commandment,
Esa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice as a Trumpet, tell Israel
of his sin, and Judah of his transgression: And thus for our example did the
Prophets, Apostles, and the Lord of the holy Prophets, Jesus Christ. Eliah tells
Ahab to his face, that it is he that troubled Israel; Nathan tells David,
Thou art the man; John Baptist tells Herod, It is not lawful for thee to
have her; Act. 2. 24. It was you that crucified the Lord of glory: Acts 8. 22.
Repent of thy malice, and pray if the wickedness of thy heart may be forgiven
thee: Mat. 3. 7. O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to fiye from
the anger to come? Mat. 23. 13. Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for ye will not enter your selves, and ye shut the door against
others; Verse 33. Serpents, and generation of Vipers, how will ye fly the
damnation to come?

1. This is a part of the will of God, and it belongs Reas. 1.
to faithfulness to deliver the whole Counsel of God, and keep nothing
back. The Ambassador to a Prince must deliver his Masters mind, and
commission wholly, if he will expect the reward of fathfulnesse.

2. This is that part of the Word, which is the portion of the greatest part of
the world, and even of 2.
them that live within the visible Church: for no natural man, no impenitent
person, has any part in any other part of the Word: Pro. 26. 3. To the horse
belongs a whip, and a rod for the fools back: and as Iehu said to Iehorams
servant, What have thou to do with peace so long as the sins of Iezabel
remain? so what has any wicked man to do with peace of the Gospel, so long
as he is in his sins? We may not cast this childrens bread to dogs, nor
these precious pearls before Swine.

3. This is as necessary a part of the Word to salvation, 3
as any other, neither is there any part fruitful but by this. Can any man
hear of pardon that will not hear of his sin? Will any skillful Surgeon
apply healing Salve to a corrupt and festred wound, before he open and cleanse
it? And must we power oil into sound parts of men, yea, or into their wounds,
before we have powered in Wine to search them? No, were we to preach before
Kings, as Nathan, we must preach the Law before pardon. The Lord appearing to
Elias, there was first a mighty strong wind that rent the Rock, and then an
earthquake, and after that a terrible fire, and then came a still voice, in
which he was comfortable: Even so, when his Ministers by the tempest of the
Law have rent the rockie hearts of men, and made them at their wits ends, that
they come trembling and crying with the Iayler, Acts 16. Sirs, what may I do
to be saved? now is a fit season for the voice of peace, and the bindings of
the Gospel.

4. The whole Scripture does nothing but separate between light and da knesse,
between the Children 4
of the Kingdom, and the children of Hell: and so must the true handling and
application of it sever the precious from the vile. We must manifest it to be
Ier. 15. 19.

Mat. 3. 12.


the fan in the hand of Christ, severing the chafe from the wheat. And this
is as a wise steward, to give every man his portion

Here some objections must be removed.

Object. 1. We are under the Gospel, and freed from the Law, which is not
given to the just, 1 Timothy 1. 9. you need not be so stern and earnest

Ans. The most men that live under that Gospel, by secret hypocrisy or open
disobedience are under the curse of the Law, and wrapped in that great
condemnation, pronounced by Christ upon the world, that light is come, but men
love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil, John 3. 19.
But, suppose all that hear the Gospel were converted by the Gospel, were the
menaces and terrors of the Law needless to them? For though the malediction
and law is not to be urged against their persons, yet it is to be urged
against their remaining sins: and the best men may, by frequent meditation
and application of the curse of the law, be much furthered in godliness: For,

First, the best being sanctified but in part may sometime abuse the grace of
God to liberty in sin.

Secondly, the best need more humiliation, which is wrought by the Law.

Thirdly, the best may nodd, and need a wakening voice.

Fourthly, the best may fall, and need an help to rise.

Fifthly, the best may slack their pace, their love and zeal, need spurs to
prick and hasten them in their way: Now if the best need the law, what do the
worst?

Object. 2. You are preachers of the Gospel of peace, and must set forth the
peace, and grace, and mercy of God, and not be so tart and sour.

Ans. We are so, and must do so; but when, or to whom?

1. Shall we preach peace before men see the need of it, or before their
hearts be ever troubled for sin? or the grace and favor of God to a
graceless wretch that spurns against the grace of God? or mercy to him that
presumptuously sins, and adds drunkenness to thirst? May we say, that
God will fill vessels of wrath with mercy?

2. To whom shall we preach peace? to every graceless sinner that loves his
peace in his sins better then peace with God? Shall we preach peace unto such
as grow into open hostility with God? to such as blaspheme his name, his
servants, his graces? to such as upon pretenced malice wickedly spurn at Gods
Ministers, and slander the doctrine that is according to godliness? God
speaks no peace to these, nor may we from God: He can have no peace with God
till he war with his sins: And he must begin with the Law, that must
conclude with the Gospel of peace; He must be at peace with the Law, before
the Gospel be peace to him.

Object. 3. The servant of God must not strive, but exercise all meekness, and
patiently suster evil men, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.

Ans. A meek disposition is much set by of God in all; and of all men it is
most useful and graceful in a Minister: But,

1. Christian meekness is a meekness of wisdom, I am. ^. 13. and this
discerns both of cases and persons, to whom mecknesse must be showed; for all
sins are not alike; some are motes, some are beams, some are but as scratches,
some are deeper and larger wounds; some let out with the prick of apinne, some
not without the lance. In matters of greater moment, when Gods glory is
impaired, the happy proceedings of the Gospel stopped, or the salvation of men
greatly hindered, now is no place for meekness to sway. Moses that was the
meekest man upon earth, in case of Gods dishonor and making the Calfe, turns
his meekness into a severe revenge, broke the Tables, and slew three thousand
of his brethren the same day.

For persons: Meekness of wisdom discerns, that all sinners are not a suit;
some are weak, some wicked; some ignorant, some wilful; some are leaders,
some are led; some are freeborn, some of Hagars seed; some need the rod, some
the spirit of 1 Cor. 4. 21.
meekness; some must be saved with compassion, some with fear, Iud. 23.
some are won by meekness, some marred and lost: Our Savior Christ, who was
the mirror of meekness, and our pattern, of whom we must learn to be lowly
and meek (for he would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking
slaxe) yet he who never failed, or departed from the highest pitch of any
grace, being to deal with Scribes and Pharisees, who had corrupted the Law, and
sinned against their knowledge, and Mat. 23.
led others into sin, how loades he them with curses one in the neck of
another? And his Ministers sin not against meekness of wisdom, when in
cases where Gods glory is trodden down, man's salvation hindered, the devil
prevails, and sinners are impudent, they valiantly show themselves for God,
against all that rise against him.

2. No grace of God is contrary one to another; and therefore Christian
meekness neither abolisheth nor weakneth Christian zeal: And therefore
although meekness will always show it self to the persons, yet zeal will
ever burn against their sins. Zeal will not suffer under a pretense of
meekness, an irreligious and mute approbation or bearing of evil, but will
kindle and fasten upon it.

3. No part of Scripture is contrary to it self: Those Scriptures which
command us to show meekness to all, cross not those which command us to
reprove sharply or cuttingly; we must set an edge and point Tit. 1. 13. (...)
upon our reproves; nor those which bid us, Reprove plainly, and not suffer,
sin upon our brother: And Leu. 19. 17.
therefore meekness in a Minister must not stop him from sharp reproves
whereoccasion is, but must temper and order them: and excellent is the use of
meekness in plain and sharp reproving: For,

1. Meekness does so temper zeal, that it comes slowly, and as it were with a
leaden foot to sharp reproves, not rashly or hastily.

2. It makes it come orderly: It will first assay loving and gentle means
before it grow to roughness, especially if the parties be corrigible, and not
conceited, and impudent in their sin. Deuteronomy. 20. 10. when the Jews went out
to war, the Lord commanded them first to offer conditions of peace to that
City; and if it refused peace, then to besiege, smite and destroy it So we
first offer peace, and this refused, we proclaim war; first allure,
admonish, exhort, and then thunder, threaten, and terrify them that stand out.

3. Meekness mingleth charity with sharpest reproves; and as the Lord in his
sharpest reproves and messages seeks our good, so do his Ministers: Men cry
out, that Ministers are angry, when we deal sharply with a stubborn and
perverse people: and why may we not be so? he that commands us to be angry
and sin not, has made it a sin not to be sometimes angry. But we speak
Ephesians. 4.
not now of natural and personal anger, against persons; but a Christian and
holy indignation, which we must express against sin; treading in the steps
of our Lord and Master, Mark 3. 5. he looked about him angrily, but mourned
for the hardness of their hearts: So me knesse forbids us not anger against
men's sins, but injoynes us pity and compassion to their persons: We must
hate the works of the Nicolaitans, and be angry not so much against the men,
as their wilfulness and obstinacy.

4. Meekness seasoneth zeal and zealous reproves with Sugar, that is, some
manifestation that the sinner may see himself not hated when his sin is
sharply reproved; and moderateth it with a readiness of mind to heal the
sinner so soon as he sees his wound: It stints the number of stripes, as in
the law, that they exceed not. The Apostle was zealous against the incestuous
Corinthian, but so, that upon his sorrow he is careful to comfort him, lest
he be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Acts 2. 37, 38. when
they were pricked at their hearts, Peter comforts them; and Paul, the Jailer,
Acts 16. 31. And he that mournes and prays for his brothers sin, as Christ
over Jerusalem, and Moses for the Idolatrous Israelites, Exodus 32. will rejoice
in nothing more than such a one, won by the rebukes of the Word, and receive
him as joyfully as the father his lost son returning.

Well, if Ministers must be faithful in delivering Use 1.
the legal part of the Word, then those Ministers are reproved,

1. Who want breath to blow this Trumpet; dumb and unable persons, blind
guides and insufficient men, who in that place let in a fludgate of sin and
mischief amongst the people.

2. Such as are more able, but as unfaithful; they wink at sin, and will
not see it, or coldly reprove it, as afraid to blow the trumpet too loud for
waking the sinner: these are far from making sinners afraid of sin. Should
such a trumpet blow, and not make men fear? Amos 3. 6. Is not Gods word a
two-edged sword, to pierce the very heart of the sinner? and the hammer of God
to break the heart to pieces? and will this be done with dallying reproves,
as if men were at foynes? No, no; if the Minister can do it with
down-rightblowes, he shall find them little enough. Besides, is not sin
grown to a great height and impudency, as a disease come to the height of his
crisis? and is that curable with a gentle remedy? No, it is the blewnesse of
the wound that must purge most evils of this age, and the stripes within the
bowels of the belly, Prove. 20. 30. Add here to, that all sinners are not alike;
for as in a material house all stones are not alike, some are soft, and easily
hewed for the building, some are of an harder and flinty or marble disposition,
which require sharp tools, and strong blows to frame them to their place: so
in the house of God, some stones are more soft, sooner humbled and reformed,
but most are harder, as the Adamant, and easily yield not to the strokes of the
Word; lightly to smite these is but to hearten and harden them in sin.

3. Of all other the most mischievous are they in their places, that either out
of a careless and unconscionable coldness, or out of aim and desire to
please, or fear to displease, or out of purpose to get applause of being
peaceable men, or out of base covetousness flatter men in their sins, cloak
their known evils, and dissemble their vileness: All is well, so that it may
be well to themselves; all the praises of piety shall guild rotten posts for
base hire and reward: Oh the sin of these men is passing great, who encourage
and uphold men in their wickednesle, betray them into the hands of the devil,
drown them deeper in the pit of destruction, and set their feet on their
necks to keep them under from ever rising any more; whereas they should lend
an hand, and reach them the line of a faithful reproof to help them out.

2. This shows the corruption of many, who Use 2.
cannot abide to hear the threatenings of Gods word: Oh, our Preachers are so
tart and sour; they preach nothing but hell and damnation, and seek to bring
men into despair; they cannot abide these Bonarges, sons of thunder; they
would feign once change them with ^ome sweet-tongued Prophets and Zidkiahs that
will sew pillows under their arms, and by their flatteries cause them to err.
To these I answer:

1. He is far from reforming his sins, that will not abide them to be
reproved; and his heart shall never be pricked with godly sorrow, that will not
have his sins pricked with the sharp needle of the Law.

2. He is far from pardon of his sins, that will not hear of them: David
because he willingly hears of his sin, presently hears of pardon; but
Herod, because he will not hear John Baptist speak of his sin, never
hears of pardon.

3. A property of a good heart is, to delight in the Law of God in the inner
man, Romans 7. 22. and hold it a sweet benefit by it, that it still discovers the
secret evils, which must be repented of and reformed. The joy of a godly soul
is, to be anatomized by the Word, and searched. But he is a bankrout that
cannot abide his estate to be cast up.

4. It is a property of soundness to justify the Lord in all his sayings, as
David did, being reproved by Nathan of foul things, Psalm. 51. 4. A true humble
spirit, acquainted with repentance, will acknowledge, that no part of Gods Word
can be so sharply spoken, as justly. If God be sharp in reproving and
threatening, it will stoop and say, it is most just, I have matter enough in
me, and given cause enough, if he threaten me with a thousand hels and
damnations. When the Lord threatens Eli with the destruction of his house, (1 Samuel 3. 18.) he yields himself, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. When Esaias threatens Hezekiah with the like destruction of his house and
state, he yields, 2 Kings 20. 19. The Word of the Lord is good: He might
have been more severe and brought it in my days. Mat. 15. 27. Christ calls
the Cannanitish woman, dog: she justifies him in his saying, and says, Truth
Lord, I am no better, but give me some crummes of mercy. If legal doctrine
strike thee down in thy self, and send thee forth to seek mercy as she, here
is a note of soundness.

5 There is not a more certain note of a wicked man and hypocrite, then to
tax Gods word of too much severity. If God threaten Cain for killing Abel, oh
his punishment is greater then he can Micah. 2. 7.
bear: he could bear an heavier sin lightly, but the punishment and
threatening is too heavy. Let John Baptist reproove Herod for incest, the
reproof is too harsh and heavy, he shuts John up in prison. So Act. 7. 51.
Steven calls the Jews stiff-necked, uncircumcised, resisters of the holy
Ghost: whereas they should have justified the Lord in this reproof, they stop
their ears, gnash their teeth, and run upon him, and stone him.

Whosoever he be that hates plain dealing, means not plainly. He that cannot
abide to have his conscience touched, is surely festred and galled. Mark those
men that most resist the doctrine of the Law, you shall find them most
lawless, most graceless, most wicked men, for most part openly: if not, the
deepest dissemblers.

3 This shows their great sin, that contest against sound doctrine, and
refuse to hear it, out of malice Use 3.
or envy to the persons, but with a fine pretext: It is too personal, and such
a doctrine as does particularize men, as plain as by their names. But,

1 These men perhaps think we must speak to pillars and posts, not to
persons; or if to persons, to some persons in Utopia: but not to the sins and
necessities of our own hearers: and how do we then give every person his
portion?

2 Does any person come to hear: who has a dispensatio^ that God by his
servant must not meddle with his sins? or must we dispense the word in
respect of persons.

3 Does not particular reproof of particular offenders in many kinds stand
with the word of God? How was Nathan overseene to tell David he was the man,
and Eliah to Ahab, and John Baptist to Herod? Is it now so unsufferable a sin
to deal with personal sins?

4 How does the Lord set men's sins in order before them, but by the ministry
of the word? Psalm. 50. 21. How shall we teach the Church to avoid hurtful and
infectious persons, but by discovering them? How can Titus carry his doctrine
to make the opposites ashamed ( Tit. 2. 12.) if he may not meddle with their
personal sins? And many that care neither for Gods law nor Gospel, yet by
shame may be restrained, and stopped from their wickedness. Some are so
incorrigible and impudent in their sin, that they are fit to be branded and
discovered by the Churches severity, as in the course of justice desperate
malefactors are boared in the ear, or burnt in the hand.

5 If any man could teach us how to sunder persons from sins, that sins
might walk like ghosts without bodies, it might be we should offend no
persons, but all our shot should be levelled against sins. But seeing sin
is so close set to the persons, as they both make but one man, and men love
their sins as themselves, we cannot point at a sin but presently we are
blamed and distasted as pointing at the person.

6 Let all such know that the time comes when they shall say it had been
wiselier done to have forsaken their sin then the Ministry that checkes it,
and not as foolish children, who had rather keep a sore finger or foot then
abide the pain of opening and curing.

4 This is instruction to all hearers, to endure Use 4.
themselves patiently to be launced and pricked to the hearts by Gods Surgione,
as knowing that the hurt of the daughter of Gods people is not cured with sweet
words. Ier. 6. 14. The thunder and lightning more purifieth the air then the
warm sunshine. And that you may do this, get wisdom and grace to consider
these things,

1 That Ministry that works no smart, works no cure. A sound Ministry
divides between the marrow and the bone, yea between the soul, spirit, and
joints, Heb. 4. 12. Can this be done without smart? Oil heales not without
wine. There is no profit nor cure in skinning festers unsearched, and no search
without smart.

2 That we take no pleasure in your smart or judgment, but that without it you
cannot be cured, It is you that compel us to severity in our Ministry, while
you will hold your sins stiffly against the word, and resist the powerful
means of your own good. What should we do to be free from your blood, if we
find you proud, scoffers, churlish, earthly, profane, but directly repoove
these sins if we would not have them set on: our score? What our hire is, if
we see the sword come upon you and not give you warning, see in Ezekiel. 33. 7.
Nay, happy were it for us and you, if we might speak nothing but peace, so we
might discharge our duty: and if we proclayme woe you may help it, we cannot.

3 That whereas you would have us preach Gods mercies to you, in this legal
doctrine, what do we but declare his admirable mercy, who sends the sound of woe
before the sense of woe? he is not bound to give us so much warning.

4 That to speak of woe is not to cast men into woe, but to help them out of
it: for that is both the Lords intention, and the drift of us his Ministers,
who both are loath that men should be smitten unwarned, and till there be no
remedy.

5 That it were every man's happiness to see woe written in the face of every
sin, which else is sure to follow at heels inevitably. For sin and sorrow
are bound together inseparably, and there is never a sin but has woe written
on it, if not on the face, on the back. And therefore men should rather praise
God to be smitten by his word for prevention, or amendment, then suffered to go
on to unavoydable woe and perdition.

6 That the same Ministry which most casts down a sinner, is sanctified by
God to lift him up again. The same hand that launceth commonly heals. The
same Nathan that condemns David, absolveth him. Peter by sharp doctrine
pricks the Jews hearts, Act. 2. 37. the same Ministry and person reviveth
and comfort them. Paul casts down the Jailer, and presently rayseth him,
Act. 16. Christ himself calls the woman of Canaan a dog, but straightway
gives her desire. Stick to that Ministry that most sharply smites,
wounds, rebukes, that is the Ministry most likely sanctified by God to
heal and bind thee up, that Ministry has oil for thee as well as wine, if
thou stick constantly to it.

Woe to the inhabitants of the earth and sea.] Here we are to enquire the
persons on whom that heavy woe is denounced, to weet, the inhabitants of the
earth and sea. Which cannot be meant properly and literally: for,

First, these are the worke-man-ship of God, and excellent creatures:

Secondly, they are opposed to the heavens in the former words, which were not
taken literally and properly, but figuratively and metaphorically:

Thirdly, the godly who are bid to rejoice, dwell in them properly taken, as
well as the wicked, but they are exempted from this woe.

By inhabitants of the earth and sea are meant such persons and places as are
not accounted the true Church, but among whom the devil has power and bears
sway. For these inhabitants are opposed to dwellers in heaven, which are true
professors of Christ, members of the Church, and of an heavenly conversation.
Specially inhabitants of the earth are mere earthly men, favoring nothing of
heavenly things, whether they be heathens and Gentiles, or such as be in name
Christians, but indeed earthly Antichristians, who are the beast rising out of
the earth. And they are called inhabitants of the sea for their tumult, and
inco^stancy, casting up as the sea nothing but mire and dirt, and carried as
waves of the sea by every wind, Jude. 13.

But if any think the Evangelist aymeth more distinctly at some particulars, I
am not ignorant that some by earth understand the common multitude of wicked
persons, enemies unto Christ, and by sea the ecclesiastical men who have
corrupted the earth with bitter, brinish, and salt doctrine of errors and
humane traditions; and thus still oppose them. But I conceive a further drift
of the Spirit of God, well suiting to our whole exposition, and period of time
which this part of the Chapter aymeth at: That rather by earth are meant all
such nations and Kingdoms of earth, subjected to the spiritual whordomes of
the dragon, so called for their earthly profession, affection, and practice:
and by sea, the then Roman Empire it self, so called,

1 For the floods of impiety that issued from it, as the floods and rivers do
all from the sea: it was the head of wickednesses.

2 For the unbridled rage of it, and the unresistable power which was then the
great Ocean swelling over all banks. So as the sense seems to be, Woe to the
earth and all wicked nations that are enemies to the Church of God, but
especially woe to the sea, the great Empire, whose sins the dragon has
brought to a great height, so as the great mutation of that great estate is now
near, and the subversion of the Imperial and Cesariall power is at hand: For
now at this time so effectually did the dragon work in the delusions of
Antichrist, as that he whose coming was in all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, was shortly to swallow up the Imperial power, and so to take
him out of the way, which stood between him and his greatness, as was
formerly prophesied, 2 These. 2. and not long after accomplished.

When the Church is happy in the midst of persecutions, Doct.
wicked and earthly men are unhappy and miserable. So is it here: rejoice ye
heavens, but woe to the earth and sea. Eccles. 8. 12. 13. Though a sinner do
evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it
shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him: but it shall not
be well with the wicked. Esa. 3. 10. Say ye, it shall be well to the just, but
woe to the wicked, it shall not be so to him, it shall be evil to him, the reward
of his hands shall be given him. Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the upright man, and behold
the just, for the end of that man is peace: but the transgressors shall be
destroyed together.

One reason hereof is in the text. Satan, being cast Reas. 1.
out of the men of the Church, gets into the swine of the world, and carries
them into the lake, first of sin, and then of destruction. In their best estate
they are Satan's possession

2 It must be so by the perpetual rule of divine 2.
justice, who neither shuffles good and evil men together, as men do, nor
mistakes persons and actions. Among men there is a righteous man, to whom it
comes according to the work of the wicked, and the contrary. Eccles. 8. 14.
But the Lord judges with righteous judgment. Neither does he forget any of
their works. A wise man that delivers the City by his wisdom, may be
forgotten among men. Eccles. 9. 15. as Joseph was: but the Lord forgets not the
goodness of his servants, nor his enemies sins, but sets up all on their
heads for the day of reckoning and recompense. Revel. 22. 12. Behold, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to his
works. The just Judge of all the world must do right.

3 According to a man's seed time, so commonly is 3.
his harvest. Gal. 6. 7. As a man sowes, so must he reap: he that sowes to the
flesh, must reap corruption; but he that sowes to the spirit, shall reap life
everlasting. Do thou sow chafe and darnell and weeds, and look thou for
a crop of wheat? Sow righteousness, and thou shall have a sure reward, Prove.
11. 18. but if thou sowest iniquity, look to reap affliction.

4 The truth of God in accomplishing his word must leave the godly most happy,
while the wicked 4.
are wrapped in hellish woes and horrors. The same weight of truth which
carries down wicked men into their place, hoiseth up the godly as in the other
scoale. For as all the precious promises of the word belong to the one, whereof
earth nor hell can defeat them: so all the woes and execrations of Scripture
belong to the other, and shall be true upon him so long as God is true in
himself. There is not a wicked man, but he has all the threatenings of God,
all the curses of the law, and all the terrors of his own conscience standing
and shall stand for ever in force against him, if he stand out impenitently
against GOD.

Now this is a direction to Ministers for the course and carriage of their
doctrine: to sing both mercy and Use 1.
judgment, and to come both with a rod and the spirit of meekensse. We must
speak peace to godly men, but feed the impenitent with judgment. This text,
and all texts, and the whole tenor of the Scriptures go before us in this
course. Unhappy men are they that speak all peace, and preach nothing but
promises, as if all men were godly, and the congregations not mixed: or, if they
distinguish of men, it is to encourage, hearten, and harden wicked men for
their own gain, and dishearten and disgrace such as fear the Lord.

2 It is a direction to all men, to carry our affections Use 2.
differently according to the differences of men, expressing our love and
kindness to men fearing God, and our dislike of evil and wicked men.

1 So does the Lord and his Spirit in this text; and whosoever are guided by
the Spirit of grace, will show themselves in the helping up and encouragement
of godliness, and furthering the joy of the faithful, and in the discouraging
and daunting so far as lies in him, the wickedness of men.

2 A note of a good man is that a vile person shall be contemned in his eyes,
and he will love them that fear the Lord.

3 True judgment helps him to discern between an Israelite and Ismaelite, and
true affection will cleave to the one, and disclaim the other. Gods Spirit
teaches none to esteem careful Christians vile persons, nor to cleave to
enemies and resisters of the grace of God, who are indeed vile persons, and so
are they that sort with them, or plead for them; and as sin makes men vile to
God, so it makes them seem to good men.

3 It is an encouragement to godly men in the way Use 3.
of holiness: for they are in the way of happiness, nothing can make them fall
short of an happy condition, they shall not be rolled in the destruction of
evil men, but shall be hid in the secret chamber of Gods providence, when the
storm of wrath shall come like haylestones, yea like tallents of ledd, upon
the heads of sinners: then shall there be a difference between him that
fears God and him that fears Exodus 11. 7.
him not: then shall it be seen, that it is not in vain to serve the Lord.

4 It is a terror for evil men: seeing it is as impossible Use 4.
for a sinner to avoid woe, as God to be untrue in proclayming it. Sorrow
follows the sinner, as a shadow the body. Most common it is for the wicked to
applaud themselves in a woeful condition: for, whatever their estate seems, it
is most unhappy. They spend their days in pleasure, and forecast that none
shall have more pleasure then they. But it is like Belshazzars, when the
writing on the wall appeared over against him. They lay about them for wealth
and a secure estate here below, and, rather then want it, will curse and resist
the people of God as Balaam, little thinking that the Angel stands with a
drawn sword to meet them in every corner, to slay them. No, all the earth
cannot make him happy who fights against heaven, and whom heaven has accursed,
earth cannot bless; He has sown tares, and tares he must reap.

5 Here is a spur and incitement unto repentance, Use 5.
and a trumpet to awaken secure souls, that while it is called to day they may
hear the voice, lest all these woes seize upon them and oppress them
unawares. It stands every sinner in hand, to rise out of the bed of security,
and get a melting and bruised heart, considering the day that comes, which
shall burn as an oven, and all that are proud and all that do wickedly shall be
as stubble, Mal. 4. 1.

But seeing men are loath to apply this part to themselves, we must help it
home a little more particularly.

1 What a fearful woe is denounced in Scripture against all Popish and
Antichristian Idolaters? Rev. 14. 9. If any man worship the beast and his
image, and receive his mark in their hands and foreheads, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and be tormented with fire and
brimstone for ever. Whosoever shall do thus, and persevere after admonition,
and will not come out of Babylon, must perish in her destruction. They prepare
fire and faggot for the Saints whom they call heretics: but, worshipping the
beast and his image, Christ prepares fire and brimstone for them, and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend for evermore.

Now there is no way to avoid this woeful damnation, by wilful persisting in
that Apostasy, but instead of the character of Antichrist by taking in our
foreheads the seal of CHRIST, by which he separates us from the world, by
faith and holiness, and from Antichrist, by zealous profession of the truth,
which he persecutes, and marketh us up for his own sheep; the property of
which is, to hear his voice and follow him. Ioh. 10.

2 What a dreadful woe belongs to our voluptuous gallants that are at ease in
Sion, who put the evil day far away, and remember not Joseph's affliction?
Amos 6. 1. Silks and Velvets cannot cover the secure sinner from this woe.
Greatness of birth, place, power, treasure, cannot elude these threats, which
are more stable than the foundation of the earth; but according to the cursed
seeds thou sowest, shall thy harvest be; Gods people sow in tears to reap in
joy, and thou must have a share in the sorrow for sin, and in the afflictions
of Gods people, or never look to share in their joy.

3. Were the Prophet Esaias living, where he proclaimed one woe upon drunkards,
he would power out ten thousand upon this drunken age, which is drowned with
drink: Esaias 5. 11. 22. Woe be to them that rise up early to follow
drunkenness, and to them that continue till night; Woe be to them that are
mighty to drink, and strong to power in strong drink. How will the drunkard
escape this woe, and all the threats in the Book of God, which shut him out
of heaven, where is no room for drunkards? There is but one way, and one there
is, to leave thy cup of drunkenness, and come drink another cup, a cup of
mercy, a cup of tears for thy sin, a cup of the blood of Jesus Christ, a cup
of the water of life, that heaven may be opened to thee, a sorrowful and sober
penitent, which thy sin had shut and barred against thee.

4. What a fearful woe does our Savior denounce upon all contemners of the
Gospel, and despisers of the blessed light of it? Mat. 11 24. It shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomorra in the day of the Lord, then for such: And whence
else was the heavy woe here upon the earth and Sea, but for sins against the
Gospel, not receiving the truth in the love of it? 2 These. 2. See we any woe
or heavy hand of God upon the Kingdom? in this effect who sees not the cause,
the contempt of the Gospel? does any extraordinary cross and judgment lie on
this City, on your trades, on your estates? why are ye blind to this day, and
will not see the cause? you poare like blind men on secondary means, fewness
of buyers, troubles abroad, scant of money, scarcity of times, and the like;
but you see not the next cause at home, your contempt and sleighting of the
Gospel, your Sabbath-breaking, your want of reformation according to the rules
of Gods Word, your causlesse hatred of the bringers of the truth, etc. change
your course, and God will change his; entertain his best blessings, and then
expect inferior; else know, as sin is linked fast, so are Gods judgments;
these shall be but the beginnings of woe, and one woe shall follow upon another,
till repentance come between.

For the devil is come down, etc.] The reason of the former woe denounced
follows, and is twofold:

1. The coming down of the devil.

2. His wrathful disposition, where of the reason is given, because he knows
his time is short.

For the Exposition.

Quest. What is this coming down of the Devil? was not Satan before among
the inhabitants of the earth, till now that this victory is gotten by Christ?
were not wicked men under this curse and woe before this, by Satan's wrath and
ruling?

Ans. Yes, the devil was the Prince of the world before this, and was
commander among the Inhabitants of the earth and sea; but he is now said to
come down in three respects.

1. In a more general and universal mischief intended by the dragon, which
was to spread it self over the face of the earth, which was by a general
Apostasy of the world from Christ to Antichrist, foretold in 2 Thessalonians. 2.

2. In a far more dangerous and mischievous manner of working, by which he
shall prevail far more efficaciously than ever before: For whereas he could
not succeed by open tyranny, now by secret trains and persuasions of
heretics, under a plausible form of Christianity and piety, he shall carry
the world headlong after Antichrist, and wrap it up in his impostures and
Apostasy, that, whose bodies he could not destroy by sword and tyranny, their
minds he might poison with errors and heresy.

3. He descends with a far more furious hatred and wrath over those who
are left under his power: for as a man coming angry from abroad, will show his
wrath at home; so the dragon seeing the Church escaped from his furious hand by
Michaels help, does look more narrowly to make them faster, who are left in
his power, lest they should break away from him as the other had done; and
therefore he now comes on them with continual and efficacious temptations,
and binds them with strong chains and bolts of unrighteousness. Now the
devil takes his peniworths in the earth and sea; by increasing his wrath he
increases their woe, and not only rides the Nations, but galloppeth them to
hell.

This arising of Antichrist, bringing with him a mist of black darkness and
Idolatry, is the devils coming down into the earth; And his powerful
prevailing by strong and forcible delusions among them that perish, is his
fierce wrath which he exercises in the earth and sea, but justly upon them
that had refused Christ's rule over them.

Where Christ and his Gospel cannot prevail, the devil comes armed with
power, and efficacy of delusion, Doct.
and he prevails: Jesus Christ came into the world, and was preached in the
earth and sea, but could not be received, he came to his own, and his own
received him not, yea they persecuted him, drove him away, slew the heir, and
crucified the Lord of glory; he came by the preaching of the Apostles among the
nations, and set them into the true Olive, when his own were broken off; but
they after a little lightning fell off, first from their first love, then from
all love of the truth: Now the wicked spirit makes a re-entrey into his hold,
whence he was cast, he comes down into the earth more forcibly, with seven
spirits worse than before, and prevails with them to their destruction: I come
in my Fathers name; John 5. 45.
that is, by his authority, in powerful doctrine and miracles, to set up his
name and glory in promoting your salvation, and ye receive me not; if another
come in his own name, that is, seeking his own glory, not Gods, and intending
his own ends and good, and not the good and salvation of men, him will ye
receive: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. God shall send strong delusions; the effect is, to
believe lies; the end, that they may be damned; and the reason, because they
loved not the truth, nor believed it, nor entertained it, but rejected the
happy means of their own salvation The Lord sends Michaiah his Prophet to
warn Ahab of his danger near him; Ahab will not hear him for his own
safety, but commits him to ward, feeds him with bread and water of affliction;
now comes the devil, and is a lying spirit in the mouths of 400. false
Prophets; them presently he hears, speaking to hasten his destruction.

1. Man's heart will be resting and settling upon something; it is like a Mill
that is ever grinding: if it Reas. 1.
rest not on truth, it will on lies: The soul of a man is such an hold or
tenure, that cannot want an owner or occupyer; If it be not resigned to the
God of heaven, it is reserved for the god of the world: If Gods Spirit depart
from Saul, presently the evil spirit comes upon him and vexes him: A servant
must every man be to one of these masters.

2. The just desert of wicked men pulls on them this fearful vengeance, to be
delivered up to the devil: 2
The world loves lies better than the truth, and liars above the bringers of
truth; how just is it that such as reject the truth, and prefer lies before
it, should be given up to the father of lies, as children most like him? What
more righteous revenge can the Lord inflict on him that will not come to Jesus
Christ to be saved, then that the dragon should come down upon him with great
wrath, and carry him headlong into his own damnation? how just is it for those
who refuse the government of a merciful Prince, to be given up to the spoil
and oppression of most cruel tyrants? Is any so blind as he that will not
see? and are any so justly blinded as those that will not open their eyes to
the light? Who can implead the Lords justice, in delivering up him to the
Prince of darkness, that hates the light? or who can say it unequal in him,
if he give over such as choose death, unto him that has the power of death,
that is, the devil?

3. Refuse to come to Jesus Christ, and what remedy is left to rescue us from
the power of the devil? 3
If Christ and his truth be rejected, what can resist the devil when he
assaulteth with lies and false persuasions? If the way to be rescued from the
power of Satan, be the knowledge of the truth, so as by it to come to
amendment, as 2 Timothy 2. 24. then to refuse Gods grace offered in the Gospel,
is to assent and covenant with Satan, and refuse freedom offered from his
vassallage: lies have no enemy, no discoverer, no conqueror but truth. There
is no freedom from the impostures of the father of lies, till truth rescue us
and set us free, and if truth set us free, we are free indeed. Truth is the
only effectual instrument and means of our salvation: it is the arm of God
to save us; to refuse and resist this arm, is to hate life, and abide under
damnation. In a word, the resistance of Christ is an inviting of Satan home to
us, and a kind welcomming of him with full contentment: where Satan sees such
a man, there is a fit subject for him to work upon.

Take notice then of this fearful sin of refusing Use 1.
the voice of Christ in the Gospel, being a sin of such provocation as it
is, as most injurious to God, to the grace of God, to the Son of God, and to
the truth of God; a sin of such a deep dye, and so deadly to the soul of
the sinner, who prefers to drink rank poison before the sweet waters of
the Well of life, and a sin so fearfully revenged by God with many other most
heinous sins, the just punishments of it.

Now because men commonly startle at the high sins against the law, and
conceive Gods wrath due to them, and in the mean time seldom take knowledge
of sins against the Gospel, and the Lords severity against the^; let us cast
our eyes upon the Lords most severe revenge against this sin above other, as
sins against the remedy, and therefore not more severe than righteous: for if
God revenged upon the heathens their sins against the light of nature, in
delivering them up to vile affections, and unnatural sins, to receive such
recompense of their error as was meet, Romans 1. 24. 27. how much more must he
think it a meet recompense of such a sin against the light of grace, to give
them up t^ effectual delusion, to be carried by Satan hoodwinkt and headlong
unto destruction?

But let us see some instances.

1. How he spared not his own people the Jews, 1. Instance.
his own first borne, among whom when the Son of God came as to his own,
they received him not; when false Prophets, and false Christ's rose up among
them, those they followed, both before his coming and after, as both divine
and humane stories make mention: John 10. 8. All that came before me were
thieves and robbers: Acts 5. 36, 37. Judas and Theudas drew away many to
destruction: And after false Christ's and Prophets were to rise with such
efficacy of delusion, as to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect,
Matthew. 24. Josephus speaks of sundry, especially one Egyptian which carried
away De bello Iud. l. 2. c. 12.
thirty thousand Jews by one vain delusion to destruction: And not long
after, this same sin made their nation spew them out, that they are now an
hissing, an execration to all the nations of the earth; They renounced Christ
to rule over them, and ever since the dragon has had them in possession.

2. Consider how the wrath of God came upon 2. Instance.
the former ages of the world, according to the warning of the Gospel, and how
the earth and sea, who would not receive Christ, received Antichrist in his
room; and the inhabitants of them, not loving the truth were therefore led
away with horrible lies. See Gods retaliation.

First, God sent them Apostles, Evangelists, and true Pastors, who sought only
the glory of God, and the salvation of men, but they despised and distasted
them: But how did the Lord plague the earth in the same kind, giving up the
inhabitants to receive hypocrites, Impostors, Friars, and fat Monks, who only
sought themselves, and to make a spoil of men, eating up their estates as
Locusts for number, and unprofitablenesse? these were willingly borne; as the
Church of Corinth, despising the Apostle Paul, gave ear to false Apostles, who
robbed and spoiled them.

Secondly, Christ the Lord came with an easy and sweet yoke; his doctrine
and his Apostles was a freedom from the bondage and burden of Ceremonies and
traditions of the Fathers, 1 Pet 1. 18. and the new commandment was only to
believe in the Son of God, and love one another. This sweet yoke was cast
off; but with what an exchange? now the devil yoakes them with traditions,
superstitious ceremonies, and plagues the earth with tyrannical and
Antichristian Laws, Canons, Decretals devised by men; his little finger is
heavier then Christ's loins; yet Popish Countries receive them, and like them
well.

Thirdly, Christ instituted and ordained a most holy Sacrament, the Communion
of his blessed body and blood; but the inhabitants of the earth and sea
despised that simple and most chaste and Primitive institution: But was not the
world ever since justly plagued with that gaudy and impudent harlot of the
Popish Mass, the very spirit and quintessence of Antichrist*

Fourthly, how could the world be more severely plagued, then by receiving
that greasy Priesthood, and that hateful sacrifice of Antichrist? but could
it be plagued more justly, for abolishing the Priesthood and sacrifice of
Christ?

Fifthly, Christ in the Gospel calls men to the participation of grace, life,
pardon, heaven, and salvation freely offered in the Gospel; men would not hear
this voice: How justly therefore has the world bin blinded and gulled these
many hundred years, in buying at great rates lies, sleights, impostures,
iuglings, mere tricks of wit and cunning, pardons, dispensations, merits,
masses, and heaven it self.

Sixthly, Christ ordained in his Church holy Pastors, giving them liberty to
live in holy wedlock, according to Gods Ordinance. This order of Christ
pleased not the earth and sea: but how sensibly revenged? for no sooner did
they refuse and reject holy Pastors, but they admitted most filthy bawds, and
unchaste Pope-holy Priests and Nuns into Ecclesiastical Orders; I might say
into the Popes chair. A man had need of a vizard, to speak of their
holiness, and stop all his senses to hear it.

Seventhly, when the world scorned and persecuted the Saints living, how did
the Lord give them up to worship and invocate in most idolatrous manner the
Saints dead and departed? And when they despised and trod under foot the living
images of God, the godly and holy Professors of Christ, great was the Lords
revenge in giving them up to worship dead images, of wood, stone, metalls, etc.

3 God who is ever the same and like himself, has heretofore warned us in
this land, that we have 3. Instance.
not received Christ, nor embraced his truth, in that love and affection that
became us:

1 By the prevailing of Priests and Jesuits heretofore in the land, who
swarmed as the frogs of Egypt, and have seduced many thousands, but never any
that loved the truth.

2 By the propensity and readiness of many to receive any religion or doctrine
according as the times should require. And this has ever been the sin of
English people to swim with the stream of times, And this print of Gods finger
is at this day set upon many, plainly convincing that they never received the
truth in the love of it.

3 By the general fighting against the light, and hatred of the very sent of
sincerity in both preachers and people; which the Apostle makes a sure note of
perdition, Phil. 1. 28. Let John Baptist come, he is excepted against and has
a devil. Let Paul come, too much learning has made him mad. Let Christ come,
he is a friend of Publicans, a demoniacke, etc. But let Antichrist come, Popery
come, a flatterer and deluder come, the multitude applaud them* receive them.
Delusion shall be effectual to the damnation of such as he must carry into his
own perdition.

4 The same arrows of Gods wrath against this sin are shot in amongst our
selves; many of whom 4. Instance.
plainly bewray their natural hatred of the light, and love of lies. Let a man
come in the name of Christ, convince, entreat, persuade, beseech men to be
reconciled: let him with the loss of his own peace seek theirs: the more
faithfully and sincerely he deals, the more despightfully he is rejected; the
more pains and love such a man shows, the less is he loved or recompensed
by many: presently they plot to sterve him out, or if he stay, he must live on
air or grass for them. Let a flatterer come in his own name, and call the
churl liberal, and sing an Omnia been, and for their own applause, profit,
or credit, run along in all their courses; no marvel if these men be put in
their bosoms: and how can it be but he that hates true dealing, should love
false?

Is this, love of the light, when God offers a blessing to a place and people,
for their instruction and comfort of themselves and families, to mutiny and
murmr against Gods bounty, and fall to threatenings if any such blessing be
let in? Is this, love of truth, that when Popish seducers come and open their
pack, and by books and persuasions broach their fundamental errors, that
sophistry and plausible slights should drive some, to a stand and demurre
whether they be in the right* others, to a profession that there is not so much
difference between them, others, to an indifferency that they have resolved to
be with the stronger, and all this after threescore years of the shine of the
light among us? Now open your eyes, and behold what is all this but a fearful
stroke of Gods wrath, plaguing them for not receiving the truth in love, by
giving the^ up thus to be deluded? If CHRIST cannot prevail, the Devil must.

Beware then of so desperate a sin: and let it awaken Use 2.
us to entertain Christ in his truth and Gospel better then we have done.

For motives hereunto:

1 Consider that in our text: look on the dangerous estate of all resisters
and contemners of the truth, For,

First, they are no children of wisdom: for wisdom is justified of all her
children.

Secondly, they judge themselves unworthy of eternal life; Act. 13. for they
have no name to be saved by; they lie without redemption, uncalled,
unsanctified, unsaved. If Christ be the light, they are in darkness. If he be
the Savior and head of the Church, these are no members, share in none of his
merits.

Thirdly, Christ will prove too strong for him that rejects or resists
him: Bring those mine enemies that I may stay them, Luke 19. 27.

Fourthly, Christ will not stay where he is not welcome, but will be gone: he
will not stand casting pearls before swine, Mat. 7. 6. and he has places
enough to offer his grace to, who will better esteem his word and work: he
need not stick to a people unwilling, resisting. Know you, that there is no
such need of plotting and devising how to be rid of Christ and his Gospel; he
goes fast enough of himself from ungrateful persons, as you may see in the
Nation of the Jews, Mat. 21. 43. and those famous Churches of Greece and the
Gentiles, now sunk under Mahomet.

Fifthly, who be they but despifers of the Gospel, and not lovers of the truth,
that are in danger of Antichrists seduction, and lie open to all his slights
and subtilties? And this is the just plague awayting such as being enlightened
thrust away the truth with both hands, and shut the door of the Kingdom
against themselves. Now let us look to it, that as we have the truth, we have
also a love and sound embracing of it, lest it come to pass that God in his
wrath be provoked to deprive us of judgment and understanding, and deliver us
to such blindness, as the Papists themselves shall not be more effectually
deluded then we shall be; that against the light of Scripture, yea against common
sense and reason we shall sup the poyloned broth of Popery, and as stiffly as
that seduced synagogue, maintain such shameful absurdities as are
Transubstantiation, judicial forgiveness of sins by Priests, salvation by
the merit of works, worshipping with heathenish idolatry Saints, Angels,
images, relickes, crosses, bread, and bones, and a thousand such senseless
dotages.

Sixthly, consider how the devil into whose hand they are given up, prevails
against these men, and binds them with strong chains and bolts of
unrighteousness to damnation.

First, They being permitted to him, he blinds their eyes and hardens their
hearts to destruction.

Secondly, He not only strips them of the benefit of Christ's victory, but uses
them as vassals to fight against Christ, and his Church, and to withstand his
victory.

3 He makes them not only to live in the dark, but to love the darkness, and
hate the light because their deeds be evil.

4 He makes their damnation more grievous then if they had never heard of Jesus
Christ: for before they sinned of ignorance, but now of malice and wilfulness:
before they sinned without Christ, now they sin against Christ. This made
Christ mournefully weep over Jerusalem, who could not see her own mournful
estate. We can give Christ no occasion to mourn over us, but we have much
more cause to mourn over our selves.

2 Add hereto the benefit of receiving Christ and his truth, into the inner
room of our hearts. For,

First, it is the only antidote against the poison of Antichrist and heresy.
It is not the profession or knowledge, but love of the truth that armeth a
Christian against the efficacy of his power: this shall strongly fence him,
when the greatest profession, yea the deepest learning and knowledge, that ever
men or Angels had shall not do it.

Secondly, Christ never comes but to make us gainers: he comes to Jerusalem
to gather her as an hen her chickens. Mat. 23. 37. It may be we may lose swine
by him, as the Gadarens, but it is to chase away devils, Iusts and sins in
which the devils rule. It may be we may part with some goods as Zatheus, but
it is to bring salvation to our house. What if we must sell all with the young
man? it is to have treasure in heaven. Keep Christ, and we have treasure and
wealth enough.

Now the means to further us in this duty of embracing Christ and his truth,
are of two sorts.

First, To east off the lets and impediments that hinder.

Secondly, To get near us the helps and furtherances.

The first let is ignorance of Christ, of his worth, and offers of grace. Ioh.
4. 10. if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that talks with thee,
thou would have asked, etc. A foolish cock contemnes a pearl: can skill of
nothing but barley. A rude man knows not the worth of a jewel, but a Lapidary
who knows it and the wealth of it, will buy it, and by it enrich himself. This
shows that both Preachers and hearers are ignorant of this saving knowledge,
who say to the Almighty, Depart from us, we have no desire to know thy ways,
nor that the means of knowledge be settled among us.

The second let is envy, and hatred of Christ, and the truth truly dealt with.
This sin in the high Priests and Pharisees got Christ upon the cross. Ioh.
12. 19. See ye not that the world goes after him? if we suffer this man, down
goes our credit, all will believe him, and we shall displease the Romans (the
Romanists) and be great losers, Ioh. 11. 48. Luke 19 14. the citizens hated the
Nobleman, and sent him word, We will not have this man to rule. Whosoever
expresses hatred to his word and ordinances, to his graces and virtues, to his
servants and children, this man hates his person, and sends him word he will
not have him to reign over him. And many such messages Christ has daily sent
him from us.

The third let is earthlinesse and covetousness: the love of swine. The loss
of swine and fear of loss sends Christ packing from the Gadarens. We have too
many Gadarens who cannot distinguish between Christ and a pig, unless it be
to prefer a pig before him: Oh if Christ come among us and settle near us,
we shall lose this profit and that: poor Christ brings a charge with him: and
when men are resolved not to part with a nutshell for Christ, say what they
will, and hear as many Sermons as they do, they had rather have a legion of
devils stay among them, then Christ. Love of swine makes the Gadaren put off
all love to his own soul; yea and all charity from their neighbors: they are
contented better with a legion of devils among them with their swine, then
with Christ, without them.

The fourth let is love of lusts and our darling sins: And these are dearer
to men then their swine: these foul and swinish lusts, in which they wallow as
swine, make men fall quite out with Christ and his truth. For Christ and his
word never speaks good to an evil man. He is one that knows all, and will
tell thee all that ever thou have done, Ioh. 4. He will be rough against thy
darling sins. He will whip out buyers and sellers from the Temple, and let no
sin take Sanctuary. Thou art a great swearer, he will say thou must not
swear at all, and then thou must sew up thy mouth and not speak at all. Thou
art an adulterer, and he will cry out against him that looks on a woman to
lust after her. Thou art mighty to drink; he will disgrace thee and barrethee
out of heaven. He is so precise as he will urge thee to set a watch before
every word, that no filthy or foolish talking, nor jesting proceed thence. He
will be urging to continual hearing of the word, and observation of the whole
Sabbath, which (to many) is a misery of miseries, and bands, and yokes, fit for
none but slaves. These men, so far in love with their sins, cannot but hate
Christ, and cast him out of their coasts: darkness cannot but hate light: and
Christ has foretold it, Ioh. 7. 7, the world hates me because I testify of
it that her works are evil. And his Ministers find it in theirs, how they
would resist himself in person; because his word makes all things manifest,
Ephesians. 5. 13. It discovers the drunkard, adulterer, atheist, swearer, gamester,
Sabbathbreaker: and if a man be any of these, or all these, how can he but wish
Christ and his word a thousand miles off him.

Now of the means to help us to receive Christ and his truth.

1 To set our hearts upon the truth, as our treasure, But it, but sell it not.
Count all dross in comparison of Christ. Choose the good part with Mary. This
affection keeps the word: but the wicked wanting it, lose it at last, though
they seem to hold it a long time. The good Merchant rejoices to find the
pearl: therefore he will sell all to purchase it.

2 To grieve when we find not such sweetness in the word, as we would, and
as sometimes we have done. Suspect now Christ stands aloof for some disrespect
of him: he dislikes something in his entertainment. Nay we must grieve not only
when our selves prefer other things before it, but when others do so. Psalm.
119. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy
word. How then did he mourn for his own faylings?

3 Wait at the gates of wisdom: frequent her threshold, hear her voice, let
that voice persuade Prove. 8. 34.
thee, be ruled by her counsels, hate all vain inventions discovered by it,
whether errors in doctrine or corruptions of life. Embrace her servants: for,
he that receives you, receives me: love them for their glad tidings. Evil
men may hear much, but seldom refrain from any evil way. They pretend great
love to Christ, but hate to the death his servants.

4 Let it work upon our hearts till we find a resolute purpose to hold
Christ and his truth through crosses, losses, and troubles for the defense of
it; till we attain the resolution of ancient Believers, who willingly suffered
the spoiling of their goods. Heb. 10 34. and till our lives be not dear unto
us, nor loved to the death, in comparison of Christ and his Gospel: as the
blind man confessed him, though he were sure to be excommunicate, Ioh. 9.

5 Follow the means by which the truth may come to dwell plentifully in us,
and amongst us. The former by frequent hearing, meditation, reading, and prayer
especially, ask wisdom and ye shall find it. Christ is the gift of God: the
way to obtain him is prayer If thou had known the gift of God, thou
would have asked etc. The latter is by bringing it in reckoning with others;
often speaking of it, conferring, especially whetting it on our families and
friends, as Abraham did.

6 In holy conversation and practice of life, show the life and counterpaine of
the truth. So much of the truth we know truly, as we practice. He has received
Christ, who expresses the virtues of Christ. Let it therefore be our care to
leave a pattern and sweet sent of grace and truth every where behind us, as
our Lord himself did.

Who has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. The words
contain the second reason of that dreadful woe denounced upon the earth and
sea, taken from the wrathful disposition of the devil, who in the former
words is said to have descended; and amplified by the reason of it, because he
has but a short time.

Quest. What is meant by this great wrath of the dragon?

Answ. The sly stealing of Antichrist upon the world by a Catholic Apostasy
is here called the great wrath, with which the Devil comes into the earth.
For whereas he could not succeed by open tyranny of the Imperial dragons, but
that Christian religion was more propagated, and many daily pulled out of his
power by the preaching of the Gospel, and that Christianity prevailed against
Idolatry and Ethnicisme: now as a furious person whose plots have not hitherto
succeeded, he comes with a new mischief more spiteful then the former: he
rayseth a mist of black darkness to obscure the sun of grace, and secretly
works in the mystery of Antichrist; God permitting him to come with strong
delusions on the blind side of the world. Now he that could not by open force
destroy the Church, or cast out Christ, does under the name of Christ, and
pretense of the honor of Christ and his religion, fight more furiously and
prevayle more forcibly then ever he formerly could by open persecution and
tyranny.

The words therefore foretell and threaten the mighty enterprises, and secret
stratagems of the dragon by Antichrist, who was in aftertimes to prevail in
all the Christian world. This is the great wrath here spoken of, and teaches,
that

The greatest wrath that ever Satan watched and Doct.
brought upon the world since the fall, was the raising of Antichrist. He had
been mischievous before, and wrathful in open tyranny: but now he puts
forth a greater wrath, in secret delusion. Which truth will appear, if we
consider.

1 Antichristianisme in it self: 2 In comparison with open tyranny. 3 In the
more fearful fruits and grievous effects of it.
1. Antichristianisme in it self is the most fearful plague that ever the
wrath of God or Satan struck the world withal, if we consider,

1. The cause. 2.The effect. 3. The generality.
In the cause, it proceeds from the greatest wrath that ever God put forth
upon earth; for,

1. It is a wrath from the divine justice, due to the most fearful sin in
the world, which was the worlds rejecting the truth of the Gospel, wherein the
wrath of God is come both upon the Jew and Gentile to the uttermost.

2. It is a wrath of the dragon, whetted by the wrath of God, in which God
sends the strongest and most prevailing delusions that ever were; in which
that wicked spirit, who seemed to be cast out of the world by the preaching of
the Gospel, is returned again, and has brought seven worse spirits than
himself.

3. It is a wrath not only punishing sins of such a deep stain, but with
most fearful sins, such as immediately forerunne damnation, even that
universal damnation of all those who chased away the truth of God to embrace
the delusions of Antichrist: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. God shall send strong delusions,
that all they may be damned, who loved not the truth.

4. It is a wrath so great, as the Spirit of God finds no parallel to compare
it with, but the great day of Gods wrath; and therefore in the opening of the
sixth Seal ( Revel. 6. 12.) which describes the coming of Antichrist into the
world, he resembles the time of his appearing to the greatest day of wrath
that ever was before it, and describes it by all those fearful events which
shall accompany Christ himself, when he comes to his last and universal
judgment.

The signs of the wrath of that great day of wrath are seven, by this
wrathful day of Antichrist notably resembled.

1. Great and fearful earthquakes shall go before the coming of Christ,
Matthew. 24. 7. Even so, at the coming of Antichrist, the foundations of the
earth shall be shaken, a new face of things shall appear, the pillars and
foundations of old Apostolical doctrine and discipline shall be shaken down,
and a new Ecclesiastical Monarchy shall eat up the ancient, civil, and
Imperial government, which was the studd and pillar upholding the earth and
societies of men.

2. The Sun shall be darkened as sackcloth, Mat. 24. 29. and Christ the sun
of righteousness, who shined so clear in the firmament of the Church, the
only Savior, Mediator, and satisfaction shall be wholly darkened, and
horribly ecclipsed in the day of Antichrist; the holy doctrine concerning his
person, natures, offices and benefits shall be clean obscured, as the Sun at
midnight; a black veil of traditions, and a thick curtain of humane
constitutions blacked and darkened all his most sacred Ordinances; the
Sacraments by theatricall pompes and devises shall be adulterate; the worship of
Christ, by adoration of Idols, and veneration of creatures, wholly depraved: Now
is the Sun of the Church turned into darkness.

3. The Moon shall be turned into blood: So the Church, which as the Moon,
receives all her light from the Sun of righteousness, shall seem all blood,
partly by the cruel and bloody wars, and partly by the bloody persecutions
of Antichrist, who shall boast of both swords, and fill both his hands with
weapons of wrath and cruelty.

4. The Stars shall fall from heaven, Mark 13. 25. So in the appearing of
Antichrist the Bishops and Pastors shall become Apostates from the truth, and
of shining stars in holy doctrine, holy life and beautiful graces, in their
several Orbs shining in humility, charity, sobriety, diligence, and
heavenly-mindednesle shall fall to pride, ambition, contention, wordlinesse,
war, seats of Judicature, and whatsoever is earthly, and sensual, and
pompous.

5. At the coming of Christ the heaven shall depart Isay. 34. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
as a scrole; so in the day of Antichrists coming, the Church (the heaven upon
earth) shall be shut up and hide it self, and shall not be visible and
conspicuous to the world: And although many good and godly men still in all
ages contested against Antichrist, yet were they condemned for heretics, and
were counted no part of heaven, nor faithful members of it.

6. The Mountains and Islands were removed out of their places. By Mountains
are meant Kings and Emperors, who by the fraud and power of Antichrist were
removed from their high places and authority, which was swallowed and engrossed
by Antichrist; and by Islands, the people and nations who were all forced upon
pain of damnation, in stead of obedience to Christ, to submit themselves to
the tyranny of Antichrist: Nothing so firm as Mountains; nothing so far
off as Islands, but Antichrist reached them.

7. As in the day of Christ's wrath the wicked shall in utter despair of their
estates call for the hills and Mountains to cover them, and hide them from it;
so shall the great day of Antichrist drive great ones to Luke 23. 30.
utter despair, not knowing what shall become of them, and of their estates;
and this shall be the hire and recompense of all the ayders and supporters of
Antichrist, in the day of their particular judgment if their consciences be
awakened, at farthest in that last and great day of wrath, in the general
judgment.

Thus we see the Scripture setting out the day of Antichrist to be as
wrathful as the great day of Christ, which of all dreadful things is to all
wicked men most terrible.

Secondly, now consider the great wrath of Antichristianisme in the effect; and
we shall see it the most horrible mist and black darkness that ever the world
was stricken withal: Other heresies and heretics which made way to this, are
called the black horse, Revel. 6. 5. as being contrary to the white horse,
Verse 2. which was the integrity of Apostolic doctrine: but those did obscure
and darken the light, as in the evening: But when Antichrist comes, this
heresy chaseth away all light, as at midnight: Not that the Church cease to
be, no more than the Sun cease to be at midnight; but it appears no more
in that Horizon or Hemisphere, tha^ if it were not all; Heaven passes as a
scrole, which is no less, but less seen.

Hence is the Kingdom of Antichrist called spiritually by the name of Egypt.
Rev. 11. 8. for it resembles that Kingdom, especially in three things,

1. In Idolatry.

2. In cruelty and oppression of the Israel of God.

3. Most of all in blindness and darkness, with which that Kingdom was
covered for three days, Exodus 10. 21. And between the darkness of that
Egypt and this there is apt resemblance,

1. Of all the plagues of Egypt that went before it, the darkness was most
grievous; and so is this, no plague in the world before this was comparable to
it.

2. The Lord restrained from them not the light of the Sun only, but of fire
and Candle, and withdrew his blessing and comfort from all his creatures; so in
this spiritual Egypt, and Antichristian Kingdom, is a miserable palpable
blindness; they see nothing of Christ savingly, nor of the Scriptures which
witness of him, nor of sound interpreters the Candles in the CHVRCH, consuming
themselves to give others light, nor are guided or comforted by the Spirit, who
is as fire, warming and inlightning believers: God has laid a curse on all
their means of light, that they get no sound or saving light from them; no not
their greatest scholars, unless they be enlightened to sin against their
consciences.

3. Yet had the Israelites light, mingled among the Egyptians; Even so the
true Church, hidden in Babylon, has light and knowledge, and great blessing on
weak means, though the Egyptian cannot discern or see it; as, among our
selves, a Recusants house has nothing but darkness, and superstitious
ignorance, when a Protestants house (perhaps next to it) has light of
knowledge, holiness and saving grace.

4. That darkness was next to the death of their firstborn; even so here,
the pale horse follows the black, Revel 6. 8. and this darkness fore-runnes
everlasting darkness in hell, as that did death in the Egyptians houses.

But with this difference, that this is a more miserable darkness:

1. In the kind, because it is spiritual, as it is called Egypt spiritually;
a blind body is miserable, a blind soul is damnable.

2. That was a darkness of the air, but not of their eyes; this is of both,
and the blackest darkness is within them, as theirs was without them.

3. The Egyptians by their darkness knew the benefit of light the better, and
saw their plague, and mourned under it; but these Egyptians are pleased with
their darkness, and fight against the light the more, and are not more
fearful or watchful against any thing, than that the light should peep in
amongst them.

Thirdly, next, as Antichristian Apostasy is blackest, so is it most general
of all heresies, even the Catholic heresy, into which all other heresies of
the New Testament run, as into a sink: One calls it an abridgement of all old
heresies. (...)


For it is not against any one Article of faith, (as other particular heresies
are) but,

First, against the holy Scripture, which is the Scepter of Christ, infinitely
disgracing it, calling it a nose of wax, a sheathe for every sword,
insufficient, obscure, the book that makes heretics, and, The Scriptures have
no authority but from the^, no sense but from them, they forbid the reading of
them, they prefer Apocryphals, traditions, Church-determinations above them,
etc.

Secondly, against the whole Gospel; which is a doctrine of free justification
and salvation, by the only righteousness and merits of Christ, imputed by
faith; but they teach to seek salvation in our own merits and satisfactions,
here or hereafter.

Thirdly, against the whole person and offices of Christ: They appoint infinite
Priests to repeat his only sacrifice; a number of mediators against this one
Mediator, that men may be heard by their prayers, and saved by their merits.
They appoint the Pope a King of Kings, by whom all Kings reign; who has all
power in heaven and earth; yea, the Head and Husband of the Church (which is
proper to Christ.)

Fourthly, against all the foundation of religion and Catechism: For although
they hold in word and outward profession, the Creed of the Apostles, the Lords
Prayer, the words also of the ten Commandments, yet indeed, and by direct
consequent they reverse and renounce every Commandment of the ten, every
Article of the twelve, if we except that of the Trinity, and every Petition of
the six, as sundry godly writers have cleared, and my self have in a
readiness to prove.

Thus of Antichristianisme considered in it self.

II. Now consider the tyranny of it comparatively with the tyranny of temporal
enemies, and the wrath will be infinitely greater; and that in three respects.

1. For secrecy of working. 2. For transcendency of the danger. 3. For
hopelesnesse of recovery.
Of the first; open mischief a man may avoid, or prepare for, but here is a
more secret and undiscernable mischief; a great adversary, but sly and under
a contrary profession of friendship; the greatest wounder of Christian Faith,
under pretext of Christian Faith; whether we consider his person or his work.

For his person, he is a son of perdition; a son must resemble his father;
the dragon his father builds up his Kingdom rather by fraud than by force,
so does his eldest son Antichrist. Hence is this great Adversary compared to
a Whore, who hunteth the precious life of man, not by open force, but by secret
and fair pretenses, sugared speeches, and alluring flatteries; she has a cup
in her hand full of abominations; the draught is deadly poison, but she has
put it in a golden cup Revel. 13. 11. the second beast which is Antichrist,
speaks like the dragon, that is, breathes out devilish doctrines, and
thundereth hellish curses against the true Professors of Christian Faith, but
has two horns like the Lamb; that is, a counterfeit show of humility and
meekness.

For his work, it must be a mystery of iniquity; He must sit in the Temple
of God; he must not be a Turk, to destroy by fire and sword, and open
defiance of Christ, the profession of Christianity; but an Herodian, who
pretending to worship him intends to kill him: He must deny Christ to be
come in the flesh, but in a mystery, not openly and directly; for then all
Christians would abhor him, and renounce him, but indirectly and by express
consequence; and (says the Father) Whosoever denies Christ in his deeds, the
same is an Antichrist. Quisquis fact is negat Christum, is Antichristus est.
Aug. tract. 3. in Epist. Ioh.


Of the second; this tyranny of Antichrist is more inward and spiritual than
the furious persecutions of other tyrants; and inward plagues are a thousand
times more deadly than outward. It is true, that as the dragon is extremely
tyrannous against the bodies of Saints, so is Antichrist; but yet the cruelty
of both is more spiritual than temporal, and aymeth more at the death of the
soul than the body; and it is most true that one says, Open tyrannies and
outward oppressions are torments of sinful men, but these inward are the
increasers of sins and vices. Tormenta peccantium: Incrementa vitiorum.
Pharaohs hard heart was a more deadly stroke than all the ten plagues beside.
It was a more grievous plague to give up the Idolatrous Gentiles to their own
lusts and vile affections ( Romans 1.) then to give over the Idolatrous
Samaritans, to be torn with Lions, 2 Kings 17. Let heathen tyrants come upon
a Christian, they can take but his external, lower and sensitive part; but let
this Ecclesiastical tyrant come, he wins the highest towers and faculties
of man, his mind, judgment, affections. Let the Turk come, he may expose
the body to be slain with sword, fire, teeth of beasts; and in all this
nothing comes contrary to the condition of mortal men; But let the Pope come
and he will do all this, and beyond all this; by his fraud and impostures he
takes the mind, and delivers up the heart to be ruled by the devil; that
lusts and vices as wild beasts prevail against reason, religion, and humanity
it self; and this is most unnatural and monstrous.

If they spoil our goods, maime our bodies, deprive us of our liberties, there
are some remedies, and hope of recovery, or by a right use of these trials we
may better our selves in grace; But if Antichrist withdraw us from grace,
delude our souls, sit in our consciences, and so cast us into the wrath of
God, what remedy is left? Now shall we find, that a gash in the soul, as it
is the deeper, so it will prove more incurable than any bodily wound.

Of the third; this tyranny of Antichrist is beyond all external tyranny in
the difficulty of recovery; because it is more pleasing to sense, than the
other. External oppression and tyranny every man naturally avoydeth and
resists; but this every natural man chooses and desires; for it dazelleth
the eyes with external pomp, outward splendour, and worldly power, in all which
it is contrary to the simplicity of the religion of Christ. This Antichristian
poison, which was by a voice from heaven, said to be powered into the Church in
the days of Sylvester, natural men drink up without all inquiry, and are
willingly detained under Antichristian slavery, and without a mighty arm of
Christ, (a stronger than he) are never pulled out.

All this shows the fearful wrath in this Antichristian tyranny beyond all
other.

III. The third argument will further clear it; that Satan comes with
greater wrath in Antichristian delusions, than in any open tyranni^ or
persecution besides, drawn from the effects of this wrath, which are more
fearful than any, or all other judgments of God besides.

The miserable effects of this wrath are especially three:

1. An upheaping of the measure of sin. In open tyrannies the enemy fights
against the Christian man, and this is the enemies sin; in this he makes the
Christian fight against Christ, and his truth, and his Church, which is his own
horrible sin: In the other it is miserable to see men besmeared and all
imbrued with their own blood; but here is a greater misery, to see men wallow
in their inward filthiness, and bloody vices and pollutions. The former may
be a means to open the blind eyes, and the sealed ears, to bring in a sight
and sense of sin, and soften the heart; but here is nothing but increasing of
sin, for this is a means to harden the heart more, and blind the eyes more,
and wrap men not only in darkness, but in the hatred of the light.

2. An unhappy resisting of the means of recovery. In other tyranny tyrants
may chase men to the Rock of their salvation, and drive them toward heaven, as
Israel toward Canaan by the oppressions of Egypt; but this tyranny gallops men
to hell, and intercepteth all means of reconciliation and repentance, so long
as they are under this thraldom; which is plain in these particulars:

First, it is a turning of men from truth to fables, from light of Scripture to
the darkness of humane traditions and devises.

Secondly, a going an whoring from Christ, to many lovers and harlots.

Thirdly, a denial and renouncing of the only sacrifice and merit of Christ.

Fourthly, a sinning against the whole Gospel, and all the Offices of Christ.

Fifthly, a settling of men in contempt and hatred of holy Scriptures; and now
what greater plagues can be imagined, than thus to fight against Christ, and
that salvation so dearly purchased by him?

3. Another effect is, a rushing headlong into a gulf and maine sea of wrath:
This tyranny finds men sons of wrath, but casts them into a deeper wrath
than it finds them in: For, is it not a greater damnation to fight against
the light, than to want it? Is not the issue in a deeper wrath, to refuse the
remedy, than contract the disease? Is not that judgment heavier, which brings
eternal confusion of the whole man, than that which only can bring the
outward man to confusion?

Thus having cleared the doctrine, we come to the Use.

1. Of all judgments in the world beware of spiritual Use 1.
plagues, in which is the greatest wrath which either God or the dragon can
inflict on a man in this life: We must more fear blindness of mind, than of
the body; fear more the stone in the heart, than the stone in the bladder;
fear more to be drawn to error, than to torment. We have had great cause to
fear the power and forces of Antichrist, but much more the efficacy of his
delusions: For where God gives up to efficacy of error, it is such a token of
his wrath, as except he should presently send him to the place of his iniquity,
he cannot strike him with a more severe judgment; this being a sign, that the
Lord has denied or deprived such a one of his saving grace, that he has
rejected him from his care and special Providence, and that he means to
glorify himself in his utter destruction.

Here for fuller application of this point, consider two things.

1. The marks of a man under this wrath. 2. The means to avoid it.
The marks of one that lies under this wrath, are these.

1. Ill use of gifts bestowed, and not profiting by good means of grace
vouchsafed; when Gods Word and Ordinances are too weak to prevail with a
people or person to reclaim him: Esaias. 5. 4. What could the Lord do more to
his Vineyard? Which when it failed of all his expectation; he would lay it
waste; nothing but briars and thorns should thenceforth grow in it, and he
would command the clouds to rain no more on it; The unprofitable servant that
employed not his Talent to increase, had his talent taken away, and himself
bound hand and foot unto execution. Heb. 6. 8. the ground often watered and
dressed, that still bears thorns and briars, is near a curse, and the end is
burning: So the bad ground of wicked men's hearts, which under a powerful
Ministry grow more stony, more secure, more hateful, their conscience more
seared, their courses more obstinate against the means of grace, are near a
blow, and the longer it is a fetching, the heavier it will be: So when the
Lord adds to his Word his hand, and adds some stinging external cross to
awaken the soul, and bring it low before him; but this gracious warning and
summons is set out, and no good use made of it, it hardens so much the more, as
in Pharaoh, and causes the Lord to leave such persons to themselves, as a
father who cannot prevail against his sons stubbornness, by admonitions nor
corrections, leaves him with sorrow to himself; or a Physician who has put
Art and nature to the uttermost extent, but cannot prevayle against the
disease, leaves the Patient to death: so the Lord, Esa. 1. 5. Wherefore should
ye be smitten any more? ye fall away more and more.

2 Another note is pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 12. this signs a
man given up to this wrath. By unrighteousness is meant error of judgment, or
of practice, whereby God or men are deprived of their due, as righteousness
gives both their due. By taking pleasure in unrighteousness is meant.

1 Not a willing of their sins only, but a liking and allowing of them.

2 An high prizing and esteeming of them, as things we take pleasure in.

3 An earnest, greedy, and delightful pursuing of them.

4 A fight and contention for them, and against contrary grace.

5 A resolution by no means to part with them, no more then we will with
things, in which we take most content and pleasure.

Examine the content which thy course gives thee, and see whether it be a
sweet fruit of the Spirit of truth, or arise from the spirit of error and
delusion. For there be many ways that be good in a man's own eyes, but the
issues are death, Prove, 14. 12. and a most grievous plague it is, when a
seduced heart flattering the sinner shall cause him to bless himself, while
his sin worthy to be hated is found with him Psalm. 36. 2. This calling of
good evil, and evil good, draws on sin with cartropes, Esa. 5. as many
nowadayes count religion preciseness; care of pleasing God hypocrisy; zeal
rashness and folly; in the mean time they think their own profane estate
good enough. Well: take heed of pleasure in unrighteousness, which argues a
man stripped of all sound grace; for the least grace would acknowledge the
least grace, and disallow the least evil: and it argues a man in a course,
which brings on swift damnation: and whosoever delights in unrighteousness,
the righteous Lord will dash all his joys, and make them end in woe and
desperate sorrow.

3 Another note, is society with vile persons out of favoring their vices, as
with Atheists, swearers, drunkards, enemies of grace, and such whose damnation
sleeps not. For what is this but to partake Psalm. 50.
and thrust a man's self into the wrath of other men's sins? and how can a man
be knitt unto the members of a body, and not to the head? If Gods justice have
permitted thee to be one with the members, thou may well discern he has
permitted thee, and for the present delivered thee to the head: seeing the head
and the members make up but one dragon, And as there is not a more discernable
mark of a Believer, then love and hearty union with the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.
14. so is there not a more discernable note of a man belonging to the dragon,
then by sorting with his brood, and running with workers of iniquity.

4 He is apparently under the dragons wrath, that confirms himself in the
customable neglect of Gods Ordinances, public or private. This man will fall
to nothing, as he that ordinarily refuses his meat: or at best his religion is
but a passion, or fit, or is in respect of persons, or occasions. And it is
because he will not be reclaymed from some lust.

5 He also that is an enemy of righteousness; a man whose bent is, to
disgrace the way of God, and turn men out of the way, as Elymas, Act. 13. 8.
10. a flaunderer, a deviser against it, an open contester against the powerful
purity of Gods word, an instrument of the devil, and makebate to cast out thy
means of Salvation; such a one is in the devils work: and why not in his
power? The like of them that mis-judge the generation of God, and pronounce
wicked sentence on them whom: the Lord acquiteth: as, if a good man be cast
into some furious disease, they are ready to judge the estate of the soul by
the distemper of the brain, and disgrace a godly and holy life by a violent
death etc.

Now the means to avoid this great wrath, are twofold:

I. To avoid the special sins which arm Satan with this great wrath against
us: as

1 Want of care to know God: Romans 1. 28. the heathens, because they regarded
not to know God, God gave them up to a reprobate mind. For when men cast God
out of sight, and out of mind, how just is it that God cast them out of sight
and mind? Thou that have not God before thine eyes, think not of him but as
of one that has nothing to do with thy matters, forgettest him to be a judge
and witness of all thou do, deridest the true knowledge of God, and wilt
take no direction from him; know it, thou have thy choice, God will have as
little to do with thee for the present as thou desire, his grace and presence
shall be far enough from thee, own thee who will, guide thee who will, his
mercy and help will be far to find. Who sees not this heavy stroke of
Gods wrath in numbers left by God, and ruled by the devil, men of reprobate
minds, destitute of judgment and common reason, rejecting all that is good,
refusing nothing that is naught, rejoicing in the highest sins, swearing,
drinking, drabbing, railing, cursing; defying whatsoever savoureth of God or
Godliness.

2 Sin: want of love to the truth. 2. These. 2. therefore God gave them up to
the strong delusions of Antichrist. See we a man despising the means or
bringers of the truth, or a man that willingly suppresseth and choaketh the
truth in himself, or withstandeth the holy means, resists and scornefully
thrusts away the preaching of the Gospel of truth, or prefers vain
speculations and frothy discourses and devises of men's brain before the simple
truth of Scriptures, or a man that does not regard to procure, preserve,
practice, and propagate the true knowledge of God? this man is far from love
of the truth, he is fit for any delusion, there is no trust in him, but be his
knowledge and profession never so great, he may make a strong Papist, an open
Apostate, or any thing but a sound and constant Believer. If we know the
truth, happy are we if we love it.

3 Sin: idolatry, Romans 1. 26. for this cause God gave up the heathen to vile
affections; namely for their idolatry. And yet theirs was invincible, they knew
not the true God by the light of the Scripture, but only by reading in the
book of nature. How much more shall Christians be given over for their wanton
and wilful Idolatry, after so long teaching, and such clear shining of the
truth amongst us? Where an idol stands up, there is no place for God; Dagon
and the Arc cannot stand together. How far Antichristian Idolatry has
driven God from that synagogue, we may read in the great letters of such
senseless errors, as no blind heathens were ever worse seduced. It was Gods
patience, that our easiness to Romish Masses and idolatry, did not wrap the
Kingdom into this fierce wrath.

4 Sin: earthlinesse, love of the world, of profits, and self love: as in
Demas, who forsook the truth, and embraced the present world. This sin made
Judas, being an Apostle, at the side of Christ, and steward of his family, to
be delivered up to the full wrath of the devil. What else carries away our
Fugitivos and Seminaries, to become Priests, and traitors to Religion, their
Prince, and country, but hope of preferments and profits, which here they fail
of?

II. The only positive means to be hid from this wrath, is, to walk
carefully and humbly before God. Eccles. 7. 26. there is a woman whose heart is
as nets and snares, her hands are bands, he that is good in Gods sight, shall be
delivered from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her: Even so, only piety
delivers from this Babylonish harlot, which hunteth the precious lives of men,
Prove. 6. 26. For the more wicked a man is, the more is he hated of God; and the
more hated of God, the more subject he is to be deceived by Antichrist. And
therefore the sinner is in great danger. Now the way to avoid this danger, is,
to be good in Gods sight: which goodness consists in

1 Approoving our hearts and ways unto God, the chief good.

2 Framing our actions by the word, the unfayling pattern and rule of
goodness.

3 Walking and persisting in the way of good men, For it is not goodness of
nature, wit, education, civility, learning, nor any humane skill which can
keep a man from the hooks and snares of this harlot, but only goodness of
grace and the fear of the Lord.

2 This serves to admonish all, who are in full Use 2.
communion with the Pope, and are formal limbs of Antichrist, and of the
Romish Church, timely to look to themselves, and consider these four
propositions.

1 That those who adore the Beast, and receive his Image, must drink up the
lees of this wrath, Revel. 14. 8. 9. But so does every limb of Antichrist,
adoring him, in yielding him divine honor, and seeking pardon of sin from
him, as if he were God: and receiving his image, by subjecting his conscience
to his laws, as to the laws of God, and depending on his mouth as on the mouth
of God. And therefore they all lie under this great wrath.

2 That he that has not the Son, shall not see life. But no obstinate and
wilful Papist that holds not himself only to Christ's righteousness for
justification, but will stand before God in his own righteousness, merits and
satisfactions, has the Son. And therefore no such shall ever see life. The
Assumption the Apostle teaches, Gal. 5. 4. They are abolished from Christ, and
fallen from grace, whosoever will be justified by the Law.

3 That he which believes not in the Son of God, the wrath of God abides on
him. Ioh. 3. 36. But no such Papist does believe in the Son of God: For saving
faith is condemned as presumption, and access to the throne of grace with
boldness, and assurance of the favor of God, are scoffed at: and in stead of
saving faith they nourish a general assent to the truth of the word of God,
which I affirm to be common to the reprobates, and devils. Therefore they are
under wrath.

4 That he which lives and dies an idolater, cannot avoid the wrath of God.
But so must he do, that lives and dies an obstinate member of that Church;
being bound to give divine honor to Saints, relickes, images, consecrated
things, and especially to the breadden god. And therefore what a desperate
thing is it, to live and dye in that religion? Antichrist only prevayleth in
them that perish: none of the Elect can be seduced by this great seducer:
neither can any that follow the beast, avoid to drink the dregs of the Wine of
GODS wrath. Revel. 14. 7. 8.

3 Pity the case of those that are carried away into Use 3.
Antichristian delusion and Apostacy. For of all sinners they are in most
fearful case.

1 For their persons: they are a number of men, whose head is the son of
perdition, who are in state of perdition, who are given up to the most
mischievous wrath of the dragon, such as whose names are not written in the
book of life.

2 For their course: they are men that sin against the light, against the
remedy, against the whole Gospel, especially against the precious blood and
merit of Jesus Christ. Oh what a sin is it, to sin against this blood, and
bring the guiltiness of it upon a man's own head, as they do by undervaluing
it, and trampling it under foot, equalling with it the blood of Becket and
traitors, preferring before it the milk of his mother! as Carolus Scribanius,
a late Jesuit, in a Poem not only holds the best compound for a sick soul,
to mix Mary's milk and Christ's blood, but that of the two her milk and the
merit and virtue of it is more precious and excellent then CHRIST'S Blood.

3 Their estate is most fearful, because there is no loss to the losle of
the truth, no fall to the fall from grace, no wrath that the Dragon can watch
against a person, comparable to this: For he is sure, that whosoever persist in
this condition, they must drink of the winepresse of the wrath of God.

We pity men if we see the^ in any bodily torments: but no bodily torments can
equal the wrath of being given up to the strong delusions of Antichrist. And
we must put on bowels of mercy and pity toward our brethren in misery, which
if it rise right will begin at their souls, and especially will compassionate
the spiritual miserable. This is to be like God who had pity on us, when we
were in darkness, in our blood, our navell not cut, etc. Ezekiel. 16.

4 We learn hereby not to take offense if we Use 4.
see many turned away to this horrible Apostasy, but take notice of the just
judgment of GOD in delivering up men to this great wrath of the Dragon.

For particula^ ^ersons: what wonder to see careless and contemptuous hearers
of the Gospel set over to Satan, to execute all his wrath and mischief over
them? God in justice has allotted them their wish and choice: The truth woed
them, but could not win them, and therefore falsehood and lies have justly
seduced them. Christ in the Gospel made love unto them, entreated, promised,
allured by all loving means, but they slighted him, refused his offers of
peace and life, and therefore are justly a spoil and prey of Antichrist. The
truth offered to set the^ free, and bring them into the liberty and privileges
of the sons of God: but they refused truths freedom, and therefore are justly
chained and fettered in the bands of deadly errors and delusions. How justly
must he drink up a full vial of wrath, who will not be persuaded to taste a
sweet cup of mercy and salvation? how justly is that felon executed, who
scorns the Kings most gracious pardon?

So for people and Kingdoms. What may we gather from the great and open
prevayling of Antichrist in any Kingdom? which will be apparent in the
infinite increase and boldness of Papists and Recusants in such places, in the
swarms and numbers of the people after a strange boldness running and
resorting to their Masses, in the open increase of multitudes of locusts and
frogs, Jesuits and Priests, croaking in corners and streets, challenging,
seducing, and deceiving, and as diligent as the dragon himself, whose tail
they are, to wrap men not loving the truth, in this fearful wrath and deep
perdition. What may be hence gathered but the provocations of such a kingdom,
kindling so great a wrath of God against them? Did Antichrist ever come into a
kingdom, and the sins of that kingdom not let him in? Were men not fierce
against the Lord in contemning and despising his truth, in open ^rophanation of
his Sabbaths, in desperate scoffing at religion, in bringing in their sins to
their height? Had they not lost their first love, their zeal, their taste of
Manna? were not they unthankful to the Lord for setting them out of this
Egypt? and were they not looking and running back to the Onions and
fleshpots, which made the Lord shake the fiercest Arrow of his Quiver against
them? Could any thing but hellish profaneness and contempt of so shining
grace, have entered such a wrath amongst them, as heaven nor hell in this life
cannot inflict a greater? for Turkish tyranny is light in comparison of
Antichristian. Oh that our Apostasy to a very formal and powerless
godliness were laid to heart, as the hatcher and breeder of such wrath, which
will not be so easily removed as let in! Did we still march courageously as
we began in the beginning the reformation, we should not then need to fear
our former oppression and tyranny. Let us be wise by the rod shaken over us,
lest the stroke and smart fall also on us, and show us our folly.

5. Labor to preserve one another from this damnable Use 5.
way: To which we have these and sundry motives.

First, we pull one another out of fire and water, and should much more out of
the fire and water of Gods wrath, yea out of hell and damnation.

Secondly, all our Saviors course was, to win souls, to seek and save what
was lost.

Thirdly, God has made every man his brothers keeper; who has commanded to
pull our neighbors, yea enemies Ox or Ass out of a ditch: And therefore
every man must be servant to every man, (as Paul) to win some, and not be
careless whether he stand or fall, sink or swim, live or die: And we must
by all good means preserve and strengthen our brethren; Ministers by discrying
the danger (this is our chief intent, not wrath and anger to our people)
Private men by exhortation, brotherly conference, wise reproofs of the
obstinate, etc. All by godly life and holy innocence, which is a means both to
stop the mouths of malicious Papists, and win such as are tractable.

Knowing that he has but a short time.] In these words is the reason of the
dragons wrathful disposition; where consider three things:

1. How Satan's time is said to be short. 2. How he knows it is so. 3. What
use he makes of this knowledge.
For the first.

Quest. How can that be said a short time, which has continued now since the
writing of this Prophecy sixteen hundredth years, or not much less?

Ans. A time long in it self must be said to be short respectively: So this,

1. In respect of God, to whom a thousand years (which is a long time in it
self, and to us) is but as one day; and so even thus long since our Lord said,
Rev. 21. 6. Behold, I come shortly.

2. In comparison of former times; so this continuance of Antichrist, which is
simply in it self, a long time, is comparatively said to be short, in respect
of the time and ages going before it: And so the whole time of the New
Testament, which is in it self a very long time, is called the ends of the
world, 1 Cor. 10. 11. and the last hour, 1 Ioh. 2. 18. for so the manner of
Scripture is, which distributeth the world into three ages; the first from Adam
to Moses, the second from Moses to Christ, the third from Christ his first
coming to his second. This last period was called the last hour, not because
presently upon Christ's Incarnation or Ascension the world was to end, (for how
then could the Church have been gathered through the Christian world?) but
because,

1. This was the last and full time in which all was consummated and ended,
which was fore-prophesied in former ages touching man's redemption, even the
full and last revelation, which is to be in earth, and no other change of
worship and Ministry is to be expected as in the former; till the great and
last day, in which the great Judge shall put an end to days, and time, which
shall be no more, and to the warfare of the whole Church.

2. It shall be a far shorter time than that which went before, yea in
likelihood shorter than either of the former periods, or ages; for seeing it
shall be bitter and sharp by the tyranny of Antichrist, for the Elects sake
(Christ says) these days shall be shortened, Mat. 24.

For the second.

Quest.How does Satan know his time to be short?

Ans. 1. Because he knows his time is determined; for the wicked spirits know
perfectly by the accusation of their conscience, and partly by the sentence
already passed upon them, that a day of further torment awaites them; whence
they say, Mat. 8. 29. Art thou come to torment us before the time?

2. He knows this time is hastening upon him, sundry ways.

1. By prediction and observation of Scriptures. He observed the Apostles
saying, that on us the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. joining
himself with those Christians that then lived, and all the rest that were to
live till the end of the world, being all comprehended in one body, and all
subjected to the same last dispensation of grace, which was not to be ended or
changed, but by the return of Christ to judgment.

2. By daily experience he sees the decrepit age of the world, as in the
several parts, so in the whole: If old buildings crack, it threatens ruin.

3. He knows and observes most of the signs of Christ's second coming to be
past; as,

1. That many false Prophets inspired by himself, are risen up and have
deceived many, as was foretold Matthew. 24. 24. This is an argument of the last
hour,

1 John 2. 18. we know it is the last hour, for many Antichrists are come,
that is, petty-Antichrists, the prodromi and forerunners of that great one.

2. That the Gospel has been preached through the world, predicted, Mat. 24.
14. and accomplished, Romans 10 18. Their sound is gone through all the world,
and their words unto the end of the earth. For,

First, this was Christ's commandment, Go teach all nations, Mat. 28.

Secondly, the Apostles obeyed this commandment, and fulfilled it, Col. 1. 6,
13. The Gospel is come unto you, as it is unto all the world.

Thirdly, the incredible swiftness and power of the Gospel shows the
divinity of it, in that before the destruction of Jerusalem, or within thirty
years, it was spread into all the inhabited world, as many Fathers hold: And
therefore if any barbarous nation or newfound land bewray utter ignorance of
Christ, either they were not inhabited, or they have had some sound of the
Gospel, but have suffered it quite to die and be lost.

3. The detection of Antichrist is so plain and manifest in this fifteenth age
past, as children can point at him, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.

4. Horrible persecutions, wasting the Church, not only by heathen Emperors,
but ever since by fierceness of Antichrist, the Apollyon of Rome, foretold in
Mat. 24. 6.

5. General defection from the faith, foretold in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. through the
spreading of the leaven of Popery, which drove the woman into the wilderness.

6. Universal corruption of manners, and obstinacy against the truth; see Luke
17. 26. and, 2 Timothy 3. 1. By all which signs Satan knows, that the last day
(which is the time of his torment) is not far off.

For the third.

Quest.What use makes Satan of this knowledge?

Answ. Knowing that he shall shortly be cast and confined into hell, he
recompenseth the shortness of his time with cruelty of wrath: This knowledge
of his damnation does but whet up his malice against mankind; and seeing that
the sentence passed against him hasteneth upon him, he is so much the more
busy to pull as many as possibly he can into his own ruin and damnation; a
manifest sign of furious and desperate wickedness.

Certain things are hence to be collected and observed.

I. There is a determinate time of Satan's rage, and Doct. I.
of the Churches conflict against him: The war lasts not always: And why?

1. There is an hour for the power of darknesle, Reas. 1.
and but an hour; that is, a certain and determinate time, in which by Gods
permission he may put forth his malice in the world, but beyond it he cannot
pass, Luke 22 53.

2. As it was with the Head, so also with the members: 2.
There was a time when Christ was assaulted and tempted in the wilderness, and
a time when the Devil left him, not willingly, but because he could stay no
longer, the date of his Commission being expired: So there is a time, when his
members and Nunc pluit, and clar^ nunc Jupiter aethere fulget.
disciples in the ship of the Church shall be tossed and almost covered with
waves, and a time when there shall be a great calm, Mat. 8. 26.

3. The wickeds rod must not always lie in the 3.
lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125 3. Our merciful God sees our weakness, and
need of breathings, and refreshings, and so mingleth his cup according to our
health, and strength, and as we are able to bear: Whereas, were Satan and his
Impes left to themselves, they would never cease smiting and afflicting.

4. Our experience seals the truth of the promises, 4.
who after a storm meet with a calm, after a weary hill a sweet dale, and
after darkness see light; And it assures of the maine promise of all, that
after a good fight fought there is a crown of righteousness to be given by
the righteous Judge.

Which incourageth us with constancy and patience Use 1.
to stand out a little while in this fight: Re. 3. 10. there is but an hour of
temptation, and cannot we watch one hour? are we sure of victory if we
stand to it but one hour more, and shall we faint? Heb. 10. 37. Yet a very
little while, and he that will come shall come: therefore cast not away your
confidence, but care a while, and be ever safe: Behold, the field is even
almost won, the battle even at an end, and we are in the last hour of
conflict; a few straggling enemies are to be rooted out; and therefore let us
renew our courage and strength, as those that are not at leisure either to
fear or feel the blows, seeing victory is in our hands already.

Also it may comfort us in all the assaults and troubles Use 2.
of this life, in ward and out ward; seeing God has determined them all, and
he that has appointed the beginning has appointed the end also. The try all
is but a storm, or cloud, and it will vanish: And if Satan's rage be limited
to a time, to a short time, so is the wickedness of his instruments, and this
time they shall not pass: And if now be the season, in which the Lord uses
them justly, as rods, to afflict his children, yet ere long these rods must be
cast into the fire,

2. Note here, that the sharper the aslault of the dragon Doct. II.
is, so much the shorter it is; the fiercer the wrath, the less time it
lasts. For why?

1. The harder a man works, the sooner will his Reas. 1.
work be done; the more busy and violent Satan is, the sooner will his
measure be full, the sooner shall the Elect be tried, and purged, and chased
to heaven, and the sooner will he bring destruction on the wicked, whom he
gallops to hell, and hastens to swift damnation.

2. Violent things cannot be lasting or perpetual, 2
and extremes are nearean end: It is true that wicked spirits and men are in
their affection endless and perpetual in their violence against God and all
good things and persons; and therefore according to this affection their
plagues are endless; but actually violent they cannot always be.

First, because themselves cannot long subsist, but must give place to death
and hell.

Secondly, if themselves would never end, yet would God put an end to their
violences, as Matthew. 24. unless God had put an end and measure to those
miserable days of Jerusalems destruction, no Jew had been left; but for a few
Elect God shortened them.

Which greatly comfort Gods people in the Use 1.
midst of the great confusions and tumults now stirring in the world.

1. Do we see iniquity abound, and sin more shameless than in former
times? Is the Sun in the heavens a witness against the earth of such
contempt of the Gospel and despite of the grace of GOD, the bringers and
messengers of it, and professors of the grace of God, as former times of the
Gospel cannot parallel? Do we see envy, cove tousnesse, idleness, and
scorn of godliness in Ministers? see we the reign of drunkenness, adultery,
pride, blasphemy, obstinacy, and desperate impenitency in people, such as is
wonder the earth opens not her mouth, as hell, to swallow up her inhabitants,
so highly sinning against such a light? Now hence we must conclude, that the
devil is come down in this age with more than* ordinary wrath, and in more
tyrannous manner than in former days; And in this outrage of sin see the
outrage of Satan's wrath, and that the more furious his wrath is, the shorter it
is like to be. For this is an infallible sign of the last times, and the last
hour; when Satan's wrath seems to mingle heaven and earth, let us lift up our
heads, the Lord is not far off to put an end to this confusion.

2. Do we see Antichrist furious and wrathful, laying about him with both his
swords so busily, as that he is in hope to gain the morsel he has long
gaped for? Do we see him make havocke and waste in the flourishing Churches of
Bohemia, the Palatinate, and other parts of Germany? is he casting down the
worship of God, banishing the Scriptures of God, killing the Ministers and
people of God, setting up his Idols and puppets for gods, before those that
receive his mark in their hands and foreheads? What may we hence gather but
these two things?

First, that we are cast into the last of the last times; for the nearer we
are to the last moment of the last hour, so much the more busy shall we see
Antichrist, and the spirit of error active in putting forth their wrath.

Second, that Antichrist his time is short; the sharper the assault is, the
shorter it will be; and how can he that reads the Scripture with judgment
but know, that as there is an hour of judgment and vengeance to light upon
that Antichrist ( Rev. 14. 7.) so it is not far off their necks?

2. Let all wicked men beware of boldness and Use 2.
fierceness in sin, which argues them not only delivered up to the wrath of
the devil, but that their time is not long; for their measure fills apace: See
it in Judas how industrious he is near his death. A man in the high forms of
sin easily loses his life in the service of some sin or other; God usually
taking them at their hight and top. How many judgments of God witness this
truth daily upon drunkards, swearers, riotous persons, and quarrellers, who
come to untimely deaths, and seldom live out half their days? How suddenly
has the Lord taken down proud and scorn full persons in the hight of their
pride, and pursuit of his children? examples are too many to recite: And how
many wicked men are so like the devil, that as he refuses not to be thrust
into Hell at the judgement-day, on condition he may play Rex against the
Church, and vex and torment the Saints till then, so these care not for hell
and damnation afterward, so they may a few days live as they list, and bring
to pass as lawless persons, their wicked devises and villainies, in trampling
down the servants of God, and in service to their own damnable lusts, as
drunkards, swearers, revengefull men, and the like.

3 We must from the dragons practice pick out Doct. 3.
our lesson, and duty concerning our own time.

1 As the devil knows and observes his time, so must we labor to know
ours, and the fitness of it for duty. Christ sharply reprooves the Jews for
not knowing their time, Luke 12. 56. Why discern ye not this time? Mat. 16. 3.
Hypocrites, can ye discern the face of the sky, and not the face of these
times? How few be there, who know the happy times and opportunities they enjoy?
Satan knows the time of his mischief, and slips it not: men know not the day
of their visitation, nor the acceptable time, nor the day of salvation, which
God offers for grace and conversion. The Lord may justly complain of us as
of the Jews, Ier. 8. 7. The Crane, the Storke, the Swallow, know their times;
but my people know not me. How else comes it, that the Lord stretches out his
hands all day long, and knocks continually by the hammar of his word at the
door of every man's heart, offering the precious mercies of grace and glory, but
who open unto him, or answer his gracious invitation? Why do our youth riot out
their time, and cast the care of religion into their last accounts, but because
they know not their time? Did they consider, that youth is most fit for
impressions of grace, that grace is in that age most graceful, that now they
have fresh wit, quick senses, and all powers, lively instruments for grace, and
that now they have strength and vigor called for, 1 Ioh. 2. 14. to overcome
evil; knew they such a seed time of grace, would they sow to the flesh? would
they not seek wisdom early?

Whence else is it, that our elder men, after long teaching and trayning in the
profession, are as ignorant as children, spend their time as vainly as the
heathen in earthly lusts, but because they never knew their time? Should not
they that have had more means, have been more expert in the word? does not
their time, who have been bred up in the profession, and lived twenty or
thirty years in it, call for double or treble measure of knowledge and grace,
as they have doubled or trebled their years beyond others? the devil would be
loath to slip any part of his time so foolishly.

Why else do our great and rich men wallow in lusts, feed their senses, pamper
their bodies, cast away their souls, eat up their time in eating, gaming,
riot and wantonness, but because they have not learned, neither from Gods
book nor the devils diligence, to know their time, and the fitness of it for
their own good? Have they not many hours free from so necessary labor, as
poor men are bound unto? as many hours free from cares and distractions for
necessaries, which lie heavy on poor men? many hours and days in a week
free to hearing, reading, prayer, meditation? want they any thing but grace and
will to do themselves good? and does not their very time tell them (if they
knew the voice of it) that they ought to be as far above others in grace and
piety, as place and opportunities of grace? But why be these so far below
their inferiors, in knowledge, in practice, in use of the means? why do they
suffer the poor to receive the Gospel and the grace of it from them, but
because they know not their time, neither the worth nor use of it, and
therefore they so miserably wast it.

2 As the dragon knows his time is short, and therefore bestirres him, so we
must know our time is short, and yet has long wings to fly swiftly from us,
and therefore not to wast it out idly.

Object. Who knows not that his time is short? experience and sense teaches it
every day: few children but can show some marks of their parents mortality.

Answ. Sense and observation and experience may teach the dragon, that his time
is short: But thou must have a better and higher teacher, or else thou can
not learn this lesson. And therefore Moses, seeing few men wiser by the sense
and experience of the shortness of their lives, and uncertainty of days, and
that nature and experience cannot teach this skill to benefit themselves by the
frailty of themselves or their predecessors, goes to God to teach him to
number his days, Psalm. 90. 12. For by nature a man is never the wiser by any
chastisement he sees or hears, except God nurture and teach him. It is true,
that the dim light of nature could highly prizetime for some outward profit, as
the usurer, husbandmen, Merchant, and occupyers, and the heathens: No day
without a line, and Titus could say, Heu diem perdidi! Alas, I have lost a day!
But it must be the teaching of grace, that makes us to reckon the minutes and
moments of our present precious time, so as therein to make our selves gainers
of something more precious then it self.

And how few are thus taught by grace, appears, seeing few hold it a
seed-time, to go forth to sow in tears; few hold it such a moment, as on which
eternity depends; few hold it a time of traffic till the Master come, but
as if the Masters absence were for eating, drinking, and smiting the
fellowservants; few know the worth of their time, before the want of it. Many
are niggardly of their wealth, but prodigal of their time. Many complain of
the shortness of life, but not of loss of time. Many utterly cast away this
short time, by doing nothing or as good as nothing. And as little children who
have spent their candle in play, are glad to go to bed by dark, and never till
too late see their folly: so these. None of all these ever had their hearts
taught by God, of the shortness of their days.

3 Knowing that our time is short, we must make another use of this knowledge
then Satan does. His knowledge provokes his diligence in all mischief: the
shortness of his time whetteth and sharpneth his wrath. But our knowledge of
the shortness of our time must make us industrious in grace, that we may make
a quick and profitable return thereof to our selves. Thus our Lord commanded,
Ioh. 12. 35. work while the light lasts; the darkness hastes, when none
can work. And thus he practiced, Ioh. 9. 4 I must work the work of him that
sent me, while it is day: the night comes when no man can work. The same did
his Apostles, 2 Pet. 1. 13. Knowing that shortly I must lay down this my
tabernacle, I think it meet to stir you up.

Reasons hereof are these.

1 It is a sign of a good man, to be best and busiest at last: Psalm. 92. 14.
the just are more fruitful in their age. Revel. 2. 19. The Church of Thyatira
her works were more at last then at first. For though no part of the life of a
Christian converted be fruitless, yet is it the autumn of his life that
yields most fruit: and as to him that has, more is still given, so the more he
has given, the more is his employment, and the more receipts, the more return.

2 Christian wisdom teaches the Believer, that this short time is allotted to
work, not to loytering; and to work the greatest work in the world, both in
performing acceptable service to God, in doing good unto his brethren according
to their needs, spiritual or temporal, and in gathering up his own comfort,
by making his election sure, both by increase of graces, and fruits of faith in
abundance of good works: All which call for a wise husbanding and improoving
of his time, and a diligent hand, so much the more, as the time or season
hastneth from us, or we from it: as in harvest the fairer the day, and nearer
night, the more busy are the careful workmen; so must it be here.

3 It argues a heart zealous of Gods glory, to do all the good he can while he
may, and is only grieved that he has done so little good, and can do no more.
A good heart still complains of the unprofitablenesse of it; to will is
present with it, it loves obedience, and purposes of obedience shall not perish
when performances often fail.

4 It brings comfort to the heart, when the conscience witnesses to a man
that he has not slipped his opportunity, but done the business he had
committed unto him: Our Lord himself thus comforted himself toward his death,
Ioh. 17. 4, While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: and I
have done the work which thou gave me to do. And the Apostle Paul near
death rejoiced, that he had fought a good fight, and finished his course; and
now was laid up for him a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 46.

1 This reprooves idleness in all men, whose time is so short. Gods word
teaches that he that sleeps in harvest is the son of confusion, Prove. 10.
5. and that the harvest is not to last always, neither will God hold out his
grace always when he is held off with delays. The unreasonable creatures, who
have no reason to persuade them, none to call on them or admonish them, know
their times and seasons: the silly Ant knows, and labors in summer; a creature
of no account or respect, yet men are sent to her to learn her ways. Our own
experience Prove. 6. 6.
has known many cry out of themselves in the end of their time, because they
knew not their time; and have not received answer or comfort, which they could
ever express: because God had often cried and called, and they would not in
time answer. Now it were well, if at length such as would never learn this
lesson from God and his word, nor from his works and creatures, nor from their
own experience, would learn it of the devil; to be busy in their proper
work, as he is in his, because his time is short. But of all men, old men
especially, who must either now work or never, and who if they spare not at
the bottom of the vessel of their time, are for ever hopeless and desperate.

2 Let us provoke our selves to diligence in weldoing. Use 2.
The devil knows, if this short time be shut in, he cannot do any more
mischief, and therefore, plyes it while it lasts. So if thy day be shut in,
and thy short time expired, thou art taken away and can return no more to do
any good: and therefore, seeing none of us have any long time, it stands us in
hand to supply the shortness of our time with diligence in dispatching our
principal business. Eccl. 9. 10. Whatsoever thou have to do, do it with all
thy power: for there is neither wisdom nor invention in the grave.

And as the dragon, the more mischievous his work is, the more active he is in
it; so the better our work is, we must be so much the more earnest in it: for,
shall the devil be earnest in mischief; and we slack in good? The work of
the Ministry is an excellent work, and therefore the Minister whose time is
commonly shorter then other men's, the shorter his time grows, the more earnest
must he be in preaching, writing, counselling, comforting the people of God.
Many resolve to take their ease, when they grow into years: but then is true
grace most active: the consideration of the approach of death was a spur to
the Apostle Peter, to double his diligence in the Ministry, 2 Pet. 1. 13. The
Magistrate has a notable work in hand, in repressing the wrath of the dragon,
upholding and encouraging godliness: and annual Magistrates have but a short
time when it is longest, in their office: Have you but a short time? be the
more stirring, and careful to do good that little time. We have seen some in
that short time have done a great deal of ill business; therefore imitating
the dragon, because they would not hear the voice of God. But a good man in
office will do a great deal of good in a short time. We hear sometimes some
Magistrates reckon what a short time they have to wear out: I would we could
hear what good they are resolved to do in that short time, which will away
apace: for it is only the good they do in it, which will abide for their
comfort. Finally, the private Christian has an excellent work in hand,
namely, to work out his own salvation, and to further others, both in works
of piety, and by works of mercy, spiritual and temporal, to help them unto
heaven, and in earth: Have thou but a short time for so great a work? be so
much the more diligent. See thou the dragon, because his time is short, so
industrious in heaping up his own damnation, and wrapping as many others as he
can into his judgment, and wilt or can thou slack thy pace and diligence in
promoting thine own and other men's salvation?

3 As the devil and his instruments show and declare the shortness of their
time by extreme wickedness, Use 3.
because Satan powers forth his spirit upon the world, to poison it with
outrageous sins: so let us manifest, that we keep in mind the shortness of
our times, and that we are cast into the last ages, by our readiness and
cheerfulness in good duties, and in abundant fruits of the spirit, which in
the last days was to be powered out, Act. 2. 17. We must express the pouring
out of this spirit, by our increase in knowledge, faith, obedience, and be more
fruitful in our age. Thus we shall aright testify our right judgment of our
own time, and of the last age of the world.

And as the wicked of the world show appara^tly the last time, and Christ near
at hand, by abundance of iniquity, by worldliness, atheism, and excesses of
carnal delight (for is it not as in the days of Noah, wherein men eat and
drink, and marry, and give in marriage, and cast off all care of judgment?) so
let us show it the last age, and that a short time remains, by using the world
as not using it, by marrying as not marrying, and by heavenly conversation: and
all this, because the time is short, as the Apostle advises, 1 Cor. 7. 29. 30.
because there is no constancy or durance of any of these earthly contentments,
no more then of the world it self; let us use these moderatly, and gain those
which are lasting, unwithering, and unperishing.

Verse. 13. But when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the woman which brought forth the man-child. SAtan being cast out of
heaven (I mean that heaven upon earth, which is distant from the earth not in
distance of place, but in sanctity of faith and manners) so as he cannot
prevayle to prejudice the same as he would: (for neither can he hinder the
sound of the Gospel, but it prevaleth in the world, neither can he seduce the
Elect, nor prevent the Saints of their salvation:) Now seeing himself cast
unto the earth, he rages among earthly-mindedmen, and stirs up his agents
and vassals to raise up horrible persecutions, and new tyra^nies, to root out
(if it were possible) the name and mention both of Christ and the woman his
Spouse; but all in vain, as the former assault was, as appears in the sequel
of the Chapter.

In this and the fourteenth Verse are two things:

1. A new onset of the dragon upon the woman, with the reason in this Verse.

2. The evasion or escape of the woman, with the means in the next Verse.

In the Onset consider,

First, the person persecuting, The dragon.

Secondly, the person persecuted, The woman.

Thirdly, the time and manner, When she had brought forth the man child.

I. The persecutor is the dragon; that is, both the devil, the head of that
fierce kingdom, and all such instruments as he raised and used against the
Church in this new assault and persecution: for there is but Observe.
one persecutor of the woman in all ages, even Satan, The dragon is one and the
same persecusor in all ages.
who is the same; but he has many members and Ministers, even a continual
spawne and succession, who as they carry his nature, so here also his own
name, and are one and the same dragon in mind, in will, in malice, in act:
Hence it is, that in Scripture whatsoever the one does, the same the other is
said to do: Revel, 2. 10. The devil shall cast some of you into prison: What
Commodus, Decius, or the other Tyrants did, the devil is said to do; and the
works of the Jews in persecuting Jesus Christ, is called the devils work,
John. 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, his works ye do.

1. Because the dragon, being the god of the world, Reas. 1.
rules the hearts of wicked men, who inclines their wills to hate the Church,
and stirs them up to persecute, and leads them at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
and a slave cannot do but what his Lord commands him; only he inspireth and
acts voluntaries.

2. The same causes which stir up the one, stir 2
up the other to this fury:

First, as there is an old enmity between the woman There are the same causes
of persecution in all ages, and they are four
and the serpent, so is there between the seed of the woman, and the seed of
the serpent: If there be hostility between two Princes, it is maintained among
all their subjects.

Secondly, as the dragon being a deadly enemy to Gods glory, incessantly
seeks to hinder and abolish pure religion, holy worship and worshippers,
because it is contrary to his designs, and stops his power, which
prevails in Idolatry, superstition, and Atheistical liberty; so do wicked
enemies, his issue and offspring, in all ages fight against the true worship
of God, holy religion and pure worshippers, as against their contraries,
because they despise their false gods, detest their idolatry, resist false
religion, contest against their superstition, and actually reprove their
Atheistical liberty, and all their proceedings contrary to the light of grace,
and the word of grace.

Thirdly, as the dragon fears that Christ and his Kingdom will weaken his
kingdom, so the spawne of the dragon fear the same. Herod and Domitian fear
the coming of Christ, and therefore command them of the stock of David in
Jewry to be slain: If we let this man alone (say the Pharisees) all men will
believe him, and down goes our credit: Yea, say the Rulers, and the Romans
will come and take our Nation.

Fourthly, the dragon is false and unjust in usurping that which is not his;
and so are his issue; for tyrants and persecutors (as appears in the story of
the Primitive Church) promoted and accused the Christians for lucres sake, that
they might have the spoil of their goods; as Promoters sometimes use not for
justice sake, or for love of the laws, to accuse men, but to get money to
themselves; so here these two commonly go together, cruelty and injustice.

Which serves to satisfy some places of Scripture Use 1.
that seem contrary to this doctrine: for it seems 3. Differences between
the work of God, and of the dragon, in the same action.
that God stirs up persecutors; he bids Shimei rail; and Ashur is the rod
in his hand, and therefore the dragon is not the only persecutor.

Answ. There is great difference in the work of God, and of the dragon in the
same action; for,

1. God works by wicked men in afflicting his Church, but the devil works
effectually in them.

2. In the manner; God by permitting and ordering their malice, the dragon by
immitting and inspiring them with malice and mischief.

3. In the end; God for the good and salvation of his Church, the devil for
their destruction and damnation if it were possible. The fire of Gods furnace,
who ever be the blowers, is to try and purge as gold; the fire of hell is to
burn up and consume, if it might be.

Again, whence are the persecutors of godly men Use 2.
and godliness? they are of the dragon, and of their father the devil, whose
works they do: Whence is Popish religion, of all other the most fierce and
cruel, but from the dragon, who inspireth and acts them with his own spirit
of enmity and murder, who was a murderer from the beginning? for as these
Antichristian dragons were next in time to the Imperial, so also the next in
condition; for as among them, so among these none must go back from the
judgment seat, non mutata sententia, which was an Euse. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c.
21.
old law against Christians. That religion must needs be Antichristian which is
most contrary to Christ's; his doctrine and person was lowly and meek, he
never kindled furious or sulphurious fires against the persons and bodies of
his enemies, but used other arguments of love and lenity, to win and persuade
them

So, whence are they who pick quarrels against godly men, as Nero did to
discharge his own guilt upon their backs, desirous to find and father
occasions and suggestions against them? Are they not inspired and acted by the
devil, and wholly guided by the dragon in mind, will, and affection? Would
thou show thy self an absolute slave to the devil? go on in the way thou art
in, to persecute, revile and wrong the servants of God. When we see a man
fierce and furious, that no persuasion, no reason, no bands or strength of men
can rule him, we will say surely he is possessed of the devil; as truly may
we say here, This furious enemy is possessed by the dragon, whom no reason or
persuasion of GODS Word, no bands or ties of religion or grace can conquer, but
he goes on in rage and fury against godly men, and, as far as he can,
contrives* mischief against them. Here is one possessed with an unclean spirit;
the devil acts and moves him; what he does the devil does: Let
persecutors set what face and countenance they can, they be persons in whom
the devil reigns; Rev. 2. 13. Antipas was slain where the devil dwelt;
that is, by men in whom the devil held his throne and hold.

3. From the former reasons we may discern, Use 3.
who they be from whom we may look for persesecution Three sorts of men from
whom we may expect persecution.
if occasion and time serve.

1. If men express any fierce enmity andgreat difference in matter of
religion, whether in judgment or practice, here will arise easily as great an
estrangement as was between Jews and Samaritans, who meddle not one with
another; and it will easily go farther, from affection into action, if
occasion serve: If Cain cast down his countenance upon his brother, for the
sacrifice sake, and if Abels find better acceptance, no band of nature can
make up the quarrel; if Cain find opportunity, he will lift up his hand in
the murderous act, as well as cast down his eyes upon him. If thou hear men
persecute by their tongues, the way of God, (as persecutors spare no speech
against that way, supposing it a justification of themselves) conclude of them,
their hands will be ready enough upon occasion, to act the persecution of their
tongues: The dragon can put him into one part as well as another.

2. When men regard not in conscience and sincerity, Gods holy Ordinances, nor
love the means of grace and salvation, they will easily be brought to
persecute and throw down the same: Gods justice strikes the want of love to
the means of grace, with a stronger delusion; and he that in the shine of the
Gospel shows not love, this man in the storm will show hatred: And whosoever
stands out against the light of grace, and word of grace, there is the same
reason with that in the dragon, because there is an hidden darkness in
himself contrary to it.

3. When a man is set to make good his own estate, credit, and profit with the
love of the Church and Gospel; if he fear Christ's coming near him, will not
stand with his projects and profits, this man is in the high way to this
mischief, Gods glory shall give way to his own, and rather then Gadarens will
lose Piggs and Swine, all the City will rise and pray him to be gone, and if
he will not by entreaty, they will go further; as the Jews fearing loss by
Christ, persecute him to the death. And to this add covetousness and
injustice, noted in the causes; when men for lucres sake, and for no just cause
else, and for a little money, or expectation of reward, show themselves enemies
to godly men, they are not to be trusted: If Judas will fill his bagg, let
Christ look to himself. The dragon in these lusts rules them, and moves them,
and carries them from evil to worse, and on occasion will show it.

4. If the dragon be the persecutor of the Church, Use 4.
then the way to overcome all persecutors, is to overcome the dragon, and to
prevail against the devil. Enemies of the Church and people of God are as
fierce and inexorable as the dragon; they must go on as 4. Means to conquer
the dragon.
far as the dragon is permitted to move them, and therefore to conquer them
we must prevail against the dragon; not by force, fury, impatience, reviling,
or the like, but,

First, by the Word, as Christ in his temptations.

Secondly, by prayer, that Christ would rebuke him; and add fasting, because
this devil goes not out but by fasting and prayer.

Thirdly, by innocence, holiness, and the practice of godliness; this indeed
makes him more raging, but far weaker, and has GODS promise of defense.

Fourthly, by the contrite spirit of patience, meekness, forgiveness, love
and peace: Thus we overcome evil with goodness. Observe.


II. The person persecuted is the woman. The proper Persecution inevitable to
the true Church.
object of the devils malice, next unto Christ himself, is the Church of
Christ, and so inevitable a condition is persecution, as nothing in the world
can keep it long off: For,

1. Here is a woman weak in her self, and impotent, Reas. 1.
whom none but a coward would contend withal; but the dragon is inured since
the first skirmish in Paradise, to offer violence and wrong to such as can
least repel it; from whom the Priests and Jesuits have learned the principles
of their trade in seducing seely women, and ignorant sots, who have no strength
nor weapons.

2. This woman has Michael standing with her, 2
and has brought forth a potent man-child to help her; yet he weighs not
all the strength and power gathered for her: He that dare assault Michael
himself in person, will for all him fiercely and fuririously assault the woman.

3. Here is a woman clothed with the Sun, 3
having the Moon under her feet, crowned with a crown of twelve Stars,
arrayed with righteousness and holiness, as the Spouse of Christ, the ground
and pillar of truth. But this abates not the dragons wrath, but kindles it,
that she is the justified and innocent Spouse of Christ: Besides, here are
many things worth winning from her.

4. This is the same woman that he had immediately 4
before persecuted, and now again renewes his persecution; for loath he is to
afford this Dove of Christ any rest for the soale of her foot.

The Church then cannot be discerned by that Use 1.
durable and lasting peace and glory, which Papists The true Church not
discernable by durable peace
make a mark of their Church; but rather by durable and lasting conflicts, and
obscurity: For trouble is the best trial of religion, and Christ was best
known by his Cross, and so also is his Spouse.

Object.The dominion of Christ shall be everlasting in glory, and Jerusalem is
a vision of peace.

Answ. True: but his kingdom not being of this world, it is in respect of the
spiritual and invisible Kingdom of Christ, the glory of which the world
cannot see: and of that sweet and inward peace of conscience, and joy of
sanctified souls, which the stranger enters not into.

Object. But what has the poor Woman done?

Answ. The dragon persecutes not for evil, but for good: here the better
work, the worse wages: and no other reward can godly men expect at the hands
of wicked ones: to whom they have been instruments of greatest good. David
mitigateth Saul's vexation by his harp: but how vexes he David for recompense?

Let us therefore make no account of rest and peace Use 2.
here, which is not the Churches resting place. Our Lord taught us to make
other accounts, Ioh. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have affliction. We would
have Canaan, before the Canaanites be subdued. But wisdom will expect freedom
when the combat is ended, not before. It is enough we have our earnest in hand
to begin withal: we must look for our wages in the end of our work, and the
crown after the victory.

111. The time of this persecution seems very express in the text: namely
when the dragon had been cast unto the earth, and after the woman had brought
forth her man-child.

The dejection we have showed to be the suppressing of the power of the
heathenish tyrants and Emperors, who upheld pagan idolatry, oppressed the
Christian Church, and withstood the power and passage of the Gospel.

The bringing forth of the man-child we have showed to be the raising up of
Christian Princes and Emperors, the protectors and maintainers of Christian
faith, who succeeded after the heathen Emperors.

We must therefore secke out this fierce persecution in the times of Emperors
by profession Christian; even in those times when the woman might have expected
rest and peace by this manchild, who now had the rod of iron in his hand.

And by looking into the story, and event of those times (which is doubtless
the most true and proper interpretation of prophecies) we find among the
Emperors Christian, after Constantine, a twofold persecution of the dragon:
one civil, the other ecclesiastical and more pernicious.

The former was by the cruelty of diverse Christian Emperors after Constantine,
as Constantius, Julian Apostata, Valence, and others who had nothing but the
pretext and name of Christian, but indeed differed nothing from most fierce and
savage tyrants, wasting the Church, and the Orthodoxe pastors and professors.

The latter, namely ecclesiastical, much more pernicious then the former was,
when the dragon poisoned the Church, partly with damnable heresies, of Arius,
Eunomius, etc. for the maintenance whereof the Emperors most violently
persecuted the sound Stayres by which Antichrist rose to his height.
Bishops, Pastors, and Professors: (the dragon that could not now prevayle by
slaughters and Butcheries as before, does now by poysonfull lies:) partly with
pride, pomp, ambition, and fierce contention of Orthodoxe Bishops for primacy
and superiority over other Churches and Pastors. For now the manchild having
furnished the Church with peace, ease, wealth, lands, patrimony, large revenues
and immunities, the maine study is for the increasing and maintaining of their
pomp: And as ease, wealth, and security increases, so the care of soundness
of faith and sincerity decaieth. Presently from pride grows hot contention
among themselves: Council is called against Council, Synod against Synod: the
greatest strife is for Patriarchicall seats, and quarrels for primacy,
precedence, Churches immunities, Clergy-priviledges, Peter's patrimony, and
revenues of holy Church.

To these ends the principal employment of those Bishops was for setting up
altars, images, crosses, unctions, orders of Monks and Nuns, consecrated
garments, habits, shavings, and an hundredth toys which took up their
thoughts, time, and lives: while the primitive simplicity of Christ and his
truth, with Christian faith and religion, slipped from between their fingers.

Thus Antichrist came to his hight and turret, and thrust in on the blind world
as an armed man. Now was the woman disrobed, the Church spoiled of her chief
ornaments and graces wherein she shined, and was indeed crowned in her low and
afflicted estate. Now were the Ministers who made way unto Antichrist, lifted
up, and intended every thing but conscionable Ministry. Now Jerome justly
complains that after the Christian Church found Christian Princes, Opibus et
potentia, mayor, virtutibus vero ac pietate minor. in vita Mal^bi.
she became in wealth and power greater, but less in virtue and piety.

And this I take to be the most violent assault, by most virulent poison cast
out of the mouth of the dragon, especially aimed at in this text: yea the most
bloody and fierce persecution, which then began to assault the woman, who had
brought out the manchild, Doct.
from under which she is not yet recovered, as Peace has more baned the Church
then persecution.
we shall see if God permit.

The point is this.

Prosperity and peace much more baneth and wounds the Church, then tyranny
and persecution. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Israel when he should have been upright, waxed
fat and spurned with his heel, for sooke the God that made him, and regarded
not the strong God of his salvation. The whole book of Judges shows, that
when Israel was at rest and had the world at will, they forgot the Lord and
turned to idols: but when they were under oppression of enemies, into whose
hands the Lord delivered them for their sins, then they returned and sought
after God diligently. Hos. 13. 6. as in their pastures, so were they filled,
and their heart was exalted, therefore they have forgotten me: whereas the same
Church, having her way stopped with briars, and hedged in with thornie
afflictions, resolves to return to her first husband, for it was then better
with her then now, chap. 2. 7.

From the testimonies come to the induction of most famous Churches,
overthrown by prosperity. The first Churches of the old Testament did thrive
better in Egypt, under that tyranny, then in the milk and honey of Canaan;
which by pride, wantonness, and fullness of bread brought her into Babylons
captivity. The primitive Churches of the new Testament, our text shows how they
were blacked and tanned with the sunshine of peace, plenty, ease, wealth, and
temporal prosperity: that, as the Moon never suffers eclipse but in the
full, because in the full she is farthest distant from the Sun, from whom she
receives her brightness; so the Church in her fullness is farthest from her
Sun, of whom she receives her light, and then suffers most eclipse.

What need we go far for this proof? The Church of England coming out of
the fire and hot furnace of 2. Mary's days, at the restoring of the Gospel,
in the beginning of 2. Elizabeth of happy memory, by whom the book of the Law
was restored, and true worship established, oh how precious and sweet was that
Manna! how zealous, how forward, how painful were godly men to gather it, and
get knowledge! with what joy of heart, courage, and encouragement did the
Saints receive the truth! how resolute and vehement were they against Popery!
what a number of miles did they measure to a Sermon! how took they the
kingdom of heaven with violence!

But now in the continuance of our peace, plenty, and prosperity, how do men
loath this Manna, only cloyed with preaching of Gods word! The former age that
prized it, is gone, and carried their affections with them. Our peace has bred
up a surfetted and graceless generation, that hate the directions of truth,
and scorn the profession of holiness as an hateful heresy. Instead of
frequenting Sermons, and godly exercises of praying, reading, conference, and
holy communion: now the tavernes, tobacco-shops, alehouses, play houses,
whore-houses are stuffed. Knots of drunkards, gamesters, swearers, and vile
persons haunt together, and fear no laws of God nor man. For bibles and godly
books we have the devils: yea cards and dice, store of pipes and smoke. In
stead of holy exercises and conferences we have blasphemous swearing, and
scorning of goodness, riot and ribaldry, surfeiting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness, audacious boldness in evil, and shaming at
nothing but the very show of goodness. Thus as plenty begets surfeit, so our
peace has made the land heart-sicke, and the disease is not more general then
desperate, likely to shame all the Physicians, all the Ministers of the land,
who know not how to turn their hands to recover and help her.

1 Worldly prosperity is a good mother, but Reas. 1.
through our folly brings many bad daughters: so A good mother brings bad
daughters.
ease slayes the fool, Prove, 1. 32. That Gods blessing should be our bane, is
in us, not in it. For our natural folly is, that having found honey we eat
too much. even to hurt our selves: and this folly reigns in wicked men, and
too much of it is bound up even in the hearts of Gods children, by which they
are prone enough to pervert Gods good gifts. God feeds men to the full, and the
wicked run to commit adultery, and assemble themselves by companies into
harlots houses, Ier. 5. 7. Thus do wicked men abuse these sweet refreshings, as
the drunkard does drink to wash away his sense and reason, or as a mad man a
sword, which might serve for his safety. Yea even Gods children are too like
our children, who having got fruit hardly give it over without a surfeit.

Quest. What are these lewd daughters, bred up by prosperity?

Answ. 1. Forgetfulness of God. Worldly prosperity 1 Forgetfulness of God.
and peace make both Churches and persons forgetful of God. Hos. 13. 6. They
were filled, and their hearts were exalted, and they forgot me Ier. 22. 21. I
spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou saydst thou would not hear: this
has been thy manner from thy youth. The Prodigal never remembered his father,
while he was in prosperity and riot. This danger the Lord well discerning in
his own people, straightly warns them, that when they come into the land,
and enjoy houses, vineyards, olives, and have eaten and are full, then to
beware they forget not the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 6. 11.

2 Pride against God, and forgetfulness of themselves. 2 Forgetfulness of
themselves.
Let prosperity once win the heart, it fortifies it against God. Hence has
pride and ambition been the bane of the purest Churches: and so incident to
good men in their peace, as the disciples themselves shall affect hierarchy and
Kingdom, and their own preferment at the right and left hand of Christ, in his
supposed temporal kingdom. Now another mischief hangs hereupon; that the
tops of these mountains of pride are unfit for the herbs and flowers of
grace, to root or grow upon: neither do the raines of Gods grace stand upon
these hills, but slide down into the valleys.

3 Effeminatenesse, softness, love of the world, 3 Effeminatenesse.
delicacy, fear and slight of the cross of Christ. For it is exceeding hard
to have prosperity and not to love it: it is hard in the increase of riches,
not to set our hearts on them: and most easily is the heart won from the God
of heaven to the god of the world. The reason is, because we are naturally from
earth, and carry a lump of earth in our hearts: and quickly fill up all our
roumes and senses with it, our eyes, hands, ears, mouths, and all our natural
motion is that way. Again, minding of earthly things must needs make men
enemies to the cross of CHRIST, as those in Phil. 3. 19.

4 Contention and strife for the holding and enjoying 4 Contention.
of the present fullness and security, and a special resistance of those thac
stick closest to the simplicity of Christ and his Gospel, or any way touch
upon that string. Ambitious Amazia will not suffer Amos to preach. And
Diotrephes loving his pre-eminence rises up against St. John and the most
faithful Pastors.

By all which we see, that as weeds grow abundantly Weeds grow abundantly in
rank soil.
in rank soyles, and without great care kill the herbs* even so many
mischievous plants and weeds rise up in the fat grounds of prosperity, which
seldom peep out of the lean and barren grounds of persecution and tyranny.

2 As Satan is more frequent and dangerous in 2.
these temptations of prosperity, so our selves are most easily foiled in these
rather then in the other.

For the first, Satan is more dangerous in these: for as an enemy when he
cannot overcome in a pitched field, gets him to the woods and bushes, and there
lays his ambushments, in which he is more dangerous then in open hostility, so
Satan when he cannot by violence and open force conquer, by secret and
bewitching allurements he gets an easy victory.

For the second: our-selves are more securely drawn and allured by the
sweetness of prosperity, which, as a bewitching Delilah, has more prevayled
by sugared words and craft against many Sampsons, then by all the power of the
Philistians. If prosperity came out against us with a bloody ensign, or a flag
of defiance, or with a dreadful sword shaking in open hostility, our fear
would be more, and our danger less. But it comes as Ioab, or Judas; when it
kisseth, it kills: it kills with kindness, and with the sweet poison of a
cunning enchanted cup.

Which serves for refutation of Papists, who glory Use 1.
in outward prosperity, as a note of the true Church: but by this text and our
own experience we see, that their prosperity is like Jaels milk, which has
brought them on a dead sleep, as Sisera, whence they shall never awake without
a mortal wound: Judge. 4. 12.
and like the dead sea, in which no life or living thing, no grace, no spirit,
no spiritual worship is to be found:

Likewise it reprooves the folly of carnal men, who will be acquainted with
religion so far as they may profit themselves and thrive by it. If godliness
may be gainefull, and wisdom come with inheritance, they are forward and
devoute: but if it will not stand with their state, ease, credit, and outward
prosperity, either they forsake it with Demas, or with Demetrius persecute it.
Heaven it self has no content, because golden gain and hurtful prosperity
powers not from thence.

2 Note hence how contrary our nature is Use 2.
to Gods: he by his infinite wisdom fetches good out of evil for us, but we
out of our folly su^ke evil of good. God gives us good gifts as sweet as honey,
but we like spiders draw infection and poison from them. Lamentable it is how
we pervert all Gods gracious ends and aims for our good. There be three
chief ends, which the Lord aymeth at in raining down the showers of good
blessings and prosperity upon us, but we pervert them.

1 He expresses his bountifulness to lead us to 3 Chief ends of prosperity
perverted by our selves.
repentance, Romans 2, 4. Every benefit should be a means, yea Sermon of
repentance. But we by hardness of heart that cannot repent, abuse them to
hinder our selves from repentance, or to multiply that where of we must
repent. And no marvel if the wicked by their prosperity harden their own
hearts, when the godly are in danger by others prosperity to harden themselves,
as David, Psalm. 73. 13, 14.

2 The Lord shines upon us with the sun of prosperity, that we might
rejoice in the beams of his love, and serve him with more cheerfulness and
better hearts Deuteronomy. 28. 47. thou servedst not the Lord with joyfulnesse and a
good heart for the abundance of all things. But we use them as clouds to hide
from us the light of the sun, and hinder our sight from the beholding of his
grace, being never less mindful of him then when he is most mindful of us.

3 The Lord affords outward prosperity to his servants, to be by them
occasioned and encouraged in goodness, to quicken them in the way, and to make
by them better speed to heavenly habitations: Luke 16. 9. Make you friends of
unrighteous Mammon, that they may receive you into heavenly Mansions: namely,
not as causes, but witnesses of our salvation: But we make it as a dead sea, in
which lives nothing, or as nails to fasten our hearts to earth and earthly
things; so as hardly and heavily are we lifted up in heavenly meditation or
conversation.

All this injoynes us,

First, to bewail the vile corruption of our nature, 3. Rules of direction
herein
which is so started away from God, with whom we had once a similitude and
conformity.

Secondly, to watch it narrowly, being so slippery and prone to decline, even
where it is most encouraged and fenced to the contrary.

Thirdly, to labor to correct it, and bring it back the way it is gone from
God: Keep it straightly to Gods aims and ends: For shall the Lord even by
afflictions, ill in their nature, work out our good in conversion,
sanctification, and salvation, and shall we be so contrary to him, as by his
benefits set forward our own damnation, as if the Lord intended to kill us
with kindness?

3. If prosperity more bane the Church than adversity, Use 3.
then must we be more watchful in prosperity All our watch is little enough
in prosperity.
and peace, because then danger is nearer: For compare these two a little, and
see, and say whether is more dangerous: For,

1. Prosperity usually is a beam in the eye, and Four instances of the
dangers of prosperity.
shuts the eye of understanding, and closes the ear from hearing counsel;
whereas the rod and persecution opens the shut eye, and the ear that was
sealed, Job 33. 16. For as the Sun and dust do hinder the sight, whereas a
ruffling and stirring wind clears both the air and our eye; so the sunshine
of prosperity fills the eyes of the mind with moates and dust, which suffers us
not to discern spiritual things so clearly, till God by some tempest clear
our sight, according to that, Vexation sharpeneth the sight: See I^r. 31. 18,
19. Vexatio dat intellectum.


2. Prosperity commonly makes men secure, naked, open to temptation; whereas
persecution and tyranny makes them watchful and armed, and fit to make
resistance against sin and assaults. David who could not be overcome in his
battles, but was humble, tenderhearted, chaste and conscionable, compiling
holy Psalms and prayers, full of gracious soliloquies, in his peace and rest
was soon conquered, now must he have Bathsheba, slay Vriah, in the pride of
his heart send out Ioab to number his people, to see how he could stand by his
own strength, and what great evil comes amiss? now he is off his guard, and
out of his strength, and as a City without walls.

Look upon Hezekiah in his sickness, and see him a picture of humility, a
pattern of piety, full of confessions, prayers, praises, and divine
meditations, Esa. 38. But look on him recovered, and you shall see him glorying
in his wealth, priding himself in his treasures, and confederating with
enemies: for as a fair and hot summers day makes a man cast off his clothes,
whereas a cold storm or wind makes him fasten them unto him; even so it is
incident to good men in the gleame of peace and rest to walk more loose, and
at large; whereas a threatening storm will make them buckle themselves, and get
their graces fast unto them

3. Prosperity makes men and Churches wanton, and unruly; as Israel is an
untamed heifer, knows not his master, and leapes over all hedges, but adversity
is as a thorny hedge, Hos. 2. to contain men in bounds, and hold them from
excess; Israel in affliction will return to her first husband, considering it
was then better with her then now. This made Augustine Jnselix Ecclesiae
foelicitas. Magnae foelicitatis est a foelicitate non vin^i.
truly term it the Churches unhappy happiness, and to conclude it a point of
great felicity not to be overcome by worldly felicity.

4. How many of our own experiences may awaken us, and hold us waking,
suspicious of prosperity. Who ever saw the tree of grace grow in the fertile
land of pleasure? Sodom was as Eden, the Garden of God; but what were the
inhabitants? Who are they that receive the Gospel? not many wise, noble or
rich, but poor ones, and weak ones, 1 Cor, 1. 26. Christ's Kingdom is not of
this world, his subjects are called out of the world, and at defiance with the
world; Nay, his Kingdom is contrary to the kingdoms of the world, they rise by
worldly prosperity, wealth, wisdom, power, but Christ's by humility, passion,
patience.

Who are the poorest among us in good works of mercy, piety, and charity, but
those that most abound in wealth and superfluity? Dives cannot spare crumbs:
Poor men that receive the Gospel can spare some mites to uphold the Word
among them; but many of our great rich men can spare only disgrace, contempt,
and, I doubt, would be at some cost to get it away. I never knew man who would
be at no cost for the Word, but he was willing to be at some cost against it.
It is true of many great men, as we see true in the Mountains, which the
richer they are in metals and minerals within, the more barren and fruitless
are they without; Even so men to whom God has given the greatest means, are
often most barren of good works, because he has not given them grace and will
to use them aright.

How hardly shall a rich man be saved?

Who be they that leave Gods house most desolate and empty, but they who most
curiously build and seal their own houses? Hag. 1. 4. Poor men in town and
country can come with much travel to this exercise; rich me^ many who have
time and means to come with ease and pleasure, come not; because who are chosen
to the end, are chosen to the means. Who be they that are carried to Popery
and Idolatry from the truth, but great persons for the most part? and why so,
but because it is a religion according to the flesh, a natural religion, a
libertine religion, that suites with men's corruptions, set up by carnal policy
and power, and therefore carries away such as abound in worldly prosperity? Who
exceed most in riot and excess, but such as abound most in wealth and riches?
And we may generally conclude, Worldly prosperity has made many worse, few or
none better: If adversity has slain his thousand, prosperity has slain ten
thousand.

4. This affords us some rules and directions for Use 4.
the ordering,

First, of our desires. Secondly, of our conditions.
For the first: If God bid us (as he does) ask what we would have, and he
will give us our wish, as he did Solomon; let us ask (as he did) wisdom
before wealth or any outward prosperity; even that true wisdom with which God
adds no sorrows: This is a gift which cannot be turned to our bane, as all
outward gifts may. In the prosperity of saving graces lie no snares, as there
do in all earthly prosperity, yea in all common graces: Christian wisdom
teaches to check those excessive and covetous desires, which seek and affect
great things How to order our selves.
in this world, as knowing that paths washed in butter are slippery; and to
say, Give me neither riches nor poverty, but things convenient.

For the second; the ordering of our estates. 1. In prosperity be sober.


1. Of prosperity: If God please to add wealth to wisdom, as he did to
Solomon, we must be sober and abstinent, and learn to abound as well as to
want, for this is an harder lesson to take out; but Phil. 4. 11.
not so hard as fruitful. For as sobriety and abstinence in the midst of
large provision preserves bodily health, and helps to free us of such
diseases as come of fullness; so the sparing use of worldly comforts preserves
the health of the soul, and keeps strength in grace and virtue, and preserves
from corrupt humors of vice and sin, which come of fullness and
unwatchfulnesse.

2. Of adversity; If the Lord temper our prosperity 2. In adversity be
thankful.
with a sound measure of affliction, we must on this ground,

1. Be thankful; for all his works are, Gods works are all,


First, wise; in wisdom he does them all, unto which we must subscribe,
though we see not 1. Wise.
the reason of them: In wisdom he appointed the way to Canaan, through a dry
and barren wilderness, though Israel murmured at it: Yea, Christ himself, the
wisdom of his Father, came from heaven, and best knew the way thither; and to
show us the right way, made choice rather of an afflicted then prosperous
estate.

Secondly, seasonable; for he does all in his appointed 2. Seasonable.
time, in which every action is beautiful.

Thirdly, profitable to his Church; and therefore he sends in afflictions like
a cold frost, to nip in the 3. Profi^able.
rankness of our soil, and so fit us to fruitful^es; and as a good Physician
sees it profitable to prescribe a spare diet to his surfetted Patient, so does
the Lord to his surfetted Church or servants: Therefore let us not in all this
sin with our mouths, or change God foolishly.

2. Make no more haste out of afflictions than good speed; Gold is not
presently pulld out of the fire, so soon as it is cast in, but must stay a
while till it be purged: It is a safer state, though sowrer; as the three
Children were safer in the furnace than out of it: Gold has more cause to
fear the rust, than the fire; and to us prosperity is more dangerous than
adversity.

Verse 14. But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she
might flee into the wilderness into her place, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. AS the former
Verse expresses the furious assault of the dragon against the woman, so this
declares her happy evasion and escape, with the cause of her conservation, and
that was her flight, and disappearing from the sight of men: For what should
the poor woman do, being not able to withstand so huge and fierce a beast and
Monster?

We have seen how this woman stoutly withstood the bloody persecutions of the
Imperial Dragons, and never thought of flying; she feared not sword, fire,
Gibbet, nor the most exquisite torments of the fiercest tyrants, but the more
she was persecuted, the more glorious she was, and shined in surpassing
brightness of holy doctrine and life. We have heard what an happy victory and
triumph she has carried against all those bloody and open enemies.

But now the dragon turning himself into another shape, and unto another
stratagem, under the profession of Christ furiously opposing Christ; when by
the clouding and vailing of the truth of the Gospel, she saw her self spoiled
of the shining clothing of the Sun; when she saw the Moon, that was under her
feet, set above her head; when now her Pastors and Bishops, whom persecution
could not conquer, were addicted to pomp, wealth, contention, primacy, and
greatness; when now she saw her self robbed of her crown of twelve stars,
that was upon her head, and those stars were fallen from their Orb and
Firmament; when her Pastors, forsaking Apostolic doctrine, and striving for
superstitions, and to stuff the Church with humane devises and traditions, in
stead of Christ's most sacred institutio^s; when she saw that not now the bodies
of men were slain and wounded, as in former persecutions, but their souls and
consciences were everlastingly wounded with heresies, errors, and Apostasy
for the truth; now she flies into the wilderness, now she dares not show her
face in those particular co^gregations, in which formerly her beauty and glory
was conspicuous: her case now is as of a chaste spouse, who seeing a painted
harlot and a bewitching whore taken into her place, and those offices of love,
and duties of marriage bestowed on her, which is the wives right, she is
willing to give place, and take her self to a solitary and sorrowful life, to
be so unkindly cast off; so does the true Church and Spouse of Christ hide her
self from those adulterate doctrines, superstitions, and Idolatries, which
thrust out Christ's own pure Ordinances.

Here are two things:

1. What is this flight. 2. What are the means.
For the flight.

1. This flight of the Church is not a ceasing to be, Four conclusions to
understand aright what is this flight.
but to be seen; for Christ will have always a true part of his Catholic
Church upon earth, that shall hold and profess constantly the true faith
without change. So as the Church cease not to be, when she cease to be
seen, but has a true being when she is least visible.

2. This ceasing to be seen is not in respect of particular Christians, but
of particular Congregations; the which although they may cease, because by
persecution or heresy the external government may fail for a time, the
Pastors may be interrupted, the sheep may be scattered, the discipline
hindered, and the external exercise of religion suspended, and sincerity of
religion exceedingly corrupted, yet there shall not cease to be many godly
members dispersed here and there, who shall hold the truth for substance; and
so now, though there were no or few assemblies, in which God was purely
worshipped, while superstition, tyranny and Idolatry usurped all places, yet
many believing Christians were reserved to Christ in secret, although either
not known, or of no reckoning in the world, but contemned and oppressed.

3. This ceasing to be seen in particular Christians is not inrespect of their
persons, as men, which are as visible as ever, but in respect of the visible
exercise of Gods Ordinances, of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and outward form
and government, which persecution had now restrained.

4. This invisibility in respect of visible exercises, is not in regard of the
Christians themselves, but of the blind world; for the persecuted Christians
may have a secret knowledge among themselves, and a secret profession and
exercise of religion, and yet the blind world take no notice of the^; and yet
the Church not destroyed, nor cease to be, no more than the Sun cease to
shine, though a blind man cannot see it in the day, nor a seeing man in the
night, and no more than a man cease to be a man, because he is hid.

Now from the cause of this invisibility and flight, Observe.
learn that error and heresy is more hateful to the Heresy is more
hateful to the Church than tyranny.
Church than persecution and tyranny: Corruption of doctrine, and changing the
truth into a lie, more straightneth and scatters the Church than sword and
torments of tyrants: that drives the the Church to her wings, not this; that
manifests the true Church and members, but this hides and obscureth her.

Let the example of the Church make us wise, Use.


1. To fear the dragon more when he fawneth Nobis melius visum ^st, locum
mutare, quam fidei veri^^atem; aedifici^ru^que and (...) amaenitatem amittere,
etc.
than when he rages, more in his Foxes skin, than in his Lions skin; He is
more dangerous when he would teach Christians to deny the truth, than when he
would force them: His wiles are more mischievous than his violence, his Doctors
more dangerous than his Captains.

2. More to fear loss of truth, than loss of wealth; Hier. Ripario
loss of the Gospel than loss of goods or life. This is true godliness
which teaches Mary to fasten upon the good part, whatsoever become of the
worse.

3. Hold him that would spoil us of the truth, a greater robber than him that
would steal our goods, an heretic worse than a tyrant.

4. Be more careful to hold the truth, and keep our part in the Gospel, than
our portion of goods and wealth: The Church to hold the truth, chooses a poor,
desolate, solitary and sorrowful estate; and a wise Merchant will sell all to
buy the pearl.

But where is this care, or where be the Children of this mother, who for the
truth sake would follow her into the wilderness, who either care for the
presence of truth, or fear the loss and removal of it? Where be the buyers
of the truth in this age, when so many value it not worth a shoo-string? How
few fear the prevailing of Popery for the truth sake, though perhaps for their
peace sake, or wealth sake they had rather have things stand at a stay?

Now in the means of the woman's deliverance are five things in this verse.

1. The means themselves, two great wings of an Eagle.

2. Whence she did fly with them, from the face of the serpent.

3. Whither, into the wilderness, called her place.

4. To what end, to be no^rished and preserved there.

5. How long, for a time, times, and half a time.

In the first are,

1. What these wings are. 2. The number. 3. Whence she had them, they were
given her. 4. The similitude, wings of a great Eagle.
By Wings are meant the special means of the Churches escape from danger; so
called, because What these wings are.
they resemble the wings of the birds in a twofold use.

First, as a bird by his wings flies swiftly from the danger, and so saves
his life, even so the Lord by these means, foreseen and appointed by
himself, works a swift escape and speedy safety in the present perils of his
Church.

Secondly, as the bird hides her young under her wing, Mat. 23. 37. so by and
under these means the Lord hides his Church, as under the wings of his
Providence, where she lies most safe and secure till the danger be over,
Psalm 91. 8. He shall cover thee under his wings.

For the number, they are two: enough to fly withal: The number of them.
no bird has or needs more for her flight. The Church is supplied with as
many means of her good, as the Lords wisdom sees her need to require at all
times. This number of two has set many wits on work, to tell us what they be.
But they agree not, nor can, seeing the means of the Churches safety are
infinite. Some define them to be faith and patience, which lift her from earth
to heaven. Some say they are the two Testaments, the Old and the New, in which
the Churches defense lies. Some say they are the two Tables, containing love
of God, and of our neighbor. Some, that the one is the wing of prayer, the
other of charity. Some, that the one is the contempt of earth, and the other
the aspiring to heaven. But we need not be so acute: and, if we should settle
upon any two things, we should perhaps miss the mind and aim of the holy
Spirit of God, as most of these must needs do. The likelyest (if we would
restrain the number, and conceive it definite) were, the providence of God
protecting, and his oracles directing the woman in this speedy flight. But the
number is definite for indefinite; and two in this place, for the propriety of
the subject, and metaphore: For, for a bird to have more wings then two, or
fewer then two, to fly withal, were harsh and improper. Not that we are not
to conceive more means of Gods providence, and the Churches safety, then two:
for these two wings are the same with the seven pipes serving to the lamps,
Zech. 4. 2. alluding to the pipes of the candlestick, which were seven, of
which he speaks in that place: and as the number of seven aptly agrees with
that allusion, so only the number of two aptly agrees with this.

But whence had the Woman these things? Whence she had them.
They were given her. The text implies two things.

First, That the Church had no wings of her own: all her safety and defense is
laid out of herself: as a weak woman can make small shift for herself
against such an army of dragons.

Secondly, Though it be not said, who gave her the wings, yet it is employed
they were given of God: for he is the father of lights, from whom comes every
good gift: and, he that prepared her the place, verse. 6. prepared her wings to
fly to it: and, with him only is counsel and strength; he only can afford
means of escape and evasion; he stretches out his strong and oculate
providence, as two wings, the feathers of which are the truth and faith of his
promise, sealed and delivered by the hand of his Two Witnesses; and thus he
saves her.

Lastly, for the similitude: wings of a great Eagle. So many phrases in this
book, so many mysteries. Here is an allusion to Exodus 19. 4. you have seen
how I have carried you on Eagles wings, and brought you unto me. By those Eagles
wings someunderstand Moses and Aaron, their leaders: but they themselves also
were carried upon these wings. By them is meant the powerful means of opening
a way in the sea, rayning Manna from heaven, breaking a rock for water,
covering them with a cloud by day and night, etc.

In this text these wings of a great eagle note to Wings of a great Eagle note
4. things.
us 4. things:

1 As the eagle out of her love to her young ones fluttereth and steareth them
out of the neast to a safer place, when she fears danger: so the Lord for the
love of his Church, in danger urges her out of her neast and rest, and leads
her into a safer place, in the wilderness; Christ out of Judea, Israel out of
Egypt.

2 As the eagle having gotten her young ones forth, when they begin to fly,
supports them with her wings, lest they should fall, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. so the Lord
supports his Church in her flight from falling, carefully seeing to her that
she take no hurt. Psalm. 37. 24.


3 As an eagle, especially a great eagle, has strong wings, agill, and able to
carry her in a strong flight, to fly far from danger: so the Lord in the
needs of his Church provides some great and powerful means, and by them as by
strong wings sets his Church beyond all the reach of hurt and danger, Thus
Nebucad-nezzar a great man is called a great eagle with great and long wings,
and full of feathers, fit to accomplish GODS word against Zedekiah, Ezeck. 17.
2.

4 As the eagle flies high aloft in the air, and beyond all sight of men, by
the length and strength of her wing: so the Lord draws his Church near unto
him, from out of the sight of men, and near Heaven, and the nearer him the
further from danger.

Observe. 1. God who could save the woman by his word, without wings, does not
ordinarily save God ordinarily saves his Church by wings and means.
her but by wings. For Gods providence excludes not, but includes means of
safety. Moses must be saved from the waters to be a Deliverer, but he must be
put into a basket, pitched and prepared for him. They in the ship ( Act. 27.)
must be saved from drowning, but they must abide in the ship, and then some on
plankes, some on boards and pieces of the ship came safe to land. Exodus 15. 25.
God could have sweetened the bitter waters with a word: but Moses must cast in a
piece of wood to sweeten them. He could have divided the sea, and dried the way
by his strong word, but does it by a strong East wind.

Which teaches us not to neglect the means appointed by God for our good: for
God who tyeth not himself to wings, tyeth the woman to use them when he
pleases to afford them. Hezekiah must be healed by a lump of dry figs. Nature
teaches, that he that would reap, must sow; he must eat, that must live; and
he must fight that would have victory. So grace teaches, that he that would
reap one harvest in glory, must sow the seed of grace in the seedtime: and he
that would live eternally, must feed on Christ by hearing, reading, believing,
and obeying his word: and he that would be crowned, must strive lawfully.

Observe. 2. The Woman having no wings of her The Church has wings and means
sufficient to avoid danger. 3. reas.
own, has wings given her of God: which teaches, that the Church and members
of it shall have wings sufficient to avoid all hurtful danger in due season.
For

1 Our text says God will afford two, sufficient for escape, and, wings of an
eagle, to fly swiftly and make a speedy escape, and, wings of a great eagle, to
fly strongly, and aloft, and far from danger.

2 Gods presence is not an idle presence with his people, but he is present to
save; Ier. 30. 11. I am with thee, to save thee.

3 The Arc was a type of the Church, and that was all and always covered with
wings of Cherubins; signifying the divine protection always watching and
covering the Church, and spreading his wings over the faithful, to repel any
harm, further then he will turn any evil to his own glory and his Churches
good. For we must know, that all promises run with exception of the cross:
and God in his wisdom does not always give to every member of the Church
wings to fly from external tyranny and persecution, but deals as a good
husband man with his corn, some he sends to mill to grind, but some he
reserves for seed; so the Lord appoints some of his servants (as Ignatius) to
the mill; I am, says he, the Lords wheat, and now I must be ground with the
teeth of Lions, to become good bread; but others are reserved for succession
and growth. So as the Church and her members shall not want wings for safety,
if God see it not better or fitter for them to be thoroughly tried for his glory
and their salvation: and then, if they be not saved from the danger, they are
saved in it, and by it.

Use. 1. It serves for the consolation of Gods people 4 Grounds of comfort
hence.
in the midst of so many dangerous difficulties.

1 The dragon may create the woman trouble, so as she shall want no molestation
for a time: but he cannot hinder her from wings, to make an escape: seeing God
has undertaken she shall not want seasonable deliverance.

2 If we want wings of our own, or our wings want strength, the Lord looks
on our weakness, and, as an eagle, puts under his wing to sustain us. Think
on this in sickness, weakness, wants, etc.

3 These wings of God cannot be clipped, shortened, weakened, or broken off:
which is a sure stay in all the affronts against the Church by Antichristian
forces, who, if they could get the Church from under these wings of God, would
soon effect their exploits: but as soon must Christ fail, as his Church: his
death, and passion and all should then be in vain.

4 These wings greatly comfort the Church in Gods deliverance employed to be*
danger, by implying the quality or properties of Gods deliverance: as,

1 It is speedy, as having long and large wings: 1 Speedy.
what speed was made in Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, when they came out
all in one day, and all Egypt in one day sunk and was drowned?

2 It is unresistable: these eagles wings carry the 2 Unresistable.
Church through all hazards, and enemies, beyond all reach of danger or dart;
as if the eagle had her young above the clouds and sight of men. Thus the Lord
carried Israel through the wilderness beyond all hazards and enemies on all
sides, as if no enemy had seen them. Thus the Lord carried the Arc through a
world of waters, waves, winds, rocks, mountains, as if there had been no
danger at all.

3 It is most comfortable: for besides the safety 3 Comfortable.
that the wing of the hen affords from injury of weather and the birds of
prey, how does the wing cherish and refresh and strengthen the birds under it,
keeping them warm from cold and chillinesse? the same comforts do the Lords
wings of protection afford to his children.

Use. 2. This serves for instruction.

1 Acknowledge that all the wings which the Woman has for her preservation are
from the Lord, and a free gift of his mercy. Psalm. 3. ult. Salvation is the
Lords: and besides him is no Savior. He is not only the Son in the peace of
the Church, but the shield in her trouble, Psalm. 84. If then we have means of
good, ascribe them and the glory of them to God; not to our own industry,
policy, forecast, or endeavors. Neither have Saints, Angels, Prophets,
Apostles, Virgins, Martyrs, any wings for us to hide us under. But this point
we prosecuted at large in the beginning of the tenth verse. In all dangers to
fly under the shadow of these wings.


2 In all our dangers to fly under the shadow of these wings: as David prayed,
Psalm. 17. 8. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings: For 4. ^eas.


First, Here is a strong and sure hold for safety: the 1.
name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run Pr^v. 18. 10.
to it and are saved: no power can scale it, no stratagem can win it,

Secondly, other creatures being pursued fly to 2.
their dens and neasts in earth, but the Churches hiding place is in heaven.
Psalm. 32. 7.

Thirdly, God therefore acquaints his children 3.
with dangers, to chase them under his wing: for as the hen sometimes calls
the chickes, but they come not, but if a kite or hawke be above them, then they
run under her; even so never do the Saints more desirously run under these
wings, then when they are most frighted by wicked men. Jacob, afraid of Esa^,
runs under them. David, pursued by Saul, runs apace under them, and composeth
that Psalm, Ne perdas. Psalm. 57. 2. In the shadow of thy wings will I trust,
till these storms be overpast.

Fourthly, God therefore gives us experience of the 4.
comfort of these wings, that we should run under them, and do as the chicks,
who finding the comfort and cherishing of the wings, still run under them.
Psalm. 36. 8. Oh how great is thy goodness! therefore the sons of men trust
in the shadow of thy wings: and Psalm. 61. 5. Because thou have been my refuge,
I will seek protection under thy wings. Have we in the Church and Land had
such experienced safety under the wing of God, against the Spaniards in 88. in
the gunpouder treason, in the safe and happy return of our Prince, in all
which we were given as lost? let us still run under the same wings.

3 Though we see not wings presently, to escape danger and trouble, yet let us
depend upon the Lord who in due time will supply them. Abraham had them not
till the third day, nor saw them till he was in the Mount, even in his deepest
trial, and then the Lord gave him wings of deliverance. Israel saw no wings
till he was in the bottom of the Sea, and in the deeps, and then the Lord
afforded these two wings of a great Eagle for their deliverance. See thou no
means as yet? wait still: perhaps thou art not yet deep enough: but in the
deepest sorrows wings shall be supplied. Jonas sees none in the deep till the
third day, nor our Lord himself the true Jonas.

4 Be sure that all the wings and means of safety Be sure that thy wings be
given thee of God.
be given thee of God, that they be lawful, warrantable, and good: be sure
they be allowed and ordained of God: for he gives no other. Be able to say as
Abraham to his son, My son, God will provide a sacrifice. If we want wings,
Satan would have us make stones bread. Esau wanting wings will make himself a
pair, by selling the birthright for present maintenance. Saul wants wings of
escape, and provides them from the witch of Endor, and from her takes advice
and help. Nay Peter in the sight of Christ, if he want wings to fly out of
danger, will make him two wings to save himself by, by denying and forswearing
his Master, Gehezi will get wings by lying and deceiving: and so do many
Tradesmen: But these wings are not given of God, but of the devil.

Against all such unjust and impious means we must hold the resolution of
those godly men; If the Lord should forsake us, we will not do this; I will
not seek to the devil, nor to the witch; I will never own the wings and
means which come by lying, swearing, deceiving, Sabbath-breaking; I will use
the wings of faith and confidence, of prayer and patience, the wings of piety
and holiness, and these weak wings of mine shall lean upon the strong wing
of God, til his appointed time and deliverance come.

5 Learn, when it is lawful to fly in persecution; Then we may fly
persecution when we have wings from God.
namely, when God has given wings to fly withal: but the woman must not fly
before she have wings. When thou have wings, thou may use them.

Quest. How shall we get wings to fly from 4 Rules to obtain them.
danger?

Answ. 1. Become Eagles, and you shall have 1.
Eagles wings: so Christ calls the godly, Luke 17. 37 Eagles.

First, To fly aloft, and lift up our neasts, even in Job. 39. 30.
the rock: converse and dwell in heaven, and there hide our selves.

Secondly, To be of sharp and strong sight, to see our meat a far off, to
fetch the promises from far and feed on them as present, to behold Gods face
in Christ, cleared as the sun in his strength, by the Eagle-eye of our Faith:

Thirdly, Not to be weary of flying, or faint in waiting, but renew our
strength as the Eagle, Psalm. 103. and go and grow from strength to strength:

Fourthly, Where the body is, thither to resort, Luke 17. 37. follow after
Christ, and frequent the places and means where he is preached, fly after him
by holy thoughts and desires, ascending to heaven where he is.

2 To get wings to fly danger; be sure of a commandment 2.
and warrant, as Joseph for the safety of Christ, his wife, and himself, Mat.
2. and as Elias, fly for thy life into the wilderness, when thou art sent.
First, hear that voice, Get out of her my people; and that, Esa. 26. 20. Get
thee into the chamber, my people, till the storm be over.

3 Fly to God by earnest prayer. He that wants 3.
wings to fly to God, wants wings to fly danger. First get the wings of a
Dove to fly to GOD, and then shall thou get the wings of an Eagle, Psalm. 55. 6.

4 Fly from sin by the wings of repentance and godly sorrow. Thus John Baptist
commanded the Jews to fly from judgment to come, Mat. 3. 7, 8. This is the way
to fly present wrath: else thy flight will be to little purpose: flying from a
Lion thou meetest with a Bear, and it is like the flight of Amaziah, 2 King.
14, 19. who fled, but death met him in his flight.

From the presence of the dragon.] This is the second general in the verse.

Quest. How can the woman fly from him, whose throne is in all places, being the
god of the world, and himself every where compassing the whole earth? And if
she fly any where among wicked men, it is but to fly from the devil to the
devil, her state is not bettered. Besides, is she so swift to fly, that the
devil cannot overtake her?

Answ. This flight from the dragon is not in respect The flight from the dragon
is in respect of state not of place.
of place and bodily motion, but in respect of state and condition: so as here
we must not understand a change of place, but a change of condition and
ornaments.

2 It is not an absolute avoiding of the dragons presence: for both he and his
army ever compass the Saints; but it is respective, namely, from his deadly
power in persecuting; as when the power of tyrants is so restained, that they
cannot reach and overtake the Saints, to murder and destroy them, as formerly
in the days of heathen Emperors.

3 The woman could never fly from Satan's temptation or molestation, but by this
flight might and did avoid the serpents face, that is, open persecution and
tyranny, as Paul was saved from the mouth of the Lion Nero. 2 Timothy 4. 17.

The sense then is, that the Church was now more safe from open persecution and
oppression than before, called here the face of the dragon; as they that fled
out of Jerusalem, ( Act. 8. 1.) fled not from the temptation of the devil, but
from the reach of the high Priests.

Object. But you say that the Text and this flight is to be understood of the
times of Antichrist; and was there ever more horrible spoil and tyranny
against the Saints and faithful Christians than all that time? was ever the
dragons face more furious than in Antichristian religion, which never met with
any godly man of any degree, whom they spared?

Answ. Antichristianisme being contrary to Christianity, must be most cruel
and fierce, as that is most meek and peaceable; so was it ever an Apollyon,
and destroyer of Gods Saints; but,

First, not in open profession of hostility against Christ, as the Imperial
dragons; the Antichristian dragon is as fierce, but he hides his face, and
under a colorable pretext and profession of Christ, destroies Christ and
Christian profession; Antichrist comes not like a Turk, with a flag of defiance
against Christ, but like an Herodian, pretending his worship, intends his
murder.

Secondly, for the time of the blackness of Popery, though they persecuted to
death all the Professors of the true religion, whom God had set out in the
several ages to witness his truth, and to confirm the rest of the Saints,
yet the Lord hid most of the Saints from their rage and fury; the intentions of
Antichristian enemies were bloody and tyrannous, but the Lord by preserving his
Church, caused them to fail in execution, because he kept them from the face
and knowledge of the dragon, and saved them from the mouth of the Lion;
experience hereof was manifest in Queen Mary's days, in the Massacre of 1572*
and Gunpowder treason.

Into the wilderness. Hither does the woman fly; and it is called her The
third general in this verse.
place, appointed her by God for her safety. Of this wilderness we have
spoken at large, Verse 6. and will now only note this lesson; that the woman,
The true Church is not always glorious, but always Observe.
safe. Church not always seen. Ecclesia aliquando in uno Abelo, in uno Enocho,
in uno Noacho, in uno Abrahamo. Aug.


She is not always glorious and externally conspicuous to the world: For
sometime she is hid in the wilderness, in an afflicted and sorrowful
condition; Was not the Church hid and obscure, when as clear an eye as Elias
could not see it, yet were 7000. reserved? was she not hid and inglorious in
Christ's time, in a few obscure persons, Joseph, Mary, Simeon, a few shepherds,
fishers, women, Publicanes, and other mean and despised persons, persecuted,
excommunicated by the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and Elders of the people? Was
not the Church obscure under the heathen Emperors: when the Pastors were
slain, the Churches spoiled, the Scriptures of God burned, no Christian
suffered to live? no sooner was any known, but accused; no sooner accused, but
condemned and executed.

In the ages next to them, the whole world wondered to see it self so suddenly
become an Arrian, and that there were in the world scarce five Catholic
Bishops, who durst show themselves in that age; Where was now the glory of the
Church? Hilary a Bishop in France, living in those times, about Delituit i^
cavernis, non eminuit in primarijs sedibus. Cont. Auxent.
the year 370 tells us where then we might find the Church: If any would find
the Church, (says he) it must not be in houses, Temples, Cities, but in
prisons, Mountains, Dens, Deserts and Caves of the earth.

But she is always safe: for, But always safe, four Reasons.


First, if she cannot be safe in the City, she shall be safe in the
wilderness: God provideth a safe place for her. 1


Secondly, the purpose of God for the safety of the 2
Church cannot be altered or abrogated by all the enterprises of the enemies;
for his counsel must stand; and therefore let Pharaoh slay all the infants
beside, Moses must be preserved alive by his own daughter, in his own
bosom, to be a Deliverer, the only thing he would prevent: Let Herod slay
all the infants under two years old, he shall miss of him whom he seeks.

Thirdly, Gods high account of his Church makes her always safe, as the signet
on his hand, as the Apple 3
of his eye: the Church is as the Lords wheat (says Augustine) and shall be
kept in the Lords Granary: If Egypt be not a safe place for Moses, he
appoints him Midian to fly into: If Judea be not safe for the child, he
shall be safe by a flight into Egypt (a wilderness in comparison) till the
appointed time. Athanasius, who dyed in the year 390. speaking of those that
were hid from the persecutions of those times, said, The child was preserved
whom Herod sought Servatus etc puerulus ille, quem Herodes int^rfiere volebat.
Oral. 1. contra
to destroy.

Fourthly, Gods wisdom makes it healthful for the Church sometime to be hid,
that she may always be safe; for else the whole world would Arian.
fall upon her all at once, and utterly destroy her. 4


Which serves to remove the brag of the Papists Use.
concerning their Church, and their brand and scandalous imputation against
ours.

For their Church they prove it the true Church, because they have had a
perpetual external splendour, and a continual glorious visibility, and a true
noted and famous succession of Pastors and Professors since Christ's Ascension
till this day. To which I answer two things.

1. It is false, that the Romish Church has held The Popish Chuch has no true
succession of doctrine nor persons.
a true succession, either in doctrine or persons; for two Reasons,

First, because there is no part of Popery, wherein it dissenteth from the
Reformed Churches, which is near the age of Christ and his Apostles, but came
in by patches and pieces many hundred years after, and some points very
lately, till the whole Antichristian Chaos, and confused body was made up: I
might instance in their Latin Service, Transubstantiation, Communion in one
kind, worshipping of Images, prohibition of Ministers marriage, and the
patching together of the several shredds of the Mass, with a number of other
new devises, confessed by themselves to stand only by the Churches
constitution, and not by authority of the Scripture.

Secondly, as that argues their doctrine not successive from the Apostles, so
they have no true personal succession from them: For there was not a Papist in
the world for the space of six hundred years after Christ, nor any Father,
Council or learned man in all those ages, who held the same points of Popery
as now these do: This has Bishop Jewel unanswerably discovered in 27.
points, and Master Perkins in thirty nine, in his learned Problem against
Iodo^us Coccius.

2. Another thing I answer to their bragg, is, that if it were true as they say
of such perpetual glory and visibility, then could they not more strongly
conclude themselves a false Church, seeing the true Church of Christ must fly
into the wilderness many hundred years from the fury of Antichrist; unless
they can make it appear, that a perpetual glorious external splendour, a
perpetual visible head, Neither can such a visible perpetual succession stand
with so many schisms in the Papacy: 30. averred by Onuph^ius, 26* confessed by
Bellar^ine.
and the most domineering Monarchy in all the world comporteth with the abject,
desolate and retired estate of the wilderness, a place full of annoyance,
wants, obscurity and solitariness.

For their brand and challenge of our Church, that we cannot derive the
pedigree of our religion beyond Luther, nor show where it was, nor the names
and persons of any that professed it: To this I answer, 1. with Tertullian,
Quod antiquissimum, verissimum; That which is indeed ancientest, is of all
other the truest; and we hold our religion from the ancient Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, therefore it is the true religion, and has a true
succession in doctrine, and consequently of persons (suppose we could not name
them) because it is the religion and faith of the woman in the wilderness,
which sometimes Antichristian tyranny suffered her not openly to profess: she
flies into the wilderness, according to Gods Word, to hold and preserve it to
all succeeding ages.

Object. But if you have so true a succession, why do not you name them.

Answ. This miserable shift of the Jesuits apparently The late miserable shift
of Romanists.
argues the desperateness of their cause, and is like a Crayfish, which has
more picking than meat; a very trick and trivial inconsequence, to call us
from the cause whereof they are weary, unto persons; as if we had no sounder
arguments for the truth of GOD, and verity of our religion, then from men's
testimony and succession: We know, that if we receive the testimony of men, the
testimony of God is greater; and profess as the Samaritans to the woman* We
believe not our religion for any man's word, or any woman's, or because any
hee-Pope or shee-Pope says it is so, or contrary, but because we have heard
Christ himself speaking in the Scriptures. We take our religion as we take
gold, not only or chiefly by the sound, but by the touchstone and balance;
and we have learned in our Creed, to believe the Catholic Church, though we
see it not.

And because contraries make one another more perspicuous, I would ask them,
whether we may not believe that the Tower of Babel was built, unless we
could name all the persons that brought Brick or Lime to it, all the Masons,
all the laborers, and workmen that were upon it; or whether we may not
believe, that a tree is grown, unless we know the person, the name, the
particular time and hours of the planting, sprowting, and growing of it:
Doubtless, if we did not know when, and by what degrees, or by what persons
and workmen their Romish Babel is built and reared, yet we see and must
believe that it is built. And suppose we did not know (which in most
essential differences we do) the persons, nor the very period of the time
when every branch of the tree of Antichristian heresy did begin to sprout and
bud out; yet our eyes see, and we must believe, that the tree is deep rooted,
large spread, and grown tall and thick: And were it not most absurd, that
matter of divine truth must not be believed, unless we can name all men that
ever spoke or believed it?

But to hold them to short and manifest reason, I conclude in this form;
Whatsoever Church has a true succession of doctrine from Christ and his
Apostles, has also a true and perpetual succession of persons, whether that
succession be visible and nominable, or no: But we have true succession of
doctrine from Christ and his Apostles, as by the Scripture we are ready to
clear in all points; and therefore we have true succession of persons,
whether we can name them or not: By which reason we bring them back to the
matter and cause, whence they are willing to slide, by bringing us unto persons.

2. I answer: If we were not so able, as by Gods grace we are, to answer them
calling for names, this were not to be laid to the charge of our religion, but
of theirs; seeing the craft and tyranny of their Antichristian Synagogue has
made our search more laborious: For they have chased the Church into the
wilderness, and forced her to hide her self out of sight, and then ask us
for all those names that fled into the wilderness, and lived, and dyed there
many hundred years since: They burn the persons and records, and then call us
to account to show them their murders: They oppressed their persons as
heretics, and suppressed their works as heretical, and used all cruelty and
craft to extinguish their names and memories for ever, and now shamelesly they
call upon us to put life into all those asnes, whose blood their cruel hands
have spilt upon the face of the whole earth: And whereas the names which they
call for, are to be had out of history, themselves by falsification of all
Antiquity and story, and by shameless purging of all books from all truth
which might make against them, have made this task more difficult, and
themselves not more insolent than fraudulent.

3. I answer; that there was never any age since Christ, wherein our religion
(in what it is substantially contrary to Popery) was not taught and professed,
and must needs be more ancient than the now Roman faith, yea, the only true
Catholic faith, from which theirs is a Catholic Apostasy.

This assertion they have proved abundantly:

1. By Doctor White in his Way to the Church, Digress. 52. where he has
cleared, that from the year 600. (before which there was no substantial or
fundamental innovation received into the Church, though some corruptions were
creeping in before) till the present age, there was no half age wherein he
names not sundry the Teachers and Professors of our religion, and resisters of
the Papacy while it was in the shell. Me thinks the Jesuits should answer
something to those names, before they call for more.

2. The same is further cleared by one of themselves; whose witness is the
stronger, because it was the testimony of an enemy and Inquisitor, as is
judiciously noted by that learned and worthy Bishop, Doctor Usher, in his book
de statu Ecclesiae, cap. 6. page 151.

There were (says Reinerius the Inquisitor) many sects of heretics in times
past, but none ever were more pernicious to the Church of God, than that of the
Waldenses, or pooremen of Lions, for three causes.

1. Because of the continuance of it; sor some say it was from Sylvesters time,
and some say it was from the Apostles themselves.

2. Because it was more general, for there is almost no land, wherein it does
not spread and creep.

3. Because all other, by some foul blasphemy against God, make men abhor
them, but this has a great show of piety; for they live justly before men, and
believe all well concerning God, and all the Articles which are contained in
the Creed; only they blaspheme and hate the Roman Church, and the multitude is
easily drawn to believe them.

This is the testimony of a Popish Inquisitor; Whence I infer thus:

If these men held the whole body of religion now maintained in the Reformed
Churches, and the same positions against the Roman religion, which we do, (as
is undeniable by their Confessions, Catechismes, and Commentaries upon the
grounds of religion; manifest, as else where, so especially in that late and
worthy book entitled, Luthers forerunners, or The history of Waldenses,
strangely reserved by God for these times; the same also is apparent in the
Articles objected against them by the Inquisitors, set down by Papists
themselves, and for which these godly Martyrs lost their lives by hundreds and
thousands)

If they were so ancient as from the Apostles, or Sylvester. (a circumstance
not to be contemned;) If they were of such just life and sound belief, as the
enemy reports them to be; If they were so many in number, and so dispersed
into all Countries, and Fox. 211.
so assisted, as none durst stop them, for the multitude of their favorites: If
Reinerius himself say true, that himself being often in the Inquisition, and
present at their examination, found forty Churches in his walk infected with
that sect; and in one Parish of Cammach were ten open schools of them; If at
one time were observed eight hundred thousand persons that made profession of
the faith of the Waldenses. Morellmemorials page 54. out of the story of
Waldens.


I would now ask a Jesuit, whether his fellow has not named him persons
enough in all ages, of page 11.
such as ever since Christ held and maintained, and sealed with their blood our
faith and religion; And whether any credit is henceforth to be given to his
fellows, who say that our religion was never heard of in the world till
Luther, and was but six years old when King Edward the sixth dyed; but every
thing is nourished by that, whereof it is bred; and their religion being a
compact of lies, must be upheld by lying whereof it is framed.

4. I answer: There was never any age since Christ, in which the Popes
Headship, the maine pillar of Popery, has not been resisted as heretical,
and contrary to Orthodoxe religion: The Jesuits have names enough in that
learned book of Doctor Crakenthorpe, entitled, Of the Popes temporal Monachy;
who, as if he had intended to prevent the Papists unreasonable demand of
names, has cleared by many names in every Century since Christ, that the Popes
temporal authority was resisted, and by whom, and that the sandy foundation of
it, namely, the pretended donation of Constantine, is but a fiction, and a
trick of a false finger, by which Popery has been, through outfacing,
supported a long time. I need hold no Candle to this Torch, only I wish the
Jesuits to answer those names, before they call for more, or else they must
go shorter by the head.

5. There was never any age since Christ in which the Pope was not detected and
proclaimed to be Antichrist; before his appearing, implicit, and after it,
explicit and expressly. This I have ready to prove Monarchomac. page 23.
by names in all ages since Christ, in way of co^futation of a Jesuits book
sent to me to review, who impudently affirms, that Luther was the first that
called the Pope absolutely Antichrist.

1. The Church is ever safe as the Arc on a world of waters, Christ is the
Pilot. Use 2.


2. None can take her out of his hands, John 10. he is stronger than all.

3. He knows who are his, and where, and how to deliver them.

4 Quod inimici in perniciem machinantur, deus Aug. Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
convertit in adjutorium: fear not the tumults of Princes nor Antichristian
forces, so long as Christ is in the ship it shall not miscarry.

To be nourished.] The fourth general in this verse, is, the end why the woman
fled into the wilderness: and that is, both to be preserved safe and provided
for there.

And this place is an allusion to the ancient story of the former Jewish
Church, whom, when she cannot be safe in Egypt, God brings into the
wilderness, where not having any provisio^ by ordinary means, he does
extraordinarily feed her by Manna from heaven for the space of forty years.
And thus he deals now with the Church of the Gentiles under the Antichristian
tyranny, heavier then that of Egypt: When the woman can find no safety or
peace amongst men, in the public profession and exercise of Christian
Religion, the Lord retyres her into secret places which afford her private
exercises of religion, and in this hidden desert, and afflicted estate provides
secret means of her feeding and safety.

The Church of God and every member in the most hard times and desert condition
shall be assuredly Doct.
fed and provided for. Of all places the wilderness The Church shall be provided
for in ^ardest times.
was most unlikely to afford food and provision, where was neither sowing nor
reaping, planting nor watering: the earth affords them neither fruit nor corn
for forty years: and now the Lord affords them for one yearly a daily
harvest, not of corn but of bread, not from earth but from heaven: he spreads
for them a large table in the wilderness, and feeds them with dainty food and
quails at his pleasure. So Elias flying from Iezabel was sent by God into the
wilderness, where he might seem more miserable, as exposed to famine, a more
dreadful death then the sword: But he fled to be fed there, and the ravens
shall be his stewards and Caterers, before he shall sterve in the wilderness.

1 The truth of Gods promise cannot fail. Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in the Lord, and
thou shall be fed assuredly: Reas. 1.
and verse. 19. the upright men in days of famine shall have enough. Psalm. 84.
11. He withholdeth no good thing from them that walk uprightly. He should deny
his truth, his faith, himself, if he should not feed and provide for his: and
therefore, if all fields should fail: and the whole earth grow barren, GOD
cannot fail but feed those that trust in him.

2 Gods power confirms it: who is not tied to 2
ordinary means, nor limited to places, nor has bound up our life in the
fruits of the earth; but man lives by every word of God; not only ordinary, but
extraordinary: so as if men will not, or cannot feed Elias, ravens can and
shall. And all that he can do with means, he can without them.

3 His love is to his own as unchangable, as his 3
power is infinite. He may alter their place and state, but not his love. He
may change their condition, but not his own affection. And if the love of the
creature be so bountiful and communicative, how can there be any lack in his
love, which is a full sea and fountain, and all affection in the creature to
his is scarce as the drop of a bucket?

4 His near relation to his Church causes it. Every 4
man provides for his own family; else he is worse then an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5.
8. We belong to Gods houshod and family: and if an evil father can and will
give good things to his children, much more our heavenly father. He will bless
and feed his inheritance, Psalm. 28. 9. And if there be no Master but will
maintain his servant in his own work, much more will our Lord and Master in
heaven.

5 His infinite wise providence, who mingleth 5
his chastisements with mercy, and crusheth not his Church out of measure, nor
tramples her under his feet, when he suffers men to trample on her, It is
enough to bring her into the wilderness, and that not to starve her, but to
provide for her. He leads her thither, but leaves her not there: but as a
father, affords her meat and cloth, and at last provides her an inheritance.

Object. But Gods people are often in want, hunger, thirst: as, Lazarus, Paul,
the Apostles, and Christ himself.

Answ. God who would not allow beggars from door to door (which is against all
order; and rules of charity) has ordained there should be poor always with
us, to be examples of their patience, and objects of our charity. And many of
these the dear servants of God may know great want and scarcity: so did the
Church. Heb. 11. 37. Because corporal benefits are not always, not to all the
godly allowed in any great measure, but then only when Gods glory and their
own salvation call for them. But, what they are scanted in temporal things,
they are supplied in spiritual, which they always certainly enjoy. And when
they are most scanted, they are not forsaken, but have enough to bring them
home, and are denied only of those things which might prove burdens.

Now this serves to comfort the Saints in want, Use 1.
and to cherish our faith. For 4 Grounds of comfort.


First, what the Lord will do he can do, and will do all for our good.

Secondly, his providence is waking when we sleep. Manna shall fall in the
night, when Israel sleeps. God watches to feed his Church, when she sleeps.
He watches for Mordecai, when he sleeps: for the babe and his Mother in the
night when they sleep.

Thirdly, his absolute sovereignty and power may make the wilderness our
portion for a time: he may pitch us here or there, in a fair place or in a
foul, in a moist or in a dry: and we must be willingly disposed by him, whose
wisdom over-reacheth ours.

Fourthly, when all means are turned against us, he is most able and willing
to succor us. Joseph and Mary shall have gold and precious things brought them
a far off, when they think not of it.

Let us therefore labor to see our want of faith, our greatest want: and if we
know not what to do, let our eyes be toward him. And if our thoughts be
inquisitive as Isaac, how shall I do for this or that? or where is the ram? say
to thy soul as Abraham, My soul, God will provide. Now stir up thy faith,
which leans not on means, or things seen, but on the naked word. Abraham
leaned only on Gods truth and power, when al was contrary, Romans 4. 20.

2 This may provoke and encourage every one in Use 2.
the study and practice of piety, which has so sure a reward and patron. And
though we may not serve God for temporalls, as hypocrites can do, yet we must
honor him who has undertaken the care, not of our inheritance only hereafter,
but of our present maintenance: and love him unfainedly, who makes 2 Timothy 4. 8.
good unto us even the promises of this life, made unto godliness, as well as
of that to come. And though this may seem a smaller mercy, because it is so
common to the worst, yet it is not common to enjoy temporalls in the promise,
which makes them sweeter then ordinary, even the love tokens of a father, and
not the wages of an hireling.

3 This may assure the Church and members, that Use 3*
in the hardest times of straightness and persecution they shall be spiritually
fed (which is here chiefly aimed at.)

For all the adversary power of Antichrist, or dragons, The Church in hardest
times shall be fed.
cannot hinder God from providing and preserving to the Church faithful
Pastors, secretly and conscionably to feed the woman in the wilderness, in
season and out of season. And as none can send Pastors but he, so none can
hinder the Pastors whom he sends to dispense his allowance: whom he
furnishes, raises, and protecteth till his work be done, and the Churches
need supplied. The stars Rev. 1. 16.
are in his hand: who then can hinder them? But if they could intercept his
messengers, they cannot hinder himself, who can and will by himself feed the
woman, if all means else should fail: as Eze. 34. 14. I will feed them my
self. And if himself feed not, all Ministerial labor is but lost.

Quest. How does the Lord himself feed the Church? God by himself feeds his
Church three ways,


Answ. 1. By the word of his grace: He leads his sheep into the green
pastures of his wholesome word. By writing his word in their hearts, and
carrying 1
his law into their secret parts. He only who has his chair in heaven, can
teach the heart. And who can hinder his strong arm and mighty power, or the
might and power of his word which is omnipotent as himself? or who can stand
in his way to hinder his access into a believing soul?

2 As he did with his ancient people, so still he 2
feeds the Church with bread from heaven, by the gracious gift of his Son,
whose flesh is meat indeed and whose blood is drink indeed: even that only
true Manna, and bread from heaven. He is the gift of God, Ioh. 4. if thou
knew the gift of God. This is that shepherd mentioned, Ezekiel. 34. 23. I will
set up a shepherd, and he shall feed them even my servant Rev. 3. 20.
David. And, if CHRIST will come in and feed in and with a believing soul, who
shall hinder him?

3 He will feed her by his Spirit of grace, who is 3.
greater in her the^ the spirit that rules in the world: His office is, to
open the heart, to work faith, to bring in holy light and illumination, and
light of consolation, to bring things into remembrance, to uphold by his mighty
power to perseverance and salvation, against all the adversary powers of it. 1
Pet. 1. 5.

4 See hence, what a bootlesse thing it is for Use 4.
enemies to strive and struggle against the word and The Woman must be fed in
the wilderness. 3. reas.
truth of GOD. The woman must be fed even in the wilderness.

First, Where God has any called, or to call, his 1.
word shall be taught, either openly or secretly.

Secondly, Christ compares the course of the 2.
Gospel to the course of the lightning, which flies swiftly and suddenly from
one side of heaven to another, and cannot be stopped: for the Gospel passes,
and is protected with divine power.

Thirdly, how impossible was it for all the tyranny 3
and policy of the devil and flesh, to hinder the power of the Gospel in the
most tyrannical times of heathen Emperors? How miraculously and fully was the
Church fed in that wilderness? But in this wilderness mentioned, a wonder it
was, that so many ages of Antichrist, the enemies having as many eyes as Argus,
and as vigilant to destroy and root out the memory and mention of sound
Professors, and wanting no will nor humane power, yet could not prevail but
that the darkest and most violent ages of Popery yield us witnesses of the
truth; in whom we see, that the Woman in the wilderness must be fed.

In our fathers days it was a wonder, that those hot and fiery days of Queen
Mary wasted not all that sincerely stood with Christ against Antichrist and his
breadden god. And when they threw down all the means of knowledge and
Instruction, how admirable was it, that so many poor souls did steal up so
much knowledge and resolution, as to be invincible in maintaining and suffering
for the truth? Who sees not, that the woman in the wilderness must be fed and
provided for?

This makes the enemies at their wits ends: they cannot work wisely enough to
destroy her: but ascamomile, the more it is pressed, the more it spreads and
rises up. This makes the Church impregnable. No hold in earth so strong but
may be won, if not by sword, yet by famine: only this fort cannot be
famished. All the inquisitions in the world cannot intercept her food.
Antichristian forces may besiege her, but cannot take her, etc. This sets them
in a rage: they give her bread of affliction to eat, and tears to drink, she
thrives with it: they give her ashes, and mould up her bread with them, and
give her blood to drink, she is in better plight with that then Kings children
with dainties. Thus God confounds them, and convinces them that they even
fight against God, who makes the blood of Martyrs the seed of the Church, He
makes poison feed her: for she must be fed.

A time, times, and half a time. In these words is the fifth general in this
verse, namely, the time how long the Woman was fed.

The Lord, when for the sins of the Church he was urged to bring some severe
rod and correction, that he might express his remembrance of mercy in
judgment, and show that in love and measure he meant to chasten, used to
foretell the very time of deliverance, before the misery was inflicted. Thus
the expiration of that great oppression of Israel in Egypt was foretold about
350. years before it began, that they must be strangers 400. years. Number. 14.
34. Israel must walk and wander in the wilderness forty years according to
the forty days of searching the land. The Babylonish captivity was for
continuance of seventy years long before signified, and then to determine and
expire. The bondage of the Jews under Syrian tyrants was precisely foretold to
last sixty and two weeks.

So in the New Testament, the sorest oppression that ever befell the Church,
namely by Antichrist, is in these words before hand described for continuance
and determination. For, that the persecution of Antichrist, and the time of it,
is here noted, is the consent of Interpreters. For the text denies it self to
be meant of the Turks treading the holy City Jerusalem underfoot: because the
two Prophets must help her: Now what can two Prophets do against Turkish
tyranny? It is not Prophecy can repress them, but sword and power, with which
he comes armed openly against Christ, and not by underhand seduction and lies,
which must be resisted and conquered by Prophecy.

But where and when the period for beginning and ending of this time is very
obscure, and perhaps as yet unknown to man; the Spirit of God being more
willing to lead us in the search, then in the knowledge of the seasons put in
his own power. Act. 1. 7.

I have collected what my most diligent search of this high mystery can
attain, into these Propositions.

1 Propos. That this time, times, and half of time, is the same duration with
the two and forty months, chap. 11. 2. in which the holy City, that is, the
Church (resembled by Jerusalem) shall be trodden underfoot, namely, by Antichrist,
sitting in the Temple of God, by subtilty and tyranny, boasting himself to be
the head and universal Monarch of the Church. And, the same number with three
years and an half of Antichrists reign, prophesied by Daniell, chap. 7. 25.
Which being years of years come to the same reckoning. And, the same number
with the 1260 days, which we have expounded, verse, 6. which being to be meant
of mystical and Prophetical days, we have just so many years of
Antichrists tyranny.

2. Propos. In this time the Spirit of God alludeth to the persecution of
Antiochus, a type of Antichrist, whose tyranny as it continued a time, times,
and part of time, that is, three years and ten days, Dan. 7. 25.
(understanding civil and natural years;) so shall the tyranny of Antichrist
last (of Prophetical years) a time, times, and half a time, that is, three
years and about an half: For the Apostle John not easily departed from the
Septuagint, for the great honor it was then in: And 1260. want eighteen days
of three years and an half; because for the Elects sake those days must be
shortened. Besides, some learned observe, these Prophetical years must not be
meant of Lunar or Julian years, but Egyptian, in every month of which are
only thirty days; and so reckon, because the Church was now in spiritual
Egypt.

3. Propos. This term cannot be meant of three Not to be literally meant of
3. years and an half, as Papists dream, 3* reas.
natural years and an half, as Papists in general assign the commi^^ of
Antichrist but to three years and an half, and after his destruction Christ
must come at the end of 45. days: For,

1. Antichrist is come already many hundred years since; for, did the mystery
of iniquity in Paul's time prepare the way for the son of perdition to enter,
and is there after sixteen hundred years no more preparation at all then
before? Besides, did only the Roman Empire withold in the Apostles time,
which many hundred years since is dissolved, and translated to Germany, and is
he not already come, he that hindered being so long since taken out of the way?

2. If it were literally meant, all men in Antichrists time might exactly know
the day of Judgment; contrary to our Savior, Of that day and hour knows no
man, no not the Angels. Beside that, Christ foretold of the days before his
second coming, that it should be a secure, merry time, and age of eating,
drinking, making merry, and marriages, and not of such troubles, battles and
persecutions as they agree to be in the days of Antichrist.

3. The litterall time of three years and an half, is not half proportional
to the great works which they say Antichrist must do: He must (say they) sit
in the Temple of Jerusalem, perhaps he must build it up in three days, which
Solomon, having all things prepared and ready, was finishing seven years, and
Zerubbabel was repairing 46. years: This only work will eat a great hole in
his time assigned; if we can conceive it might be finished in the whole. He
must call and persuade all dispersed Jews through the world, to gather
themselves to him, as to their Messiah: this they may think may be done in a
moment, but we think three years and an half too little for it. He must
build up Rome, burnt by the ten Kings, and sit there as Monarch, the Bishop of
Rome, and all his being expulsed: What? will the Pope, and Cardinals, and
Princes be so fainthearted, as to leave the cause, the City and holy Seat so
soon as he lifts up his finger? me thinks it would call for three years and
an half to do this business. He must slay three Kings of Egypt, Lybia and
Aethiopia; he must conquer seven Kings more; he must destroy all Churches in
the world; he must by force of arms expel the great Turk out of Syria, the
great Persian out of the East, great Cham out of the North, great Prester John
out of the South. This stripling of three years and a half must conquer all
the world, which no man can post over in far more time: And what a dead
sleep shall all the Monarchs, Kings, and Emperors of the earth be in the
mean time, who could scarce in that time, if they were never so willing,
resign their States to him? Many mo great acts must Antichrist do in this
stinted time, perhaps in a moment; and undo (if we believe the fable) what the
whole power of earth has been settling many thousand years.

These and the like absurdities make the learned Papists give up this Legend.
Alcasar in his vestigation, page 567. says, To take these numbers of days,
years, and months, as they sound, nequaquam stilo aenigmatico quadrat, agrees
not with this mystical writing of S. John: Ribera another Jesuit rejects
Bellarmines opinion of 45. days after Antichrist for the end of the world:
Hentonius a Papist, against the dream of three years and an half, in his
Preface to his translation of Aretus, says plainly, It is impossible that
Antichrist, in so short a time of three common years and an half, should
obtain so many Kingdoms and Provinces.

Let us then look to these deceivers, who would hold us off from beholding the
Antichrist of Rome, and are willing we should seek his rise many years after
his ruin.

4. Propos. It is easier to define, where it begins not, then where it does
begin: And this rejects many opinions and conjectures concerning the
beginning of this term: As,

First, that conjecture of Sabbaticall years, or years of Sabbaths, beginning
at John Baptists death, and was the whole time of the three hundredth years
persecution, till Constantine the Great, which was just 294. years; Master Fox
his conceit. And the conjecture of Sabbaticall years of a latter persecution,
beginning in the year 1360. when the Turks power was enlarged, and the holy
City trodden under foot; which lasting 294. years (for so many the years of
weeks amount to) they had been ended about ^3. years since, which they are
not, and the Turkish power stands in the Eastern part stronger than ever, and
the woman not eased of it.

Another conjecture of Iunius and the Magdeburgensis, is, that it began at
Christ's passion; against which, are express words, Rev. 1. 1. and 4. 1. I will
show thee what shall be hereafter.

Again, then had this time been expired in Boniface 8. who began his reign
in the year of Christ 1294. from which number take thirty four years of
Christ's life, and there remain 1260. But this time is not expired; nor the
treading of the holy City ended not in Boniface, but is still trodden down,
and Antichrist sits still in the Temple of God, neither is the woman yet got
out of the wilderness.

Neither does this time begin presently after the revelation of it: for there
must come between, the woman's dwelling in heaven, the clothing of her with
the Sun, the Crown of twelve Stars, the treading of the Moon under foot,
the assault of the dragon, the birth of the manchilde, the foyling of the
dragon, and after all these the flight, (as we have heard) and all these are
not done on a sudden, but require many hundred years for their effecting.

5. Propos. If it cannot be known certainly unto us a priori, who have not
seen the accomplishment and conclusion of this Prophecy; yet it shall be
known to the Church a posteriori, as other parts of this divine Revelation are
by the events and performance.

Some godly men have conjectured a priori, and set down their opinions; which
how far they carry truth, time will discover. I will only allege three
late Writers, and leave their opinions to your consideration.

1. Of Pareus, who on Revel. 11 2. says, if it were Tempus hoc divino quidem
confilio definitum est Ecclesiae exilio; humano vero calculo quantum ad
terminos impervestigabile.
lawful for him to conjecture, he would say this term might begin in the
year 606. when Boniface

3. gate up into the chair of pestilence; and then it must end in anno 1866.
but that of this term (says he) God will cut off some for the Elects sake.

2. Of Moulin a French Writer, in the book entitled, The accomplishment of
the Prophecies, dedicated to his Majesty, who begins the time in the year when
the Pope laid the foundation of his temporal Empire, anno 75 5. to which
number if ye add these 1260. years of this Hierarchicall Kingdom and Empire,
it must last to the year 2015. of Christ, according to which reckoning it has
391. years yet to come; but that (says he) of this time some may be shortened
for the Elects sake.

3. Of learned Brightman, who supposes it to begin Dies velannus certe statui
non potest in quem erunt excquiae, tamen ex alijs scripturis perspicuum esse
arbitror non differend as ad longissimum ul'ra sexaginta annos. in cap. 19. 4.
about the year of Christ 426. and to expire in the full account about the
year 1686. and yet these days, as near as they be, for the Elects sake may
be shortened: For on Chap. 19. 4. he tells Rome, when she kept a Jubilee 30
years ago, that within a Jubilee of 50 years from thence she should keep a
Jubilee, not so much for her own joy as the joy of all Gods people over her,
who shall rejoice in her utter destruction, and therefore she had more need
intend her funerals than Jubilees. How true this is he knows who inspires his
special servants: Only we see greater likelihood of it every day than other:
The Lord has said it, we must wait and pray him to hasten his own work for
the joy and deliverance of the Church.

6. Propos. In all these difficulties and differences among the most learned,
scarce one consenting with another in the period of entrance, I add the last
conclusion, that the safest opinion of the most modest and learned is, that a
number finite is put for an indefinite; and that this number is indefinite, not
that it is not certain and defined to God, but that it abides undefined as
yet, and uncertain to us for the term of beginning and expiration. This is
the judgment of the modest and learned Bishop Abbot in the 108. page of his
demonstration against Antichrist. It is the judgment of Bishop Cowper: In this
opinion rests that learned Pare us, because he says he finds not a better,
nor safer. To these agrees To stanus, and other the soundest of our Writers:
And in this the safest and soundest I also will rest.

Now to sundry Observations which we have noted concerning the time, on Verse
6. we will briefly add these following.

1. No sorrows or afflictions can steal upon the Use.
Church, but all are known, foreseen and determined by God. Here the woman
chased into the wilderness, is known of her Lord; the place provivided by
him, and she in it provided for all the time: Her state is hidden to the
world, retired in her self, but not hidden unto God, but by him she is hidden
in the chambers of his Providence during all this tyranny and reign of
Antichrist. In all our sorrows and restraynts consider, they are foreseen of
God, and we are not unseene in them. Let us with Hagar in the wilderness say,
Thou God see me: Genesis 16. 13.
Have I also looked after him that sees me?

2. God has measured all the afflictions of the All afflictions of the Church
measured by God.
Church; that although tyrants may disturb and hinder pure religion by force
and violence, yet is it but for an appointed time: Antiochus may interrupt
Jewish religion, and bring in Swines flesh into the Temple, but it is but for
three years and ten days, a time, times, and piece of time. Antichrist that
great Apollyon may make havocke and ^^ead under foot the holy city, but it is
but for 42. months, a time, times, and half a time, even three Prophetical
years and an half. Iezabel wastes the Church, and causes the Prophets to hide
themselves in Caves, and fly for their lives, but it was but three years and
an half in the letter. The Jews may bury Christ in the grave, and roll a stone
upon him, and seal, and watch the sepulcher, but they can keep him down only
three days.

Know that what affliction soever thy self, or any member, or the whole Church
sustaineth, it is not endless: neither shall the whole nor parts suffer one
hour more then Gods wisdom has assigned. The proudest waves cannot pass
those bounds and banks, which Gods power has set them.

3 All the sorrows of the Saints are by Gods divine power overruled, to their
good and safety; to preserve them from some present danger, spiritual or
temporal, and to chase them under Gods hiding place, as David, Psalm. 32. 7.
Truly may the woman say, Periissem nisi periissem, I had not been safe if
peril had not driven me into the wilderness: And did not the Lord see his
Church safest in the wilderness, he would not suffer her hid there the
greatest part of the time of the New Testament: He over-ruleth death it self to
be the greatest of al deliverances.

4. In all the sufferings and oppressions of the woman, this comfort abides by
the godly, that she is not left of God, nor destitute of his presence, nor of
his Providence for supply, nor without a promise of deliverance, nor without
faith of the accomplishment, nor without a joyful assurance that the time of
this oppression is not far from expiration.

Verse 15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a blood, after the
woman; that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. THE woman
chased out of sight, being now in the wilderness, in a close and secret
dispersion in corners: But this contents not the dragon, that she is out of
sight, because she yet is and has a being; he is still unquiet, because she
is not brought to utter havoc and confusion; he would afford her no room in
the world, and therefore out of his implacable fury he turns him to another
device, utterly to extirpate and root all the letters and characters of her
honorable name, and carry her quite away off the earth, as with a mighty flood
and current.

Where are three things:

1. What are these floods of filthy waters, which this huge Monster casts
after the woman.

2. The spring whence they rise and slow, out of his mouth.

3. The issue and scope of them, that she might be carried away of the flood.

For the first.

By floods of water are meant in Scripture extreme perils, and deep dangers
and trials, whether inflicted by God, or men, or Satan.

Sometimes they are inflicted by God, Psalm. 42. 7. All thy floods and waves
are gone over me: Sometimes by men, stirring up raging tumults against the
Church; when mighty enemies, Princes and people, rise in their power, fury, and
unresistablenesse like a flood; Esa. 59. 19. The enemy shall come like a flood.
Sometimes by the dragon himself, as here the serpent casts out a flood after
the woman.

Quest. Why are these great trials compared to floods of waters? Why great
trials are compared to floods of waters: Five Reasons. For their, 1. Danger. 2.
Abundance.


Ans. 1. For the danger, threatening destruction to the Church, as the floods of
water do drowning.

2. For abundance; As many waters gather together into one to make a swift
stream or flood, so many enemies of all peoples and Countries, even all the
wicked of the world, gather their forces and combine their wrath together,
against Christ and his Church, to make a great and violent flood, and head to
destroy her; Rev. 17. 1. Antichrist is the great whore that sits on many
waters; and these waters are the multitudes, nations and tongues, all gathered
under one head against Christ, Verse 15.

3. For their depth; these floods seem as impassable as the deep sea, so as
the godly are ready to 3. Depth.
sink, and can find no footing: Psalm. 69. 2. I am come into the deep waters.
The Israel of God is often even in the bottom of the sea: Jonas was in the
deep waves and weeds: And the Church has often waters of affliction wrung
out of a full cup, that is, a large portion of troubles, Psalm. 73. 10.

4. For the instance and incessant restlesnesse of them; 4 Instance.
for as the waves succeed one another, and thrust on one another, so do
grievous afflictions; one deep calls another, Psalm 42. 7. and the end of one
trial is but the beginning of another.

5. For the pride, fierceness, swelling and rushing 5 Swelling.
of many waters; for the fierceness and pride of enemies is compared to the
swelling of waters, Psalm. 124. 5. then had the swelling waters gone over our
soul.

For the second.

The spring or fountain whence these floods flow, is the dragons mouth: The
waters must needs be filthy, which issue from so foul a fountain: And shows
us more distinctly, what the waters be: For there is a two fold flood of
persecutions, cast by the dragon after the woman.

The former was that bulk of persecutions, with which the dragon had infinite
ways vexed the Church in her infancy and cradle, and even in her riper age,
such as war, exile, fire, sword, and diverse torments: But all these darts and
keen weapons he threw out of his hands, by which he forced her into the
wilderness: But now the woman is escaped his hands, and is out of his reach:
Which some not well observing, expound this flood of actual persecution by
sword and torments; which stands not well with her hidden estate: But the
phrase more properly aims at a flood cast out of the serpents mouth, and not
out of his hands, which the woman in the wilderness hardly escapes: Whereby I
mean in general, whatsoever poysonfull thing is by Antichrist and his
Champions (who are the dragons mouth) vented and spread abroad, for the utter
wasting of the true Church and Christian profession, if it were possible: More
specially I take it, the Spirit of God here aymeth at three things.

I. The flood of heresies and poysonfull errors, the 1. Floods of heresies.
bitter waters of false doctrines against the foundation, and all those
troubled waters of Antichristian superstitions and traditions to drown and
oppress the woman for ever: For as the pure doctrine of the Gospel, coming
out of the mouth of Jesus Christ, is that aqua Coel^stis, or aqua vitae, by
which the woman is quickened and revived to eternal life; So that heretical and
poisoned doctrine, coming out of the mouth of Antichrist, is a bitter and
cursed flood of water, to drown the woman, if it were possible.

For as we do not exclude those most deadly heresies (the vomit of the
dragon) after Constantine, the Arrian heresy, the Pelagian, Nestorian,
Eutychian, which vexed the Church almost three hundred years; so do we
especially mean here those Monsters of opinions, blasphemies, and damnable
doctrines against the whole Gospel, vented and cast out of the mouth of
Antichrist in all the ages of Antichrist till this day; so directly bent to
carry away the woman, as none must buy and sell, no nor breathe and live, that
will not receive and worship the Image and mark of the beast, Rev. 13. 15, 17.

For example.

Against the Scriptures Antichrist casts out of Against the Scriptures.
his mouth, that they are a dead letter, a Nose of wax, a breeder of herefies,
of no more authority than Esops fables without the Churches authority; this was
godly spoken by Hermanus, says Hosius. De authorit. Sc. ^^. l. 3. ^ct. and
Mon. p^g. 1076.
A Popish Doctor reasoning with M. Tindal, boldly said, We might better want
Gods law than the Popes: It was objected by Doctor Benet, Chancellor of the
Bishop of London, that the heretics did read certain Chapters of the
Evangelists in English, which contain in them diverse erroneous and damnable
opinions, and conclusions of heresy.

The like blasphemies he vomits out against Christ: as

1 That he is not (...) God of himself, Against Christ.
Rhemist. on Ioh. 10. 3. Who, though he be the Son of the Father, yet is he God
of himself, Ioh. 5. 26. as the Father has life in himself, so also has the
Son. The word therefore is another person from the Father, but not another
thing.

2 That Christ did penance by fasting, solitariness, and conversing with
beasts, Rhemist. on Mark 1. sect. 6. An horrible blasphemy, making Christ a
sinner: for, no sinner need no repentance.

3 That Christ's death is neither the efficient cause, nor formal cause of our
justification: Bellarm. in sundry places: but we are formally made just by a
justice inherent in our selves, Conc. Trid sess. 6. can. 10. Rhem on Romans 2.
sect. 4. A blasphemous heresy, contrary to Phil. 3. 9. not having mine own
righteousness.

4 That by grace we may truly make satisfaction Acceden^^ gratia dei vere
possamus aliquo mo do ex proprys et ad ^qualitatem, ac per hoc just et ex
condigno sati^facere. Bellar.
in some sort ex proprijs, of our own, et ad aequalitatem, to a full equality,
et per hoc just et ex oondigno satisfacere, Bellarm. de paenit: l. 4. c. 7. A
most horrible blasphemy, that a man by his own proper works can satisfy God
fully, according to the exact rule of justice: contrary to Job. 3. 9. None can
answer God one for a thousand. Neither can he blind us as he does himself, by
saying, accedente gratia Dei; for Gods grace and satisfactory works are (...),
can never stand together, Romans 11. 6. if of grace, not of works.

5 That a Priest may properly forgive sins: as Tecellius the Popes pardoner
openly proclaymes, in Churches and elsewhere, that although Sleidan. l. 13.
a man had layne by our Lady, the Mother of Christ, and begotten her with
child, yet he was able by the Popes power to pardon the fact. This horrible
blasphemy was the ground of Luthers revolt from Popery.

6 That a man having true faith in Christ may be damned, Bellarm. de baptis. l.
1. c. 14 Against the Apostle in Ephesians. 2. 10. We are saved by faith, and Romans 5.
1. by faith we have peace with God, and our Saviors promise that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it.

To these six I could add six hundred more, to make this flood of
Antichristian heresies swell: but I content my self with a taste.

I I. A flood of slanders, and gulf of reproaches and hellish devises,
imputing to the Woman and true profession of religion most scandalous opinions,
and heinous enterprises, and all to keep the Woman under water, to get the
secular sword drawn against her, and to make the Princes jealous, fierce, and
severe against her, as the greatest enemy of their estates and royalties.

Instances of the former: Does not Antichrist out of his mouth send out most
false and slanderous lies? as, that our doctrine teaches,

1 That the Church has failed from off the earth many hundred years, till
Luther.

2 That we condemn all Counsels, Fathers, Antiquity, and will only be tied
and tried by Scripture; whereas we refuse not to be judged by men, judging
according to Scripture, and allow the Churches approbation, and consent of
Antiquity: only holding it absurd, that the authority of Scripture should
depend upon the approbation of the Church; which is the question. And this were
to make the shine of the sun dependant on the light of a candle.

3 That we teach God the author of sin, even of that treacherous sin of
Judas: Rhem: on Act. 2. sect. 9. Whereas we only teach as Scripture does, that
Christ was delivered up according to the determinate counsel of God: and that
God hardneth evil men, not as an author of evil, but as a righteous judge;
and not by bare permission, but by actual withholding his grace, and giving
them over to the devil to be hardened, as a just judgment.

4 That we are enemies to all good works, and hold only faith necessary; nay
that we condemn good works, as sinful, pharisaicall, hypocritical, Rhem. on
Romans 2. sect. 3. whereas we teach, that to justification before God faith is
only necessary, but such a faith as works by love; and that good works are
inseparable fruits of faith, signs of justification, and a way in which
Christians must walk to salvation.

And many more imputations there are, not needful to be all rehearsed.

For the latter. Have not the Papists in all ages prooved themselves to be the
very mouth of the dragon, breathing out nothing but their own poysonfull
inventions, against our religion, and sincere Preachers and Professors of the
same? Have they not published to all the world (and do) that no sort of men are
such enemies to Princes and government, none such disturbers of a settled State
and common peace, no sect so bad, none so unworthy of common favor, none such
enemies to Laws, orders, Kingdoms? Have they not licked up the spettle of the
father of lies, and infinitely shamed themselves with lies and slanders, as
black as the waters of Styx, the river of hell? as that

Luther learned his Divinity of the devil, was borne of the devil, and dyed
of drunkenness. That Calvin was eaten up of worms, and dyed blaspheming, and
invocating devils: whose life and death was so holy and happy, as the dragon
must open a wide and impudent mouth to stain the same. That Beza dyed
reconciled to the Pope, and cursed the day he ever knew Protestant doctrine:
which Beza himself lived to confute. That Mr. Bucer denied at his death, that
Christ was come: the whole country, and D. Redman preaching at his funeral,
knowing the contrary: and as true as that Mr. Perkins dyed in despair, of
whose happy life and death my self was an eyewitness; as true as that those
whom they called Puritanes had blown up the Parliament house.

III. Another part of this flood is the cruel 3 A flood of cruel edicts.
and bloody Edicts, the cruel Constitutions, and inhumane Rescripts which they
furiously breathout, with such violence and rage as a strong current and flood
which has broken out of the banks: Such as are their Trent-curses for every
slight difference in opinion from them: Such as are their Spanish barbarous
Inquisitions, which are as the sharp teeth in the mouth of the dragon: Such as
their Romish Bulls and cursed excommunications, their degradations, etc. Such
as are their six Articles, their horrible execrations, and abrenunciations, and
all of that kind, to destroy, root out, and for ever to drown the very name
and memory of the woman, and sound Christian Religion.

For the third. The end of the dragon in sending out this water, was, to drown
and carry away the woman.

First, The end of all the dragons fury is the destruction of the Church:
nothing will serve him but drowning: his malice stints not it self in any
mischief or hurt he can bring upon her.

Secondly, His wrath once carried her out of Paradise: now he would carry her
out of the way to heaven also: he envyes not only her safety and quiet in
earth, but her salvation in heaven.

Thirdly, It notes a difference between the waters sent out by God, upon the
Church, and these of the dragon. The floods of God do but water, or if any
more, do but wash the City of God. The floods out of the dragons mouth are to
wast and destroy the woman, and to carry her away from the earth.

The dragon had made sundry assaults upon the woman before, and still Michael
had crossed him, and against this last hid the woman safe: yet so great is his
fury and rage, and so blind his malice, that not observing Gods providence
toward his Church, he bolts on forward to new enterprises against her. Whence
learn, that

Satan and his instruments will never give over their malice against the godly,
though they have never Doct.
so ill success in the same. Psalm. 1^. 4. Do not workers No ill success can
make the dragon cease assaulting.
of iniquity know, that they eat up my people as bread. q. d. though they do
know them Gods people, and see by many arguments that God is their God, yet
they oppress them with desire, and delight, even as desirously and greedily as
they eat bread when they are hungry. Did not Phar (...) see, that none of his
devises succeeded against ^srael, and that he could not work wisely enough to
destroy them? did he not see, that the more violent he was, the more God took
their part, and followed him with most mighty and dreadful plagues? and did
not himself confess those plagues from God, and most just on his own
particular sin? did not his servants ask him, if he would see all Egypt
destroyed before he would let them go? Exodus 10. 7. Yet would he not desist,
but run on in mischief against them, till irrecoverable mischief overtooke
himself.

The malice of the Jews against Christ was such, as nothing could satisfy them
but his blood: no means nor che^kes could hinder them: his innocence did shine
before them as the sun: never man spoke so; by the confession of his enemies:
his miracles were divine and undeniable: Yet they consent to compass his
death; they send me^ to apprehend him; when they come, he strikes them all to
the ground with one word; yet they go on. When he came before the Judge, the
Judge cleares him, and washes his hands from innocent blood: yet they go on,
and the more sparks and flames of innocence and grace shine in him, the more
violent they grew, and call his blood on themselves and their children for ever.

1 The devil and all wicked men make up but Reas. 1.
one dragon, and are all of the same disposition. No In all evil a man is a
similitude with Satan.
child is so like the father, as a wicked man is like his father the devil.
Both have this one property, that no ill success can make them give over their
ill courses. When the dragon set upon Christ himself, and was foiled in one
temptation, he left him not: when he was confounded in a second, he left him
not, but renewed a third: when he was unprosperous in all three, he left him
not but for a season. Such also is the malice of his members against the
members of Christ. If they fail in one course of mischief, they hope to
prevail in another, and no stone will they leave unturned to work out their
mischief against the godly.

2 There is in both a restlesnesse in evil, to which both of them are carried
with full sail: Pro. ^. their 2.

And a restlesnesse in sin.


feet run to evil, and they make have to mischief, they cannot sleep till
they have done it; See this restless disposition of wicked men in the
Sodomites against Lot: they cannot sleep till they have done their villainy;
they are all night about it: When Lot persuades them to desist, they are
farther off, and more violent, now must Lot look to himself. When the Lord
from heaven smites them with blindness, both great and small, a man would have
thought they should have thought it high time to sit down: Yet they resist God
resisting them, and will not give over, but still seek the door.

3. In both head and members is such a fullness of 3.
poison, that they have an affection and endeavor And a fullness of poison.
to do mischief above their strength; their wills being infinitely evil, and
though their power be restrained, and their arms shortened, yet their wills are
not changed or abated: And therefore, whatsoever mischief they fall short of,
by want of power, they still supply by readiness and forwardness of will to
attempt the same or some other project as mischievous.

4 It is by the just judgment of God that such 4.
creatures are left to themselves, and ruled by the And a resistance of means
of their own good.
will of the devil: whereby it comes to pass, that no means of counsel,
perswasion^, or restraint, never so powerful in themselves, shall any whit
prevayle with them, unless to stir up their corruption the more. Consider it
in Judas, a secret enemy of Christ: what gracious means had he in Christ's
presence and family? he shaw Christ's innocence, heard his powerful doctrine,
was an eye witness of his miracles, was advanced into Apostleship, made a
Preacher of the Gospel, by Christ betrusted as the steward of his house, are
bread at his table, dipped in the same dish, was admonished of his fact by
Christ's own predictio^; yet how unfruitful were all these unhappy means? how
weak to restrain him, till he had betrayed his Lord, and dearly earned the
price of blood, both his Lords and his own?

See hence the pedigree and progeny of many men Use 1.
discovered, who show themselves the natural issue of the dragon.

1 Such as are authors of lies and flaunders. These streams of lies and
slanderous reproaches flow forth of the mouth of the dragon. As when men turn
themselves out of their callings, and have little else to do, and know little
other discourse but to reproach and slander men, till they have filled the
town and country with lies and slanders: incited thereto either by envy at
the prosperity of others, or from secret grudge, or for some fraudulent
purposes, or from wilfulness and set purpose: if they cannot prevail with
true things, they will with false if they may. All such raisers and devisers of
scandalls and false surmises, are the very mouth of the dragon, and of their
father the devil.

2 Others that revile the innocent, and speak evil of just and godly men,
whom they ought to praise and honor: accounting it their honor to contend,
and to overcome in contention; and glory to sweel as a fierce stream, to carry
them quite away if they might.

3 Others who reproach and scoff at goodness it self, and at the way of God:
desirous to drown the truth under terms of heresy, singularity and folly.
All these cast out their foame, scum, and froth of a naughty and dragon-like
disposition.

Again, men unappeasable and restless in their malice; as the waves of a
violent sea or flood: the breaking of one wave is but the matter of another,
and one deep here calls another. Papists see their treasons and wicked
enterprises miraculously crossed, and themselves confounded by God, as the
dragon here, but yet never give over devising the overthrow of true religion.
Others carry their malice many years against innocent and just men: All men
but themselves see them crossed and shamed in their attempts; yet not
considering the Lords cover and protection over his servants, go on as if they
had but new begun. Others guided by the same spirit wish they could raise a
flood to drown all good men at once: they cannot abide one good man near them
but hate all the generation of the just: Were they once rid of them, and had
none near them but such as themselves, they were at ease. Here is the dragon
ready to carry away the woman.

Members of Christ, sons of this woman, must Use 2.
look for floods of tribulation, and trialls as dangerous, Sons of the woman
must expect these floods.
as deep, as plentiful, as incessant and fierce as a mighty flood, or full
sea, threatening to carry all away before it. For

1 So long as wicked men are restless in their wrongs, we may not think this
our resting place. But so restless are they, that they cannot but go on to
extremity of mischief. Nothing serves the dragon, but drowning. Hence is it,
that the law endictes every wicked man hating the godly, of murder, 1 Ioh. 3.
15. not only because hatred is a degree of it, but because his will and desire
carries him to the highest degree and execution of it.

2 Members must be conformed to the head in obedience both active and passive.
What floods the dragon raised, and cast out of his mouth, to carry Christ away
is manifest in the story: imputing to him sorcery, blasphemy, sedition,
treason, and all that was heinous and poysonfull: If they called the Master of
the house Belzeb^b, what will they not call his servants?

3. The more innocent thou art, look thy suffering to be the more; for malice
is most against grace and innocence: When good men are generally maligned, and
floods of water cast after them, the general conceit and speech of other is,
some fault there is, were there not some fire there could not be so much
smoke, some indiscretion, some oversight, some fault: No, no, there is shining
grace, wisdom, holiness, watchfulness; the dragon will revile good men, be
they never so discreet and innocent, yea for innocence, as Christ himself.

Again, seeing it is inevitable that the godly should Use 3.
be molested with these floods, and rising of waters, let them for their
comfort and direction think of these Rules.

1. Against the multitude of Antichristian enemies 1. Directions against the
flood of violent enemies.
who increase and combine as a flood to overflow all banks, oppose the promise
of God, Esa. 17. 12, 1^. They shall make a noise as the noise of many waters,
but God shall rebuke them: he has passed sentence against them, which is not
far from execution; and Chap 59. 19. The enemy shall come like a flood, but
the Spirit of the Lord will chase him away; and daily shall they be blasted by
the breath of his mouth; all his forces cannot prosper, being gathered against
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.

2 Against the floods of Antichristian heresies and 2. Against the floods of
Antichristian heresies.
false doctrines we must stablish ourselves,

First, with true humility; to contain our selves within bounds of truth:
Pride and conceit makes heretics.

Secondly, with sound love to the truth; this only will make us hate all false
inventions, Psalm. 119. 113.

Thirdly, with true obedience to the truth revealed; Ioh. 7. 17. If any man
will do my will, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God: By these
means we shall stick fast to the Rock, and hold fast by truth, and not be
carried away with this flood.

Fourthly, when they trouble our waters with traditions and fables (for they
are called troubled waters) Jer. 2.
oppose the sweet and clear crystal fountains of the Scriptures; the waters
out of the Rock; and out of the fountains of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33. 28. this shall
be sufficient against the full sea of Antichristian, brinish, salt and
damnable doctrines.

3. Against the drowning waters of scandals, reproaches, 2. Against the floods
of virulent reproaches.
threatenings, wicked Edicts, false accusations, or violent executions, oppose
those sweet refreshing waters of comfort, Esa. 55. 1. These promise,

First, Christ's presence, who rebukes wind and sea, and makes a calm.

Secondly, strength and patience, because they are the rebukes of Christ.

Thirdly, a clearing of thine own innocence, as the light.

Again, oppose thine innocence, purity, sound conscience, honest conversation;
and then assure thy self no reproach can take away thine innocence, no more
than thy head.

Lastly, wait on God, as David in Shimeis railing; he may do thee good for
their evil; he may bless thee for their cursing, and honor thee the more for
their dishonor, as Mordecai; And many of his servants have experience, that
the more evil men seek to cast them down, and carry them away with floods of
injuries, the more God does establish and uphold them, and carry them up above
the waves and billows which threaten to drown them.

Verse. 16. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the stood which the dragon cast out of his mouth. AGainst new
dangers the woman has still new remedies; for unwonted dangers, unwonted
helps. Against the former dangers she had wings to fly from them; here the
earth sets in for her help; the dragon casts the flood out of his mouth, and
the earth takes it into her mouth.

By the earth is not meant the earthly globe, which Mathematicians call the
center of the world, in which we walk; neither may we understand it properly
of this vast Element, but improperly and metaphorically, as we did the flood
in the former words, drunk up by it. By earth therefore is meant;

1. In general, all the means by which the former The earth is taken not
properly, no more than the former floods.
flood was drunk up; and the phrase is an allusion to an ancient story, in
Numb. 16. where the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up Corah and all his
company, who had cast floods of reproachful waters against Moses and Aaron;
even so here, before the Lord will suffer his Church to be drowned and
overwhelmed, he will command the earth to open it self, and swallow up all
such as enterprise against it, as formerly he had, to swallow alive Corah,
Dathan, Abiram, and all their accomplices.

2. More specially by the earth we mean those special providence, by which
the former floods were dried up; as,

1. The floods of herefies; spewed out of the dragons Floods of he resies
drunk up by the earth. Two ways.
mouth, were swallowed up of the earth; for,

First, it was the earthly and wicked Synagogue that embraced all the drago^s
plausible heresies, such as whose names are written in earth, but not any whose
names were written in the Book of life: the true Church drunk not a drop of
that poison spewed out of the dragons mouth.

Secondly, because that the Synods and Councils, gathered out of all the earth
resolved and swallowed up those pernicious heresies against the grounds of
Christian religion: For as of old the Council of Nice swallowed up the
poisoned flood of Arrius, the Constantinopolitan supped up the heretical flood
of Macedonius and Eunomius, the Ephesine of Nestorius, and the Chalcedon of
Eutiches; so we might name a number of Canons out of Councels gathered under
Antichrist, resisting many main Romish errors, and heretical doctrines; as the
sixth general Council about the year 700. decreed against the Church of Rome
the marriage of Ministers, and forbad to make the Holy Ghost in likeness of a
Dove. The Council of Portugal at Bracca appointed the Cup in the Communion:
Sundry other Councels, as of Constantinople under Leo Isauricus, and after,
under Constantius Copronimus, and of Frankeford under Charles the Great, all
against Images; and many of their own contradicting their fellows in matters
of greatest difference, as might be cleared at large, but is done already by
Doctor Hall in his book entitled, The peace of Rome.

2. The floods of slanders and false suggestions have been dried up even by
the earth, earthly men Floods of slanders dried by the earth, how.
and enemies of the Church, who have acquitted and discharged the Christians of
those horrible scandalls which were out of the dragons mouth, sent after them
to drown them; as in the ancient Story the Christians of the Primitive Church
under persecution, were by Plinius Secundus (an heathen Philosopher) justified,
and discharged of all the foul things devised against them, even to Trajan
that persecuting Emperor; as in these words of his letter: The whole sum of
that sect consists in this, that they use at certain times to convent before
day, and sing hymns to Christ their God, and confederate among themselves to
abstain from all theft, murder, and adultery, to keep their faith, and
defraud no man; which done, then to depart for that time, and after that to
resort again, to take meat in companies both men and women, and yet without
any act of evil: about the year of Christ, 100.

So did Aristides a Philosopher in Athens justify the same poor Christians
from those horrible slanders, in an oration before the Emperor Hadrian in the
year 120. And many such examples the story affords.

But our text speaking of after times, in the tyranny of Antichrist, we want
not a number of instances amongst themselves, falsifying their own wicked
slanders against the Professors of true Religion. We have heard Reynerius a
great Inquisitor justifying the Waldenses, that they lived justly before men,
and believed all well concerning God, and all the articles which are contained
in the Creed. To the same effect answered the Visitors of K. Lewis 12. of
France, and of Francis 1. which made one of them swear, that they were a
better people then he or his people.

See many instances of many adversaries of the woman, giving honorable reports
of her, enforced thereto by force of truth it self, in hist. Waldens. lib. 1.
cap. 5.

3 The floods of cruel edicts and decrees, cast Floods of cruel edicts drunk
by the earth, how.
out of the mouth of the dragon, were often swallowed and hindered by earthly
occasions, and encumbrances which rise among the wicked, and inhabitants of the
earth themselves: and the Lord ordinarily orders the counsels and quarrels
of his enemies among themselves, every one having his own special aim, so as
shall be good for the Churches escape: As Paul got free by casting a bone
between Act. 23. 6, 7.
the Pharisees and Sadduces: So the Church escapes often, while bones of
quarrels and contention are cast between wicked Princes. In the year 1526.
Charles 5 Emperor, and Francis 1. King of France, agreed to join all their
power and forces, and raise a flood wholly to carry away the woman, and root
out every where the mention of Lutheran Religion: but the earth help the
woman: for the Pope himself, intending their destruction as fiercely as they,
on other occasions brake the league, and made the Emperor so much business in
Italy, that he professed by public writing, that the Pope was in the fault,
that he had not wholly suppressed the heresy of Lutherans.

Thus while the wicked plague the ungodly, the Church has some rest and
breathing from their wicked decrees: as in one other instance appears, anno
1530. For what a cruel edict did the Emperor Charles 5. thunder against the
Professors of the Gospel, that every one feared to be quite carried away by
that flood, which rose out of the dragons mouth at the Diet of Ausperg? But see
how God commanded the earth to open her mouth, and swallow this flood, that it
should not hurt but help the woman. Instantly the Turk, as if he had been
earryed by the hair of his head, came into Austria, invading the Empire: and
now it was no time to wish the Emperor to grant peace to the Protestants,
against the former edict; that he might obtain of them aid against the Turk,
the common enemy of Christendom.

In the greatest dangers of the Church, she shall always Doctr.
have some help, and though she be much In greatest floods the Church has
always a little help.
pressed, she shall not be oppressed. We see many floods may rise up and swell
as a springtide to carry her away; but they cannot drown her. The same was
typified in that horrible persecution of Antiochus, who when he was most
raging, and made most havocke in the Church, yet was the woman helped with a
little help, Dan. 11. 34. God stirred up Mattathias and his sons, who were
but an handful to Antiochus his army, and so prospered their small help, that
the cruelty and tyranny of that monster was stayed for the time. Even so in the
highest floods of Antichrist (of whom Antiochus was a most eminent type) the
poor woman has ever had a little help.

1 Because of the presence of God, who sits Reas. 1.
on the floods; whose presence with the Church Gods presc^ce.
makes her safe, Esa. 43. 2. ^eare not Jacob, thou art mine (there is the
ground of safety, in the covenant of God) when thou passest through the waters,
I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not overflow thee,
etc. If his promise fail not, he must be with his in the hotest fires of
persecution, and in the most unpassable floods of calumnies and here sies.

2 Gods wakefull providence and protection ever devises and affords some
help. Moses was 2. Gods providence.
cast on the waters, but God provides him a basket to help him out. Jonas was
cast into the sea: God provides a Whale to carry him out. Noah was tossed on a
world of floods: but God became pylot, and he that shut him in, helped him out:
And as the great flood could not drown the Arc, but the earth at length
swallowed and dried it up, much less can these lesser floods drown the Arc
of the Church, on which Gods protection is no less. 3.


3 Christ's headship ever affords some help. A Christ's headship.
man cannot drown so long as his head is aloft, let him be in never such
deepes. Christ the head of the Church is ever aloft, and cannot sink. If all the floods that ever were cast out of the mouth of the dragon, could have
carried him away, then had they more easily carried away his body, the Church:
but they could not sink or drown him: therefore is she safe.

4 The Church can pray in faith: and the prayer of 4
faith is a strong cable, and sure means of her safety, Prayer of faith.
and stays her till seasonable help come: Psalm. 32. 6. Therefore shall every
godly man pray: and then, surely in the floods of great waters they shall not
come near him. Jonah prayed in the floods of great waters, and was safe being
compassed with waves, weeds, rocks, and mountains, chap. 2. 1.

Thesefore is the Church unmooveable, and shall Use 1.
so continue to the end of the world, seeing no flood shall carry her away, and
God whose she is, is never wanting, never weary in helping her. He had saved
her from the dragon by raising up a man-child: he saved her the second time by
hiding her: and now the third time he draws her out of the floods, which
intended to drown her; so as earth and hell weary themselves in vain in
devising to overthrow her.

The more impudent the Papists, who say we teach that the Church failed from
off the earth all the time of Antichrist, for the space of a thousand years.
No: Antichrists rage and floods might cause her to hide her head for that time,
but could not drown her.

Again, here is a direction for Believers in extreme Use 2.
dangers.

1 Get to the rock: believe in Jesus Christ: by 1 Get to the rock.
faith become a member of his body. Against this rock the gates of hell cannot
prevail: and therefore a Christian built on this rock, cannot miscarry. Men
on a rock are safe in high floods, when houses are driven down, and men and
cattle drowned. Get thee to this rock, and then, though the floods of
wickedness may make thee afraid, yet shall they not hurt thee, Psalm. 18. 4. and
46. 1. 3.

2 Lean upon the power of God, who can make waters stand as dry land, and not
flow till his people Exodus 14. 22.

Josh. 3. 17.


be passed over. Art thou ready to faint, to sink, Lean upon Gods power.
to despair of ever swimming out of the floods? behold this power, it can make
iron swim, 2 King. 6. 6. and if thou be in thy self as heavy in the floods
as iron, say as in Psalm. 93. 4. The waves of the sea are mavelous, but the
Lord is more mighty.

3 Cleave to the word of God, which applies Cleave to the word.
this power and makes it thine own. God has set his powerful word on the sea
and floods, and set bars and doors unto them, and said, Hitherto shall ye
come, and ye shall lift up your proud waves no further. Again, he has set
over and passed his word unto thee for thy security. Christ's word makes Peter
walk safely on the waters. Wait on his word, which only can make a great
calm. If thou losest this security, thou can not but sink in thy troubles.
as David, had it not been for thy Law I had perished in my trouble. And
further, if this word were weak, he has sworn to thee, Esa. 54. 9. that as
the waters of Noah shall never go more over the earth, to drown it, so he will
nevet be so angry as to cast thee into the floods to drown thee,

4 Keep Christ in the ship: awaken him with thy Keep Christ in the ship.
prayers, cry to him as the Disciples, O Master save us, we perish. He walks
on the waters, and will make thee so to do also. He may seem to sleep till
thou be dashed, threatened, and ready to sink, but he will awaken in time,
and rebuke the winds and seas, and make a present, or seasonable calm.

Next, in that the earth help the woman, learn Doctr. 2.
that the Church has often help where she least expects it. The earth is the
dragons own bounds: for he was cast into the earth: yet this earth affords
help and safety to the woman against the dragon. Israel at the sea environed
with monntaines, enemies, The Church often has most help where she least
expects it.
and floods, was by the sea saved from the sea, whence they expected to be
swallowed up. The same sea that threatens to swallow Israel, saves Israel.
Could Daniel expect safety by the Lions from the Lions? Could Jonah expect
help from the devouring sea by the devouring Whale? Could the three children
expect safety from the fire by the fire?

1 The Lord being the Lord of hosts has all creatures Reason 1.
in heaven and earth to command for the help and safety of his Church, and
has made a league between them and his people for peace, and aid, for war
defensive and offensive against their enemies.

2 Things which are impossible to men, are possible 2.
to God: and therefore he works above all the power of nature, and beyond the
reach of reason, and nothing can hinder his counsel or hand. Zech. 8. 6. It
seemed as impossible for Israel to be brought back to a glorious estate in
Jerusalem from captivity, as dead men to be brought out of their graves: but
though this be impossible in the eyes of the remnant of the people of those
days, should it be therefore impossible in my sight, says the Lord of hosts?

3 The Lord most magnifieth his wisdom, when he helps by most unknown and
unlikely means: 3.
for now he shows he has a reach beyond the creature; and what we cannot
see, or oversee, he foreseeth for us. It was an unknown means, proper to
Omnipotency, to dry up the sea for Isreal's passage. It was an unknown means,
beyond the creatures reach, to suspend the fire from burning persons and things
combustible applied to it. It was an unknown and unexpected means, to feed
Israel in the wilderness with a daily harvest, not from earth, but from
heaven. The dragon and Antichrist have not so many devises and reaches to
offend the Woman, as the Lord has ways to overreach them and defend his
Church.

4 The Lord magnifies his mighty power, when 4.
he sends help by contrary means, which of al other are most unlikely; as
here by the earth: for here he brings most help, whence is indeed most danger.
As when earthly and carnall-minded men, intending the clean contrary, procure
help and peace to the Church. Thus the Lord helped David out of Saul's hands by
the Philistimes, as deadly enemies to David 1 Samuel 23. 26.
as Saul was. Thus he helped Moses out of the water by Pharaohs daughter, no
less enemy to Israel then Pharaoh himself. Thus when Zedekiah was taken, his
eyes put out, and himself bound prisoner into Babell, Jeremy being in prison
must be helped out, and by whom but by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, and
Nebuzaradan his chief steward, in all appearance as great enemies to Jeremy as
to King Zedekiah: Ier. 40, 1. 2.

And rather then Paul shall be killed, and have no help, God will save him by
one in likelihood fitter to kill him then they, even the chief Captain, Act.
21. 32. And how often was he helped by Felix, Festus, Agrippa, men open enemies
to Christ? And how often did the Lord stir up earthly instruments such as
Cyrus, Ebed-melech, Gamaliel, whose power and policy he used for the drying up
of the floods risen and swelling against the Church? A notable instance we have
in Dan. 1. 10. What great favor and tender love God gave Daniel and his
fellows from Ashpenaz, an heathen and enemy, and how God overruled his speech
to Daniel, that while he thought no such thing, he secretly employed the true
way whereby Daniel and his fellows should attain their desire: If you look
worse, I shall lose my head: then said Daniel, put this to the trial ten
days, and so obtained their wish.

Note hence the justice of God upon the earth and earthly enemies of the
Church. They mind by raising Use 1.

The earth must drink up her own floods.


floods to drown the Church, but themselves must drink up those floods to the
drowning of themselves. The woman flies out of Egypt into the wilderness:
Pharaoh means to drown her in the red sea: but the earth must help her: for
earthly Pharaoh himself and all his earthly company drink up the flood for
her, and she escapes it. Thus comes Haman^ devise upon his own head, his
gallows catch himself. Thus the gunpowder blew up the plotters and layers,
but not one for whom it was laid. Thus the enemies drink as they brew, and
digest the bread of affliction they prepared for others.

2 Let us acknowledge with much thankfulness Use 2.
the truth of this prophecy, We have seen the earth Late experience of this
truth.
drink up many floods, cast out of the dragons mouth by Antichristian tyranny,
sufficiently strong and deep to have carried her quite away. Among many
instances I will record two in fresh memory, and not far off. In the year
1521. when Luther had appeared before Caesar at Worms, to give account of his
doctrine and doings, what a mighty flood issued out of the mouth of the dragon,
which in the Imperial edicts threatened nothing but death and bloodshed against
the Professors of the Gospel? and this flood like Danubius ran through all
Germany. But now see how the earth drunk up the flood; Shortly after arose an
exceeding great trouble in Spain, to the pacifying of which the Emperor went
in person, and so the Professors of the Gospel had a little breathing; till
the States of the Empire assembled at Norinburge, got those cruel Edicts
mitigated and qualified, to the great prosperity of the Gospel.

The other in our own Kingdom, in the days and memory of our Fathers: When
in the reign of Queen Mary many were carried away with that raging and
high-swelling flood of the six Articles, and the enemies were devising not to
strike off the branches only, but (as one persuaded) to strike at the root, in
cutting off the then Lady Elizabeth, being then in prisonand very unlike ever
to get out of their bloody hands; now see how the Lord caused the earth to
help his Church, for who was the means to keep them off her, and her head on
her shoulders, but King Philip of Spain, an earthly Idolater, who had no
reason but to be a greater enemy to her than her sister or that state? Now the
earth drank up the flood, and a few months set that happy Lady, and the
Church and Kingdom by her, in such glory and prosperity, as ancient ages had
never seen, and future ages perhaps both wish and admire.

3. In the present trials and persecutions of the Use 3.
Church, when we see the floods swell even almost over her head, and
Antichristian Armies every where gathered, and carry before them whole Provinces
and Churches, be not dismayed, but stand still and see the Lords salvation; he
will appoint one means or other to swallow up all these floods; as here he
commanded the earth to ^each her helping hand, both to take in and harbor the
Lords exiles in the secret chambers of her desert Mountains and Caves, as also
to drink in the dangers for them: Nay more, the Lord who causes the earth to
help the woman, will in and by these persecutions help up his Church and
truth; Act. 8. 1. The wicked men of earth raise great persecution against the
Disciples at Jerusalem, and scatter them; but they being scattered and
dispersed, spread the Gospel through all the Regions of Judea The scattering
of the Saints is the dispersing of the Gospel.
and Samaria.

In the story of the Waldenses is reported, that the banishing of Waldo and his
followers out of Lyo^s, was a means Which God used to spread the doctrine of the
Gospel, in the darkest times of Antichrist, almost over all Europe. Thus the
Lord brings light out of darkness to his Church; the earth shall not bury
the truth, but spread it; neither shall these Antichristian floods drown the
woman, but shall only water her furrows. And let the Church be instant with
the Lord, and he will in the end of these businesses show he has a reach beyond
all Actors and lookers on: the wrath of men shall turn to his praise: themselves
shall drink the rivers of blood which they intend against the woman; and shall
root themselves out, that the Gospel which they fight against, may find
footing in the most desolate Popish Countries, and the time and their pride
hasteneth it.

Let us always set these props under our faith, to support us through our
trials, whether we see means (...) (...): It is enough to see the power and
faithfulness of God, who can, and (rather than fa^^e) will work the Saints
delivery by unknown, and even by contrary means: Wait upon the Word. If he
seem not to regard thee in danger, awake him by thy prayers: he may delay
help a while, but he cannot dehy thee help but he must deny himself; but
either he will lead thee out by preventing the danger, or help thee through
it, and make thee more then a Conqueror in it, by a conquered death.

4. As the Church abroad is tried, and in resistance Use 4.
of the floods of violence, and lies under the fire and sword of the enemy; so
the dragon cease not amongst us in our peace to cast out such floods as he
can, of scandalls, slanders, and reproaches of Gods people, against which we
must fo^tifie our selves with assurance, that all these floods shall be drunk
up, and dried up also for us: For,

1. Our Head is the truth, and as strength of truth prevailed in his own
person, and rose again from Psalm. 37.
underground, so it shall in all his members by his mighty power.

2. Gods promise is, to bring forth our righteousness as the light, even as a
bright morning comes after a sad night of black darkness.

3. Gods providence watches as well the names and reputation of the Saints, as
their persons; because, as their persons are nearely joined to Christ, so are
their names nearely linked to his, and their honor is his, as their reproach
is his, Heb. 13. 13.

4. Look upon the unknown means used by God to drink in these floods:

Sometime from heaven: The Angel turns away the flood of scandal, which had
like to have drowned the Virgin, while Joseph was thinking to put her away,
Mat. 1. 20. Fear not to take her.

Sometime the earth (as here) rather than fail, shall drink it up: The Judge
shall pronounce Christ innocent; Saul shall proclaim David's innocence, 1* Sam.
24. 18. Thou art more righteous than I.

Lastly, though truth and innocence may be clouded a long time, yet it shall
be disclosed, and time (the mother of truth) shall dry up and drink Veritas
temporis fili^
in all wicked accusation; when all secrets shall be disclosed, as well for
the opening of innocence, as the shutting of the mouth of guiltiness.

Verse. 17. Then the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war
with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ. THE dragon being again defeated of his purpose
in drowning the woman, sees that he cannot hurt her, yet he cannot but hate
her the (more: He cannot meet with her to do the mischle^^ that he would, for
she is out of sight; neither can the floods, cast out of his mouth, reach her,
for she is safe and hid, and the earth shall drink it for her; yet he abates
not of his wrath against her, and for the wrath he bears to her, he goes and
makes war with her issue, described here, 1. By their paucity, The remnant of
her seed. 2. By their property, twofold, 1. They keep the Commandments of
God. 2. They have the testimony of Jesus Christ.



First of the dragons wrath and war, then of the persons against whom,

In the former, 1. What kind of war this is. 2. With whom.
The kind of war will appear, if we consider the Captain, and the weapons.


The Captain of this war under the dragon, who is General of the field, is
described in Chap. 13. 1. The Captain of this war under the dragon.
and 7. The Beast; whom the Evangelist so calls, rather than the Bishop of
Rome, or rather a succession of them, because he is a Prophet here, not a
Doctor; these spoke plainly, they enigmatically, especially in arguments
dangerous and envious: Besides, if he had plainly named him, he had not left
it a mystery so deep.

This beast rises out of the sea; that is, out of those very floods, which the
dragon cast out of his mouth after the woman; namely, of herefies,
superstitions, traditions, abominations, and wicked constitutions and decrees
against the truth and professors, which enthroned Antichrist, and set him in
his Chair.

He has seven heads, a monstrous Hydra, sits on seven hills, and has gotten
seven kinds of government into his hand, and ten horns, he has the power of
ten Kings to uphold him.

He has on his heads the name of blasphemy; not in open profession, for he
will disclaim it in word, but in deed and truth brings into the Church and
maintains, under glorious titles of Headship, blasphemous doctrines, religion,
and idolatrous worship; so it is expressed Verse 6. He opened his mouth to
blaspheme God, and his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in heaven.

1. He opposes himself against all that is called God, challenges all that
God can do; he can create, and that, his Creator; he cannot err; he can make
something of nothing; he can make Gods Word of authority, or no authority; he
can make Kings and transfer kingdoms: he shows himself as if he were God,
and suffers his flattering Canonists to style him God: Oh high blasphemy!

2. He blasphemeth the Tabernacle of God, that is, the Church of God,
resembled by the Tabernacle; challenging to be the head, the husband, the Lord
of it; oppressing it with tyranny, infecting it with heresy, blaspheming and
condemning for archheretikes all that yield not to his blasphemies.

And if by the Tabernacle of God we mean the body of Christ, as some do,
what more horrible blasphemy against it then to undertake to create many
thousands every day out of a few pieces of bread, to sacrifice, to eat and
destroy it at their pleasure?

3 He blasphemeth all that are in heaven, that is, the Saints in the heaven
upon earth; stiling them heretics, schismatickes, rebels, the most wicked of
al men, unworthy of common light, air, or any society or sufferance in the
earth.

In the 7. verse it is given to this beast (the dragon seals his Commission)
to make war with the Saints: alluding to his type, that little horn
Antiochus, Dan. 7. 21. an eminent figure of the Roman Antiochus, that is said
to make war with the Saints, and prevail against them. So as this prophecy is
meant of the wars of Antichrist against the Saints; and is manifest by the
time of 42. months, the time that the woman was hid in the wilderness.

This of the Captain.

The weapons also are answerable to the war: The weapons of this captain
twofold.
which is twofold, Ecclesiastical, and Civil, in ordine ad spiritualia. So
the beast has two swords:

One is spiritual, by which he wounds the souls and consciences of men, and
that for their consciences. This sword is his Canons, Constitutions, Counsels
deceitfully called, Decretalls, doctrines of devils, heresies, the Popes
head-ship, Jesuitisme the sharpest point of it, sophisticate distinctions,
sleights of equivocations, cursings, anathemaes, excommunications, damnatory
proscriptions, damnable Bulls and Breves, degradations, condemnations, Popish
absolutions for murders of Parents, and Princes, canonization of Traitors, and
the like enamilings of his spiritual sword.

The other is the secular sword, with which he lays about him to force the
obedience and subjection to the former. This is his tyrannical inquisition,
Guisian massacres, English powder-plots, pistolls, poniards, poisons, fire,
sword, insurrections, rebellions, invasions, Armadoes, treasons, slaughters,
butcheries of Princes and people, Kings and kingdoms that yield not themselves
as slaves to his beastly authority.

And this of the kind of war.

The persons with whom it is waged, will further open it: that is, the remnant
of her seed: namely such of the faithful, who, when all the public assemblies
were openly corrupted by Antichristian Idolatry, yet retained the ancient
faith, and stepped out sometimes to make profession of the same The beast could
no sooner meet with them, or find them out, but presently he brandished his
sword againstthem; whether they were,

1 Kings, that ruled not according to the Popes rules, who were warred against
as tyrants* or

2 Pastors and Bishops who taught not according to the Popes decrees, with whom
the Pope warred as against heretics. or

3 Private persons, called laymen, who lived not according to the Popes laws;
these he warred against as outlaws and excommunicate persons.

In a word, seeing the dragon could not now make war against whole
congregations, as formerly he had done, (for now in the dark times of
Antichrist they appeared no where) he watched if he could find any of the
remnant of the seed, any scattered and dispersed Saints, who privately (as they
could) exercised the pure worship of God: who kept themselves to the
commandment of God, in freeing themselves from the abominations, idolatries,
and superstitions of Popery: and who had the testimony of Jesus, sq^aring their
consciences to the written word, and would not receive the Popes Laws,
traditions, and decretalls for Articles of Faith. These were made meat for the
sword of the Beast, excited by the dragon to make war with the remnant of the
woman's seed.

Of the wrath of the dragon we have spoken before, which admits no truce; as
also of the renewing of his assaults, though he be never so foiled in them.
Only now in this wrath of the dragon, which is continued against the woman hid
in the wilderness, note, that

Wicked men hate and malice the godly, whom Doct.
they never knew nor saw; as the dragon the woman Wicked men hate the Saints
whom they never saw.
now out of sight. Hest, 3. 6. Haman thought it a small thing to lay hands on
Mordecai only, but sought to destroy all the Jews: yet he knew but few of them,
and only one of them (Mordecai) had offended him. Phara^h pursues all the
Israelites, though he knew but few: and drownes all the males: and Herod kills
all the infants, which he never saw: and Balak calls Balaam to curse all the
people of God.

1 Because of the general enmity put by God between Reas. 1.
the two seeds, of the Woman and the serpent: And hatred is of kinds, not
individualls only. The wolf hates all lambs. A man naturally hates all
serpents, even those he never saw: so the serpentine seed hates all the woman's
seed, which it never saw. And as hunters know not, nor never saw the particular
game they take, but lay nets and deadly engines for any of the kind, so these
Nimrods and hunters spare none.

2 The wrath of every wicked man is a spark 2.
from hell and an ember of the dragons wrath, who here hates the Woman hid
as well as appearing. And look as the dragon hated Christ the head deadly while
he was in the world, and now hates him with no less deadly hat^ed when he
has left the world (he hates him absent, as much as present) even so his
brood hates his members that were in the world, as well as those that are in
it, even those that they never knew nor saw; and persecute their dead ashes,
and are as spiteful to their names and memory, and to their posterity, as
their predecessors were to their persons while they lived.

3 Darkness hates all light, near or far off. 3.
They that hate God the chief good, must needs hate all the godly that follow
the thing that is good. They that hate God himself, must needs hate his image
every where: for he that hates the father, hates all the children, whether he
know them or no. They hate the glory of God, and the true worship and service
of God, and that they may abolish it, they cannot but seek to root out all the
people and persons that uphold it,

4 Such a venom and poison is seated in a wicked 4.
man's heart, as knows no bounds of reason or moderation, but overflowes all
bancks and limits: For there is no spirit to check or restrain them: so as
neither sea nor Alps bound a wicked man's wrath against godliness.

5 They hate them whom they know not, because they know them not: for so it was
with Christ 5.
himself: they saw him but they knew him not: for, had they known him, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory Ioh. 8. 29. When the Son of man
shall be listed up, then ye shall know that I am he So with his members, they
know them not nor their innocence, let their lives be never so unblamable and
just. If they cannot pick quarrels against Daniel in the matter of the
Kingdom, they will see what they can do in the matter of his God. If God
himself show favor to them, and his power for them; they will not know who
the Lord is, as Pharaoh, but lay on burdens the heavier: and therefore, as
Balak and Moab, they seek their confusion, Number. 22. 2, 3.

A reproof of numbers of men, who in these Use 1.
days express with what spirit they are guided. The Papists rail upon, and
revile all the godly restorers of our religion, whom they never saw nor knew. It
is a third part of the Pamphlets they send daily in amongst their Proselytes. A
man would think they had their hands full of adversaries alive: and that they
need not break up the graves of the dead, and persecute dead ashes: What
spirit besides the dragons, ruled the Council of Constance, who sentenced the
dead bones of Wickliffe to be digd up and burnt 41. years after his death? did
any of them ever know or see him? or was not the wrath of their predecessors
enough against his person?

Who sees not the wrath of the dragon in a number of profane beasts, who
incessantly make it their table talk to revile and use opprobriously men who
never made nor meddled with them, men hid in their innocence, and retired in
their privacy? whose life in respect of them, is as if they were out of the
world.

And others that exclame against all that make show of religion, as men not
worthy to live, the worst of all men, all dissemblers, liars, factious, all
alike, as if they knew them all. Whence rises this wrath? certainly not from
particular causes, but from the general: not from the persons they revile, but
from their own vile dragon like disposition. They may pretend some personal
quarrels now and then: but the cause and care lies deeper: they will hate the
same goodness in any other person, where soever they may discover it. Here now
is the dragons wrath against the Woman, hid out of sight.

2 This is a word of instruction: not to marvel in observing the hatred of
wicked men against the Use 2.
godly whom they know and see: for they do the same against those they never
knew. See we Ahab hating Eliah, Micaiah, and all the true Prophets he knew? no
marvel: he has a fountain of poison ready to flow on all that he knows not,
if he could reach them. And so does every wicked man: if he hate any one good
Minister because he is so, he hates every one. See we all wicked men, be they
never so fallen in pieces among themselves, yet all join in hatred of all the
godly? then see in them the work of the dragon, who plots an unity and
agreement against the Church: hatred of goodness is the bond, that joins
wicked ones together. And yet Gods hand is in all this: the godly must be
thoroughly tried, and the wicked must go on to the filling up of their measure.

Are we cast among men, who, when they cannot hurt godly men, yet will not
help them, but as Balak said to Balaam, neither bless nor curse them? Praise
God that has limited the power of wicked wills and violent affections. They
that would hurt one godly man, would mischief all if they could: and those
that will not help them, would hurt them if they were able.

See we evil men desirous and contriving to cast down the worship of God,
and a faithful Ministry in the place where they live? their wrath rea^heth
beyond that place: if it it were in their power, they would abolish the true
worship of God out of the world, and leave no faithful Ministry standing in
the earth. Hatred is of kinds: and the dragon hates faithfulness every where,
fearing the decay of his Kingdom, and his own fall by their standing.

3 This teaches us 1 to unite and combine our Use 3.
selves to all the Saints, even those whom we never saw nor knew; they being
of the same Father, Mother, blood, spirit, family, and inheritance with us.

2 Again, as we love the head, so also the members: but the head though we
have not seen, yet we love and believe, 1 Pet. 1. 8 so the members whom we
believe every where to be dispersed, we must love though we see not: for the
love of the members must be a sparkle from the flame toward the head.

3 Further, we must not ground the love of Saints in our senses, but in our
faith, which cannot but work by love; if to him that begat, so also to all
that are begotten.

4 If faith may not be measured by sight, being of things invisible, no more
may love the daughter of faith. But if we believe in him whom we see not, we
must also love them whom we see not.

5 The soul has as well his eye of faith, as the body the eye of sense: and
by that we see not the head only, but the members, and believe and live in the
Communion of Saints.

And went to war.] The wrath of the dragon produces the war of Doctrine.
the beast; and Antichrists wars are the dragons wars: the dragon by and in
Antichrist makes war upon the Church. For

1 The wrath of the dragon is in them, as the chief moover, inspirer, and
General, who seals commission Reason 1.
to his universal Vicar and Li^utenant, who receives power from him, Revel. 13.
2.

2 The cruelty of the dragon is in them: who 2
as he is an homicide and manslayer from the beginning, so is this an Apollyon,
a destroyer, a scarlet beast of a bloody coulor, dyed in the blood of Saints; a
woman drunk with blood.

3 The scope of the dragon is in them; universal 3
and unmercifull destruction of bodies, and souls: Rev. 13. 15. Whosoever will
not worship the beast, he commands them to be slain. But this is a small
thing to his spiritual war, in which he comes with effectual delusions
among them that perish, that all they might be damned, etc. 2 These. 2. 10, 11.

4 The means of the dragon is in them. As the 4.
dragon seeks to draw the worship of God upon himself from God, Mat. 4. so
does Antichrist sit as God, and all the earth must worship the beast. As the
dragon to attain his ends will salsifie and vilify the word of God, so the
beast slayes the two Prophets, Rev. 11. 9. that is, as some interpret, the two
Testaments. He must needs destroy souls, if first he can destroy the
Scriptures. And, never were the two witnesses so warred against, as by
Antichrist,

5 The subtilty of the dragon is in them, even all 5.
his seven heads. He fights not only like a Balak, with open fierceness, but
like a Balaam, a false prophet, by his wiles and delusions. He comes not so
much with displayed banners, as with hostility wrapped up with all guile and
deceitful pretenses. He will not be seen to war as an enemy and persecuter
of the Church, but under specious terms of the Patron and just defender of the
Catholic Church.

Now if the wars of Antichrist be the dragons Use 1.
wars, of all other we must hold them the most pernicious to mankind, and
of all other deprecate these, and wish rather to fall into the hands of any
Turk or tyrant then into the hands of Antichrist. For

First, other tyrants are raised by the general wrath of the dragon against
mankind: but this from the greatest wrath against the Church the seed of the
Woman.

Secondly, those are satisfied with our goods, lands, liberty, or life, and
intend no further: but this not so content must have our religion, consciences,
and salvation, our heaven and God from us.

Thirdly, their weapons are corporal, and only wound and slay the body: Let
Nero, Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian, or the Turk or Scythian come, they can
bring sword, fire, wild beasts, melted ledd, gibbets, and other exquisite
bodily torments: But the cruelty of Antichrist, beside all these, brings strong
delusions, idolatry, apostasy, heresy: And this spiritual persecution is so
much more cruel; as the soul is more excellent then the body; and so much
more dreadful, as the destruction of both together is more desperate then of
one alone. We must not measure the cruelty of Antichristian war, as theirs,
by the privation of mortal life, but by the invaluable loss of life eternal.

2 Note the miserable estate of such as fall unto Use 2.
the part of Antichrist they are intereffed in the dragons wars, and directly
fight against Christ, against their own salvation, and others. We must
esteem them greater enemies then any tyrants or robbers that would only
bereave us of our goods or lives. These slaves of Antichrist are become
bondslaves to the dragon: for none worship the beast, but they first worship
the dragon, Rev. 13. 4.

3 Let it moove us to stand so much the more resolutely against Popery, and the
impostures of Antichrist: Use 3.
seeing we stand against the wrath of the dragon; for the right and honor of
Jesus Christ, against his sworn enemy, and for our own salvation. This
willbe the honor of the Saints, that they perish not only as sheep woryed by
the wolf, but as the valiant soldiers of Jesus Christ, who even in martyrdom
are more then conquerors.

With the remnant of her seed. The number of faithful Christians that stick
Doct.
close to Christ against the corruptions of Antichrist, is but a small number,
and as small in worldly reputation. Christ's company was always a little
flock, Luke 12. 32. And Israel is as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant only
shall be saved, Rom 9. 29. This phrase is a metaphore taken from tradesmen, who
having cut out a whole piece of cloth, leave some small remnant or remainder:
even so the true professors of the Gospel are but as a small remainder of the
whole piece and people of the world. Beside, it is but the remnant of her seed:
As a little seed-corne is reserved out of a great heap for store, which is
nothing to the whole croppe; so is the small number of true Believers, reserved
by grace, to the whole field and croppe of the world: as it was in the state of
the ancient Church in captivity, Zech. 3. 1. Is not this a brand pulled out of
the fire? the state of the people being as a great tree cut down and cast into
the fire, of which one little brand was snatched out of the flame, and returned
from captivity: and the dragon would have had that brand burnt to ashes too: so
here he warreth on the remnant of the seed of the woman in the wilderness. So
also is the number of Gods company said to be one of a City, and Ier 3. 14.
two of a tribe: as if in a great inundation of water, which carries away a
whole town or country, some one or two houses or persons should escape; or as
if in a blazing and universal fire, devouring a whole City, one or two houses
should be left standing.

1 Few are chosen, Mat. 20. 17. God has decreed that few shall be saved. The
earth affords much clay Reason 1.
for potters, but little oar for gold. Common stones are many, pearls but a
few. In the universal Church signified by the Arc, were but few even eight
souls saved, all the rest drowned, 1 Pet. 3. In particular visible Churches
there are but a few names that defile not their garments, Rev. 3. 4. All are
not Israel that go for Israel: and all that go for Virgins, are not admitted to
the bridegroomes chamber.

2 The gate to heaven is straight, and few find it, Mat. 7. 14. None know it
of themselves, and of 2
them that know it, few will endure the persecution, the sharpness, the
self-denial, the mortification, the losses, the crosses, with which that
straight way is strawed: the most will walk in the easy and broad way where
is elbow-roome, profits, pleasures, ^applause of the world, and pleasing of a
man's self,

3 The worth of grace and salvation, and the excellency 3
of eternal life allows it not to be common to every idle hand. It is as a
precious commodity, in the hands of a few: as pearls and jewels are so much
more advanced in price, as they be harder to come by.

4 The true Church is the park of God, empaled 4
from the rest of the world, or a garden enclosed, Cant* 4. 12. aparadice of
God, not the wast of the world: a fold, not the field.

If it be objected, that the multitude of Abraham's Object.
seed are as the sands of the sea, innumerable, Genesis 15. 5. and, who can number
the dust of Jacob, or the fourth part of Israel, as Number, 24 10. and that Sion
shall abound with children, and many shall come from the East and West and sit
down in the kingdom of God, Mat. 8. 11. and that John saw a multitude which
none could number, of all nations, kindreds, tribes and tongues, that stood
before the Lamb in white robes, Rev. 7. 9. To all these and like places,

I answer, That we must consider the Believers, Answ.


1 Simply, in respect of themselves, and the Church in respect of the several
parts: and thus they are an innumerable multitude.

2 Comparatively, in respect of unbeleevers, infidells, hypocrites, and
reprobates: so they are few, and as an handful to a whole floor, a remnant to
a whole piece, a spark to a great flame, a drop to a whole stream.

Therefore multitudes are no mark of the true Use 1.
Church, as Papists teach, but of Satan's Synagogue: neither the rule of our
way, which is straighter then that the multitude walk in.

2 Be not offended with the fewness of the godly; Use 2.
compared with heaps of wicked men. The true Church is as a little wheat in an
huge heap of chafe: as a little gold in a mountain of clay or dross: a
gleaning after the harvest: a few berries after the vintage: And thus as it
has been, it will be, till the GOD of heaven have cast the god of the world
into his own place.

Neither be offended that we teach them to be few: but rather quarrel with
Christ and the Scripture from whom we so speak. For we stint not this number
to a definite company, as some fondly say we do; this is their Arithmeticke,
neither ours nor the Scriptures. But a few there are, and as our text says,
But a remnant. Why wrangle they not with the Scripture that speaks but of one
of a City, and two of a tribe? as it was then, it may be again. But let such
stretch the way of heaven as wide as they can, yet will it be too strait for
carnal men, and careless men, be they never so just and civil.

3. Let us strive earnestly to be of this little flock Use 3.
and remnant, and join rather with a few godly, then a multitude of sinners.
Walk in the way of good me^, and though thy company be small, it shall be good:
and suppose this sect be every where blasphemed, in court, in country, in
markets and meetings, in pulpits and tavernes, yet one day thou shall wish thy
self of this small number, and be most unhappie that thou have sorted with thy
company which thou have chosen, and now can have no better.

4. If the true members of the Church be so few, Use 4.
never be daunted at the great shoales and number of Atheists, Epicures,
Libertines, hypocrites, scorners, blasphemers, worldings; not at the
overspreading of Popery and Idolatry. We must not measure the Church by our
senses; though few appear, yet there is a remnant; God will have seven
thousand reserved whom Elias cannot see; Romans 1. 1. 5. A few there be, who in
heart and soul cleave to us, the benefit of whose prayers we enjoy.

5. If so few shall be saved, praise God that any Use 5.
believe, and that ever it was thy lot to be brought to the faith; seeing the
Apostasy to Antichrist is so general; this is as great a mercy to thee, as in
the great deluge one Noah to be saved, or in a raging fire in a City one house
or one person to be saved.

Which keep the Commandments of God.] Here is the first of the properties, by
which the small remnant is described; where,

1. What it is to keep the Commandments. 2. How the godly keep them.
The keeping is either Legal, or Evangelical.

Legal is the perfect and personal observation of the whole Law, in the whole
man, in all things, at all times: Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life
keep the Commandments: Thus only Christ since the fall kept the
Commandments, and we shall in heaven. This is not here meant.

Evangelical is that acceptable obedience to the Law, which the Gospel
injoyneth upon Believers. To understand this, know,

1. That the Gospel being not to abolish, but to establish the Law, is not
satisfied unless the Believer bring such a perfect and absolute obedience as
the Law requires: Only this being impossible to the infirmity of flesh, it is
satisfied that we bring it not in our own person as the Law requires, but in
the person of our surety, made by God our righteousness.

2. And because the grace of the Gospel allows us not to be careless, or
idle in the work of the Lord, it enjoynes on every Believer a conscionable and
constant endeavor of keeping all the Commandments of God, even in our own
persons, in way of gratitude and thankfulness.

3. And lest the godly should be discouraged by the sense of their own
imperfections and failings in performance, seeing themselves at best but
unprofitable servants, for their encouragement and quickening, the Gospel
calls that endeavor and strife in obedience (being cheerful and sincere) A
keeping of the Phil. 3. 11.
Commandments; because it is accepted of God as perfect; the person being in
Christ, in whom all defect and imperfection is covered.

But how do the godly keep the Commandments?

In just conditions, and in sure and safe coffers.

The conditions are four. They keep them,

1. Undiminished; God has betrusted them with his whole law, and they set all
the law of God before them, and have respect to all the Commandments; they be
no Papists to strike out the second Commandment, or any other: They know the
Commandments are linked and chained together, as a band of ten clauses, break
one and the whole band is forfeited.

2. Unmingled; not blending the Lords sweet wine with puddle water of humane
fancies: This remnant care not for the additions, traditions and commandments
of men, but hold them close to the Commandments of God. They pollute not
themselves with the abominations of Popery, superstition and Idolatry, but shut
their ears against the determinations of Churches, Councels, Fathers, Popes,
contrary to Gods commandments; yea, ifan Angel should bring any other
doctrine, they would pronounce him accursed.

3. Vnviolate; defending, propagating, maintaining the commandments of God,
without wavering or halting between two opinions: They hold them not as
lukewarm Laodiceans, but steadfastly and unmoveably; they hold fast the
faithful word as their life, Pro. 4. 13. As Naboth, they will not lose a foot
of their birthright.

4. Unspotted; adorning and beautifing the truth in all things, by conforming
their lives to the Commandments of God.

These are the conditions.

In sure Coffers also do the remnant keep the Commandments.

1. Of a firm memory; Luke 2. 51. Mary (...) and pondered the things in her
heart: Psalm. 119. 16. I will not forget thy word: And this sanctification of
memory sanctifies the whole man.

2. Of a faithful and believing heart; for faith mingled with the Word gives
rooting, and so continuace: This was Abraham's Coffer, in which he laid the
promises, and neither delay, nor deadness of Sarahs womb, nor conflict of
contrariety, or impossibility could rob him of them.

3. Of a sound and loving affection of the soul; love is a safe and faithful
keeper; things that we love we will hold fast: Oh love I thy law, says David!
such love is stronger than death, no water can quench it.

4. Of holy practice in the whole life; bewrayed in three things,

1 In professing a good profession, as Christ before Pilate, holding forth the
word of life.

2 In promoting and defending to our power all good things and persons in their
conformity to the law: a good man preserves the law, as well as observes it.

3 In suffering for good things, and sealing (if we be called) the truth with
our blood.

Next let us inquire, how we may show our selves of this remnant, and know our
^elves to be keepers of the Commandments. The Marks are these.

1 If we do all from within: for all obedience to the law must flow from a
pure heart, the end of 1 Timothy 1. 5.
the Commandment is love out of a pure heart, Psalm, 119. 2. Keepers of his
testimonies seek him with their whole heart. If we hear, we hear with an
honest heart, Luke 8. 15. If we pray, we pour not out words, but our souls,
as Hanna. If we praise, we call all that is within us to praise him, Psalm.
103. 1, 2. If we preach, we are fervent in spirit, as Apollos. If we receive
the Sacrament, it is with examination of our hearts. As the clock mooves from
the spring within it self, so is the motion of a good man to the law from
within, not from without.

2 If we do all by our rule: holding the truth for the truths sake. The word
is called a lantern, and the commandment a light, and obedience to the
commandment a coming to the light, that our works may be manifest, first to
our selves, and then to others, that they are according to God, Ioh. 3. 21.
This argues a secret disciple, silently denying his own and acknowledging Gods
wisdom, holiness, and sovereignty. An artificer that would have his work
approoved, must not coble it up any way, but do all by rule and line, and
square: so here, in all things make truth thy guide.

3 If we easily depart not from the commandment, but stick to it,

First, in all things, even the least as the greatest: In commandments against
thy profits, the Saints endured the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10. and
Abraham to fly out of his country. In commandments dangerous, as Daniel and
his fellows, and the Martyrs. In commandments most irksome, as Abraham in
killing his son.

Secondly, in all times; not as the Galathians who ran well, but desisted: but
with constancy, as one that has begun soundly and wisely.

Thirdly, in all places, at home and abroad, in the house, and walking by the
way, Dan 6. 7. in Gods house, in thine own house, in other men's houses, never
laying aside the Commandment.

Fourthly, among all persons and companies, high as well as low, and before the
meanest Christian as the greatest. Hold the commandment among the wicked as
among the godly, so did Lot.

This is the third note.

4 If we willingly endure to be examined and tried. A good man can endure the
conviction and trial of Gods Ministers, as Peter did Paul's, Gal. 2. 14. David
Nathans, 2 Samuel 12. Eli Samuels, 1 Samuel 3. But Saul, Ahab, Amaziah, Felix, will
abide no trial. A sign they have not kept the commandment. Yea a good man
will try himself, and examine himself whether he be in the faith, 2 Cor. 13.
5, and will come to the light, to judge himself: Nay more, he will desire God
himself the Judge to try him, Psalm. 26. 1, 2. and is glad that it is the Lord
that will and must examine and judge him, 1 Cor. 4. 4.

5 He earnestly loves others that keep the commandments of God. His soul
cleaves to the Saints he does them all the good he can: he speaks to God for
them: as Elisha prayed for the mother and the 2 King 4. 33. Ephesians. 3. 14.
child, and Paul for the Ephesians: he speaks to man for them, in their
defense, as Hester for the Jews, David for Jonathan, Nicodemus for Christ. He
speaks to themselves and to their hearts, for their comfort, strength,
instruction, and encouragement. He never scorns nor reviles them, but honors
them that fear the Lord.

6 He sees in all he does, his faylings, and humbles himself daily, and
abhorres himself in dust and ashes, as Job. chap. 42. 6. David that so
resolutely kept the comman dements, saw what a beast he was by his faylings,
Psalm. 73. 22. Agur sees himself more foolisher then any man, Prove. 30. 2.
Paul after many a year striving and combat for the law in the inner man,
complains what a miserable man he is, Romans 7. 14. 24. how carnal he was, and
sold under sin. Now this hastens us to Christ, and makes us watchful against
corruptions, and still strive hard to the mark.

That we may be provoked to show our selves of this remnant, by keeping the
commandments of God, and abiding in the duty which the word commands, let us
take these motives.

1 Keep the word, and it will keep thee: keep the name of Christ, and thou
shall be kept in his name, Pro. 2. 11. Ioh. 17. 6. 11.

2 All the commandments of God are pure: the law is holy, just, and good, of
the same nature, power, and justice as God himself, Psalm, 119. 128. I esteem
all thy statutes right, and hate all false ways. Yea all of them tend to
perfection of holiness, as our Father is perfect.

3 In keeping them is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. The righteous are in some
manner recompensed on earth: they enjoy a sweet peace with God, and in their
consciences assured hope and precious promises; But their full and final
reward is in heaven: Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments,
that their right may be in the tree of life: and may enter through the gates
into the City: If Solomon shall endeavor to keep the Commandments, God
promises to establish him in a Kingdom: 1 Chronicles. 28. 7. On the same condition
will he establish us in an eternal Kingdom of glory.

4 Obedience is the only true testimony of love to God: as the second
commandment implies, In them that love me and keep my commandments. Measure
thy love to God by the love of his commandments. Peter, love thou me? feed
my lambs. He that keeps my word, is he that loves me, Ioh. 14. 15. This
makes the godly invincible in labor and sufferings, under rebukes, and evil
report, and for all this they turn not aside, nor deal unfaithfully in the
covenant. And there is no love lost: for their love upholding them in
obedience, that obedience upholds them in Gods love, as our Savior says, Ioh.
15. 10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, as I have
kept my Fathers commandments and abide in his love.

And have the testimony of Jesus Christ. This is the second property of this
remnant:

Where consider 1 What is this testimony of Jesus. 2 What it is to have it.


The testimony of Jesus is the word and Gospel of Jesus Christ: Rev. 1. 9.
John was banished into Patmos for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus
Christ: where one is expressed by the other. Now the Gospel is called the
testimony of Jesus.

First, Because it is revealed by Jesus Christ: by him brought from the bosom
of his Father, an hidden mystery to men* and Angels: none was worthy to open
this book, but he: in which regard he is called the true and faithful
witness, Rev. 1. 5.

Secondly, Because the subject of it is Christ, revealing Christ: the Gospel
is the true faith and doctrine concerning salvation wrought: by Jesus Christ
and him alone: Romans 1. 2. concerning his Son, etc.

3 Because it was testified unto by Christ: not only by revealing it by his
divine doctrine, but by his holy life, his mighty miracles, his faithful
profession before the Jews, Pharisees, Pontius Pilate, the whole Council, and
by his most innocent death; by which he set his seal to his testimony.

4 Because the end of it is Christ: it aims only at his glory, Act. 2. 36.

But what is it to have this testimony?

Answ. The phrase is taken two ways:

1 To have the Gospel, is to preach the Gospel: so John bare record of the
testimony of Jesus, Rev. 1. 2. and most plainly, chap. 14. 10. I am thy
fellowservant, and of those that have the testimony of Jesus. The testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

2 To have the Gospel, is to profess the Gospel, to uphold and maintain it,
to give witness unto it, and to hold it in life and death: as Rev. 20. 4. the
souls of Martyrs beheaded for the testimony of Jesus. And so it is taken in
this place. This remnant, as they abide in the duty which the word commands
(for they keep the commandments) so they stick to the faith and doctrine
which it teaches, they hold it fast against all the slights and intrusions of
the beast, or Antichrist, and testify unto it both by life and by death. The
truth of the Gospel is an hold which Antichrist cannot win from the Saints.

Note hence, that the keeping of the commandments Observe. 1.
of God and having the testimony of Jesus must go together. 1 Timothy 1. 19.
having faith and good conscience: and chap. 3. 9. holding the mystery of faith
in pure conscience. For

1 The law and gospel, Christ and Moses, though Reason 1.
in matter of justification before God they can never be reconciled, no more
then most abhorring contraries, fire and water, light and darkness, yet in
Christian conversation, profession, and practice they may never be divorced,
there must be light within, and shining without.

2 In all Christian conversation we must join 2
faith and love, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Because neither of these can stand alone: faith
without love is dead, and love without faith is at best but Civility. Beside,
all duties of love without faith are sin, and whatsoever we do without love,
suppose suffering of martyrdom, is all nothing.

Papists then slander our doctrine, who say we Use 1.
teach only to believe, and destroy good works; we say contrarily with our
Savior, what God has joined together, let none put asunder. But they sunder
what God has joined, in that they pretend to magnify good works, and set up
the law, but cast out the doctrine of faith, and preaching of Christ; insomuch
as the word may not be had or read in a known tongue, neither in public nor
private.

This also shows, that protestants disgrace the 2
doctrine of grace, while they content themselves with a profession of faith,
but are barren and fruitless in good works, of piety and mercy. Beware of the
curse of the fruitless figtree, that kept the ground barren: notwithstanding
all the show and leaves

Again, note hence, who they be that the dragons Observe. 2.
wrath most aymeth at, and is bent against: such as keep the commandments,
and have the faith of Jesus Christ: such as abide by the word, and will not be
pulled aside by any imposture or delusion, And why?

1 He needs not war against conquered slaves, Reason 1.
whom he has pulled away already, The strong man has the hold, and things are
at peace, Beside, what have they to lose, who have already lost the faith and
love of the Gospel, and with it their own salvation?

2 These are likest to Christ, and the residue of his 2.
body, who must be conformable to himself: he was a butt and sign of
contradiction, in the days of his flesh, and is so still, being ascended, in
the persons of his members; who are inspired by the same spirit, quickened with
the same life, ruled by the same word, fight against the same enemies, and
walk in the same steps to the same inheritance and Kingdom, whereof he is gone
to take possession.

They have the word of faith in them, which the 3.
dragon most hates as the greatest enemy of his kingdom. For being light, no
marvel if the prince of darkness resist it. It is the sword of the spirit,
which cuts off his temptations. Being a rule of righteousness, it is the
sentence of his condemnation. No marvel then if he hate it and all that love
it.

They have also the faith of truth, which he deadly hates; as the shield which
quenches all fiery darts. It makes us so strong, as that the gates of hell
cannot prevail. Only faith crosses the dragon, getting power from Christ, and
makes all Gods Ordinances profitable, all weak obedience acceptable. And has
he not reason to seek to win this hold from us, seeing when the foundation
is overthrown the building must fall, and the root overturned, the branches
must wither?

Such therefore as set themselves to keep the commandments Use 1.
of God, and hold the testimony of Jesus Christ, let them make account of the
incessant malice and madness of the dragon. He never rests opposing those that
will not be driven from the testimony. Some of them he casts into prison, some
he tryes by mockings and scourgings; some he follows with inward temptations,
some with outward afflictions; some he lashes with the scourges of spiteful
and lying tongues, and all he draws into what dangers he can. He is no wise
Christian that makes not account of all the spite that the devil by wicked
men can create him.

2 Take good notice, why wicked men make godly men theit butt to shoot all
deadly arrows against. Use 2.
If we believe them, they are heretics, schismatickes, rebels, hypocrites,
the vilest monsters of men: and so they harden themselves in impudency, as the
devil himself is not more foul and nimble in horrible lying and false
accusing. But this scripture shows the just reason of the dragons hatred: it is
because they keep the commandments of God, and have the faith of Jesus
Christ: they cannot forsake their rule, to run with evil men into excesses,
nor swim with the stream, nor enrich themselves by choking their consciences,
nor cover or cast a mantle over men's sins, by their society, silence or the
like practice, Let none of such as fear God, like themselves the worse, to
hear themselves blasphemed by impudent and shameless sinners: For as these
must do it being ruled by the devil, so they must suffer it being ruled by God.

3 Let men fear to persecute and blaspheme the remnant of the faithful, and
obedient Christians, Use 3.
who will not yield to Antichristian devises, nor depart from their own rule:
Or else blame not the word for charging them to be his brats, whose practice
and language they here see it to be: as Christ told the Jews, Ioh. 8. you are
of your father the devil, his works you do. When the enemies of Gods Church
cast the Saints into prison, the devil does it. Rev. 2. 10. When Judas comes
to betray, the soldiers to apprehend, false witnesses to accuse, Jews to
scorn and mock, the prince of the world comes in them, Ioh. 14. 30.

This of the second note.

3 If we would know our selves of this remnant, Observe. 3.
we must find this property, that we keep the testimony of Jesus Christ.
Tit. 1. 9. we must hold fast the faithful word. And the reasons are many.

1 We had need so do, having so many with-holders; Reason 1.
the dragon pulls it from us by temptation, the beast by persecution, the wicked
by scorns and derision: all would pull us from our hold, and then were we
easily conquered.

2 Our love to Christ commands it. By holding the testimony we hold Christ
himself. Search the Scriptures, they witness of me, Ioh. 5. 39. The object of
the word is Jesus, the use of it to testify of Christ.

3 The truth must be firmly held: as is said, Buy the truth and sell it not:
it is true, and testified by truth it self, who is the mighty God and cannot
lie.

4 It is the sure evidence of our salvation, of our heavenly inheritance, a
saving testimony* because it is the testimony of Jesus: Rev. 1. 3. blessed is
he that reads, hears, and keep it: not meritoriously, as if he therefore
merited salvation: but as it is an instrument of God, and directive, appointed
as a rule to guide us unto salvation. Now as men look up their evidences in
sure and safe places, delight often to read them, suffer no man to cosen them
of them; whatsoever casually comes, these shall be by all possible means
safe-guarded: so ought we much more here, without which we have no assurance or
tenure to one foot in heaven.

Beware therefore of being ashamed of this testimony, Use 1.
being the testimony of Jesus Christ; as many be, and let it go,

First, for the contrariety of the doctrine to nature and natural courses.

Secondly, for the plainness and simplicity of it; for Christ came from heaven
to bring this doctrine, which all the skill of Men and Angels could not reach.

Thirdly, for the crosses and afflictions that attend it, being the word of the
cross.

Fourthly, for the infirmity of professors; which makes many, both Preachers
and hearers, ashamed of the sincerity and strictness of it.

Beware also of Apostasy from the truth. The 2.
mark of a Believer is, to have the testimony, not to have had it. It is a
misery to say, Fuimus Troes, I was a Protestant, I was a professor of religion,
etc.

And beware of scorning, hindering, persecuting the truth, which is most
contrary to this of the remnant. 3.
Each of these is a brand of a wicked man, in whom the spirit of the dragon
breathes.

This of the third note.

4 The calling of ever Christian is, to be a witness Observe. 4.
to Jesus Christ. Heb. 12. 1, being compassed with such a cloud of witnesses:
that is, the godly who witnessed the truth, and to whom the Scripture witnessed
that by their faith they pleased God, Esa. 43. 9, 10. Ye are my witnesses.

This witness is either inward, or outward.

The former is by the inward faith and affection of the soul, by which we
give strongest testimony to Jesus Christ, that he is the only Lord and husband
of his Church, our Emanuel, the redeemer of his Church, the savior of his
body, and that he has fully and perfectly fulfilled all righteounesse; by the
merit and virtue whereof the Church in general, and my self in special a
believing member, shall obtain salvation. True faith is the most real
testimony to Jesus Christ, that can be. For this is, to set to his seal that
God is true, John 3. 33. namely in his word and covenant, concerning salvation
by Jesus Christ. And he that believes, has the witness in himself, 1 Ioh 5.
10. Faith brings in the spirit of God, and his office is to witness unto
Christ, and to acquaint us with the things given us of God, And that spirit, to
which the spirit of God gives witness, will hold to the truth witnessed in
him; if all the world, and power of earth and hell would witness against him.
What an honest man has set his seal to, he will never be driven off it: but
by his faith he has set his seal to the truth and testament of Jesus Christ.

Outwardly the Believer witnesses to Christ three ways.

1 By profession and confession of the mouth: Romans 10. 10. with the mouth we
confess to salvation: that is, give clear witness to all the doctrine
concerning the nature, person, offices and benefits of Jesus Christ, and that
we rest and lean on him only for salvation.

2 By practice of life, beseeming the faith of Christ: for this is a witness,
that Christ lives in us, mooveth in us, rules in us, and that we live not
henceforth, but Christ lives in us, Gal. 2. 20.

3 By passion and suffering for Christ and his holy religion: for martyrs and
witnesses are all one: Acts 22. 20. Paul calls Steven Christ's witness: and,
Rev. 2. 13. Antipas that faithful witness was slain. And not only the
suffering of the pains of death, but inferior persecutions, by scourgings of
hand or tongue, or scornings, is a witnessing to Christ in the lower degrees of
Martyrdom.

Object. Christ neither needs nor receives the testimony of any man. Ioh. 5.
33.

Answ. Christ is true God, and his truth is the truth of God, infallible, more
certain and firm then al men's testimony. And it were very unworthy, that
infinite should need finite, or infallible should need fallible, or that the
author of truth should need authority from men. In this sense Christ neither
needs nor receives the witness of any man, as necessary to himself, or
for his own part: but that they might be saved; partly for the weakness of
men, who cannot come to understand divine things without men's testimony or
ministry; and partly for their salvation, which by men he promoteth: He uses
John's witness, and calls for the witness of the meanest believer.

Now the reasons why every one of the remnant must give witness to Christ, are
these:

1 Nothing that we can do, can more honor God and Jesus Christ, then this:
Romans 4. 21. Abraham was Reason 1.
strong in faith, and gave glory to God. What or wherein can we give greater
glory to God, then when our faith gives him a witness of his great power,
truth, and goodness, even contrary to sense and reason, as Abraham did?

2 Nothing can more honor our selves, then to 2
be vouchsafed witnesses to God, testifying his truth, and the excellency of
Gods holy religion, both in word and conversation. Were it not a great honor
for a great Prince to call a mean subject to be a witness on his side for the
opening of a truth that nearly in honor concerns him? But this honor have all
the Saints; it being the office and function of the whole Church, to be the
ground and pillar of truth, the upholder and maintainer of that truth which
upholdeth the honor of God himself. What an honor was it, that the Lord called
in the whole Church of the Jews to be witnesses on his side? Esa. 43. 10.
against all the heathens, to testify of his Omniscience, in predictions of
things to come which their gods could not do; and of his Omnipotency in
admirable works done for them in the wilderness, in the sea, in the land; of
his singular goodness and providence in innumerable mercies, wherein they were
advanced above all people of the earth. Did the Lord need them to witness? no,
but it was their honor to be vouchsafed such grace, that whereas all the
heathens witnessed to their idols, they of all people on the earth witnessed
and celebrated the great and noble acts of God done among them.

3 Nothing makes us liker to Christ our head, 3.
that true and faithful witness: this was his special office, to witness
the truth as the redeemer of mankind, and the author of truth, Ioh. 18. 37.
For this cause was I borne, and came into the world, that I might testify of
the truth. Even so every member of Christ is borne into the Church, and comes
into the world of Believers, to give witness unto the truth, as being taught
in the truth, and as the redeemed of the Lord.

4 As nothing can make us liker to God, so nothing 4
is better pleasing unto God. God the Father has often and sundry ways
testified unto his Son.

First, Sensibly and audibly, in his baptism, and transfiguration also, that
he was the son of his love, who had all his love cast upon him.

Secondly, By the internal revelation of his Spirit, in the hearts of
believers, as to Peter, Mat. 16. 17 Flesh and blood has not revealed this, but
my Father in heaven.

Thirdly, and especially by the mission and ministry of the Son himself: Ioh.
3. 33. he that receives his testimony, fealeth that God is true: for he whom
God has sent, speaks the words of God. If we desire to be like God, or to
please God, we must herein imitate him as dear children.

Which serves for the reproof of such as are afraid or ashamed of this
testimony: contrary to 2 Timothy 1. 8. Use 1.
Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord. Many will not testify to Christ
among poor men, some because great men resist it; some are afraid of the
strictness of it, some of the crosses, some of the scorns of it; and most,
because this witness would witness against their own contrary courses: and
men of little faith are dejected in small matters. But such Christ will be
ashamed of in the day of his appearing, and shall witness against them that he
never knew them.

Such also are condemned, as do contest against the witnessing of Christ. The
world is full of false witnesses, such as were suborned against Christ: as

First, all false teachers that father that on Christ, which he never spoke; as
Papists or others that deny, any article of faith and Christian Religion: so
the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. If the dead rise not again, we are false witnesses. So
to teach the doctrine of man's merit of free will to good, image worship, or the
like, is to be a false witness against Christ himself.

Secondly, all unbeleevers that receive not this testimony: whether such as
scorn to hear the witnesses of Christ (if they dislike the person, they will
none of the witness; loath to drink good wine, because they like not the dish)
or such as hear sometime, but believe not the witness; this infidelity makes
God a liar, so far as a wicked man can, 1 Ioh. 5. 11.

Thirdly, such as contest against his witnesses, to elevate their testimony:
for, as in the days of his flesh there wanted not such as witnessed against
himself in person, that he was a drunkard, a devil, a friend to Publicans and
sinners, an enemy to Caesar, a blasphemer; so for the same end, to weaken the
authority of his witnesses, there never wanted such as would witness against
Job, that he was an hypocrite, that Paul was a pestilent fellow, a moover of
sedition, a preacher of false doctrine, unworthy to live And can the devil
devise so foul accusations, or so slanderous, which his agents will not
boldly urge against the witnesses of Christ, to whose innocence and godliness
God himself witnesses?

This also serves to comfort,

1 Poor Christians, despised in the world: God Use. 2.
honors the poorest Believer, to be a witness to his truth: and a poor man's
testimony is as good even in men's Courts, as a rich: but much more before Gods
tribunal.

2 Such as suffer for this testimony losses, reproaches, and the contempt of
the world. Even we lovingly respect such as suffer for their love to us in
upholding our truth and innocence: and much more does the Lord: see the promise
for encouragement. Mat. 19. 29.

It is also a word of instruction: that we frame and fit our selves to this
witness. Use 3.


Quest. How may that be?

Answ. To a good testimony is required a good witness, and to a good witness
must concur these five things.

1 Knowledge and certain persuasion of the truth, to which we are to testify.
When Christ was to raise up witnesses to the truth of the Gospel, he would
have them his own domestickes, to be with him, to be eyewitnesses, and
eare-witnesses of all he did or spoke: so as they were to deliver nothing but
of their certain knowledge, the things they had heard and seen and handled; 1
Ioh. 1. 1. So as ignorant persons that care not for the knowledge of the
mysteries of the Gospel, are as fit to witness to Christ, as a blind man to
judge of colors.

2 For this knowledge and persuasion, because it must be from a divine teacher,
as the thing witnessed is, we must not content our selves with the report of
men, or an humane apprehension of the matters of religion, but be sure we have
the spirit of God inwardly to teach us: for the natural man cannot discern
the things of God: Ioh. 15. 26. When the Comforter shall come, he shall
testify of me, and ye shall witness also: but not before they have received
the Spirit.

3 Faithfulness and sincerity: to testify the truth only, and the whole truth.
A man of integrity is a fit witness in this great cause of Christ. Many
profess o^e thing and practice another: have a form of godliness, but deny
the power of it. These are unfaithful and disgraceful witnesses, that say and
unsay; a discredit to the cause, a shame to themselves: Their word and witness
goes for nothing: men's tribunalls cast out such witnesses with disgrace, much
more the Lords.

4 Plainness and opennesse: that men may know, what they witness: that their
testimony may be an evidence: not to fumble, or flatter, or blanch the truth.
Ministers must explane the Testament of Christ, and speak plainly that Christ
by it gives nothing but to his friends and kindred, to his mother, brethren,
sisters, even such as hear the word and keep it: that he bequeathed the
inheritance to the sanctified, not the profane; that pearls are not cast to
swine; that howsoever wicked ones will scrape acquaintance with Christ at this
day, and at the day of judgment, for that they were just, sober, charitable,
civil, harmless, yea beyond many of us in their civil entertainments of
Christ, yet shall they not be found in the genealogy, are not of the house of
faith, nor of the blood of Christ.

5 Courage and boldness to stand to their witness. Pilate gave a good
testimony of Christ his innocence, but wanting courage he went against his own
testimony. Now this courage is necessary,

First, to stand out against numbers of false witnesses. One Elias must stand
against four hundred false Prophets: the Apostles against the whole Council,
Act. 5. 32.

Secondly, to contemn the wrath of the adverse part, armed with fury and
madness against them; Act. 5. 33. they brust for anger, and consulted.

Thirdly, to abate the madness of adversaries: as did the courage of the
disciples, having the better end of the staff, Act. 16. 39. the magistrates
came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of
the City.

Motives thus to give witness to Jesus Christ.

1 All creatures, even the unreasonable, witness to the glory of God. Act. 14.
17. he left not himself without witness, in that he gave rain and fruitful
seasons. If we should hold our peace, the very stones would cry.

2 It is so honorable a service, as the Angels themselves desire to stoop
and bow unto it, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Even they affectionatly long and desire to
behold and witness the spiritual riches of the Church by Jesus Christ. The
faces of the Cherubins were always upon the Arc: they could never look
enough, nor with admiration enough, upon the affairs of the Church. How ready
and faithful have they been on these errands and messages? etc.

3 To faithful witnesses God witnesses, that he is their God, as the
Patriarchs, Heb. 11. 16. he is not ashamed to be called their God,

4 Professors and slaves of Antichrist are bold to witness their false faith,
with resolution of mind, danger of body, loss of goods, lands, liberty, and
life: and shall Christ's servants be ashamed in his testimony?

5. The Saints have not counted their lives dear to them, nor loved them to
the death for Christ's sake, as we have seen on Verse 11. He is a very Jade
that will not follow a free Leader.

6. The season and time invites it: If men will not now witness to Christ in
the days of truth and protection, what will they do in the fiery trial? for
what days do so many conceal their resolution? why do so many desire rather
to be counted wise, than religious?

And I stood on the Seashore, or land.] These words belong not to this
Chapter, but to the next vision; neither read in the first person, He stood,
that is the dragon (as some read) on the sand, that is, on a sandy and
mouldring foundation, or on a multitude of wicked men, as the sand: but in the
first person, I stood, that is, I stood in vision on the sand, to see the beast
rising out of the sea; so as the words are a transition to the vision of the
beast in the next Chapter.

So I have by the grace of God finished this task and text, which has notably
suited with the occurrences of these latter times, and seasonably met with the
present occasions and state of the Churches, at home and abroad. I will not go
forward in this mystical book; for in this chapter I have led you into the
heart and kernel of the whole book; and given not a dark light to the whole:
Besides, you love variety, and my self aim at some other plainer doctrine.

Bella, minas, fluvios, mulier cum semine sancto
Sustinet, and victrix astra Ducemque petit.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Table of the chief things contained in the foregoing
EXPOSITION.
A
Accusations of the godly, in things true and false. page 553 The godly lie
open to all manner of false accusation and why, 561 False accusation the nearest
and expressest image of the devil, 571 Disswasions from it, 577 How to fence
our selves against it, 582
Accusers of the godly shall one day have their mouths stopped, 588 Actions
that are good, studiously hindered by Satan, 157 Blemished two ways, 161 Affect
men differently, as they differ in good or evil, 673 Afflictions of the Church
may be long and grievous, 325 how long and short too, 326 Agreement of
disagreeing enemies, against the Church, 130 Angels ^ignifie any servants and
soldiers of Christ, 342 Resemble them, 347 What the good Angels do for the
children of God, 345
Antichrist arising is the great wrath of the dragon, demonstrated, 693 By what
stayres he arose, 739 Time of his reign ^^cording to Papists, confuted, 786
His wars come of the dragons wrath, Reas. 828
Antichristianisme, an universal heresy, 699 Worse then temporal enemies,
three ways, 700 Effects of it far worse, 703
Apology for our innocence, needful, 586 Armo^ of God, taken from us, or
turned against us, 171 Assaults and stratage^s of Satan against the Saints, 168
B
Be busy more and more for grace and goodness, reas. 726 Beast, that Antichrist,
noted and described, 820 Beginning of good: watched by Satan, to hinder it, 248
Benefits of receiving Christ and his truth, 688 Birth of children in nature and
grace, how they are alike, 92 The spiritual far better then the natural, 97
Appears in five things, 110 Effected with pain, four reasons, 118
Hindrances of the new birth, 120 Resolve to go through all, 124. motives, 125
Body of Christ, threefold, 300 Blood of Christ, how we overcome by it, 605 How
all our enemies are overcome by it, 606 Answers all objections for us, 607
Bootlesse to struggle against the truth, or Church, 782 Brethren, several
sorts, 554 All brethren, that profess Christ, and how, 555 Mockers and enemies
taxed, 559
Brotherly love commended to Christians, 557 motives, ibid. Objectio^s
answered, 558 Conditions of it, 559

C
Callings, general and special, disordered, 174 Censure not every one that is
accursed, 568 Christ: cleave to him, in person, affection, affliction, 19
Depend on him for direction, protection, provision, 20 Honor him, 22 Please
him, six ways, 23 More excellent then the world, and so esteemed of the godly,
68 Received into us, how, 455
Church: six privileges of it, as Christ's Spouse, 25 What her crown is, 77
How it continues, 78 How on her head, 79 See more, 219 A fruitful mother of
children unto God, 95 Mother Church, which, 98 Popish notes, disproued, 99 Five
true notes, auowed, 104 Marks of true children of the Church, 110 Sorts of
them, 4. 271 Safe ever by the salvation of God, 508 Not always glorious, but
always safe, 768 In hardest times, assuredly fed and provided for, 777
Coming of Christ expells Satan, 444 Why, and how, 446
Conclusions about the churches visibilitie. 297 Consolation in the great power
of Christ, 538 Conversion: casts out every devil, why and how, 471 Courage
necessary for great performances, 279 Motives to it, 280 Means, 281
Crown of Christ: set and hold it on his head, 222 Crown and Princedome of
Satan, what, how, wherein: 200
Cruelty in the devil and his instruments, 142 Whence, and why permitted, 144

D
Dangers, what to do in them 812 Days put for years, 321 Death of Christ,
how necessary, 537 Deceive the world how, 411 Delight in earth, discovered to
be predominant, four notes, 13 Desert, what in this Chapter, 292 Despair not
of the worst, 452 Despise life and all for Christ, why and how, 624 Meditations
and practices, 632
Differences of Gods working, and Satan, in the same action, 733 Disgrace put
upon good actions, 162 Disloyalty taught by Popish religion, 533 Devil called
a dragon in four respects, 127 So are also his instruments, 128 Why comprised
here in the name of one dragon, 128. 129 Notes of him cast out, 431 Motives to
cast him out, 454 Means, 455
Dragon: emblem of persecuting Princes, why, 129 Defeated many ways, 242
Means to overcome him, 736 Not cast out till Christ and his Gospel come, 425
Overcome, not only by Christ, but by Christians, 599 Dominion exercised among
wicked men only, 439

E
Eagles wings, what they are, 758 Ease in our Christian profession, not
comfortable, 339 End of magistracy, what, and wherein, 289 Enemies of Christ,
who, 530 Enemies of the godly have four chief sins in their oppositions,
566 Enemies of the Church shall be finally destroyed four reasons: 390 Enemies
spiritual overcome by the power of Christ in us: 550
Enterprise of wicked enemies bootlesse, 465 Entertain Christ and his truth:
motives, means, letts, 686 Euili actions, how by Satan put forward, 166
Exorcisme, to dispossess a devil: 449 Expect floods of opposition and
persecution: 804
F
Faith our victory, how, 606 Faiths power, wherein bewrayed, 548
False fears, what mischief to the Christian combatant, 178 Families: how the
devil is cast out of them, 258 Fence against the devil, how, 407 Fidelity to
God and the Church, requisite, exemplified: 7. 8 Fight against Christ. how the
wicked do so, 357 Notes of them, 362
Flight of Satan, sometimes fained, 175 Flight of the Church, what, when, how:
752 How from the face of the dragon: 766
Floods of waters signify afflictions, and why: 793 Out of the dragons mouth,
three sorts of them: 795
Fly in persecution, when lawful, and not lawful: 619. 765 Food for the
soul, what, and how certain, 781 Friendship pretended to deceive, 153
Frustrate and Fruitless, how good things are made to be, 164
G
Garment: of Saints is Christ, for necessity, ornament, distinction: 39 Better
then the other in five respects, 42 How put on, 43 Motives to put it on, 46 and
that continually, 49 Express the shining of it, 50 Not disgrace it on others
52 Keep it clean, why, how, and who offend, 54
God saves his Church by means, though he could without them, 759 gives
sufficient means, 760
Godliness: wherein the power of it is seen, 549 Good gifts, how given to
evil men, 149 Great adversaries of the Church, 136 Great helps against them
138 Great encouragements likewise, 140

H
Happiness of Christians cannot be prevented, nor discontinued, 30 nor a whit
prejudiced by any enemies, 467
Hatred in wicked ones against the good unknown, or unseene, five Reasons, 824
Hearing of the word, hindered by Satan, 169 Hell: why the devil is not confined
to it, 437 Help ever afforded to the Church in the greatest persecutions,
Reas. 811 Many times when she least expects it, four Reasons, 814
Heaven: the Church militant so called, 5. and 642 True Christians already in
heaven, how: 8 Many therefore no true members of the Church, 12
Heresy more hateful to the Church, then tyranny, 755 Heresies drunk up of
the earth, how, 807
Horns, what they signify, 186 Horned beasts against the Church, that is,
hurtful men, 188
I
Jesuits and other Papists impudent in false accusations, 574 Impotency of
Satan in doing mischief, 238 Instances of Satan near us, or standing before
us, 254 Instructions by consideration of Christ's power, 542 Instruments of
special good, fitted of God thereunto, 276 Instruments of the devil: notes of
them, 355 cast out together with himself, 460 How, seeing they prevail so
much, 462 Impudent and instant in false accusations, 569 Marks of them, 572
Joy: none but the godly called to it, and why, 643 Joy of Heaven must now be
expressed, and how that may be, 649 How heavenly and earthly joys, may stand
together, 655
Join all in fight against Satan, 344 Iudgment-day, signs of it, showed in
the coming of Antichrist, 695
K
Keys: a sign of power, and in Christ's hand, 426 Kingdom of God, what, and
how it florisheth, 509 Kingdom of Antichrist resembled by Egypt, how. 697

L
Lamb: Christ so called, why, what use, 603 Lamentable estate of wicked men 352
Law and terrors needful to the best, 659 Legal and Evangelical keeping of
the commandments, 835 conditions of keeping of them, 836 sure coffers to keep
them 837 marks of them that keep aright, 837 motives, 840
Lets of receiving Christ and his truth, 689 Lessons to be learned, of Satan,
to redeem time, 723 Life, how it may be loved, 617 Light skirmishes get the
devil great advantages, 176 Love of Christ, which will hold out to the death,
four notes of it, 631 Love the godly unseene, and how, 828
Luther: where the Church was before his time: 303, and 771 Lying signs and
wonders, why, 412
M
Magistrates must resemble God in four things, 286 Manchild: Christ like it,
not the same, 261 Constantine, with the like, so called, 266 collectively,
reasons, 267
Martyrs overcome the Dragon, and others too, with three qualities, 618 how in
suffering they overcome, 622
Means to a void the Dragons wrath, 708 Michael: notes Christ, 341 Ministers:
stars in the Church, 81 must resemble stars, how, and wherein, 82 motives
to ministerial duties, 84 dignity, duty, end, and comfort of a good Minister,
122, and 225 must preach woes as well as comforts, 656, reasons, 657 objections
remooved, 658 who blame worthy, 663
Ministry, though sharp, must be endured, motives, 668 Modesty commended. 7
Moon: resembles the world in four things, 62 must be kept below Christ, both
the best and worst of the world, 65 for five reasons, 66 must be held with
four cautions, 67 notes of one, whom the world has overcome, 75 and one that
has the moon under his feet, 77
Mourn to see Gods Kingdom opposed, or not enlarged, Multitude no sure note
of the Church, 414
N
No news to see the Church goared and persecuted, 193 No calling or condition
can secure a good man from opposition, 253 No prevailing against the Church,
365. objections answered, 369 No easy thing to be a Christian, 627 yet many
make such account, four sorts, 629
Notes of one seduced of the devil, 421 Notes of one lying under the Dragons
power, or wrath, 705 Notes of one whose place shall not be found among Saints,
398 Notes of one prevayling against the Dragon, 377 and of one, in whom the
Dragon preuailes, 379
Number of ten implies perfection, 188 Number of true enemies to Antichrist,
small, four reasons, 831

O
Occasions for Satan to take advantage at us, 155 Offense not to be taken at
the Apostasy of Ministers or others, 237 Order our desires and conditions,
how, 750
P
Patience needful, 221 Peace, how affirmed of the Church, 333 Persecutor one
in all ages, how, what use, 731 Persecution from whom to be expected, 735
inevitable to the Church, why, what use, 736 even by Christian Emperors,
twofold, 739 sometimes hindered by earthly occasions, 809
Personal reproof, necessary, 666 Popes headship ever withstood, 776 Power
of Christ, twofold, 527 his power, as Mediator, superior to all created power,
528 how discerned to be in us, 545
Praise God for the overthrow of the Churches enemies, 477 Objections answered,
478, 479 conditions, means, and motives, 485
Preaching, why resisted as it is, 450 who condemn tart preaching, 665 their
sin, 666
Prepare for adversity, or flight into the wilderness, 304 Prevent it, how, 308
Profaneness: in preferring the world before Christ, 69 helps against it, 70
motives, 71
Prosperity of the Church sends it into a wilderness, how, 293 use it warily,
307 hurts more then persecution, how, why, 340 ill fruits of it, 743 no note of
the Church, 737
Profession of religion: practices of it, to cast out Satan, 457 Providence:
God feeds his in greatest scarcity, and why, 316 Protectors of the Church: be
such, three means, 275
Q
Questions of the spiritual combat, two, 254
R
Reinerius the Inquisitors testimony of the Waldenses, 774 Rejoice to see Gods
Kingdom of grace prevayle, 510 Rejoice in spiritual conquests, and temporal,
483
Recusants should consider four things, 710 their pitiful case, 712
Religious courses thought uncomfortable, and why, 648 Repent and get out of
security, 675 Repiners at the Churches prosperity, no true Christians, 490 and
513 Revenge on the contempt of the Gospel; instances, 682 Restless malice of
Satan and his instruments, though crossed, why, 800 Romish religion cruel,
therefore false, 146 Romish Church called a woman, why, 15 no true Church, for
that she gives salvation to others then God, 500

S
Saints on earth have Kingly dignity, and how, 84 must be thankful, cheerful,
and live as Princes, 87 and not lose their crown, what, 90
Salvation: wholly from God, to the Church, and members, 494 give him all the
glory, 497
Satan, an enemy to whom 405 cast out by Christ, and his members, how, 424
cannot hinder the birth and rising of excellent instruments, 269 his chief
aim is, to throw down such instruments, 232 prevent him, 235 pray for such, 236
Seduction, how to be avoided, 417 Serpent, an emblem of the devil, 403
Sharper assalts are the shorter, why, what use, 720 Sins, as signs of wrath
toward a Church, 308 Slanders of Papists against the doctrine and life of
Protestants, 797 how dried up of the earth, 808
Soldiers of Christ, why used by him, 343 Subjection to Magistrates, 283
Subtilty of the devil and his instruments, 149 instances, 152 comforts against
it, five 184
Superiors instructed to humiliy, moderation, and mercy, 560 Sun: Christ
resembled by it, for affects and effects, 36 but far better, 36 so admire
him, rejoice in him, be thankful for him, imitate him, and walk as beseemes
him, four ways, 36, etc.
Stars of the Churches fall to the earth, three ways, 226 yet not all, why,
231

T
Tail of the Dragon, what, and who, 228 Terror by Christ's power for Christ's
enemies, 530 Testimony: Gods word, how Christ's, and ours, 610 why the testimony
of Jesus, 841 testify to the Gospel, four ways, 610 motives, 616
Thanks to be given for clearing our innocence, 595 how to be expressed. 597
Thrones and rulers are of God, 286 Treason taught among Papists, not
Protestants, 285 Trial of religion, persons, and places, whether for Christ,
or no, 429 Time, times, and half, what 785 Time of Antichrist short, how, 715
Time of Satan's rage in any mischief, determinate, why, what use, 718 and 791.
foretold, why 784
Turk not so pernicious as Antichrist, 839
V
Valor of Christians in 2 things, 89 Victory: triumph after it, not before,
three reasons, 639 who faulty, 640
Visibility and outward splendour no note of the Church, 207. and 294 and 770.
objections answered, 299 Visions: kinds, differen. and reas. 3, 4, Unhappy are
the wicked, while the godly are happy and rejoice, 671 Unity no note of the
Church, 132 what unity to preach, ibid. and practice, 133
W
Wait for deliverance out of trouble and how, 496 Walk wisely as well as
warrantably, 182 Watch in prosperity, with directions, 747 Watch against
satan, three rules, 251 Warfare of the Church on earth, 335 Want of temporals:
comforts against it, 779 Weapons of Antichrist, spiritual and temporal, 822
Where Christ may not prevail, the devil shall, reas. 679 Wicked men uphold the
devils crown and dignity, described, 105 they cannot safely rejoice, 645
Wicked companionship to be forsaken, 474 Wilderness, or sad estate, the estate
of the Church, 295 comfort and contentment in it, 306 Wings of the woman,
what, why, whence, 756 Wisdom of the serpent in four things, 179. means to
get it five, 182. practice of it, 183 Witnesses: who the two witnesses are, 315
Withstand Satan, six rules, 258 Wives duties to their husb. 18. etc. Wizzards:
no good Christian, that seeks to them, 506 Woe, what note it is, 6^6 Woman:
the Church militant so called, 16, 17 Word of God: by it we overcome
spiritual enemies, how, 611 treachery of Papists, disarming us of it, 613.
word neglected or despised, leaves wicked sinners, 614
World must not get our affections, conformity, patronage, 14
Y
Youth taxed for slipping their time 723
Z
Zeal and meeknes, how to be tempered in Ministers and others, 661
ERRATA.
Page 14. read, it lies in wickedness p. 38. r let the light make us ashamed,
p. 75 r. in the full, and all is gone, p. 103. r. personal and doctrinall and
they have not the succession of Peter, who have not the faithof Peter, p. 112.
r. may well mistrust their conversion, p. 135 r. in John's time having command,
etc p. 199. r. must not touch Jobs life, p. ^74 r. either of their faith or
salvation, p. 282. r. meditate often on Gods promises, p. 285 r laudatorie
oration, p. 310 r. word of salvation, p. 522. r. Nathan, or Gad, p. 607. r.
dead works. Heb. 9. 14. p. 7^5. r. more easily drawn, p. 803 r. all these
happy means, p. 837 r. Oh how love I thy Law.

FINIS.

