THE Recantation made at Paul's Cross, by William Tedder Seminary Priest, the
first of December, Anno. 1588.

PSALM. 118. Impulsus euersus sum vt cad^rem, et Dominus suscepit me. I was
sore shaken that I was like to fall, but the Lord has vpholden me. Whereunto
is adjoined: The recantation or abiuration of Anthony Tyrell, (sometime
Priest of the English College in Rome,) pronounced by himself at Paul's
Cross the next Sunday following, in the same year.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlewoode, and VVylliam Brom. Anno. Dom. 1588.

To the Christian Reader.
BEfore you come to the reading of this my recantation, J thought good to
advertise you, first of the cause that moned me to publishe it in print, which
is the satisfaction of all my Countrymen. First, of them that were present at
the pronouncing of the same, for though they did hear me speak in that place
where I did utter it, yet heard they not all that here is set down, for the
shortness of time caused me to omit that which I did. Secondly, I have added
something more then was in that copy: such are most of the authorities noted
in the margent, out of the Scriptures, and certain verses, which here I have
put down. Third-lie, I thought it not sufficient to have pronounced it in one
place: I know it had been sufficient for the assembly there present: But, my
desire is, that all her Majesty's Subjects whersoeuer, though they heard me
not, should have if it please them, a copy of my Recantation in their hands.
First to peruse for their satisfaction. Secondly to praise God for mine
effectual conversion.

I am now to entreat the Christian Reader, not to consider so much the style
wherein I have written it, as the affection wherewith I did write it: and when
you have seen the same, I beseech you to pray God to continue me in that good
work, which his majesty has begun very graciously in me.

Your hearty welwiller William Tedder.

The Recantation of William Tedder Seminary Priest, pronounced by himself at
Paul's Cross, the first of December. Anno. 1588. (*)
ALthough even from my childehoode in a manner, I have been noseled up in the
faith or rather error of the Church of Rome, (both my Parents being
vehemently addicted to ye same) Yet my fault was so much the greater, because I
did not only obstinatlie, but also in a manner desperately persist in that
Sinagogue against mine own conscience. For I was always distracted in mind
with doubts of the greatest points of that Religion. As of the Pope his
authority. The doctrine of transubstantiation. The presumption of free will.
The fancy of purgatory. The derogatorie sacrifice of the Mass, and such like.
In the which opinions I waded so far, that if the help of the Lord GOD had not
been at hand, it had been to mine utter ruin and co^^^^ion.

But seeing it has pleased God to call me back again, I will say as David
said: Psalm. 94.
If the Lord had not helped me, it had not failed but my soul had been put to
silence. Again, I was in greater fault, for though I thought they could
prove these At ticles by authority of Counselles and Fathers, and as they
bear men in hand by good reasons, yet could I find not so much as the ground
of one word for them in the holy Scriptures. And thus being ouerwhelined with
so great waters, I was constrained to say with the Prophet: Psalm. 69.
I stick fast in the deep mire where no ground is, I am come into deep
waters so that the floods run over me.

Three causes there were which kept me so long in mine obstinatie and errors,
which being compared with the cause of my returning again, are of no force at
all, because they were foolish and of men: the other, was only of God, whose
thoughts are not as the thoughts of men.

The first of these causes which turned me so far from the way, was the
great delight that I had in the study of Natural Philosophy. And in this
point I was persuaded, that I should more profit in the parts beyond the
Seas, then here at home in mine own native Country, and therefore, partly by
the instigation of my Father, and partly for the desire that I had to see
foreign Countries, and most of all for the love that I bare unto ye study of
Philosophy, I repaired unto the Countries beyond the Seas, little considering
the dangers that might ensue thereof, as the displeasure of God, the
displeasure of my gracious Prince, and the offense of all my Countrymen.

The second cause, was the fear of worldly shame and te^porall discredit, for
I feared that then, which I find no we to be true: which is, that they which
were once my friends, would become my mortal enemies, which by experience I
know. I did not consider then, or else I cared not for that sentence of our
Savior: Luke 12.
Every one that confesses me before men, the son of man shall confess him
before the Angels of God. And he that denies me before men, he also shall be
denied before the Angels of GOD. This was the cause that made me to take a
preposterous way, turning all things to mine own credit, when I should have
turned them to the glory of almighty God, Matt. 6,
for our Savior says: First seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness of
the same, and all other things shall be given unto you. Thus thinking to get
credit by mine obstinacy, I did loose the favor of God, the love of my
Sovereign ye Queens most excellent Majesty, and the good will of all true
subjects, which I hope to recover again, by this my free Recantation, and my
further conversation from henceforth in my Country.

The third cause, was the tickling of vain glory, and this cause I am sure
does detain most of the contrary side in their perverse obstinacy, howsoever
they brag that they seek nothing by their dealings but the glory of God.
For, I was not moved a little to submitt my self to her Majesty's mercy, and
to embrace the knowledge of the true faith, seeing the wicked counsel and
deuillish devises of the Pope and his Children, against the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and our most dear Country. Which counsels I thought they
would never have put in execution. But when I saw that great practice come to
pass, I mean ye invasion of this Land, God so moving me (as hereafter I
will manifest) I thought utterly to forsake them, although couertlye for vain
gloryes sake I continued a while amongst them. I thought it then a goodly
thing, and worthy of commendation for me, to defend an evil cause by
probable reasons. Yet I knew it was an hard thing for Anaxagoras to prove that
Snow was black, or yncke white, and for me to prove light to be darkness, or
darkness to be light. For it is written, 1. Cor. 1.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and cast away the understanding of
the prudent.

But now, seeing it has pleased almighty God, to call me to the knowledge of
his truth, in detestation of this vain glory, I will say with the Apostle:
2. Cor. 11
Si gloriari oportet, quae infirmitatis meae sunt gloriabor, that is, If I must
needs boast, I will boast in mine infyrmitie. 2. Cor. 12
And again, Libenter gloriabor in infirmitatibus meis, vt inhabitet in me
virtus Christi: that is, I will gladly boast in mine infirmities, that the
power of Christ may dwell within me. Thus have I breefely declared the causes
which drove me out of the way, and caused me to delight in vanities, and
follow lies so long, Psalm. 4.
that if Gods grace had not been, I had been cleene cast away. But, now I
say again, Psalm. 118
Impulsus euersus sum vt caderem et dominus suscepit me, I was sore shaken that
I was like to fall, but the Lord has vpholden me.

But here you will ask me the cause of so sudden a change: I answer,
that I know no other but the grace of almighty GOD, the which works when
and as it pleases him. This grace have I often refused for the causes before
alleged: me thought I heard him say unto me daily, Ecce sto ad ostium et
pulso, Behold I stand knocking at thy doors. Apo. 3.
Yet was I not ashamed to thrust him out, and to let in his adversary the
devil. I heard him cry within me, Cant. 5.
Aperi mihi soror mea, amica mea, Columba mea, immaculata mea, caput meam
plenum est rore, et cincinni mei guttis noctium: Open unto me my sister, my
friend, my Dove, my unspotted, my head is full of dew, and my locks with the
drops of the night. I heard him give me these loving titles, but I refused
him and gave him this answer: Ibidem.
Expoliaui me tunica mea, quomodo induar illa? Laui pedes meos quomodo
coinquinabo illos? I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on again? I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them again? Thus continued I, until
he by his grace so sweetly and forcibly prevented me, that whether I would or
not, at length he compelled my rebellious will to obey. So that I which once
did so little account of the true and ancient faith, that I counted it for an
heresy: now I see evidently, that without the same there is no way to
salvation.

Therefore, if ever you pitied any man's case, I beseech you have compassyon
upon mine, considering that it is a thing incident to ma^s nature to err and
to sin, but to continue and persist in it, is the part of the devil. I
freely do confess and acknowledge that I have sinned against God, my Prince,
and my Country, as a man whose nature is prone, Genesis 6.
and the thoughts of whose heart is always bent to mischief, I persisted in
mine errors a long time, as one that followed the suggestions of the Serpent,
rather then the inspirations of the spirit of God. But by his motion, I am
returned again to the sheepfold of Christ. Where fore I request you all, for
the tender mercies of God, that you would receive me that return again,
following the steps of our Savior: who disdained not to receive Publicans and
sinners: who left 99. Luke 15
sheep in the wilderness and went to seek one that was lost. I have been like
the prodigal Son, which loosely and wantonlie spent his portion in riot and
lust, and was compelled to eat such meat as the Hogs did. All this have I
done, I have spent that Talent which God gave me, in maintaining the harlot of
Babylon, in upholding the chair of pestilence, I mean the Church of Rome, I
have fed my self with the swill and dregs of men's inventions and traditions,
forsaking the fountain and food of Gods word. All this I have done: but at
the last being by hunger compelled, I cried out with that prodigal child,
saying: Pater peccaui in caelum et coram te, iam non sum dignus vocari filius
tuus: Luke 15
Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am not worthy to be
called any more thy Son. This confession moved his Father to compassion, who
lovingly embraced him, received him willingly, and cherished him tenderly So
I desire you not to refuse me, though I come late home, receive me again, and
have compassion. For our Savior Christ says, Matt. 5.
Beati misericordes quoniam ipsi misericor diam consiquentur, Blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain mercy. And truly to have compassion is a
thing wherein a man does follow the example of almighty GOD, for Christ
himself does say, Luke. 6
Estote misericordes sicut pater vester misericors est, Be you merciful as
your Father is merciful. Receive me I beseech you which was a fugitive, as one
that repents, as one that desires rather to be an abject in Gods house,
Psalm. 84.
then to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners. His name therefore who has so
mercifully called me, be blessed for evermore.

But now I will come to the purpose, that is, to recant and renounce such
errors, as heretofore I have maintained, desiring God, that as it has
pleased his heavenly goodness to give me the grace to forsake them, so it would
also please him, to give me the gift of perseverance to continue, that I may no
more fall into them again.

You know it is the nature of the Serpent, to keep his head whole though he
put his body in danger for the defense of the same: but, if a man once bruise
his head, he can no longer endure against him but he must of necessity die.
And I can no better compare the huge and weldie mass of Papistrie to any
thing, then unto a Serpent, therefore in renouncing of it I will begin with the
head.

The Papists do think, and I did think the same, that the Pope was Christ his
Vicar, The first Article of the Pope.
and supreme head of the universal Church here upon the earth militant.
This Article being mightily vpholden, and stoutly defended, they think none
other of their Bulwarks can be shaken. They think also that he has such a
prerogative, that he cannot err, whereof ryfeth this presumption in deposing
of Princes, degradation of Bishops, excomunication of all sorts of people
without respect, and of most light occasion.

Hereof he presumes to prescribe Laws to the whole Church, the which
forsooth without his dyspensation must be inviolable, Sub pena
excommunicationis. And whosoever does break them, if it be Emperor, King,
Queen, or what Prince soever, he must be deposed, such wickedness has he
practiced against the Queens most excellent Majesty, to his utter shame and
confusion, that the Proverb may be fulfilled, God sends a shrewde Cow
short horns. But his holiness, if it please you, is not contented with this:
he chalengeth to himself so great a prerogative, that he will make and
deface Articles of the Faith at his own will and pleasure. Gratian.
Quia Dominus Deus noster Papa. Hereof it arises, that in that Synagogue,
scarce any of the Lay people can tell what they believe: for being asked a
reason of their faith, they say nothing else, but thus believes ye Church,
thus says the Pope. Whereas in deed, the reason of our Faith should be taken
from the word of God, for as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 116
Omnis homo mendax, Every man is a liar. And therefore it shall suffice me that
the Pope is a man, and consequently a liar, and may not only err, but also
has already erred, which if I desired not to be brief I would prove, unless
by this his supreme usurped authority he be deified or made a God, which thing
to confess is not only impudency but also intolerable blasphemy. I
therefore do here utterly detest, abjure, and renounce him, with all his
excommunications, interdictions, suspentions, degradations, depositions,
irregularities, and a thousand such like trifling thunderbolts. I pronounce
also his doctrine, not to be according to ye holy Scripture, but contrary unto
it, and therefore I do freely and joyfully recant it, thanking GOD that it
has pleased his divine Majesty to deliver me from the slavery of that
Tyrant, desiring him also that I may not fall into his subjection again.

Next unto this is their blasphemous doctrine of their Propitiatory sacrifice,
2 Of the Mass.
which they call the sacrifice of the Mass. This Mass I once did devoutly
think upon, heard with great attention, and with great reverence I did
celebrate, only because I thought it was indeed a sacrifice, propitiatory
both for the living and the dead: when as the Scripture plainly testifies,
1. Pet. 4.
that Christus semel pro peccatis nostris mortuus est, iustus pro iniustis, vt
nos offecret Deo, mortificatos quidem carne, viuificatos autem spiritu. Christ
once died for our sins, the just for them that were unjust, that he might
offer us up to God, mortified in flesh, but quickened in spirit. Hither to
also does all the Epistle to the Hebrews tend. It was also commanded the
High Priest in the old Law, that he should enter into Sancta Sanctorum but
once in the year, which similitude the Apostle, in the same Epistle, applies
unto ye only sacrifice which Christ offered for our sins upon the Cross. The
which because he has once done, I think it unlawful to have any more
propitiatory Sacrifices then that one of our Savior Christ. And therefore
that which they call the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, I think it
rather to be a derogatorie blasphemy to the passion of Jesus Christ. And for
that cause I deny that either it is a Sacrifice, or auailable for the living,
much less for the dead. I do also from henceforth utterly denounce it to be
wicked, and an Idol.

Transubstantiation, 3 Of transubstantiation, and real presence.
a term invented in the Laterane Counsel, under Pope Innocentius the third
of that name, to establish an other error as gross as it self, that is to
say: The Real presence of Christ his body in the Sacrament (as they call it)
of the Altar: is contrary not only to Faith, but also to natural reason.
For the holy Scripture teaches us, that Christ is ascended into heaven, Mar.
16.
and sits at the right hand of God. And also that it was thought convenient
that heaven should contain him, not according to his divinity, which is
incomprehensible, Act. 3.
but according to his humane nature which is circumscriptible, or to be
contained in one place, for he took not only the body of man upon him, but
also the passions of a natural body, and therefore has his proper place. But
if they will needs have him present in many places at once, they must also
deny ye he has a body, and consent to the Eutichian heresey, and say there
was a commistion of the divine and human nature, which Athanasius in his
Creed denies, saying: Athanasius in Symbolo.
Neque commistionem passus, neque diuisionem, neither suffering mixture nor
division. Yet of this matter was I never so fully persuaded, but that still I
had some doubt of it. And now I renounce it, craving pardon of God, for
defending that which I always doubted of.

The number of the Sacraments in the Church, I acknowledge is no more then two,
that is to wit, 4 Number of Sacraments.
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and these two I find to be instituted by
Christ himself in the holy Gospel. The other five which they add, which
are, Confirmation, Penance, Extreme unction, Order, and Matrimony: Because I
know not where to find them, neither by the institution of Christ, nor in the
Gospel or New Testament, I count them not for Sacraments: for I think none
to have authority to make Sacraments but God only, and therefore those two I
think to be Sacraments and none other.

They make a great striving and struggling to maintain Prayer, 5 Prayer to
Saints.
and invocation to the Saints departed, thinking the mediation of our Lord and
Advocate Jesus Christ insufficient for us: This invocation, I did think being
in that Sinagogue, to be a necessary and a convenient thing, although for the
same I could find no ground in the word of GOD. Yet one thing in the same,
being as I thought then an abuse, I knew not how to excuse: and that was the
invocation of diverse Saints for diverse purposes. As, one against the plague, as
S. Sebastian. An other against the tootheake, as S. Appolonia. Another against
the falling sickness, as S. Christopher, and diverse other. As though almighty
God could not hear us but by the help of these Saints. And thus in calling
upon them, we derogate from the glory of almighty God. But they say, they
desire them but to pray for them, and ask no other grace at their hands. Then
would I gladly know of them why they use these verses in their office of S.
Peter ad vincula.

Solue iubente deo terrarum Petre cathenas,
Qui facis vt pateant caelestia regna beatis.
In English thus, O Peter loose as God commands, from us the earthly chain,
The which to blessed me^ do make, the gate of heaven plain.


And in a Hymn of the same.

I m bone pastor Petre clemens accipe,
Vota precantum et peccati vincula,
Resolve tibi potestate tradita,
Qua cunctis caelum verbo claudis aperis.
In English thus.

Now sheepeheard good, o Peter mild rece^ue,
The vows with prayer which we yield to thee:
By that same power which God to thee did give,
Which make the skies be shut, and wide to be.
One thing I marvel at, that as yet the adversaries being in controversy,
whether the Saints do see God or not, and yet granting that Saints cannot
hear the prayers of the living but by the sight of God, why so obstinatly they
defend this point? And now, whereas before I counted it necessary and
convenient, I count it vain, and superfluous, and take it for an error.

Again, prayer for the dead, 6 Prayer for the dead
is a point of great Religion amongst them: which Article they ground upon an
other, no less absurd then it self, and that is Purgatory, which Purgatory
I see not how they can defend by Scripture, though they seem contentiously
to wrest certain places of the Scripture, from the true meaning of the same
unto their own meaning, and all to defend this gross error of theirs. For
they say that those souls that depart out of this life with any venial
sin, or else with the Relics of mortal sin: must needs be purged after
this life before they can come to Heaven.

This is a gross error and is taken out of the Poet Virgil, for in that place
where he brings Anchises, to enstruct his Son Aeneas of their state in
heil, he speaks on this sort.

Quin et supremo cum lumine vita reliquit
Non tamen omne malum miseris, Aeneid.

Corporea excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est,
Multa diu conereta modis violescere miris.
Ergo excutentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplina expendunt, aliae puntuntur inanes,
Suspensae ad uentos, aliis sich gurgite vasto
Infectum el^i^ur scelks, aut ^xuritur igni,
Quisque suos patimur manes, exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium et pauci laeta arua tenemus.
In English thus.

And also when the pleasant life is gone with gladsome light,
Yet every, mischief from those souls is not departed quite,
Nor plague of body yet is gone, and so it needful is,
That many things should them desteine which once have been amiss.
Therefore they suffer punishment, and for offenses past,
They have their meed, of blustering winds, some feel the bitter blast
And some in botto^ of a gulf do wash their faults away,
And some with flames of scorching fire, for passed sins do pay,
Each one of us his pain does feel, and then exempt from pain,
We walk about these pleasant fields a very little train.
This Article therefore with the rest, is superstitious, vain and ridiculous.

Works of supererogation as they call them, 7. Works of Supererogation,
are so vain and foolish, that I meruatle that wysemen at any time will
confess any such to be. For the holy Scripture says, that when we have
done all that we can, we must call our selves unprofitable servant. Truly
for my part, I know not why they should so bind God unto our works, that if
we deo them, he cannot choose but save us. For all that we can do comes
from God, and we are bound to follow, and accept of the good inspirations of
him. But this word Supererogation, does signify that the work which we do,
is more then we are bound to do, which takes away the grace of God as the
Pelagean does, and fortifieth our freewill so much, as though it had never been lost. But truly I think and believe our Freewill to be so wounded, that
not only it is not able to do more the^ we ought, but also it can not
perform ye which we ought to do. Let them of the adversary part contend and
wrangle never so much to the contrary. The ground of this their ungrounded
dectrine, is taken out of the Parable of the Samaritane, Luke 10.
which took compassion upon him, who discending from Jerusalem to Jericho, was
wounded by Thieves. For paying the Host of the house for his charges, he sold
him that whatsoever he laid out more the^ he had given him, at his return he
would pay him again. Yet consider they not, that in that Parable our Savior
exhorts us to mutual love and neighbourly charity, and that every man is
bound to do good unto his neighbor in time of need.

They deny that faith is sufficient to justify us in Gods sight, without our
own merits, 8 Good works.
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans, and
Galathians. For good works are indeed required at our hands, not as the
cause, but as the effect of our justification. And for this cause works are
required at our hands, to be a testimony of our Faith, and a cause that other
men may give the glory unto God: for our Savior says, Math. 5.
Sic luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, vt videant opera vestra bona et
glorificent Patrem vestrum qui est in caelis. So let your light shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. Then is it consequent, that our justification comes no ways of our
selves, but only by faith in Christ Jesus.

After this follows a most ridiculous doctrine, 9 Indulgences and pardons.
of the Popes Indulgences and pardons, wherein he does most insolently
arrogate to himself, the dispensations of Christ his passion, applying that to
the forgiveness of sins, the form of which has an arrogant kind of speech, as
thus. If a man fast one Friday with bread and water, he shall have plenarie
indulgence, and if he fast so on another day, his pardon shall be limited for
certain years, as 10000. etc. or some such like, or else a pena et culpa. I
always thought these trifies vain, but now I see the blasphemy of them. For
it is scant possible to get these great Indulgences, but by wearing a pair of
Beads, or a Grain, Medall, Crucifixe, Picture, Agnus Dei, or such like
tromperie. It would be too tedious to set down the manifold kinds of these
Indulgences, which al tend to one end, that is, to the lessening of the virtue
of Christ his passion.

The second commandment plainly forbids us to make or to have any graven
Image, 10 Images. Exo. 20.
or ye likeness of any thing to worship it. But the adversary excommunicateth
them that deny the necessity of Images in Churches, as it is to be seen in
diverse of their Counsels. For say they, it is lawful, not only to retain
them, but also to worship the^. The which if it be not against the second
commandment, let them look unto it, I for mine own part do see it, and am
ashamed that ever I was so blockish, as to think a block or a stone to be
necessary or godly, I thought it so once, but now I cannot be so persuaded.
For he that has any reason in him to discourse, or sense to perceive, cannot
be so void of reason, or so senseless as to exhibit honor or reverence to a
senelesse Image, when the same Image, if it had sense, would not only refuse
that worship, but also would willingly fall down to worship or adore the
workman that made it.

They hold and defend that the Lay people may not receive ye Communion under
both kinds, 11 Communion in both kinds
which doctrine is repugnant to ye institution of Christ For he said unto the^
that were present with him at his last Supper, Take and eat, and drink ye all
of this. For though the adversary say, that the Lay people have not the
privilege to receive the Cup, because the Apostles who only were present at
that supper were Priests, and not Lay men: it holds not, for by the same
reason, a man may also bar the Lay people from receiving of either kind,
for ye Apostles were Priests, and only present at the Supper, ergo it is
unlawful for any to be pertaker of that Supper but only Priests. And yet
Christ himself in another place says, Ioh. 6.
Unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you.
And these words he spoke not only to the Apostles, but Turbis Iudeorum, to the
company of the Jews, and therefore I count their dealings injurious to the
people, their doctrine blasphemous, and their proof to no purpose.

Finally, all such Articles, which are repugnaunt to the word of God: I
utterly refuse, as in special, 12 Diverse other Articles.
the Service in an unknown tongue, the prohibition of the reading of
Scriptures to the Lay people, the forbidding of the translation of the same
into a vulgar tongue, Pylgrimages, Vows, and to conclude, all such Articles,
as are contrary to the Articles of Religion, set down by public authority,
I do utterly renounce and abjure: and on the other side, I do willingly, and
without compulsion, and gladly with reverence, receive, embrace, and freely
profess, the said Articles set forth by public authority, as doctrine
without superstition, and most agreeable to the word of God.

Thus have I generally recanted mine errors in matters of Religion, and now,
will I accuse my self and my dealings, touching my disobedience toward my
Sovereign the Queens most excellent Majesty. I have most stubbornly and
wilfullye transgressed her Majesty's Laws. Knowing first the offense of going
beyond the Seas, and yet caring not for that, I proceeded further, and
willingly was priested at Rome. Thirdly, maliciously I came into my Country,
with a will to seduce her Ma. Subjects from the true and sincere Religion, and
make the^ subjects to that tyranny, unto the which I was my self subject. Then
being banished, I returned again into my Country, with the same intent that I
came in first, and for these great faults of mine I am most heartily sorry,
and in the bowels of Gods infinite mercy, I desire all them, that any ways by
my means have been deceived, and do now repent, to forgive me. Likewise
those that have not as yet their hearts moved by my example, to forsake their
errors, and amend their opinions.

Thus first of all I ask forgiveness of almighty God, whom like a most
ungrateful and wilful wretch, I have most grievously offended. First, in
abusing his gifts, which of his fatherly goodness he had bestowed upon me.
Secondly, in refusing and rejecting his holy inspirations. And lastly, by
provoking others to offend by my example. And all this have I done, not like
unto them, unto whom our Savior promises a milder judgment in the latter day:
but like unto them of whom S. Paul speaks: Which when they knew God, Romans 1.
did not honor him as GOD was to be honored, and therefore my damnation had
been the greater if I had persisted. But seeing that it has pleased him,
which has preserved me from my Mothers, womb to call me to his wonderful
light, I desire you all that are here present, to give him thanks for the
same: for there is more joy in heaven before the Angels of God, for the
conversion of one sinner, Luke 15.
then for 99. just persons which need no repentance. Desiring also his divine
Majesty, that he would not remember mine old wickedness and folly: Psalm. 143
for if he would enter into judgment with his Servants, there should none be
justified in his sight. But that he would think on the passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ, by the which he has most mercifully redeemed me, desiring him
also, that it has pleased his divine Majesty, to call me to the light of his
truth: so it would please him to bring al them which now do live in blindness,
to the same. Secondly, with humble heart I ask forgiveness of the Queens
Majesty, most humbly submitting my self to the mercy of so godly a Prince,
whom when she called her Subjects to their duty and obedience, not by
severity and rigor of the Law, but like a pitiful mother, by mercy: I have
not only not heard her, but also, (with sorrow I speak it) I have contemned
and set light by.

Lastly, I ask forgiveness of you that be here present, in whom I think that
I see all my Countrymen present: desiring you to forgive all such offenses, as
I have committed against GOD, the Queens Majesty, and against you.

God save the Queen. Me ita sentire sicut scripsi testor Deum. Guilielmus
Tedderus.


