TAILORS URANIA, OR His Heavenly Muse. WITH A brief Narration of the thirteen
Sieges, and six Sackings of the famous City of JERUSALEM. Their miseries of
War, Plague, and Famine, (during their last siege by VESPASIAN and his Son
TITUS.) In Heroical Verse compendiously described.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at S. Austins gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, and worthy favorer of all good endeavors, Sr GEORGE
MORE Knight, Lieutenant of his Maties Tower of London, and one of his Highness
Justices of the Peace and Quorum, in the County of Middlesex.
MOst humbly (worthy) and religious Knight,
These things which did from my invention flow:
On you in love and duty, I bestow,
Whose patronage can shield me safe from spite.
And though the style, and phrase, vnpollisht be
Of new-coynd words, to please these Critic times,
(For I, no Scholar, what can come from me
But downright plain, and ordinary Rimes.)
Yet when your leisure serves you to peruse
These poor endeavors, which my wit has done:
You shall perceive my weak laborious Muse
Has in this Work, hir-selfe, hir-selfe outrun,
The Matters true, and truth I know you love,
And Love conduct you to the joys above.
Your Worships, in all dutious observance, JOHN TAILOR.

To the Reader.
THis Book, if I with boasting should commend,
In seeking to defend, I should offend:
Or should I brag, and say it is well writ
Twere self-conceit, presumption, and no wit.
Again, should I my self, my self deprave
It were a sign I small discretion have
Then as my thoughts, all bragging pride do hate,
So I abhor to be so much Ingrate
As to deny Gods gifts, and say that he
By Nature, nothing has bestowde on me.
If ought be Good, I thank the power Divine,
All that is bad I must acknowledge mine;
My God he is Author of my doing well,
Without whose Grace, no Good in me does dwell.
But be it good, or bad, or well, or ill,
Kind Reader, gently judge, my Artles skill.
The Author to the Printer.
GOod honest Printer, to thy buisnes look,
Be careful how thou do Compose this Book:
If thou thy letters, or my words misplace
The fault is thine, but mine is the disgrace.
Then for my Credit, and thine own Respect
Compose, and prove, and every fault correct.
In laudem Authoris. To the Helliconian Water-Poet, my honest friend, John
Tailor.
IN every Art, save Poetry, the mean
Is praisd: but therein meanely-well to do
Is base, too base: then Judgment cannot lean
On what is too base, but base it must be too.
Then each man that his Reputation huggs
For Judgment, praise no lines of but mean Reach:
And laud but what draws dry Mineruaes duggs,
Lest they their Judgments might thereby impeach.
Then is my Judgment Jack perplexed in thee;
For thou do write so well with means so ill
That thine Admirer I confess to be,
Much rather then the Iudger of thy skill:
Art makes not Poetry, thou do plainly prove,
But supernatural bounty from above.
John Dauis.

In Vraniam Iohannis Tailor Encomium.
IT is disputed much among the Wise,
If that there be a water in the skies:
If there be one: no Waterman before
Was ever known to Row in it with his Oar.
If none; such ic thy high surmounting pen
It soars above the strain of Watermen:
Whether there be or no, seek far and near
Thou Art matchles sure in this our hemispheare.
William Branthwaite Cant.

In Vraniam Iohannis Tailor.
IN sport I hitherto have told thy fame,
But now thy Muse does merit greater Name:
Soars high to Heaven, from earth and water flies,
And leaving baser matters, mounts the skies.
Where hidden knowledge, she does sweetly sing
Careless of each inferior common thing.
Oh that my Soul could follow her in this,
To shun foul sin, and seek eternal bliss,
Her strength grows great, and may God ever send
Me to amend my faults, as she does mend.
Robert Branthwaite.

To the honest Sculler John Tailor.
THe water Nimphs that do the Thames frequent
(The dearest daughters of the Driads old)
Concluded once, with one combyn'd consent
A day of Sacrifice abroad to hold.
With which they did old Innachus so please
(The God of Rivers, Fountains, Wells, and Springs:)
That he to give his sacred Nymphs some ease
Inuites the Muses to their offerings.
For which, agreed it was by all the Nine,
That since so well the watery Dames did sing:
Some one of theirs, with power most divine
They would inspire, as Guerdon of the thing.
Then chus'd they thee, and on thy nimble brain
Pow'rd out a draught of Heliconian wine:
Which when Apollo saw, he did refrain
To guide the light, and with a sharp Ingine
He crowned his daughters gifts, and with a Bay,
That then was twinde about his golden hair
Which he from his beloved had plucked that day
He wreathed thy brows, and bad thee that to wear.
Since when thy Muse aspired to things divine,
Still graced by Phoebus, and the Sisters nine.
Henry Sherlye.

To my honest friend John Tailor.
WHat shall I say, kind Friend, to let thee know
How worthily I do this work esteem:
Whereof I think I cannot too much deem
From which I find a world of wit does flow.
The poor vnpollisht praise I can bestow
Upon this well deserving work of thine,
Which here I freely offer at thy Shrine
Is like a Taper, when the Sun does show,
Or bellows help for Eol's breath to blow,
For thou as much have soard beyond the strain,
Whereto our common Muses do attain
As Cinthyaes light exceeds the worms that glow.
And were my Muse repleat with learned phraise,
The world should know thy work deserves praise.
Thine in the best of friendship, Richard Leigh.

To the Author John Tailor.
WAst ever known to any time before,
That so much skill in Poesy could be
The attendant to a Skull, or painful oar,
Thou live in water, but the fire in thee;
That mounting Element, that made thee choose
To Court Urania, the diuinest Muse.
Row on: to watermen did never blow
A gale so good, none so much goodness know.
Thomas Brewer.

To my friend John Tailor.
ROw on ( good Water-man) and look back still
(Thus as thou do) upon the Muses Hill,
To guide thee in thy course: Thy Boate's a Sphaere
Where thine Urania moves diuinely-cleere.
Well have thou Plyd'e, and (with thy learned Oar)
Cut through a River, to a nobler shore
Then ever any landed-at. Thy sail
(Made all of clouds) swells with a prosperous gale.
Some say, there is a Ferryman of Hell,
The Ferryman of Heaven, I now know well,
And that is thy Self, transporting Souls to bliss,
URANIA sits at Helm and Pilot is;
For Thames, thou have the lactea via found,
Be thou with bays (as that with stars is) crowned.
Thomas Dekker.

To the Understander.
SEe here the Pride and Knowledge of a Sayler,
His spritsaile, foresaile, mainsaile, and his Mizze^;
A poor frail man God wot, I know none frailer:
I know for Sinners, Christ is dead, and rizen.
I know no greater sinner then John Tailor
Of all his Death did Ransom out of Prizzen,
And therefore here is my Pride, if it be Pride,
To know Christ, and to know him Crucifide.
Thine in all humility John Tailor.

TAILORS URANIA.
(1)
Eternal God which in thine arms do Graspe
All past, all present, and all future things:
And in inevitable doom do claspe
The lives and deaths of all that dies and springs,
And at the doomefull day will once vnhaspe
The acusing book of Subjects and of Kings.
In whom though ending nor beginning be,
Let me ( o Lord) begin and end in thee.
(2)
All cogitations vain from me remove,
And cleanse my earthly and polluted heart:
Inspire me with thy blessings from above,
That (to thy honor) I with Artlesse Art
May sing thy Justice, Mercy, and thy Love;
Possess me with thy Grace in every part
That no profane word issue from my pen
But to the Glory of thy name; Amen.
(3)
I do beseech thee, Gracious loving father
Reject me not in thy sharp judging Ire:
But in thy multitude of mercies Rather
Recall me to thee, Recolect me Nigher,
My wandering Soul into thy bosom Gather
And with thy Grace my graceless heart Inspire,
Dictate unto my mind what it may think,
Write with thy spirit what I may write with ink.
(4)
Thou all things wast even then when nothing was,
And then, thou all things did of nothing make:
Of nothing All thou still have brought to pass,
And all again, to nothing must betake.
When sea shall burn, and land shall melt like brass
When hills shall tremble, and the mountains quake,
And when the world to Chaos turns again,
Then thou Almighty All, shall all remain.
(5)
And since this universal massy ball
This earth, this air, this water, and this fire,
Must to a ruin and a period fall
And all again to nothing must retire:
Be thou to me my only All in All,
Whose love and mercy never shall expire.
In thee I place my treasure and my trust
Where Fellon cannot steal, or canker rust.
(6)
All things (but only God) at first began,
The uncreated God, did all Create:
In him Alone is equal will and can
Who has no ending, or commencing date.
To whose Eternity all time's a span
Who was, is, shall be, ever in one state.
All else to nothing howerly does decline
And only stands upon support divine.
(7)
Our high Creator our first Parents formed,
And did inspire them with his heavenly spirit:
Our Souls seducer ( Satan) them deformed
And from Gods favor did them disinherit:
Our blessed Redeemer them again reformed
And ransomed them by his unbounded merit.
Thus were they formed, deformed, reformed again
By God, by Satan, and our Saviors pain.
(8)
Man's Generation did from God proceed
A mortal Body, and a Soul Eternal:
Degeneration was the Devils deed,
With false delusions and with lies infernal:
Regeneration was our Saviors meede
Whose death did satisfy the wrath supernall.
Thus was man found, and lost, and lost was found
By Grace; with Glory ever to be crowned.
(9)
Man was produc'de, seduced, and reduc'de
By God, by Satan, and by God again:
From good to ill, from ill he was excusd'e
By merit of the immortal man of men.
The unpolluted blood from him was sluc'de
To save us from damnations dreadful den.
Thus man was made, and marde, and better made,
By him who did sin, death, and hell invade.
(10)
Let man consider then but what he is,
And contemplate on what he erst has bin:
How first he was created heir of bliss,
And how he fell to be the Child of sin;
How (of himself) he howerly does amiss,
And how his best works do no merit win,
Except acceptance make them be esteemed
Through his obedience that our Souls redeemed.
(11)
Before thou wast, remember thou wast naught,
And out of naught (or nothing) thou wast fram'de:
And how thy Body being made and wrought
By God, was with a living Soul inflam'de:
And how the eternal Nomenclator taught
Thee name all Creatures that were ever nam'de.
And made thee Stuard of the worlds whole treasure
And plac'de thee in a paradise of pleasure.
(12)
Then wast thou Viceroy to the King of heaven,
And great Lieuetenant to the Lord of hosts:
The rule of all things unto thee was given,
At thy command all creatures served like posts
To come or go, and at thy beck were driu'n
Both near and far, unto the farthest coasts.
God all things made, as servants unto thee
Because thou only should his servant be.
(13)
He gave life unto herbs, to plants, and trees,
For if they wanted life, how could they grow?
A beast has life and sense, moves, feels, and sees,
And in some sort does good and evil know:
But man's before all Creatures in degrees
God life, and sense, and reason did bestow.
And least those blessings should be transitory
He gave him life, sense, reason, grace, and glory.
(14)
Then let our meditations scope be most
How at the first we were created good:
And how we (wilful) Grace and goodness lost
And of the sons of God were Satan's brood.
Then think the price, that our redemption cost
The eternal son of Gods most precious blood.
Remember this whilst life and sense remain,
Else life, and sense, and reason are in vain.
(15)
Thou to requite thy God that all thee gave
Ingratefully against him did rebel:
Whereby from Regal state, thou turnedst slave,
And heavenly Justice, doomb'd thee down to hell.
As thy rebellion from thy God thee drove,
So against thee all things to rebellion fell.
For when to heaven thy due obedience ceast,
Thy disobedience taught each brutish beast.
(16)
Now see thy miserable wretched state,
Thou and the earth is eake with thee accursed:
All worldly things, which thee obaide of late,
In stiff commotion now against thee burst:
And thou for ever drove from Eden gate
To live an exilde wretch, and which is worst
Thy soul, ( Gods darling) fell from her preferment,
To be the Devils thrall, in endless torment.
(17)
But Mercies sea, has quenched Justice fire,
And Heavens high heir (in pity of man's case)
In person came, and satisfide Gods ire,
And Graceless man new Repossest in Grace.
The son of God came down, to raise us higher
To make us Glorious, he himself made base.
To draw us up, down unto earth he came,
And honored us, by putting on our shame.
(18)
Who can conceive the Glory he was in
Above the heaven of heavens, in throan'd in bliss?
Who can conceive the loss that he did win
To rectify, and answer our amiss?
Who can conceive the Mountains of our sin
That must be hid with such a sea as this?
No heart, no tongue, no pen of mortal wight
These things can once conceive, or speak, or write.
(19)
Man may collect the abundance of his vice
And the dear love his God to him did bear,
In thinking on the inestimable price
Was paid his sin polluted soul to clear.
To gain him an immortal paradise
And to Redeem his foes to pay so dear.
For if our sins had not been more then much
The ransom of them sure had not been such.
(20)
The blood of any mighty mortal King
Was insufficient this great debt to pay:
Archangels power, or Angels could not bring
A Ransom worth forbearance but a day;
The only son of God must do this thing
Else it must be undone, and we for aie.
God was the Creditor, and man the debtor
Christ ( God and man) did pay, none could pay better
(21)
Then since thy sinful Soul from Grace was lost,
And since by Grace it has found Grace again:
Since being lost so Great a price it lost
TO enfranchise it from everlasting pain
And since thy crimes are quit, thy debts are crossed
Thy peace with God, the way to heaven made plain
Let not all this in vain for thee be done
But thankful be to God, through Christ his son.
(22)
Forget not thou art ashes, earth, and dust,
And that from whence thou came, thou shall again,
And at the last trump that appear thou must
When Procseys and Essoynes are all in vain:
Where just and unjust, shall have judgment just,
For ever doomb'd to endless joy or pain.
Where though that thou be damb'd it is Gods glory,
Thy wife, thy Son, thy Sire, will not be sorry.
(23)
Methinks it should make man this world to loath
When that which will a thousand cloth and feed:
It should but only one man feed and cloth
In fares excess, and gorgeousness of weed,
Yet this brave canker, this consuming moath
(Who in his life never means to do good deed)
Must be adorned for those good parts he wants
By fearful Fools, and flattering Sichophants.
(24)
Has he the title of an earthly grace?
Or has he Honor, Lordship, Worship? or
Has he in Court some great commanding place?
Or has he wealth to be regarded for?
If with these honors, virtue he embrace
Then love him; else his puckfoist pomp abhor.
Sunshine on dung-hills makes them stink the more,
And honor shows all that was hid before.
(25)
Shall men give Reu'rence to a painted trunk
That Is nothing but all outside, and within
Their senses are with black damnation drunk,
Whose heart is Satan's Tap-house, or his Inn.
Whose Reputation inwardly is sunk,
Though outwardly raisd up, and swollen with sin.
I think it worse then to adore the Devil,
To worship his base Instruments of evil.
(26)
No, look upon the Man, and not his Case,
See how he does his Maker imitate:
If Grace supernall, give internal Grace
That makes his mind on virtue contemplate.
That holds this world, and all things in it as base,
Knows death makes happy, or unfortunate.
That does no wrong, for Fanour, Gain, or Fear,
And lays on each, what each deseru's to bear.
(27)
Such men (no doubt) but few such living are,
For they are thickly sowed, and thinly grow'd,
The purest wheat is mixed with the Tare,
The humble minds, are servile to the Proud.
Vice Reuells, and poor Virtues poor and bare,
Hypocrisy into the Church will crowd.
So man must more then humane wit possess
T'escape the baits and snares of wickedness.
(28)
The Atheist of the Scriptures can dispute,
That one would deem him a Religious man:
The Temporizer to the Time will suit,
Although his Zeal be Machiuillian.
Then there is a Faith that seldom yields good fruit,
And though impure, is called a Puritan.
A thousand Sects in thousand Proteus shapes
Are Times true turne-coats, and Religious Apes.
(29)
The greatest plague, that ever came from Hell
Is to be puffed and stuffed with self-conceit:
When men too Ill, esteem themselves too well,
When ouer-valued worth proves light in weight,
When Self-love and Ambition makes us swell
Above the limits of Discretions height.
When the poor Iay, displaies his borrowed plumes,
And man (unfeeling sin) to sin presumes.
(30)
But if thy featherd pride, Icarian-high
Does soar too far above true Reasons bownd:
The Eternal Sun thy waxen wings will fry,
Thy fatal Fall, thy Folly shall confownd.
Who (like that Cretian) mounts ambitiously,
In Seas of sorrow shall (like him) be drowned.
By pride the Caldean Monarchy decreast,
A King (the best of men) was made a Beast.
(31)
The state of Man may be compared well
Unto a Kingdom governed well or Ill:
For if his Rule and Policy excel,
His Reason (like a Queen) commands his will.
But if seditious Passions do rebel,
They Reasons Court with all disorder fill,
And ouer-run her careless Commonwealth,
With murder, fraud, oppression, whoredom, stealth.
(32)
The Senses are this Kingdoms Court of Guarde
To keep their Queen secure from terrene treason:
Great is the trust and saftie of this ward
Whilst they give true Intelligence to Reason:
But if this Guard their duties not regard
And mis-informe their Queen at any season;
Then right for wrong, and wrong for right she will conster,
And in her Apprehension proves a Monster.
(33)
The Hearing, Sight, the Taste, the Smell, and Touch,
If Vices do present themselves for objects:
And they (incredulous) not deem them such,
Informing Reason that they are good Subjects;
If Reasons judgment be not more then much
She entertaines for Worthies these base Abiects:
Who spoil her Court, and break her Kingdoms frame,
And turn her State, and Glory into shame.
(34)
The Appetite, the Fancy, and the Will
(Spiritual Faculties) are Reasons Peers:
Who (of themselves) do counsel all things ill
Not knowing what is true, but what appears:
If she attend, what only they instill,
She takes in mere delusions through her ears:
And they at last will thrust her from her Throne,
And then ( usurping Rebels) sit thereon.
(35)
These Vassals having got the Regal sway,
Enforce the Commons which are the Affections,
Their hateful hellish precepts to obey,
With promise of their favors and protections:
The Affections all agree, and all do pay
These Miscreants their tributes and subiections.
And now is Reason banished, and they threat
She never shall gain again her awful seat.
(36)
Th'vsurping Heart, sometimes does reign as King,
Sometimes the Brain is Counselor of State:
The Eyes and Ears, Intelligence do bring,
The Tongue, (as Herald) tidings does relate.
The Hands and Feet do execute each thing,
Which these intruding Tyrants love or hate.
And every Member plays a painful part
To serve a swimming Brain, and swelling Heart.
(37)
The Fancy (like an Ape) skips to, and fro,
Begins a thousand things, and ends none:
Makes, marrs, forbids, and bids, no, yea, yea, no,
Do, and undo, hold fast, and let alone:
Run, stay; up, down, stand, fall, go, come, come, go,
Sad, glad, mad, witty, foolish, mirth and moan.
Thus Fancy does in Apish toys delight
To serve the greedy maw of Appetite.
(38)
And Appetite (as does a big woomb'd Dame)
Lusts, longs, desires, and must have this and that:
Herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, Fish, Foul, Beasts wild and
She must and will have, well she knows not what: (tame
Whilst Fancy, and Imagination frame
Themselves more nimbly then a mowzing Cat.
Still searching what the Appetite desires,
Superfluous meats, drinks, bables, and attires.
(39)
The Memory Lord Keeper of the Treasure,
And great Recorder of this world of dust:
The Understanding gives true Justice measure
To Good, to Bad, to Just, and to Unjust;
Invention and Remembrance, wait the leisure
Of Memory, and Understanding must
Have Wisdom for her fellow, and her guide,
Else Prince, and Peers, and Commons stray aside.
(40)
Truth, and false Lying, on the Tongue attends;
The one instructs her plainly in the Truth,
The others proper, and improper ends
Does teach to lie, and vouch it with an oath:
The Tongue, loves one of these, yet both contends
But she wants entertainment for them both.
At last she takes in Lying for her Page,
And bids Truth walk, a beggars Pilgrimage.
(41)
When Wisdom, must give Folly cap and knee,
When hare-braind Will, over Wit does rule and reign
When Lying, shall make Truth regardles be,
When Love is paid with hatred and disdain:
When Sense and Appetite do all agree
To serve a false rebellious heart and brain;
When they have Reasons Court, thus vnderminde,
It is a sign that Vnderstanding's blind.
(42)
Then is the place where Virtue had abode
Made a foul Rendeuouz for filthy Vice:
The Temple of the holy Spirit of God
Esteems his blessed presence of no price.
Man spurns against his just revenging Rod
Worse then the Jews, that for his Coat cast Dice.
Men fallen into a reprobated Sense
Dread not their Makers great Omnipotence.
(43)
Then what art thou, poluted earthly clod,
Thou span, thou froth, thou bubble, and thou smoke:
Worse then the dust, that underfoot is trod,
Dare thou thy Makers fury to provoke?
Why will thou (wilful) thy perdition plod,
And with damnation thy salvation choke?
Christ bought thy Soul, and lent it thee to use it,
It Is none of thine; and therefore not abuse it.
(44)
Dare thou profane with thy ungodly breath
His Name, that did (before the world) elect thee?
Dare thou, dare him his Justice sword t'vnsheath?
Dare thou provoke his mercy to reject thee?
Dare thou run headlong to perpetual death,
Whereas eternal torments shall correct thee?
And dare thou (wretched worm) of earthly race,
Belch blasphemy against thy Makers Grace.
(45)
He thou offendest is the King of Kings,
Heaven, Earth and Hell do tremble at his frown:
Bright Angels and Archangells always sings
Before the seat of his immortal Crown:
His foes to fell confusion down he slings,
He gives his servants Honor and Renown.
His power's not circumscribed here, or there,
But All in All, is All, and every where.
(46)
Can nothing move thy flinty heart to Ruthe,
That of thy self thou some remorse would take;
And not to spend thy beauty, strength, and youth
To serve the Sovereign of the Stigian Lake:
Say not, to morrow, thou will seek the truth,
And when sin leaves thee, thou will sin forsake.
When thou no more (through weakness) can offend,
Then lame, old, rotten, thou will God attend.
(47)
When hoary hair, and blood all frozen chill,
When eyes wax dim, and limbs are weak and lame:
And that no more thy rash rebellious will
Cannot perform vile deeds of sin and shame:
When thou have lost thy strength to do more ill,
Then unto Heaven, thy mind thou 'ginst to frame.
Thy youth in Satan's service being spent,
In age thou think on God, and do repent.
(48)
Suppose a man that is much engaged to thee
Has a good Horse, which thou do much desire:
Thou offrest for him thrice his worth, to be
The Master of this Beast thou do require:
But this ungrateful wretch will not agree
To give, to sell him thee, or let thee hire,
But lets him (all his youth) be rid by those
Who are thy spightfull, and thy mortal foes.
(49)
And when he is lean, and old, and lame, and blind,
Galled, foundred, filthy, wanting no disease:
Botts, Glaunders, Spauin, broken in his wind,
Not a tooth left to mumpe on beans and pease:
Then this Companion, (most unkindly kind)
Will let thee have this Palfraie, if thou please,
If now (past good) thou scornest to receive him,
Heel flay his skin off, and the dogs shall have him.
(50)
Betwixt thy God and thee, such is the case:
When thou art young, strong, sound of wind and lim,
Thy soul and body shuns his heavenly Grace,
Thou will not serve thy God, nor wait on him:
But (heedles) headlong runn'st a hellish race
Till age has brought thee to the graves hand brim.
Then (being clogged with sin, diseasd and foul)
Thou offrest God thy body and thy soul.
(51)
But do thou think he is at thy Command,
Or that his mercy must attend thy leisure?
Or do thou think thou can in Judgment stand
And escape the Justice of his high displeasure?
Or do thou think that his Almighty hand
Is shortened? or that his supernall pleasure
Regards not how the Sons of Men do live?
Or that without Repentance he will forgive?
(52)
Sly Satan's Rage is almost at an end,
And well he knows his dominations stint;
He therefore now does all his Engines bend
To batter and confound our fleshly Fort;
He and his Ministers do all attend
To draw us to his damned infernal Court.
For if he loose our souls at latest cast
Twill be too late when all his power is past.
(53)
And therefore now he plots his devilish drifts
To separate us from our God so loving:
In making us unthankful for his gifts,
And by our heinous sins his Anger moving,
Whilst wings of Faith our prayers upwards lifts
To praise our Maker (as is best behouing.)
Then Satan kills our Zeal, and unawares
We are entangled in vile worldly snares.
(54)
God made enough, all men to satisfy,
Yet not enough to give one Man content:
For he that had the worlds whole sovereignty
Would covet for a further continent.
Ambitious thirst of fading Dignity
(As though they were for ever permanent)
Does banish Love, and every heavenly Motion,
Blinds all our Zeal, and murders our Devotion.
(55)
It Is truly writ in many a thousand story,
And thousand thousand sheets of blotted paper
Declares how terrene things are transitory,
Incertaine certain, wasting like a Taper.
How froathy painted Pomp, and gaudie Glory
When least we think does vanish like a vaper.
Experience teaches this, and truth bewraies it,
And various humane accidents displaies it.
(56)
To day great Dives in a purple coat
With Epicurian Apetite does feed:
His cups with wine do ouerflow and floate,
His baggs with quoyne, his heart from fear is freed,
And on the world, and wealth does only dote
(As if his death, his life should not succeed.)
He loves himself, himself loves him again,
And liu's a hated wretch, of God and Men.
(57)
Nor stone, or dropsy, or the groaning Gowt
Can make him with his Wealth to live in hate,
He (maugre pain) takes pleasure to find out
New Proiects to increase his too great state;
To marry muck to muck, he casts about,
And never dreams of his expiring date,
Until he hear the fatal bell to towle,
And Hell stand gaping to devour his Soul.
(58)
I'haue heard of an extortionizing Curr,
That has bin numbd and senceles, as a logg;
Who neither limb, or leg, or joint could sturr,
But on his deathbed grunting like a Hog:
And almost speechles with his rattling Murr,
Yet care of Coin his conscience did so clogg,
That not a thought of Heaven he could afford,
But ten in the hundred was his latest word.
(59)
Thus Gold that should be captive unto all
Does captiuate his Keeper, as a slave:
Who like an Idol does before it fall,
And never means another God to have.
And when Heavens Pursiuant, grim-Death, does call
To warn him to his vn-a-voyded Grave,
Until his Jaws be crammed, and ram'd with mold
He Will speak or (speechles) make a sign for gold.
(60)
We ought no formed Creature to adore,
Or frame will worship in our idle brain:
Nor of the Angels must we ought implore,
For Man and Angels help is all but vain;
Yet pur-blind Avarice still gapes for more,
And makes his Mammonitish God his Gain:
He plays the Bawd, his money is the Whore,
Whilst it breeds Bastards, he does hold the door.
(61)
He thinks his life Angelical, because
Amongst the Angels he does spend his time:
And Royal he will be, for in his paws
The Royalls are insnarde like birds in lime:
And with his Nobles he ordeineth laws,
That base extortion shall not be a crime.
He marks how Kingdoms, Provinces, and Towns
Are ouer-ruled by his cursed Crowns.
(62)
But if he note his Angels, what they be;
Not heavenly, nor yet those from Heaven that fell:
But they are in a third, and worse degree
Dumb damned senceles, ministers of Hell.
They cannot smell, or feel, taste, hear, or see,
And thousand times being told, yet cannot tell.
They Are locked, and barred, and bolted up in thrall,
Which shows their Nature not Angelical.
(63)
His Royalls does not Royallize himself,
Or make him better then he is or was,
In spite of all his ill got cankered Pelf,
He Is but a miserable golden Ass:
The Devils dear darling, a most hateful Elfe,
Which as Hells Factor on the Earth does pass.
Were every hair about him made a Royal
He were a Wretch, to God and Men disloyal.
(64)
His Nobles no way does enoble him,
Their Counsel cannot mend his Rascal mind:
His hart's obdurate, and his eyes are dim
To think or see, t'ward good to be inclinde.
He Will venture soul and body, life and lim
To scrape and scratch what he must leave behind.
His Nobles thus, ignobly make him live,
And headlong to the Devil, their Master drive.
(65)
Amongst his Marks he never marketh how
He spends, or lends, or gives, his ill got store:
He marks to make it multiply and grow,
And for the use of Fistie takes a score.
He never dreads Heavens dreadful angry browe,
But daily grinds the faces of the poor.
Let vengeance thunder, and let Hells dog bark,
Amongst his Marks, of Grace he has no mark.
(66)
And though a world of Crowns are in his hand,
For every Crown might he a Kingdom have,
His state no better (in my mind) should stand
Then a rich Beggar, or a kingly Slave.
He should his Crowns, and they not him command
They (Vassall-like) should do what he should crave.
Lo thus the Crowns their Sovereign ouerswayes,
They Rule and Reign, he like a Slave obayes.
(67)
Thus Angels to a Catiffe, are a curse,
His Royalls makes his baseness far more base:
His Nobles, his ignoble mind make worse;
His Marks, are marks and figures of disgrace:
His Crowns usurps in his Niggard purse,
And in his heart Contentment has no place.
For Angels, Royalls, Nobles, Marks and Crowns
Can put no virtue, in the minds of Clownes.
(68)
The only slave of slaves, is Moneys slave,
He pines in plenty, staru's amidst his store:
Dies living, and does live as in a Grave,
In wealthy- want, and in abundance poor:
The Goods he has, he badly does deprave,
And only cares how he may purchase more.
For he himself cannot afford himself
A good meals meat, for wasting of his pelf.
(69)
His feare's his wealth, his torment his delight,
His Conscience foul, affrightfull is his sleep:
His hopes despair, his mirth in sadness dight,
His joys are Cares, what he has got to keep:
His Rest, is restles unrest day and night,
And in a sea of Melancholy deep.
Amidst his large possessiions liu's in lack,
And dies in debt to's belly and his back.
(70)
Me thinks I hear a Miser-Churle object,
None railes at Wealth, but those which live in want:
The idle Grasshopper cannot affect
The toylesom labors of the frugall Ant:
The Prodigal by no means will be checked
So much as when his Purses linings scant.
The Fox does scorn the Grapes, but wot you why?
Because out of his reach, they hang too high.
(71)
So does a sort of poor and needy Hyndes,
The scum and dregs, of every Commonwealth:
The shakerag-shaghaird crew, whose boundles minds
Must be supplide with shifting, or by stealth.
Like sick men, when their pains their Reason blinds
They envy all men that are well in health.
So does a swarm of drones, and idle mates
Revile and envy at our happy states.
(72)
But let them storm, and rail, and curse, and swear,
Within our coffers, we will keep the Gold:
Let them themselves, themselves in pieces tear,
What we have got with toil, with care we will hold.
What is it does men to Reputation rear
But when their goods and wealth grows manifold.
We care not then let needy Rascals rail
Till Tyburne eat them, or some loathsome Iayle.
(73)
Thus does a Wretch his thirst of Gain excuse,
And makes his bad trade good with show of thrift:
Himself, (continual) with himself does muse
Upon some purchase, or some gaining drift;
And as a Hog, his downward looks do use
To poare, and not aloft his eyes to lift.
He takes Heavens fruit, and hoordeth up the same,
And never remembers God, from whence it came.
(74)
But fill thy baggs, till they are ouer-filld,
And empt thy conscience more, (if more thou can)
Raise higher rents, and let thy Land be tilled,
And tell thy self thou art a happy man.
Pull down thy Barnes, and boasting bigger build,
As if thy blessed state were new began.
Then comes a voice, with horror and affright,
Thou fool I Will fetch away thy soul this night.
(75)
And tell me then, who shall these Goods possess
That thou have damned thy Self to purchase them?
Who shall be heir to all thy vain excess,
For which thy Soul, that dear (too dear) bought lem,
In hazard is, of endless wretchedness
Be'ing banished from the new Jerusalem.
The Goods are Ill, that does the world control,
Whose cursed Gain, does lose the Owners soul.
(76)
What Is in the world should make men wish to live,
If men could well consider what it is:
What in the world that happiness can give
Which is not drowned in sorrows black Abiss?
What Goods in the world can a man achieue,
But woe and misery, o'rewhelms his bliss?
No pleasures, or contentments steadfast are,
For all we can call Ours, is only Care.
(77)
I'haue seen a Gallant, mounted all in gold
Like Alexander, on Bucephalus:
The ground (in his conceit) too base to hold
Him whom the smiles of fortune favors thus.
But in his height of heat, how soon he is cold,
By death, snatched from his pomp, himself, and us.
His Name, and Noble-Mushrom-fame forgot,
And all things (but his shame) must lie and rot.
(78)
The beauteous Lady, that appears a Saint,
Of Angels form, and Heaven admired hue:
That can (by Art) defective Nature paint,
And make false colors to the eye seem true:
Yet Death at last, her brau'ry does attaint,
And (spite her Art) she must pay Natures due.
The rarest features, and the fairest forms
Must dye and rot, and be consumed with worms.
(79)
Wealth, Beauty, as they are abusde or used
They make the owners either cursed or blessed:
As Good or Ill, is in the mind infusde
They add a joyful rest, or woes unrest:
To use them well they are blessed, but if abusde
Thy God does thee and them loath and detest:
And turns his blessings, which should most co^te^t thee,
To dreadful cursings which shall still torment thee.
(80)
Seek then Heavens kingdom, and things that are right,
And all things else shall be upon thee cast:
Thy days of Joy shall never turn to night,
Thy blessed state shall everlasting last.
Live still, as ever in thy Makers sight,
And let Repentance purge thy vices past.
Remember thou must drink of deaths sharp cup,
And of thy Stuardship account give up.
(81)
Had thou the beauty of fair Absolon,
Or did thy strength the strength of Sampson pass:
Or could thy wisdom match wise Solomon,
Or might thy riches Cressus wealth surpass;
Or were thy pomp beyond great Babylon
(The proudest Monarchy that ever was,)
Yet Beauty, Wisdom, Riches, Strength, and State,
Age, Death, and Time, will spoil and ruinate.
(82)
Make of the World, no more then as it is,
A vale of Cares, of miseries, and woes:
Think of it, as the sink of all amiss
That blinds our Senses with deceiving shows:
Account it as a den of balefull bliss
The which (unthought of) all estates o'rethrowes.
How Satan in it bears a Lordly sway,
And how none but his subjects it obey.
(83)
And whilst thou runn'st this transitory race,
Use well the blessings God to thee has sent:
Do Good with them whilst thou have time and space,
And know they are but things unto thee lent.
Know that thou must appear before Gods face
To answer if they well, or ill be spent.
If thou have spent them well, then heaven is thine,
If ill, thou art damned to hell, by doom divine.
(84)
But ten times happy shall that Steward be,
Which at the last the Lord shall faithful find:
Heart, tongue or eyes, cannot think, speak, or see
The glory that to him shall be assinde.
He shall out-passe the Angels in degree,
He shall outshine all Stars that ever shinde.
He shall for ever, and for ever sing
Eternal praises to his God and King.
(85)
Unto which God the Father, first and last,
Whose goodness, all conseru's, preseru's, and feeds:
To God the Son, whose merits down h^ath cast
Sin, death, and hell, (due unto Sinners meeds.)
To thee o Holy Ghost, that ever vvast
The blessing that from Sire, and Son proceeds;
And to the vn-deuided Three in One
All Power, and Praise, and Glory be alone.
FINIS.
THE SEVERAL Sieges, Assaults, Sackings, and final Destruction, of the
famous, ancient, and memorable City of JERUSALEM.

Divided into two parts.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at
his shop at S. Austins gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1616.



TO THE TRVLY worthy, and right Worshipful JOHN MORAY Esquire, one of the
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Royal Bedchamber; Earths Honors and Heavens
happiness.
THis Book, (Good Sir) the issue of my brain
Though far unworthy of your worthy view,
Yet I in duty offer it to you
In hope you Gently it will entertain.
And though the Method and the Phrase be plain,
Not Artlike writ, as to the style is due,
Yet is it void of any thing untrue,
And truth I know your favor shall obtain.
The many favors I from you have had
Has forced me thus to show my thankful mind:
And of all faults, I know no vice so bad
And hateful, as ingratefully inclinde.
A thankful Heart, is all a poor man's pelf,
Which, (with this Book) I give your Worthy Self.
Your Worships, ever most obliged JOHN TAILOR.

The several Sieges, Assaults, Sackings, and final destruction of the famous,
ancient, and memorable City of JERUSALEM.
THe Justice, Mercy, and the Might I sing
Of Heavens just, merciful, almighty KING.
By whose fore knowledge all things were elected,
Whose power has all things made, and all protected,
Whose Mercies flood has quenched his Justice flame,
Who was, is, shall be, one, and still the same.
Who in the Prime, when all things first began,
Made all for Man, and for himself made Man.
Made, not begotten, or of humane birth,
No Sire but God, no Mother but the Earth;
Who never knew Childhood, or the sucking teate,
But at the first was made a man complete.
Whose inward Soul, in God-like form did shine
As Image of the Majesty divine.
Whose supernatural wisdom, (beyond Nature)
Did name each sensible, and senceles creature,
And from whose Star-like, Sand-like Generation
Sprung every Kindred, Kingdom, Tribe, and Nation.
All people then, one Language spoke alone,
Interpreters the world then needed none:
There lived then no learned deep Grammarians,
There were no Turks, no Scithians, no Tartarians,
Then all was one, and one was only all
The language of the universal Ball.
Then if a Traveler had gone as far
As from the Artick to the Antartick star,
If he from Borcas unto Auster went,
Or from the Orient to the Occident,
Which way soever he did turn or wind
He had bin sure his Countryman to find.
One hundred, thirty winters since the Flood
The Earth one only Language understood:
Until the son of Cush, the son of Cham
A proud cloud-scaling Tower began to frame,
Trusting that if the world again were drowned
He in his lofty building might rest sound;
All future Floods, he purposd to prevent
Aspiring to Heavens glorious Battlement.
But high Jehovah, with a puff was able
To make ambitious Babell but a babble.
(For what is man, that he should dare resist
The great Almighties power, who in his fist
Does gripe Eternity, and when he please
Can make, and unmake, Heaven, and Earth, and Seas:)
For in their expectation of conclusion
He plag'd them all with sundry Tongues confusion.
Such Gibrish Gible Gable all did iangle,
Some laugh, some fret, all prate, all diffring wrangle;
One calls in Hebrew to his working Mate,
And he in Welsh Glough whee Comrage does prate.
Another gapes in English, or in Scotch,
And they are answered in the French or Dutch.
Caldaicke, Siriacke, and Arabian,
Greek, Latin, Tuscan, and Armenian,
The Transiluanian, and Hungarian,
The Persian, and the rude Barbarian;
All these, and diverse more then I can number
Misunderstanding tongues did there incumber.
Thus he that sits in Heaven their plots derided,
And in their height of pride, their tongues divided.
For in this sudden unexpected change
The wife and husband, Sire and son were strange,
The Brother could not understand the Brother,
The Daughter stands amazed at her Mother,
By every one a several part is acted,
And each unto the other seems distracted.
Thus by the Justice of the Lord of Hosts
Each several tongue was driu'n to several coasts,
And GOD (peculiar) to himself did choose
His most beloved, yet hard-hearted Jews.
Iehouahs honor with them then did dwell,
His Name was only known in Israel,
Salem his habitation was of yore,
In Sion men his glory did adore,
The Eternal trine, and trine Eternal one
In Jury then was called on alone,
The sons of Heber, were th'adopted stock,
Gods only Chosen, holy sacred flock,
Amongst all Nations, them he only liked,
And for his own use, them he culd and pik'd;
Them his sin-killing, saving word he gave
T'instruct the^, what condemned, and what would save,
To them he gave his word, his Covenants band,
His Patriarks, his Prophets, and his hand
Did bless, defend, instruct, correct, and guide
The Jews, and no one Nation else beside.
For them, a world of wonders has he done,
To them, he sent his blessed begotten Son,
On them, a Land he freely did bestow
Where milk and honey plenteously did flow,
With them, he was till they from him did turn
And wilfully against his blessings spurn,
All heavenly, earthly, Souls or Bodies good
They lacked no temp'rall, or eternal food.
His Temple builded in Jerusalem
Where he had daily sacrifice from them,
Where though their service, was defect and lame,
The Almighties mercy did accept the same.
(For though Man's sin is great, God has decreed
To take his best endeavor for a deed.)
And whilst they in his love and fear abode
They were his people, he their gracious God.
But when impieties began to breed
And ouergrow old Jacobs sacred seed,
When they from good to bad began to fall,
From ill to worse, from worst to worst of all,
When GODS great mercies could not them allure,
And his sharp threatenings could not them procure,
When each ones body was unto the soul
A loathsome dungeon, to a prisoner foul.
When sin (all shameless) the whole land over spreads
Then God threw dreadful vengance on their heads:
And for their heinous heaping sin on sin
Jerusalem has often assaulted bin.
First Shishack, Egypts King, with might and maine
Made hauock there in Rehoboams Reign;
The City, Temple, Golden vessels, Shields,
All (as a prey) to the Egiptians yields.
Next Ioas came, the King of Israel,
In Amaziahs days with fury fell;
He brought Judea to Samariaes thrall,
King, Kingdom, Princes, Peers, and people all.
Then thirdly, Rezin King of Aram came
In Ahaz time, with sword and furious flame.
The Assirian great Zenach'rib was the next
By whom good Hezekiah was perplexed,
But when blasphemous Pagans, (puffed with pride)
Contemptuously the GOD of Gods defide,
The Lord of Lords (whom no power can withstand)
Took his own gracious, glorious cause in hand.
He vsd no humane Arm, or spear, or sword,
But with his All-commanding mighty word,
One Angel sent to grisly Plutoes den
A hundred, eighty, and five thousand men.
Then fifthly was Jerusalem subdude,
In Iudaes blood, the Assirians hands imbrude,
Manasses Godles glory did expire,
All yield unto the insulting foes desire;
Usurping Conquest all did seize upon,
The King in chaines-bound, sent to Babylon,
Till he (Repenting) to his GOD did call,
Who heard his cry, and freed him out of thrall.
Then sixthly, Pharaoh-Necho, Egipts King,
To great distress all Iudaes Land did bring,
With fell confusion all the Kingdom, filled
And (with a dart) good King Josias killed.
The Shepherd, for his wandering sheep was shook,
The godly Prince, from godles people took;
So this just, zealous, and religious Prince,
(Whose like scarce ever Reigned before, or since)
The Almighty (to himself) did take again,
As knowing him too good for such bad men.
Nabuchadnezer, next made them obey,
When Zedekiah did the Scepter sway:
King, Kingdom, Peers and People, all o'rethrowne,
All topsie-turuy, spoyld and tumbled down;
The cursed Caldeans did the King surprise,
Then slew his Sons, and next plucked out his eyes:
Then unto Babylon he was conuayde,
In Chains, in Prison, and in Darkness laid,
Till death his Corpse, did from his soul divide
He lived a slave, and sadly, gladly did.
The City, and the Temple burnt and spoyld,
With all pollution every place was soyld;
The holy vessels all away were borne,
The sacred Garments which the Priests had worn,
All these the Caldies, (void of all remorce)
Did carry unto Babylon, perforce.
Which, seventy years, in slavery and much woe
They kept, and would by no means let them go,
Till Persian Cirus did Earths glory gain,
Who freede the Jews, and sent them home again:
He rendered back their vessels and their store,
And bad them build their Temple up once more.
Which many years in glorious state did stand
Till Ptolomie, the King of Egipts band
Surprisde the Jews, and made them all obey,
Assaulting them upon the Sabbath day.
Next after that, from Rome great Pompey came,
And Iudaes force, by force, perforce did tame:
Then did the Caesar's bear the earthly sway,
The universal world did them obey.
And after that the Roman power did place
The Idumean Herod's graceles Grace,
Him they created Tetrarch (demi King)
Against whom the Jews did boldly spurn and fling,
For they had sworn that none but David's seed
In the seat Royal ever should succeed.
But Sossius, and King Herod's armies strength
Did ouer-run them all in breadth and length,
By hostile Arms they did them all provoke
To bear the burden of their awful yoke.
And lastly them the Romans ouer-run
By valiant Titus, old Vespasians son;
Then fell they to an vnrecouer'd wane,
They all in general, were or slain or taken,
Then was the extirpation of them all,
Their just, worst, last, most fatal, final fall.
Thus mercy (being mocked) pluckd judgment down;
Gods favor being scorned, prouokes his frown;
Above all Nations he did them respect,
Below all Nations he did them deiect;
Most unto them his favor was addicted,
Most upon them his fury was inflicted;
Most near, most dear, they were to him in love,
And farthest off his wrath did them remove;
He blessed, he cursed, he gave, and then he took
As they his word obayde, or else forsook.
How often Jehovah seemed his sword to draw
To make them fear his precepts and his Law,
How often he raisd them, when they headlong fell,
How often he pardond, when they did rebel,
How long did Mercy shine, and Justice wink
When their foul crimes before Gods face did stink
How often Repentance, like a pleasing savor
Repurchasd GODS abused gracious favor.
When he did blessings upon blessings heap,
Then they (ungrateful) held them mean and cheap;
Their plenty made them too too much secure,
They their Creators yoke would not endure,
They (Graceles) fell from goodness and from grace,
And kicked and spurned at Heavens most glorious face.
The Prophets, and the Seers that were sent
To warn them to amendment and repent,
They stoned, they killd, they scorned, they beat, they bound,
Their goodness to requite, their spite did wound.
The Prophets came with love, and purchasd hate,
They offered peace, and were returned debate;
They came to save, and were unjustly spilld,
They brought them life, and were unkindly killd,
No better entertainment they afford
Unto the Legates of their loving Lord.
Thus were the Lab'rers in GODS Vineyard used,
Thus was their love, their care, their pains abusde;
Their toils and travails had no more regard,
Bonds, death, and tortures, was their best reward.
At last The Almighty from his glorious seat
Perceived his servants they so ill entreat,
No more would send a Prophet or a Seer
But his own Son, which he esteemed most dear.
He left his high Tribunal, and down came,
And for all Glory, enterchang'd all shame,
All mortal miseries he underwent
To cause his loued-loueles Jews repent;
By Signs, by Wonders, and by Miracles,
By Preaching, Parables, and Oracles,
He wrought, and sought, their faithles faith to cure,
But ever they obdurate did endure.
Our blessed Redeemer came unto his own
And amongst them neither was received or known,
He whom of all they should have welcomed best
They scorned and hated more then all the rest.
The GOD of principalities and powers,
A Sea of endless, boundles mercy, showers
Upon the heads of these unthankful men,
Who pay love, hate; and good with ill again.
Their murdrous-minded-malice never left
Till they the Lord of life, of life bereft;
No tongue, or pen, can speak or write the story
Of the surpassing high immortal glory
Which he (in pity and in love) forsook
When he on him our frail weak nature took.
To save Man's soul, his most esteemed Iem,
And bring it to the new Jerusalem,
From Greatest great, to least of least he fell
For his beloved chosen Israel.
But they more mad then madness, in behavior,
Laid cursed hands upon our blessed Savior.
They killed the eternal son and heir of heaven
By whom, and from whom, all our lives are given,
For which the great Almighty did refuse,
Disperse, and quite forsake the faithles Jews,
And in his Justice great omnipotence
He left them to a reprobated sense.
Thus sundry times these people fell and rose,
From weal to want, from height of joys to woes:
As they their gracious GOD forsook, or took,
His mercy either took them, or forsook.
The swart Egyptians, and the Isralites,
And raging Rezin King of Aramites,
Then the Assirians twice, and then again
The Egiptians ouer-runs them all amain;
Then the Caldeans, and once more there came
Egiptian Ptolomy, who them o'recame.
Then Pompey, next King Herod, last of all
Vespasian was their universal fall.
As in Assiria Monarchy began
They lost it to the warlike Persian,
Of Nimrods Race, a Race of Kings descended
Till in Astiages his stock was ended;
For Cirus, unto Persia did translate
The Assirian Sovereign Monarchizing state.
Then after many bloody bruzing Arms
The Persian yielded to the Greeks Alarm's,
But (smoake-like) Gracian glory lasted not,
Before it was ripe, it did untimely rot.
The worlds Commander, Alexander did,
And his Successors did the world divide;
From one great Monarch, in a moment springs
Confusion ( Hydra-like) from selfe-made Kings.
Till they (all wearied) slaughtered and forlorn
Had all the earth dismembered, rent and torn;
The Romans took advantage of their fall
And ouer-ran, c^ptiu'de, and conquered all.
Thus as one nail another out does drive,
The Persians the Assirians did deprive;
The Graecians then the Persian pride did tame,
The Romans then the Graecians overcame,
Whilst like a vapor all the world was tossed,
And Kingdoms were transferd from coast to coast;
And still the Jews in scattred multitudes
Delivered were to sundry seruitudes,
Changed, given, bought, and sold, from land to land,
Where they not understood, nor understand.
To every Monarchy they were made slaves,
Egypt and Aram, Caldea them out braues,
Assiria, Persia, Graecia, lastly Rome
Invaded them, by heavens just angry doom.
Four Ages did the sons of H^ber pass
Before their final desolation was;
Their first Age, aged Patriarks did guide,
The second, reverend Judges did decide,
The third by Kings, naught, good, bad, worse and worst,
The fourth by Prophets, who them blessed or cursed,
As their dread GOD commanded, or forbid
To bless or curse, even so the Prophets did.
Our Savior, weeping on the Mount did view
The City, and foretold what would ensue;
And in his tender pity unto them
Said, oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
Thou killst the Prophets, and to death did ding
Those that were sent, thee heavenly grace to bring,
How often and often would I (for your own good)
Have gathered you, as does as Hen her brood,
But you would not, and therefore to you all
Your houses shall to desolation fall.
Which came to pass, according as he said,
Which in the second part is here displaide.
The last and most lamentable Destruction, of the Ancient, famous, and
memorable City and Temple of Jerusalem; being destroyed by Vespasian, and his
Son Titus.
COnfusion, Horror, Terror, dreadful Wars,
Domesticke, foreign, inward, outward Jars,
Shafts shot at Judah in Iehouahs ire,
Infectious plague, war, famine, sword and fire,
Depopulation, desolation, and
The final conquest of old Jacobs Land.
These are the Theames my mournful Muse rehearses,
These are the grounds of my lamenting Verses.
Josephus wrote these things in ample wise,
Which I thus briefly do Epitomize:
Which worthy Author in large scope relates
His Countries alterations, and estates.
The Books of his Antiquities do tell
How often times th'arose, how often they fell,
How often God favored them, how often his frown
From height of greatness cast them headlong down,
The Seaueuth book of his Wars, declares plain
How Roman Conquest did the Kingdom gain,
How death did tyrannize in sundry shapes,
In sword, in fire, in famine, and in Rapes.
Who loves to read at large, let him read his,
Who likes compendious briefes, let him read this.
Since Hebers sons the country first enjoy de,
Six times it has bin wasted and destroyde,
Twice three times spoyld, and thirteen times in all
Wars force, or Composition made it thrall.
Compare all wars, that chanced since the Creation,
They all are nothing to their desolation;
No story, or no memory describes
Calamity to match old Isrels Tribes,
For if each Land their bloody broyls recount
(To them) 'twere but a molehill to a mount,
All which (for sin) in the Almighties fury
Was heaped upon the sinful Land of Jury:
And almost sixteen hundred winters since
Did great Vespaesian, Romes Imperial Prince
With brave young Titus, his stout valiant son
Iudeaes Kingdom spoil and ouer-run.
And with an Army Royal, and renownd
They did Jerusalem beleaguer round.
With force, with stratagems, with warlike powers,
With Rams, with Engines, scaling ladders, Towers,
With all the Art of either might or slight
The Romans upon each advantage wait.
Whilst the besieged, that within did dwell
Amongst themselves to fell sedition fell;
Like neigh'bring bauins lyeng near each other,
One burns, and burning each one burn another;
So did the Jews each other madly kill
And all the streets with their slaide corpses fill.
Eleazer, Simon, John, all disagree
And rend Jerusalem in pieces three.
These each contending who should be the chief
(More then the Romans) caused their Contries grief.
John scorned Eleazer should be his superior,
And Eleazer thought John his inferior;
And Simon scornd them both, and each did scorn
By any to be ruled or ouer-borne;
The City sundred thus in triple factions,
Most horride, bloody, and inhumane actions
Were still committed, all impieties,
(In sundry sorts of vile varieties)
All sacrilegious and ungodly acts
Were counted Noble meritorious facts.
They strived each other to surpass in evil,
And labored most, most how to serve the devil.
These men, of grace and goodness had no thought,
But daily, madly against each other fought.
They hurly burly all things ouerturn'd,
Their storehouses with victuals down they burned,
With hearts more hard then Adamantine rocks
They drailed Virgins by the Amber locks;
The Reverend Aged they did rend and tear
About the streets by snowie ancient hair;
Young Infants, some their harmles brains dash out,
And some on points of Lances borne about,
That it is not possible to write with pen
The barbarous outrage of these deuilish men:
For they (unmindful of the Roman force)
Themselu's did waste and spoil without remorce.
Their cruel slaughters made their furious foes
Relent and weep, in pity of their woes,
Whilst they (relentles Villains) void of pity
Consume, and ruinate their mother-Citty.
The Channels all with purple gore over flowde,
The streets with murdered carcasses were strowde:
The Temple with unhallowed hands defilde,
Respect was none, to age, sex, man, or child;
Thus this three-headed, hellish multitude
Did waste themselu's, themselu's themselu's subdude
Whilst they within still made their strength more weak,
The Roman Rams th'oposed walls did break:
Whose dreadful battry, made the City tremble,
At which the Factious all their powers assemble,
And all together (like good friends) unite
And against their foes they sally forth and fight.
Like a swollen River, bounded in with banks
Opposed long, with Pike-like Reedy Ranks,
At last the ambitious torrent breaks his bounds
And ouer-runs whole Lordships, and confounds
The living and the liueles, that dares bide
The fury of his high insulting pride.
Even so the Jews from out the City venter'd,
And like a flood the Roman Army entered,
O'rewhelming in their desperate madness all
That durst withstand them, or assault the wall.
They set the fearful Engines all on fire,
And bravely fighting made their foes retire;
The battle done, back came these hare-braind men
And each the others foe, divide again.
Pell mell confusion, then again began,
All order straight unto disorder ran;
Their corn, and victuals, all consumed with fire,
Their hunger-starued bodies 'gins to tire,
Provision in a moment, spoyld and wasted,
Which kept (might well) for many years have lasted.
Then Famine, like a Tyrant roames and rages,
Makes faint (yet furious) hauock of all ages,
The Rich, the poor, the old, the young, all dies
All starved, and fleshles bare Anatomies.
This was a plague of plagues, a woe of woes,
On every side their death did them enclose,
But yet the manner how to lose their breaths
Did more torment them then an host of deaths.
To sallie forth the Romans shed their blood,
To stay within, they starve for want of food,
And if they would go forth, the gates were shut,
And if they staid within, their throats were cut.
That if they stay, or go, or go, or stay,
They Are sure to meet destruction every way;
But of all torments, hunger is the worst
For through the stony walls (they say) 'twill burst;
These people with war, woe, and want, beset,
Did strive how they might to the Romans get,
They hopde to find more mercy in their swords,
Then their still-dying famisht state affords.
Man's wit is sharpest when he is oppressed,
And wisdom (amongst evils) likes the least.
They knew Vespasian for a Noble foe
And one that did not glory in their woe,
They thought it best his clemency to try,
And not immurde with hungry famine die.
Resolved thus (dispairing in their hopes)
A number slyding down the walls with ropes
Fled unto Tytus, who bemoand their case,
Relieuing them, and took them to his Grace.
Thus forty thousand near with famine starved,
Were all vnhop'd for by their foes preserved.
The City soldiers searched each house to see
Where any victuals might conuayed be,
And if they any found, they thought it fit
To beat the owners for concealing it.
But if they saw a man look plump and fat
His throat they presently would cut for that,
They thought him too much pamperd, too well fed,
And to save meat and drink, they strike him dead.
Some men and women, Rich and Nobly borne
Gave all they had for one poor strike of corn,
And hid themselves and it below the ground
In some close vault they eat the same vn-ground.
If any could get slesh they eat it raw,
The strongest still, the weakest ouer-awe,
For hunger banished natural respect,
It made the husband his own wife reject,
The wife does snatch the meat from out his hand
Which would and should her love and life command.
All pity from the Mother was exilde
She tears and takes the victuals from her Child,
The Child does with the Parents play the thief
Steals all their food, and lets them pine in grief.
Nor Free or Bondman, Fathers, nor yet Mothers.
Wives, Husbands, Servants, masters, sisters, brothers,
Propinquitie or strong Affinity,
Nor all the rights of Consanguinitie,
No Law, or Rule, or Reason could bear sway,
Where strength commands, there weakness must obey.
The pining servant will no master know,
The son his father will no duty show,
The Commons did no Magistrate regard,
Each one for one, and but for one he card,
Disordred, like the Cart before the horse,
All reu'rence and respect did yield to force.
These Miscreants with vigilance all watched
Where they could see a door or locked or latch'd,
There they supposd the people were at meat,
And in their outrage open the doors they beat,
Where entering, if they found them feeding fast,
From out their throats they tear the meat in haste,
Half eaten, half uneaten, they constrain
The wretched people cast it up again.
They halde them by the ears the house about
To force them bring supposed victuals out;
Some by the thumbs hanged up, some by the toes,
Some pricked with bodkins, some with many blows
Tormented were, to force them to reveal
Meat, when they had not any to conceal.
Now all was fish that fell into the net,
And all was food that fraud or force could get;
Grass, hay, bark, leaves of trees, and Dogs, and Cats,
Toades, Frogs, worms, snailes, flies, maggots, Mice and Rats,
All filthy stinking and contagious Roots,
The couers of their Coaches, shoes, and boots,
All vermin, and the dung of Fowls and Beasts
Were these poor wretches miserable feasts;
Things loathsome to be named in time of plenty,
Amongst the starved distressed Jews were dainty.
This famine ran beyond all Natures bounds,
All motherly affection it confounds,
No blood or birth, with it compassion won,
It forced a Woman kill her only Son,
She ripped him and dis-ioynted lim from lim,
She dressed, she boyld, she broyld, and roasted him,
She eat him, she interred him in her womb,
She made his births place his untimely tomb.
From her (by Nature) did his life proceed,
On him (unnatural) she her self did feed,
He was her flesh, her sinews, bones and blood,
She (eating him) hirselfe, hirselfe made food.
No woe her misery can equallize,
No grief can match her sad calamities;
The Soldiers smelt the meat and straight assemble,
Which when they saw (with horror) made the^ tremble
Each one with staring hair, and ghastly look,
Affrighted, and amazed, the house forsook.
This horride action, quickly overcame
These men, whom force of man could never tame.
Thou that do live like to a fatted Brawne,
And cramst thy guts as long as thou can yawne,
Thou that do eat and drink away thy time,
Accounting Gluttony a God, no Crime,
Thou must have Foul as high as heaven that pearc'd
And have the bowels of the Ocean searched,
And from all places near so far remore
Have dainties for thy all-deuouring throat,
Whose pamperd paunch never leaves to feed and quaff
Till it be made a Hogs trogh, filld with draff.
Think on Jerusalem amidst thy Riot,
Perhaps twill move thee to a temperate diet.
And you brave Dames, adorned with Iems and Jewels,
That must have Cawdles, Cullisses and Grewells,
Conser^'s and Marchpanes, made in sundry shapes,
As Castles, Towers, Horses, Bears and Apes,
You, whom no Cherries like your lickrish tooth
But they must be a Pound a pound forsooth,
Think on Jerusalem amidst your glory,
And then you will be less dainty. and more sorry.
What there auaild their bewty, strength, or riches,
(Three things which all the spacious world bewitches)
Authority and Honor helped them not,
Wrong trod down Right, and Justice was forgot,
Their greatest, chiefest, only earthly good
Was (it was no matter how they got it) Food.
One little piece of bread they reckond more
Then erst they did of bags of Gold before,
One scrap, which full fed crops away do fling,
With them, had bin a ransom for a King.
The loathsome garbadge which our Dogs refuse
Had been a dish of state amongst the Jews.
Whilst Famine played the Tyrant thus within
The Roman Army strived the walls to win,
Their Enginers, their Pioners and all
Did mine and batter, and assault the wall.
Jerusalem had three strong walls of stone
And long it was ere the Romans could get one,
The dearth and death of sword and famine spread
The streets, that living trod upon the dead,
And many great men's houses full were filld
With carkases, which the seditious killd.
That with the stench of bodies putrifyde
A number numberles of people did.
And burial to the dead they yielded not,
But where they fell, they let them stink and rot,
That plague, and sword, and famine, all three strove
Which should most bodies from their souls remove.
Insensible of one another woes,
The soldiers then the liueles Corpses throws
By hundreds and by thousands over the walls,
Which when the Romans saw their dismal falls
They told to Titus, which when he perceived
He wept, and up t'ward heaven his hands he heau'd,
And called on GOD to witness with him this
These slaughters were no thought, or fault of his.
Those wretches that could escape from out the City,
Amongst their foes found both relief and pity,
If the seditious any caught, that fled,
Without remorse they straightway stroke him dead.
Another misery I must unfold,
A many Jews had swallowed store of gold,
Which they supposd should help them in their need
But from this Treasure did their bane proceed.
For being by their en'myes fed and cherisht,
The Gold was cause that many of them perished;
Amongst them all, one poor unhappy Creature
Went privately to do the needs of Nature,
And in his Ordure for the Gold did look,
Where being by the straggling soldiers took,
They ripped him up and searched his maw, to find
What Gold or Treasure there remained behind.
In this sort, (whilst the soldiers gaped for gain)
Was many a man and woman ripped and slain.
In some they found Gold, and in many none,
For had they Gold, or not Gold, all was one,
They were imbowelld by the barbarous foe
And searched if they had any gold or no.
But now my story briefly to conclude,
Vespasians forces had the walls subdude,
And his triumphant Banner was displaide
Amidst the streets, which made the Jews dismayed,
Who (desperate) to the Temple did retire,
Which (with ungodly hands) they set on fire.
Whilst Noble Titus, with exceeding care
Entreated them they would their Temple spare,
Oh save that House (quoth he) o quench, oh slake,
And I will spare you for that Houses sake,
Oh let not after times report a story
That you have burnt the worlds unmatched glory,
For your own sakes, your Children, and your wives
If you do look for pardon for your lives,
If you expect grace from Vespasians hand
Then spare your Temple, Titus does command.
The Jews with hearts hard, offered mercy heard,
But neither mercy, or themselves regard,
They burnd, and in their madness did confound
King Salomons great Temple to the ground.
That Temple which did thirty Millions cost
Was in a moment all consumed and lost,
The blessed Sanctum Sanctorum, holiest place
Blessed often with high Iehouahs sacred Grace,
Where (at one offering) as the Text says plain
Were two and twenty thousand oxen slain,
One hundred twenty thousand sheep beside
At the same time for an oblation did
That house of GOD (which reigns above the thu^der)
Whose glorious fame made all the world to wonder,
Was burnt and ransackt, spite of humane aid
And level with the lowly ground was laid.
Which when Vespasian and young Titus saw,
They cride kill, kill, use speed and marshall Law;
The Roman soldiers then (inspirde with rage)
Spard none, slew all, respect no sex or age;
The streets were drowned in a purple flood
And slaughterd carcasses did swim in blood.
They slew whilst there were any left to slay,
The ablest men, for slaves they bare away.
John, Simon and Eleazer, wicked fiends
As they deserved, were brought to violent ends.
And from the time the Romans did begin
The siege, until they did the City win,
Sedition, sword, fire, famine, all depriues
Eleven hundred thousand, of their lives.
Besides one hundred thousand at the least
Were taken, and sold, as each had been a beast.
And from the time it was at first erected
Till (by the Romans it was last dejected)
It stood (as it in histories appears)
Twenty one hundred, seventy and nine years.
But yet ere GOD his vengance down did throw,
What strange prodigious wonders did he show,
As warnings how they should destruction shun
And cause them to repent for deeds misdon;
First in the Firmament, The Offended Lord
Showed them a Commet like a fiery sword,
The Temple and the Altar diverse nights
Were all enuiron'd with bright burning lights,
And in the midst of the Temple there
Vnnat'rally a Cow a Lamb did bear,
The Temples brazen gate, no bolts restrain
But (of it self) it open flew amain.
Armed Men and Chariots in the Air assembled,
The pondrous Earth, affrighted, quaked, and tre^bled,
A voice cride in the Temple, to this sense,
Let us depart, let us depart from hence.
These supernat'rall accidents, in sum
Foretold some fearful Judgment was to come;
But yet the Jews accounted them as toys,
Or scarcrow bugg-beares to fright wanton boys,
Secure they reuelld in Jerusalem,
They thought these signs against their foes, not the^
But yet when war and death had all performed,
When ruin, spoil, and furious flames had stormed,
Who then the desolated place had seen
Would not have known there had a City been.
Thus Judah and Jerusalem all fell,
Thus was fulfilld what Christ did once foretell,
Sad desolation, all their joys bereft,
And one stone on another was not left.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the 23 staff of Urania, line 7 for adornd, read ador'de.

In the 30 staff, lin. 5. for Cretian, read Cretan.

In the 39 staff, lin. 1. for Memory, read Memory's.

In the 40 staff, lin 2. for truth, read troath.

In the 45 staff, lin 5. for slings, read flings.

In the first part of Jerusalem, page 6. lin. 17. for shook read struck.


