Wit and Mirth,

Chargeably collected out of Tauernes, Ordinaries, Innes, Bowling Greenes, and
Allies, Alehouses, Tobacco shops, Highwaies, and Water-passages.

Made up, and fashioned into Clinches, Bulls, Quirkes, Yerkes, Quips, and
Ierkes.

Apothegmatically bundled up and garbled at the request of old John Garrets
Ghost.

By John Tailor, Water-Poet.

Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at Christ-Church gate.

1628.

TO THE TRVLY Loyal hearted, learned, wellaccomplished Gentleman, Mr.
Archibald Rankin.
SIR,
Being enjoined by the Ghost or Genius of old John Garret, (a man well known
and beloved) to collect, gleane, or gather, a bundle or trusse of Mirth, and
for his sake to bestrow the stage of the melancholy world with it; and withal
to present it to some one generous spirit, who was old John's friend; I thought
upon many to whom I might have made my Dedication, who were both Royal,
Honorable, Worshipful, and all welaffected toward him: As to mention one for
all, that (...) of the world, and richest Iem of her sex, that Magazine of the
two inestimable Jewels, Patience and Fortitude; to that illustrious peerless
Princess I might have recommended it, to whose service, and for whose
happiness, his life and best endeauours, with his prayers and implorations at
his death, were unfeignedly consecrated. But my manners conceiving the subject
of this Book, of altogether to triuiall a nature to be sheltred under the
shadow of the wings of transcendent and admired Majesty; I stepped so many steps
down the stairs with my invention, where by good fortune I met with you, whom
I knew did love that old honest mirror of mirth, deceased; and whom the world
better knows, are a true devoted friend to honest harmless mirth; and
laudable recreation.

I therefore entreat you, that (when your more serious affairs will permit)
you would bestow the looking upon these my poor and beggarly wardrobe of witty
lefts, whom I dare not call Apothegmes.

And because I had many of them by relation and hearsay, I am in doubt that
some of them may be in print in some other Authors, which I do assure you is
more then I do know; which if it be so, I pray you but to conniue or
tolerate, and let the Authors make twice as bold with me at any time.

Thus wishing every one to mende one, whereby the rent and torn garments of
Threed-bare Time may be well and merrily patched and repaired, craving your
pardon, with my best wishes, I remain

Yours ever in the best of my best (...). JOHN TAILOR.

JOHN GARRETS GHOST.
THE doors and windows of the Heavens were barred,
And Nights black Curtain, like an Ebon Robe,
From Earth did all Celestial light discard,
And in sad darkness clad the ample Globe;
Dead midnight came, the Cats'gan catterwaule,
The time when Ghosts and Goblins walk about;
Bats fly, Owls shrick, and dismal Dogs do bawle,
Whiles conscience clear securely sleeps it out.
At such a time I sleeping in my bed,
A vision strange appeared unto my sight,
Amazement all my senses over spread,
And filled me full with terror and afright.
A merry grave aspect me thought he had,
And one he seemed that I had often seen:
Yet was he in such uncouth shape y clad,
That what he was I could not wistly ween.
His cloak was Sack, but not the Sack of (...),
Canara, Mallago, or sprightfull Shery,
But made of Sackcloth, such as bears the grain,
Good salt, and coals, which makes the Potters weary
Laced round about with platted wheaten straw,
For which he nothing to the Silkeman owed:
A wearing never mentioned in the Law,
And yet far off, like good gold lace it showed.
Lined was his mantle with good Essex plush,
Pyde Calves skins, or Veale satin, which you will:
It never was worn threedbare with a brush,
I (naturally) saved the labor still.
A hat like Grantham steeple, for the crown
Or Piramide was large in altitude:
With frugall brim, whereby he still was known
From other men amongst a multitude,
A Princes shoe, he for a jewel wore,
Two ribbonds, and a feather in his beauer,
Which shape me thought I often had seen before,
Yet out of knowledge where, as't had bin never.
He in his hand a flaming torch did hold,
(And as he nearer did approach to me)
My hair 'gan stand on end, fear struck me cold,
Fear not, I am John Garrets ghost, quoth he.
I come to rowze thy dull and lazy Muse
From idleness, from Lethe's hateful lake:
And therefore stand upon no vain excuse,
But rise, and to thy tools thy self betake.
Remember me, althongh my carcass rot,
Write of me, to me, call me Fool or Iester,
But yet I pray thee (Tailor) rank me not,
Among those knaves that do the world bepester,
Thou wrot'st of Great Otoole and Coriat,
Of brave Sir Thomas Parsons, Knight o'th Sun,
And Archy has thy verse to glory at,
And yet for me thou naught have ever done.
Write that in Ireland, I in Mars his train,
Long time did under noble Norris serve:
Where (as I could) I stood against Pope and Spain,
Whilst some were slain, and some with want did starve
Where shot, and wounds, and knocks, I gave and took
Until at last half maimed as I was,
A man decrepit, I those wars forsook
And (with my Pass) did to my Country pass.
Where getting health, I then shook hands with death,
And to the Court I often made resort.
Where Englands mighty Queen Elizabeth
Allowed me entertainment for disport.
Then by the foretop did I take old time:
Then were not half so many fools as now,
Then was my (...), and my only prime,
My purse receiving what my wit did plow.
Then in such compass I my jests would hold,
That though I gave a man a gird or twain:
All his revenge would be to give me gold,
With commendations of my nimble brain.
Thus lived I till that gracious Queen deceast,
Who was succeeded by a famous King:
In whose blessed Sons reign (I with years oppressed)
Me to my grave, sickness and death did bring.
And now (kind Jack) thou see my ayrie form
Has shaken off her Iayle of flesh and bone,
Whilst they remain the feast of many a worm.
My better part does visit thee alone.
And as between us still, our good requests,
Thou never me. I never thee denyd:
So for my sake collect some merry Jests,
Whereby sad time may be with mirth (...).
And when it is written find some good man forth,
One (as thou think) was when I lived my friend:
And though thy lines may be but little worth,
Yet unto him my duty recommend,
So farewell (...), dame Luna 'gins to rise,
The twinkling stars begin to borrow light:
Remember this my suit I thee advise,
And so once more good honest Jack goodnight.
With that more swifter then a shaft from bow,
He cut and curried through the empty air,
Whilst I amazed with fear, as cold as snow,
Straight felt my spirits quickly to repair.
And though I found it but a dream indeed,
Yet for his sake of whom I dreamed then,
I left my bed, and clothed my self with speed,
And presently betook me to my pen:
Clear was the morn, and Phoebus lent me light,
And (as it follows) I began to write.
Wit and Mirth.
(1)
MY self carried an old fellow by water, that had wealth enough to be Deputy
of the Ward, and wit sufficient for a Scauenger; the water being somewhat
rough, he was much afraid, and (in stead of saying his prayers,) (...)
threatened me, that if I did drown him, he would spend a hundred pound, but he
would (...) me hanged for it; I desired him to be quiet and fear nothing, and
so in litlle space I landed him at the Bears College on the Bankside, alias
Paris Garden,) Well (said he) I am glad I am off the water, for it the Boat had
miscarried, I could have swum no more then a Goose.

(2)
AN old (...) (at the repayring of a Church) was writing sentences of Scripture
upon the walls, by chance a friend of mine came into the Church, and reading
them perceined much false English: Old man, said my friend, why do you not
write true English? Alas Sir (quoth the Painter) they are (...) simple people
in this Parish, and they will not go to the cost of it.

(3)
TWo men being (...) at a Table, one against the other the one of them having a
cup in his hand, drank to the other, saying, Here Opposite I will drink to
you: Opposite, said the other (being angry) what is that, I would not have thee
put any of thy nicknames upon me, for thou shall well know that I am no more
opposite then thy self, or the skin (...) thy brows.

(4)
A Wealthy Monsieur in France, (having profound (...), and (...) brain) was
told by his man that (...) did continually gape in his sleep: at which he was
angry with his man, saying, he would not believe it: his man (...) it to (...)
true, his master said that he would never believe any that told him so, except
(quoth he) I chance to see it with mine own eyes: and therefore I will have a
great Looking-glass hanged at my beds (...) for the purpofe, to try whether
thou art a lying knave or not.

(5)
THe said (...) commanded his man to buy him a gray hat, with a button in the
(...) to button it up behind: his man bought him one, and brought him, he put
it on his head with the button before, which when he looked in the glass and
saw, he was very angry saying, thou cross (...) knave, did I not (...) thee
buy a hat with the button to hold it up behind, and thou have brought me one
that turns up before: I command thee once more go thy ways, and (...) me
such a one as I would have, (...) it cost me.

(6)
THe same Gallent as (...) traveled, would have a Goose to his Supper, which
when she was (...) and brought to the Table, he said she (...): not so, I
hope, said the (...), it cannot be, for I am sure she was alive since you came
into the house: That may be quoth the (...), but then I am sure (...) you killed
her when she was (...), she would never stink so else.

(7)
AN exceeding tall Gentlewoman was riding behind a very short little man, so
that the man's head reached no higher then her breast, which the aforesaid
(...) perceiving, said, Madam you will ride a great deal better, if you put
your leg (...) that same pummell of your saddle.

Another time he chanced to meet a Lady of his acquaintance, and asked her how
she did, and how her good (...); at which word she wept, saying, that her
Husband was in heaven; in (...), (...), it is the (...) time that I (...) of
it, (...) I am (...) for it with all my heart.

(8)
ONce the said (...) saw a (...) that had a Jack Daw to sell: Sir quoth he
what will thou take for thy daw? (...) (said the (...)) the price of my Daw is
two French Crowns. Wherefore (said the other) do thou ask so much for him?
the fellow replied, that the Daw could speak French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch
and Latin; all which tongues he will speak after he is a little acquainted
in your Lordships house: Well quoth he, bring thy Daw in, and there is thy
money. In conclusion, Jack Daw (after a month or five (...) time) never spoke
otherwise then his father (...) Kaw Kaw: whereat the (...) said, that the Knave
had cozened him of his money; but it is no matter, there is no great (...) in
it: for quoth he, though my Daw do not speak yet I am in good hope that he
thinks the more.

(9)
ANother time he commanded his man to buy some sweet thing to burn in his
Chamber, for (quoth he) my (...). (...) in a paper, and (...) he was going for
fire, his master tasted of it, and finding it stick in his teeth, and relish
very bitter, he called his man cozening knave, that would bring him such bitter
trash for his money; and straight ways commanded (...) to buy a pound of the
best sugar, and burn it straight to sweeten and perfume his Chamber.

(10)
THis Gallant in his youth was much addicted to dicing, and many times when he
had lost all his money, then he would pawn his cloak, and so go home
without either cloak or coin, which grieved the Lady his mother very much:
for remedy whereof, she caused all his doublets (of what stuff soever) to be
made with (...) painted backs, whereon was fashioned 2 fools, which caused
the gentleman ever after to keep his cloak on his back, for fear two of the
three should be discovered.

(11)
Will Backstead the Player cast his Chamber-lye out of his window in the
night, which chanced to light upon the heads of the watch passing by; who
angerly said, who is that offers us this abuse? Why, (...) Will, who is there?
Who is here, said one of the pickled watchmen, we are the Watch. The Watch,
quoth William, why my friends you know, Harm watch, harm catch.

(12)
A Cardinal of Rome had a goodly (...) house new built, but the broken bricks,
tiles, sand, lime, stones, and sush rubbish as are commonly the remnants of
such buildings lay confusedly in heaps and scattered here and there: The
Cardinal demanded of his Suruayor wherefore the rubbish was not conveyed away:
The Suruayor said; that he purposed to hyre an hundred carts for the purpose.
The Cardinal replied, that the charge of Carts might be saved, for a pit might
dug in the ground and bury it. My Lord, said the Suruayor, I pray you what
shall we (...) with the earth which we dig out of the said pit? Why you
horseson (...), said the Cardinal, (...) thou not dig the pit (...) enough,
and bury all together.

(13)
A Poor Country man praying (...) Superstitious before an old Image of S.
Loy, the Image suddenly fell down upon the poor man, and bruised his bones
sorely, that he could not stir abroad in a (...) after; in which space the
cheating Priests (...) set (...) a new Image: the country man came to the
Church again, and (...) a (...) off, to the new Image, saying, Although thou
smilest and look fair upon me yet thy father played me such a knauish pranke
lately, that I Will beware how I (...) too near thee, lest thou should have
any of thy Fathers unhappy qualities.

(14)
A (...) ten (...) in suit of Law, had a trial at (...), where the (...) went
on her side; whereupon (...) presently (...) her (...) by (...) some of her
nearest tenants and (...) to supper; amongst whom was a plain down right
country (...), to whom the Lady said, (...), I think I have tickled my
adversary now, though it were long first, I trow he will make no brags of his
meddling with me. The honest (...) replied, Truly Madam I did ever think what
it would come to at last, for I knew when he first meddled with your (...), that
he had a wrong Sow by the (...).

(15)
ONe asked a (...) what the Westminster Hall was like; Marry, quoth the other,
it is like a Butlers Box at Christmas amongst (...), for whosoever loses, the
Box will be sure to be a winner.

(16)
A Proper Gentlewoman went to (...) a rich (...) that had more gowt then good
manners, at her taking leave he requested her to taste a cup of Canara: She
(contrary to his expectation) took him at his (...), and thanked him. He
commanded Ieffrey Starueling his man to wash a glass, and fill it to the
Gentlewoman. Honest (...) filled a great glass about the bigness of two Tailors
thimbles, and gave it to his master, who kissed it to save cost, and gave it to
the Gentlewoman, saying (...) it was good Canara of six years old at the
least, to whom she an swered, (seeing the quantity so small) sir, as you
requested me, I have tasted your wine, but I wonder that it should be so
little, being of such a great age.

(17)
A Soldier upon his march found a horseshooe, and stuck it at his girdle,
where passing through a wood, some of the enemy lay in (...), and one of them
discharged his musket, and the shot by fortune light against the fellows
horse-shooe. A ha, (...). he, I perceive that little armor will serve a man's
turn, if it be put on in the right place.

(18)
ONe being in a (...) with his friend, looking out at the window, he saw one
riding on a horse in the street, said he, do you see that horse? yea, (...).
the other: then said he, you may swear you have seen the best horse in
England: how do you know that said the other? I know it well, said he, for it
is my horse, and I am sure that he is the best, and yet I (...) that I have one
in my stable worth ten of him.

(19)
AN unhappy boy that kept his fathers (...) in the country, did use to carry a
pair of Cards in his pocket, and meeting with boys as good as himself, would
fall to Cards at the Cambrian game of Whip-her-ginny, or English one and
thirty; at which sport he would some days lose a sheep or two: for which if
his father corrected him, he (in revenge) would drive the sheep home at night
over a narrow bridge, where some of them falling besides the bridge, were
drowned in the swift brook. The old man being wearied with his ungracious
dealing, complained to a Justice, thinking to afright him from doing any more
the like. In brief, before the (...) the youth was brought, where (using small
reverence, and less (...),) the Justice said to him, Sirrah, you are a notable
villain, you play at Cards, and lose your fathers sheep at one and thirty.
The boy replied, that it was a lie. A lie, quoth the Justice, you saucy knave,
do thou give me the (...) No, quoth the boy I gave not you the lie, but you told
me the lie, for I never lost Sheep at one and thirty, for when my game was one
and thirty I always won. Indeed, said the Justice, thou say true, but I
have another accusation (...) thee, which is, that you drive (...) fathers
sheep over a narrow bridge, where some of them are oftentimes drowned: That Is
a lie too, quoth the (...), for (...) that go over the bridge are well enough,
it is only those that fall beside: which are drowned: Whereto the Justice said
to the boys father. Old man, thou (...) brought in to false accusations
against thy (...), for he never lost sheep at one and thirty, nor were there
ever any drowned that went over the bridge.

(20)
A Quiblet.
A (...) passing through a room where a Woman was (...) a buck of clothes, but
he thinking she had been (...), saw a dish, and dipped some small (...) of
the Lie, which he supposing to (...), drank up, and (...) to (...), spt,
(...), and spaule: the (...) asked him (...) he (...), (...) told her, and
called her some (...) names, saying, he had swallowed Lie, Nay then I cannot
blame you to be angry, for you being a Soldier and a Captain, it must (...)
trouble your stomach to swallow the Lie.

(21)
A Country fellow (that had not walked much in streets that were paued) came to
London, where a dog came (...) out of a house, and furiously ran (...) stooped
to take up a (...) the Dog, and finding them all (...) or paued in the
ground; (...), (...) strange Country am I in, (...) the (...) tie up the (...),
(...) let the dogs loose.

(22)
AN honest Mayor of a Town, being all Mercy and no Justice, loving ease and
quietness, and unwilling to commit any offense or offender, one said of him
that he was like the herb John in a pottag pot, for that herb did not give
any taste at all either good or bad, but an excellent (...): so the Mayor did
neither good nor harm, but (as an image of a Mayors authority) filled up the
room.

(23)
A Justice of the Peace, being angry with a pilfering Knave, said, Sirrah, if
thou do not mend thy manners, thou will be shortly (...), or else I will be
hauged for thee. The bold knave replied, I thank your worship for that kind
offer, and I beseech your worship not to be out of the way when I shall have
occasion so use you.

(24)
Certain Justices of the Peace being informed of the odious abuses daily
committed by drunkenness in their Jurisdictions, did according to their places
and duties, meet at a market town, and sat two days, hearing informations,
and working reformations: at last they concluded that the Ale and Beer were
too strong, and therefore commanded that from thence forth smaller drink
should be brewed, whereby these unruly people might sometimes go to bed
sober. But one mad tospot fellow being much grieved at this order, having made
himselie half pot-shaken, without fear or wit came to the Justices, and asked
them if they had sat two days about the brewing of small drink: to whom one
of the Justices replied, yes: Why then quoth the (...), I pray you sit three
days more to know who shall drink it, for I will none of it.

(25)
THere was a Scottish Gentleman that had sore eyes, who was counseled by his
Physicians to forbear drinking of wine: but he said he neither could nor
would forbear it, maintaining it for the lesser suill, to shut up the windows
of his body, then to suffer (...) house to fall down, through want of
reparations.

(26)
Upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, there was a Mayor of a Country Town
sitting in consultation with his Brethren: to whom he gravely said, My
Brethren and Neighours, I (...) hear that the Queen is dead, wherefore I
thought it exceeding (...) we should despair to this place, that being
dissembled together, we might consult of our estates, for I doubt (...) shall
have another Queen or a King, and I stand in great fear that the people will
be vnrude, so that we shall be in danger of strange Resurrection,

(27)
ANother Mayor that was on hunting, (by chance) one asked him how he liked the
Cry: a pox take the Dogs, says he, they make such a bawling that I cannot
hear the Cry.

(28)
AN old Justice was fast a sleep on the Bench when a (...) Malefactor was
judged to be hanged; at which word the Justice suddenly awaked, and said to
the Thief, My friend, I pray let this be a warning to you, look you do so
no more, for we do not show every man the like favor.

(29)
AN old Recorder of a City in this Land was busy with a Country Mayor, in the
mean space they were interrupted by a fellow that was brought before him for
killing of a man: my Lord asked the fellows name, who answered, his name was
Gilman. Said my Lord, take away G, and thy name is Ilman put K to it, thy name
is Kilman, and put to Sp and thy name is Spilman, thou art half hanged already
(as the proverb says:) for thou have au ill name, let a man vary it how he
can.

The Mayor all this while stood by musing at my Lords canuasing the man's name,
and afterward being at home among his own good people, he had an offender
brought before him for getting a Wench with child: Master Mayor asked him his
name: the fellow said, if it please your worship my name is Johnson. Then
Master Mayor (striving to Imitate my Lord) said, take away G and thy name is
Ilman, put K to it, it is Kilman, put Sp to it, and thy name is Spilman, thou
art a knave, thou have an ill name, and (...) shall be hanged, etc.

(30)
A Quiblet.
MAster Field the Player riding up Fleetstreet, a great pace, a Gentleman
called him, and asked him what play was played that day: he (being angry to be
(...) upon so frivolous a demand) answered, that he might see what play was to
be played upon every Post, I cry you mercy (said the Gentleman) I took you
for a Post, you road so fast

(31)
ONe being (...) vexed with the spirit of jealousy, came suddenly into his
house, and found a man (whom he suspected) some what too busy with his wife;
to whom he said, Now good fellow I thank thee, for thou have cured me of a
strange hellish torment; my suspicion is cleared, and apparent knowledge has
given me such ease of heart, that I will be jealous no more.

(32)
A Skillful Painter was requested to paint out a fair Courtezan (in plain
English a Whore) I pray you spare that (...), said the Painter, for if she be
a right whore she daily paints her self.

(33
SEigneur Valdrino (play master to the Camp of Alphonsus King of Aragon) a man
exquisite in courtship and complement; as two or three were at strife laying
wagers what Countryman he was, a blunt bold Captain asked what was the matter:
why Captain, said one, (...) are laying a wager what Countryman my L.
Treasurer Valdrino is: Oh said the Captain, I can tell you that, I am sure he
was borne in the land of Promise, for I have served the King in his (...) these
seven years without pay, and ever when I petition to my Lord, he pays me with
no coin but promises, which makes me half assured that he is that countryman.

(34
A Nobleman of France (as he was riding) met with a yeoman of the country, to
whom he said, My friend I should know thee, I do remember I have often seen
thee: My good Lord, said the Countryman, I am one of your Houors poor tenants,
and my name is T. 1. I remember thee better now (said my Lord) there were 2
brothers of you, but one is dead, I pray which of you does remain alive?

(35)
THe (...) man having had a (...) that was blind, play to him after supper
(...) late, at last he arose, and commanded one of his servants to light the
(...): to whom the (...) said my Lord, the Harper is blind: (...), quoth my
Lord, he (...) the more (...) of light.

(36)
A Young fellow (...) himself the richest (...) in England: to whom his Mother
(...) very angerly, you foolish (...) boy, why (...) thou desire such a wish,
has not (...) own Father enough in store for thee?

(37)
A (...) Rampant, made her husband a (...) Dormant, with a front Cressant,
surprised by the watch Guardant, brought to the Justice (...), with her
play-fellow (...), after a coursie Couchant; the Justice told her that her
offense was heinous, in breaking the bonds of matrimony in that adulterate
manner, and that she should consider that her husband was her Head: Good sir,
quoth she, I did ever acknowledge him so; and I hope it is no such great fault
in me, for I was but trimming, dressing, or (...) my Head.

(38)
A Man being very sickely, one said to his wife, I marvel your husband does
not wear a nightcap. Truly (quoth (...)) within this six months that my
husband has been sick, although his legs be shrunk, yet he has outgrowne all
his night-caps.

(39)
A (...), whose mother was noted to be one not ouerloden with honesty, went to
seek his Godfather, and enquiring for him, quoth one to him, who is thy
Godfather: the boy replied his name is goodman Digland the Gardener: Oh said
the man, if he be thy Godfather he is at the next Alehouse: but I fear thou
take Gods name in vain.

(40)
A Scholar riding from Cambridge toward London, his horse being tired, (a
lazy disease often befalling such hacknies) met a Post on the way, who
notwithstanding he did what he could to make his horse give him place, by
(...), switch, and bridle, yet the Post was (...) to give him the way: to whom
(in anger) he said, Thou paltry fellow, do thou not see I am a Post? The
Scholar straight replied, And thou ignorant fellow, (...) thou not see that I
ride upon a Post.

(41)
A Fellow having more drink then wit, in a (...) evening made a foolish vow to
take the wall of as many as he met betwixt the Temple Bar and Charing cross,
and coming near the Sauoy, where stood a Post a little distance from the
wall: the drunkard took it for a man, and would have the wall, beginning to
quarrel and give the Post foul words: at which a man came by, and asked the
matter, and whom he spoke to: he answered he would (...) the wall of that
fellow that stood so stiffly there: my friend said the other, that is a Post,
you must give him the way: Is it so, said the fellow, a (...) upon (...), why
did he not blow his horn?

(42)
A Saylor being on a tired horse, riding (...) Dover to London, his company
prayed him to ride faster: to whom he answered, I can come no faster, (...) you
(...) see that I am be calmed?

(43)
TWo Gentlemen were (...), and one of them cast away the others hat; but the
other caught his hat off, and put it on his own head: now fie, fie, quoth tho
other, thou spoylest my hat: wherewith said the other? Marry (said he that was
bareheaded) thou spoy lest my hat with putting a Calves head into it.

(44)
The figure Conversion.
IF a Uintner does draw me good wine upon money or credit, then he is fitter to
draw then hang: but if he draw me bad wine for good money, then he is much
fitter to hang then to draw.

(45)
A Man having been with a Doctor of Physic to have his advise about (...)
grief he had; when he came home his wife asked him what news? Marry, said
he, my Physician does counsel me to drink Asses milk every morning
fasting: Why husband, quoth the Woman, I pray you tell me, does master Doctor
give suck?

(46)
A Brave and valiant Captain, whom I could name, had a scarce given him here
in England, and he sailing over into the Low Countries, an old (...) Catholic
Lady of his acquaintance, was very importunate to beg his scarf of him: the
Captain asked her what she would (...) with it, and said, it was not fit for
her wearing. She answered him, that if he would give it her, that Jesus Christ
should wear it in the Church upon holy days, meanning the Image, Madam, said
the Captain, if you will bring me word that ever his father wore such a
scarf, then I will give you this for him.

(47)
Between the hours of twelve and (...) at noone, one asked me what it was a
clock: I answered him, it was little or no thing. He demanded of me what I
(...) by my answer? I replied, that it being not one of the clock, it was to
be reckned or counted for naught, for that which is lesser then one, is little
or nothing.

(48)
A Gentlewoman cheapned a close (...) in Paul's Churchyard, and the shopkeeper
did ask her to much money for it, as she thought, Why mistress, said he, I pray
you consider what a good lock and key it has: She replied, that she had
small use for (...) lock or key, for (...) purposed to put nothing into it,
but what (...) cared not who stole out.

(49)
A Country woman at an Asses was to take her oath against a party; the said
party (...) the Judge that her (...) might not be taken; the Judge demanded why
he excepted against (...) my Lord (quoth he) she is a Recusant or Roman
Catholic, and they hold it no matter of conscience to swear any thing
against us. Come hither woman, said the (...), I do not think thou art a
(...), I am persuaded that for forty shillings thou (...) swear the Pope is a
knave: Good my Lord, said she, the Pope is a stranger to me, but if I knew him
as well as I know your Lordship, I would swear for half the money.

(50)
A Cardinal kept a knauish fool for his recreation, to whom he said, Sirrah
fool, suppose that all the world were dead but thou and I, and that one of us
should be turned to a Horse, and the other of us to an Ass, say which of these
two would thou choose to be? The fool answered, Sir, you are my master,
and for that (...) it is fit that your worship should choose first, and I will
be contented to take that which you leave. Why then said the Cardinal, I would
be a horse: no said the fool, let me entreat your worship to be an Ass, for I
would be an Ass to choose of al things: why quoth the Cardinal? marry, said
the fool because that I have known many Asses come to be (...), but I never
knew any horse come to the like (...).

(51)
A Grave discreet Gentleman having a comely wife, whose beauty and free
behavior did (...) her honesty into suspicion, by whom he had a (...) almost
at man's estate, of very dissolute and wauton carriage: I muse, said one, that a
man of such stayed and moderate gravity should have a son of such a contrary
and froward disposition. Sir, (...) another, the reason is that his pate is
stuffed with his mothers wit, that there is no room for any of his fathers
wisdom: besides the (...) of her heels is gotten into her sons brains.

(52)
A Rich Grasier dwelling 150 miles from Oxford, having a son that had seven
years been a student there, at last sent for him home, to whom he said, Son
I do hear that you are well practiced in the rudiments of learning, but that
withal you are addicted to an idle vein of the poor and threedbare art of
Poetry; which I charge thee to leave and avoid, as thou (...) my favor. for my
mind is not to have thee live beggarly, and dye poorly; yet I will ask (...)
one Poetical question, which is. Wherefore think thou that so beautiful a
creature as Venus, was so besotted to match her self with so ill favored a
knave as Vulcan: In truth (...), quoth the young man, I can yield you no reason
for it, but I wonder at it; and yet I do admire as much wherefore my mother
married with you.

(53)
A Man going with his Wife by a deep river side, began to talk of Cockolds,
and withal he (...) that every Cuckold were cast into the river: to whom his
wife replies, husband I pray you learn to swim.

(54)
A Man riding through a village with his dog tunning by him, which dogs
name was called Cuckold, leaping and frisking into every house he past by where
the (...) was (...): whereupon the man being afraid his dog would be lost,
calls and whistles, here, here, Cuckold; to whom an old woman said, whom do
thou miscall? I would have thee know that no cuckold does dwell in this house.
Good Woman, said the man, you mistake me, I do call no body but my dog; Now
out upon thee thou misbeleeuing kuaue, said she, where learned thou that
manners to call a dog by a christen bodies name.

(55)
A Lusty Miller that in his younger days had been much given to the flesh and
the devil; so that not one pretty maid or female servant did or could bring
grist to his Mill to be grownd, but the knave (...) would do his best to
undermine and blow up their chastity, and withal he would bargain with as
many as his temptations overcame, that at his day of marriage every one of them
should give him a Cake. In process of time the Miller was married, and those
foresaid (...)-hearted Wenches sent each one their cakes, to the number of 99.
His wife the bride, who also went for a maid, did muse and ask what was the
meaning of so many Cakes? The miller told her the truth of all without any
dissembling: to whom his wife answered, If I had been so wise in bargaining as
you have beeue in your time, the young men of my acquaintance would have sent
me 100 cheeses to (...) with your cakes.

This bawdy Miller in a trap was caught,
Nor only married, but most fitly matched:
In this the proverb is approved plain,
What bread men break is broke to them again.
(56)
THere was a fair ship of two hundred tuns lying at the Tower wharfe at
london, where a Conntryman passing by most earnestly looked on the said ship,
and demanded how old she was: one made answer that she was a year old. Good
Lord bless me, said the Countryman, is she so big (...) in one year, what a
greatness will she be by that time she comes to my age.

This man's blind ignorance I may compare
To Aquavitae given to a Mare:
Let each man his own calling then apply,
Ne suitor vltra crepidam, say I.
(57
Twelve Scholars riding together, one of them said, my masters let us ride
faster: Why, quoth another, me thinks we ride a good pace, (...) warrant it is
four mile an hour. Alas said the first, what is four mile an hour amongst
all us.

Let not man boast of wit or learning deep,
For ignorance may out of knowledge creep
A among 12 men 4 mile an hour to ride.
He that has wit to each his share divide.
(58)
AN Apprentice in the market did ask the price of an hundred Oysters: his
friend persuaded him not to buy them, for they were too small; too small
replied the Prentice, there is not much loss in that for I shall have the more
to the hundred.

If up the hill a measured mile it be,
Then down the hill's another mile, I see:
A groat to pay, 4 pence will quit the cost.
What Is won in t'hundred, in the shire is lost.
(59)
SIx Gentlemen riding together, were in doubt that they were out of their way,
wherefore they rode a flight-shot to an old shepherd, one of them enquiring of
him if that were the way to such a town, and how far it was thither. Sir,
quoth the Shepherd, that is the right way, and you have six miles thither.
Quoth one of the Gentlemen, What a lying old knave art thou, it cannot be
above four miles: the Shepherd replyde, Sir you offer like a chapman, and you
shall have it for four miles, but I Will assure you it shall cost every one of
these Gentlemen six miles before they come thither.

Here rashness did the Galla^ts tongue oreslip,
To who^ the Shepherd gave a pleasing nip:
Thus softest fire does make the sweetest Malt,
And mild reproves makes rashness see his fault.
(60)
A Man was very angry with his maid, because his eggs were boiled too hard:
truly, said she, I have made them boil a long hour, but the next you have
shall boil 2 hours but they shall be tender enough.

The boiling of this wenches eggs I find
Much like unto a greedy mizers mind:
The eggs the more they boil are harder still
The mizer's full, too full; yet wants his fill.
(61)
TWo learned good. fellows drinking a pipe of Tobacco, it being almost outthat
he that drunk last did partly feel the ashes to come hot to his lips;
giving the pipe to his friend, said, Ashes to ashes: the other taking the pipe
and (being of a quick apprehension, threw it out to the dunghill saying, Earth
to earth.

Thus wit with wit agrees like cake and cheese
Both sides are gainers, neither side does lose
(...) begets conceit, jest, jest does father
And butter fallen to (...), does something gather,
(62)
ONe said a Citizen was a man all in earnest, and in no part like a jest,
because the Citizen was never bad, or the jest never good till they were both
broke,

What Is one man's yea, may be another nay,
The Sun does soften wax, and harden clay:
Some Citizens are like to jests, for why,
They Will break in jest, or bankrupt policy.
(63)
A Gallant with a galloping wit, was mounted upon a running horse toward a
Town named Tame, within ten miles of Oxford, and riding at full speed, he met
an old man, and asked him, Sirrah is this the way to Tame? yes sir, he replyde,
your Horse, I Will warrant you, if he were as wild as the devil.

This is a ridle to a fool, me thinks,
And seems to want an Oedipus or Sphinx,
But (...), in my book I hold it fit,
To find you lines, your self must find you wit.
(64)
A Complementall Courtier that in his French, Italian, and Spanish cringes,
(...), and curtelies, would bend his body, and bow every way like a tumbler, a
Mercere servant espying his marmositicall (...), said, Oh if my master could
have bowed but half so much; I am certainly persuaded that he had never broke.

Too much of one thing often proves good for nothing,
And dainties in satiety, breeds loathing:
Th'ones flattery mingled with the others pride,
Had served them both, both might line long vnspide.
(65)
I My self gave a book to King James once in the great Chamber at Whitehall
as his Majesty came from the Chapel, the Duke of Richmond said merrily unto
me, Tailor where did you learn the manners to give the King a book and not
kneel? My Lord, said I, if it please your Grace, I do give now, but when I beg
any thing then I will kneel.

Be it to all men by these presents known,
Men need not kneel to give away there own
I Will stand upon my feet when as I give,
And kneel when as I beg more means to live,
But some by this may understand.
That Courtiers (...) kneel then stand.
(66)
THe trained soldiers of a certain Shire which I could name, to the number of
6000, as they were mnstring and drilling under their several captain, a
yeomans son being there as a raw soldier in his corslet, his father standing
by said, I vaith it does me much good at heart to zee how trim a vellow my
zonne is in his hardness. The young fellow hearing his fathers commendations
of him, began very desperately to shake his pike, and looking exceeding grim,
with a (...) horrible terrible countenance, said, O vather, chad lather nor a
groat that all we had but one Spainard here.

One Spainard among 6000, pity it were,
Better ten thousand Britains bold were there
Led by brave Leaders, that might make Spain e quake,
Like Vere, or Morgan, Essex, Blunt, or Drake.
(67)
ONe said that he could never have his health in Cambridge, and that (...) he
had lived there till this time, he thought in his conscience that he had dyed
7 years ago.

I will not say the man that spoke so lied,
Seven years ago, no doubt, he might have di'd
He by his trade perhaps might be a dyer,
And daily died to live, and bin no liar.
(68)
A Country fellow was much grieved that he had not gone seven miles to a
market town to have seen the (...): Why, said his wife, it is too far to go
and come in a day to see such bables, especially it is too great a journey on
foot. O quoth he, I could have gone thither with my neigbour Hobson on foot,
like a fool as I was, and I might have rid back upon my neghbour Iobsons
mare, like an ass as I am.

Thus in the preter tense a fool he was,
And in the present tense he is an Ass;
And in the future, fool and ass shall be,
That goes or rides so far such sights to see.
(69)
THere was a (...) young Scholar preferred to a (...) in the Country, and
commonly on Sundays and holydaies after evening prayer he would have a dozen
bouts at (...) with the (...) youths in his parish: The Bishop of the Diocese
hearing of it, sent for the parson, telling him that this beseemed not his
profession and gravity, and if that he did not desist from that (...) kind of
exercise, he would vnbenefice him; Good my Lord, said the person) I beseech you
to conceive rightly of me, and I doubt not but my playing (...) will be
accounted tolerable, for I do it (...) purpose to (...) the ruder sort of my
people: How so, said the Bishop; Marry my Lord (quoth the Parson) whatsoever I
do teach them at morning and evening prayer, I do heat soundly into their
(...) at cudgels afterward, for their better remembrance.

I wish that all the Fencers in our nation,
Were only of this Parsons congregation:
That he his life and doctrine should explain
By beating them, whilst they beat him again.
(70)
A Judge upon the Bench did ask an old man how old he was: My Lord, said he, I
am eight and fourscore: And why not fourscore and eight, said the Judge: the
other replyde, because I was eight before I was fourscore.

Eight's before eighty, all men may descry,
Yet we name eighty first, contrarily:
Pull off my Boots and Spurs, I you beseech.
when Spurs and Boots is rather (...) speech
(71)
A Fellow made his boast that he rode 220 miles with one horse and never drew
bit: that may be quoth another) perhaps you rid him with a halter.

The proverb says, he that will swear will lie,
He that will lie will steal by consequency:
Swearers are liars, liars most are thieves,
Or God help Iaylors, and true Vndershrieues.
(72
ONe saw a decayed Gentleman in a very thread bare cloak, said to him, Sir you
have a very watchful cloak on: Why said the poor Gentleman the other
answered, I do not (...) it had a good nap this seven years: the Gentleman
replied, and truly sir me thinks you want a nap as well as my cloak, for you
talk idly for want of sleep.

The Prodigal at Poverty does scoff,
Though from his back the begger's not far off,
Here flout with flout, and bob with bob is quitted,
And proud vainglorions folly finely fitted
(73)
A Diligent and learned Preacher on a (...) in the afternoon was preaching,
whilst most of the zealous (...) men (for their meaner edification) were fast a
(...) in (...) pues: in the mean space a young child cried somewhat aloud at
the lower end of the church, which the Preacher hearing, called to the Nurse,
and said, Nurse, I pray thee still thy child, or else it may chance to awaken
some of the best men in our parish.

Men sleep at Sermons, sure their brains are adle,
Sly Satan lulls them, and does rock the cradle:
When men thus do no ill, it is understood,
The devil hinders them from doing good.
(74)
A Chorister or singing man at service in a Cathedral Church, was fast asleep
when all his fellows were singing, which the Deane espying, sent a boy to him
to waken him, and ask him why he did not sing? he being suddenly awaked,
prayed the boy to thank master Deane for his kind remembrance, and to tell him
that he was as merry as those that did sing.

They say he is wise that can himself keep warm,
And that the man that sleeps well thinks no harm,
He sung not, yet was in a merry (...),
Like John Indifferent, did not harm nor good.
(75)
A Kind of clownish gentleman had half a Brawne sent him against Christmas, he
very illiberally gave the Serving man half a shilling that brought it: the
Seringman gave the Porter that carried it eight pence before the (...) face.
(...), said he, are you so prodigal to reward the Porter with eight pence,
when I give you but six pence, thou bear the mind of a prodigal Gallant,
although by thy foot thou seem (...) clown: Good sir, said the fellow, I
confess I have a very clownish lubberly pair of feet, but yet I am persuaded
that a pair of your worships shoes would fit them well.

Here Is Bore and Brawn together are well met
He knew that giving was no way to get,
The world gets somewhat (...) the (...),
When as the (...) gets the devil and all.
(76)
A Griping extortiouer that had been a maker of beggars for the space of forty
years, and by raising rents and oppression, had undone many families, (...) on
a time in anger to a poor fellow that had (...) a (...) of his, (...) villane,
(...) thou rob me, I vow and swear there is not so damned a rogue in the world
as thou: to (...) the fellow answered, I beseech your good worship remember
your self, and be good to me for Gods sake, and for your own sake.

This Rascals eye is with a beam so blind,
That in the poor man's he a moat can find:
The wolf himself, a temperate feeder deems
And every man too much himself esteems.
(77)
A Seruingman and his mistress was landing at the Whitefryars stayers, the
stayers being very bad, a waterman offered to help the woman, saying. Give me
your hand Gentlewoman I Will help you: to whom her man replied, you (...) fellow
place your words right, my mistress is (...), she is a Lady.

All is not gold (they say) that glisters bright
Snow is not sugar, though it look as white:
And it is approved to be true and common,
That every Lady's not a Gentlewoman.
(78)
A Seruingman going in have in London, (minding his (...) more then his way) a
Gallant iustled him from the wall almost into the kennell: the fellow turned
about, and asked the Gentleman why he did tustle him so? the Gentleman said,
Because he would not give the wall to asawcy knave. The Seruingman replied,
your worship is not of my mind, for I will.

Here Pride that takes Humility in snuff,
Is well encountered with a couuterbuffe:
One would not give the wall unto a Knave,
The other would, and him the wall he gave.
(79)
A Justice of the Peace was very angry with a country (...) because (...) came
not to him at (...) sending for him; and after he had (...) bestowed two or
three dozen of knaves upon him, he said to him; Sirrah, I will make you know
that the proudest saucy (...) that dwells under my command shall come before we
when I send for him. I beseech your worship, said the man, to pardon me, for
(...) was afraid: afraid of what, said the Justice? of your worship, answered,
the fellow. Of me, said the (...)? why wast thou afraid of ma? Because your
worship looks so like a Lion, said the man: a Lion quoth the Justice? when
did thou see a Lion? may it please your worship (the fellow replyde) I saw a
Butcher bring one but yesterday to (...) market, with a white face, and his
four legs bound.

This fellow was a knave, or fool, or both,
Or else his wit was of but slender growth:
He gave the whitfac'd Calfe the Lions style
the Justice was a proper man the while.
(80)
Diverse Gentlemen being merry together, at last one of their accquaintance came
to them (whose name was Sampson) A ha, said one of them, (...) may be securely
merry, no Sergant or Bailiffe dare touch us, for if a thousand Philistims come,
here is Sampson, who is able to brain them all: to whom Shampson replyde. Sir I
may boldly venture against so many as you speak of, provided, that you will
lend me one of your Iaw-bones.

(81)
TWo Playsterers being at work for me at my (...) in Southwarke, did many
times patch or dawbe out part of their days lobour with prating, which I being
digging in my garden did ouerheare, that their chat was of their wives, and how
that if I were able (quoth one) my wife shoule ride in pomp through London, as
I saw a Countess ride yesterday: why quoth the other, how did she ride I pray?
Marry, said he, in state, in her horslitter: O base, quoth the other,
Horslitter, I protest as poor a man as I am, I would have allowed my wife a
threepeny trust of clean straw:

(82)
SIr Edward Dier came to the Tower on some business just at the time as the
Gate was newly shut, and the Warders going away with the keys, he looking
through the gate called to one of them, saying, Hoe fellow, I pray thee open
the gate and let me in: None of your fellow Sir but a poor Knave: Why then
said Sir, Edward, I pray thee poor Knave let me in: nay no knave neither,
quoth the (...). Why then said the knight, he was a knave that told me so.

(83)
ONe met his friend in the street, and told him he was very sorry to see him
look so ill, asking him what he ailed: he replied, that he was now well
amended, but he had been lately (...) of the Pox: What pox, the small Pox,
said his friend? Nay, quoth the other, my mind was not so base; for I had the
(...) Pox that I could get for my money.

(84)
AN honest Hostess of mine at Oxford roasted an old shoulder of a (...), which
in the eating was as tongh as a Buffe Ierkin: I did ask her what the reason
was that the mutton was so tough: She said she (...) not, except the Butcher
deceived her in the age of it, and she would tell him on both sides of his
(...), like a knave as he was: Nay, quoth I, I think there is (...) fault in
it which will excuse the Butcher, for perhaps you (...) it with old wood: in
troth quoth mine hostess it is like enough, and my husband never does other
ways, but buy old (...) and (...) which makes all the meat we either roast or
boil, so exceeding tough that no body can eat it.

(85)
ONe hearing a clock strike three when he thought it was not two, said, this
Clock is like an hypocricicall Puritan, for though he will not swear, yet
he will lie abominably.

(86)
(...) Tarleton said that he could compare Queen Elizabeth to nothing more
fittly then to a Sculler, for said he, neither the Queen nor the Sculler has
a fellow.

(87)
TWo obstinate rich fellows in Law (that had each of them more mouey then wit)
by chance one of them coming out of Westminster Hall met with his adversaries
wife, to whom he said, in troth good woman I do much pity your case, in that
it is your hard fortune that such a fool as your husband should have so
discreet and modest a wife. The woman replied, In truth Sir I do grieve more
that so (...) a wife as you have, should have such a wrangling knave to her
husband.

(88)
A Poor laboring man was married and natched to a creature that so much used
(...) scold waking, that she had much ado to refrain it sleeping, so that the
poor man was so batterfang'd and belabour'd with tongue mettle, that he was
weary of his life: at last four or five woman that were his neighbors
(pitying his case) came in his absence to his house to admonish and connsell
his wife to a quiet behavior toward her husband; telling her that she was a
shame to all good woman, in her bad usage of so honest a painful man: the
woman replied to her neighbors, that she thought her husband did not (...)
her which was partly the cause that she was so froward toward him; why (said
an old woman) I will show thee how thou shall prove that he loves thee dearly;
do thou counterfeit thy self dead and lie under the table. and one of us will
fetch thy husband, and he shall find us heavy and grieuing for thee; by which
means thou shall perceive by his lamentation for thee how much he loves thee:
this counsel was al lowed and effected; when the poor man came home, be
hearing the matter (being much oppressed with grief) can under the table
bemouing the happy loss of his most (...) vexation, and making as though he
would kiss her, with a most loving embrace, to make all sure, he brake her
neck. The (...) pitying the man's extreme passion, in compassion told him that
his wife was not dead, and that all this was done but to make a trial of his
love toward her: whereupon they called her by her name, bidding her to rise,
and that she had fooled it enough with her husband: but for all their calling,
she lay still, which made one of the women to shake and iogge her, at which
the woman cried, alas she is dead indeed: why this it is quoth her husband to
dissemble and (...) with God and the world.

(90)
A Pantler of a College in Oxford possessing some crumbs of Logic and
chippings of (...), making distribution of bread at the Scholars table, one of
the Scholars, complained unto (...) that the bread was dow baked: Why, quoth
he, so it should be, what else is the definition of bread but dough baked?

(91)
A Miserable fellow in the country, did once a year use to inuit his
neighbors to dinner, and as they were one time sat, he bad them welcome,
saying, that there was a surloine of beef, that the ox it came from cost 20
pound and that there was a Capon that he paid 2 (...) 6 pence for in the
market: at which a country yeoman sitting against the Capon (...) to and cut
off a leg of it, (the (...) of the guests being not yet past their roast beef)
to whom the man of the house said, My friend, I pray thee eat some of this
same surloyne: (...) sir, God forbide, quoth the fellow, I am but a poor man,
an ox of 20 pound price is too dear meat, a Capon of half a crown will
serve my turn well enough, I thank you.

(92)
A Rich man told his nephew, that he had read a book called Lucius Apuleius,
of the Golden (...) and that he found there how Apuleius after he had been
an ass many years, by eating of (...) he did recover his manly shape again,
and was no more an ass: the young man replied to his uncle, Sir, if I were
worthy to advise you, I would give you counsel to eat a sallad of Roses once
a week your self.

(93)
A (...) having been married but (...) weeks, perceived his wife to be great
with child, wherefore she (...) him to (...) a Cradle: shortly after he went
to a Fair and bought ten cradles, and being demanded why he bought so many,
he answered, that his wife would (...) use for them all in one year.

(94)
A Gentleman untrust and vnbuttoned in a cold winter morning, a friend of his
told him that it was not for his health to go so open in the raw weather, and
that he mused it did not kill him to go so often untrust: to whom the other
replied, Sir, you are of the mind of my Silceman, Mercer, or Tailor, for they
find fault as you do because I go so much on trust, but it is a fault I have
naturally from my parents and kindred, and my creditors tell me that I do
imitate my betters.

(95)
A (...) of the peace committed a fellow to prison, and commanded him away
three or four times, but still the fellow entreated him. Sirrah ((...) the
Justice) must I bid you be gone (...) many times, and will you not go? The
fellow answered, Sir, if your worship had (...) me to dinner or supper, I
should in my poor manners not to have taken your offer under two or three
biddings, therefore I pray you blame me not if I look for four biddings to
prison.

(96)
A Great man kept a miserable house, so that his servants did always rise from
the table with empty panches, though clean licked platters: truly, said one of
his men, I think my Lord will work miracles shortly, for though he practice
not to raise the dead, or dispossess (...) devil; yet he goes about to feed
his great family with almost nothing.

(97)
ONe said that Bias the Philosopher was the first Bowler; and that ever since
the most part of Bowls do in memory of their orginall, wear his badge of
remambrance, and very dutiful (...) Bias. Now to tell you, this Bias was one
of the seven Sages or wise men of Greece. My authors to prove him the inuenter
(...) Bowling, are Shamrooke, a famous (...) Gimnosophist in his 9 book of
(...) and (...); of which opinion Balductus the Theban (...) to be in his
third treatise of court performances: the likliest conjecture is, that it was
denised as an emblem to figure out the worlds folly and inconstancy; for
though a child will ride a (...) or staff with an imagination that he is on
horseback; or make pyes of dirt or (...) of cards, feed with (...) spoones,
and cry for (...) pieces of bread and (...), which childish (...) are
ridiculous to a man: yet this wise game of Bowling does make the fathers
surpass their children, in (...) and niost delicate dogtrickes. As first for
the postures, 1 handle your Bowl: 2 adnance your Bowl: 3 charge your Bowl: 4
aim your Bowl: 5 discharge your Bowl: 6 plye your Bowl: in which last
posture of plying your (...), you shall perceive many varieties and divisions,
as wringing of the neck, lifting up of the shoulder, clapping of the hands,
lying down on one side, running after the Bowl, making long (...) scrapes and
legs (sometimes bareheaded) entreating him to (...) (with pox on it when it is too
short:) and though the bowler be a Gentleman, (...) there he may meet with
attendant (...), that sometimes will be his (...) to four, (...) by his (...)
what house he came; (...), because he being (...) and gotten into some
handsome shape, forgets the house he came of, suffering his betters to give him
the often salute whilst he like (...) neither (...) himself, nor will know
his superiors. But I hold a mistress to be the fittest name for it, for there
are some that are commonly termed (...), which are not much better then mine
aunts: and a (...) is oftentimes a mark for every knave to have a (...) at,
every one strives to come so near her that he would kiss (...): and yet some
are short, some wide, and some over, and who so does kiss, it may perhaps
sweeten his lips, but I assure him it shall never fill his belly, but rather
empty his purse. So much for bowling: that I fear me I have bowled (...) the
(...).

(98)
A Minister riding into the west parts of England, happened to stay at a
village on a Sunday, where he offered kindly to bestow a sermon upon them:
which the Constable hearing, did ask the (...) if he were licenced to preach,
ye^s quoth he that I am, and with that he drew out of a box his (...), (...)
was in Latin, truly said the Constable I understand no Latin, yet I pray you
let me (...) it, I perhaps shall pick out here and there a word: No good sir,
(...) the Minister. I will have no words (...) out of it, for spoiling my
License.

(99)
A Clinch.
A Country man being demanded how such a River was called, that ran through
their Country: he answered that they never had (...) to call the River, for it
always came without calling.

(100)
A Fellow having his book at the Sessions, was burnt in the hand, and was
commanded to say God save the King: the King, said he, God save my Grandam,
that taught me to read, I am sure I had (...) hanged else.

(101)
A toy to mock an Ape.
IN Queen Elizabeth's (...) there (...) a fellow that (...) a (...) in his hat,
like a (...), with a (...) and two letters: this (...) had a (...) from the
Lord (...) at that (...) to travel with an (...) which he (...); whereby he
(...) his (...) from time to time at markets and (...): his Ape (...) always
(...) upon a (...) dog and a man with a (...) to attend (...). It happened that
these four (...) came to a (...) called Looe in Corwall, where the (...) being
taken, (...) went about to (...) to the people, that at such an (...) an Ape of
(...) and quality, if (...) to (...) their time and (...) to (...) him: (...)
the (...), and other (...), (...) to (...) either (...) or (...) Ape-tricks, so
that (...) to the (...), to the great (...) of (...) an Apes (...): (...)
collecting (...), (...) to (...) to (...) upon the (...), whatsoever came of
it; (...) he (...) pen, ink, and (...), and (...) a warrant to the Mayor of
the town, as (...).

These are two will and require you, and every of you, with your wives and
families, that upon the sight hereof you make your personal appearance before
the Queens Ape, for it is an Ape of rank and quality, who is to be practiced
through her Majesty's (...), that by his long expetience amongst her loving
subjects, he may be the better enabled to do her Majesty service hereafter;
and hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary. etc.

This Warrant being brought to the Mayor, he sent for a (...) at the (...) end
of the (...) to (...) it: which when he heard, (...) all his (...), who went
with him to the town (...) to (...) upon this (...) business. (...) after they
(...) a (...) of an hour, no man (...), (...) any man knowing (...): at (...)
a young man that never (...), said, Gentlemen, it (...) speak, I think
(without (...), (...)) (...) this (...); to (...) the (...) said, I pray good
(...), (...) though you never did (...) any (...), yet (...) may speak as
(...) as some of (...). (...), said the young man, my (...) that this Apecarier
is a (...), and one that does purpose to make this (...) a (...) through the
whole Kingdom: for, was it ever known that a fellow should be so impudent
(...) as to send a Warrant without either name or date, to a Mayor of a town,
to the (...), and that he with his (...), their (...) and families, should be
all commanded to come before a I'ack-an-apes? My counsel is that (...) take
him and his Ape, with his man, and his dog, and (...) the whole mess or (...)
of them out of the town, which I think will (...) much for your credit if you
do.

At which words a (...) man of the town being much (...), said, My friend you
have spoken little better then treason, for it is the Queens Ape, and
therefore beware what you say; you say true, said master Mayor, I (...) who
(...) that (...) fellow come into our company, I pray thee my friend depart, I
think you long to have (...) all (...). So in (...) he was put out of the
(...), for they were no company for him. Well now what is to be done in this
matter? (...) (said another Senior) we see by the (...) in the (...) hat that
he is the (...) man, and who knows what power a (...) may have in the Court to
do (...) men wrong in the Country, let us go and (...) the Ape, it is but 2
(...) a piece, and no doubt but (...) will be well taken, and if it come to
(...); (...) will think us kind people that would (...) so much duty to her
Ape, what may she think we would do to her (...) if they came (...)? (...) it
is above 200 miles to London, and if we should be complained on (...) fetched
(...) with (...), whereas now every man may escape for his 2 pence, (...)
warrant it would cost us 10 (...) a piece at the least. This counsel passed
current, and all the whole drove of the townsmen, with (...) and children, went
to see the Ape, who was sitting on a table with a (...) about his neck, to whom
master Mayor (because it was the (...) Ape) put off his hat, and made a leg,
but Jack let him (...). But mistress (...) coming next in her clean linen held
her hands before her belly, and like a woman of good breeding made a low
curtsie,

(...)

(...) (...), quoth he. I think she be in a presumption: a consumption thou
would say, said the Physician: I told you before (the fellow replied) that I
do not understand your allegant speeches: Well, quoth the Doctor, does thy
wife keep her bed? No, truly sir, said he, she sold her bed a fortnight since:
verily quoth the Doctor she is very costiue: Costly said the man, your Worship
says true, for I have spent all that I have upon her almost. Said the Doctor,
I do not say costly but costiue: and I pray thee tell me, is she loose or
bound? Indeed sir, said the man, she is bound to me during her life, and I am
bound to her: yea but I pray thee, said the Doctor, tell me in plain terms
how she goes to stool? truly, said the fellow, in plain terms she goes to
stool very strangely, for in the morning it is so hard that your Worship can
scarce bite it with your teeth, and at night it is so thin that you might eat
it with a spoone.

(103)
GOod fellows having well washed their (...) in wine at a (...), (...) of them
was very (...) to be gone; to whom another of them said, I pray thee be
patient, talk no more of going, for (...) thou will (...) still but a little,
thou shall (...) that we shall all be gone, though (...) stay here.

(104)
AN (...) who dwelt with a rich (...) he had, was by a Courtier begged for a
fool, (...) the fool perceiving (...) home to his uncles Parlour which was
fairly hung with (...) hangings, and in every one of the hangings was the (...)
of a fool wrought: So the Fool watching his opportunty that no body was in
the parlour, he took a knife and cut the fools pictures out of every hanging
and went and (...) them in a hay (...), which when his uncle came in (...) saw,
be was very angry, demanded who had spoiled his hangings? (...), said the
Idiot, I did cut out all the fools, for there is a great man at Court that
has begged me for a fool, and he would have all (...) rich (...) can hear
of, therefore did I (...) the in all out of your (...), and I (...) did (...)
where I think he will not (...) in (...).

(105)
A (...) being scoulded at by his Wife would make her (...) he would (...)
himself: and as he went toward the (...), his Wife followed him (...) to
(...), or at the least to let her (...) with him; (...), quoth he, speak
(...), for I am in (...); then husband (...), seeing you will drown your self
(...) you to take my counsel, which is, that you (...) not your self into
this (...) place here, for it will (...) my heart to see (...) long you will
(...) a dying: but (...) with me a little way, and I will (...) you a deep
place, where you (...) be dispatched presently.

(106)
A (...) in Scotland lay dying, to (...) her husband said, Wife now (...) art
(...) leave me alone, I pray (...) tell (...) with (...) shall I marry. She
replied, are you in (...) to (...) the breath (...) out of my (...), then (...)
the devils dam: not (...), I have had his daughter already, and (...) should
match with his (...) too, (...) I should (...) guilty of (...).

(107
THere was a Gentleman that was of a very (...), so (...), and (...) at all
things, and (...) seldom pleased with any (...), and withal was a great
(...): and as (...) time he beat and (...) his man, the (...) ran from him, and
told one of his (...) that he thought his master was (...) med into Brawne, for
he was all Choler, and that he thought the reason (...) his kicking was,
because he (...) Coltsfoot (...) mong his Tobacco.

(108)
A Doctor of (...) in Italy asked a waterman if he might (...) well by water
over the (...) Po, the fellow told him (...) but the Doctor when he came to the
water side and saw it was a little (...), was very angry, and said, You
Watermen are the veriest (...) in the world for (...) you care not to cast a
man (...); to whom the Waterman replied, Sir it appears we are men of a
cheaper function and better conscience then you; for you sometimes will not
cast a man away under 40, 50, or 100 crowns.

(109)
ONe borrowed a cloack of a gentleman, and met one that knew him, who said I
think I know that cloak: it may be so, said the other, I borrowed it of such
a gentleman: the other told him that it was too short: yea but quoth he that
had the cloak, I will have it long enougth before I bring it home a gain.

(110)
A Poor woman's husband was to be hanged at the town of Lancaster and on the
excution day (...) entreated the (...) to be good to her (...) stand her
friend: the (...) said that he could do her no hurt, for her husband was
condemned and judged by the law, and therefore (...) suffer. Ah good master
Shrieue said the woman, it is not his life that I ask, but because I have
far home, and my mare is old and stiff, therefore I would entreat you to do
me the favor to let my husband be hanged first.

(111
ONe came into a College in an Uniuersity, and asked how many Fellows
belonged to the house: another replied, that there were more good fellows then
good (...) two to one.

(112(
A Fellow being drunk was brought before a Justice, who committed him to
(...): and the next day when he was to be discharged he was to come to the
Justice again, who said to him, Sirrah you were not (...) the last night:
(...) Worship says true, said the fellow. Yea but you were drunk, said the
Justice, and you did abuse me, and said I was a wise Justice: the fellow
replied, If I said (...) I think I was drunk indeed, and I cry your Worship
mercy, for I will never do you that wrong when I am sober.

(113)
A (...) eye chanced to (...) a man in the field, (...) has (...), the other
man (...) the (...) the (...), whereat the (...) man suddenly cast down his
Rapier (...) Buenas noches, which in the Spanish tongue is goodnight.

FINIS

