THE PROGRESS OF SAINTS TO FVLL HOLINESS: Described In sundry Apostolical
Aphorisms, or short precepts tending to sanctification. With a sweet and
divine prayer to attain the practice of those holy precepts.

By THOMAS TAILOR, Doctor in Divinity, and Pastor of St. Mary Aldermanbury.
LONDON.

ISAY 35.8. And there shall be a path, and a way, and the way shall be called
holy, and the polluted shall not pass by it.

LONDON, Printed by W. I. for John Bartlet, at the sign of the Gilded Cup
in Cheapeside, in Goldsmiths Row. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND WORTHY KNIGHTS, SIR RICHARD YOUNG, Knight
Barronet, and Sir ROBERT HARLY, Knight of the Bath; and to my worthy friends
the Merchants, and the rest of my loving people of St. Mary Aldermanbury,
increase of grace and blessing from the rich fountain.
SInce it pleased the almighty providence, by your free choice, to give me
charge over you, I have not spared my pains to acquaint you with the counsel
of God, according to the measure of grace bestowed on me. My aim has been
to speak to the meanest capacity, for the informing of every man's judgment,
and the awakening of every man's conscience: and my prayers have been frequent
unto him who has commended unto me this piece of service; that he would please
to make me an able instrument of your good: neither has my success
discouraged me, who have for the greatest, and best part of you; found you a
willing and loving people. If any be as yet otherwise minded, and have not
given up themselves to God, and to his Ministers; by instructing them still
with meekness, and waiting when God will give repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25.
we will not distrust that grace of God, by which the worst one day may be
won to consider; 1. That it is a most dangerous thing long to enjoy the good
means of grace, and not to get grace by them. 2. That the more powerful and
profitable the Ministry is which an unreformed man lives under, the more
unhappy and damnable his estate his. 3. That the long and often refusal of
Gods call, gives the Lord just occasion to call no more. 4. That it is not the
having or hearing of a Teacher that will avail an unconverted man, but a
discerning of the Lords voice, and an opening the door of the heart to the
Lord, who has a long time stood knocking and seeking entrance.

And now because love is a loadstone of love, Magnes amoris amor.
I could not but think of some return, and thankful acknowledgement of your
loving respect of my self and weak labors among you, for whose sake I have
recollected the heads of many Lectures preached among you, and presented in a
shorter view or model; the marrow and substance of sundry discourses more
largely handled in the delivery. For as unto you, under God, my time, my
strength, my labors in publlke and private are most due, so herein I render to
you but your own* and that perhaps not uncalled for by you^ These lines will
call upon you for 3 duties especially. First, every day to strive in subduing
in your selves your personal corruptions, till you have brought down every
high thing, and thought into holy subjection. Secondly, most inwardly to affect
holiness in your selves, and most entirely to love such as walk most holily,
as being the likest, nearest, and dearest unto God. Thirdly, to see that every
part of your lives aim at progress to full holiness. My desire of the Lord
is that there may be added to your perusal, a second addition of blessing and
success. My request to you all is, kind acceptance of this my labor, as a
pledge of my care over you, and of my hearty desire every way to help you
forward toward your desired end. My encouragement and recompense shall be
your profiting and progress in an holy reformation of heart and life. This is
the right praise of a Preacher. And though I can promise, or presume nothing of
my own strength, which is well nigh drawn out by the painful labors of my
Ministry above thirty years; yet (the Lord assisting me) my purpose and
endeavor shall be to frame this latter age, and act of my life, suitable in
pains to the former; so as it may be most fruitful unto you, and useful unto
the Church, into whose treasury I have cast another mite. I shall better
attain my purpose by the assistance of your prayers: which I desire may daily
meet with mine, for you all, before the throne of grace for mutual blessing.
And so I rest: From my study November. 17. the happy day of that admired Queen
Elizabeth, the worlds wonder, the famous Mother of our Country, and nurse of
our religion. 1630.


Your loving Pastor, THOMAS TAILOR.

To the Christian Reader.
HArd it is to persuade the wisdom of flesh that which the wisdom of God
has so expressly affirmed, Luke 12.42.
that One thing is necessary. And the reason is, because it neither discerns
what this one thing is; nor what is the necessity of it. This one thing is not
one dish as Theophilact: Nor Unity as Augustine: Nor one grace, whether faith,
(...) hope, or charity, as some others. But this one thing is that Christian
care which every one ought to have of his own salvation. For 1. Mary and
Marthaes care are here opposed. 2. Our Savior calls it the good part chosen
by Mary, whilst she carefully used the means of her own salvation. 3 To
this is promised the grace of perseverance, that it shall never be taken away.
For as salvation is the happy part of the elect, which shall never be taken
away; so neither shall this care to atteine that end in the means, whereby the
Lord preserves it. And it is said to be the one thing necessary; not because
many other things are not necessary: But 1. It is in order before, and above
all things necessary. Math. 6.33. First seek the kingdom of God, that is, to
get into the state of grace. First in time, and in the first place: as Israel
must go forth to gather Mannah the first thing they do in the morning. 2.
This one thing is simply necessary for it self: and all other things only so
far as they conduce unto it. 3. It is most transcendently necessary, far
beyond all other things in the world, for this alone is sufficient to make a
man truly happy, and to state him in salvation: all they are insufficient. 4.
It is constantly necessary, and perpetually while we live; lest beginning in
the spirit we end in the flesh: and so loose the crown which is set on the
head of perseverance. But is it not necessary to follow our callings, to
provide for our families, and intend our civil business and occasions? Answ.
Yes. And every one must abide in the calling in which he is called. Yea
Religion binds a man to be a good husband, and to guide his affairs with
diligence and discretion, that he may both maintain his own, and be helpful
to others. But he must know, that he must first be a good husband for his
soul. 2 That in thy most earnest, and urgent affairs of this life, he must
never forget that there is one thing more necessary than they all. 3 That
Christ commands the care of salvation in the means to take place of the care
of enterteining his own person; and commends it in Mary. 4. That these two
callings are not contrary but subordinate, for a man may have great employments
in the world, and not remitt his service to the Lord Christ; neither has any
man any allowance in any earthly business to be earthly minded. 5. That this
one thing being neglected, all other things are unprofitable. For what would
the gain of the whole world profit him that has lost his own soul? Yea,
they be vile and lossefull. How does the holy Apostle esteem of all things
loss and dung, in comparison of Christ in the means? All without a man's
self, authority, wealth, favor, honor: all within himself, as knowledge,
wisdom, memory, discourse, profession, revelation, and the most excellent
gifts which the Apostle had had in abundance: all is lossfull that helps us
not toward heaven. And indeed the glorious excellency of Christ in the Gospel
is such, as should draw all eyes from off these shadows and vanishing
contentments, to the surpassing brightness of it self. The greater will prove
their sin and shame, that shall set the Moon above the Sun of grace; or
prefer pottage before the blessing; the Swine before Christ, and very husks
before the bread in our Fathers house.

Now whereas many are convinced more easily, that this care of this one thing
is necessary on the Sabbath day; but there be not a few that put it off with
their holy day clothes, and are so far from the use of any public means in
the week day, as that they are ready to say of such as preach or hear a
weeks Lecture, as Pharaoh of Moses, and the Isralites, desiring to go into
the wilderness to worship. Exodus 5.4.
Moses and Aaron, why cause ye the people to cease from their work: get you to
your work, to your callings: much people are in the land, and ye make them
idle. Therefore partly to stop such profane mouths, and partly to satisfy
the inquisition of others, I shall not think much to give a word of direction
in this particular; only aiming to advance this holy care which ought never to
be laid aside, but must run through and quicken all the actions of our lives,
one day as well as another; as the blood runs in all the veins of the body
to maintain the life and vital spirits in every member. And first, that we
may make no more sins then God has made; nor by men, where God has left them
free: we make it not a case of necessity, either for a Minister to preach, or
for a people to hear a weeks Lecture: for which we have no such express
commandment, as for frequenting the public exercises on the Sabbath day. Yea
we affirm that all men must ordinarily abide, in their ordinary callings in
the six days: according to that commandment, Six days shall thou labor: and
that some men are more straightly tied to stick close to their callings, as who
can very hardly afford the time for a public exercise, without disabling
themselves and wronging their families. But yet as the commandment on one
side, does not so enjoine rest on the Sabbath, as that on no occasion we may
labor: So on the other, does it not straitely enjoin labor on the six days,
as that on no occasion we may rest and refresh our selves. Nay it was never the
Lords intention, to allow us the six days for our own work; so as in any of
them his own worship (at least private) should be neglected. Neither are we
freed from the service of God on any of the six days, no more than on the
Sabbath; because we must serve him on the Sabbath in duties of Religion and
mercy only. So as when God is pleased to offer the opportunity; as where a
willing Pastor calls his people, or a willing people (ready to redeem
sometime in the week day) calls their Pastor to bestow his pains for an
hour or two in the week, to so good a purpose as to hear Gods word, and
invocate his name in prayer and praises. I conceive it not only lawful, but
commendable, and in some cases necessary for the people to hear.

For 1. That it is lawful for the preacher to preach on the week day, is not
only warranted by that vehement charge enjoining him to preach the word, to be
instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
but also by the practice of Christ himself, Luke 19.47.
who taught daily in the Temple. Had it been unlawful for us, Christ would not
have given us such an example: (...).
which although it be not a law to bind us, yet it is allowance upon just
occasion. Agreeable to whose example was the practice of his Apostles: Yea, of
the Ancient Fathers themselves. Chrysostom usually begins his Homilies with
(...), Yesterday we handled, etc. Bernard often concludes with his cras, to
morrow we will go forward: And most worthy Calvin ordinarily begins with his
heri, yesterday, etc. And how can we grace their persons so much, if we
disgrace their practice.

2. That it is lawful for a people to hear on the week day is manifest, in
that all the people hanged on Christ daily teaching in the Temple, Luke 19.48.
and a great number continued with him three days together, and spent some
good time in coming and going. It is plain also that it was not the Sabbath,
Math: 15, 32.
when Mary satt down to hear Christ's gracious words, being as is observed by
Divines the sixth day before his death.

2. If this practice was commendable in ancient believers, how can it be but
praiseworthy in us? But the believers in the Primitive Church were commended,
Acts 2, 46
for that they continued with one accord daily in the Temple. Why? Had they
nothing else to do? Had they no callings, no families, no business to intend?
Certainly the spirit of God asks no such questions; but speaks to their
singular praise and approbation. It is also recorded to the high praise of the
Gentiles, Acts 13, 42. In tempore sabbatis interiecto. Pisc. Vt intra proxime
sequens sabbatum exponerentur sibi haec verba. Beza.
that they besought Paul and Barnabas, who had taught them the Sabbath day,
that they would preach the same words unto them: (...): That is, betwixt that
and the Sabbath following. And that the Apostles did so, according to their
desire appears in the next verse 43. Now who dare blame this desire in them
which the spirit of God commends? Or whence is it, that what was praise
worthy in them, should be blame worthy and scorned amongst us?

3. In some cases it may become so necessary, as it shall prove a fearful
sin to neglect this public help on the week day. As where a people are
unprovided of an able and preaching Ministry on the Sabbath day, I suppose none
so unreasonable as to deny it necessary for them to seek out, and enjoy at
home or abroad the means on the week day, unless we will wholly deny them
the means of salvation. And besides for such as have opportunity and leisure
from their callings, it must needs be an unanswerable sin to neglect or
contemn the offer of the means of their own good; while they can spend that,
or more time idly, or sottishly; or in gaming, sporting, vain companionship,
complement or the like. For here is not only a vain and sinful expense of
precious time; but a profane despising of the most sacred ordinance of God,
which is now as a prize in the hand of a fool, but he wants heart. Were there
a true knowledge of Christ offered in the means, he would be thankefully
received at any time. Were there any true love of Christ, it would always
enjoy him whom the soul loves, and delight at any time to behold him through
these grates: but he loves him not on the Sabbath, that hates him on the
weeke-day. Were there any hunger after Christ, it would find the need of this
bread of life on the weekday, as hunger finds need of food for the body on
the Saboth day: hunger after Christ would force him out of his tent to gather
this Mannah in the due season of gathering, if it were every day to be had.
Were there a true taste of Christ, he would be as sweet to the soul one day
as another: Did ever man that truly tasted Christ on the Sabbath day, prefer
earthly things before him in the weeke-day? or did ever man prosper by the
means on the Sabbath, that desp^sed them in the weeke-day? Were there true
sense of a man's self, it would not suffer him to be less holy any day than
the Sabbath; only it must be more publicly expressed: it would not suffer him
at any time, in the midst of his earthly business to be earthly-minded; and
much less to be so wedged, and rivited into earthly distractions, as not to
bestow an hour in a week, when God offers a public help to the winding up
of his heart toward heaven.

The objections are idle, and of idle men: Object. Answ.
As that there is too much preaching. If it be made by Preachers themselves, I
should marvel the more; because I never heard men of any other trade
complain of too much trading: If of private men, a man might wait to
weariness before he should hear them complain of too much money, too much
land, too much gain: Which plainly evidenceth, that Gods word is undervalued,
and rejected below base profits; whereby men pull the brand of Esaus profanesse
upon themselves, preferring every measse of broth before the birthright, and
exchanging with the Prodigal for very husks the bread of their Fathers house.

Object.
But so much preaching brings preaching into contempt, say some. Yea but what
infant contemnes the milk, Answ.
because it sucketh often every day? or who contemnes his meat, because he
eats every day? who falls out with his apparel, because he puts it on every
day? or who despises his wealth, because he increases it every day? and is
not Christ in his word propounded our food, our wealth, our apparel, and all
in all unto us? Let them also make us believe, that the light of the Sun is
made contemptible, because it shines every day: Or that Daniel brought prayer
into contempt, Dan. 6.10.
when he prayed thrice every day: Or David, Psalm. 119.164.
when he prayed seven times a day. Why may they not as well persuade us, that
the public prayers appointed four days in a week, brings public prayer
into contempt, as well as preaching once in a week?

But I have no leisure, says the rich man, I have many weighty occasions and
employments, Object.
it is for poorer men, who have no such distractions, to run after Sermons.
Answ.
To whom our Savior makes a full answer; That one thing is more necessary than
they all; in comparison of which Mary neglects all other things: and who dare
say that Mary did more than she was bound to do? or that she did hear only
because she had nothing else to do? or that she was blameworthy, whom our
Lord commends, in that for the love of the word she did neglect all other
things.

2. It is not indeed want of leisure, but want of love, and taste of the word
that makes this objection, for love of any thing will find time and leisure to
enjoy it.

3. It is not want of time, for no man but has much more time than he uses
well; and none but has much time which he spends worse: but want of
judgment, to give priority to things of greatest weight, and worth. Is any
worldly business of greater importance than the seeking of Gods favor, and
the assurance of a man's own salvation? Would any employment, never so weighty,
make a man wholly neglect for a week together all means of preserving his
body? and is any so necessary as to make us neglect the health and welfare of
our precious souls? or can thou with reason be straiter to thy own soul on
the week day, than the Lord is to thy body on the Sabbath day? He allows thee
to consult with a Physician for thy body in case of necessity even upon his
sabbath; and do not thou allow thy self an hour among so many hours in a
week to consult with thy spiritual Physician for the help of thy soul?
Might a Jew make a journey on the Sabbath to consult with a Prophet, and may
not a Christian step out of his doors for counsel in the weekday? Nay
more, may a Jew perform a work of mercy to a beast on the Sabbath day, as to
help it out of a pit, or to drive it to water: Luke 14.5. Matthew. 12.11.
and must not a Christian do so much for his soul on the weekday, as they
for the body of a beast on the Sabbath?

4. It is not want of time, but want of well husbanding the time, that gives
rise to this objection; for he that employeth his time wisely, shall never need
to complain for want of time, especially for the maine business of his life.
A good husband will be sure to set out time for the chief points of husbandry,
and so will a good husband for his soul: but he that trifles out his time in
unnecessaries, must needs want it in necessaries. And indeed they be not such
necessary duties as they are pretended, which engrosse and eat out men's time:
but for the most part, unnecessary and lombersome employments, (such as Christ
reproves in Martha,) which for a great part of them might be pared off and
parted with; were men so wise as to lighten the overburdened ship for the
safety of the passengers. But if men will grapple and pull upon themselves all
the employments they can any way reach, and then complain that they are so
distracted with many things, as that they have no time left for the one thing
necessary: It is all one as if a man should roll and moyle himself in the
clay, and then complain that he cannot get out his feet.

5. Can thou find no time for the Lords work? what time hopest thou to
find for his wages? have thou leisure for every thing but to be saved? what
time will thou attain the end, that have no time for use of the means? or art
thou all body without an immortal soul? or is there is no further use of thy
soul, but to be as salt a while to keep thy body sweet? Is all thy care for
a ruinous house, and never mindest the tenant within? I marvel not to hear
our Lord say, that it is a very hard thing for a rich man to enter into heaven;
but I never heard him say, that it is impossible for a man to be rich and
religious too.

Object. And I, says the poor man, can spare no time as the rich may do, I
am oppressed with a great charge, and must intend my family, etc? But art thou
poor and want many necessaries? there cannot be a stronger motive to
attain this one thing necessary. Art thou poor in earthly blessings, and will thou not therefore be rich in heavenly and spiritual graces? Have thou no
house, land nor inheritance to rejoice in? Thou should so much the more make
Gods testimonies thine heritage for ever, and the joy of thy heart. 2. It is
true, men of meaner estates had need be good husbands of their times and
estates; but yet they must conceive, that piety and seeking of God is an enemy
to thrift, and good husbandry. Mary was no bad houswife in sitting down at the
feet of Christ; and it was the blot of Marthaes houswifrie, that she did not
so too. Is godliness great gain: and fear thou it will only bring want and
poverty? Must only that hinder our thrift and prosperity, that has the
promise of this life as well as of that to come? and which only gets blessing
on our labors from him who only gives power to get substance? How far is
this from trusting God on his word; who has assured us that whosoever fear
him (rich or poor) they shall want nothing that is good for them? By all which
that has been said, Psalm. 34.1^* Psalm. 84.11.
we may conclude, that it is not the strength of any argument made against this
holy care; but strength of corruption that removes unsettled and unstable minds
from the practice of it.

This I have set down for the use and direction of such as heartily desire to
be led in the right way, and for the encouragement of such as seek the Lord
constantly in his ordinances on all good occasions: hoping that it may somewhat
confirm them, that no blast or objection of profane persons may either blow
them away, or weaken their frequent and reverent use of Gods most sacred
ordinances. And now Christian Reader, I commend thee unto God, this book to
thy godly use, and my self unto thy godly prayers.

Aldermanbury, London. November. 17. 1630. Thine in Christ, THO: TAILOR.

THE PROGRESS OF SAINTS TO FVLL HOLINESS.
1 THESSAL. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit.
THE holy Apostle in this Chapter, setting down, and enforceing a number of
rules, for true sanctification, adds this also as a principal part of
holiness, Not to quench the Spirit.

Here we must inquire and find out, 1. What is the Spirit. 2. What it is to
quench the Spirit.


I. By the Spirit in Scripture is meant; What is meant by the Spirit.
1. The blessed Spirit of God, promised by Christ to be given us, Ioh. 14:16.
and dwelling in the elect as his own temples, 1 Cor. 6.19. inspiring them with
all good thoughts, motions and affections. 2. The gifts and graces of the
Spirit, such as wisdom, knowledge, counsel, the fear of the Lord, peace,
joy, long-suffering, called the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. So it is said
that John Baptist was filled with the Spirit, Luke 1.15. that is, the graces of
motions of the Spirit in the mind, stirring up good desires and purposes,
Psalm. 51.10. Renew a right Spirit within me. This is called the leading of the
Spirit, Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God. All are here meant, even the presence of the Spirit in us; for gifts,
and operations and motions, presuppose the presence of the Spirit.

II. Quench not. This is a Metaphor taken from fire, which giving heat and
light in great measure, is quenched, or extinguished. In which respect the
Spirit, The graces of the Spirit compared to fire.
and his graces are compared to fire, Mat. 3.11. So in other respects also: 1.
Fire enlighteneth dark places; so the Spirit is a shining lamp, in the
darkness of this world, and therefore called the Spirit of Illumination, 1
Ioh. 1.5, heateth and warmeth, yea reviveth and quickens; so the Spirit
warmeth the Christian heart with love of God, and of men, inflameth it with
zeal, and makes it burn within us, as the Disciples going to Emaus, Luke
24.32. and he revives us in the ways of God. 3. Fire consumes Romans 8.13. If
ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. 4. Fire
purifieth mettalls; so the Spirit purges the heart Cor. 6.11. 5. Fire
ascends

Again, fire is quenched two ways: First, Fire of the Spirit how quenched.
by putting it out quite, as by casting water upon it, violently extinguishing
or smothering of it. And secondly, by slacking or lessening the heat and light
of it, when yet some fire remains: So the Spirit of God, and his graces are
quenched, either when grace is wholly lost, which formerly seemed clearly to
shine and burn; or when grace is lost in part, and any grace suffered to decay
and die in us.

Quest. Can grace be wholly quenched or decay where it is?

Answ. Consider here a twofold distinction; first, distinguish of persons: some
are hypocrites, or wicked and obstinate sinners, who may well lose all the
grace that ever they have, as Saul and Judas did, who had many excellent
graces. Some are godly* who have received true faith, true hope, etc. and these
may lose some fruits and effects of the Spirit by security, and (as it were)
slake the heat and light, and warmth, and comfort of the Spirit; but they do
never wholly quench the Spirit: for the Spirit abides in them for ever, Ioh.
14.16. And the seed of God remains in them, 1 Ioh. 3.9. else could it not be
an immortal seed, as 1 Pet. 1.23.

Secondly, distinguish of graces; both for their kinds and for their degrees.

I. For the kinds of graces, we are to know, first, that some graces are of
absolute necessity, and serve to the being of a Christian, without which
salvation cannot be, as faith, hope, and love: these maine graces are like the
fire of the Sanctuary, which never went out; these can never be lost quite,
they may be lessened and decay, but can neither wholly nor finally be lost:
Secondly, other graces serve to the well-being or comfort of a Christian, as
sense of Gods favor, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, alacrity in
good duties, sense and feeling of comfort in that estate: these and the like
may be quite lost, David himself may pray, Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, Psalm. 51.12.

Again, for the kinds of graces, we are to know that some are true saving
graces, as faith, love, zeal, etc. which are given to such as are effectually
called, fruits of the Spirit proper to the elect, springing only in their
gardens; these cannot be wholly quenched, although where these be, the Spirit
may be sore grieved, as by Sampson, David, Peter: Other graces are excellent,
but common, not saving, not sanctifying, tending more to others good than their
salvation that have them; such as are historical faith, justice, chastity,
temperance: these and many the like may be quite quenched, and never remembered.
As we see in Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,
namely which had been present with him in many common graces, and the evil
spirit came upon him: and in Judas, who had many excellent gifts, yet it is
said of him, Luke 22.3.
that the Devil entered into him, who never comes but he makes waste of all
grace.

II. For the degrees of grace, they are four: Grace quenched in what degrees.
1. Election, 2. Justification, 3. Sanctification, 4. Vocation. Of these, two
are wholly laid out of our selves, two are within our selves. In the two
former, Election and Justification, a man cannot increase, nor yet decay: being
two simple acts of God, once wrought in him by himself immediately; and rooted
in Christ, who being the root dies not; and no more can the living branches in
him. The two latter, because they are wrought mediatly, by such outward means
as are not always alike, may receive both increase and decrease: A man may
fall wholly from his vocation; for, Many are called, but few chosen, Matthew.
22.14. and from a great measure of sanctification; and from the whole comfort
of true sanctification, seeing nothing in his soul but the presence of
corruption: yea from many degrees of the soundest graces, attending
justification, and eternal life. Yet here some care is preserved in the heart
of the elect, by the Lord, so as all sound grace is not quenched. Here the case
is as heretofore in the Romans war, if only the top of the standart were
stricken off, the standart-bearer holding still the trunchion in his hand, lost
neither office nor honor; but if he lost the trunchion, and suffered that to
be beaten out of his hand, he lost both: So in our Christian war, if all care
in the heart be expelled, the honor and place of Christianity is lost; and
then, men fall not away from their election, but they that were never elected
fall away.

Thus we see the meaning of this precept directed to believers, who have
received the Spirit, (for fire cannot be quenched but where it is) that they
should not quench the Spirit: that it is not to be meant of an utter
extinguishing of saving graces, which cannot be, but not to suffer any grace to
be quenched, in the brightness, measure, or degree of it: this fire must be so
far from being quite put out, that it must not be slackened or lessened; it
must be so far from total quenching, as they must not let it decay in part,
or in any degree of it.

We come now to the points of instruction that this exposition affoords us. The
first is this:

Doct. 1. The Saints have all the same Spirit.
All the godly have the Spirit of God: else could he not be quenched, this fire
cannot be quenched but where it is: Romans 8.9. Ye are in the Spirit, because the
Spirit of God dwells in you: and, If a man have not the Spirit of God, the
same is not his. Hence the godly are called the temples of the holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 6.19.
in whom he dwells as in his temples. 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your selves, know
ye not that the Spirit of God is in you, unless you be reprobates. 1 Ioh.
2.20. Ye have the anointing which abides in you.

Object. The Spirit being infinite, he is also in the wicked.

Answ. 1. He is one way in the wicked, The Spirit in the godly and wicked, but
differently.
as in all other things, by the infiniteness of his essence; another way in
the godly, by the presence of his grace and blessed effects. 2. He is
graciously present both with the wicked and godly, but the former in common and
general graces, the latter in special and saving graces. In the former he
dwells as in the world for the good of the world, and societies of men. In the
latter he dwells as in his temples, for the perfecting of the blessed
communion of Saints, both in grace and glory. In the one by grace restraining,
in the other by renewing grace.

Reasons of the point are these.

1. Members must needs have the same Spirit with the head; Reason 1
as a branch has the same sap with the root, and as every member lives by
the same soul that the head does. This is the Apostles reason, Romans 8.11. The
same Spirit that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because his Spirit dwells in you.

2. Christ's promise is, that his Spirit should supply his bodily absence. Ioh.
16.7. 2
It is meet I go away, else the Comforter shall not come, but if I depart I
will send him unto you: for greater is our comfort in Christ's bodily absence,
then we could have in his bodily presence, we must not now gaze upon his holy
flesh, but the blessed merit of it. If we should always corporally see, we
could not spiritually believe, says Augustine. Now Christ has carried our
flesh to heaven, and opened the way by his flesh to our flesh; in our flesh
makes requests and prepares places for us, and supplies that comfort in the
mean while by sending out his Spirit to glad our hearts.

3
3. This comes to pass by Christ's effectual and powerful prayer: Ioh.
14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall send you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever. Now he was heard in all things, Ioh. 11.42. But
for whom prays he? Answ. First, for the Apostles, and then for those that
keep the word, and believe, Ioh. 17.20. He prays not for the world, verse 9.
And for what prays he? Answ. For a Spirit whom the world knows not, neither
can receive, but the elect know him: For ye know him, for he dwells in you,
and shall be with you all, Ioh. 14.17.

4. The manifest accomplishment both of the promise and prayer, 4
proves, that the regenerate have the spirit of Christ in them: Gal. 4.6. And
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, which cries Abba, Father. Christ's intercession is not a forcelesse
prayer; but according to his promise he sends out the Spirit: which sending
forth is not by change of place, but by manifesting his operation, in the gifts
of illumination, faith, regeneration, heavenly life, sense and motion: and for
the most part they are never more comforted, than when they are most afflicted,
which argues a spiritual and inward Comforter, whose joy the world cannot
take away.

Use 1.
This puts believers in mind of their honorable and happy estate, who are
become temples of the holy Ghost, who never comes but with a full horn and
hand of blessing. The Centurion thought himself unworthy, that Christ in his
base estate should come in his house: How much more unworthy are we, 1 Pet.
4.14.
that this spirit of glory should come into our hearts? See hereby what account
is to be made of a poor Christian: let his outside be never so base, yet he is
so glorious within as God himself delights to dwell in him: As we make much
even of a wooden coffer that is filled with gold, and pearls, and precious
things. And if we make so much of a man that bears about him a reasonable
soul, and because he has Gods image on him; how much more should we make of
a Christian, because of Gods Spirit? What a shame is it to think highly of a
man for land in the field, for oxen in his stall, for money in his chest, and
not for graces, yea the spirit of God in his heart? what a heavy judgment
hangs over them, who account these the very offscouring of the world? against
whom the very Pagans and Heathens shall rise up in judgment, who whenever
they spoiled Christians, yet spared their Temples, because of the honor of
God: but these destroy the temples of the holy Ghost, and God will destroy
them: 1 Cor. 3.17.

Again, this serves for the comfort of poor Christians. Art thou contemned?
Use 2.
God has more honored thee than the world can disgrace thee. Art thou in
prison? Behold thou have the God of liberty with thee, yea in thee. Art thou in
banishment? What care where thou dwell, while God dwells in thee? What
comfort can thou want while the Comforter dwells in thy heart? Do thou
fear falling away? Be not dismayed, the spirit of God in thy heart will never
shift his dwelling; He shall dwell with you for ever. John 14.16.
Christ commands his Disciples, where they find intertainment, not to shift
their host: much less will he ever shift himself where once he enters, but
thy heart shall be as the Temple was called Beth-gnolam, an house of eternity.

Thirdly, let this teach Christians to look to their hearts, Use 3.
that they may be pure and clean for so pure a Spirit. The unclean spirit
delights in spiritual sluttishnesse; and many with the harlot provide their
bed, and all things decked for sin and Satan: In one end he finds a gorge of
drunkenness, in another a wardrobe of pride, in another a stews of
uncleanness; and there he inhabiteth and solaceth himself. But Gods spirit is
most pure; and although he will dwell in a poor and homely house, yet it must
be pure and cleanly. Let us therefore honor this guest with the best room,
and fit our hearts for him; let us wash this room with tears, sweep it with
repentance, beautify it with holiness, perfume it with prayers, deck it with
virtues, and hang it with sincerity: fear not to make it too pure, or holy,
care not for the scoffs of preciseness. When a great Ambassador is sent from
a strange Country, what care is taken to provide him a fit house, and to deck
it with fit stuff beseeming so great a personage? Now the holy Spirit is sent
as an Ambassador from the great God to thee: then prepare thy heart for him,
sweep out carnal desires and lusts, fill it with good cogitations, that it
may yield him fit entertainment and contentment.

Lastly, this teaches men to examine their sonneshippe by the presence of the
Spirit with them: Use 4.
For as the presence of the soul discovers it self by the life, so by the
life of God and Christ is the presence of the Spirit discovered. Many men,
while they trade in sin, wallow in lusts, and become voluntaries to lusts, of
swearing, railing, drinking, or any foul sin, (under the reign of which
they are bondslaves) will yet stoutly plead for themselves, Alas, we are flesh
and blood, and what can we do? But know (silly man) know, that flesh and blood
shall not inherit the kingdom of God: thou must be more than flesh and blood,
or thou art none of Gods: For, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the
same is none of his. Thou may as well say, thou art no child of God; For, if
ye be sons, he sends his Spirit into your hearts, Gal. 4.6. If of Christ's
body, you have Christ's spirit: deny thy self a Christian, if sin must reign.

But to return to the chief intent of this use, none we see can be assured he
is the child of God, but by the presence of the Spirit. Quest. How shall I know
that God has given me the spirit of adoption? Answ. This question is very
necessary, though some think they cannot know their sonneship, others that
they need not, and so neglect it. For the possibility hereof: As he that has
life in him, knows he has life, because he can stir, feel, move, walk
and go, so here also. And as for the necessity of it, mark what the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, (namely by his Spirit)
unless ye be reprobates?

Signs of the Spirits presence,
Now the marks of the Spirits dwelling with us are most of them inward, not
discerned by outward sense, as the soul in the body is not seen, or felt, but
discovered by the effects and operations.

1. Conviction.
The first is Conviction: Ioh. 16.8. When the Spirit shall come, he will
reproove the world of sin. And the Spirit of God rebukes sin in us, by
working in us, 1. sense, 2. sorrow for sin, 3. an earnest desire of mercy, 4.
a loathing and leaving of sin: All which we may see in those converts, Acts
2.37. when once the Spirit came, They were pricked in their hearts, and said,
Oh what shall we do to be saved?

2. Subjection.
The second is Subjection, for the Spirit dwells, that is, not only abides, but
rules and commands, and governes as the master of the house; and
notwithstanding the presence of the flesh, still the Spirit has the upper
hand: therefore we must submit our selves to this great householder; here must
be agreement in minds and wills: for if an house be divided against it self
it cannot stand. 2 Cor. 10.5. The work of the Spirit is, to cast down high
things exalted against grace, and to bring every thought into the obedience of
Christ: by working self-denial, and a willingness to undertake whatsoever
the word suggests, and a constant delight in the law of God.

The third is Direction, 3. Direction.
Ier. 31.31. the spirit of God writes the law in the hearts of believers, and
so brings in a new light, and yet more, John 16.13. He shall lead you into
all truth: he says not only, This is the way, but walk in it, Isa. 30.21.
This note the Apostle give us, Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God: Implying, that we are as blind men before
conversion, and afterward as children, both having need to be led.

The fourth is Sanctification, and new creation: 4. Sanctification.
1 Cor. 6.11. Now you are sanctified by the Spirit of our God: both enabling
you by mortification to hate evil, and quickening you to love that which is
good, which love is made manifest, Gal. 5.19.
by the fruits of the Spirit: Both are put together, Gal. 5.13. Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh

The fifth is sound Consolation; 5. Consolation
for he is the Comforter: 3 ways. 1. Sealing up our adoption and salvation:
Romans 8.15, 16. therefore called the Seal or Earnest confirming the whole
bargain. 2. Strengthening in temptation, and spiritual combat; for the
spirit of God takes our part in the strife between the flesh and the spirit.
3. Comforting in affliction, by peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost,
which made the Martyrs invincible.

6. Supplication.
The sixth is Supplication: for he is called the Spirit of supplication, Zech.
12.10. and makes us cry Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. Because, 1. he makes us see
our misery: 2. he gives us sound knowledge of the excellency of God, and his
mercies, which makes us fervent in prayer: 3. he lets us see God appeased
toward us in his Son: 4. he propounds the truth of God in his promise, who
has said, he will hear us: and 5. the merit of Christ's intercession, to whom
the Father denies nothing.

By these notes examine thy self.

So much for the first Doctrine: we come now to the second, which is, that,

Those that have the spirit of God, must be careful not to quench it. Doct. 2.
The godly must be careful not to quench the Spirit.
The Text implies, that in the best the Spirit is subject to be quenched, where
it shines brightest; and in the meanest and poorest Christian of the weakest
grace much more: a small spark of fire is easily quenched, and will decay, if
it be not blown up and preserved: And the Apostle exhorts all, Heb. 12.15.
Let no man fall from the grace of God: no man, rich nor poor in grace, high or
low; no man, not the hypocrite, who shall fall from all grace, nor the sound
Christian, who may fall from many degrees, and much comfort, but is preserved
from falling by the fear of falling, and a care not to fall: for God susteines
him inwardly by his preserving grace, and outwardly by the word preventing
security. Therefore Revel. 2.25. That thou have already, hold fast till I
come. And 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he
fall. All which shows that the state of grace is lubricus ad lapsum, that is,
slippery, and in danger of falling.

First, Reason 1
The Spirit comes not (we say) with a wet finger, nor without labor and
desire; he is not powered but upon thirsty grounds, nor obtained without much
sorrow, mortification, and cleansing of the heart; he will not dwell in a sty,
nor set up his Temple in the den of a dark and deceitful heart. Now when a
man has with such difficulty got the Spirit into his soul, shall he by
quenching him lose his labor? suffer so many things in vain? and suddenly
cast down, what he has been so long a setting up? Shall he be so foolish as
to begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3?

Secondly, The spirit of God with his graces, 2
are the earnest of our salvation. 2 Cor. 5.5. The pledge of our inheritance:
Ephesians. 1.14. The chief witness with our spirits that we are the children of
God, Romans 8.16. By which we call God Abba, Father. Yea he is that holy Spirit,
both in his nature, The spirit of God is holy both in his nature and operation.
being the fountain of holiness, and in his effect, making us holy, By whom
we are sealed to the day of our redemption. This is a Metaphor taken from
Merchants, who having bought some choice commodities, do seal them for their
own, to know them again: So the Lord by his spirit seals his own, both to
distinguish them from others, and to set them apart as his own; and also to
make their election firm and sure, by setting his own seal and Image upon
them. Shall we then quench this spirit, who alone preserves our holiness,
peace, comfort, boldness with God, and assurance of our own salvation.

Thirdly, To quench the spirit is far more damnable than to want him
altogether: 3 To quench the Spirit more damnable than to want him.
for this is Apostasy, than which nothing does more provoke the vengeance of
God against men. Heb. 10.26. If we sin willingly after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful expectation of judgment, etc. And this the godly themselves can
justify, what torture they have in their souls, when they have in part
quenched the spirit: As David roared day and night, and his bones consumed,
Psalm. 32.3, 4. And Peter went out and wept bitterly, Matthew. 26. ult. And such
as now let no sorrow come near them for their relapses, shall find the more
behind.

4 No fall so woeful as to fall from grace.
Fourthly, Of all falls, the fall from grace is most woeful: 1. In regard of the
good things which are lost, even the most precious graces of faith, love, joy,
hope, to which all earthly wealth is not comparable. 2. In regard of the loss
and ruin of the soul, in such as quite fall away from grace received; which
is the best thing a man has: and what recompense shall he give for his lost
soul? For a man to fall with a millstone about his neck into the bottom of
the sea, were an easier fall, (says our Savior) than thus to fall. 4. In
regard of the woeful and miserable change in the soul of Gods own child,
Woeful changes in the soul of Gods child who has quenched the Spirit.
who but in part quenches this blessed spirit: As appears in these instances.

1. Change. Whereas the spirit of God was the soul, and life, and joy of the
soul; now being quenched but in part, he withdrawes himself and his presence,
yea the joy and comfort of his presence, that a man shall think him quite
gone: and the joy which upheld the heart in all estates, shall now be so clear
gone as if it had never bin there. David found this change after his sin:
Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit
within me: therefore in this sense the spirit was gone: Again, Restore me to
the joy of thy salvation; therefore that also was gone.

2. Change. Instead of the power and efficacy of grace, all is in a wane, and
goes backward; the spirit of prayer cease, the first love is fallen from;
zeal decays; watchfulness is remitted; conscience is cast asleep; the aid
of the spirit greatly lost: which when David discerned, he prayed thus: Oh
stablish me with thy free Spirit: verse 12.

3. Change. Gods children shall find, that the spirit once quenched, in stead
of the lively practice of piety formerly upheld, they are given over to their
own corruptions, to commit gross sins, which even many civil men would not
commit. What fearful sins did David moyle himself in, when the spirit
withdrew himself? the sins of adultery, carnal policy, and shifting out of
one sin into another, and falling from evil to worse? How was Peter given up
to lying, swearing, and forswearing for the time, that a Jew might have been
ashamed on him, notwithstanding all his former holiness and gracious
confession?

4. Change. Whereas the spirit being cherished, there was a continual feast in
the soul, and unspeakable glorious joy, now being in part quenched, he brings
a rack into the conscience of Gods child, and that conscience which before
excused and justified, now accuses and terrifieth: the burden of which is so
heavy, as all the mountains of the world are light in comparison. These
terrors of conscience were the deepes, out of which David (even hopeless, and
almost swallowed in the pit of despair) cried to the Lord, Psalm. 130.1.

5. Change. Even the child of God quenching his spirit shall feel the smart
and shame of his sin, which shall pursue him, and vex him, and he shall
know what it is to exasperate the spirit. David's child shall dye, his daughter
shall be defloured, Ammon shall be slain, his wives ravished by his own
son, himself driven out of his kingdom by Absalom: Oh miserable change by
quenching the spirit.

Fifthly, Most men have the spirit of God, and some motions; 5 Motions of the
Spirit much different in the godly and hypocrite.
but great is the difference between a godly man and an hypocrite: in the one
they are quenched quite, in the other for the most part they are cherished, and
at last perfected. As for example:

First, hypocrites have knowledge as well as the godly, but they quench it, and
fight against it, therefore all good knowledge quite leaves them in the end:
but the godly carry their knowledge to heaven with them: therefore the one is
compared to the light of the Sun, which lasts all day, the other is like a
flash of lightning, suddenly appearing, and suddenly vanishing.

Secondly, hypocrites may be grieved for sin, but it is only and chiefly
because of punishment, not because of offense; and they quench this grief, not
willing to torment themselves before the time: they run into merry company
and turn off sorrow, lest they should disquiet themselves too much with such
melancholy: whereas the godly nourish godly sorrow, and never cease sowing in
tears, till they reap in joy.

Thirdly, hypocrites pretend great love to God, but it is for his goodness to
them, not his goodness in himself; for wages, not for service: but they
utterly quench this love by the love of the world, or pleasure, or sin, and
being grounded on earthly things, when they fail it fails. If Saul love God
for his Kingdom, when his kingdom fails, his love quaileth too: If Judas
love Christ for an Apostles place, when that place will not hold him with
further credit, he will for gain betray his Master. But the godly love him
when he crosses them, and if he kill them they will trust in him: much water
cannot quench their love. Cant* 7.


Fourthly, an hypocrite has many good motions, the worst man living is not
without some: Balaam has good desires, but covetousness quenches them: Saul
acknowledges his sin, and his son David to be better than himself, but it
was a blaze in straw, suddenly quenched. But the godly, for the most part, go
from motions to resolutions, and so to practice, many practices grow to habits,
and so to perseverance.

Use 1.
Well, is it so? such as have any assurance that the spirit is in them, must
have a special watch that they quench him not: Then let Christians carefully
avoid the means of quenching the spirit. Quest. Means of quenching the Spirit.
Which be they? Answ. Three especially.

1. When we let grace die of it self: As 1.
I. Fire is quenched, when it is suffered to die of it self: so is the fire of
grace quenched, 1. when we use not our graces, but let them be idle, neither by
them procuring glory to God, nor good to men: As iron, let it be as bright as
crystal, cast it by in a corner, and not use it, it will grow rusty, and
unprofitable; even so will grace. And the drowsy Christian, though endued with
good graces, if he wax idle, his heart shall be like Salomons field of the
sluggard, all overgrowne with moss and weeds, which choke the good seed.
The health of the body is preserved by exercise, so is the health of the soul
by the exercise of grace; the moth frets the finest garment, when it is not
worn, standing water is sooner frozen than the running stream. 2
Secondly, as fire dies of it self, when we prepare not or add not fit
matter for the fuel and feed of it: so suffer we our graces to decay, when
we neglect such means as God has set apart for the strengthening and
confirming of grace: the case being with the soul as with the body, which is
in a continual decay, and needs daily repast, or else it dies. If a man
forbear his ordinary meals, the natural heat will decay, and vigor, and
health, and life, and all: so will the Christian, if he neglect the word, the
Sacraments, meditation, prayer, watchfulness, and the like. Thirdly, as fire
must needs die of it self, 3
when we take away the fuel by which it should be nourished, so is it in the
matter of grace: look into the places where the word has been powerfully
preached, but is now removed, and see if good things begun be not quite
overthrown, and if ordinarily, and for the general such people be not more
profane than any other. Many think they can walk many days without the
strength of a Sermon: But it was a miracle, that Moses fasted forty days and
forty nights; and let Moses be away but a few days, he shall surely find a
Calfe made. Mark them that absent themselves from the assemblies of Gods
people, whether they do not wither or no, and fall by little and little into
flat Atheism. If thou keep not thy watch in the Temple, if thou look not to
the holy lights and fire, morning and evening, how will the Spirit be kept?
will thy graces in so great security be still lively? While Thomas was absent
from the company of the Apostles, did he not lose that manifestation of
Christ, which might have strengthened his weak and tottering faith? and not so
only, but grew he not into a peevish infidelity, that he would not believe
but upon his own carnal conditions?

2. When grace is violently smothered.
II. Another means of quenching the Spirit, that is to be avoided, is, when the
fire of grace is violently smothered by the contrary. Sin is as water to
quench the grace of God, both our own, 1. By our own sins.
and those of others.

flesh) does ever lust against the Spirit: Gal. 5.17.
and by reason of this there is never a grace of God in us, but it conflicteth,
and is conflicted by the contrary extremes, the fear of God, A burning aguish
heat eats out natural.
with distrust and presumption; faith with natural infidelity, and so the
rest. Now therefore our natural corruption must be daily wasted, and mastered,
else will it be with us, as a man that rows against the stream, if he leave
never so little, he is driven twice as far back as Anger gives advantage to
the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Saul had many good motions, but cherishing his anger
against David, he lost the spirit of God, and was haunted with an evil
spirit; not only a melancholicke humor, (as some think) but even an evil
Angel. So for voluptuousness, a lust which while Herod cherished, he lost all
his gifts: And covetousness in Judas, lost all his gifts together with
himself. The light of the Sun puts out the light of the fire: and the love
of the world puts out the love of God. So for carnal fear, the fear of men,
of danger, of loss, etc. it quenches thousands of good motions, insomuch as
men neither by (...), nor yet by night dare come to Christ, but (...)
themselves to be as the cake half baked on the hearth, not warmed through.
Thirdly, sins in our Ephesians. 4.30, 31. Let no speech that is corrupt proceed
out of your mouths, and then it follows, Grieve not that holy Spirit of God.
Therefore we must keep our mouth with bit and bridle, Psalm. 39.1.
and see that our words issue from the spirit of grace, and minister grace to
the hearers. Fourthly, sins in action do quench David after his sins of
adultery and murder lose the feeling of the Spirit? for sin blinds the
mind, hardens the heart, and leaves a blot behind it.

Now among all actual sins, Three sorts of actual sins more violently
quench the Spirit.
some there be which more violently quench the spirit than other: as 1. Sins
that are studied and meditated: which is not a slipping into sin, but as a
pitching of a man's self into the sea. A woe is devise wickedness on their
beds, and in the morning practice it. Absalom for two years together plotted
his brothers death, and at last compassed it. How can this but extremely quench
the spirit, whose motions all the while are resisted? 2. Sins repeated,
doubled, in sin, when men live in an evil course, purposely and constantly.
These are as the complicated diseases, seldom cured. How often do we see
ordinary drunkards, quarrellers, riotous persons left by God and his spirit,
and now ruled by the Dive^^, and commanded by him to outrages against their
own and other men's lives? conscience, when Gods word stands as an armed man in
the conscience, yet for all that the wretched sinner resists the loud call of
Gods word ringing in his own conscience. This is an opposing and a resisting
of the spirit, joined with a wilfulness and obstinacy in sin,
notwithstanding all calls to the contrary: these sins thrust down the
regiment of the spirit, and therefore David prays against them, Psalm. 19.13.
Keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, that they prevail not over me.

2. By others sins.
So much of our own sins. The sins of others also are a great means to quench
the spirit of God. How does profane company dead the spirit, as Peter in the
high Priests hall! Solomon fell by the company of outlandish wives, and shall
we look to stand where he fell? The Israelites hated the Egyptians, and yet
through conversing with them learned their manners. Besides, when we thrust
our selves into evil company, we ordinarily say nothing at all, or nothing but
what is pleasing unto them; and by both these means the spirit is grieved and
quenched. But especially if they be the sins of superiors, sins of
Magistrates, they suddenly infect and fall upon the inferiors; as sudden
raines fall off the hills into the valleys, and stand there. But especially
sins of Ministers, by preaching seldom, coldly or maliciously; men's green
wood will not burn without better blowing. As also when their lives are
scandalous, what will fire in preaching do, when a man carries water in his
life, and is noted with pride, covetousness, contention, drunkenness, or any
such foul lusts?

III. A special means of quenching the spirit, which is to be avoided, is, 3.
When the Spirit is grieved.
To grieve the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. Now he is grieved four ways: 1.
By not preparing, or not preserving Non solum qu^ad internam operationem
Spirit^s eff^^^cem, sed et qu^ad externum Prophetarum ministeriu^. (...). v^s.
seq.
2. By shutting up and hardening Psalm. 95.10. Forty years long was I vexed in
the wilderness, while they hearkened not to my voice, nor regarded my wonders.
Acts 7.51. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised of heart, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost, even as your fathers. 3. By Prove. 1.30. They would
none of my counsel, therefore they shall eat of the fruit of their own way.
4. By dishonouring him in his own Temple:

Again, if we must not quench the spirit, then must we observe and carefully
mark, Use 2. To observe what gifts of the Spirit we have received. Reasons.
not only the presence, but the work of the spirit, and be able to judge
whether he be quenched or no: Therefore here I say to every one as Saint Paul
said to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is given thee. And this
observation is of great use: 1. Highly to esteem the gifts and graces of Gods
David, Psalm. 116.12. Oh what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me! 3. To bind us to the Pet. 4.10. Let every man as he has received
a gift, minister the same to others as a good steward of the manifold graces of
God. 4. To enable us to make up our accounts, according to the number and
measure Matthew. 25.24. the master observes the number of talents, and the
servant that received ten talents, must bring in according to ten.

Quest. How shall I know if the Spirit be quenched, or no?

Answ. By the application of this observation, thou shall see whether thou art
gone forward or backward, whether thou have quenched or cherished the Spirit.
This examination shall be reduced to five particular heads: Rules of trial
whether the Spirit be quenched.
in respect of 1. Graces, 2. Good motions, 3. Good duties, 4. Sin, and 5. the
Spirits work on thy affections.

First, examine thy self in graces received, 1. In respect of grace.
both for number and measure.

1. If the Spirit in respect of the number of graces be quenched, try thus: For
number.
If a man make no conscience of some points of doctrine or practice, which
heretofore he has made conscience of, as swearing, usurie, lying, gaming,
family duties, and the like; now the Spirit is quenched: he is like a man, who
being in decay, for matters of the world, does cast off some of his train. So
also, when a man is not able to feed his understanding and practice, as one
ignorant about what he may employ his head and hands. A tree being in decay
withers first at top, because it cannot send sap so far from home: so is
the life of grace known to be in decay, if it feed not all the parts of the
Christian course. Or to use our own Metaphor: As an aged man appears by his
head, his white hairs show a decay of natural heat and moisture: so a
Christians falling from right understanding, judgment and practice, is as
white hairs, and argues a decay of spiritual heat and vigor.

For preservatives in this case, first consider, that God expects the number of
talents committed unto us. Secondly, why should we be like the brute beast,
which wants the art of numbering? why should we be as the silly bird, that
lays twenty eggs, yet take away all but two, she is as well and as painful
for them as for all, and all because she wants numbering? How can a Christian be
so simple as to please himself as much with few graces as with many?

For measure.
2. In regard of the measure of graces, try thus: If a man waver and stagger in
that wherein he has been constant; still he has some faith, some zeal,
some patience, diligence, and other graces; but he wants that measure which
sometimes he had: now though he have an under measure in all, yet has he
quenched the spirit: Even as an old man is known to be decayed, because,
though he have his whole number of parts that ever he had, yet he has them
not in that measure of vigor, as formerly he had them.

For preservatives against this decay, first consider, that the Church of
Ephesus is blamed for falling from her first love, that degree of carefulnes
which once she had, Rev. 2.4. Secondly, consider that we are commanded in the
Scripture, to add grace to grace, as days are added to our lives, 2 Pet. 1.5,
6. yea in respect of the measure and strength of grace: 2 Timothy 2.1. Thirdly,
this is remarkable, that those, whose hearts have once been heated with the
fire of Gods spirit, and afterward have abated, do grow more frozen in
iniquity than any other; as water once hot is afterward most cold, and
freezeth hardest.

Secondly, 2. In regard of good motions.
examine thy self in regard of good motions: If these be lessened, the spirit
is quenched. As for example, when thou have been moved to hear the word, and
have neglected it for some vain pleasure, or some small profit; or sometime
thou have a motion to leave thy swearing, cursing, lying, usurie, gaming, etc.
Gods spirit did knock at the door of thy heart, but thou did shut the door
against him, and keptst out that heat which he would have put into thee; this
is to quench the spirit. Take heed lest failing thus in so necessary duties,
thou fail of the means whereby thou should rise: Repent and do the first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, (says the Lord) and remove thy
Candlestick out of his place, Rev. 2.5. And again, Matthew. 21.43. I say unto
you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation that
will bring forth the fruits thereof.

3. In respect* of good duties.
Thirdly, examine thy self in regard of good duties: after this manner. 1. If
in stead of fervency groans which are unutterable. Romans 8.
2. If once coming to the word thou burn by opening the Scripture. A man in a
swone, if rubbing and Aqua vitae fetch him not again, his soul is gone: the
same is thy case, if the spirit of God do not revive and quicken thee. 3. In
keeping the Lords Sabboths, if sometimes no strength, or small comfort, know
for a certain that the spirit is quenched; some sin or other is as a cloud
hindering the beams of his sweet grace and comfort from thee: Psalm. 77.2, 3.
I sought the Lord yet my sore ran, and ceased not, my soul refused comfort,
I did think upon God and was troubled, I prayed, and my Spirit was full of
anguish: Verse 7. Will he absent himself for ever? and will he be favorable
no more? Consider here what a dead carcass is without the soul, and so is all
our service without the spirit.

Fourthly, examine thy self in respect of sin, 4. In respect of sin.
thus: 1. If some sin which was of great burden and weight in thy estimation,
do now seem less, and less dangerous; if sometimes thou could not be
comforted in the sense of sin, and the same sin now move thee nothing at
all: thou could not abide cursed speaking in others, now thou fallest to it
thy self; thou could not away with idle and graceless companions, now thou
can: now have thou quenched the spirit. 2. If thou be apt to rush into sin
once conquered, thy strength is abated. 3. If thou be unwilling to hear any of
thy sins reproved, the spirit is quenced, because he rebukes sin. 4. If
the word and rod preserve thee not from sin, the spirit is not present in
thee. 5. If after sin committed thou do not more hate it and sorrow for
it, than before thou lovedst it, and rejoycedst in it; if thou have not a more
constant care to avoid sin than before, yea if thou have not a greater zeal
in doing good; know for a certain, that some sin in thee or other is as
water cast upon the spirit.

5. In respect of the work of Gods Spirit on thy affections.
Fifthly, and lastly, examine thy self concerning the work of Gods Spirit on
thy affections, thus: If thy love of heavenly things be abated, or be more to
earth than to heaven; if thy joy be troubled; if thy conscience be perplexed
with accusations: if there be in thee an excessive fear of death, or the like:
certainly the spirit is now quenched, look well unto it. Object. Alas! I have
found my affections more fiery than now they be, I have had a great measure of
zeal for God, much indignation against sin, fervent affection in Gods
service, joy in God, comfort in my self, and in good duties; but now it is not
so with me, I could never attain the like affections as at first: what may I
think of my self? Answ. We must wisely distinguish of the diffusing of grace,
from the decaying of it. In earthly marriage, love will be more vehement at
first, because less diffused, but afterward is rather more extended than
languishing: so it is in the heat of grace. But how may I know it? thus: 1. If
thou be displeased that thou can not get thy heart to the highest pitch of
delight in grace. 2. If thou still hungrest after grace, and a further measure,
as one that has tasted honey desires more: so having tasted of the spirit,
do earnestly desire a greater measure of it. 3. Stickest thou to the means,
in public and in private, and wilt not be driven off, still lying at the
Poole where the spirit mooveth? then discourage not thy self, but go on
comfortably, this small affection toward the Lord, and his grace, be it but as
a grain of mustard seed, it shall outgrow all choke weeds, and master and
kill whatsoever affections would overtop it. So much for the second use.

Thirdly, Use 3. Motives to stir up the Spirit of God.
seeing negative precepts include the affirmative, every Christian must hence
be stirred up, to stir up the gift of God that is in him, and not suffer it
to decay: 2 Timothy 1.6. A fit lesson even for Timothy himself. For first, the
Spirit is ever blow up.

Quest. What means may we use to blow up the Spirit?

Answ. 1. Means to blow up the Spirit, 7.
The word of God in the public and private use of it. First, the preaching of
the word, as it begets, so it nourishes grace: The meet together in a perfect
body, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Natural food strengthens the body by the daily use
of it, and spiritual food strengthens the soul by the continual use of it.
Those that say they know as much as they need, or as much as the Preacher can
tell the^; never truly saw their great weakness: for let any good conscience
say, if it need not the word continually. David, a man of singular grace, yet
lay foully in his sins till Nathan came and stirred him, saying, Thou art the
man. Despise Prophecy, and quench the Spirit; where vision fails, grace
perishes.

Secondly, the word must be privately read and conversed in, for such is the
excellency and power of it, that it transformes the mind conversant in it unto
it self, and to be affected as the penmen were, holily and graciously.
Besides, it begets and furthers found judgment; whereas others err, not
knowing the Scriptures: and it stirs up good affections and gracious desires.
Again, the word must be meditated on in private, without which, hearing and
reading are to little purpose. Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that meditates in
the law of the Lord continually. And here is mutual help; for, hearing and
reading do feed meditation, and meditation does fasten them: Why else has
God given man a reasonable soul, but to meditate upon his word and works? Or
why else has he set apart a whole day in seven, especially for meditation, if
it were not a notable means to excite grace? Or why else did our Lord take all
occasions from the works of God, to teach and instruct us, but for our
example, that we should tread in his holy steps?

We see the first means.

keep in continual memory the covenant between God and us, with the means
thereof: yea the very preparation to them includes a special means of
stirring up our graces, of repentance, of renewing our faith, of obedience,
thankfulness, and all the means of growth in the covenant. And much more
strength does a good heart find in the celebration of them. Therefore to
forbear them of contempt, argues no member of Christ: and of negligence to
forbear is to cast ones self into the judgment of God.

3. Prayer sets all graces on work: as faith in Luke 11.13. Our Father will
not deny his Spirit to them that ask him.

4. Company, or commerce with the godly, Paul himself might be comforted by
the Romans, chap. 1.12. And when Silas came, Paul burned in the Spirit. But
how can one coal alone by it self keep it self glowing? Yea evil men have
become better for good men's company: Saul himself among the Prophets will
prophecy. And shall the wicked in their companies abet and further one another
in evil, and shall not good men in good?

Motions of the Spirit to be observed.
and follow them. For the first the prodigal son is a good example: he had a
motion and good inspiration, he remembered the estate that he was in, and the
estate that he had been in, and the estate of his fathers house; and in no
case suffers this motion to die, but follows it, surely I will starve here no
longer, but resolves to go to his father and goes. Many kill good motions in
the rise of them: many follow them to purposes and resolutions, but there they
die; few follow them to practice. So in Gods ways with our selves: If he make
our estates prosperous, and advance us in the world above others, what is his
aim but that we should be eminent instruments of his glory? Many purpose when
they come into great places of Magistracy, or any preferment, to do much good
every way, but they suffer this purpose to die, and never follow their
resolution unto execution. So what is the aim of God in crosses and trials,
but to excite and exercise our graces? which while we suffer to lie still, God
takes us in hand, and mooves us, and shakes us by the north wind of
afflictions to blow our ashes and dust from us. Therefore in every trouble let
us follow this aim of God, and make account that every of them is the Lords
bellows to blow up our graces: so shall our afflictions, yea our sins
themselves be as the smithes water on coals to heat us the more.

general calling of Christians. In our selves let us practice piety, and keep
on work the grace received; for the Lord recompenceth the practice of grace
with the increase of grace: No man used his talent but with gain. And to
others let us exercise friendly admonition, exhortation, reprehension, and
loving chastisement of such as are under our charge. For first, every Christian
is a debtor to every one, and all gifts are given for the body. Secondly, the
nature of grace is as fire, which will fasten and kindle where ever it can find
matter. Thirdly, the recompense shall be much increase, as the meal in the
barrel, and the oil in the cruse, the more spent the more increased. The
special calling also feeds all graces, and calls for the practice of them, as
of piety, and justice, patience, and charity, and the rest; yea is indeed a
school of all virtues.

7. Propound we still to our selves an higher pitch, and a further degree of
grace than as yet Paul stir up himself, Phil. 3.13. I forget those things
which are behind, and reach forth to those things which are before, etc. Men
are never rich enough (they think) have never money enough, so long as any are
before them, this makes them bestirre themselves to gather still: But a little
grace is enough, yea a small measure is thought excess and too much. The
Pharisy looks to such as in his conceit are behind him, and then he is not
such a one, or such a one. But we must set before us the best examples; and to
imitate the best things in the best men: and not only men, but the Apostle
propounds to the Church the example of Christ that unerring pattern: Heb. 12.2.

Now to stir us up both to avoid the means of quenching the Spirit, Motives.
and to use the means of quickening the Spirit, 1. Let us consider, that we
Obed-Edoms house, he was blessed for it, which was but a sign of Gods
presence; how much more blessed shall that heart be, that entertaines himself?
Cheer the Spirit in thy heart, and he will cheer thee. 3. Whosoever Sam.
16.14. The good Spirit went, and the evil Spirit came upon Saul: and the
Devil entered into Judas. Of them that by Apostasy so far provoke the Lord,
it is most true, Their latter end is worse than their beginning: better for
them they had been heathens, yea dogs; better for them that the Spirit had
never given them the least common grace, better they had never known the way
of truth and righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.20. And if the godly quench him by
security, or any sin, he will hide himself till they know what they have
done. Object. What matter? he will come again if I be Gods: no great harm if
he go for a while. Answ. 1. Thou may deceive thy self in thy reckoning, and
think he dwells in thee as one of the elect, when he is in thee but in some
common graces: and then he goes quite away at length, and never comes any more:
And likely it is, that thou art such an one, in whom this deceit discovers it
self, who can be content he absent himself: when as David prayed, Lord,
take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. 2. Suppose he will come again
to thee that art the Lords, yet he will not come again so freely, but thou
shall know to thy cost what thou had, and what thou have lost; and shall shed
tears, and sigh, and cry, and learn how to prise him before he come again:
See Cant. 5.2.6. 3. Perhaps he will never come with that abundant blessing as
he did before, and thou shall never attain thy first love, thy first joy, and
the comfort thou once had; yea thou may pass all thy days in grief to
see how much thou want of thy self, and to consider of thy decays.
Therefore deceive not thy self, watch thy heart to receive and entertain the
good Spirit whilst thou have him, lest he depart in displeasure; and thou be
left to lament thy loss.

VERSE 20. Despise not Prophecy.
THe Coherence of these words with the former is this: The Spirit of God and
his graces are continued and cherished in the hearts of believers by the means
of Prophecy; therefore if you would not have the Spirit quenched, you must not
despise Prophecy.

To find out the meaning hereof consider these two things: 1. What Prophecy
is. 2. What it is Not to despise it.


Prophecy what
I. Prophecy in Scripture is used both in a strict and in a large sense. In a
strict sense it is used for prediction or foretelling of things to come: of
(...), to foretell. So those holy penne-men of Scripture are called Prophets, 2
Pet. 1.10. And Philips four daughters, Prophetisses: Acts 21.9. In a large
sense Prophecy is taken for the interpretation of the word of God, and the holy
Scriptures. And this is a gift of the holy Spirit, enabling men to expound
Prophecies concerning Christ, and to interpret, and apply the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. Thus the word is taken, Romans 12.6. Having Prophecy let
us Prophecy according to the analogy of faith. And Ephesians. 4.11. Christ
ascending into heaven, gave some to be Prophets: speaking of Evangelicall
Ministers.

This latter Prophecy, being here meant, has two parts, preaching and prayer:
Parts of Prophecy.
for every Prophet is partly the voice of God to the people; and partly the
peoples voice unto God: God said of Abraham, Genesis 20.7. Give the man his wife
again, and he will pray for thee; for he is a Prophet. And both of them are
joined together, 1 Cor. 11.4. Both these parts of Prophecy are here meant,
especially the former, which has two parts: first, Donum Prophe^iae duplex. 1.
Quod studio and meditatione paratum est. 2. Quod gratiae extraordinaria
spiritus aliquibus donatum est
teaching, which stands in right interpreting of Scripture, giving the right
sense, raising sound doctrines, and beating down contrary errors. Secondly,
exhorting, which is the applying of doctrines to the use of edification and
consolation. These were distinguished in the primative Church into several
offices, of Doctors and Pastors, because of the abundant gifts then given, and
the indistinct multitude of believers, not brought into distinct congregations:
but now for the most part they are confounded into one. For the proof of these
parts of Prophecy see, 1 Cor. 14.3. He that prophecieth, speaks to men, for
edification, for exhortation and consolation.

II. To despise, is not only openly to contemn preaching and public prayers,
but lightly to regard, or carelessly to hear the word: for the word (...)
properly signifies basely to account of a thing, and esteem it nothing worth,
and of no reckoning; which indeed is all one with despising it. And the
Apostle intends when he says (Despise not) that they should not only not
loath and contemn the word, but honor it, highly esteem it, heartily love
it, yea sincerely follow it. So the children are said to despise the counsel
of their parents, when they do not follow it. For thus the phrase (Not to
despise) is used in Scripture: Psalm. 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart, O
Lord, thou will not despise, that is, highly esteem, value at a high prise and
rate: In such speeches (by a meiosis) less being spoken than meant.

Doct. Every powerful Ministry must be conscionably embraced.
Christian men and women must not only not despise, but conscionably embrace
the preaching and ministry of the word. 1 Cor. 14.1.3. Above all other
special gifts desire and esteem Prophesying. Prove. 8.32, 33. Hear
instruction, and be wise, refuse it not: Blessed is the man that hears me,
watching daily at my gates, and giving attendance at the posts of my doors.

Reason 1
One reason hereof is in the Text: By faithful preaching, the Spirit, and his
graces, and motions are quickened and cherished, as by it they are begun and
continued. 1. The Ministry is the chariot of the Spirit, whereby he rides
gloriously into the hearts of the elect. Acts 10.44. While Peter spoke, the
holy Ghost fell upon them which heard his words. 2. Prophecy is that which
inciteth and provokes us in our dullness, and quickens us to the faithful
employment of such gifts as are given us by the Spirit. Eccles. 12.11. The
words of the wise are like goades, and nails, fastened by the masters of
assemblies: As goades, to prick us forward when we grow dull and sloathfull
in the practice of piety and virtue; and as nails, to fasten us to the sound
love and obedience of the truth, when we grow either wavering, weak, or weary;
for so the Apostles by preaching confirmed the Disciples at Antioch, Acts
14.22. So Jeremy calls the word of the Lord a fire shut up in his bones, which
warm and heates our cold and frozen hearts, and quickens our graces; as the
two Disciples, whose hearts glowed in them while Christ opened to them the
Scriptures. Luke 24 32.
3. Prophecy is powerful for Edification in the knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ, in faith, in godliness, love, zeal, repentance, newness of life, and
all the heavenly virtues. For Exhortation, which contains admonition and
reprehension; both which are special good means to awake and quicken us, when
coldness and carelessness creep on us. And for Consolation, for seeing it is
the portion of the Saints, by many tribulations to enter into the Kingdom,
Acts 14.22.
they have great and continual need of matter of comfort and strength, the
which being only to be had from the conduits of comfort in the Scriptures, and
from the gracious promises contained therein; what a forcible argument is this
to make us highly esteem, and joyfully embrace so gracious a means, not only
of instruction, but of strong consolation!

Reas. 2.
2. The gift of Prophecy and faithful preaching is that precious gift which our
Lord Jesus, when he left the world, bestowed on his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. For the
gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
building up of the body of Christ. Now with what safety can any man despise so
great a gift of so dear a friend, which he was so careful at his last
departure to commend to his friends; to so gracious a purpose and end, as to
gather them from under the wrath of God, and from the dispersed and lost estate
of the world? whereas without vision or prophecy people are lost, or (as the
word is) naked, exposed to Gods wrath and their own perdition: Prove. 29.18.

Nay more; the Lord in this one gift offers a whole mint of mercy to be divided
among believers. He offers us life of grace in it; and therefore it is called
the word of life: Acts 20.32.
and the word of grace, Ioh. 6.33. the word that I speak unto you is spirit
and life. He offers us light of grace and glory, without the shine of which
glorious light of the Gospel, men sit in darkness and shadow of death;
having their understanding darkened, and strangers to the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them. He offers by it grace and peace, with himself,
and in our own consciences, and therefore it is called a Ministry of
reconciliation, Acts 10 36.
and the Gospel of peace, whereby God through us beseeches men to be
reconciled: 2 Cor. 5.19. He offers us faith by this gift of Prophecy, this
being the ordinary means by which we attain that precious gift of gifts: Romans
10.17. Without hearing, no faith. Romans 10.8. The word of faith which we
preach. Lastly, he offers us by it, the end of our faith, even the salvation
of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. and therefore it is called a word of salvation, Acts
13.26. Now what great and unspeakable wickedness were it to despise so great
salvation, to despise the word of life, of grace, of light, of peace, of faith,
and the end of it which is salvation? for it is the ingraffed word, able to
save souls: Iam. 1.21.

3. Manifold is the evil that overtakes a despiser of Prophecy: 1. He is
destitute of the Spirit, Reas. 3.
who has no being, no delight to be there; as the connection of the precepts
witnesses. 2. Prophecy being neglected, piety is lost, and men prove profane
persons: this was a brand of Esaus profanesse, that he cared more for a meals
meat, than he did for the blessing, Heb. 12.16. 3. Despise thou prophecy, thy
prayer shall be despised, and all thy service is abominable: Prove. 28.9. and
chap. 1.28. Because I have cried (says the Lord) and ye would not hear, ye
shall cry and not be heard. 4. It ties and fastens sin on men, yea and heaps
up judgment; for first, it nourishes ignorance, a maine supporter of Satan's
kingdom: secondly, it resists faith, by refusing the only and ordinary
means of it: thirdly, it barreth out repentance, because this is the means of
our regeneraration, and change of heart and life: fourthly, it makes sin
far more sinful, because here is a refusal of mercy and grace offered by
prophecy: Ioh. 15.22 If I had not come and spoken, they had not sinned; but now
they have no cloak for their sin. Fifthly, the refusal of prophecy
provokes the Lord to give up men to vile affections, to work all uncleanness
with greediness, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Lastly, it ties on judgment as fast as sin,
and wraps the despiser in the curse of God: Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if
we neglect, (much more) despise so great salvation. Consider the threatenings,
Acts 13.41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away: Behold, I will
work a work in your days which a man would not believe for the terror of
it: out of Habak. 1.5.

Use 1.
This serves to reproove, 1. Anabaptists and Enthusiasts, who pretend the
Spirit, and despise prophecy; they have the Spirit to guide them, and therefore
need no preaching. 2. Those profane Atheists at home, who despising the Spirit
of grace, and the word of grace, live as without God in the world. Many who
have Jacobs voice, profess in word better things, yet prize the preaching of
Christ as a thing of naught. It is better to be casting up some account, or
reading some history, or walking in the fields, or visiting some friends, or
perhaps going to a play, than to a Sermon. Are these the sons of Abraham, or
the sons of God, and not rather the profane sons of profane Esau? What can
he tell me (says one) which I know not? As if thy knowledge could privilege
thee to despise Prophecy. And what think thou? These Thessalonians had
knowledge as well as thou, for they were taught of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. yet must
not they despise Prophecy, and will thou despise it? We see not (says another)
but that all this preaching does breed barrenness, as an immoderate rain,
and brings preaching into contempt: As if the abundance of prophesying did
privilege the profane heart to despise it. The Israelites made just such
another reason, Oh we have nothing but Mannah, Mannah, and our soul is weary
of this Mannah, and yet by their own confession, if they loathe this Mannah,
they must have nothing else to live by, they shall surely die, and their blood
be upon them. Object. We see not that this preaching does any thing but breed
contention among Preachers and hearers. Answ. As if, because a bad stomach
turns wholesome meat into bad humors, therefore good meat must be despised:
and because man's nature (spider-like) turns wholesome doctrine into poison,
therefore wholesome doctrine may be despised. Many other allegations the Devil
puts into the minds and mouths of men, against Prophecy, because he knows by
preaching, his kingdom falls like lightening, Luke 10.18. But those that fear
the Lord will abhor them. 3. Others are reprooved, who can be content to
hear the word read, and think themselves in good case if they can read the
word, or good books at home, but despise prophecy and interpretation: which
what else is it but to reject Gods wisdom in his own means, who has set us
apart to pray men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God? The conversion of
men was never committed to men's own private reading, no nor to the ministry
of Angels; no nor Christ himself, undertook to convert the world, by his own
industry, but left his Disciples to do greater things than himself: Ioh.
14.12. Contemn Gods means, and thy own shall never succeed. Besides, will
not any say, that he understands better by interpretation of things, than by
bare reading? Yes, any but gross malice, and wilfulness. 4. Others will hear
the word, not read only but preached, and yet despise Prophecy, because they
despise the practice of that they hear; as Herod. That which a man cares not
to keep, he despises. Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep
it, and do it.

Use 2.
Therefore beware of despising Prophecy, and of receiving the grace of God in
vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. but rather heartily and sincerely embrace it. Means to
embrace Prophecy.
Means. 1. Labor to see the necessity of it, being the power of God to
salvation, Romans 1.16. and Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes, feeling their want,
would suck every hour of the day and night. Esteem it Mary, the one thing
necessary. 3. Attend at the gates of wisdoms house, Prove. 8.33. It was the
praise of these Thessalonians, that they heard the word with all readiness,
Act. 17.11. and a great work of God in Lydia, chap. 16.14. The Lord opened her
heart, to attend to the words of the Apostles. 4. Rejoice in it as the Iaylor,
Act. 16.32. He rejoiced that he and all the household believed. And the wise
Merchant went away rejoicing. Not to delight in the word, is to despise it:
Ierem. 6.10. Behold the word of God is to them a reproach, why? they have no
delight in it. 5. If He that despises you despises me, Luke 10.10. But have
them in singular love for their works sake, as our spiritual fathers
begetting us unto Christ. We see how the Prophets of the old Testament were
esteemed even of Kings themselves; as Ioash, though a wicked King, finding
Elisha ready to die, fell on his face, and wept, and cried, My father, my
father, the horsemen of Israel and the chariots thereof, 2 King* 13.14. And
shall not believers in the new Testament honor the Prophets of the new
Testament, who as good lamps consume themselves to give others light? But
alas! the calling of Prophesying it is like Christ himself, who was like a
withered branch, and a root in a dry ground, no beauty, no favor to desire
it, the carnal man sees no good in it; notwithstanding Christ has magnified
it in his own person. Such are clearly convinced to despise prophesying, what
ever they say to the contrary. And much more those, who like Saul can let his
spear fly at David, while he plays on his harp to solace and comfort him,
and drive the evil spirit from him. They can cast darts of reproach and
slander, and shoot arrows of malice and violence, while the Prophets of the
Lord play on this heavenly harp, to drive the evil Spirit away out of the
hearts of men.

VERSE 21. Try all things: Hold that which is good.
THis precept is aptly knit to the former; we must not despise Prophecy, Coher.
but yet we must not receive and believe every prophecy and doctrine which we
hear, but first diligently and with judgment try what we hear, and proving
it to be good and sound, strongly hold and maintain it, and reject whatsoever
is contrary thereunto.

[ Try all things.]

Here are three things considerable. Divis.


1. The Action: Try. 2. The Object: Things. 3. The Extent: All things.
To understand the precept, consider these four particulars.

1. What it is to try. 2. What are the things to be tried. 3. Who must try
them. 4. By what rule they must be tried.
1 To try, what.
For the first: The word (...) is taken from Goldsmithes, who try and prove
their mettalls; and they prove them two ways, or for two ends: 1. By the fire,
to separate and consume the dross: 2. By the touchstone, to discern good
mettalls from counterfeit. This later is here enjoined, that we should not hand
over-head take doctrines and courses up upon man's word, but first try them by
the touchstone whether they will hold touch, and by this means find out what
is good, and what is evil, what is true and what is false, what is current and
what is counterfeit, either in doctrines or manners, to embrace and hold the
one, to eschew and abstain from the other.

There is a trial of all things by fire also: but it is not of Christians
here, but of Christ himself hereafter; of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
3.13. The fire shall try every man's work of what it is.

2 What must be tried.
For the second: the Object, or what things are to be tried; All things.

Quest. What? may we try as Adam did the forbidden tree as well as the tree of
life? Or would our Apostle have us try with Solomon, mirth and laughter,
wisdom and folly, Eccles. 2.1? the former whereof by trial he found but
madness, and the latter but vanity? Or in matter of doctrine, would he have
us run through all sects and religions, as an Heretic (confuted by Iunius)
confessed he had been with Jews, He said he had spent 22 years in trial of
Religions.
Arians, Mahometans, and such sects, that at length he might find the truth
among them: which is (as he says) viam per avia investigare, and to seek
truth by wandering through all sorts of errors. Are all things to be tried
without restraint or limitation?

Answ. This general or universal particle All is to be restrained to the
matter in hand; Despise not Prophecy, but yet be not so light and rashly
credulous, to receive and believe whatsoever doctrine ye hear; but try and
examine all doctrines which are propounded for truth, whether they concern
matter of faith or of manners, that ye may receive that which is sound and
reject the contrary.

Quest. 1. What? must all doctrines be tried? what if the chief Doctors and
Pastors of the Church enjoyne us to hold this or that point? Is that liable
to examination?

Answ. 1. The Priests in the Law might not determine and judge of cases as they
list, but according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10, 11. 2. If they were partial in
the Law, yet the people might not depart from the ways of sincere truth, Mal.
2.9. 3. True it is, that sheep are simple creatures, and should follow the
shepherd, but Christ's sheep are not so simple as to follow any for his office
and place sake, Ioh. 14 6.
but so far as they hear the voice of Christ: They are reasonable sheep,
and know, that He that is Truth it self must be determiner of all truth. And
suppose a guide be blind, as Christ calls the Pharisees blind guides, it is no
warrant for other men to shut their eyes, and follow them, Mat. 23.6.
lest both fall into the ditch. 4. We read, that the Bereans are commended
for trying Saint Paul's doctrine, Acts 17.11. And what Doctor or Pastor of the
Church is any whit comparable to Saint Paul? who has the spirit of
infallibility as he had?

Quest. 2. What if a doctrine come backed with the consent of ancient Fathers,
or the Authority of Councels, or other Antiquity? may not that be free from
trial?

An ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Tertull.
Answ. 1. We neither despise nor neglect Fathers and Counsels, and yet we have
not learned to try truth by persons, but persons by truth: out of Tertullian
and Augustine. 2. What says the Apostle, Gal. 1.8. If we, or an Angel from
heaven bring any other Doctrine, hold him accursed? plainly implying, that
though the person which brings a Doctrine, were an Angel, yet he must be
tried. 3. Fathers themselves never challenged this immunity and exemption, as
indeed there is no reason they should; for themselves have erred in many
Doctrines, some of which they retracted, and some they never retracted:
Besides, they wrote many truths which are not extant, and many things are
extant in their names which they never wrote; and many things are true which
they never thought on. Therefore an allegation out of their writings may not
pass without trial. 4. Antiquity exempts no Doctrine from trial; Quod
antiquissimum, illud v^rissimum.
for though that which is most ancient, be most true, (for the good wheat was
sown before the tares) yet truth got only the start of falsehood, and falsehood
is almost as ancient as truth: I am sure as ancient as Paradise, or as the
first day of man's creation, and follows truth as the shadow the body, and
hangs on it, and comes up with it as chafe with wheat. 5. Who that is
conversant in the ancient Fathers, wishes not that some of them had been more
wary than by undiscreete zeal to receive from the tide of ancient times many
relickes of Jews and Pagans? and that they had been more cautelous, than out
of dark devotion to set up Antichrist in his throne while they intended to
hold him down?

By all which we may observe the Popish blasphemy, vented by Stapleton saying,
Doctores, non Doctrinam in authoritate posuit Christus. Stapl de Authorit.
Script. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Christ set Doctors in authority, not Doctrine.

Quest. 3. In matter of practice; what if any thing come backed with the
example of great men, or of the general multitude, and the custom of the
times? I hope we must not be so nice as to bring that to the trial.

Answ. 1. As the ancient speech is, Christ said, Veritas, non vetu^^as. Council:
Caerthag.
I am Truth, not Custom, so Christians must frame themselves to Truth, what
ever the Custom be: Custom (we say) is a tyrant, but Truth must be our King
and Guide; and it is the part of a wise Christian to row hard against the
stream of bad Customs, whereof the world is full. 2. For the example of great
men, it had been good for Peter to have tried the example of the Rulers in
their dealing against Christ, before he had denied and forsworn him: their
example as little patronized him as themselves. Well said Augustine, Non
debemus semper probare quicquid probati homines urgent, August. lib. 2. Epist.
con^. Gaude^ium.
sed judicium Scripturarum adhibere an illae probent: We must not still approve
whatsoever worthy men urge us unto, but take with us the judgment of the
Scriptures, whether they approove it or no. 3. Suppose they be as good as
great, and as great as the Apostles, yet must we follow them no further than
they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. 4. For the example of multitudes, it is a good
saying of the Father, We are not to number the voices we have on our side,
Nen numeranda suffragia sed appendende: August. in Psalm. 39
but to weigh them: and it often comes to pass, that the great part overcomes
the better part. And as I approove of Diogenes his wisdom, who thought he
should do best when he did least what the common people did: so I am sure out
of the word, that that course of life is most acceptable to God, which is most
contrary to the fashion of the world.

Quest. 4. What if any thing come with Authority, and have the image and
subscription of Caesar upon it? must that be presently admitted without further
question?

Rom: 13.1.5.
Answ. 1. Every soul must be subject to the higher powers, and that for
conscience sake; but not without a conscience rightly informed and guided,
only so far forth as God be not disobeyed, nor his truth disparaged. 2. We
acknowledge with Tertullian, Colimus Imperatorem ut homin^m a De^ se^^^cum, and
solo Deo ^mm^rem. Tertul, ad Scapulam.
and reverence the Emperor as one that is the second man under God, and
inferior unto God only: And give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, but
so as we give unto God the things that are Gods. 3. It was the error of the
unbeleeving Jews against Jason and the brethren, Acts 17.7. These men do
against the decrees of Caesar, saying, there is another King, one Jesus. For,
we may not do against the decrees of Caesar, yet we must say, there is another
King one Jesus, whose decrees are of absolute authority, and Cesars so far as
they cross not his. 4. No man blames his neighbor that brings a piece of
money to the touch and weights, though it have Cesars image and superscription
upon it: It is no disloyalty, but wisdom and wariness, to try the Kings
coin, there being so many slippes and counterfeits.

Thus we see that nothing either in doctrine or manners can come so strongly
armed with Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority, but it must pass the trial
before we can hold it as good and current.

Now of the third general: 3. Who must try all things.
Who must try all these things?

Answ. Our Apostle writes to a whole Church, and to every particular Christian
in it. Object. What? has every Thessalonian, without restraint, granted him a
power to censure and judge of Doctrines, in all points of faith and manners? Is
it not enough for a common man to give his consent to the Church, and to
believe as the Pastors believe. Answ. Indeed so the Church of Rome teaches,
and namely the Rhemists on 1 Ioh. 4.1. corrupting a most express text, where
the Apostle wishes and commands every Christian to Try the Spirits. But
nothing is more plain in Scripture, than that people ought judicially to
examine the Doctrine of their Pastors before they give it entertainment, as
afterward we shall more clearly prove. Rhemists on 1 Ioh: 4, 1.
But the Papists and the Rhemists on that place say, Is it not absurd that
every particular person by himself and of himself should take upon him to
examine and control Doctors and Doctrines? I answer: It were absurd if of
himself or by himself only he should try them, but for himself every
Christian must, and by such rules as God has appointed to discern whether a
Doctrine be of God, or no: unto which not only Doctrines of Pastors, but of
Counsels, Fathers, and Popes are to be subjected, unless we will take sour
for sweet, and darkness for light. Hence it is that every Christian should
have his senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14. That every man
should abound with knowledge and judgment to discern things that differ,
Philip. 1.10. That every man should be persuaded in his own proper mind, Romans
14.5. And every sheep of Christ discernes Christ's voice, (...)^
and will not hear the voice of a stranger, because he is able to try and
discern that too: John 20.4, 5.

2 By what we must try all things.
The fourth general remains: By what must this trial be made? Answ. Every
trial is made by some (...) or direction: We try the soundness of solid
things by weights and the balance, of liquid things by liquid measures; we
try figures by line and rule, and the kinds of metal by the touchstone: We
must therefore find out some weight, or rule, or touchstone, to try the
soundness and kind of Doctrines concerning faith or manners. Now there can be
no perfect balance, or exact rule for the trial of all things, but only the
word writted: Esa. 2.3. The law out of Zion, and the word from Jerusalem must
be Judge among the Nations: and chap. 8.20. all appeals must be made to the
law and the testimony, or else there is no light to be had. Christ himself for
his doctrine stood to the judgment of Scripture: Ioh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me. And Paul subjected his Doctrine to the
same rule, Acts 28.23.

And good reason: For,

1. The Scripture has all in it that a sufficient rule should have: It is, 1.
declarative, 2. directive, The Scriptures the only rule of trial.
3. explorative. 1. It is of the nature of God, who is the measure of all
things, and immediately derived from him, and so the first cause, the rule of
all that follow concerning Gods worship. 2. It is full of direction, for any
thing that is to be believed or done, as the Artificers rule directs his work
and hand. 3. It is sufficient to try and prove all things when they are done,
as the touchstone tries the metal, or the square tries the work squared. In
all which respects it is like the pattern showed to Moses in the Mount, after
which he was to frame the whole Tabernacle, and by which he might try it being
framed: That as nothing was in the Tabernacle which was not in the pattern, so
may nothing be with us which is not agreeable to the pattern of Scripture, 2 Timothy: 1, 1^.
called the pattern of wholesome words.

2. By what should causes be tried but by the Laws of the Body Civil where
they do arise? But look what the Law is in the Commonwealth, the same is the
Scripture in the Church, and speaks not as a man but as a Judge.

3. The word hereafter must judge all things, John 12.48. therefore it is meet
that it should judge them here, and try them.

4. No man will deny but that the Oracle in the time of the Law was a most
sufficient and certain rule in all cases, because it was the lively voice of
God himself. But the Scriptures are titled to be the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2.
yea, (...), Lively Oracles, Acts 7.38. Because, though they were not delivered
by lively voice, yet by immediate inspiration from God, and must be as Oracles
to us in all doubts, as David made them the men of his counsel. Psalm: 119, 24


Object.
Bellarmine here objecteth, and says, that the Scripture is a Rule indeed,
but a partial one, or rather a brief Commonitory, to be eeked partly by
Tradition, and partly by the help of the Church. I answer, Answ.
1. We are content to leave that honor with them, to write and speak most
basely of the Scripture, to set up their own Traditions. But the very light of
Nature is against them herein: for the Philosopher himself makes it the part
of a wise Lawgiver to contain as much in the Law as is possible, Aris^: Rhet:
lib. 1, capt. 1.
and leave as little as may be to the liberty of the Judge. Now shall Wisdom
it self, Christ himself, who has the fountains and treasures of wisdom,
prescribe a law to his Church, which must be imperfect, unless it be eeked by
Tradition, and by the help of a supposed Judge? For the Judge of the Church is
not the Pope, Christ's pretended Vicar, but Christ himself the Popes destroyer.

2. The very writing of the Scripture was to this purpose, that the hazard
might be prevented which the truth were in, if it should spread it self by
report only, and pass from hand to hand by Tradition as formerly it had done.

3. The state of the Church of the New Testament should by this account be
worse than the Old; the Patriarchs should have had a more perfect word than we:
for they were taught and ruled by immediate revelation, and infallible voice;
and if we should hold truth as trailed through the corruptest ages of the
world, and the unfaithful hands of men, we should be far behind them, and
the Apostle was out when he said, We have (...), 2 Pet. 1.19. that is, a surer
word of the Prophets.

4. He has lost his reason that will deny but that the first and chief Truth
must be the rule and measure of all the rest; and he has lost all religion
that will deny, that of all Truths behoofefull for salvation the Scripture is
the principal and first; the perfection of which David avoucheth, Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect: and Paul, 2 Timothy 3.15. It is able to make the
man of God perfect to every good work. Doct. All things to be believed or
done, are first to be tried by the Scriptures.


Out of all this exposition arises this point of Doctrine: That, every
Christian is bound in whatsoever thing he is to do or believe, first to try it
by the touchstone of Gods word. Acts 17.11. the men of Berea are commended for
searching the Scriptures, to see whether the things spoken by the Apostles were
so or no. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Try the Spirits. And the same Commandment is in the Law,
Deuteronomy. 13.2. to try the Prophets, not by events, but by Doctrine, if it were
agreeable to the word. This is that wariness commended so often by our Savior
Christ; as Matthew. 7.15. I beseech you, Romans 16.17.
brethren mark them diligently which cause division and offenses, contrary to
the Doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them. And for practices herein
see, Lament. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, etc. that ye may prove
what is that good, Romans 12.2.
that acceptable will of God. Proving what is acceptable to the Lord. Ephesians.
5.10.
Let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6.4.
and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.

And why?

1. Because there shall always be false Teachers in the Church, who shall
easily misleade us into error, if we try them not. This is the Apostles
argument, 1 Ioh. 4.1. Try the Spirits: Why? For (says he) many false Prophets
are gone out into the world. 1 Kings 22, 22.
We read of a lying Spirit in the mouth of 400 Prophets: and in the New
Testament, that false Apostles came as they had been the Apostles of Christ; 2
Cor. 11.13.
for if the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, Verse 14.
no marvel if his Ministers can do so.

More particularly: the word of God witnesses, 1. That they shall come under
Satan's standart in great troops: 2 Timothy 4.3. Rev 9 Swarms of locusts darkning
the Sun* and eating all the green things of the earth.
Heaps of Teachers. So we read, that in the first four hundred years after
Christ, which was the prime of the Church, there arose 88 several kinds of
false Teachers, seducing from the faith, and mightily prevailing against the
Church.

2. That they shall come armed with all arts to deceive: first, they shall
pretend simplicity, 1. Simplicity Mat: 7, 15.
they shall come in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves: that
is, come in the habit of true Teachers, being indeed false Apostles, and
deceitful Teachers. If Elias and John Baptist come in rough and hairy
garments, the false Prophets also will wear a rough garment to deceive, Zech.
13.4.

Secondly, for their Doctrine, they shall allege Scripture as the Devil did
to overthrow Christ: Chap: 4, 6.
They shall obtrude error under pretense of deep learning, as the sect of the
Nicholaitans called their heresy profound learning, 2 Profundity
but by the holy Ghost called the depth of Satan, Rev. 2.24. So the Popish
Doctors at this day pretend all the Fathers to be on their side, all
Schoolmen, all Antiquity, and Mystical Divinity, Theologia mystica.
shut up in secrets and vaults of dark and unwritten Traditions; when indeed
it is a very cave of darkness, and the depth of the Devil.

Thirdly, for their Authority, they shall pretend themselves to be some great
men, 3. Authority
as Simon the Sorcerer said he was (...), Acts 8.9. Doctor 1. Angelicus. 2.
Seraphicus. 3. Subtilis. 4* Irrefragabilis etc.
Angelical Doctors, Seraphicall Doctors, the only men of Authority, Christ's
Vicars, Peter's Successors, great Cardinals, on whom are set all the pillars
of the state of the Church; Catholics, and Catholic Doctors, and the like:
yea sometimes they come armed with great signs, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9.
and lying wonders, pretending mighty miracles as Simon Magus did, Acts 8.10:
But alas! What miracles did Calvin and Luther show? Romish Priests abound in
miracles, they cure strange diseases, and cast out Devils, etc. Which indeed
God may suffer them to do sometime by sorcery, sometime by juggling and
knavery, for a plague upon the unthankful world, which cared not to receive
the truth in love, as was foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. For this purpose God
sent them strong delusions.

4. Humility.
Fourthly, for their behavior, they shall pretend great humility, Col. 2.18. Oh
they dare not go to God but by Mediators, Saints and Angels, they must use
much bodily affliction in chastising and whipping themselves: as Baals Priests
did, so do they. And their speeches shall be as fair and insinuative as their
behavior: The locusts have faces and hair like women, insinuative and
flattering.
Oh they seek nothing but to win souls, to convert their Contrymen; they
venture their lives for the Catholic Church; the souls of their dear
Contrymen are dearer to them than their own lives: And thus with fair and
flattering speech they deceive the simple, Romans 16.18. They flatter with
Princes and great men, to make themselves great. Ahab must not be offended, but
go up and prosper, 1 Kings 22.15.
and so was sent to his excution by 400 false Prophets: And if one poor
Micaiahs word be not as theirs, the poor man must be shut up, and fed with
bread and water of affliction, because he cannot flatter.

Fifthly, 5. Constancy.
they shall pretend such zeal and constancy, for their false and heretical
doctrines, as that they shall boldly die for their opinions. Christ has his
Martyrs, and so has Antichrist his. Which indeed is not constancy, but
obstinacy; not boldness, but wilfulness; not a suffering of Martyrs, but as
Malefactors: for not the pain, Causa non poena facit Martyrem.
but the cause makes a Martyr.

Therefore seeing false Teachers come so many, so armed with pretense of
simplicity, of depth of learning, of authority, of miracles, of humbling
themselves, of fair behavior toward others, of constancy even to the death;
had not such as would not be deceived by them, need try both them and their
doctrines by that which only can direct them, namely, the light of the
Scriptures?

2. True Teachers are not so assisted but they may err; Reas. 2.
even such as have the gift of Prophecy, are not so illuminate presently, and
infallibly directed, but they may be deceived and deceive. In the same field
where good wheat is sown, some tares may be cast unawares, as the Parable
shows. All is not fire from the Altar that seems so to be: Much heat is from
men's own Spirit, and not from Gods. Therefore doctrine even from the best must
be tried. Samuel an excellent Prophet may follow his own affection, and speak
rashly, 1 Samuel 16.6. he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the Lords Anointed
is before me: but the Lord wished him not to look on countenance, etc. and so
checked his error. The next Prophet to Samuel that we read of, was Nathan a
worthy man, yet he also was deceived; and was like to have deceived David: 2 Samuel 7.3. Go and do all that is in thy heart, for the Lord is with thee: But
the same night the Lord caused him to retract it. Now if the extraordinary
Prophets might sometimes nod (as we say) and not look so near to their
message as they should: much more may Evangelicall Prophets, whose message is
not so immediate as theirs: 1 Cor. 14.32. The spirit of the Prophets is subject
to the Prophets: and verse 29. When one prophecyeth, the rest must judge.

3. As there be many errors and heresies, so also are there many offenses in
the world to try us, Reason 3.
and it stands us in hand to try them, if we would not be overturned by them:
for all the falls of Gods servants proceed from hence, that they lay aside
this trial of things which are to be believed or done. Whence was our greatest
and first fall from happiness, but that Eve tried not the counsel of the
Serpent, nor Adam the counsel of Eve? whence are many great ones wrapped daily
into the gulf of Popery and Antichristianisme, but because they are willing to
trust before they try? They are carried away with the glister of the golden cup
of her abominations, but never try the wine in it. Was ever error or vice
taken into the heart or hand, Specie virtutis, and umbra.
into affection or action, in his own shape? no, but in the likeness of some
virtue, or profit, or pleasure; they all come masked and painted, and appear
not themselves till they be tried and uncased, but in the trial appear such
friends as betray us with a kiss.

Our souls are proner to any evil than to the least good; Reason 4.
1. because the flesh is ever lusting against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. 2. Besides
our own evil imaginations, the Devil is ready to drive us forward: and 3.
the world will ever be encouraging us in evil. But in any good thing we row
against the stream, and do (as it were) an unnatural thing, offering
violence to nature. To what good purpose would the Israelites have parted so
easily with their eare-rings, as to make a Calfe? If the Jews who were so
forward to bestow their corn, and wine, and oil, and wool, yea their gold
and silver on Baal, to maintain false worship, Hos. 2.8. had they been moved
to have been half so liberal to the true worship of God, what excuses and
whining should the Prophet have heard? But in Baals honor, if their gold and
silver were too little, they would afford their sons and daughters, and
sacrifice them to Devils. At this day: If men be moved to any matter of charge
toward Gods worship, toward the poor, or good purposes, they will be
niggardly, pinching, and grossly base: But let their lusts call on them, let
play, cards or dice, bowls or carnal fellowship, invite them to expenses,
they can freely enough drop shillings, or crowns, or pounds perhaps and
pieces. Had we not need then to try diligently the things we lay hands on,
seeing our inclination is so averse and alienate from every good thing? If we
observe our choises in general, we shall find by trial, that the hastiest
assent is never safest. And it would prove safe for us (as our Proverb is) to
look before we leap, to try before we trust; and to prove and examine things
before we give them entertainment.

I come now to the uses of this Doctrine.

Use 1.
The first is an use of reprehension to many sorts of men, who hereby are found
culpable.

try all things? Or who is so absurd as to conclude thus in civil things?
because some men may deceive us in buying a commodity, will we therefore vow
never to buy any thing? Because some wares are bad, will we buy none at all: or
because some are crafty Merchants and couseners, shall we trust no man that is
of good credit and report? What man will refuse all silver and gold, because
some be copper pieces and counterfeit? Or what an awke and unreasonable
conclusion is this; There be many slippes in mettalls, and therefore I scorn
the touchstone? nay rather, therefore thou should use it. Or this, There is
poison prepared, therefore I scorn a preservative?

Popish, but also the Protestants implicit faith, Protestants implicit faith.
which is to take up Doctrines and Opinions without Trial; and this indeed is
a senseless ignorance, and infidelity: 1 Pet. 3.15. Every man must be ready to
give account of his faith, and therefore must be able to express his own
faith. Solomon records it as a part of extreme folly to be so credulous, Prove.
14.15. A fool believes every thing, that is, rashly gives credit, and
hearkens to every Deceiver: But a prudent man takes heed to his steps, that
is, examineth and weighs what he hears, and what he does before he
undertake it. And Job makes this the chlefe office of judgment, Chap. 34.3.
The ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. Let us seek judgment among
us, and let us know among our selves what is good. And what difference is there
between a wise man and a fool, but that the fool wants judgment, follows
his fancy, and is led by his senses, and appearances without trial?

Object. Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7.

Answ. 1. That is, in other men's sayings and actions it believes the best, but
suspecteth his own ways most, Prove. 14.8. 2. It believes not all things
simply and indefinitely, not errors and falsehood, but rejoices in the truth,
verse 6. 3. Not all things without trial and discretion, (for then it should
rejoice in unrighteousness:) but after it has tried them. 4. Nothing is
contrary to charity that is agreeable to wisdom, but with the judgment of
charity there must go a judgment of prudence.

Object. 2. Is not this a disparagement to our Teachers, and to the truth which
should be freely embraced? or how will this stand with mingling the word with
faith? Heb. 4.2.

Answ. 1. Our Proverb is, A man may tell money after his father, not in
distrustfulnesse, as if he suspected he would deceive him, (for this were
against duty, and charity) but in wisdom, because he may unwittingly deceive;
and this is held no disparagement to his father: no more is it to our
spiritual fathers. 2. The truth loses nothing, but rather gains by being
tried; because it is more approved and justified than before: as gold is no
whit prejudiced, but purged and refined by the fire.

try any thing at all; others try something, but not by the right rule: some in
great matters nearely concerning them, purposely abstain from all examination;
as those in the 2 Pet. 3.5. they are willingly ignorant in matters both of
judgment and practice, thinking that while they hood wink themselves, they
may the more freely entertain whatsoever makes for their pleasure, profit or
preferment: some controversies they dare not look into, for fear the light
should make them losers. Some practices they would never bring to the trial:
it is death for them to have their usuries, their affected games, their strange
fashions meddled withal, or brought to the touchstone: they would stop both
their ears, or wish there were no tongue to touch their darling sins, for
fear they should be brought to dislike such profitable and pleasurable sins,
which to lose were to part with their hands and eyes. These persons resemble
that gluttonous Parasite, who covered his tongue with a skin, that he might
swallow any thing though never so hot: they have covered their consciences with
a seared skin, that they may take down any thing insensibly without
examination.

But here let us consider, Motives to bring all things to this trial, 7.
1. what an express commandment we have for the duty, Romans 12.2. Prove what
is the good and acceptable will of God: Ephesians. 5.10. Prove what is pleasing unto
God: Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work. Lam. 3.40. Let us search
and try our ways. 2. How try our meat, our drink, our money, our mettalls,
our beasts, nothing shall come into our hands untryed: But only in the
greatest things, appertaining to God and good conscience, we are altogether
careless. 3. There is nothing wherein a man for their number, power and
subtilty, all cunning enough to work upon our simplicity. Satan will surely
sift and try us, he will winnow us as wheat, Luke 22.31. The world and all
sorts of wicked ones lie in ambush to entise us: Our own deceitful Delilah,
our own flesh, which is the nearest and most powerful over us, is most
treacherous against our selves. Every occasion without stirs up inward
corruption. We had need therefore try every thing offered unto us, lest we take
from these cheaters a box of counters for a box of gold. 5. God observes and
commends such as try doctrines and courses, Rev. 2.2. To the Church of Ephesus
write thus, I know thy works, and that thou have examined them which say they
are Apostles, and are not, but have found them liars. 6. This is necessary to
comfort our own hearts trials, and scorns of evil men, who will be ready to
turn all our glory into shame, and all our religion into hypocrisy; and all
our godly endeavors into preciseness and faction. We had need try our ways
by the Rule, that we may be able to outstand their imputations, and contemn
their contempt, and scandalous falsehoods. So long as we hold our Rule, we
shall be ever able to appeal unto God, and hold our innocence till we die:
let it be faction, let it be schism, yea heresy, we shall boldly say, In that
way which they call heresy, we will worship the God of our fathers, Acts
24.14. 7. There is a day of trial for all 1 Cor. 3.13. Let the fire of the
word go before the fire of the world, let that try which is stubble, hay, and
chafe, and which work will abide. There is a Judge who one day will straightly
examine what men now pass so slightly; and he will judge our ways then as the
word now judges them. If we would in trial be approoved then, we must now
have our courses approoved by the same word which shall judge us at the last
day, John 12.48.

Fourthly, this Doctrine reprooves such as False rules of trial are six.


1. Some will have corrupt reason to hold the scales; 1. Corrupt reason.
and this ingrafted principle of natural reason must be followed as the only
rule: Men would captivate the commandment to their own reason, and limit the
wisdom of God within the narrow bounds of their own wisdom. Naaman being
commanded by the Prophet Elisha to wash seven times in Jordan, was incensed,
and began to compare the waters of Israel with them of Damascus: 2 Kings 5, 12.
Are not Arbanah and Pharphar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters
of Israel? And had not his servants been wiser than he, to persuade him to so
small a thing, his reason had returned him home without his errand. Men think
it reason to profess religion, but so far as they may thrive and prosper by
it; to trust in God, but so far as they see him, and as he leaves a pawn
behind him; to favor religion and religious persons, when the times favor
them: But they see no reason to forsake themselves, to hate father and mother,
to part with their profits, their lands, liberties, or lives; and they never
thought them wise men, that for such conceits would so easily part with so
precious things. And what is the reason, but because they never became fools,
1 Cor. 3, 18.
that they might be wise, and because their religion is not now regulated by
the proper rule of religion, but of corrupt and natural reason?

Reason cannot be a right rule. 3 Reas.
Against this use these considerations: first, how can corrupt reason be a
perfect rule, being made Nicodemus cannot see how an old man can be borne
again, and so disclaimes the Doctrine of Regeneration: the blind eye of
natural reason puts no difference between the light of the Sun and
darkness; nor the blind Samaritane between water of life and well water.

nature: Eccles. 11.5. Thou know not the way of the wind, nor how the bones
grow in the womb. Who ever gave a reason of the Loadstones drawing iron? of
the fig tree taming a wild bull? of the little Remora fish that aresteth a
ship passing swiftly on full seas? of the dying of the corn in the earth
before it can live? and much more must it grope as in the dark, and shut up it
self as an owl eye against the shine of mysteries in grace: How absurd and
contrary to reason is the creation of all things out of nothing? nature cannot
believe it, but faith must, Heb. 11.3 The conception of a Virgin without hand
of man: The resurrection of dead bodies almost infinitely transmutated: That
life must be fetched out of death; heaven out of hell: that losses for Christ
is gain; that not kisses but killings are love; that death is advantage:
Philosophers laugh at these things, Acts 17. So the life of reason is clean
contrary to the life of faith.

Thirdly, the rule must go before the thing ruled; but reason must be an
attendant to follow Anthropomorphits, who conceive of God every way as a man;
brought Images into the Churches; hatched that monster of Transubstantion, and
all Popery. And whence are our new Pelagian positions quickened in the profound
mysteries of election and predestination; but because we must with our candle
drown the light of the Sun, and receive into our spoone the deep sea and
Ocean? The Apostle Paul gives faith unto that which reason cannot reach, and
cries out, Oh the deepnesse! but proud reason must be a strain beyond Paul,
and must comprehend all this deepnesse in the slat and shallow of it self.
Thus we see the unfitness of this rule, reason must know her place, and not
presume to check or prescribe to faith; if Hagar will contest with Sarah, she
must be cast out of doors.

2. The way of forefathers.
2. Some make the way of their fathers the rule of their religion and courses;
as the musled and misled Papists, who depend on their Predecessors, Ruth 1.16,
17.
as Ruth upon Naomi, there is no entreating of them to depart, where they are
gone thither will these, where they dwell there will these, where they die
there will these, and there they will be buried: likewise the old Idolaters,
Ier. 44.17. who would still offer sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, because
their fathers did so: the case was overruled by the former ages. So the
Papists refuse knowledge, will hear no Sermons, come to no Church, because
their forefathers did no such thing: This can be no sure rule.
which is altogether absurd. Against which consider, first, how absurd it is in
religion; for consult with flesh and blood in the matter of our faith, which
Paul in the matter of his religion refused to do, Gal. 1.16? Immediately I
consulted not with flesh and blood, etc. he held it unmeete and absurd in the
matters of God poison himself, because his grandfather was so. Thirdly, it is
attended ever with a seduced go into the Common Hall, lest they should be
defiled, Ioh. 18.28. yet in the mean time their conscience could suffer them
to accuse, arraigne and condemn the innocent Son of God: They made great
conscience of putting the thirty silver pieces into the treasury, but none at
all of giving thirty pieces to betray Christ. So these conscionable Catholics
make no conscience of Treasons, of Equivocations, of blowing up of Parliaments,
and the like. And what a rule is that which Turks and Infidels can truly
allege for their religion? who suck in their impious Alcoran with their
mothers milk from their forefathers? which the Samaritanes allege for their
mixture? John 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this Mount. And this all limbs
of Antichrist allege for themselves; which a man may frame unto, and be
without all religion. As these brag of Peter and Paul, and of bones, and
relickes of Saints and Martyrs: But for the Doctrine of faith, of religion, of
holiness and a good conscience they quite cast off. Fourthly, this is contrary
to the rule which calls us from our forefathers to it self: Ezekiel. 20.18. I
said walk not in the statutes of your forefathers, but walk in my statutes and
judgments, and do them: and he complains of that stubborn and rebellious
generation, that set not their hearts aright, and whose spirit was Psalm. 78.8.
Fifthly, the Rule notably directs us in points of imitation. Rules of Scripture
concerning imitation of our forefathers: 5.


1. It teaches us that the rule of religion, is not the foundation of any
forefathers but of the Prophets and Apostles.

2. It teaches us to dististinguish of fathers; some were carnal, some
spiritual; some were enlightened and zealous, some blind and superstitious:
and we must not admit any our forefathers in religion, but such as had God
their Father, and the true Church their Mother, that said unto wisdom thou art
my sister. Thus far the good Kings followed David, and so did Timothy his
Grandmother Lois.

3. It teaches us to distinguish between that our forefathers have done, and
what they ought to have done; and we may follow them in all that they ought to
do, not in all they do: Thus in looking on our Ancients must we heed what
the Ancient of Days has warranted. The Jews now go on in their blaspheming
of Christ, as their Predecessors did, but they ought not; and Papists they
imitate their Ancestors in horrible idolatry, blindness, cruelty, but they
look not what they ought to do.

4. To inquire whether we may lawfully do what our Ancestors might lawfully
do: The ancient Jews might lawfully Sacrifice, Circumcise; but their
posterity (though they do) ought not: still we must look to our own
warrant. Our Ancestors were in the dark, wanted the light which we have: it
is less safety, more shame and danger to us to walk as in the dark than for
them.

5. It affoords us wisdom to discern between the things we receive from our
forefathers. A wise man would be willing to enjoy his fathers lands, goods,
plate, jewels, yea his good qualities and virtues; but he would be loath to
receive his hereditary diseases, goutes, stone, blindness, vices and shameful
blemishes: so it is here. But foolish and superstitious sotts as Israel going
out of Egypt, not only borrow their jewels and wealth, but carry away their
biles, botches, leprosy, Idolatry calves and all corruption.

3. Some make humane laws the rule of their life. Why come many to Church, 3.
Humane Laws.
but because the Law of the Land calls them to it? not considering of Gods Law,
nor in conscience performing any duty. Why is that horrible sin of swearing
so rise every where, and that by no small oaths, as it has much ado to be
kept out of the mouths of some Professouts? but because the Laws of the Land
(at least in their execution) take no hold on it? Gods Law runs so straight
against it Swear not at all, (not by little oaths, faith and troth, not in
matter of truth, not by good things, not by small things:) and, The Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: that a good heart would
tremble at an oath. But generally this is no sufficient rule to bindmens
tongues to their good behavior. Why is biting usury grown to so great and
ordinary a trade, that a number of trades and tradesmen resolve themselves into
it, but because Gods Law is cast aside, and men stick to the Law of the Land,
which indeed allow it not, but supposing Usurers to be cruel, enacts a Law
against their cruelty? What is the reason that men abstain from Adultery in
the act, but not in the eye, in the tongue, in the heart, but because they
walk by man's Law? their outward man is bound by an outward Rule, but they have
cast into a corner this Rule which would bind their thoughts and enter into all
the corners of their hearts. And why else do men abstain from actual
murder, but not from murtherous speeches and thoughts, but that the law of man
binds their hands, and rules them, but the Law of God rules not their hearts?
And the like might be said of a number of sins.

The Romans had a law, forbidding any Emperor to consecrate or set up any God
which was not first approoved by the Senate. For Tiberius Caesar, Eusebius. hist:
Eccles. lib. 2 cap. 2.
hearing of the miracles and fame of Christ in Judea, by virtue of that law
moved the Senate to promulgate and relate Christ among the number of gods.
Whose folly Tertullian thus scoffeth: Tertul. in Apol^get.
Apud vos de humano arbitrio divinitas pensitatur; nisi homini Deus placuerit,
non erit Deus; homojam Deo propitius esse debet. So may we say of these legal
Christians, whose Religion reaches not beyond the Scepter, Truth shall not be
Truth, nor God God, unless it please men so to enact it, and God must be
beholding to man to let his word stand as a rule.

Against all which know that all humane laws are imperfect rules, as all men
be, Humane laws imperfect rules 4 reasons.
but our rule must be a perfect rule.

First, they neither can discover all sin, for

Secondly, they are not internal, but only require

Thirdly, they are alterable, and abrogable, as

Fourthly, the rule must not only rule man in innocence,

4. Some walk by the rule of crooked and corrupt affections, which as so many
Lords, 4. Crooked and corrupt affections.
enact so many new laws, but all contrary to the commandment and law of God;
Herod will not part with his Herodias; and Ahab casts away the rule, because it
is a troubler of his estate: Micaiah never prophecies good unto him. And so is
it in all such as hate to be reformed. The Usurer has found a trade to live
by, his means come in easily and richly; now he weighes the matter in his own
balance, and shunnes the balance of the Sanctuary; he cares for no bands
between God and him, so he have sure bands of the borrower. The Shopkeeper
cannot live unless he sell wares on the Saboth day; and every man must live by
his calling: Now this base covetous affection ruling the heart, the Law of God
for the sanctification of the Saboth must not rule and order such persons. So
what harm is it (say some) to play a game or two at cards on the Saboth day?
will nothing but damnation serve for such an offense? they like no such rule,
it is too straight and strait; they must have a Lesbian leaden rule, that will
yield a little in the laying, and not stand so straight and stiff against
their lusts. Our Gentlemen and Gentlewomen will say in general that the
Scripture is the rule of good life, and care not greatly if they give a little
countenance to the truth: but bring this rule close unto them, and tell them
that it calls them to amend their fashions, to stoop to the simplicity of the
Gospel; to leave off their strange apparel, their vain discourses, their
idle complements, their service of pleasure, and unfruitful spending of their
time: now they storm against the rule, and the hand that holds it; here is a
rule indeed that would make them as despised, as he is despised of them that
calls them from their vanities. Our Ministry in general holds in judgment
the Scripture as the rule, and that they ought to tie themselves to this rule;
but when this rule would tie them to instant teaching, to careful walking as
examples to the flock; to prepare the people as a pure Virgin for Christ; oh,
it ties them too strait, their conceits and gifts call them to higher things,
other affairs withdraw them; as for diligent preaching, they leave that to the
inferior sort that have nothing else to tend, and no livings to trouble them.

But shall the word be a rule to our judgment, and not to our practice? Shall
it be a rule for us and for our rights, and shall it not be a rule for our duty
and office? Let all men know and consider, first, what a judgment of God it is
to give Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.3. Secondly, the Thirdly, to fear the departure

5. Some depend upon the persons of some great men whom they reverence, 5.
Admiration of men's persons.
and hold in admiration. What? are not such and such, great men, and learned
men, in high degrees and preferments? yet they do thus and thus, they are of
another judgment, and practice too, and if it were not right they would not
do it. And so they dangerously compare themselves with wicked men, digest
their oaths, vanity, pomp.

But consider, first, what a plague it is for great Dionisius the Tyrant, had
flatterers about him, who like dogs would lick up his spittle, and commend
it to him to be as sweet as Nectar. Secondly, no example can make that good
which Thirdly, all persons must be tried by the rule, not the rule by any
person: Even the Apostles must be followed so far as they go by rule, and
follow Christ, no further. This is the difference between the Papists and us,
they receive no Doctrine, no nor the Scriptures, but so far as warranted by
Fathers and Councels; we receive no Fathers nor Councels, but so far as they
are warranted by the Scriptures: Rom: 3, 4
For, Let God be true, and every man a liar. Is this our judgment, and shall
we slip from it in our practice? Fourthly, there is no more compendious
Micaiah, esteemed the Kings enemy? yet he alone held the rule. This was the
cause that pulled all the Jews into the guilt of Christ's death, they admired
their Rulers and Rabbis, as great and learned men, having the key of
knowledge, and so easily and freely consented to that fearful sin, which the
Sun was ashamed to behold. Fifthly, in all imitation of Sixthly, the only
perfect example of our rule, was Jesus Christ, whom we must follow: we are
commanded to be perfect, not as Abraham, Moses, David, etc. but as our heavenly
Father, whose absolute perfection shines in his Son, who is the engraven
Image of his Fathers person. Now as the best picture must needs be that which
is drawn from the lively face, rather than that which is drawn out of another
picture; so must this which we take from Jesus Christ himself, who was the
true idea and counterpaine of our Rule here described.

6. Some make Success their rule, 6. Success.
and walk by that; as they that say, If my course were not good, God would not
bless me as he does; and if I sin, God would not be silent: or if I sin,
and God be silent, he either sees not, or regards not, or will spare me, and I
shall ever escape reckoning. Whereas, first, the rule tells us, Psalm. 50.
These things have thou done, and I held my peace; but I will reproove thee, and
set thy sins in order before thee. And Eccles. 9.2. The same event is to the
good and the bad, to him that swears, and him that fears an oath. Many
run to witches and sorcerers, and think it warrantable from the success,
they find some relief and some help, and God would give no such success if
it were unlawful. Whereas it is just with God, that such as run to the
Devil, shall meet with the Devil to their further delusion. Others run to
stage plays and enterludes, because they teach some good lessons, and may
edify as well as Ministers by Sermons. Oh profane mouths, who have cast away
the rule, which is far from sending them to the stews to learn chastity, or
to Atheists to learn religion; or to learn virtue and good manners in the
school of vices, where things are expressed and acted which ought not to be
named among Christians. Ephesians. 5.3.


Secondly, this rule tells us, that Gods patience shall not violate his
justice, nor forbearance is no payment, he will not bear the sword in vain.

Thirdly, no man easily forgets his own name; the Lord will not forget his
justice, but must return to every man according to his own works.

Fourthly, as thou have thy time, so surely will God have his, when thy measure
is heaped up, and thy Epha is full; although thou may think with Agag, the
bitterness of death is passed, yet the Lords sword will come and hew thee in
pieces.

Against all these crooked and distorted rules, first, that Christianity is no
ranging course, or a running at random, but a Secondly, this rule is expressly
set down, Phil. 3.16. So far as we are come, let us proceed there is a
promise to all that walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk by
this rule, peace shall be on them and mercy, and on all the Israel of God; that
is, the rule of Gods word, which is to Christians as the pillar of the
Israelites. Fourthly, it is evil to them that forsake this rule: As a son
left unto himself, is the shame of his Father: So the sons of God running
their own ways, and despising the counsels of God, are a shame to their
Father, a reproach to their Fathers house the Church, a dishonor to their
profession, and ruin to themselves.

The second use is an use of instruction: Use 2.
If we must try all things, then must we learn to get wisdom, rightly to
apply the rule to every particular which is to be regulated: 1 Cor. 2.13.
Comparing spiritual things with spiritual: for to try is nothing else but to
apply the rule or touchstone to the thing to be tried. And when I speak of
wisdom, I mean that spiritual wisdom, whereby the spiritual man comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, discerns all things. This man led by the
Spirit, acknowledges Christ, and follows him in all things; takes faith his
companion, and sets in his eye Gods glory the end and scope of all things.

Quest. Can you help us to some directions or Rules, by which we may be guided
in this application, which is the only difficulty now to be opened in this
Treatise?

Answ. Yes, and these Rules are of two sorts:

1. General, Preparative. 2. Special, Practical.

The general or preparative Rules to application are four

1. We must be industrious to know and be acquainted with the Scriptures in
their right sense of them; whether historical and litterall, or allegorical
and figurative: For this is to have our Rule at hand, and in our hand; without
which it must be with us as with the Sadduces, of whom our Lord said, Matthew.
22.29.
Ye err not knowing the Scriptures. And because true Scripture is not in words
and sillables, but in the true sense of it; we must be careful not to rest in
the words without the true signification of them. The Papists hear our Savior
saying of the Sacramental bread, This is my body, and sticking to the words,
and applying them without the sense, run into infinite absurdities and
errors on one hand; and so the Lutherans on the other. Against both which we
may not unfitly mention one of the two rules of Augustine in his books of
Christian Doctrine; Si praeceptiva locutio videtur flagitium aut facinus
jubere, August de Doctr: Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
aut utilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare, figurata est: It is not a proper but
a figurative speech, which seems either to injoyne a thing unlawful, or to
hinder a lawful. So this speech of our Lord, Unless ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man and drink his blood, John 6.53.
ye have not life in you, seems at the first to impose on us a kind of
cruelty, therefore it is figurative: So Augustine.

2. If we would be fit for this trial, we must lay up and hide in our hearts
such Scriptures as we understand, that they may be near us to serve our
several uses. The Prophet David professes that he had hid the word in his
heart, that he might not sin against God: And Mary was commended, that she
pondered all the sayings concerning Christ, and hid them in her heart. A
Carpenter or Mason whose work is squared or laid by rule, is never without his
rule in his hand, or at his back: so should it be with Christians.

3. We must absolutely submit our judgment to the word of God without
reasoning or disputing, though it be never so difficult and dangerous unto us:
for, what is else the use of a rule, but to rule? Abraham left his own
Country, and went he knew not whither, at Gods commandment, Heb. 11.8. One
would think this were folly in Abraham, but that the Scripture acquits him,
and says, he did it by faith. And in a more difficult commandment, he rose
early, went three days journey to kill his only son whom he loved, and
reasoned no cases, but went. Good Moses would weigh the word of God in his own
balance, fixing his eye rather upon the impotency and impossibility of the
means, than upon the strength of Gods word which cleaves the hardest rocks:
therefore he sinned in striking the Rock, when God bade him only speak to
it, and for it was barred out of Canaan.

4. We must aim at an absolute conformity between the whole word and our
whole man. This Rule takes place above all men's rules and laws, which rule the
outward man, but this the inner man; the soul and the conscience, the heart
and the will, yea the affections and thoughts, which in regard of men's laws
are free: but the word captivateth every thought, and brings it into
subjection, 2 Cor. 12.5. It rules the whole outward man also, our speeches and
actions, even the least, our looks and behaviors, our callings and
conditions, our sports and recreations: and as David says of the Sun, Psalm.
19.6. there is nothing hid from the heat and discovery of it, so nothing in
man is exempted from the rule of the word. We must therefore bring our practice
thereto, and think it not enough to be a rule in it self, unless it be a
rule to us also: And lay this for a ground in our souls, that there must be a
proportion between the rule, and the thing ruled.

Now we come to the special rules for the application of this Rule: And they
concern,

1. Doctrines, 2. Actions and Practice.

Rules for the Trial of Doctrines are six.

2 Timothy 1.3. Keep the pattern of wholesome words which thou have heard of me.
First, all Doctrines must be brought to the analogy of faith, and squared
thereby: Romans 12.6. Whether we prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
analogy of faith. By analogy of faith, the Apostle means the measure of faith
and Doctrine, which is indeed the holy Scripture: 1. All sound Doctrine must
agree with the analogy of faith.
the heads of which Doctrine, or the sum of which faith is contained in the
Creed, the Decalogue, and the Lords Prayer. If any Doctrine agree not with
these, which are the key and rule of faith, it is unsound and to be rejected.
As for example:

1. The Church of Rome teaches, that the bread in the Sacrament is turned into
the very body, flesh, blood and bone of Christ, which was borne of the Virgin:
We hold the clean contrary. Now bring this Doctrine to the analogy of faith;
that teaches, that Christ was born of the Virgin, true man, with a true humane
nature like ours in all sin things, sin only excepted, visible,
circumscribed, palpable, in one place only at once, as is ours: that teaches,
that he ascended into heaven in that humane nature, and there fitteth at the
right hand of God until his second coming, and therefore cannot be really and
locally in the Sacrament.

2. Romish Doctrine teaches; that a man may merit by his good works,
remission of sins and eternal life; they establish the merit of man's works in
the matter of justification: we utterly exclude them. Bring we this Doctrine to
the analogy of faith: The ten Commandments say, The Lord shows mercy to
thousands that love him and keep his commandments: If the reward be given by
mercy, Romans 11.6.
then not for the merit of the work done. The Lords prayer teaches us to pray
for forgiveness of debts; and therefore we are far from meriting. The same
prayer teaches us to pray for every morsel of bread: Is it not madness to
think we can merit the kingdom of heaven, if we cannot merit a morsel of
bread? The Creed believes remission of sins; now the law of works and the
law of faith are as contrary as fire and water in matter of justification, for
faith leans only upon Christ.

3. Romish Doctrine teaches a man to doubt of his salvation, and that no man
can be assured of it without special revelation, it were presumption: We hold
the clean contrary; A man may be assured by a special faith. Bring it now to
the Canon. Our Creed teaches us to believe remission of sins, to believe our
selves to be true members of the Church, and life everlasting to belong unto
us: (for else we believe no more than the Devils do:) so as every one must
give all diligence to make his election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and to know that
Christ is in him, 2 Cor. 13.5. This is the first Rule.

2. True Doctrine joins the two Tables together.
Secondly, all sound Doctrine tyeth the two Tables together: for as the two
Tables stand in relation one to the other; so that Doctrine must needs be
unsound, which combineth not justice with piety, and with faith, charity. This
Rule is taken out of Levit. 6.5. If a man have wronged his neighbor, either by
open robbery, or secret defrauding of him, he must come and offer to the Lord
for his trespass, and he shall be forgiven; but on this condition, that he
bring the whole sum which he has defrauded, and add a fifth part more unto
it, and restore it to the owner the same day that he offers for his
trespass. According unto which our Savior wishes to leave the gift at the
Altar, and go and be first reconciled to our brother, Matthew. 5.23. The Lord
rejects all sacrifices abstract from mercy, Esaias 1.12. What have I to do with
the multitude of your sacrifices, while your hands are full of blood? and
Ierem. 7.9, 10. Will ye steal, and murder, and commit adultery, and yet come
and stand before me in this house wherein my name is called upon? And our
Savior reprooveth the gross conceit of the Pharisees, who taught the people,
that if they did give oblations to the Church, though they releeved not their
poor parents, yet God was well pleased with them: This Doctrine tried by this
touchstone, was found counterfeit, Matthew. 15.5.

Hence we infer, if any Doctrine be prejudicial to men, it is false and
unsound: As for example: First, the Church of Rome maintains a Monkish life,
wherein their cloystred persons must leave the societies of men, and sequester
themselves from all company to give themselves to fasting and prayer. Bring
this Doctrine to this trial, and we shall find it most unsound; because God
is served not only in the duties of the first Table, but also of the second;
and this kind of life is against the light of nature, and the good of all
societies, both in Church and Commonwealth, and family; all which claim part
in every man: and is a thrusting of men out of their callings, in which they
are commanded to abide, 1 Cor. 7.20. Luther de votis Monasticis prooveth, It is
against the whole first Table; As placeing confidence in it: As setting up a
will worship: As taking Gods name in vain by an unlawful vow, etc. So
against the whole second Table: 1. Impeaching the honor of parents, and
exempting themselves from civil authority, so against the fifth Commandment.
2. They eat not their own bread, against the sixth Commandment. 3. They
raise Sodom and Gomorrah from their ashes, against the seventh Commandment.
4. They live in idleness, and are unprofitable burdens of the earth, contrary
to the eighth Commandment. 4. They bear false witness of the merit of single
life, against chastity and holy wedlock, contrary to the ninth Commandment.
6. They teach, that burning is no sin, as Pigius: But a condition under which
divina bonitas et sapientia, that is, Gods goodness and wisdom has put us,
as under hunger and thirst: clean contrary to the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7. who
says, It is better to marry than to burn.

2. In cases of trespass, the same Church appoints auricular confession, and
canonical satisfaction, in which they must give oblations, and satisfy the
Church: But if it were sound Doctrine, it would appoint reconciliation and
restitution to the parties wronged; which is the least part of their thoughts.

3. The same Church appoints a great number of fasts and penances for offenses:
But so long as they fast to strife and debate, and smite with the fist of
wickedness, anathematizing and cursing Prince and people, excommunicating all
such as walk not in their rules; yea patronizing and pardoning cutthroat
villains sent from them to murder Christian Kings, and blow up Parliament
houses; all the world sees these are not the fasts which God has chosen. This
Rule condemns all Iesuitisme which is the rebels Catechism; But we must
distinguish Popish Sinonimaes: between excommunicating out of Churches, and
excommunicating out of Kingdoms: between keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
keys of the kingdoms of the earth: between absolving sinners from sins,
and absolving of subjects from duties: between fishing of men, and fishing for
kingdoms: between teaching of souls, and killing of bodies: between power
directive, and power coactive: between ministration, and domination: between
the sword spiritual, and civil. This Jesuitical confusion of phrases has
been the confusion of the world.

4. The same Church has a long time challenged a power of the keys, of
binding and loosing, over all other persons, but wickedly changed the
Ecclesiastical power, into a mere Civil power, to the great mischief of the
world: for thereby they do unjustly and tyrannically take upon them to depose
Kings and Queens from their regency, to deprive them of their Crowns and
Scepters, to free subjects from all oaths of allegiance, and bind them to
become their executioners where ever they can take them at advantage. And all
this by the power of the keys.

5. The same Church has ratified by decree, that the vows of children
undertaking their religious orders shall be in force; and, that close and
clandestine marriages made between children, without all consent of wise and
careful parents, are allowable and indissoluble. Which Doctrine, Per Calcatum
aiunt perge pa^rem. Sola in hoc genire pietas est, esse crudelem.
brought to this Rule, is proved most prejudicial to the power of parents
given them in the fifth Commandment, which injoynes children to honor their
Parents, especially in matters of moment, such as are their marriage and choice
of their callings.

6. Some Divines have undertaken the defense of some kind of usurie,
especially to the rich, and so have animated some in that course. But this
Doctrine brought to this trial will not hold, seeing it is such a consumer of
men's estates, and so uncharitable, as the Lord would not admit of it in Israel,
Ab hoc usuram e^ige quem non sit crime^ occidere. Ambr.
but among his enemies whom he would have quite consumed. Besides, men deceive
themselves in their distinction: for God in the case of usurie distinguishes
not between the rich and poor of Israel, but between the Israelites and
Canaanites, between strangers and brethren. The poor indeed are mentioned,
but only thus: 1. Because they have most need to borrow. 2. Because they are
most liable to wrong and oppression. 3. The commandment of Loan is made
especially for their good. 4. Usury on them is a more grievous sin and
crying, Exodus 22.21. Object. But if it were unlawful, God would forbid it to
the stranger. Sol. 1. The moral Law forbids it to all. 2. It is by God
dispensed with by a Judicial, for the hardness of the hearts of the Jews,
for the unjustice of the Gentiles, who exacted it on the Jews, and for the
overthrow of the Canaanites. The word is, Deuteronomy. 23.20. not Lemicro but Lamicro,
extranc^ huic, that is, to this stranger, meaning the Canaanite. 3. It is no
more lawful than Poligamy or a bill of divorce, which was against the
Institutor. 4. When the Canaanites were destroyed, all usury was afterward
absolutely forbidden: Psalm. 15. and Prove. 28.8. Jerome on Lev. 18. Vide
profectum, etc. Ieron.
In the Law usurie is forbidden only to brethren, but in the Prophets to all
absolutely: and in the Gospel much more, because all are now brethren. So much
for the second Rule.

Thirdly, in all doubtful Doctrines, 3. That is the true Doctrine which gives
most glory to God.
that is the truth which gives most glory to God, and least unto any creature:
for as God in all things intends his own glory most, (which is the maine end
of all his courses) so does his word, which after a special manner resembles
himself. This word so propounds all the frame of man's salvation from the
lowest staire to the highest, as God may have his glory in all: 1 Cor. 1.29.31.
That he that glories might glory in the Lord: and that no creature might share
with him in his glory, which he never would communicate to any other: verse 29.
(...), That no flesh might glory in his presence. To apply this to particulars.

1. The Church of Rome maintains a Doctrine, that Saints departed are to be
invocated, as Mediators (though not of redemption, yet) of intercession. We
affirm the contrary according to the Scripture. Bring now this point to this
trial, whether gives more glory to God, and less to the creature; we, who
affirm him to be a God hearing prayer, who only knows the hearts of the
sons of men, and is omnipresent to hear, and omnipotent to help, (all which
are incommunicable Attributes of the Deity:) or they which against the
Scripture rob God of this part of his honor, and bestow it on creatures
which are not capable of it? Isay 63.16.

2. The same Church of Rome teaches, that to the justifying of a sinner before
God is required not only an imputed righteousness, but an habitual
righteousness, which are works of charity, which makes a man of just more
just. We in this Doctrine of Justification utterly exclude humane merit. Now
bring this different Doctrine to this Rule: Whether gives more to God, and
less to the creature; that Doctrine of Justification by faith only, which
utterly takes from man all that he can think of to justify himself withal,
and ascribes the whole work of salvation from first to last unto God: or that
Doctrine which puffes up man in conceit of some righteousness in himself, and
takes from the Lord this honor to be He that justifies the ungodly? And this
is the Rule, to which the Apostle brings the same Doctrine to be tried, Romans
3.27, 28. By what Law is boasting excluded? Not by the Law of works, but by
the Law of faith: And because this Doctrine excludes all boasting, he
concludes, Therefore is a man justified by faith without the works of the Law.
See Romans 4.2.

3. The Church of Rome also maintains the Doctrine of humane satisfactions,
and enjoynes many penances to satisfy the justice of God for venial sins:
We on the contrary teach, that we must every day pray for the pardon of our
daily sins. Now bring this different Doctrine to this Trial: Which gives
more to God, and less to the creature; that which applies an infinite justice
to God, the violation of which must be made up by an infinite person; or that
which imputes to him an imperfect justice, such as a sinful man may satisfy,
and an imperfect mercy, if our own works make not supply?

4. The same Church teaches, and so the Church of the (...) that God has
elected all to salvation, and Christ has redeemed all and every particular
man. We according to the Scripture hold, that God has chosen only heirs of
salvation, and that Christ for his part redeemed not all particulars, but all
kinds: for he that would not pray for the world, would not die for the world.
How shall we bolt out the truth? Answ. John 17.9.
Bring the Doctrine to this Rule: We ask, If God have elected and Christ have
redeemed every particular man, why is not every particular man saved? Because
(say they) God foresawe who would believe, and who would not: which is to make
Gods election frustrate, as electing such as he foresaw would not believe, as
also dependant on the will of man, and man's will to overrule Gods: And not man's
salvation to depend on Gods will and election; than which nothing can be more
dishonorable to the Majesty of God, Romans 9* 19. Who ever resisted his will.
Add hereunto, that in the Doctrine of falling from grace, Gods glory
suffers, for thereby the seed of God loses the glory of being
incorruptible, and Gods truth suffers, who says it abides for ever.

5. The same Church teaches, according to their ordinary practice at this day,
that the Pope has power to make laws to bind the conscience; he has power
to dispense with lawful oaths, and untie the conscience which Gods law has
bound: he has power to dispense for marriages within degrees prohibited by
God, and the like: We deny any such power can agree to any mortal creature,
and hold it a tyrannical usurpation. Bring these and the like positions to
this Trial. Whether gives more glory to God, and less to the creature, to
acknowledge him the Lord of his own Law, only above it, or to set a Prelate
not only in his chair of estate, but above God, who is able to reverse and
abrogate his Laws at his pleasure, and to sit in the consciences of men, which
is the Lords own and only consistory. That is the third Rule.

4 All true Doctrine leads unto Christ,
Fourthly, all sound Doctrine directs and leads unto Christ, magnifies and
sets up Christ, who is the end of the Law and Gospel: and as Christ prooved the
Jews not to be of God, because they dishonored him the Son of God, John 8.
So whatsoever Doctrine dishonours Christ, cannot be of God. And, if we bring
the whole body of Popery to this rule of Trial, it will appear not to be of
God.

The ambitious word merit not found in the Scripture.
1. Their whole Doctrine of merits and humane satisfactions, how does it obscure
the merit of Christ, yea abolish the absolute satisfaction of Christ who has
paid the uttermost farthing? This Doctrine makes Christ but a piece of a
Savior, half a Jesus, for every man must be a Jesus to himself; and, whereas
the Apostle says, There is no other name given under heaven whereby to be
saved, Acts 14, 12.
hereby every man has a name to save himself.

2. That damnable Idol of the Mass, wherein (as they say) Christ is offered by
the Priest for the sins of the quick and dead, what is it else but an utter
renouncing of Christ's own and only oblation, arguing it to be imperfect, and
an insufficient satisfaction? For so the Apostle concludes against Leviticall
Sacrifices, Heb. 7.27. They were many because they were imperfect; this is
perfect, therefore but one and once. See chap. 9.26.

3. Their unholy Order of Priesthood and sacrificing shavelings, what else does
it but wage battle against the Priesthood of Christ, which being after the
Order of Melchizedeck, is (...), and cannot pass from him to any other, Heb.
7.23, 24. There were many Priests, because of their impotency, but this man
has an everlasting Priesthood, therefore needs no successor on earth, nor
had none as they had.

4. The maine pillar of Popery, which stands on the Popes headship over the
Church, how dishonorable is it to Christ, who, being every where present by
his Spirit and grace, is implied thereby to be absent, and to stand in need of
a Vicar? Besides, it makes the dear Spouse of Christ a Monster, having two
heads being but one body. Besides, the infinite constitutions of this supposed
head clean contrary to the laws and government of the one and only lawful
head and King of his Church, Jesus Christ.

5. Their Doctrine of unwritten Traditions, Council. Trident*
which are pari pietatis affectu to be received with the written word, how
manifestly does it dishonor the Prophetical office of Christ? How could he be
the only true Prophet, if he left half the will of his Father unrevealed,
but lapt up in obscure Traditions? How could he satisfy his Prophetical
office, if he detained from his Church some Doctrine needful for her to know?
How was he faithful in the house of God as a Son, if he came behind Moses
his servant, Heb. 3, 5, 6.
who brought a perfect pattern from the Mount, for the direction of the
smallest things in the Tabernacle? How did he teach us all things when he came,
as Ioh. 4.25. if the Church may still coin new Articles of faith? as Scotus.
Before the Lateran Council Transubstantiation was no Article of faith: it
seems our Savior left something alone for the Council of Trent, and the
Lateran Council to determine, and that the Samaritan was deceived.

6. Their blasphemous prayers to Saints, Angels and Relikes, how pull they men
from the Mediator who is but One, and dishonor his Intercession which now he
makes for the Saints? 1 Timothy: 2, 5 Rom: 8, 34
while they have one prayer to Christ, they have twenty to the Virgin. What can
be more blasphemous and more derogatory to his power, and glory, than to join
with him in the administration of his kingdom the Virgin Mary? that he must
dispense justice, but she mercy; yea in the omnipotent work of his mediation
saluting her, and praying unto her by the title of Mediatrix hominum,
Mediatresse of men: nay giving her a power far above him, Iure matris impera,
Command him in the right of a mother. Thus our mighty God and Savior is become
an underling to a poor creature. Tit. 2, 13


These can be no sound Doctrines, which so dishonor the Son of God, and
spoil him of his royalties, as the soldiers did spoil him of his garments,
Phil. 2, 9, 10
to whom the Father has given a name above all names, that all tongues should
confess him, and all knees bow unto him. So much for the fourth Rule.

Fifthly, that is the soundest Doctrine, which most restraines corrupt nature
and fleshly affections: Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God has appeared, 5. That
is most sound Doctrine which is most contrary to corrupt nature
teaching us to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts: which is the maine
intendment of the discovery of grace. a maine fruit of the Gospel is the
crucifying of the flesh with the lusts, Gal. 5, 24 Col. 3, 5
and a mortifying of our members upon earth, which of all things a carnal man
cannot brook. Therefore in all differences of Doctrines, observe which of them
presses most precise obedience to Gods will, which of them gives least
toleration to the least offense of God, which of them is most unpleasant and
unsavory to the nature of man, which of them most boulsters and gives liberty
to natural inclination, and you have tried the truth from error. For example:

The whole Doctrine of Popery, how pleasing is it to the nature of man, seeing
there is nothing in it but a natural man may perform it without any special
grace of regeneration? which indeed is the chief cause why a great part of
the world is taken with the love of it.

Vanus est labor iqui Scripturis Hupenditur* ^^ius de expresso Et, verbo Dei:
nos ipsas Scripturas facessere iubenius, et Deum loquentem potius audiemus,
quam ut ad egena is^a element^ nos convertamus.
1. What a deal of pains cuts it off in reading, studying, and meditating on
the Scriptures, while it teaches, that Ignorance is the mother of devotion,
and, it is lost labor which is spent on the Scripture? and while they burn
the Scriptures as formerly wicked King Ahaz did, or Antiochus, or Maximinus,
calling them the Heretics Books: so as a man may truly say, that the Papists
hate the Bible, as a thief hates the gallows: This is far easier than to
call after knowledge, and cry after understanding, to seek her as silver, and
to search as after treasures.

2. How can there be devised a more easy faith, and sooner got, than confusedly
to believe as the Church believes, without any distinct knowledge or faith of
their own? A faith got without all pains, and of which we may well say, It is
worth nothing; because it is had for nothing: a faith wherein they never need
to look to the essential marks and sound growth of it. This is sooner done
than to prove a man's own self whether he be in the faith or no. 2 Cor. 13.5.


3. How does it please nature to magnify nature, to deny it to be so corrupt
and dead as it is, but half dead, as the man between Jericho and Jerusalem,
Luke 10, 30.
to tell it it has good preparations and abilities of it self to conceive and
practice much good, and with a little help it can keep the Law, and come out
of Gods debt? What man wanting grace would not find something in nature to
bring before God to bring himself into request by? For every natural man is a
Iusticiary. Whereas our Rule says that it is a new creation, which is of
nothing, Ephesians. 2, 1.
and a quickening where no life of grace was, yea a death in sins and
trespasses; and not a recovery as out of a swoone.

4. How pleasing is it to nature, to be told and taught, that no pains is
required to keep the heart, nor to resist the first motions to evil, which
they say are not evil: that some sins are venial in their nature, put away
with a light sigh, a knock on the breast, or an Ave Mary: that a man may lie
in sport or officiously for his advantage; and if he steal a small thing, it
is but a venial thing? This will please the carnal man far better than to
tell him, that he may not lie for Gods greatest glory, and that the very first
thought of stealing the least trifle is damnable. But, what is all this but to
speak peace to the wicked man, to whom the Lord says there is no peace, Esaias
57. ult.

5. Who would not be a Papist, if that Doctrine were not prooved false by this
Rule, which offers release from sins, and from hell; yea offers the whole
kingdom of heaven for money? who would not swear, whore, profane the Lords
day, rise up against Magistrates, oppress, riot, and addict himself to all
villainy, if for a little money he may have a pardon for all his sins: or
suppose he must needs go a while into the kitchen of Purgatory, yet for a
little money or lands to the Church and Priests for Masses, he is sure to be
remooved to Gods parlour in heaven?

6. In our whole courses let one Preacher come and call men to a diligent study
of the word, or to a strict observing of the whole Saboth, let him seek to
pull out of men's mouths their own words, out of their hands their cards, or
cups, and injoyne them a constant sanctification of the Lords rest; let him
call them to the often receiving of the Sacrament, and strict preparation to
it: let him call them to circumspection against the least sin, to zeal and
profession in holiness: oh what a tedious and irksome Doctrine is all this!
Now farewell liberty, sports, and all good company; what a precise fellow have
we gotten to make fools of us, etc! Let another Preacher (as some such there
be) come and tell us, A man may do well enough without so much preaching, and
what should private men meddle so much with the Scripture? That to spend the
Saboth so religiously and strictly, is Jewish, and not so necessary: That men
may take some liberty to play and recreate themselves on the Saboth day: That
it is not good to be overforward in religion, for that were to smell of purity,
and be too strict, yea wise overmuch: That Ministers may do well, and win
their people by being good companions: That men be men, not Angels, nor God so
strict in so small matters: Here Is a man indeed that winnes the spurs, he
carries Towns and Countries after him: Here is a Preacher for our people, as
was once said of the Prophet that prophecies of wine and strong drink. Micah
2, 11
But who is the true Preacher now by our Rule, he that carries the general
applause of the multitude, or he that is the greater enemy to the liberty of
the flesh? Oh were we wise to apply this Rule, Gods pure ordinances would get
strength apace, and our selves should thrive apace by the Doctrine we hear.

The sixth and last Rule for trial of Doctrines, 6 That is the soundest
Doctrine that most soundly comfort distressed consciences
is this: That Doctrine which most soundly comfort distressed consciences,
is the soundest, and to be embraced. For the end of all Scripture, Romans 15.4.
is, That we through patience and comfort might have hope: and the Prophet,
Psalm. 19.8. says, The testimonies of God rejoice the heart. The reason why God
has given learned tongues, is, to speak words of comfort to the weary: And
most excellent is that in Gal. 6.16. Isay 50 4
Peace shall be to him that walks by this rule, and mercy, and upon the Israel
of God. The Gospel is a word of peace, and glad tidings of salvation. And
therefore that Doctrine which brings the most welcome message to a distressed
conscience, is the true Doctrine, most agreeable to the Gospel. To make some
application.

1. We teach, that a man may be certain of his salvation in this life by an
ordinary and special faith; because faith assures the soul of pardon of
sin, and present favor of God, and brings in comfort, as Matthew. 9.2. Jesus
seeing their faith, said, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven
thee: it brings peace, and boldness with God, Romans 5.1, 2. it brings in joy of
faith unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. But the Papists, and some amongst
our selves hold there can be no such certainty of salvation, but conjecturall
and probable, and deceitful. Bring this Doctrine to this Rule: A poor soul
afflicted in conscience, sees nothing but Gods wrath, and hell ready to swallow
him, he is afraid of damnation which he knows he has deserved: whether has
more comfort, for a Papist to tell him of the unspeakable love of God, here is
an emplaster and remedy, but you must not be so presumptuous as to apply it;
all this increases the torment: or for him that brings the emplaster, to say,
here is the unspeakable love of God, the unsearchable grace and merit of
Christ, here take and apply it, hold the comfortable possession of Christ,
which enrighteth and entitleth you into the unchangeable love of God? Here the
heart rests not in the emplaster, but in the application of it: Popish Doctrine
is like an emplaster to a broken bone, but kept in the pocket.

2. What uncomfortable Doctrine is it, that they teach us to seek life in the
Law, which is to seek life in death, because of our weakness? Gal. 3.21. If
there were a Law that could have given life, righteousness should have been
by the Law, Romans 8.3. The Son of God supplied what was impossible to the Law
by the infirmity of our flesh. What an uncomfortable Doctrine then is it, that
we must place our hope in our own righteousness, and that the Gospel is
nothing else but a more perfect Law than Moses was? Surely if we ground our joy
in our selves, it shall be like that of Israel, dancing before the Calfe of
their own making, Exodus 32.16. as short and unsound.

3. What an uncomfortable Doctrine is that of falling away from grace, and out
of Gods favor? What comfort can I have of my faith and hope, if of a true
child of God to day, I may become a child of the Devil, and be cast into
hell to morrow? What glorious and unspeakable joy can there be in such a
persuasion, 1 Pet. 1.8.
but rather a desperate fear of final rejection? No, it is the continuance of
our joy that makes it so unspeakable: and this is the sure anchor of our hope,
that Gods love is unchangeable, Verse 5.
and he preserves us by his power to salvation, saying as Isaac, He is blessed,
and he shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. and as Pilate in Christ's superscription,
What I have written, I have written, John 19.22. His Decrees are as the Laws
of the Medes and Persians which cannot be altered, Dan. 6.8. Whom he once loves
he loves to the end, Ioh. 13.1. and also upholds them to love him to the end.

4. What an uncomfortable Doctrine is it to a wounded soul, that he must come
upon pain of damnation once in a year, and confess all his sins to a
Priest, against whom he has not sinned? he must confess a debt to him to
whom he owes nothing, and to him who cannot remit it? Which is so far from
being an ease to a wounded conscience, as that it is indeed a very rack and
gibbet to it. For, how can he confess all his sins, which himself cannot
understand? Certainly if no man can number his sins, no man can confess
them. David confessed to God, Psalm. 19.12.
and obtained remission, Psalm. 32.5. The Prodigal went from his father, and
returned to his father, and confessed, and was received again, Luke 15.18, 19,
20.

5. How full of uncomfortablenesse is their Doctrine concerning the Word and
Sacraments, the special means ordained for our strength and comfort? For the
Word: If thy word (says David) had not been my comfort I had perished in my
trouble. Psalm: 129, 92.
But Popish Doctrine takes away the word from the people, which is wisdom to
the simple, sight to the blind, light to them that are in darkness, and life
to the dead. What a dismal thing is it for a soldier to be sent to the field
against a multitude of powerful and deadly enemies, but first bereave him of
all his weapons?

For the Sacraments: If their Doctrine be true, that the efficacy of the
Sacrament depends on the intention of the Priest, who can know when it is
effectual but himself? What man knows whether he receive the Sacrament, or
no, or whether the Sacrament do him any good, seeing he cannot know the
Priests intention?

So much for the application of Rules unto Doctrines.

Now to the Rules applyable unto practice.

The first Rule respects God, three ways: 1. from his word, 2. in his
presence, 3. for his glory. All actions must be done, 1. By virtue of a word.


I. For the word of God we must labor to bring to every one of our actions,
1. A precept or commandment, calling for obedience: What I command, that do
only: else will be said, Who required these things at your hands? Isay 1.12.
2. A promise confirming us in our obedience; for, as the former gives us a
calling and leave, so this gives success. If thou be in Gods work, thou
art under his protection, and may boldly pray for a blessing promised. 3. A
threatening, to restrain disobedience, if thou be either negligent in
well-doing, or doing that thou should not. For all these, see one instance,
Genes. 6.18, 19. Noah in making the Arc, 1. had a commandment, Make an Arc:
2. A promise, Enter into it, and be safe: 3. A threat, All that enter not shall
be drowned. God is the first mover in himself, and he must be the first mover
in all our motions and actions.

II. As every action must be undertaken by his word, so also it must be done in
his presence: 2 In Gods presence.
Henoch walked with God, Genesis 5.22. David set the Lord always before him,
Psalm. 16.8. Moses by faith saw him that is invincible, Hebr. 11.27. This will
fear us from sin, as the Judges eye curbes a malefactor; and quicken us in
good duties, because our Masters eye is still upon us: and comfort us in
troubles for well-doing, because our Master is with us to save us.

III. As by his word and his sight, 3. For Gods glory. 1 Cor. 10, 30
so must I undertake every thing even the smallest, for his glory: Whether I
eat, or drink, or whatsoever I do, I must therein make my self serviceable
for his glory. This caveat will hinder all things, which would any way
dishonor God. Moses will not leave an hoof behind him at Pharaohs request,
because he looks at Gods glory. Nehemiah for Gods glory seemed to neglect his
own safety and life, chap. 6.11. Should such a man as I fly? Who being as I
would go into the Temple to live? I will not go.

The second Rule respects the action it self to be done: and this both for
substance and for circumstances.

1. Every action for the substance of it must beseem the Gospel: Phil. 1.27.
Only let your conversation be such as beseems the Gospel of Christ: our
actions must not only be squared to the rule of the Law, but to the profession
of the Gospel. This rule is of large extent, and appliable to every action:
and a man should say thus with himself, What? is this action honorable to my
profession? is it a piece of my general calling of a Christian? The Gospel is
an holy Gospel, and I professing it must pass all my time in all manner of
holy conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.17. Does this action savor of holiness? The
Gospel is from heaven, and heavenly, and my conversation, if I profess it,
must be in heaven, Col. 3.2. Phil. 3.20. Does this action relish of
heavenly-mindednesse, and of a conversation without covetousness? To join
practice with profession, beseemes the Gospel: otherwise, to speak well of
religion, without the work of it, is as if an hungry man should speak of
meat when he has nothing to eat. Liberal sciences are for contemplation,
Divinity and Christianity for practice. We must not content our selves to see
our duties in our places, as we see Cities in a Map which we were never
acquainted with.

2. Every action must be done well, Every action must be done in due
circumstances.
in due circumstances: for in things, which in themselves are not sins, much
sin lies in the undue and unfit circumstances of them. See an instance: Is
it not lawful for a King to number his people, both in respect of tributes,
and levying of armies, to impose on them oaths, and services of subjection?
Yes: David sinned in numbering the people, how
But circumstances made this unlawful and sinful in David. 1. Because he did
it in pride, to know his power and strength, without cause. 2. Because it was
in fleshly confidence, on the multitude of his army. 3. Because it was in idle
curiousity, he would know that which God would not have known, who had
promised they should be innumerable. 4. Because he neglected that word and
commandment, Exodus 30.12, 13. That when the people were numbered, every one
should pay half a shekel lest they were destroyed: and so many ways sinned.

Again, is it not lawful for a parent to bewail the death of his Son,
especially if violent and untimely, who seems to be taken away in his sin,
without any testimony of repentance? Yes: But some circumstances made it very
unseasonable for David to testify so great sorrow for Absoloms death, as Ioab
wisely signifies, 2 Samuel 19.5. for although he had just cause to mourn for
Absalom, because himself had been indulgent, and wanting in his education:
and besides, though he knew by Nathans Ministry, that his sins had brought him
into this strait, wherein he could hardly tell whether to overcome or be overcome
was more miserable; yet by exceeding in sorrow at that time, David's mourning
for Absalom culpable, 4 reasons.
1. he seemed not to be so thankful unto God as he should for victory against
seditious persons. 2. He preferred a private affection before the public
safety. 3. He showed unthankfulness to the army, by whose power and peril
himself and his kingdom was in safety, he shamed the faces of his servants
which saved his life. 4. He thought not of the danger of sudden insurrection
and present rebellion, which Ioab well perceived, verse 7. So as it was lawful
moderately to mourn, but not with such excess and testimony as was joined
with offense of his people, with neglect of his own danger, and with the
hazard of public peace.

But let us now see David who had failed in not observing circumstances,
notably graceing himself again in such accurate observance of circumstances,
as made him refuse a very lawful action when the circumstance so required. 2 Samuel 23.17. Being marvelous desirous to drink of the water of the well of
Bethelem, three mighty men brake into the host of the Philistims, and drew
water, and brought it to David to drink. David now had power and need to
drink it, Why David refused to drink the water of Bethelhem, 3 reasons.
but would not, but powered it out upon the ground before the Lord. 1. Because
he would testify his thankfulness to God, who had both given him such men,
and also preserved them. He is not proud of them, neither ascribes the happy
event to their power or fortitude, but to God. 2. Because (in great wisdom)
he would not have his subjects rashly to thrust themselves into such dangers.
He feeds not their rash confidence, but wills them (in effect) to be diligent
in avoiding of danger. 3. He would not satisfy his own desire by the extreme
peril of his subjects, but if they by such an hazard overcome their enemies,
he will overcome himself, he will show how dear his subjects lives are unto
him.

The third Rule respects the Agent: Every action must be done by a due agent
in whom three things are requisite. 1. He must be a good man, a good tree,
else there will be no good fruit. 2. The person must be pleasing in this
particular action: and that is, when it is done by faith: for whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin, Romans 14. ult. Let the action be never so indifferent, never
so small, yea never so good, if I do it with an erroneous or doubtful
conscience, it is sin to me. 3. He must in doing any thing contain himself
within his special calling, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in that calling
to which he is called. For many things are well done, out of duty and office,
which same things are sinful, done without just warrant and calling. Let a
thing be never so just, if it be done out of a man's way, it loses the beauty
and justice. Absalom had justly deserved death, but Ioab slew him unjustly,
because he was warned by David to spare him. Now David had the power over his
life, so had not Ioab. Elijah calls for fire from heaven against his enemies,
and justly, 2 King. 1.10.12. But if the Apostles attempt it, Luke 9.54. they
shall justly be reproved; because even the best examples are not to be followed
without divine vocation or calling. How Elias did well in calling for fire from
heaven, and not the Apostles. Two Differences.
For the difference between these holy men lay in the matter of their calling.
Elijah knew what spirit he was off, being stirred up by Prophetical instinct,
and was certain of Gods will: but the knew not what spirit they were of, being
stirred by an humane spirit lusting after revenge, Luke 9, 45.
Elijah had a singular spirit, and special vocation to revenge on Gods
enemies: But the office of Christ and his Apostles, was, to save sinners, and
bring them to repentance.

To preach the word is a worthy work, 1 Timothy 3.1. but for a shoo-maker or an
artizan to undertake it, is base and unworthy. To baptize the child of the
believing parent is most necessary and fit: but for a woman, or a midwife, or
private person is neither necessary nor lawful.

The fourth Rule concerns our brother, toward whom in all things we must
express two virtues. 1. Charity and brotherly love. 2. Care of his edification.


I. The Rule of charity is in that precept, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. Matthew. 22, 39.
Then look what I would not (out of sound judgment) have him do to me, To
love our neighbor as our selves, how.
I must not do to him: not offering to him what I would not have offered to my
self. The meaning of the Rule is, that I must embrace every man with the same
kind of love wherewith I love my self, although I am not always bound to the
same degree. For suppose that I be in danger with another friend, I can save
one of us two, and but one, here I must save my self, and not him. Object. But
we desire in this case, that the other should save us, and not himself, and
therefore doing as we would be done unto, we should save him, and not our
selves. Answ. That which we justly desire to be done to us we must do to
others: but this is an unjust desire in this comparison: for God has ordained
degrees of men for degrees of love; first our selves, then the household of
faith, first our own families, and then others.

Object. The widow of Sarepta had baked a little flower for her self, and she
bestowed it on Elijah, when it would not serve them both.

Answ. 1. She certainly knew the meal should serve both her self and her
son, and also the Prophet, partly by divine instinct, and partly by Elijahs
words. 2. She had experience by the miracle, that the oil and flower wasted
not, but increased, as Elijah had spoken, 1 King. 17.16.

II. In doing any action in the sight of others, I must have care that I be so
far from scandalizing, that I must edify my brother. For suppose a thing be
in it self indifferent, or lawful; yet if I cannot do it but I must offend
him, I must forbear. 1 Cor. 8.13. I will never eat flesh while I live, before
I will offend my brother. And, Let all things be done to edification, Romans
14.21.

But this Rule must be understood with these cautions: 1. It must be a weak
brother: 2. to forbear indifferent things, not necessary duties: 3. forbear
only for a time, till he may be instructed if he will: 4. in such indifferent
things as the life stands not in; our forbearance may not impair our life or
health, for then it loses indifferency.

If now we shall apply many of our actions to these and the like Rules, we
should see the crookedness of them, which yet we esteem straight enough. See
it in some instances.

I. Men in losses and extraordinary crosses seek out (as they say) and
commonly and boldly run to the witch or cunning man, and the losing witch is
thought a public good, or commodity to the whole Country where he is. But lay
this action to these Rules or any of them. 1. Gods word prohibiteth and
threatens it. 2. For Gods presence: thou have run from God to the Devil,
and renounced God by depending on Satan for help. 3. For Gods glory: thou
could not more dishonor him than by so doing. 4. For the means: thou have
renounced lawful means, sanctified by God, and have used such as for all
worldly gain should not have been used. 5. Does it beseem the Gospel, or a
believer, to run in post have to Satan? Is it because there is no God in
Israel? Did Saul ever do so till God was gone from him? 6. For thy self the
Agent: thou art a plain infidel, yea worse than an infidel; there being no
cure but by faith in the Devil: thou have run out of thy calling, have cast
off the yoke of God, and by the hand and help of the Devil have avoided the
hand of God for the present; to the scandal of thy brethren, and the wounding
of thine own soul.

II. Many addict themselves to many sports and recreations on the Saboth day:
Oh the Saboth was made for man, and not man for the Saboth, etc. Mark 2, 27.
But bring this to the forenamed Rules: 1. Where has God commanded it? Sure we
are he has commanded the sanctification of the Saboth day, which is the whole
and parts: Is this to sanctify a day to the Lord? 2. Whether makes more for
Gods glory, in whose sight we are, Saboth-dayes duties, or recreations? whether
dare we pray rather for blessing and success upon? in which have we more
comfort, and would have God to find us in? 3. Whether beseemes a Christian
better, who is commanded to cease from his ordinary calling and lawful
vocation, because they destroy the Saboths rest, and much more sports and play
less necessary? whether is recreation for rest, or labor? Whence we
conclude, that howsoever on the Saboth we may and must rejoice, yet our
rejoicing must be that of the Jews, Nehem. 8.12. that they understood the Law,
namely in things spiritual and holy.

III. Others work, and think they may, in their callings, in the morning and
evening of the Saboth: as some of our tradesmen and shopkeepers. Bring this
common practice to this Rule. 1. Gods word is express, Thou shall do no
manner of work, Ier. 17.21. 2. Have thou God in thy presence? he rested from
all his work. 3. Does it beseem that profession which is heavenly? Savours it
of heavenly contemplation, or base earthlinesse? 4. Art not thou run out of
thy way, seeing thy calling on the Saboth, is, wholly to cease from thy
calling, and do no work but works of mercy, and such as serve to preserve
the Ministry and Gods worship. 5. Is not the example as wicked as the action,
and the hurt to others more than the advantage to thy self? 6. The Psalm for
the Saboth directly meets with this objection, Psalm. 92.1. It is a good thing
to praise the Lord in the morning, and to declare thy truth in the evening and
in the night season. 7. If a man plow and thresh on the Saboth day, he is
counted a profaner of it, an Atheist, and so he is: and why not he also that
labors at the rack, or in the mill, or the boat? Alas the profanesse of
our days, that he that is drunk, diceth, cardeth, or swears on the Saboth is
counted honest and religious enough; and those that pass their Saboth worse
than beasts (which though they can do nothing to sanctify their rest, yet do
they nothing to profane it) are applauded, whilst conscionable observers of it
are scorned.

IV. For resorting to stage plays, and frequenting of places of idle resort
and unlawful games: which, would men bring to the Rule, they should not be so
frequented as they be. 1. Gods word is, Ephesians. 5, 3.
that such filthiness ought not to be named among Christians, much less
acted: and that we ought to pass away all our time in fear and trembling, 1
Pet. 1.17. 2. God is there present to take account of every idle word: Mat. ^2,
36.
and there is the passing of nothing but idle and hurtful words, against God
and man; and an holding of men's ears to them many hours together. 3. Would
thou willingly he should take thee at a play, or at cards or dice, when he
comes to judgment? 4. For one special circumstance; Are not men there in
women's apparel, contrary to Deuteronomy. 22.5. 5. For thy self, thou art neither in
thy general nor in thy special calling, and therefore art out of the way of
Gods protection. 6. For thy brethren: as thou maintainest the Players, or
gaming houses, or alleyes in an unlawful calling, so thou offendest others by
thy example; especially if thou be a Master or Magistrate that abettest such
ungodly and unlawful courses, thou sinnest by example, against duty, and
decorum. Oh let unthrifts so spend their time, and not thou who should
punish and repress them.

V. The last instance concerns our fashioning our selves in our apparel and
behaviors, both to the strange fashions of other countries, or the
fantastical fashion of our own. 1. Gods word is, Zeph. 1.8. I will visit the
Princes and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel. How has God visited the late strange fashion and coulor of yellow
ruffes, both in the deviser and first wearers; on which God has cast special
reproach, that in scorn not only chimney-sweepers, but hang-men in their
office taken it up: which yet some will not be warned by? 2. Whether does thy
conscience tell thee, that thou art assured, ^
that strange and fantastical fashions make thee as comely in Gods eye, and to
Jesus Christ whose spouse thou professest thy self to be? And whether dare
thou say, thou glorifiest God by them? Art thou sure thy conscience is neither
erroneous nor doubtful? 3. For the circumstances: have thou an eye to adorn
thy profession, with thy body? Or does it beseem the profession of holiness,
to run through all lightfashions? The Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.9. commands women to
array themselves with modesty and good works, as women professing the fear of
God. And garments should express the hidden man of the heart, ^ Pet: 3.3, 4
and show the sober fashion of our minds, and not the vain fashions of foreign
Countries. 4 For thy own person: do these fashions argue thee to be a believer,
whose chief care is to adorn the soul? Or can thou think the Lord Jesus
can be put on together with such fashions? 5. For thy brethren: how do thou
scandalize them, offending some, provoking others, and bringing a blott of
levitie upon thy self, whose good name should be a precious ointment, Eccles.
7, 3
and whose course in this behalf, should favor of grace and gravitie, suitable
to the gravest presidents of good and godly women, and the most sober of thy
rank and degree?

Object. Some will be ready to turn off all this which has been said, replying
thus, Alas man! you are too precise your self, and you would have us so too:
we cannot put on our clothes without you, nor take any recreation without your
leave, no nor yet with it.

Answ. According to the text, Try all things: And can he be too strict or
curious that must try every thing, even the least? Let me see that man that
thinks himself exempted from this precept, or any of his ways: No, no, there
is a strict Trial and account behind; and he shall best fit it, that is
strictest in Trial aforehand.

Hold that which is good.
THis precept is aptly knit to the former, and informs us what we should do
after we have examined and tried the truth, and has in it, 1. A Commandment:
Keep or hold. 2. A limitation: That which is good.


For the former: It is not enough lightly to examine our courses, no nor yet so
judicially as to find out the truth, if we go no further: as many who please
themselves, and feed their eyes with reading, and their minds with mere
speculation, but cleave to no sound opinion, but are unstable and unsettled in
all their ways. And therefore the Apostle knitteth to Trial, keeping or
holding: For, what a madness were it to try a piece of metal, and finding it
to be good gold, cast it away? which is the folly of many a man in the case of
sound and saving Doctrine, which is far more pure and precious than gold seven
times tried in the fire.

For the latter, we must try every thing, but not lay hold on every thing, and
not catch whatsoever comes next to hand, as many are ready to keep and hold,
but it is chafe in stead of good corn, and dross in stead of gold: as many
curious and dainty hearers, who are as men having ill stomachs, which cast up
wholesome and strong meat, and hold nothing but fruit and trash, which feed
and increase the humors there already: So wholesome and savoury Doctrine is
rejected, and a few fine sentences, savouring of wit or learning, fetched any
where but from the Scriptures, are held, and nothing else in comparison: Which
is with the Prodigal Son to feed upon husks in stead of the bread of his
fathers house. And therefore the Apostle limiteth us in our keeping, that only
which is good. Now as God is the Author, and his word the Rule of all
goodness, it follows, whatsoever God appoints, and his word approove, that is
good, and nothing else.

Every one is bound in conscience to keep whatsoever good thing he knows
approoved by the word of God. For the word keep, Doct. All things must be
tried, but only good things must be held.
requires a constancy in the known good, either of Doctrine or practice:
Deuteronomy. 4.6. These are the Commandments: Keep them, and do them: for that is
your wisdom. This is the general precept to all Gods people. For particular
Churches: Rev. 2.25. To the Church of Thyatira he says, That which ye have
already, hold fast till I come: and chap. 3.3. to the Church of Sardis,
Remember what thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent. And for
particular persons: 2 Timothy 3.14. But continue thou in the things thou have
learned: Tit. 1.9. Hold fast the faithful word. The like for all the sons
and daughters of wisdom: Prove. 4.4.13. Take hold of instruction and leave her
not, and keep her, for she is thy life.

Reason 1.
1. Satan and seducers will seek to snatch away the truth from us. This reason
the Apostle seems to imply in the composition of the word (...): as if he
had said, hold against all men, and all adversaries, which would withhold: hold
with both hands all good and holy truths, concerning faith and manners.
Thieves and robbers will meddle with no beggars, but where they have hope of a
booty: Satan and his agents lie most in ambush against such as embrace the
truth, and follow the thing that good is; there is the treasure of truth, the
wealth of grace, and a booty which Satan would feign finger: He makes many
on-sets to this purpose; and if we keep not our ground, (here called the
keeping of good) he pulls us from our hold, and easily surprizeth and draws
us to the contrary evil. We had need therefore so much the more watchfully to
hold that which is good, as our adversaries are watchful to rob us of all
our goods.

And, were it not that we had such enemies without us, our inward and bosom
companion, our own corrupt nature is ever soliciting us, and drawing us aside;
for were we of our selves inclinable to hold good things, the Apostle might
have spared a number of the like precepts to this: But the Spirit of God seeing
our disposition so rimie and full of holes, to let good things slip, and
perceiving our dullness and sleepiness, (with whom it is as with children, who
being once asleep, let things slip out of their hands, which before no
means could win from them:) yea and which is worse, that while we seem
waking, we hold weakly, as a thing which a man cares not whether he hold, or
no: therefore he supplies our need, and strengthens our weakness, and awaketh
our dullness, with this and the like exhortations, Hold that which is good.
Which show, that it is no less Christian virtue and fortitude to retain and
keep, Non minor est virtus quam quarere, parta tueri.
than to attain that which is good.

2. Hold and keep all sound Doctrine, because of the great utility or profit
thereof: Reas. 2.
for 1. It is the evidence of thy salvation, and of the inheritance of the
Saints: How carefully do men keep their Evidences, and lock them up safe in
the surest chests they have, because if they lose their Evidences, they may
easily lose their lands? So lose thou thy part of the word, thou losest thy
part of heaven. Shall men be wise to keep their Deeds and conveyances of
lands and leases so safe as no man shall cosen or cheat them of them, and
whatsoever casualty comes, these shall be provided for; and can it be wise or
safe for any to be careless in keeping the word, his evidence for heaven,
without which he has no tenure, nor assurance (out of his idle conceit) to one
foot in heaven? 2. Wholesome Doctrine is the staff and support of a man in the
way to heaven: A lame man, if he hold not his staff, falls downeright; and if
the word directs us not in our duty, and supports us in temptation, we fall
quite away. 3. The sound doctrine and truth of Gods word is a notable
preservative in dangers, so far as it is held unto. A man in peril of
drowning will catch and lay fast hold on any means of safety, and will lose
his hand before he will lose his hold: Every Christian is in this world as on
a dangerous sea; the Church is the ship, in which is salvation, represented
by the Arc; the anchor is faith, Heb. 6.9. the mast is the cross of Christ;
the prosperous wind is the Spirit of God; adverse winds tossing and tumbling
the Church, are persecutions, trials, temptations, afflictions; the fraught,
graces, good conscience, hope, love, and the like; and the haven is heaven. Now
lose the doctrine of faith, and shipwreck is presently made, 1 Timothy 1.19. good
conscience and all is lost: But hold the doctrine of faith sound and entire, by
the hand of faith, and all is safe.

3
3. There is but one right rule and way to attain salvation, even the truth,
which the Truth himself has purchased at a dear rate: For the word of life,
and the holy Gospel was not easily purchased, but by the precious blood of
Jesus Christ; and should we lightly esteem so dear and precious a purchase?
this will evince that it was never purchased for us: For, the Church for whom
it was purchased is honored with this title, to be the Pillar and keeper of
truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. for there in the Church fundamental truth fitteth as on a
rocky foundation: And every good man is a part of that good ground, described
Luke 18.15. who with honest and good hearts hear the word of God and keep it.

4. No man but desires comfort when he most needs it, especially in the hour
of death: 4
Now there is no surer way to provide and lay up comfort for these seasons,
than by careful keeping the truth. This ministered comfort to Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
etc. The Scriptures are the wells of consolation, Esaias 12.3.

5. It is not enough for a man that expects future salvation, to hear, 5
know or profess the truth, unless he abide and continue in it. Hence says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.2. Whereby ye are saved, if ye keep what I have
preached unto you. And our Savior tyeth blessedness not to those that hear
the word of God, but to them that keep it, Luke 11.28.

This serves to confute the Schoolmen, who have turned all Divinity into
questions, Use 1.
even the Articles of religion and fundamental points are turned into Vtrums,
and a questionary Divinity, from which no edification, no proficiency in piety
can be expected. These be most of them vain bablings, and oppositions of
science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20. As vain as if a man should dispute
whether the Sun be risen at noone: And yet in Popish Schools and Churches he
is not thought a teacher of any worth, who is not a Quodlibetary, and prepared
to dispute pro et con of the least apex or iota in Divinity: So as nothing can
be so certain or grounded but they must call it into question, and boldly
dispute and propound opposite reasons: which is far from this precept of
Holding that which is good. A far safer way they might learn of the Turks,
who suffer not a word of their Alcaron to be called in question under pain of
death.

Use 2.
Secondly, this reprooves many of our ordinary hearers, who are far to seek
in this precept. 1. Some come and hear much good and wholesome doctrine, but
hold little or none of it, but are like the tunnell that takes in the liquor at
one end, to let it out at the other; so many take in the word with one ear,
and let it out at the other: yea some that seem to take some content and
delight in the word while they hear, keep as little as the other: whom we
cannot compare fitlier than to the sive in the water, so long as it stays
there it is full of water, but take it out it keeps never a drop; so many
longer than the Church holds them, they hold nothing for an after-use. For how
comes it to pass that many men are so grossly ignorant of many principles of
religion (some not knowing at 60 years of age whether Christ was a man or no)
wherein they have been often instructed, but because they think it enough to
hear, and not to keep? How have many lost many worthy things in which they
have been greatly strengthened and comforted, but because they made no
conscience to keep what they seemed to have? 2. Some can hear and seem to
keep something, if they can carpe or catch any thing, either to feed their
own corruption, or to heap their displeasure upon the head of their teacher.
Ahab could remember that Micaiah never prophesied good unto him. Oh such a man
spoke many years ago against our government, he told us of our trades,
buying and selling, setting of rackes and vatts on the Saboth day; he was
busy with our fashions and habits, our games and recreations; he speaks
inconsideratly and uncharitably: And a great deal such they can hold and
mutter some four or five years after, as if they were spoken but yesterday.
But ask such men, what was the text of the last Sermon you heard but two days
ago? you put them into a study, and after a long pause and rubbing their
memory, they will perhaps tell you they do not remember. These men are like
the boulter poke, which lets out the finest flower, and if there be any bran or
husks, will be sure to keep it: And most opposite to our rule, because they
catch and hold not that which is good, but that which is worst and most
hurtful. The proud man will hold his fashions, and the fool his folly though
you bray him in a mortar, and the ambitious his error, if it will add but one
cubit to his height and state in this world. 3. There is a kind of Academicall
and Skepticall Christians, who notwithstanding all their hearing are unstaid
and unsettled in their judgments and courses, such as hold all things in
suspense and question, that they may admit of any thing that may make for their
profit or preferment: who walk not certainly in wisdoms way, for that does
try all things, and keeps that which is good: and how can he hold any good
thing that holds not the rule of good, which is the word?

Use 3.
Thirdly, let us frame our selves to this so necessary precept, to hold the
good lessons which are delivered unto us.

And for our direction herein we will consider, 1. The Rules of holding good.
2. The Means of holding good. 3. The motives thereunto.


Rules of holding good. 1 Upon trial.
The first is in the Text: Hold Doctrine after examination, when we have tried
it to be good and sound, 2 Timothy 3.14. Continue thou in the things which thou
have learned and art persuaded thereof: for the very keeping of good is not
acceptable, except it be out of faith and sound judgment. The Pharisees
thought they did God good service not only in their devotions, but in their
revenges and murders of the Saints, but all our service must be reasonable,
Romans 12.

2. Rule, Hold only the good: for the extent of keeping reaches only to
good, 2 Hold only good.
because many keep some good, but some evil also with it. The Jews will
worship God in the Temple, but keep their high places and altars too. Papists
will admit of Christ, but not part with Moses, they will worship God and
Christ, but Idols too. Many Protestants will serve Christ and Mammon too;
would walk in the Spirit, and in the flesh both at once; and think themselves
excused, because they hold some good, although mixed with some evil.

3. Rule. Hold all that is good: 3. Hold all that is good.
Some will not swear or curse often and ordinarily, but sometimes; nor by
great oaths, but ordinarily by smaller: but the rule is, Swear not at all.
Matthew. 5.
Some will sanctify some part of the Lords day, but if they hold all good,
they must sanctify the whole day as the Lord did. Magistrates will hold some
good, and look to civil peace and justice; but if they did hold all good,
they would look as carefully to duties of the first table, to Gods part as
well as their own. When Min^sters are diligent in doctrine, and careless in
life, they hold some good, but not all. Private men that carry themselves
soberly and civilly, and are fully content with the name of honest men, hold
some good; but they reform not their family, nor walk religiously in the
midst of their houses; and so are far from holding all good.

This is in matter of practice: So in matter of judgment. The truth and every
part of it is our birthright, says Cyprian: we must not lose a foot of it,
but hold the least truth. Many hold fast the maine grounds and articles of
religion, but in things of lesser moment are altogether regardlesse: as Bishop
Latimer thought at first that the cause of the Sacrament was rather to be
dissembled than suffered for; but considering better that he must hold all
that is good, himself happily suffered in it.

Nay we must not only hold truth in sense, but even the words wherein the
Spirit of God has conveyed it to us, not departing easily from them: for we
shall find what great mischief has oppressed the Church by taking liberty to
depart from the very words of Scripture, and in stead of them using other
improper speeches to express the same thing. As for example: The Fathers used
to express the Pastors of the Church by the name of Priests: whereupon the
Romish Church builds and backs her order of Priesthood. Doctor Fulke in his
sixth chapter of his defense of the translation against Gregory Martin has
these words: It is a folly to think that a sacrificing office external can be
established in the new Testament, which never calls the Ministers thereof
Sacerdotes, or Priests.

They often call the Table of the Lord an Altar, and the celebration of the
Supper a Sacrifice; and gave a reasonable good sense: but had they kept to the
words of the Scripture, they had prevented much mischief springing thence. For
the Romanists make advantage of their speeches, wrested out of their sense, to
set up that blasphemous doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass.

And the word Mass, what Papist knows whence it comes, being neither Hebrew,
Greek, nor Latin, nor taken from any other language of any Nation, but raked
out of the bottomless pit, without all signification, unless it agree with
our English word [ masse] that is, an heap, a lump, a chaos of blasphemies
and abominations.

The like of the word Pope, a strange, unknown and mystical name, the learned
Papists knew it not, but confounded themselves in the Etymology of it: some
from Pape the interjection of admiration, some from Papa, which Latin children
used to call their fathers by, answering to our infants dad: some from the
Roman abbreviation of Pater Patriae, expressed by pa pa and a prick between:
some from the Siracusans word Papas signifying a father. Such follies and
ridiculous and childish dotages are they feign to wander in, to seek and find
their holy father the Pope, who as himself is a beast rising out of the earth,
in whose forehead is written MYSTERY, so his name is mystical, and from men,
not from heaven, not from the Scriptures: yet is the name as ancient as
Cyprian, and used by the Fathers. Wherein we may see how dangerous it is (as
Beza observes) to decline from the word an hayrebreadth, and not to hold all
that is good, even the least. An arrow set a little awry at first makes a great
error before it fall at the mark. How happy had it been if the ancient
Fathers (otherwise godly and learned men) had held them to the very names,
terms, and proper words of Scripture, rather than by departing therefrom have
opened a flood-gate to Antichrists delusions? who as Satan creepes in the
dark, and getting in his toe will shove in his bulk: for, give sin an inch,
it will take an ell; and so of the Man of sin.

4. Hold chiefly the chief good
4. Rule. Hold most carefully the chief good things: for so men do in earthly
matters. Now there be three things worth most care in keeping. 1. Gods favor,
presence, and loving countenance: Psalm. 4. Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, let others keep corn and wine, keep thou this, fear
sin most of all, as that which would most dangerously rob thee. 2. Thine
own sincerity, uprightness, and first love: Job 27.6. I will never lose my
innocence, till I die. 3. The Crown of life is promised to him that is
faithful to death. Hold the kingdom fast in the means, and so strive as thou
may obtain. As the Martyrs who apprehended it through fire and flames.

5. Hold good against with-holders.
5. Rule. Hold all that is good, stiffely and stoutly, against with-holders and
opposers: for a man shall never hold good, if he do coldly approove it. Hold
it as one firmly glued to it; for so the word signifies, Romans 12.9. (...),
Cleave to that which is good: things glued are not easily disjoined; God has
by this phrase glued every Christian to every truth, in judgment and practice,
and no man must separate himself from it. Tit. 1.9: Holding fast the faithful
word ((...) contra (...)) against gainsayers. Take hold with both hands,
against heretics, tyrants, false-teachers, flatterers, that have laid hold to
snatch it from us: or as men in peril of drowning lay fast hold upon any thing
they can catch to save themselves, and will not let it go.

6. Hold it constantly.
6. Rule. Hold the truth constantly, to the death, whatsoever the issue be: Rev.
2.25. Hold fast that thou have till I come: as the renowned Saints and Martyrs,
who have rather parted with their lives than their depositum, 2 Timothy 1.14. Let
us therefore labor to see into every truth, and seeing it let us hold it. As
that famous soldier Cynegrius held the ship, first with his right hand, till
that was cut off, then with his left hand, till he lost that too, and last of
all with his teeth, till his head and body were severed: So let us resolve
every one with himself, That which I see to be good, I will hold it so long
as I live or breathe, my hands, my heart and soul shall cleave unto it, I will
carry it to heaven with me.

The second thing proposed, Means of holding that which is good, four.
is the means of holding that which is good.

I. If we would hold things approoved to be

The former are 1. Presumption of our own wisdom and knowledge. Humility
stands porter at the door of discipline: Psalm. 25.9. God teaches the humble.
Ier. 13.15. Hear and give ear, and be not proud. Men of conceits will hear
whom they list, but an humble man will receive good even from the meanest,
though it be an earthen vessel: Naaman from his servant, 2 Cor. 47.
and Job from his handmaid. 2. Distempered affections; as rash conceit against
the teacher, which is an usual bait of Satan to make all good things carelessly
rejected: Micaiah for this was turned out of doors, as no fit Counselor for
King Ahab. So the itching ear which is still desirous of novelties; 2 Timothy 4.5.
as the young man having heard the old commandments, would still hear more
new. And a tediousness in hearing the same things often, which the Apostle
calls a safe thing.

The latter are, 1. Hardness of heart: cast as much seed as you will among
stones, and cover them therewith, no fruit follows, for the stones hinder the
rooting: as we see in Pharaoh. Mollify the heart thoroughly, and the word will
abide in it. 2. Cares of the world, Luke 8.14.
which are as thorns to choke it: All seed sown among thorns, gets no
strength, but perishes. The Pharisees mocked Christ in his doctrine, because
they were covetous, Luke 16.14.3. Voluptuous living makes men hear only for
fashion, and to be like those widows which are ever learning, but never come
to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. or at least not to join virtue to
their knowledge: as the intemperate patient that hears the physician, but will
not follow him.

2. Means.
II. Provide and furnish the soul with helps to hold that which is good.
These helps respect, 1. Intention, 2. Attention, 3. Retention.

First, the Intention must must be clean and sincere: we must not hear for
envy, as the Pharisees and Jews in Paul's time, nor for news as the
Athenians, nor for gain or curiosity as Felix, but to receive (as babes) the
sincere milk of the word, to grow in grace thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. This intention
shall be the better furthered by premeditation of the force, use and efficacy
of the word, that it is the power of God to salvation, the incorrupt seed, the
word of life, the instrument of faith, the sword of the spirit, the bread and
water that preserves eternal life.

Secondly, Attention must be used: Acts 8.6. the people of Samaria gave heed
to the things that Philip spoke. This attention is a keeping of the heart and
affections to the word delivered. Acts 16.14. when Paul preached, Lydia
attended, and the Lord opened her heart: When Christ preached, all the peoples
eyes were fastened upon him, Luke 4. Attention is the door by which the word
enters. It is much furthered by a due estimation of the word: Thy word (says
David) is wonderful, therefore my soul keeps it. Men will attend to their
learned counsel, when their freehold is in question: so here, conceive aright
of the word as a matter of life and death, a matter that concerns thy
inheritance in heaven, thou will carefully attend it.

Thirdly, Retention must follow. In the body there are two nutritive powers,
one Attractive, to draw meat into the stomach, the other Retentive, to hold
it there till it be turned into nourishment: so in the soul. And, if the
former draw too little, the latter holds little, and so the body pines: and if
the former draw too much, that the body is not able to hold it, the body pines
still: So here, the soul must be still drawing, but it must also forcibly
hold it, till the soul be refreshed. Now this Retentive faculty is
strengthened by 4. means: 1. Meditation, clean beasts chew the cud, Deuteronomy. 11
2. Consider the works of the Lord: Psalm. 1.1. Meditate in his Law both day and
night: The acts of God must be in the mouths of them that fear him, Psalm.
149. and 39.3. while David mused, his heart was warmed. Phil. 4.8. whatsoever
things are honest, just and pure, think on those things; men have therefore
evil thoughts, because they nourish not the good. 2. Conference: which is a
whetting of holy lessons both on our selves and others: Deuteronomy. 11. the Jews are
commanded to confer of the word early and late. Acts 17. The Bereans are
commended for comparing the Apostles doctrine with Scripture. 3. A full purpose
of heart to practice good things: Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn to keep thy
law: and 50.16. Why take thou my word into thy mouth, and hate to be
reformed? 4. Fervent and constant prayer, which is the key of knowledge, gets
the hearing ear, and the soft heart; it is a key to open the coffers of God,
out of which we may take those treasures which are not from our selves, but
from above our reach.

3. Means.
III. Choose sure and safe places to hold good things in. First, in memory: we
must remember good things we hear: Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, and
keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things thine eyes have
seen. Psalm. 119.16. I will not forget thy word: and ver. 93. I will never
forget thy precepts, because by them thou have quickened me. Secondly, keep
them in the faith of thy heart, else all is unprofitable, Heb. 4.2. for that
only gives them rooting in our hearts, Col. 2.7. Prove. 4.21. Keep them in the
midst of thy heart: then shall they be as alight in the lantern, shining
through every part of thy life. This was the coffer that Abraham locked up the
promises of God in, and held them fast without reasoning, though it was
difficult and seemed impossible: Romans 4.20. and David, Psalm. 119.11. I have hid
thy word in my heart. Thirdly, keep it in the affections of thy soul; love
earnestly the word of God and all good things: for the things that we like not
or affect not we care not for keeping. The great commandment is, to love the
Lord with all thy heart. And every Christian ought to appeal to the Lord
himself as Peter to Christ, Lord, thou know that I love thee, John 21.16.
And the trial of our love to him, is, to keep his commandments, chap. 14.15.
Fourthly, keep them in the practice of thy life and whole conversation: 1. By
professing good things; as Christ himself professed a good profession before
Pontius Pilate. 1 Timothy 6, 13.
2. By promoting all good causes to thy utmost power. 3. By maintaining and
defending all good things and causes. 4. By suffering for good things, and
every way giving testimony, and setting seal to them, if need be with thy
dearest heart blood.

IV. If we would hold good things, 4. Means.
let us furnish and arm our selves against thieves and robbers. 1. Our own
carelessness: Many times we care not to understand the things of God; vanity of
mind, worldly lusts, and desire of riches, partly take up the room, partly
choke good things, so as they are neither received, nor held.

But if we understand not, let us not be ashamed to enquire and seek out till
we do understand. 2. Satan's slynesse, who steals the word and good purposes
out of men's men's hearts strangely, even while they look on and consent. Do as
Abraham who drove away the birds that troubled him in sacrificing, Genesis 15.11.
so do thou drive away these ravenous birds that are sent by Satan. 3.
Temptation and persecution: Much ground keeps the seed till the heat of
persecution comes, and in persecution falls away, and loses the word in
temptation: we must arm our selves against the trials of the truth, and
having obtained to believe, we must also get of God strength to suffer for his
sake.

Motives to hold that which is good. 5.
The third general proposed, is, Motives to hold that which is good.

1. Let us consider how little we have kept heretofore Cor. 11.2. I commend
you, that you keep the ordinances as I delivered. A good husband will keep
and save his stock, yea and increase it. 3. Keep them and Solomon says,
Prove. 4.6. Forsake not wisdom, and she shall keep thee: Hold them, and they
shall uphold thee; love her, and she shall preserve thee: keep them safe, and
they will keep thee. John 8.26. If the Son set you free, ye shall be free
indeed, that is, from errors in doctrine, and corruptions of life. So long as
we keep the word, we cannot fall quite away, because the seed of God abides
in us. 4. There John 8. Look to your selves that ye lose not the things you
have done, but may have a full reward. 5. Let us consider that this others: Let
it be said of other great places, that pride, pleasure, and profit choke the
word, and that there is but a form of godliness without power: Let us stir
up our selves to our first beginnings, our first diligence in receiving the
Gospel. Object. No doubt but we shall keep good things. Answ. 1. You are
indeed that which you are in trial: You hardly keep them while you have good
means, what would you do if the means were gone? 2. What if trial should
come, as we may justly fear it? could we then stand? Oh now lay a good
foundation, provide for it, that thou faint not in the day of adversity.

VERSE 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.
AS a careful father who is come to the end of his life, has but a while to
speak, and therefore heapeth up his lessons shortly together, which he would
have his sons remember when he is gone: So the Apostle here, drawing to the
end of this Epistle, heaps together his most necessary precepts in short
manner, as knowing what a friend brevity is to memory.

God who has put an infinite distance and disproportion between light and
darkness, between which (as the Apostle says) there can be no communion, 2
Cor. 6.14.
their natures being so fully abhorring, has under that similitude showed how
he has separated, and put as great contrariety between good and evil, truth
and falsehood, which are a spiritual kind of light and darkness, so as they
can never agree in one subject, but where light comes, darkness is chased
before it, and when darkness succeedes, the light gives place unto it: And as
darkness is the privation of light, so evil is the absence of of good: and as
it is impossible for a man at the same time to be both good and evil, so
neither can he affect evil and good at the same time, but if he will hold
that which is good, he must abstain from the contrary evil; or if he will not
abstain from evil, let him never profess the holding of good. Whence not
only this Scripture, but many other join these two by an inseparable band:
Psalm. 34.14. Eschew evil, and do good. Esaias 1.16. Cease to do evil, learn
to do well. Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which
is good. And here, Hold what is good, Abstain from all appearance of evil:
for there can be no holding of good, if a man withhold not himself from evil.

Malum non est cogn^scibile nisi per bonum. Aquin.
1. By evil is meant whatsoever departs from the rule of good: and 2. by
abstaining is meant refraining or removing a man's self from it as far as may
be: so the word is used, Matthew. 15.8. (...), Their heart wandreth far from
me? 3. The Apostle says not, Abstain from evil, but from the appearance of
evil: (...) or species is that which seems to be a thing, but is not; a shape
or representation of a thing, rather than a thing it self. So the same word is
used, John 5.37. (...), Ye saw not his shape. 4. The extent of the
proposition, all appearance, yet more helps us to the true sense of the
words, which requires of us to run as fast away from whatsoever has any show
of evil, as if it were evil in it self: for the same word is used, 1 Pet.
2.11. Abstain from fleshly lusts: and in 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. the will of God is,
that ye abstain from fornication: All noting, that we must avoid the least
show of evil with the same care that we do the greatest evil it self: and
even all shows, as making conscience of all.

Christians must not only avoid that which is apparently evil, Doct. Not
only apparent evils, but appearances of evil must be avoided.
but that also which seems to be evil, or may carry some evil with it,
though it self be be not so.

For the explaining hereof we must know, that in every action there be three
things. First, Explication.
(...), the action or evil it self, whether it be an evil of doctrine or
manners, as all false doctrine, heresy, superstition, and all sins of all
sorts, which stand not in conformity with the law. This is not so much aimed in
the text. Secondly, (...), the leaders, incentives or moovers of our selves or
others unto any sin: so Eves looking on the Apple, was not in it self evil,
but so far as it drew on her appetite; yea her conference with the Serpent,
and Adams with her in that subject or argument, should have been avoided. This
first peeping or appearance of evil in our selves, or whatsoever we may lay as
a stumbling block in the way of another, though it be not evil in us, nor in
it self, yet being an occasion of evil to another, by this precept we must
shun and fly from it. Paul's eating of flesh was lawful in it self, and
lawful to him; but rather than he would offend his weak brother, he will
never do it while the world stands: 1 Cor. 8.13. and Romans 14.21. he will
remove that which seems and appears evil to another. Thirdly, (...), the
consequents of actions are to be considered; and in things which be
indifferent, that may be done or not done, we must sometime forbear lawful
things if we suspect evil consequents. It was lawful for David to walk upon
his gallery, but had he foreseen the consequents, he would doubtless have
been otherwise occupied. It was lawful for Paul to have circumcised Titus as
he did Timothy; but espying an evil consequent, that he should confirm the
error of the Jews, who held circumcision as necessary to salvation, he would
not do it: Gal. 2. It was as lawful in it self for him to make a vow, shave
his head, and purify himself at one time as at another, Acts 18.18. yet
sometimes he inveighes against these observations as beggarly rudiments, Gal.
4.9. and will not meddle with any of them, where he might confirm any in
their error or obstinacy. All which examples teach us, either warily to do or
leave undone things which are liable to misconstruction.

2. Here remember, that in all lawful and necessary duties, let all the world
misconster and be offended, we must yield absolute obedience unto God, though
to the world it appear never so evil. Christ himself in his doctrine and
conversation was so general an offense, that he pronounced him blessed that
was not offended in him. He must preach himself to be the bread from heaven,
though it offend the Jews, John 6. He will heal the paralyticke, though they
be offended, Mat. 9.1. John must preach against Herodias, though all the Court
be offended. Daniel will pray three times a day, though it cost him his life.

3. In all indifferent things we are to avoid all appearance of evil and
scandal, with these limitions.

First, so they be not in things simply necessary to life, in these things we
must not forbear if others be offended. If one take offense that I eat bread,
or drink beer, I must do it, because life is maintained by food, but if I
can be without it and live, I must respect my brothers weakness; as to
abstain this or that flesh, this or that wine, etc.

Secondly, the like in things simply necessary for my calling: But a thing of
indifferency may not put me out of my way, I must hold my calling, I must
preach the Gospel. This is a necessary duty imposed; and good of this nature
must be done, though a show of evil to some be annexed to it.

Thirdly, in these things of indifferency, we must abstain from appearances of
evil, and things that carry an evil color; if we be nostri juris, and the
things be left to our free liberty and disposing. But if higher powers
restrain our use of liberty, and determine and limit us, then we are overruled
by lawful authority in things subjected to it, and them, in these things of
indifferency we cannot avoid all things wherein some may conceive an
appearance of evil.

Fourthly, in these things, we are not always to avoid things wherein some
conceive offense and appearance of evil; but for a time till such ignorant and
weak persons may be taught: we may not offend weak ones, by undue exercise of
our liberty; but if they be wilful and will not be taught, we must
peremptorily stand to our liberty. So did the Apostle, Gal. 5.3. For I testify
again to every man that is circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And
Titus 3.10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject.

Now for the proof of the point: Genesis 3.3. When the Lord forbade our first
parents the evil and sin of eating the forbidden fruit, he forbids also the
appearance, Ye shall not touch it, Avoid the occasion. In the Law not only
the person legally polluted was unclean, Levit. 15.17.
but whatsoever touched him, the garment which he wore, the bed on which he
lay, the seat on which he sat, and whatsoever he touched: All which did
nothing else but enforce on them a care to avoid all appearance, and all
occasions of uncleanness. The truth whereof Christians also in the time of the
Gospel must hold themselves bound unto, who ( Jude 23.) are commanded to hate
even the garment spotted by the flesh.

1. Because the Lord hates all evil, Reason 1.
and all appearance of it: Rev. 2.6. the Church of Ephesus is commended for
hating the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate, says the Lord. See
how pleasing our conformity of affections with the Lord is, in whose eye the
least evil is hateful enough. And herein we testify our love unto him: Ye
that love the Lord, hate all that is evil; for indeed all true hatred of evil
must be from the love of God, especially of the chief good: and as our love is
in degree, so is our hatred; fervent love, earnest hatred.

2. It is a chief part of repentance, Reas. 2.
and of the nature of sound grace, not only to hold that which is good, but
also to shun and fly evil of all kinds: yea when good is not so present,
with Gods children as they desire, to hate evil is ever present with them: yea
they hate the evil which they themselves do, and that vehemently, (...).
according to the phrase, Romans 12.9. Abhor evil. And he that out of the
work of grace, and out of conscience abstaines from one evil, will abstain
from all, even the least: as David, Psalm. 119. I hate all vain inventions, but
thy Law do I love.

3. The wisdom of a Christian is, to avoid the appearances, and the beginnings
of evil, Reas. 3.
and give no way to it: as Solomon counsels to stop the passages of waters
at the beginning, Prove. 17.14. As rivers, so evils come out of a little hole,
but make their way, and swell, and become broader, till they become almost
boundless. And indeed he that cares not to avoid the appearance of evil, by
little and little comes to esteem of the evil and the appearance alike.
Therefore remember to give no place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27.

4
4. Here is a difference between a sound Christian and an hypocrite: the worst
man that is can avoid evil in extremes, but he cares not commonly for
appearing and petty evils, if he can carry them clear away. This hyocrisie
the Lord detecteth among the Jews, Esaias 65.4. they would both eat of the
polluted flesh, and the broth of it was found in their vessels. A sound
Christian will not meddle with the broth, and much less the unclean meat;
he knows the broth is unclean too: the least sin is infectious and
contagious. The difference then is this: One loves the appearance of good more
than goodness it self; the other hates for the evils sake the very appearance
of it.

5. The fruit of this duty commends it to our care. 5
1. It commends our fear and zeal for God, which rises up against all sin.
As by nature we hate all serpents, yea the picture of an ugly viper; so grace
raises up the spirit against sin indifferently, and all resemblance of it.
2. It is excellent for the satisfying of a man's own conscience; for suppose a
thing be never so good, yet if it appear to me evil, I sin in doing it, and
must avoid it, because it appears to me so. 3. It commends our charity, which
respects the conscience of our brother, and is as loath he should fall by our
hand, as by himself. 4. It is the honor of our profession, and the glory of
the Gospel, when men cannot justly challenge us with appearances of evil; for
wicked mouths are stopped, and we adorn the holy profession of God; which must
needs suffer in us, if we avoid not show of evil, both for the safety of our
good name, and a good conscience.

We must be so far from loving and liking any evil, Use 1.
as we must utterly dislike it, be disparate and separate from it, whether in
Doctrine or manners.

I. In Doctrines, Evil in Doctrines.
which have but a show of evil, we must abstain and reject them as carefully
as manifest false Doctrines; for we may easily suppe up poison and heresies,
if we can digest Doctrines which carry some show of evil in them. As for
example: Heresy of Nestorius.
Nestorius a wicked heretic, and (as Evagrius calls him) officina
blasphemiae, a very shop of blasphemy, did not distinguish but separate the
two natures of Christ; and made one Christ not of two natures, but of two
distinct persons: one the Son of God, by which person all his egregious and
miraculous works were performed; the other the son of Mary, by which without
the Son of God, he wrought all those actions of infirmity, as eating,
drinking, sleeping, weeping; and the union of natures being dissolved, for one
Christ he gives us two, but neither profitable for us. He holds that we are
saved by the flesh not of the Son of God, but of the Son of man, and that
the flesh not of the Son of God, but of the Son of man is vivificall and
quickening. Now this negative makes it apparently false; from which we must not
only abstain, but also from such speeches, as although they may have a right
interpretation, yet carry a show of evil: v^gr. It is a true speech, that we
are saved by the blood of the Son of man, but we must abstain from it,
because of the cognation of it with Nestorius his heresy, and say plainly, by
the blood of God, as the Apostle speaks, Acts 20.28. or of Christ God and man
we are saved. To say we are saved by works, may be truly explained, but better
to abstain from it, From evil in works.
because it has an appearance of Popish merit. To call Evangelicall Ministers
Priests, may be truly expounded, but it were better to avoid such phrases of
speech, From evil in words.
because of the show of Popish Sacrifice and Priesthood. The words of
heretics (says one) are to be feared: Hereticorum nocabula timenda sunt.
Baron.
and say the Rhemists, if we will keep the faith of our fathers, In 1 Timothy
we must keep the words of our fathers: so say we of the faith of the
Scriptures.

In manners.
II. In practice and behavior we must shun such things as carry evil
shows. The Jews in their course of life must not only not go into unclean
houses, but must not come near them; and Christians are commanded not to touch
any unclean thing. Therefore all such are here to be reproved, as think all
Christianity stands in this, if they do no unlawful things, and so run
headlong, never looking quam male colorata sunt, what evil shows they carry.
Magistrates, who whatsoever they see president for, in their predecessors,
venterously undertake it; and so refer their authority to private use,
forgetting themselves to be public men. Ministers, seeking their own not
Christ's, they may be idle non-residents, cast up their calling, and turn
(excepting their habit) mere secular. Paul refused lawful maintenance at
Corinth, to avoid suspicion of mercenary and covetous affection in preaching.
Christians in private converse must show dislike of all appearance of evil.

First, avoid all filthiness and suspicion of it, as is said of Cesars wife,
such as are minced oaths, adulterous looks, needless company with profane
ones.

Secondly, put no colors upon sin, to digest it easier.

Object. I may company with such and such persons to win them.

Answ. Thou art liker to lose thy self by hazard of infection, if without
calling thou frequentest loose company. 2. Thou art liker to lose than to winn
them by intimate familiarity, which is fitter to harden them.

Thirdly, thou art in way to lose thy own reputation; as being a favourer of
them and their courses.

Object. But I may wear this and that fashion of apparel, my heart is
humble, and I detest pride.

Answ. If it were so, thou would avoid the show of evil in overcostlinesse
and excess of attire, a lowly heart, and a lowly habit go together.

Object. But we may strain at gnats, and small things are not to be stuck at.

Answ. Little sins have great consequents: Secondly, they commonly draw
greater after them: Thirdly, many little sins prove ponderous and
pernicious: Fourthly, none are little, if the show of them be not little, as
our text implies.

III. Let us see this: 1. In respect of Idolaters. 2 In respect of profane
persons


First, We must avoid all conformity with Idolaters In service. In Ceremony.
In near society.


First, In service. To be present at idolatrous service, is an appearance, yea
a kind of approbation of idolatry: And where all idolatry is forbidden, all
show and appearance of it is forbidden also. Besides, we must show in our
appearance our hatred of the very appearance of evil. Quest. May not a man be
at idolatrous service, and keep his heart to God? Answ. No: 1. God is but one,
man is but one, and there is but one faith; and God requires the body as well
as the soul, because they are both his. 1 Cor. 6.20.
2. It is a denial of Christ, a dissembling of religion, a betraying of truth,
where we ought to profess it; an approbation of idolatry, an hardening of the
enemy by presence and silence. 3. The very practice condemns it self: The
man holds consent of heart evil, then be must hold appearance of consent evil
too. 4. It is a reconciling of abhorring natures, light and darkness; God and
Belial, the Temple of God, and the Temple of idols. An impossible disioyning of
the soul and body, as if the one could be in heaven, and the other in hell.
Origin said he could not bend the knees of his body to God, and the knees of
his heart to Satan: Yea it is a worshipping of the true God, who is a Spirit,
not in spirit and truth, but in spirit and falsehood. 5. The justice of God is
upon such persons for the present, if a man give up his body, he commonly
gives up the heart to infection, and defection: And after in the great
judgment will judge him according to things done in the body. 2 Cor. 5.10.
The body is a member of Christ, and must not be prostitute to an harlot.

Object. Romans 14.22. Have faith with thy self before God: therefore that is
enough.

Answ. By faith in that place the Apostle means a persuasion in things
indifferent, and not the doctrine or practice of religion: And the meaning is
this; If thou beeft in thy self persuaded a thing is indifferent, use thy
liberty to thy self, have faith with thy self, but boast not of it to the
offense of another: and faith is oppressed where it is not expressed.

Object. 1 King. 13.6. The man of God prayed in an adulterous Temple; so may
we, if we keep our hearts to God.

Answ. The man of God was there, 1. At Gods commandment necessarily. 2. Not to
approove their idolatry, but manifestly to improove and exclaim against it. 3.
God would have him by an external sign show his detestation of idolatry; he
was not forbid to pray, but not to eat a morsel of bread there. 4. He did not
dissemble with idolaters, but confessed plainly against idolaters. Now all the
case is clean contrary.

Neither does the example of Naaman (2 King. 5.18.19.) any whit serve their
turn: For 1. he was but in the beginnings of conversion. 2. He confesses it
a sin, and beggeth the Prophets prayer against it. Verba Elisei sunt tantum
dimittent is abeuntem, non concedentis postulatum.
3. The Prophet approoveth not the fact, but only dismisseth him with the
usual kind of salutation, and promises he will pray that he be not
overtaken.

Quest. Whether may we bring a child to be baptized of a Popish Priest?

Answ. No; it is an appearance of evil: seeing 1. There is corruption of
doctrine. 2. Hateful and hurtful Ceremonies. 3. A profession to embrace that
doctrine. Their Church is a false Church, yet here a man professes that
himself and his child are members of it: for Baptism is a sign of
profession. 4. It is an hardening to Gods enemies; for it makes the Papists
boast, and say, if our Baptism be good, why join ye not with our Church? 5.
We must depart from all fellowship with Antichrist: Rev. 18.4. Come out of her
my people, come out of her.

Quest. If a Popish Minister do baptize a child, must he be rebaptised?

Answ. No: there is a difference between going to a Priest at first, and new
baptism from one: for baptism once administered, if the true form be kept,
must not be repeated, though there be no ground to seek it there, being an
offense both to weak and strong.

Secondly, Zeal of God cannot abide any confusion with idolaters in their
idolatrous ceremonies and fashions: for communion of rites confounds sects,
as much as communion of apparel confoundth sexes. Whence the Lord himself
appointed al his own ceremonies, so as in them (as well as in doctrine) there
might be set up a wall of partition between the Jews and all aliens. 1. The
Heathens almost eat nothing but swines flesh, having sacrificed some of the
kind: Gods people of all other must abhor this, Levit. 21.5. 2. The Heathens
reserve portions of their sacrifices: therefore there was a special law,
rather to burn with fire the residue of the Paschall Lamb, than reserve any
whit of it until next morning, Exodus 12.20. 3. The Heathens make their pates
balde, shave the locks of their beards, and make cuttings in their flesh:
therefore Gods people must not do so. 4. The Heathens set their Temples
eastward: therefore God will have his set westward, ad arcendam idololatriam,
says Aquinas, to keep them from idolatry, 1a. 2ae. qu. 3. Nay some Papists
themselves (as Vasquez) say, that God chose the form of an Arc for the
testimony of his presence, to be contrary to idolaters: for never any people
did abuse this form. And, says he, he forbade all images to the Israelites,
that they might be utterly unlike the Canaanites in theirs.

Hence 1. the ancient Christians would not set up lights and bays at their
doors, though for this they were persecuted as enemies to the Emperor,
because the Temples and doors of idolaters were wont to be thus garnished. 2.
Christians refused to celebrate a birthday, because it was a rite and custom
of the Heathens. 3. The Primitive Church could not endure, that any Christian
should look toward Jerusalem praying, because they would avoid all show of
Iudaisme.

Add hereunto the ancient Fathers, who in their several ages avoided all show
and appearance of conformity with heretics in their external ceremonies.
Tertul. lib. de idol.
Tertullian will have no lights in the worship of God, because it was mos
haereticorum, the custom of heretics; than which what more indifferent? Does
not the example of Paul show it to be lawful enough, to continue fasting upon
a Saboth day till midnight, to hear the word of God? August. Epist. 86 ad
Casulan.
yet Augustine thinks it in his time unlawful, because the Maniches appointed
their fast on the Saboth day.

To omit many things out of Councels, why should the true Church of Christ
borrow any of the rites of his enemies, while they abhor all her rites and
fashions? Why should heretics boast, that the pure spouse of Christ is not
able to serve God without their ceremonies? I conclude therefore with
Tertullian, Nihil dandum idol^, nihil sumendum ab eo. Tertul. de cor^n. milit.
We must neither give any thing to an Idol, nor take any thing from an Idol.

Thirdly, Christians must abstain from idolaters in the nearest society, which
is marriage; for this has a manifest appearance of evil: 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not
unequally yoked: 2 John 10. Receive not such into thy house: much less into
thy heart or bosom. Reasons. 1. It plainly appears, that a man loves other
things in such a wife than piety, he never looks after that. 2. How does he
marry in the Lord, who marries the Lords enemy? 3. What communion can there be
in prayers, and other holy means of strengthening themselves to Godward? 4. It
is too true that the Decretalls say, oftentimes the company of the wicked
corrupts the good, and much more such as are more prone to evil. Whence the
Lord wishes the Israelites to forbear marriage with those seven Nations of
the Heathens, for fear of seduction, Exodus 23. And if any think himself
stronger than to be seduced, and hope he shall rather win, than be won, let
him see his folly in Solomon, 1 King. 11. and in Ahab, who was naught of
himself, but seven times worse because Iezebel provoked him, chap. 16.31.

Object. We have approoved examples of Scripture for such marriages; Salmon
with Rahab, Sampson with the Philistim, Booz with Ruth, Solomon with Pharaohs
daughter, and David with the daughter of Talmai King of Geshur.

Answ. 1. Some of these examples were of women converted, as Rahab and Ruth:
now what they had been, was no hindrance, the case being that of the captives
taken in war, who might be married, Deuteronomy. 21. but conditionally, if they
betook them to the true religion, as the ceremonies show, and that caution,
that they be not an offense to thee. 2. Some of them were women not converted,
as Sampsons wife, but he married her by divine instinct, that there might be
occasion taken of revenge against the Philistims, Judge. 14.4 Now we must walk
by the rule, not by an exception from it. Gal. 6.16.
3. Some it is uncertain whether they were converted or no, as the daughter of
Talmai and of Pharaoh: Of them we say, if they were converted they make nothing
for the marriage of infidels; if they were not, the marriages were sinful, and
not imitable.

IIII. In civil conversation we must show our dislike, and avoid the least
show or touch, or appearance of evil, wherewith we are compassed; that though
we are for a while to be compossessores mundi, possessours of the world
together with profane persons, yet we be not compossessores erroris, partakers
of evil with them; we must be free from all the smutt and dross of the
world. Therefore a Christians care must be not only to live free from all
filthiness, but also from all suspicion of it, and to walk every way
unblameable. That which is said of Cesars wife, she must be free not only from
the crime of turpitude or dishonesty, but from all show and suspicion of it,
must be true of every one of the Spouses of Jesus Christ, who must be like
David, hating evil with a perfect hatred. Psalm. 139.22.


Thou that wilt not break out into oaths, nor wallow in drunkenness, yet
wilt be sociable with blasphemers or great swearers, and a companion of
drunkards, art not acquitted from shrewd suspicion and appearance of evil,
seeing, As the company is commonly so is the man, like will to like: Tell me
where thou have been, and I will tell thee what thou have done. Ephesians. 5.7. Be
not companions with them, but rather reproove them. Thou thy self swearest
not, it is well; oh but thou reprovest them not that do swear; here thou
finnest: thou observest not the Law, if thou do not preserve it.

Thou that say thou abhorrest adultery, and abhorrest wanton behaviors, but
wilt be familiar with wanton persons, and frequentest the company of other men's
wives, have not acquitted thy self from a strong presumption and appearance of
evil.

Thou that say thou hate Popery, and art as good a Protestant as any, but
mixest thy self in company with Papists, can be pleasant, jocund, and as
familiar with them as with any, without admonition or reproof, yea after some
admonitions neither forbearest nor forsakest them, gave too much presumption,
and appearance of too much indifferency or want of zeal.

Thou that wilt spit at the mention of the Devil, and hate all agreement
with him, but runnest to the witch, or art familiar with the wizard or
inchanter, have now given and gone beyond the show and appearance of a maine
evil, which easily prevails not against the child of God.

Thou that disclaimest covetousness, must be careful to avoid not the sin
only, but even the appearance of it, in base contracts, in sordid courses of
getting or holding: and upon every good occasion honor God with thy substance.
2 Samuel 24.24. Prove 3.9.
David, when Araunah offered to give him the threshing floor, and the oxen,
and other things of price for the offering to the Lord, in great wisdom
refused to take them as a gift, but would buy them, and paid fifty shekels of
silver: not only because he would declare his own love unto God, by offering
his own and not another, but because he would avoid the show of
covetousness; the show of a free gift from Araunah did not persuade him. The
like example we have of Abraham, on whom the Hittites could not thrust a
burying place, till he had paid for it 400 shekels of silver. Genesis 23, 16.


V. If we must carefully avoid the least show or touch of evil, we must take
heed as well to avoid the appearance of sin in others as in our selves: for
he that thinks he avoides gross sins in himself, has not done his duty,
if any way he communicate in the sins of others, which is more than an
appearance of evil. 1 Timothy 5.22. Be not partaker of other men's sins, keep
thy self pure. Neither communicate in the sin of another before hand, by
counsel, as Caiaphas consented to Christ's death; by commandment, as David
against Vriah; by countenance, as Saul kept the garments of them that stoned
Steven; by provocation, as Iezebel stirred up Ahabs corruption; or by consent,
as the receiver the thief: Nor abet others sin after it is done, by flattery
or extenuation; by silence, when thou have a public or private calling to
reproove, or by defense or commendation: for he that any way allows sin in
another, when he may and ought to restrain him, gives all men to know how
easily he can (if need be) dispense with it in himself.

VI. No man truly hates any vice, Hatred of vice known best by practice of the
contrary virtue.
who practices not the contrary virtue: therefore if we must avoid and hate
all appearance of evil, we must embrace and encourage all appearance of good:
so did Christ in the young man, though a Pharise, a Iusticiary, yet he is said
to love him, when he saw some sparks of grace in him: and they that will be
like unto Christ, Matthew. 12.20.
will not quench the smoking flax. Most contrary are they who hate all
appearance of good, and likest to the Devil: if any hate the least appearance
of evil, they hate such above any other, and show that their hearts are fired
with the very sparks and flames of hell: for fire from heaven fastens on them
whom heaven abhorres, and the God of heaven condemns. How does this last age
of the world dandle in her lap apparent evil men, while such as hate the
appearance of evil, are for this hunted and chased with all the indignities
and reproaches, that an age professing the Gospel can reach and devise? Come
to a profane man that loves liberty, and likes his sin, name to him a Papist,
a Masse-monger, a merit-monger, an Idolater, he can brook him well enough. A
time-server can well enough away with a Papist. Tell him of a dumb Minister or
an idle Non-resident, he likes him well enough, these are good quiet men. Tell
him of a Preacher that will boldly reprove sin in the pulpit, yet if he be a
good fellow, he is a good Churchman, he can digest him well enough. But
mention one that is faithful in his Ministry, and strict in his life, hating
the very appearance of evil; Oh (says he) these Puritans I could never abide,
now his spirit is up; and wherefore, but because they hate the sin which he
loves so well? It was once a speech among the Heathens, Oh he is a good honest
man, but a Christian: so at this day, he is a right honest man, but a Puritan.

Come to a Papist, and tell him of a profane man that walks after the flesh,
how odious his ways are, this does not much trouble him, he may be a good
Catholic for all that, he will think very charitably of such a one: Like
one in Queen MARY'S time, taken in adultery in Red-crosse-streete, said, yet I
thank God I am a good Catholic. Tell him of a man that professes enmity to
his religion in many Articles of faith, yet if he be not too precise, there is
hope of him there may be a reconcilement, at least he is a wise moderate man,
he will not out-runne himself. But tell him of a man that will cleave to the
Scripture in all things, both greater and less, and will not be beaten an
hayre-breadth out of it, and does so fly from BABEL according to the
commandment, that he will touch nothing that seems unclean, He hates, all
appearance of evil; Oh these curious fellows (says he) are not to be
suffered or endured: they trouble the Church and Commonwealth Nay we may wish
some of our own had not learned the Gileaditish language, to prefer the
Papists as better men and better subjects, than the faithful servants of God,
and their Sovereign, only because they desire to avoid the least appearance
of evil. But whence should this be, (but out of the hatred of goodness,)
that they whose hands are yearly almost in some monstrous conspiracy, should
be preferred before such as whose innocence was never yet touched?

Well let such as fear God buckle to this precept of the Apostle: because,
First, God looks on such as bow not their knee to Baal; upon such as touch no
unclean thing, 2 Corinthians. 6: and couenanteth to be their Father. Secondly,
we cannot touch pitch and not be defiled with it. Thirdly, it argues
soundness of heart in our hatred of sin, when we hate not only capital
crimes which shame us before men, but lesser evils, and such as wicked men
cannot hate. Fourthly, sweet shall be the comfort when we suffer the word to
bind us in least things; not suffering us to cast down our countenance, but
couenanting with our eyes, neither to whisper evil of others, much less to
reproach them, or have our mouth full of cursing, repressing also even unchaste
thoughts, and mental sins before they come to appearances.

VERSE 23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout: and J pray God
that your whole spirit, and soul, and body may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THE Apostle here proceeds to the conclusion of the Epistle, and annexeth a
fervent and heavenly prayer to the former precepts. For the Thessalonians might
say, you have heaped up a number of excellent precepts together, but how should
we that are but flesh and blood, and weak to any thing that is good, perform
them? You command much more than we can attain: You have given us not only
many precepts, but of such nature and strictness, as are rather fit for Angels
and Saints in heaven, than flesh and blood, weak and frail creatures on
earth; we must Try all things, hold all and only that which is good, and
abstain from not evil only, but all appearance of evil, which seem to us
impossible commandments: All which and the like allegations our Apostle meets
withal, and tells them it is his meaning indeed, First, that they should aim
at full holiness, which is conversant in every good duty, and shunneth the
least sinful defilement. Secondly, he sends them out of themselves, to God who
can sanctify them throughout. Thirdly, seeing he only can teach them their
duties, but cannot go further to give them grace, and enable them to perform
it, he goes to God with them, that by their joint prayers they might be
established in them, and to sanctify them throughout: for if God sanctify you
throughout, you shall be able to perform the former duties.

Whence note, that it is the duty of godly Ministers not only to preach,
Doctr. Ministers must not preach only, but pray for their people.
exhort, and admonish men in their duty, but earnestly to pray for them, and
with them, for the obtaining of good things which they have commended unto
them. It was the usual manner of the Apostles to pray to God for the obtaining
of those graces they had exhorted unto.

In this Text, having, chap. 4.3. showed that this is the will of God, even
their sanctification, and having laid down the parts of sanctification in the
particulars till this verse: now prays that according to the precepts they may
be wholly sanctified. So Romans 12.16. having exhorted to like mindedness; in
the 15.6. prays that they may be like minded. Ephesians. 3.14, 15. having
exhorted the Ephesians not to faint at his troubles, he prays for strength:
For this cause (says he) I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inner man. And chap.
1.8. having showed how abundant God was toward us in wisdom and understanding,
and in opening the mystery of his will, he cease not to pray, verse 17. that
God would give to them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that their eyes
might be opened. And in the 1 Pet. 5.10. Resist steadfastly in the faith, etc.
then prays, the God of all grace make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. And this doubtless the Apostle learned of the Lord Jesus himsele,
whose custom was to teach and instruct in the daytime, and to go out in the
night to pray for a blessing upon his Ministry, Luke 21.35.

1. God is hereby glorified, Reason 1.
and acknowledged the father of lights, from whom every good and perfect gift
is, James 1.17. for now we depend on him for wisdom, and draw somewhat from
his fullness.

2. It is not in man to make his doctrine effectual, he cannot reach the heart,
Reas. 2.
much less renew it. Man may hold forth the light, but God must give eyes to
see it: man may speak to the ear, but God only can speak to the heart; Paul
may plant, and Apollos may water, but God must give the increase, 1 Cor. 3. It
is his privilege to write his law in the hearts of his people, Ierem. 31.
Lydia heard the word from Paul, but not he but God opened her heart, Acts
16.14.

Reas. 3.
3. As in all other labors and works, so much more here, we must do that
which is our part, and leave God his. The husbandman must plow, and sow, and
plant, and water, but he must leave all the success to God, he cannot
command rain nor blessing. So in this spiritual husbandry Gods seeds-men must
do their work cheerfully, being co-workers with him, but commend the
success to God; in which sense the Apostle (1 Cor. 3.7) says, He that plants
is nothing, neither he that waters, that is, if he be compared with that
divine action which is all in all; or nothing without him.

Use 1.
Hereby we see how necessary it is to begin and end our Ministry and Sermons
with prayer to God, who is all our sufficiency. The Apostles begin and end
their doctrine and Epistles with prayer; and have not we more need? I know
not what pride of selfe-sufficiency, or whether profanesse shut the hearts, and
cover the mouths of many Preachers, who are almost ashamed to pray for this
blessing, nay reproach and scorn them which do: Sure I am, whether he shall
do more good to others by his prayers or preaching, I will not determine, but
he shall certainly by his prayers reap more comfort to himself. And he that
neglects prayer with his preaching, may well be suspected that he more aims at
his own glory than Gods.

Use 2.
Let people also join willingly and conscionably in their Ministers prayers,
which strive for a blessing upon themselves, and importune God who makes his
Sun shine upon the just and unjust, to let the Sun of grace shine into their
hearts, saying, O Lord, if thou build not the house, Psalm. 127, 1.
it shall never stand; as those that wait for all success from God. It is
recorded that Pope Adrian having built a stately College at Lovaine, did set
in golden letters on the gate this poesy, Trajectum plantavit ibi natus,
Lovanium rigavit, ibi literas didicit: Caesar dedit incrementum, ex praeceptore
Cardinalis factus: One took a pen and wrote under, Hic Deus nihil fecit.

Now to the prayer it self: where we have to consider: 1. To whom the Apostle
prays: The very God of peace. 2. For what he prays, in two particulars.


1. For full sanctification.

1. In general, sanctify you throughout. 2. In a special enumeration of
parts, spirit, soul, body.
2. For final sanctification: until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

First, of the person to whom our Apostle prays: the very God of peace.

Consider here three things.

1. Why he uses this Attribute, peace. 2. What is the peace here meant. 3. How
he is the God of peace.
1. This is not an idle epithet, but well fitted to the matter in hand;
because our Apostle had in verse 13. exhorted them to peace among themselves,
and has in all the precepts hitherto directed them how to uphold both outward
peace, verse. 14, 15. and inward peace, from the 16. to this verse. And he
notably in this title confirms their faith, and strengthens their prayers,
that so long as they ask nothing but things pertaining to the peace of the
Church, and the peace of every man's conscience, the God of peace will surely
grant their requests. See Romans 15.13, 14.

Secondly, What peace is meant. Peace is threefold: 1. External. 2. Internal.
3. Eternal.


1. External, which is nothing but an outward prosperity and tranquillity in
our outward estate; and this is, 1. In the Church, when it has rest from
heresy, schism, persecution, and tyranny, Acts 9.31. this is called the peace
of Jerusalem, which we must pray for, Psalm. 122.6. 2. In the Commonwealth, in
the peace whereof we have peace, when we are free from civil war within, and
foreign enemies without, Ier. 29.7. 3. In the family, and special places
where we live, which is a private agreement with all sorts of men, good and
bad, so far as may be: Romans 12.18. Have peace with all men.

2. Internal, and spiritual, and this is the sweet quiet and comfort of
conscience, rising out of our assurance of our atonement with God through
Jesus Christ, and out of remission of sins by his blood, which peace passes
all understanding, Phil. 4.7. and in which the Apostle places the kingdom of
God, Romans 14.17.

3. Eternal, which is the perfect rest, peace, joy and glory that the Saints
shall enjoy in heaven: Esaias 57.2. Peace shall come, but it is when we sleep in
our beds, called Romans 8.6. life and peace.

Our Apostle here aims especially at the second kind of peace, which is a
step and degree to the third.

For the third, why is he called the God of peace? because he has the
fountain of peace in himself, peace in him is as in a fountain. Secondly, as
the Author and communicatour of all peace unto us in all kinds: As 1. In
Church, the peace of Jerusalem must be begged of him, he stills all wars, and
makes all stirrs in the Commonwealth to be hushed and gone. And it is he that
makes men dwell together in one house. 2. He is author, and the God of
eternal peace; for eternal life is the gift of God. 3. After a special
manner is he the God of internal peace, the peace of conscience, at which our
Text aims, which is a quietness of mind and conscience through our
reconciliation with God. First, because he sent his Son: 1. To merit it for
us, when we lay in the horror of an accusing conscience; who is therefore
called in himself ( Esa. 9.6.) the Prince of peace, and in respect of us, our
peace. And therefore Ambrose expounds here the God of peace to be Christ
himself. If it be asked, how Christ merited our peace, the Apostle answers,
Ephesians. 2.15, 16. He made peace by slaying hatred on the cross, by his perfect
obedience overcomming and abolishing whatsoever God might hate in us. 2. To
preach and publish this peace, and invite men unto it: And that first in his
own person, Esaias 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, to preach good
tidings to the poor, to bind up the brokenhearted, to preach liberty to the
captives, etc. And how this Prophecy was accomplished, see Luke 4.18.
Secondly, in the person of his Ministers Christ preaches peace, Ephesians. 2.17.
Christ came and preached peace to you which were far off. Object. Why? Christ
never preached to the Ephesians. Answ. Yes he did in the persons of the
Apostles, and so now in the Pastors and Ministers of his Church to the
Secondly, because he sent his Spirit to apply and seal this peace only in
the hearts of his elect, therefore it is called a fruit of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. and the Spirit cries in our hearts, Abba, Father: chap. 4.6. He works
faith in the heart, and so we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. and bold access
to the throne of grace, Ephesians. 3.12. This is that creating Spirit, which creates
the fruit of the lips to be peace, Esaias 57.19. Thirdly, because Jerusalem the
vision of peace: his Disciples must only abide among the sons of peace,
Matthew. 10. and much more does himself.

How we are to look upon God in our prayers. First, in all our prayers we are
to behold him a God of peace: 1 Note.
labor to see him reconciled unto us. In all our prayers behold God a God of
peace.
And 1. this beholding of God reconciled gives us assurance of obtaining
whatsoever is good for us. 2. The sense of his infinite essence, and power and
presence with us confounds us, unless the sense of his grace and favor
sustain us; and hence our Lord taught us to begin our prayer with this title,
Our Father. 3. Our chief unhappiness were to be near God, if he be not at
peace with us; for our God offended is a consuming fire.

Then we must beware of sin which is the breach of peace between God and
us; Use 1.
especially before prayer let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord
depart from iniquity.

2. We must acknowledge our happiness to consist in our peace with God. Use 2.
Make peace with him, and thou shall have prosperity, Job 22.21. If they of
Tyrus and Sidon made so much of outward peace, that they by all means desired
it of Herod; and if the Jews having by Felix obtained outward peace and quiet,
acknowledged it wholly in all places with all thanks: much more should we for
spiritual, inward and heavenly peace.

Secondly, 2 Note.
in our prayers we must labor to conceive of God in such Attributes as may
strengthen our faith in our special suites: Behold him not only the God of
all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. but of this and that particular grace.

1. To this end the Scripture denominates him from particular virtues, that in
the want of any of the^, we may resort to him confidently, as the Scripture
styles him the God of love, the God of patience, the God of hope, the God of
all consolation, of wisdom, etc. that in our want of any special grace, we
may cast our eye upon these titles or Attributes.

2. The Scriptures are stored with many names and titles of God, that we might
so conceive of him affected to us in our prayers, as he has declared himself
to be.

Do we beg the accomplishment of any promise: come to him in the name
JEHOVAH, who gives being as to all things so to his promises.

Do we pray for any thing, but see many things stand in the way of our good,
public or private: now come to him in the name of EL, a strong God, who can
quickly bring mountains to plains, and effect by a mighty power whatsoever he
will.

Lack we any blessing, and are destitute of all means and comfort; now come
to him in the name of of EL-SHADDAI, I am God All-sufficient, and that is
means enough.

Find thou thy self beset with several wickednesses, and armies of wicked
Angels in high places, and environed with temptations or dangers: now come to
him in the name of EL-TSEBAOTH, Lord of hosts, who has armies of Angels to set
round about the tents of his people: this name of the Lord is an assured
strength, when the righteous fly unto it.

Have thou received any blessing, or promise, now come to him in the name IAH,
as we are commanded, Psalm. 135. who is thy good Lord and bountiful
benefactour: If the Apostles had need thus to encourage their prayers, much
more we.

Whosoever would have true peace, Doctr. All peace must be from the God of
peace.
must have it from the God of peace; as he that would have water, must go to
the well or fountain. Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with God, be at peace with
him, so shall thou have prosperity. The Apostles in all their salutations pray
for peace from God, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Because God himself and our Lord Jesus challenge this peace to be their
own prerogative to give, neither can it be had elsewhere. Reason 1.
For the former: as God is called the God of peace, 2 Cor. 13.11. etc. so this
peace is called the peace of God, Col. 3.15. Phil. 4.7. as whereof he is the
sole Author. For the latter: our Savior says to his Disciples, Ioh. 14.27.
My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Where he first, challenges it to be his own, having clearly
purchased it. Secondly, his own to give; men may wish peace, but he can give
it: men wish the peace of God or Christ, he gives his own. Thirdly, he
shows, that this peace cannot be elsewhere had: [ not as the world gives,]
plainly distinguishing his peace from the worlds, both in the gift, and the
manner of giving. The world, 1. gives a kind of peace, but that is a false
peace, mine is a true peace. 2. That is a peace in external things, mine in
internal. Difference between the peace of Christ and the peace of the world
in 6 things.
3. That is temporary and inconstant, mine lasting, yea everlasting; For your
joy shall none take away from you. 4. That is given most to wicked men, for the
world loves her own; but this is given only to believers, being a fruit of
faith, against whom the world bends all her forces. 5. That peace is against
Gods glory; and indeed the worlds peace is the keenest war against God, the
very foment and cherisher of lusts and impiety: This peace is for God and his
glory, and a war against sin, a cherisher of grace and piety. 6. That peace
ends in destruction, though men cry peace, peace, etc. This is given for
salvation, and for the fruition of perfect peace.

2. As this peace is only Gods to give, so is it only the portion of the
children of God, who are called sons of peace: this is only childrens bread,
and must not be cast to dogs, Matthew. 15.26. And it is a gift of promise, Gal.
6.16. Peace shall be to all the Israel of God. Such only as have God for their
Father, and the Church for their Mother, have right unto this, and that because
they be sons: Esaias 54.13. Much peace shall be to her children, that is, of
the Church: and because they be believers, for this peace is the fruit and
undivided companion of faith, Romans 5.3. leaning upon the mercy of God in Jesus
Christ for the pardon of sin. The wicked man has none of this peace of God,
Esaias 57.21.
because he has not mercy nor grace with the God of peace.

The seat and place where this peace rests, Col. 3.15. (...), The peace of
God must take the chief command in the heart: and Phil. 4.7. The peace of God
which passes all understanding, (...), shall preserve your hearts: A military
word, taken from soldiers that come in to aid an army; so this peace shall
bring aid to the heart, and strengthen it, when Satan, and sin, and
temptation, and persecution lay siege to it. And who else can revive the heart,
but he that made it? Who can reach comfort to the conscience, but the Lord of
it? Who can say to the soul, I have pardoned thy sin, but the Lord the party
against whom it is committed, and so pacify it? Who can work faith in the
heart, but the Spirit of God? and who can preserve this gift there, being by so
many enemies surprised, but the hand that creates it, by the power of which we
are preserved to salvation? 1 Pet. 1.5.

Then are wicked men most unhappy, Use 1.
who being estranged from the God of peace, can have no true peace. Esaias 57.21.
The wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dyrt: there is no peace to the wicked man, says my God.

Object. Who have more peace than they? they have outward prosperity and
abundance, even what their hearts can wish, and their consciences within are
quiet, and they die like lambs, etc.

Answ. 1. Their outward prosperity deserves not the name of peace, it is at the
best but a truce with God. 2. They be not inwardly so quiet as they seem;
there is a conscience within that sometime tells them unpleasant tales and
tidings. 3. When it is quiet, it is not at peace but benumbed, slumbring, or
feared, and shall one day be wakened, and as a wild beast fly in the face of
his master. 4. All this seeming peace, being not in God, but against God, must
needs be, 1. uncertain, as a dream, Job 20.5.7. or as the crackling of
thorns under a pot, Eccles. 7.6. 2. Unsound, in the face, not in the heart, In
laughter the heart is heavy, Pro. 14.13. or at least has cause so to be. 3.
Miserable in the end: Their Sun must fall at noon, Amos 8.9 their end is woeful,
yea fulness of woe: and therefore let us never affect, nor extol this peace.

This reprooves such as content themselves with a kind of peace, Use 2.
but contemn God the Author of true and lasting peace. Many affect peace, but
not that which is an effect of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ: whereas the
foundation of all true peace is our peace with God through the Prince of peace,
Jesus Christ. Many content themselves to be counted peaceable men, quiet
neighbors, who never took the course to attain this true peace, which is
gotten by sorrow, strife, and war against sin; by stirring up the heart to
embrace the prom^ses of the Gospel, and to believe the truth of Gods word: by
going to God in frequent and fervent prayer: by hungring after reconciliation
and mercy above all things in the world.

Again, Use 3.
if thou have attained this peace of conscience, be thankful and bless the
God of peace: for since that old Serpent had disturbed the peace of heaven,
from which he was cast down with his Angels, his next work was to dissolve
the peace on ear^h by plucking man from his God: whereby Satan the Author of
all enmity has corrupted the whole nature of man, and ever since has watered
these seeds, and brought them forward; so as all the sons of Adam are
children of wrath, turned naked into the fury of God, and ly under the same as
vessels filled with wrath, and the fruits of it, in his soul, mind,
conscience, will, and all his motions; being at enmi^y with God, with his own
happy estate, with all the creatures: And this is our estate of nature, till it
pleased God by his Son Jesus Christ, (called the Lord of peace) to lay the
foundations of our peace in his blood; and to bestow the blessed Spirit in the
hearts of believers, witnessing peace between God and us; by the which Spirit,
now renewing their hearts, they become sons of peace, united again unto God,
at agreement in themselves, and in all their faculties; and knit and joynted
together among themselves in the unity of the Spirit and the bond of peace.

Quest. My conscience (I thank God) is quiet and still: but how may I know it
to be true and sound peace, that I may rest in it, and be thankful for it?

Differences between sound and senseless peace.
Answ. 1. The question is the more necessary, because every quiet conscience is
not a good conscience, and every peace in the conscience is not the God of
peace. A dead piece of flesh, prick it with a needle, it feels nothing: So
that is a dead conscience, which feels no sin, nothing at all: but that is a
pacified conscience, which is alive, and indeed feels sin, but forgiven, and
apprehends God not only offended, but now again pacified.



the God of peace, has sound fruits and effects as well as sound causes. A
conscience may be quiet, because for the present it has no enemy disturbing
it, and no molestation, because the strong man has carried all away: But a
good conscience is therefore peaceable, because it is strong and stirring in
temptation, it outstandeth, and has prevailed against temptations.

4. A bad conscience may be quiet because of of God by sin, nor fears his
wrath and damnation though never so justly deserved: But sound peace of
conscience sees the offense of a Father, and fears now transgression more
than damnation.

5. A sleepy conscience may be so much the Paul and Silas in prison, and the
Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of
Jesus, Acts 5.41. Here is the peace of Christ himself, which, when the world
by all means, of persecution, and indignities, seek to interrupt it, (as in
our head himself) yet none can take it away: whereas light persecution sends
packing the peace of hypocrites, who are soon unsettled.

3. If the God of peace have possessed thee with this sweet peace, make much
of it, preserve it, Use 4.
do nothing to disturb or forfeit this happy peace, or to provoke God to
withdraw it.

Rules of furtherance herein. Means of maintaining true peace.


1. Beware of security: peace is maintained by an expectation and preparation
for war. Many are the examples of them, who by a secure peace have lost peace
and all. Therefore preserve in thee a fear of not offending God.

2. Beware of falling into any gross actual sin. How did David and Peter
disturb their peace by foul sins? And daily experience shows, that the
godly are often by Gods just correction for sin, sometimes inwardly,
sometimes outwardly, as men set on a rack; or in an hell of horrors and
sorrow till they undo by repentance some foul offense: witness the 32 and
51 Psalms: especially presumptuous sins prevail against our peace.

3. Prepare and arm we our selves against temptation; for Satan if he cannot
hinder us of our inheritance, will surely give us as little peace in the way as
he can; and therefore he will and does often terrify Gods people with hellish
temptations, with which he brings them so low, that they see nothing less than
peace of heart: sometimes they be as men in a swone, who live, and yet know not
they do live. Therefore how had we need keep on our armor, to keep our
peace.

4. Do all duties sincerely and uprightly: Mark and behold the upright man,
his end is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Be it never so weakly or imperfectly, yet do
things uprightly; humbly in respect of thy self, and heartily in respect of
God, approving thy self to him.

5. Suffer all affliction and hard measure joyfully, for well-doing and good
conscience, rather than lose thy peace: So did the Saints of God suffer
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. and so did our own Martyrs.

Use 5.
5. This is a comfort for Gods children, as Christ intimates, Ioh. 14.27. My
peace I give unto you, let not you hearts be troubled: Their God is a God of
peace: for the godly heart will say, you speak of peace which is the only
portion of Gods people, but alas! who have less peace than they? Sure I am
(will some say) I have so many and so great afflictions in the world, that I
can scarce stand upright under them; what may I think of my self?

Answ. 1. Is thy expectation of a peace outward, in outward things? if so,
where has God promised thee such a peace, without exception of the cross? 2.
Is thy lot and portion other than the Disciples of Christ, or Christ himself?
had they this outward peace? No, In the world (says he) ye shall have
tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace. 3. Whatsoever or how great soever
thy afflictions be, thou have the God of peace with thee, and for thee, yea and
in thee, and shall not want a strengh to deliver thee out of all.

Object. Yea, but were my trialls only outward, from the world, I could
rejoice; but Satan molests me and disquiets the peace of my conscience, by such
strong and violent temptations as wound my soul; and by such motions and
thoughts as seem to be brought out of the bottom of hell.

Answ. 1. Let not thy heart be troubled; thou may be at peace that Satan is
thy enemy, thou art not yet in his power. 2. Thou may have peace, that thou
see and sorrowest for the ugliness of these temptations, and outstandest the
violence of them: thus they shall be thy exercise, but not thy sin. 3. Thou
have a God of peace whom thou servest, this God of peace will shortly tread
Satan under thy feet, Romans 16.20.

Object. But neither the world nor the Devil could hurt me without my own
sin: but that which grieves my heart, my own sins do daily disturb my
peace, and grow to such a number and strength, that I doubt I shall lose it
quite.

Answ. Sin indeed is the great trouble-house and enemy to peace: But 1. know
this to thy comfort, that no sin shall destroy peace, but that sin which
has peace. 2. Consider that of the Prophet, Esaias 54.10. The mountains may
fall, but Gods covenant of peace shall stand. This God of peace has made an
everlasting covenant of peace, and that must stand.

Lastly, if God be the God of peace, then godliness makes not any man
unpeaceable, Use 6.
or turbulent; though the world condemn the godly as authors of dissension,
and the world would be quiet were it not for them. But indeed the cause that
they are unpeaceable in the worlds eye, is, because they will not lose their
peace, nor offend the God of peace, nor exchange the peace of God and good
conscience with the peace of the world. But let such as love this God of peace,
labor to show themselves sons of peace, and show this work of God in their
love of peace, to which they are called, Col. 3.15. shunning as rocks
brawlings, and contentions, and fury, and fiery affections, with all pevish and
sour behaviors. And if for not running with the world, and for standing for
the peace of God, they shall be accounted unpeaceable, the God of peace will
justify them; and they shall take their enemies book of accusation, and bind
it on their shoulders, and wear it as a crown on their heads, Job 31.36, Now
to the petition. 1. For full sanctification. 2. For final sanctification.


The former is set down, 1. In general: sanctify you throughout. 2. In
special enumeration of parts: spirit, soul, and body, blameless.


For the meaning of the words, we are to search and find out four things.

1. What is this sanctification prayed for. 2. What it is to be sanctified
throughout. 3. What be these parts enumerated, spirit, soul, and body. 4. How
the Christian in all these parts may be kept blameless.
For the first: Sanctification is the abolition of our natural corruption,
Description of sanctification.
and the renovation of

Here we have four things to be further explained.

First, the Author of this grace; God himself: 1. Author.
Levit. 20.8. I am the Lord that sanctifies thee. And especially or more
immediately the Spirit of God, whose peculiar work it is, 1 Cor. 6.11. and
therefore he is called the Spirit of sanctification, Romans 1.4. and it self
the sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1. Because it is an effect of
the Spirit who is the immediate worker of it. 2. Because it is a sign and note
of the Spirits presence, even as the beams argue the presence of the Sun.

And good reason: for 1. in the beginning of this work man is merely passive:
for what can a dead man do to his own quickening and raising? Ephesians. 2.1. 2. Who
can repair nature depraved, but the Author of nature? who can bring back
Gods image but he that at first made man in it? This is to be borne of God, and
who begets the child but the father? 3. Our Apostle goes to God for it, from
which Ocean all streams come.

2. The Subject.
Secondly, the Subject of this grace; the elect only: for this work is
peculiar to such as shall attain the perfection of it in glory. It is true
there is somewhat like sanctification in the hypocrite and reprobate, some work
of the Spirit, by which they are said to be sanctified, Heb. 6.4. and 10.29.
But we must know, that sanctification is twofold: 1. External, in outward
calling, outward profession of Doctrine, and administration of the Sacraments:
the very best of which is general illumination, and some slight reformation:
and this is common to reprobates. 2. Internal, a special renovation, or a
change of the whole man, raising up the heart to holiness, by which gracious
work the true Christian is separated from all the profane and hypocrites of
the world: therefore 1 Pet. 1.2. he calls the believers elect to the
sanctification of the Spirit: so as this is a sanctification appropriate to the
elect.

Thirdly, the form of sanctification: 3. The form.
And that is, 1. in putting off of corrupt qualities. 2. In bringing in new and
inherent holiness, which daily changes the believer into the image of God: as
Col. 3.10. Seeing ye have put off the old man with his works, and put on the
new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created
him. This new quality, created in the hearts of the elect, by the Spirit of
God, whereby they can in some measure truly hate and forsake sin, and truly
love the Law of God, with an endeavor to keep it, is the very being of
sanctification.

Fourthly, the process of sanctification: 4. Process.
It is begun in grace here, and not perfected till hereafter in glory: Which is
added, 1. to distinguish it from justification, which is perfect in one act. 2.
To note the toughness and strong heart of sin, which is slowly weakened here,
and never here perfectly subdued: for in the most perfect the flesh lusts
against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. 3. To show, that the matter of sanctification,
is, to be in perpetual motion, as a living water: He that is righteous, must
be righteous still, Rev. 22.11. 4. To show, that sound holiness never gives
over till it attain perfection; perfection is a fruit of soundness in grace:
The way of the righteous shines more and more until perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

throughout.

Answ. 1. These Thessalonians were already sanctified, and therefore the
Apostle prays, that they might happily proceed to full sanctification. 2.
This full sanctification is partly in this life, partly in the life to come:
the Apostle intends both, the former first as a way to the latter: The
through sanctification in this life is the imperfect sanctification of parts,
the other is the perfect sanctification in degrees.

Through sanctification in this life wherein it consists.
The former is, 1. in respect of the whole rule of sanctification, which is the
Law of God, when a believer can truly say with David, that he has respect to
all the commandments, Psalm. 119.6. and 18.22. for all his laws were before
me, and I did not cast away his commandments from me. 2. In respect of all
sins: it is a through change from all sin; not a turning out of one sin
into another, nor a turning from all sins save one, as Herod; but an hating
of all appearance of evils, yea of darling and bosom sins, yea of right
eyes and hands, Matthew. 5.29. 3. In respect of all gifts of sanctification,
which the Spirit gives in part to every believer, not only knowledge, faith,
love, which are eminent, but other inferior also, as patience, meekness,
temperance, peace, with every other fruit of sanctification. 4. In respect of
all the parts of the man, in which the Spirit of God puts forth this noble
work: as Cant. 4.1. etc. the Church is described to be fair in all parts,
eyes, hair, teeth, lips, temples, etc. the sanctified person must be (...),
wholly perfect.

The latter, Through sanctification in the life to come wherein it stands*
i. full and through sanctification in the life to come, stands in the
perfection of degrees, and in these particulars. 1. An utter abolishing of
sinful flesh. 2. A perfect freedom from all the causes and works of
repentance. 3. Perfect and special communion with God, and Christ, and good
Angels, and elect men. 4. Perfection of all graces, both in kind and in
measure. 5. A perfect exercising of our graces in glory and happiness. And all
this our Apostle seems to aim at in the last words, where he mentions the
coming of Christ, in which he shall attain through and full sanctification.

For the third: What be these parts mentioned, spirit, soul, body?

Answ. 1. Some by Spirit understand the third person in Trinity, as Ambrose:
What is here meant by spirit
Some a third part of man: But the Scripture speaks but of two, namely a body
and a soul; and Aquinas says, the spirit and the soul differ, non secundu^
essentiam, sed potentiam, not in essence, but as diverse faculties. Others by
the spirit understand the whole man regenerate, so far as he is opposed to
flesh; the man considered not according to the parts of nature, but according
to the parts of grace: So Athanasius said, Spiritus est donum quod jam per
baptismum accepistis, the Spirit is the gift of God received in baptism: for,
keep this gift (says he) and both soul and body will be unblamable. This
exposition is not unfit: yet I take another to be fitter; thus: It is common in
Scripture for our better apprehension of our duty to distinguish those
faculties which God has put in the soul of man, that we might take notice of
the work of sanctification, in the several faculties. There be two parts of
man, a soul and a body. Of the soul there are two noble faculties, under
which all the rest are comprehended: 1. the spirit, 2. the will, here called
the soul by a Synecdoche of the whole for the part. By spirit in this and all
places where the spirit and soul are mentioned together, is meant that noble
and eminent faculty of man's soul, called the understanding or mind: the
Philosophers call it (...), the leader and ruler of all other parts and
faculties, and the most noble of all. Under this is the conscience included,
which being renewed is called also by the name of Spirit, Romans 8.16. The spirit
witnesses to our spirits: and Ephesians. 4.23. Be renewed in the Spirit of your
mind.

2. The other superior faculty, but not so noble, is that whereby we do will,
affect, or desire that which we understand and conceive to be good. This they
call (...), under which is comprehended the will and affections. So these words
are used elsewhere, Luke 1.46. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
rejoices in God my Savior, 1 Samuel 18.1. The soul of Jonathan was knit to
David, that is, his heart, affections, desires.

3. The body is that part of man, which is the house of the soul, consisting
of flesh, bones, humors, and the like.

Now then the whole man is sanctified throughout, 1. When the mind, thoughts,
cogitations, The whole man sanctified throughout, how.
and conscience, are pure and holy, wisely to think and meditate, and guide
safely, by wise discerning of things profitable and pertinent. 2. When the
heart, affections and desires are rightly composed, and given up to the
guidance of right and renewed reason, when a sound heart and a sound mind
meet together. 3. When the whole body as the souls instrument is in all the
members of it obedient, to act and effect good actions, according to the
dictate of right reason, and the command of renewed will; when the members are
weapons and servants of righteousness: Or more briefly, when the spirit
thinks nothing, the will affects nothing, the body effects nothing contrary to
the will of God.

For the fourth. Quest. Here is perfection of

Answ. This question brings us to the explication of the fourth thing in the
Text, How a man may be said to be blameless in spirit, soul, and body, in
this life. Whereto we say: No man ever attained to this unblameable perfection
of degrees in this life, except the first Adam in his innocence, and the second
Adam, who had sanctification in all parts and degrees: for Paul a most holy man
after regeneration confesses how far he was from perfection, Romans 7. and
Phil. 3. But a man regenerate may be said to be blameless, and thoroughly
renewed.

1. In respect of his relation with Christ his head, who is made to him
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. and in whom he is perfectly holy and unblameable:
Ezekiel. 16.14. Thy Beauty was made perfect by my Beauty.

2. In respect of open and gross crimes, which might impeach the honor of his
profession: Dicit sine qu^rela, non sine peccato, quod est solius Christ's.
Aquin.
so Zachary and Elizabeth walked in Gods ordinances without reproof, Luke 1.6.
so did Samuel and Job, and other holy men. For though no man can be without
sin, yet a man may be without crime, when after his conversion he carries
himself so uprightly, as he cannot be noted for any reigning sin before men.

3. In respect of Christian endeavor and inchoation, when the believer labors
and aims at full sanctification in all his faculties and parts: for
sanctification produces holy motions in the soul, and holy actions in the
body. See it 1. In the spirit. 1. In the soul.


First, the spirit, i. the mind and understanding of a sanctified man is
endued with a sound and distinct knowledge of heavenly things, and he still
endeavors to a further measure: Psalm. 119.33, 34. Teach me, give me
understanding, etc. Matthew. 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of
the kingdom, not to others. And it is joined with a special faith, applying
the promises, which makes his person and work acceptable: Ioh. 20.28. My
Lord, and my God. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God.

Under the spirit include the conscience, in the purging of which the believer
striveth, and loses not his labor: For 1. it is a tender conscience, and
remorsefull for sin: 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Iosiahs heart melted at the reading of
the Law. 2. It is calm and peaceable; it blames not, nor accuses seth it
self, but gives good witness, first, that the person may be assured of his
reconciliation with God, Romans 5.12. and 8.36. And secondly, that he walks
with God sincerely: 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of a
good conscience, that in simplicity and good sincerity we have had our
conversation in the world. 1 Ioh. 3.21. If our heart condemn us not, we have
boldness with God.

The second faculty, called the soul here, includes the will and affections,
in both which this work of sanctification is begun, and increased.

1. In the will, when being renewed, it is now subject and pliable to God in
all things: Romans 7.18. To will now is present with me; not only in doing, but
in suffering, as 1 Pet. 4.9. in suffering it can commit the soul to God in
well-doing as unto a faithful Creator.

2. In the affections: herein is a change, being guided and carried by the
mind and will renewed. His love is not the old carnal love, of himself and
the world, but a new affection, Love out of a pure heart, a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. His hatred which was against God and his
Saints, is now against the haters of God, and things which God hates, Psalm.
139.21. His joy which was sensual and earthly, is now delightful in doing the
will of God, yea in suffering it, Romans 5.3. We rejoice in tribulation. His
sorrow which was for worldly losses, crosses, etc. is now for sin, and for
the afflictions of Gods people: His delights which were in carnal profits,
pleasures, corn, wine, or prosecuting his lusts, are now in Gods countenance,
in Gods Law, in Gods house, in Gods Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments, and in
Gods children above all persons, as those that are excellent on earth. His
desires are answerable: what ever his former desires were, now he desires the
presence of God, the pleasing of God, pardon of sin, softness of heart, the
constant fruition of the means of salvation, with a blessed success of them:
He desires the prosperity of Zion, the salvation of the Israel of God, and the
coming of Jesus Christ to his full redemption.

Thus we see how a sanctified man profits and prospers in the whole inner
man.

But fire within will break out, and so will grace which is like fire, and the
body shall be a weapon of righteousness, his outward actions shall be done in
an holy manner, his whole life is changed.

1. For the matter of his actions; Gods word is the rule of them all: Psalm.
119.35. Direct me in the path of thy commandments, for therein is my delight.
2. For the manner: they are done, first, in humility, Mich. 6.8. Walk humbly
with thy God: Luke 17.10. Say thou art an unprofitable servant. Secondly, in
sincerity, without guile of spirit, Psalm. 32.2. Thirdly, with cheerfulness,
delighting greatly in his commandments, Psalm. 112.1. 2 Cor. 9.7. as every man
wishes in his heart: The Lord loves a cheerful giver. Fourthly, with courage
and stoutnesse: Dan. 3.17. We are not careful ^f this matter, our God whom we
serve will deliver us: Acts 4.19. Peter and John said to the Rulers: Whether it
be meet to obey God or men, judge ye: Gal. 2.11. I withstood him to his face.

3. For the end: first, he will approove his heart to God, and looks not so
much to men; for his praise is not of man, but of God. Secondly, Romans 2. ult.
he desires to please God in that he does: Acts 11.23. with fall purpose of
heart cleave unto God. Thirdly, he does not good things for his private ends,
as ease, profit, credit, but even against all these, if he be called thereunto.

The 4. respect, in which a believer may be called unblameable even in this
life, is, in Gods account and gracious acceptance. Where himself works and
sees such beginnings, proceedings, and endeavors, it is accepted as
perfection, by means of Christ's merit, promise, and intercession. Thus Paul
says, Romans 7.17. It is not I that do evil. Whence our Lord pronounces of
his Church, that she is all fair, and that no spot is in her.

5. In respect of that perfect sanctification in all degrees, which is growing
unto, and shall attain in the day of Christ's second coming, when every
believer shall be free from all blame and stain, and set into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; Voto, fide, promissione, arrhabo^e, inchoatione
which now they have only in desire, in in faith, in promise, in an earnest,
and inchoation; the Lord mercifully accepting them for that they are growing
unto.

And thus we have expounded this worthy petition of the Apostle: The sum and
substance whereof is this; that God by his Spirit, who only can raise the dead
in sin, would bestow this grace, not belonging to the wicked, upon these
Thessalonians, by which they putting off all the corrupt qualities of nature,
might by a new created quality in their hearts, grow up in the image of God,
standing in knowledge, true righteousness, and holiness. And because they
were already sanctified in part, he prays that they may go on to through
sanctification, both here and hereafter: for the present, that they may attain
full holiness, in respect of all sin which they must forsake, and of the
whole law and word which they must set before them, in respect of all gifts,
principal and less principal, and of all parts and faculties, here expressed
to be the spirit, the soul, and body: that thus they may be blameless, in
respect of relation with Christ their head, in respect of gross crimes and
reigning sins, in respect of Christian inchoation, of the Lords acceptance,
and of perfect consummation of whole sanctification at the coming of Jesus
Christ.

In that the Apostle prays for through sanctification, and enumerateth the
parts, in which it is, and desires they may be kept blameless in every of
them, we learn, that

No Christian must content himself with the beginnings of holiness, Doctr.
Christians must proceed to full sanctification.
but must proceed to full sanctification, as vessels of honor, to be full of
goodness and knowledge, Romans 15.14. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness in the
fear of God. 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 4.13. In all things grow up into him which is the head. All
which places show, that the whole life of a Christian must be a continual
progress in sanctification.

1. Our Text sets down the orderly proceeding in this work: Reason 1.
It must begin in the spirit and mind, and then change the heart and will, and
so come forth into the body and actions, that the whole man consisting of these
parts, may be blameless. And further, this care must be nourished until the
coming of Jesus Christ, either to the general or particular judgment. All
which shows, that the highest and most noble parts in man, are corrupt and
unholy; and as the Apostle says, even the mind and conscience is polluted,
Titus 1.15.
till this new quality be created: for whatsoever is borne of flesh is flesh,
Ioh. 3.6. Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? And therefore our
whole life is little enough for the renewing of all these parts so corrupted.

2.
2. Sanctification is but in part in this life: for God would have sin left in
the best; our best duties spotted, and a prick left in our flesh to buf^et,
and humble us, who else through the abundance of grace, would be proud and
lifted up out of measure; and that we might go out of our selves to the Lord,
and beg the increase of grace and sanctification from him.

Add hereunto, that the weak measure of grace present is often interrupted,
our daily lapses disturb it, sin makes daily b^eaches in it, Satan
incessantly plants his great Ordnance against it; experience shows how easily
we lose both many degrees of it, and all sense of it: and therefore we had
need still to be repairing our selves. A beggars coat needs continual
patching. We cannot be rid of our rags wholly, and therefore we must ever be
mending. Soldiers that keep a fort or hold, look what batteries and breaches
are made by skirmishes and assaul^s on the day, they will repair them in the
night, else could they not hold out; no more could we against Satan and our
own corruptions without daily repair: And as our houses, so our hearts, they
will grow dusty and nasty if they be not daily swept and cleansed.

3. Sanctification is a continual act and proceeding in grace so long as we
live; 3.
because it is nothing else but a return to our first estate and image, to
which we cannot possibly attain till death. And therefore if we would
proceed to the glory of the Saints, we must proceed in sanctification to the
full measure of it: for glorification is nothing but the end and perfection of
sanctification.

4. God has set apart many excellent and glorious means for the perfecting of
this his own work; 4.
by all which if we rise not to full holiness, we shall frustrate him of his
end. The holy Scripture is able to make the man of God perfect to every good
work, 2 Timothy 3.15. the holy Ministry of the Word and Sacraments are able both
to beget and strengthen faith, Acts 15.9.
which purifieth the heart; holy meditations, conference, prayers, with
promises of blessing and success, if we rightly use them: all these witness
to us, that the Lord would have us to be still adding what is lacking to our
graces, and rise up to full assurance and holiness; and as those that are
planted in the house of God, to be more fruitful and flourishing in our age.

5. The necessity and utility of this practice imposes it on all the godly. 5.
1. In respect of the wickedness of their hearts, and a number of beloved and
darling sins, against which all care, watchfulness and strength is too
little. 2. In respect of the steine and soil of sin, which is like a crimson
dye, hardly fetched out of those that are the Lords: for when the sting of
sin is gone, and the guilt of sin is taken away, and washed in the Kings
bath, Zech. 13.1.
even the fountain of the blood of the Son of God, opened to the house of
Judah and Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness: yet is there a stain of sin
left, which remains to be washed with the fountain of water, (for Christ
came by water and blood) this fountain of pure water is the grace of
sanctification, which is as the flood Jordan to wash the souls leprosy, which
sticks faster than Naamans; so as we had need wash seven times, that is
often, yea continually; and yet for all that it shall be with the faces of our
souls, as with the faces of our children, the dyrt shall stick till it be
washed off, and being washed, soon grows foul and dyrtie again. 3. In
respect of good duties, whereunto we shall ever be unapt and unready, further
than by profiting in sanctification we are kept in a readiness: For as a man
in fetters and irons cannot do any service to his Prince, till his fetters be
knocked off; so here, our corruptions and lusts are heavier, and press us down
harder than a thousand chains; only the grace of sanctification unties us,
and gives us liberty in good duties. 4. In respect of final perfection, which
is not attained in justification, but by sanctification* It is true, that
justification heales the wound, but sanctification shuts the skarre;
justification brings pardon, but sanctification brings peace: neither was there
ever any justified person, who had received the first fruits, but he longed
for his full harvest in perfect sanctification. Paul himself being justified,
presently attained not perfection, but labored hard toward it, Phil. 3.12.
And an inseparable note of a justified person, is, that he longs, waits,
and sigheth, to put off all corruption and misery, and to put on fullness of
grace and glory. Romans 8.23. We that have received the first fruits of the
Spirit, do sigh, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body. 2
Cor. 5.4. We desire to he cloa^hed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life: and verse 8. We love rather to remoove out of the body, and dwell
with the Lord.

This Doctrine thus prooved unto us, serves for the reproof of sundry sorts of
people.

First, those are reprooved, Use 1.
who content themselves with some illumination, Illumination is not
sanctification, why.
as if it were sanctification. For 1. A man may be enlightened, may come to a
great measure of knowledge in the mysteries Judas and Simon Magus, yet his
heart and life remain foul and unclean. 2. Mark 1.28. 4. Knowledge Cor.
3.18. Therefore deceive not thy self, sanctification begins in the
understanding and mind, but goes on to renew the thoughts, the desires,
affections, speeches and whole life.

Secondly, such are reprooved as think civil life to be holiness, Civility
is far from sanctity.
and content themselves with it as sanctification: the world generally
embraces this shadow for the body, and this image and livelesse carcass for
the life and being of sanctification; between which there is as great
difference as between a man and an ape.

Differences 6.
1. Sanctification orders the whole way, and the image of God is renewed in
knowledge, Col. 3.10. Civility goes not so high for the rule, but depends on
the reputation of men, and estimation in the world, he would neither be too
forward, nor yet of no religion: It is too strict to take the word with us to
guide every word, every fashion of apparel, every thought, than which what is
more free?

one thing necessary, Luke 10. and the good part, yet will it not be negligent
in the works of his special calling. Civility is most in things for the
natural and civil life, there is his spirit, his soul, his body, and all;
and yet he must not be an Atheist, he must sometimes do religious duties, but
how seldom, or how coldly, tediously, and of custom?

some foul issues, but it is loath to meddle with the fountain; it would not
be noted for great sins, foul adultery, manifest theft, noted lying,
drunkenness, etc. but some gainful or pleasurable sin it cannot be without:
and as for smaller sins, as idleness, vain talking, evil speaking, gaming,
lesser oaths, and the like, he takes no notice of them, nor is ever humbled
for them.

4. Civility may cover sin, but cures it not;

5. Sanctification is busy both to stock up sin,

6. Sanctification in all the good it does, and in all

And thus we see, how civil men who seem to themselves to outrunne others to
heaven, are quite out of the way, and never set foot in the path of holiness
that leads to happiness: A civil man seems a sheep of Christ by his
fleece, but his liver is rotten.

Thirdly, those are here reprooved, who think this Doctrine needless, perhaps
impossible; they mean not to be Saints till they be dead, and never look
after full sanctification till they come to heaven; and so they frame their
lives as if it were absurd to think we could be Saints upon earth. But no
Saint on earth, none in heaven, such as shall attain perfect sanctification in
heaven, are described to be such as must be written among the living in
Jerusalem, Esaias 4.4. Thou must be such a one as must feel the power of the
Spirit, renewing thy soul, body, and spirit, by which if thou find not a
mastery of all coruptions, yet thou shall find a weakening of them all, and a
desire and endeavor to subdue them all, with some success: so as this full
sanctification shall be thy aim, and so as it shall come forward every day
more than other.

Lastly, those are reprooved, who seem to come to some measure of
sanctification, but either fall back, or rest in these beginnings, caring for
no increase in spiritual things. There is no comfort at all in such standing:
for 1. Saving grace is always growing: 2. As covetous men never think they have
gold enough, so Gods children must and do think they have never grace enough.

Therefore let us stir up our selves to grow up in holiness; Use 2.
as plants and children naturally grow, so also do the children of God being
planted in his courts.

To help us herein we will somewhat at large consider three things.

1. Means of obtaining a full measure of holiness. 2. Marks of one that has
attained it. 3. Motives to provoke us thereunto.
The means are five.

I. Meditation and sound consideration, Meditation a means of holiness.
concerning, 1. God, 2. thy self, 3. grace it self.

First, in God think 1. of his will, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 1. Of God.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification. We ought to follow God, if
he should call us through hell it self, much more in the sweet practice of
sanctification, which has a happy fruit. 2. Of his promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Seeing we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness. All the promises are made
to the practisers of holiness: Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart. 3.
Of his glory, which thou ought by all thy endeavor to promote, being the
end of thy life, and of thy self: but herein especially is our heavenly Father
glorified, when our light shines before men, Matthew. 5.16.

2. Of thy self.
Secondly, in thy self consider these things: 1. In thy creation thou
receivedst a soul, a body, faculties and senses, with parts and members from
him, and in him thou now live, movest, and have thy being; and can thou do
him too much service in them? Does any man build an house, but he will look to
dwell in it? Does any plant an orchard or vineyard, and not look for useful
fruits to himself? Thy self art Gods house, thy soul Gods garden, and does
not he expect not only fruit of holiness, John. 15.8.
but much fruit? 2. In thy redemption: the end of which was not only to
deliver thee from the condemnation of sin, but from thy vain conversation, 1
Pet. 1.18. redemption is not only from the guilt and punishment, but from the
service and corruption of sin; and sanctification is an inseparable companion
of justification. 3. In thy life and present estate: thou art a Christian, and
professest Christian religion, which only prescribes the rule of holy life,
whereby thou must walk; thou must life like a Christian, that have communion
with Christ, that walk in the light as he is in the light, 1 John 1.5. that
have the Spirit of Christ, which perfecteth daily his own work, and
beautifieth his own dwelling. 4. In thy death and future estate: remember thou
must die, and only holiness of heart and life shall attend thy soul, when
all things else shall leave it; and without holiness thou shall never see God,
Heb. 12.14. If death shall leave thee unholy, the last judgment shall so find
thee. So therefore live now, as thou may ever live hereafter.

Thirdly, 3 Of the grace it self.
meditate on the grace and work of holiness it self: 1. what a difficult
work it is, and therefore thou must go seriously about it; oh the work of
mortification is a painful work, a man cannot die without pain, no more can
the old man; sin has a strong heart, and is loath to die: and therefore as
to die is no dallying matter, so he that means to dally in this business,
shall never happily proceed in the degrees of holiness. 2. What an excellent
work it is: for hereby we shall be daily partakers of the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1.3. which is not in respect of the nature and essence of God which is
incommunicable, but in respect of the most excellent and precious qualities and
gifts, bestowed by the Spirit of God on those that are regenerate, wherein we
shall be like unto our heavenly Father, and grow up to the similitude of Jesus
Christ till he shall be all in all unto us.

II. Means of growing to a full measure of holiness is in our Text, Prayer:
First, Prayer a means of growth in holiness.
for the grace it self, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. Secondly, Phil. 1.9. And this I and judgment:
verse 11. being filled with the fruits of righteousness: 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. The
Lord make your hearts stable and unblameable in holiness. for continuance and
confirmation in grace: as in the Text. Ephesians. 3.14. I bow the knee, that ye
may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inner man. Psalm. 51.12. Oh stablish me
with thy free Spirit. Let it be thy daily prayer, as David's, Psalm. 86.11. O
Lord knit my heart unto thee, let thy good Spirit lead me, even to the land
of the living. Fourthly, for a blessing on the means of grace: Psalm. 119.18.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law.

Word and Sacraments means of growth.
III. Means: An holy use of the word and Sacraments. For the word in general:
John. 15.3. Now you are clean by the word which I have spoken unto you: and
chap. 17.17. Father, sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is truth. Romans 1.15.
by preaching the Gospel the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith. Now there be in the word four things, which specially help forward our
sanctification. In the word 4 things.


1. The commandments and precepts: Psalm. Thou have commanded, that we should
keep thy precepts diligently. These let us see what we ought to aim at, and
how far we are off from our duty.

2. The promises and comforts of it: Psalm. 19.11. In keeping of them there is
great reward. Revel. 20.6. Blessed and happy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, on such the second death has no power.

3. The threats and denunciations of judgment Revel. 22.15. Without shall be
dogs, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves or makes lies. 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness?

4. The examples that are in it: Heb. 12.1. Seeing Examples of holy men will
make us trust in God, Psalm. 22.4. Our forefathers trusted in thee, and thou
did deliver them: this confirms our confidence. Godly women must show the
holy and hidden man of the heart, as Sarah did, 1 Pet. 3.5.

Observe in the reading or hearing of the word these particulars, for the decay
of corruption, and the increase of sanctification.

The Sacraments or visible words help forward sanctification, because by
baptism we are borne into the Church, and notably it both represents and
seals our mortification and quickening, Romans 6.4. and by the Lords Supper we
are fed and nourished in the grace of the covenant, in faith, love, and
comfortable assurance.

IV. Means. Godly company. That man goes apace in the grace of sanctification,
who is a companion (as David) of all them that fear God, Psalm. 119.63. Godly
company a means of growth, three ways.
Now godly company furthereth sanctification 3 ways: 1. By their instructions
and exhortations; 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Wherefore exhort and edify one another. One
Christian stirs and whets up another by gracious and edifying speech, Ephesians.
4.29. and the lips of the wise feed many: as one stick kindles another,
Pro. 13.20. he that walks with the wise shall be wise: He that is in the
Sun shall be colored though he find it not; and he that sits long in a
sweet shop, shall carry Pray for us. 3. By their example: we are commanded
to mark the upright man, and behold the just, in his proceedings, and end; for
this is a notable means to stir up our selves: Psalm. 37.37. Heb. 13.7.
Remember them which have the oversight of you, whose faith follow, considering
what has been the end of their conversation. Pro. 2.20. Walk in the way of
good men: sort thy self with such as fight against the corruptions of the
world.

Sanctified afflictions set forward sanctification, 5 ways.
V. Means. Afflictions and corrections in their holy use: Heb. 12.10. He
chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness. Psalm.
94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teach in thy Law. Dan.
11.25. Some that are of understanding, shall fall, to try others, and purge
them, and make them white.

Now afflictions do set forward sanctification touchstones, and set us on the
work of searching and examining our selves: Zeph. 2.1. Search your selves,
search (I say) before the decree come forth. Joseph's brethren could find out a
sin that was unrepented of many years, when they were troubled in Egypt. So
when the mariners in the ship were troubled for Jonas, they went to a narrow
search, for whom the trouble was; Jonas his sin had not been found out but
for the tempest. 2. When bridles, to pull us back from sin: Psalm. 119.71.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I do keep thy statutes.
Therefore the Prophet Hosea calls afflictions an hedge of thorns set before
Ephraim, Hos. 2.6. 3. When they are as Vshers, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me
to be afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes: They make a man humble, and
fit him to be taught; for God teaches the humble. Psalm. 25.9.
And many things which a man will not learn by the vocal word, he shall be
taught by this real word. 4. whetstones, to put an edge in our prayers: for in
afflictions the worst will seek God diligently, Esaias 26.16. they powered out a
prayer, when thy chastening was on them. Hard-hearted Pharaoh, while the plague
is upon him, will beg prayers of Moses: Much more will David, feeling the
hand of God, and terror of conscience for his two sins upon his repentance
exceed himself in holy and fervent prayer, Psa. 51.1. and Paul finding the
prick in his flesh, will pray the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.8.
that is, often and earnestly. 5. When they are as fire, to purify the gold,
and burn up the dross of their corruptions: 1 Pet. 1.7. Ye are in heaviness
through manifold temptations, that the trial of your faith being much more
precious than gold might be found to your glory and praise. Gods flaile
purges wheat, and drives away the chafe: As we do with our vessels, so
does God with his vessels of honor, oil and soil them, but all to make them
brighter. When is the time for stars to shine but in the dark night? so do
graces in the darkest night of adversity.

We see the Means: Now we come to the Marks, whereby we may know, whether
we grow up to full holiness or no.

Trials of growth in holiness, 5.
These Marks are five.

The first is Separation: if we find our selves separated from the profane
courses of the world, 1. Separation.
gathered out of the world, John 17.6.
and dedicated to good and holy services: Come out from among them, and
separate your selves, 2 Cor. 6.17.
says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you. For
sanctification consists in three things: 1. The imputation of Christ's
holiness, who of God is made to us sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. His sanctified
nature heals our corrupt nature. 2. The infusion of moral holiness into our
natures, peculiar to the elect, a receiving of his fullness by means of union.
3. Separation from the common courses of the world, unto special service; this
is made a mark of such as are made partakers of the divine nature, to fly the
corruption which is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. The farther thou
gettest thee from the evil fashions of the world, the farther thou proceedest
in holiness.

The second Mark of full holiness, is, 2. Alteration.
an Alteration and change in thy self, both in thy spirit, and soul, and body.

1. The spirit is altered, first, when the mind having a sound and distinct
knowledge in heavenly things, and the light of renewing grace, does grow
brighter and brighter till perfect day. Secondly, when the conscience is tender
and peaceable, as we heard before. 2. The soul is altered, when the heart, the
will and affections are ordered as before. 3. The body is altered, first, in
respect of the members, when the same that the flesh most abused, do most
glorify God in some special manner. Zachary by his mouth sinned in
distrusting God, therefore so soon as he could speak, with the same mouth
he glorified him. So the woman, Luke 7. that had abused her eyes, hair, and
lips, to wantonness, now takes them from Satan, to wash, and wipe, and kiss
her Savior Christ. So in Bishop Cranmer, that hand that subscribed was first
burnt. Secondly, in respect of the outward fashion there will be a change: if
the body have abused meat and drink for surfeiting and drunkenness, if
garments and apparel for pride and wantonness, if sports and recreations in
excess or for covetousness, you shall see even in the outward man a check of
all such excesses, and a manifestation that they be not the men they were
before sanctification. Thirdly, in respect of the deeds to be done by the
body, both for matter, manner, and end, as we heard before.

3. Affection to grace known by 4 signs.
The third Mark of full holiness, is sound Affection and singular love of
grace; which affection where it increases, holiness increases accordingly.
This love and measure of it we may Phil: 3.12, 13 I count not my self that I
have attained, but one thing I do, I press hard to the mark, etc. Keep still
in thee a thirst after the water of the well of life, and Christ will give it
thee freely, Rev. 21.6. A taste of that which is delicate, makes a man long
after his fill. 2. By a diligent faith purifieth, Acts 15.9. therefore a godly
man labors still for the increase of faith: the word sanctifies, John 17.17.
a property of Saints is, they are humbled at his feet to hear his word, Deuteronomy.
33.3. see Exodus 19.5, 6. John 3.30. He must increase, but I must decrease.
Moses the more grace himself had, the more he wished to others, Number. 11.29.
Enviest thou for my sake? yea I would all Gods people were Prophets. 4. Romans
8.23. We that have received the first fruits of the Spirit, sigh in our
selves, waiting for the adoption of sons. Find in thee this affection to the
first fruits here, and full fruits hereafter, to receive daily strength and
increase, and thy holiness increases with thy hunger and thirst after it:
Never was there so happy an hunger, the more hungry the more full.

The fourth Mark is Detestation, 4. Detestation of evil manifest in 6 things
or dislike of opposites of holiness; which as it increases, so does
holiness also. Now this is manifest, 1. In John 5.18. He that is begotten of
God, keeps himself, and the evil one touches him not. 2. By rising into
greater dislike law of the members rebelling 7.23. 4. By complaining of secret
and lesser evils, which Ephraim Get you hence, what have I to do with you,
Hosea 14.8. my house is taken up already, here is no room for you. 6. By the
spirit of 4.4. judging and condemning sin. The Spirit keeps an Assize in the
soul, pronounces sentence against corruption, and kindles a fire to burn up
those bewitching evils, and a fire of zeal and indignation against them.

Thou growest not in holiness, who growest not in the measure of hatred of
evils, answerable to thy former love and liking of them.

5. Disposition to good tried by 5 signs.
The fifth Mark is Disposition to good duties: this is an argument of
soundness of sanctification. 1. When thou can ever set the Lord before Phil.
2.21. 3. When in the sober use of all Gods creatures thou art led to the
contemplation of Psalm. 8.1. 4. If when thou have performed any good duty in any
good measure, thou rest not therein, but labor more earnestly to do

Now if these be the marks of proceeding in sanctification, how rare is this
duty? 1. Where is the man that takes up this order of God, that begins this
work at the spirit of the mind, notwithstanding that God being a Spirit
begins his chief work in the Spirit, and the law the rule of holiness being
spiritual, especially requires inward sanctity. Ier. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash
thine heart, first, loathe sin inwardly, and then outwardly. Many will mend
their lives, but let their hearts alone: which is all one as to cut off a waste
bough, and not to strike at the root; to seek to draine a stream, but not
meddle with the fountain. 2. Where is the man, that having changed his
understanding from error to truth, changes also his will from evil to good?
Here many fail, who see what is good and approove it, but themselves are as
bad as ever they were. 3. How few refine every part of their life, and bring
all the members within the whole rule? who can say, I hate all the evil which
I loved, and all the good which like a swine I trampled under feet, offered in
the means, I now in some measure embrace and practice? I was intemperate, now
sober; wanton and foul, now chaste and pure; a great swearer, now I tremble at
an oath: and so in the rest. One that is a foul monster still, may reform
some things, yea many things, yea most; but to come to through sanctification,
casts off many: some are just, not merciful; some have care of honesty, not of
godliness; some are better in some company than in other: Psalm. 119.6.
few have respect to all the commandments. 4. How many be there, who have made
some fair offers of beginning in the Spirit, but have ended in the flesh? They
made men believe they had the substance of holiness, and would go through the
business, but end in mere ceremony, nay scarce that, but are haters of
holiness. Better it had been for them that they had never been enlightened,
never washed, never purged, than forget they were cleansed. Now let him that
filthy be filthy still, and let him that is holy be holy still, Rev. 22.11.

The third general thing proposed, is, Motives to full sanctification.
Motives to grow up unto full sanctification.

I. Motive. Consider, that whatsoever thou castest thine eyes upon, it calls
upon thee to proceed in thy sanctification. If thou look upward to God, the
further thou proceedest, and the greater measure of sanctification thou
attainest, the more thou art like him, and the more is he glorified: John 15.8.
In this my Father is glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. If to the
Angels, these holy and ministering spirits incessantly expect his charges, and
unweariably execute the same: besides, they are joyful witnesses of thy
profiting in grace and holiness: for if they rejoice at the first peeping of
holiness in thy conversation, how joyful will they be when it proceeds to
perfection in conversation? If thou look round about thee to thy brethren,
thou must be so far from offending or scandalizing them, that thou must be
ready by all good offices to help them, to edify them, especially by a godly
and zealous example: these must behold the shine of thy light, both for the
glorifying of God, and their own direction and encouragement; at least thou
must be blameless in the midst of a naughty generation, holding out the word
of life, Phil. 2.14, 15. If to the creatures, even the whole world, heaven and
earth, Sun, Moon and stars, beasts, fishes and plants, all these stand and
proceed in the service of their Creator; and all these have a voice by which
they continually cry, Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 148. All these
being created and given for our use, call us unto constant thankfulness, to
uphold his glory who made them for us, as all they do in their kind.

If thou look ^^thin thy self, thou have three things which ^ondl^ call for
this duty: 1. The joy of the holy Ghost, which is unspeakable and glorious:
Psalm 97.11. Light arises to the just in darkness, and joy to the upright of
heart. If Gods Spirit by thy increase of grace be gladded and cheared, he will
make thee a glad man; but if he be grieved or quenched, thou shall smart for
it, yea suppose thou be the Lords. 2. The testimony of thy conscience: this is
the sweet Paradise, in which God is familiar with man, and that honey which (as
Augustine says) is sweet in it self, and makes all other things sweet, let
them be never so tart or sour in themselves. Paul in great affliction had a
sweet relish, 2 Cor. 1.12. For this is our rejoicing, even the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness we have walked. 3. Gods
approbation and acceptance: who would not be allowed of God? but hence thou
shall be allowed, that thou art made a Disciple of Christ, if thou bear much
fruit, John 15.8. as a Schoolmasters commends them for good scholars, who
stand not at a stay, but go on in learning with diligence, climbing to the
highest forms. And if God work in the hearts of his children a delight in
those that excel in virtue, Psalm. 16, 3.
how much more will himself delight in them, who the longer they live the more
they excel?

Lastly, if thou look as low as hell, there thou shall see the Devils and
wicked Angels as busy as bees to promote their kingdom, and to pull all men,
yea even thy self into their corruption and condemnation: And should not this
add courage to thee to set up the kindome of God with all thy power, every
where, but especially in thy self.

II. Motive. Consider why God has elected, called, justified us, whereas he
might have left us in our common mass, and passed by us as well as a great
part of the world, as good every way as our selves?

Election.
First, he has elected us, that we might be holy, and that not in a small
measure, but also unblameable before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4. and Romans 8.29. God
has predestinate us to be made like the image of his Son: How and wherein?
Answ. Partly in humility, partly in holiness, that as he by an humble and
holy life went on to his glory, so must we.

Vocation.
Secondly, why or to what has God called us, but unto holiness? 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.
God has not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness, yea unto full
holiness, that as obedient children we should resemble our heavenly Father,
who is holiness it self: 1 Pet. 1.15. As he which has called you is holy, so
be ye also in all manner of holy conversation, because it is written, Be ye
holy as I am holy, Levit. 26.6. Now the word (as) signifies not an equality in
measure, which we can as little attain, as a spoon can contain the Ocean; but
only a conformity, or resemblance in our nature renewed and made obedient to
the rule. 1. He is thoroughly holy, without want or sin: so must thou strive
to be. 2. He is holy at all times, in the day, and in the night: so thou must
never lay aside thy holiness, neither on the Saboth, nor on the week day or
night. 3. He is holy in all places, in earth, and in heaven: so must thou as
well in earth as in heaven, as well in the market as in the Church. 4. He is
holy in his word, in his works, in all his ways: so must thou in thy words,
works, and whole conversation. Hear this thou that hear the Gospel, which
is Gods voice calling thee to holiness: Lead henceforth a profane life at thy
peril: He that calls thee is holy; Heb. 12, 14.
the calling is to holiness, yea to conformity in his own holiness: aim at
it, else thou shall never partake of it hereafter.

Thirdly, thy justification tells thee, that Christ dwells in thee by faith,
Justification.
and that thy heart is built up to be an habitation of God by the Spirit, Ephesians.
2. ult. Now the blessed Spirit cannot dwell any where but in a Temple dedicated
unto him, where the old man is daily put off, and the new man put on daily;
where the power of sin is daily weakened, and the grace of holiness daily
gets power and strength; for Gods Spirit will not dwell any where, but as
the Master of an house, as a ruler and commander: Neither can any attain the
comfort or sense of his justification, but by the undivided companion of it,
which is sanctification: and as this grows, so arises the measure of sense
and comfort of this present happiness: for he that does righteousness, is
righteous, says the Apostle, 1 John 3.7.

III. Motive. Consider what thou art, namely, a Christian: in the very name
thou professest communion with Christ, and consequently to walk in the light,
1 Ioh. 1.7.
as he is in the light. A Christian must adorn Christian profession by
Christian life and conversation. A Christian, called so of Christ, must show in
his whole course, that he is partaker of Christ's annoynting, 1 Ioh. 2.20. 1.
Show thy self a Christian Prophet, by profiting in the knowledge of God, and
instructing others in the same. 2. Show thy self a Christian Priest, who have
received the annoynting, by offering thy self an holy, Romans 12.1.
acceptable, living, and reasonable sacrifice. Offer thy prayers, and the
sacrifices of praises, those calves of thy lips. Offer the sacrifices of
alms and mercy; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16.
Offer thy life and dearest blood a sweet sacrifice for the chief and high
Priest of our profession, if God call thee unto the same. 3. Show thy self a
Christian King, by raising all thy power against thine enemies, and adversaries
of salvation; by defending and maintaining thy Christian liberty, in which thou
art set; by ruling over thy self, and keeping a strait hand and authority over
thy lusts and affections; make them subjects: by carrying thy self as a King,
with clemency, meekness, liberality, measuring and judging every thing
according to the Laws of Christ enacted in the Parliament of heaven. What? a
Christian, and an epicure? a Christian swearer? a Christian adulterer? a
Christian gamester, liar, etc. quam male convenient? how harsh is this to the
ear of men, of God much more?

IV. Motive. Consider, that he that is once truly good, grows from good to
better, and so is best at last. Our Savior plainly prooves, that he who has
the least measure of sound fruit, his fruit shall increase: Ioh. 15.2. Every
branch that bears fruit, the Father purges it, that it may bear more
fruit. And this is the property of such as are planted in the house of our
God, to flourish in his courts, and be more fruitful in their age, Hosea 6.4.
which is clean against the course of nature, Psalm. 92.13. Such therefore as
seemed to come on, but within a while their righteousness is as the morning
dew, or fall back and wither; who are worst at last, (as evil men must be)
were never good. Were they ever good, that are so soon remooved to another
Gospel, even in days of peace, to whom Christ was preached, of whom
professed, into whom they were baptized? or what has bewitched them to such
apostasy? Gal. 3.1. Were they ever good, who in stead of reading, prayer and
sermons formerly frequented, are grown to cards, dice, drinking, swearing, and
a distaste of faithful Preachers and sermons? Were they ever good that hate
goodness, or to hear of fullness of holiness, or of their own idleness?
Alas empty tubbs! here was never any thing but a sound, no soundness at all.

V. Motive. Consider how we are affected in inferior things, and shame our
selves for want of the like affection for the increase of better things than
they. 1. We never think our grounds, our orchards, our gardens, our cattle
fruitful enough: If a man have a piece of land that brings forth but a small
croppe, he will be at pains and cost to make it more fruitful: Alas! shall
we have more care of our grounds than of our hearts, to make them fruitful
and yielding to the laud and praise of the great husbandman? Or think we our
hearts less barren than the worst conditioned ground? Let this provoke us, if
we have gotten our hearts to bring forth thirty fold, to labor them till they
bring sixty fold, and let them not rest there till they yield an hundred fold.
This Christ commends to us in that good ground, Matthew. 13.8. This the Apostle
calls for, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. to exceed more and more. 2. In the matter of money
and wealth: (...). Aristoph. in Pluto.
how do men bestirre themselves to add to their gains, to make one pound
five, and from five to ten, and so add hundreds, and rise to thousands,
sucking profit from every thing insatiably as the horse-leach? How thrifty
husbands, 1. forecast to get, and plod to increase their stock? 2. Carefully
save that which is gotten, avoiding expenses, and much more excesses? 3. Having
got a good portion, yet still desire and seek more? for he would have none
before him in wealth, if he had his mind. 4. Lay out part or whole of that he
has, for a greater gain? Should not we be now as thrifty for our souls as
for our bodies? Is not a stock of grace better than a stock of goods? Who but
a doting worldling would not think wisdom better than wealth, and a grain of
holiness better than a talent of earthly happiness? Is a grain of grace so
precious, and is not an eternal weight of it worth our sweat and labor? Why
do we not as thrifty Christians awaken our dull spirits, to forecast with the
wise Virgins to get such store of this oil, as to carry us through to the
wedding chamber? Should we need to be stirred to save that which we get so
hardly, avoiding the expenses, and sinful excesses which eat out our stock,
and prodigally waste our estate in grace? Why stand we still, having found a
little vein of gold, namely of grace much more precious than gold, and not
hold on our labor to find the rich mine which it leads unto? Why do not
we with the wise Merchant resolve to lay out our whole estate for this pearl?
Or should we hide our talent in a napkin, and not lay it out, or employ it,
seeing by use and return it increases? It would grieve a man to see so many
good husbands for the world, to be such stark unthrifts for their souls.

VI. Motive. Consider we the means that God has affoorded us for our growth
in sanctification: 1. Gods readiness and care to fit us for the duty, so as no
want is in him: for while he pleases to continue any means unto us, he
shows his readiness (though we fail in using the means) to bring us to the
end; seeing he supplieth means of growth, he is ready in them to add more
grace. This blessed means is the sweet liberty of the preaching of the
Gospel, by which he offers to make our hearts of evil good, of good better;
he offers by it not only to work faith where it is wanting, but to add to
faith that which is wanting to it, and so to bring it to certainty and
assurance. So also the assistance of his Spirit in prayer: 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
Spiritual guides and Pastors: and the example of the godly as a cloud going
before us. Why should we frustrate God and our own souls of the end of so
happy means? 2. Our own reckoning and account, which will be expected
answerable to such means: Luke 12.48. To whom more is given, of him shall more
be required: so to whom God affoords more means of holiness, he expects more
fruit of holiness. Never any Nation, never any Age was before us, no nor
near us, in the glorious means: Never had our fathers that light, that
constant Ministry, those encouragements, those precepts, those many examples
which we enjoy: they counted the crummes of our table liberal fare. To hear
the prayers read in English made them weep for joy. To have a piece of
Scripture translated was the hazard of their lives. We read of some that did
give a whole load of hay for a few chapters of Saint James in English. Two or
three could not confer together of any good thing in those tyrannous times,
but they might have escaped far better for felony. Yet oh the holiness, the
honesty, the zeal and grace of those godly men, whose crown is, that they
were as far before us in grace as we are before them in means: If ever Age
could blush, ours might be it. And as the Land in general, so this place has
been before other places in constant and glorious means: what our growth is,
the world sees, very unanswerable to them, very unthankful to God for them.
Capernaum needed nothing but Christ's great works to condemn her: Look upon
her, and learn in time to loathe her unthankfulness.

That your spirit, soul, and body may be kept blameless.
NOw we are by the assistance of God to proceed unto the second petition in
this prayer, for full holiness in special by enumeration of parts: Where for
the meaning of the Apostle we have considered already, 1. What are these parts.
2. How are they said to be blameless.


In that the Apostle prays how that they might be kept blameless; hence we
learn,

That Christians must not only labor to attain a full measure of grace, but
also to keep it. So it is as commendable to keep our selves blameless as to
make our selves blameless. Doctr. Christians must be as careful to retain
grace, as to attain it.
1 Timothy 5.22. the Apostle exhorts Timothy, Keep thy self pure: think not
all is well when thou have gotten grace, righteousness and holiness, but
keep thy self pure: for know it is no less virtue to keep grace, than to
get it. Jude 21. Keep your selves in the love of God: and again, Keep that
thou have obtained, lest another take thy crown. And the rather,

Reas. 1.
First, because this is the effect of true religion: for true religion
unspotred and undefiled before God is, James 1.27.
to keep a man's self blameless and unspotted without just crimes in the
world, and this is, to keep himself blameless.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, no part of man can be kept blameless without great care and
industry: Adam in innocence could not keep himself blameless as he was
created; and much less the sons of Adam now in corruption. No watch is
sufficient against that subtle Serpent, that winds himself into us
insensibly; every faculty as an ear, and every sense as a window lets him into
us, to come in and spoil us: and therefore it is necessary we should labor
to keep that we have gotten.

Reas. 3.
3. Excellent and precious things are to be kept most charily; men's gold,
silver, jewels, and treasures are carefully kept, but their lives much more,
because they are precious unto them. But of all treasures, our spirits, souls,
and bodies, are of most incomparable value, nothing so worth keeping as this.
First, what a precious blood was shed for to redeem them. Secondly, if these
be lost, what price can recover them? what shall a man give for the recompense?
Nothing but the blood of Christ; tread that under foot nothing can recover it:
a treasure must be kept most carefully: but a godly man's heart is a good
treasury, sending out good things. A worldlings treasure is without him, and
that he holds fast: but the godly man's treasure is within him, he lays hold
upon faith and grace in Christ, and these he holds worth the keeping; but for
the things of the world they are not worth the keeping in safe custody. If they
be not kept till the day of Christ, they are lost eternally: there is no time
of keeping them but the present; neglect that, there is no salvation.

4. The necessity of keeping our selves blameless is exceeding great. Reas. 4.
1. If we look upon our selves in our natural inclinations to soil and
black our selves: or whether we look upon our whole, or parts.

First, the whole frame of man's heart is evil, the whole natural spirit
imagines evil continually, Genesis 6.5.

Secondly, and for the parts: 1. The conscience is darkened, by the black
darkness of ignorance; and impured by a thousand sins of most ugly hue. 2.
The thoughts, which in the day of Gods appearing shall either accuse or excuse,
Romans 2.15. are naturally vain, roving, and straggling from God. 3. The
affections, which are of great force to good or evil. If they be sinful, they
are as wings to carry us as slaves to the most barbarous and unnatural evils,
and ever pulling us aside to the world and lusts: As Cain to hate and murder
his innocent brother: Cham to lay open his fathers nakedness: Judas to betray
the most righteous Son of God. But if they be rightly ordered, they are
powerful instruments of excellent duties, and as wings to carry us to the high
pinnacles of Christianity. All excellencies have been brought out of the
strong affections of grace.

Thirdly, Look upon our selves in the presence of grace, the cleanest house
will gather soil if it be not daily swept; the brightest vessels take rust,
if not often scoured and oyled: enemies chased will turn head again, trees
lopped will grow again, nature expelled returns again, fire quenched will
kindle again: and therefore all watch is little enough.

Fourthly, Look on our selves in that to which we are called and set apart by
grace, to be sons of God, Temples of the Spirit of God, mansions for God and
Jesus Christ to come into us and suppe with us. How careful are we to cleanse
our houses from all filth, when we are to give entertainment to an honorable
friend; whom we are sure will be ready to pry into every corner, as the Lord
will surely do when he comes into us.

Use 1.
This serves to discover the general error of men, who, if they had innocence
it self, could not stand by themselves without watchfulness, yet can keep
any thing better than themselves, their horses, their swine, cattle, their
money, their wares; but very few think they need to be so careful to keep
themselves. They keep no watch over their thoughts, they are free; nor over
their words, words are but wind: nor did they ever see their souls, and
therefore care not to keep them. How careful are wise men to keep themselves
out of the lurch of the law; lest by word or deed they should forfeit any of
their outward estate, much more their liberty, lives, etc? But how careless
are the same men of keeping themselves out of the lurch of Gods law, and out of
the actions which forfeit the whole estate of grace, the liberty and life of
their souls. And yet, 1. Is not thy charge straighter to keep thy soul than
any thing else? 2. Is any thing so exposed to robbers and spoylers, so many, so
vigilant, so resolutely bent to mischief thee? 3. Is any loss so
irrecoverable, so irrepairable? 4. Can any thing thou keep so fast do thee
good, when thou have lost thy self; whatsoever thou most carefully keep
else, that thou receivest not for thy self, but for others: and will thou
fondly save all for others, with the loss of thy self? Alas! our folly, that
needs so many warnings and motives for the keeping of our selves.

Be we incited to keep our selves blameless. Use 2.
Wherein observe, 1. The generality. 2. The time. 3. The order. 4. The rules.

First, for the generality, our Apostle says the whole man, consisting of
soul, body; and the whole spirit, soul, and body: for bonum est ex causis
integris, malum ex quolibet defectu, if any part be blemished, the whole is
blamed.

Secondly, keep all or none: God will have all or none; no polluted part shall
get into his presence, he will have no part of a divided man.

Thirdly, the Saints took themselves bound to keep all. Above all David will
look to his heart, and look to his thoughts, and he will have an eye to his
will, I have vowed and will perform: and then to his mouth, he will keep that
as with a bid and bridle: and to his ways, Psalm. 39.1. Then he will lift up
his hands to the Law, and then refrain his feet from every evil way.

Fourthly, The danger of not looking to the whole: a thorn in the foot may
fester; a gangrene in one part is deadly: one poison in the body, one part
without armor is the ruin of the whole.

2
2. For the time. We must now keep our selves. Men think they can never be
Saints till they come to heaven, and profess they cannot be blameless here:
But our Text says, we must be blameless till the day of Christ: Neglect thy
self for the present, and give thy self lost for ever; sow now to the flesh,
and reap corruption.

3
3. The order. First the inside, spirit, and soul, and then the body. First
wash the inside, says our Savior; get faith which is a purifier, apprehending
Christ's righteousness: for, 1. Can we draw a clean thing from that which is
unclean, Job 14.4. or sweet fruit from a bitter root. 2. Satan lies
closest here, as a serpent in thickets. 3. It is the most compendious way, to
damme a stream in the fountain; to quench the fire in the spark, else if it
live within it will kindle and flame, on tinder or tow: where the disease
begins, there must begin the remedy. 4. God looks out of what treasury good
things come; if not out of the good treasury of the heart, if not from a pure
heart, if not from faith, all is sin: hence the works of unregenerate men,
as good in show, and beautiful, are rejected; because they flow not from a
pure fountain, and mites with the heart put to them weigh down many glorious
works. 5. Distinguish thy self from the hypocrite, he washes the outside,
Pilate washes his hands, not his heart, as if sin stuck only in the
fingers ends: the harlot wipes her mouth, and it was not she.

But we are to know that the Lord is as well angry with intentions, and inward
impurity; Use 3.
as with outward enormities. And therefore let us labor to keep, first, our
spirits and souls, and then our bodies unblameable.

Here we will somewhat largely consider certain directions for each of them.

I. Directions for the Spirit. Rules concerning sanctification of spirit.


First, Labor to have a right spirit renewed within thee, Psalm. 51.10. Now to
a right spirit there go five things. 1. Illumination, To a right spirit five
things are required.
even an heavenly David joins it with creating a new heart; for this is not in
nature, but a work of new creating grace. The Agent is God alone, who gives
light to the blind, who takes away the veil, and makes the scales fall from
Paul's eyes in his conversion. The companion is sound conversion, 2 Cor. 3.16.
the turning of the heart to the Lord, and the remooving of the veil joined;
and the sign of it is, a base estimation of the world with the profits,
pleasures, and preferments of it, the pursuing of which makes most men so
blameworthy in the day of Christ. 2. Poverty of spirit, which stands in the
sense, sorrow, shame, and hatred of sin, and cannot stand with selfe-wisdome,
or high-mindednesse, or a proud spirit puffed up with conceits, whom God
resists: but a contrite spirit is acceptable, and the poor in spirit are
blessed, and blameless, Matthew. 5.3. 3. Purity of spirit, which is attained by
daily bringing in and increasing of the graces of the Spirit, as faith, love of
God, sincerity, charity, mercy, meekness, etc. these fruits of the Spirit
argue cleanness of spirit, though it were formerly never so foul and
blameworthy: Col. 3.12. Deck the mind with graces. 4. Spiritual worship,
Romans 1.9. Whom I serve in my spirit: not bodily, formally, hypocritically,
coldly, but with my whole heart, in sincerity and fervency. This fervency is a
motion of Gods Spirit, inflaming the spirit of the believer with great love of
God, and hatred of whatsoever he hates. And where this spiritual worship
stands up in the Spirit, down must Dagon go, and all the idols that men have
set up in their hearts, down goes the external and carnal worship of civil
men, who (what ever they pretend) respect not in their spirit the worship and
service of God, but their own pleasures, ends, and praise, and that in their
most slightly duties. 5. The testimony of the Spirit, that thou art the child
of God, Romans 8.16. This testimony is sure, when the Spirit of God renewes our
spirits, and upon firm and unfailing grounds makes us able to call God Father,
working sound tranquillity in our conscience through our union with Christ,
boldness and confidence toward God, fervent love of God, constant obedience,
with other fruits, not common or competent to hypocrites. This testimony
seals up our acceptance, yea the inheritance of children: The spirit that
wants any of these is not a right or renewed spirit.

Secondly, labor (as Saint Paul did, Acts 24.16.) for a good conscience before
God, and before men. To a good conscience are required four things. Four
things requisite to a good conscience.


1. Clearenesse, 2. Clearing, 3. Peace, 4. Watchfulness.

1. It must be a clear or pure conscience, 2 Timothy 1.3. 1. Clearenesse in it
self*
This is when the conscience is cleared or purged from natural impurities,
which the Apostle calls dead works. This purity is not native, as it was in
the first Adam, but acquisite, and obtained by the second Adam: for the
material and meritorious cause of the goodness of conscience, is the blood of
Jesus Christ, who by the obedience of his death, has freed us from all guilt
and punishment of sin, reconciled us to God, and become our peace; whereby
this and all other faculties are purged through faith in his blood. Heb. 9.14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ purge our consciences from dead works.

The companions of this purity of conscience are two. First, a frameing of
conscience to the rule of the word, which is a torch-light for the direction of
it: for, the conscience being the eye of the soul, must be lightsome, not
erroneous, blind, or doubtful. Secondly, a study to preserve the purity, and
himself unspotted before God and man, and no man has purity of conscience
that wants this care.

2. Clearing his master.
2. It must be a clearing conscience, taking the Masters part against all
accusers. It self is not blameless, unless it can justly pronounce the
Master blameless. And this is,

First, when it bears witness concerning our sins: 1. That there is no
sin we have committed but we have repented the same. 2. There is none
committed, but we hate it, we purpose against it, and keep a watch that it
be never committed any more.

Secondly, when it witnesses concerning our persons, that we are now righteous
and justified by faith in Jesus Christ: of unclean blackmores we are washed
and made white in his blood, and sons of God; who of an enemy is become a
friend and Father to us.

Thirdly, when it witnesses concerning our graces; that as by the former we
are freed from the guilt of sin, so we are now freed from the power of sin,
and are no more servants of unrighteousness, but now our conscience tells us
we are in part sanctified: that the evil we do, we hate; and love the good
we do not: and that in the inner man we delight in the Law of God.

Fourthly, when it witnesses concerning our course and actions, that now they
are wrought according to God, by the warrant of his word, and because he has
commanded so to do them. Happy is that man that his conscience tells him, that
his will is now framed to Gods will; and in regard of Evangelicall obedience,
which stands in true purposes and endeavors, he may say, since the time of
his calling unto the grace of the Gospel, with the Apostle, Acts 23.1. I have
lived in all good conscience until this day.

3. It must be a peaceable conscience, in that he has done or not done: it is
at peace with God, 3. Peaceablenes
and with it self. This is when it excuses the person aright both for his
person, and for his actions. First, for his person, as now reconciled,
justified, accepted. Secondly, his actions, as having a true desire and
endeavor to please God in all things. Now the conscience being truly
peaceable, it rises up to be truly joyful, which makes the heart merry and
cheerful, as a continual feast: neither wants he any good cheer that has
it, Prove. 15.15. Nor wants he good company that has a good conscience, he can
rejoice alone, without all other company or comforts. The heart is held up in
absence of all worldly comforts, and in presence of all worldly evils, and
none can take away the joy of it.

4. It must be a watchful, 4. Watchfulnes
not a sleepy conscience, a waking, not a remorslesse conscience. 1. It
watches against all sin, both to be committed, and as a faithful monitor,
pulls the Master back: As also for sin already committed, and smites with
remorse and biting, as David, I have done very foolishly.

Object. But does not a bad conscience show some remorse after sin: what else
did Judas?

Answ. Yes, but with this difference: 1. A bad conscience has some scratch on
the outside, and sometimes a deeper gash, and an incurable wound, but it never
goes on to godly sorrow, as a good conscience does. 2. It seeks not to the
remedy, but sinkes under the burden, the wound bleedes to death, as in Judas.

Secondly, a good conscience watches to all good duties, and occasions,
desirous to please God in all things, and at all times, according to the
conscience enlightened. This pure, clearing, peaceable and waking conscience,
is necessary to an unblameable and renewed spirit.

Thirdly, seeing the true evidences of the pureness and holy temper of the
spirit, To pureness of spirit are required holy thoughts.
are holy and well guided thoughts, we must carefully look to our thoughts
and cogitations. Here 1. Choose them so as thou be sure thy heart be a
receptacle of holy thoughts: 1. Choose them.
examine them, whence they come, and whither they go, and by examination thou
shall find some vain and evil thoughts; these thou must hate all of them,
Psalm. 119.113. And if thou hate them, put away the evil of your thoughts:
and Ier. 4.4. Let the wicked forsake his thoughts, knowing that evil thoughts
are as damnable as evil actions: Acts 8.22. pray if thy thoughts may be
forgiven; which implies guilt. Some thou shall find wandering, roving
thoughts, which must be taken up as vagrants, and corrected, lest as Dinah thou
be defiled and corrupted with fleshly lusts; pass them away quickly. Some
other thou shall find idle thoughts but unnecessary: send them away, harbor no
idle thoughts, nor yet cast them out without censure and disgrace. Some are
perhaps lawful, but less necessary, put these of till another time, that the
more necessary may take up the room. Some are unruly thoughts rising up
against against God or men, thoughts of infidelity, of revenge, dishonorable
thoughts against Gods servants and ordinances: all such disordered and proud
thoughts must be brought into the subjection of God, 1 Cor. 10.4.

2. Watch them well, being so infinite, 2. Watch them.
so quick and nimble, and in so secret a place; being also so slippery, so
soon interrupted and corrupted by idleness, by society, looseness of senses,
roving of affections, unallowed objects; therefore set a sharp eye upon them:
and seeing that will not serve, bring them under Gods eye, keep them close to
God: for as the husbands eye and presence is the best way to preserve the wives
chastity; so the heart betrothed to God, carrying it self in his sight, is not
easily polluted with strange and unclean lusts.

To enforce this watch, know, it differenceth from an hypocrite: First, an
hypocrite can watch over words and actions in respect of man, but a godly man
watches over his thoughts; only the true sanctified man makes conscience of
the tenth commandment, for the government of his thoughts and desires.
Secondly, it differenceth from a wicked man, who dare not act many evils, but
none so foul, but he dare insatiably mind and contemplate them. Here is a
difference; whereas wicked men are most careless of their thoughts; the godly
have most complained of them, Romans 7. and then have been most truly comforted
in them, whiles the conscience of thoughts has been a true trial of their
sincerity.

3. Labor to feed thy thoughts, 1. with the sweetest, 3. Feed them.
2. with the most necessary objects. First, the sweetest objects are heavenly
things: Col. 3.1. Seek the things which are above, Jesus Christ and his
merits, the happiness of heaven, and the chief good which is God himself. O
how might the mind be fed and ravished with these contemplations! what
sweetness might a man sweeten and season the days of his vanity withal, if
he would mind heavenly things, and think on the way thither? Is it not a
description of ancient believers, to think on his name? Mal. 3.16. Secondly,
the most necessary and profitable thoughts are, 1. to think often of our
sins, both to call to mind some sin past unrepented; as also to prevent
some sin thrusting in. 2. To think on good duties, to excite to some duty
neglected, and to apprehend occasion and season of some offered unto us 3. Of
the vanity of this life, and our departure hence. 4. Of Gods coming to
judgment, and our final account and reckoning. Prove. 14.22. To them that
think on good things, shall be mercy and truth.

Now whereas some think thoughts free; and others conceit liberty, and
impossibility, and most no necessity of this guiding the conscience and
thoughts: To them I say, First, as thoughts be so are words, and actions: out
of the heart comes thefts, adulteries; therefore rectify these. Secondly,
good thoughts are evidences of the Spirits presence, being his immediate
motions, we of ourselves not able to think one good thought, 1 Cor. 2.5.
Thirdly, God will call them to strict account, and in judgment make
inquisition after them, their thoughts shall accuse or else excuse one another,
Romans 2.15. Fourthly, even good thoughts are recompensed: David had but a
thoughts to build the house of God, and God rewarded it with building him an
house, and stablishing him a kingdom, 2 Samuel 7.16. and Psalm. 32. I thought I
would confess my sin, and thou forgavest me all. The Prodigal thought to
return, and his father thought to meet him. Thus carry thy thoughts, begin
the day with holy thoughts and meditations, which is a sweet seasoning. In the
night call them in to think of God and holy things: add prayer to keep them
in temper, 2 Chronicles. 18.29.

Fourthly, The memory must be made and kept To a pure spirit is required a
sanctified memory.
1. When we keep in fresh memory our sins and declinings so far as to be
humbled for them: A corrupt memory is the corruption of the whole man: Deuteronomy.
9.7. Remember, and forget not how thou provokedst the Lord to anger in the
wilderness. The memory is Gods register and officer; and though now there be
none in office, yet in the day of Christ it will bring forth the records which
seemed to be lost: a prelude and taste whereof we see in such as are
distressed in conscience. 2. When we keep good lessons in our memory: Rev.
3.3. Remember how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent.

II. Directions to keep the soul unblamable. Every man may hold himself
bound in conscience, and charged by God with the safe custody of his own soul
under God: Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently.
A man would be loath to forfeit a joint of his body by heedlesnesse: how
carefully do men look to their eyes, heads, hands, and every member, and the
least part of the body, and yet more carefully to the whole body; and this
nature teaches every man: But is not the soul that better part, that calls
for so much more care and circumspection; and this grace teaches us to keep
our soul above all; for if a man lose his soul, what recompense shall he give
for it?

Now because that in the soul is included, 1. the heart, 2. the will, 3. our
affections, all these faculties in the soul must be kept safe as the soul it
self, and lays upon us a necessity to watch them narrowly.

First, for the keeping of thy heart the precept is, Prove. 4.23.
^eep thy heart with all diligence, for thence issues life or death the chief
part of the body is heart, the fountain of life, and the chief care is to
keep that sound; so the soul, the heart, desires, and choyces, are to be
chiefly intended, for thence are the issues of life or death. And indeed
according to the well tending or neglect hereof the constant course of
holiness is either furthered or hindered. Besides, nature in the framing of
man's body begins with the heart, and the liver, and other inward vitalls, and
comes last to the face and other outward parts; teaching us the method in grace
where to begin our frame: keep the heart well and unblameable, Rules to the
keeping of the heart.
and all will be well. And for this end observe some rules.

Fist, I. Keep it humble.
therefore if thou will keep thy heart unblameable, thou must keep it humble,
it must be an humble and contrite heart that God will not reject, and a broken
heart is a sacrifice of Gods delight: the soundness of the heart is the
through breaking of it; the plow of the law must rend up the fallowes of our
hearts, and fit it for seed: this must help both the rotting and rooting of
the weeds, Ier. 4.4. This is called a melted heart in Josiah: for as gold can
never be approoved and purified before it be melted, no more can the heart till
it be a melted heart. It is called the circumcision of the heart, with
circumcision not made with hands, Col. 2.11. wherein the foreskinne of the
heart is removed, sinful flesh, and beloved lusts are wounded, the party put
to pain, and made sore as the Sichemites, in parting with a piece of his own
flesh.

This exercise of painful mortification of sin is the entrance into
possession of a good heart, and the grounds of all soundness in religion,
whereas they only prove unsound and rumous in religion who never were soundly
humbled, nor traded in self-denial, as that building, when the foolish
builder would not be at pain to diggge deep whereby to lay a firm and sure
foundation.

II. Keep it clean.
Secondly, then see thy heart be not only an humble heart, but a clean heart:
Blessed are the pure in heart, Matthew. 5. striving after inward purity as well
as outward: For these an hypocrite can resist, an hypocrite can wash the
outside, and may seem to others to be pure and blameless: But an heart
desirous to free it self from blame, deadly hates natural pollutions,
filthiness of heart, vile thoughts and lusts; and because it cannot be clean
without faith, which is an inward purifier, it labors for the increase of
faith in the means, to apprehend Christ's merits and holiness. And because the
word is a means of purifying and cleansing the heart, as Psalm. 119.9. and
Christ says they are all clean by the word, he will show himself in
embracing the word, in heeding of it, and framing himself according to the
rules of it, and apply his heart unto it. And because a fusty vessel is not
fit for sweet waters, he will still and still be cleansing his heart, that it
may be capable of the word. And because by nature the heart is foul, and does
every day contract some filthiness, wash it with the blood of Christ, and get
near unto Christ to have part in his holiness, and get the beesome of the Law
to sweep it daily; and by the exercise of repentance and mortification, daily
part with the uncleanness of flesh and spirit.

Thirdly, see it be a single and sincere heart, called a true heart, Heb.
10.22. III. Keep it sincere
Let us draw near to God with a true heart, void of guile, of deceit, of
dissimulation: with such an heart as Nathaniels was, commended by Christ, a
true Israelite in whom was no guile. This is the heart of Gods delight, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. Now you shall know the singleness of it

1. By this, it is not one heart, in one estate, To know a single heart.
in one company, and another in another; but the same in sickness and health,
on the Saboth and on the week day, the same in trial as in peace: but if
there be any difference, a single heart will be better in a bad age, and most
careful among a most careless generation: true grace is like light, it shines
brightest in the darkest room, and like fire hottest in the coldest and
sharpest weather.

2. You shall know a good heart by this, it cares rather to be good than seem
so, it is more careful to have grace than seem to have it, it does not only
abstain from evil but abhor it, Romans 12.9. True godliness and soundness
of heart consists in the power of godliness, it does not only forbear the
sin it loved, but loathes it, as the sick stomack-doth loathe that meat
most, that it once surfeited on, and what once cast up, it ever hates it.

3* It will be religious alone, and if it cannot get company it will be
singular, ^ good heart will walk to heaven alone if it cannot get company; it
would rather have company, but if it cannot it will rather go alone to heaven,
than any where else with company. Ioshuah says, I will go my way, if you will
not go with me I will not go yours: Iosh^ 24.
As for me, I and my house will serve the Lord. And Lot in the midst of a
naughty generation did not follow that pattern, but walked alone in his own
way. Eliah stood alone for the worship of God: and in John 11. Mary desired
that her sister would come and sit with her at Christ's feet; but she will sit
down alone if Martha will not: so a good heart will if it can get company to
heaven, and be glad of it, but if it cannot it will go alone: But a false
heart will look at rulers, at rich men, at safety among men, at laws, at
multitudes, and cannot abide the reproach of singularity. IV. Keep it well
watched, how.


Fourthly, see thy heart be well watched, for it will soon be bowed away from
God.

it is deceitful above all things, Ierem. 17.9. therefore thou must look well
to it, and to the flipperinesse of it, it will deceive thee else, deal with it
as with an untrusty fellow, set a watchful eye over him to keep him from his
flippery tricks.

defile the man, and make him justly blameable, Matthew. 15.18. Consider that a
godly man is said to have right thoughts, Prove. 12.5. and that his desires are
only good, chap. 11.23. not that his heart is quite empty of evil motions and
desires, but he resists and fights against them, he hates them and repents of
them, and God imputes them not.

3. Watch it in the least sins as well as in the greatest, for he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust in much, a pilferer will easily purloyne a
greater booty. Yea watch it well not only in sins that bring no benefit, but
in those that are somewhat beneficial, not only in things our inclinations or
occasions carry us not unto, but those which run with the stream of nature.
Herod will do many things, but leaves not Herodias: Iehu destroys Baal, but
not the calves, for that was now dangerous, he feared the people, and walked
for all this in Ieroboams sin that set them up.

4. Because thy watch is not sufficient, set it under Gods watch, keep thy
heart in Gods presence, Shall I do this (says Joseph) and sin against God?
Walk with God as Henoch did and avoid blame.

Fifthly, let thy heart be a right ordered heart, V. Bound it within Gods
limits, how
carried in the ways of God, and this will lead the whole m^n in the same
way. To this purpose, 1. Get the law written in thy heart, Psalm. 119.3. Blessed
are they that keep his testimonies, they 32.40. I will write my law in their
hearts, and they shall not depart from it. Keep the word, and it shall keep
thee. The Lord having written his Law in Tables, made choice of the Arc to lay
up the same in, Exodus 25.1^. but this Arc must be laid with pure gold within
and without; signifying, that the proper place to lay the word in is a sincere
heart both within and without: any other but this will shut it out one time or
other.

Psalm. 119.6. Then shall not I be confounded, when I have respect to all thy
commandments. It is a general sin of men, they desire to have the word
framed and fitted to their desirable and unprofitable lusts; but thou must come
to the light as one careful to get a word for every action, and as one
submitted to the whole form of doctrine delivered.

Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. The word of the Lord is good: it was not fitted to his
heart, being a lamentable prediction of his own ruin, and the ruin of his
posterity: But yet he fitted his heart to it. And so did Abraham to the
difficult commandment, Go and sacrifice thy son. So Hezekiah, 2 Kings
20.19. Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken, when he was
threatened by the Lord for his pride: he frames his heart unto the word and
acknowledges it good.

2 The will of man must be framed to Gods.
Now for the second faculty, and that is the will. And because a perverse will
upheapeth the measure of sin and blame, and there is no sin we commit,
which is not a preferring of our own will before Gods; therefore it is
impossible that any man should keep his soul without blame, unless he set a
narrow watch round about his will, to keep it in some order and frame with the
most righteous will of God.

For which end, our wills 1. must be denied, To this they must be
2. renewed, 3. freed, 4. framed unto God.

1. Our wills by nature are crooked and rebellious, 1. Denied.
the natural will is not subject to God nor can be so long as it is natural.
Now the cure of the crooked will is to deny it, and captivate it to the will of
God in all things: let our wills loose to themselves, they will be sure to
approove, improove, choose, and refuse, clean contrary to God. And therefore as
he that must set up a frame must carry away the rubbish; so must he deny his
own will, that must frame to Gods, who commands, Honor me by not doing
your own wills.

2. They must be renewed, 2. Renewed.
else shall a man still fulfill the will of the flesh. And it is not in us to
will, till the Lord work first the will and then the deed; so that grace now
must guide thy will as nature has formerly swayed it.

3. They must be freed. Voluntas est libera quatenus liberata: 3. Freed.
They are chained to unrighteousness: and when the Son sets us free we are
free indeed, and till this time we are servants of sin, whose wills are not
their own, but their masters; we must every day seek more freedom to good,
and get grace against the bondage under evil, Romans 7.25.

4. They must be framed, that there may be but one will between God and us, 4.
Framed to Gods.
that we may say feelingly, Thy will be done. This is when the will determines
every thing with God and for God, both in matter of faith and obedience.

First, in matter of faith and repentance. If the will of God in the Gospel
require repentance of sin, and to believe in Jesus Christ; let thy will
determine now with and for God: bewail thy sin, believe the promises, cast
thy self upon Jesus Christ; claspe the promises against reason, as Abraham
did, in receiving his son.

Secondly, in matter of obedience both active and passive.

1. Active, If the Law require duties to be done to God or man, there God
expresses his will: frame now thy will to such duties, be they never so
difficult, as Abraham in sacrificing his son; never so dangerous, as Daniel
in praying to the God of heaven, even under the sentence of death.

2. Passive, in any cross or affliction upon thy self, or others: when God
reveals his will, determine thy will with his, as David, Psalm. 39.9. I held my
tongue, and spoke nothing, because thou (Lord) did it. There must be but one
will between God and a faithful soul, between Christ and a Christian.

Quest. How may I know my will thus denied, renewed, freed, and framed to God?

Notes of a renewed ^ill.
Answ. The signs of it are, 1. in respect of it self, 2. in regard of sin,
3. in regard of good duties.

1. In respect of it self: it will not run before, but will wait upon
sanctified knowledge, and renewed reason; it will not inthrall the light of the
mind to inordinate desires: it will be prooving still what is the good and
acceptable will of God. It will resolve and purpose that so long time as it is
in the flesh, to walk after the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2.

2. Thou shall know it in regard of sin. 1. It is resolute in resistance of
sin, and the occasions: for although the will renewed admit sin, in respect
of corruption, yet it self is in great part set against sin, that it wills
it not fully, it purposes not to sin: as David, I vowed I will keep thy
judgments; it has a fast purpose to cleave to God: Psalm. 119.104. and hates
all the ways of falsehood. 2. When it yields to sin, it is with grief, it
does not sleep in sin so but that the heart waketh. So the Apostle, Romans
7.15. he even hates sin while he is a doing of it, I hate that I do. 3.
After sin it rises timely by repentance: if he fall into sin he hardens
not his heart, Prove. 28.14. he wills it not neither before nor after, there is
a struggling and a reluctation in him against it: and thus you may know the will
rightly framed.

3. In regard of good duties: it will not only be well-doing, but cheerful
in well-doing, he does good duties willingly, freely. There is a difference in
doing one and the same action between a good man and a wicked man: the work
of the will renewed is not only to take opportunity to do good, but seek
opportunity to do it; it will not do good of constraint, but will do it with
willingness; he will do it cheerfully, as a good Pastor feeds his flock
not by constraint, but of a willing mind, 1 Pet. 5.2.

Quest. Why should we thus look to our wills?

Answ. First, the state of Christianity is rather a willing, than a doing the
will of God: thou that can do no more, would thou do less? Secondly, no
greater plague can befall a man, than to be given up to his own will, the
holding to a man's own will, is the loss of the will and soul too. Thirdly,
as thy will is pleased with the sin, so it shall be revenged in the sorrow of
it: that will of thine that will not be compelled to obey, shall be compelled
to suffer: all the plagues of sin by a just recompense are laid upon the
will, as his sin was a resistance, and renouncing of the will of God: for in
hell no sinner shall ever obtain what he would, but shall ever sustain what
he would not. Thus God brings the ways of the wilful sinner upon his own
head, Ezekiel. 11.21.

3. To keep the soul blameless the affections must be narrowly watched.
Thirdly, to keep the soul blameless we must narrowly watch all our
affections, wherein the soul moves it self every where: for man by his fall
has lost, not his affections, but the holiness and rectitude of them; for now
man naturally hates the Lord and his image, in his word, in his servants, and
graces, he fears and flies what he should most joy and delight in, that is,
God himself; he joys in swallowing the pleasures of sin, the baytes of his
perdition; he is angry and impatient at God himself, as Jonas, and carried
with a rageing madness causelessly and intemperately on any occasion. And
therefore we must fly to the grace of regeneration which does not abolish
affections, but the disordered motions of them, and restores them toward their
original rectitude and goodness. Where this work of grace is not, and where
the spirit has laid no bridle upon the affections, no marvel if that soul
run riot into all unruly lusts, and make it self blameworthy, and guilty
every moment of foul sins. Yea where this grace is, care must be to preserve
it even in every affection, the least disorder of any of which is enough to
impure the soul and leave it under blame.

Now the rules of keeping the affections unblameable: and then for the reasons.
How to keep the affections unblameable. Rules.


I. To keep thy affections unblameable, thou must labor (seeing they cannot
be unblameable if they be not good in the rise) to get a good rise for thy
affections, a good motion must be from a good mover, labor to see who is the
mover of thy affections, whether the Spirit of God, or the wicked spirit, or
thine own carnal spirit. Excellent are those affections that are moved by the
Spirit of God, as when fear, anger, love, joy, grief, are 1. grounded on just
causes, 2. guided by the rule of renewed reason, for the Spirit never moves but
according to the word: 3. tempered in ordinate measure, now they become
servants of grace. Whereas if thy own carnal spirit move them, contrary to
the word, for their subject, object, manner, or measure; now they turn enemies
to God, and to thine own soul.

II. Be sure they be carried upon right objects only, set thy affections where
Gods Spirit would set them.

Right objects of affections.
Here first, the proper object of love is God himself; and not for his gifts
but for himself: and of Jesus Christ, whom if any man love not, let him be
accursed; and that not as a Jesus only but as a Lord: And then the things of
God, we must covet the most excellent gifts, and with Mary choose the better
part, even our part in the Gospel and word of Christ: and then entirely love
the friends of God, all our delight must be in the Saints that excel in virtue.

Secondly, the object of our anger is sins, not persons, nor so much the
sins of others, as our own which are nearer us.

Thirdly, the object of our joy, is pardon of sin, Gods favor and
countenance, Psalm. 4. It is wrong placed when it is in the creature, not in the
Creator, when in the gift, not in the giver.

Fourthly, the object of our patience, is evils of punishment which we must
patiently suffer, but not evils of sin as Moses.

Fifthly, of our fear the true object is God, more for his goodness than
greatness; more for his mercy than justice: Mercy is with thee to be feared,
Psalm. 130.4. more lest we offend him than be offended by him: And so in the
rest. What a business now is it to keep our affections upon allowed and
warrantable objects?

III. In these best objects, see they be most vehement and intense. To do this
observe these rules.

First, bestow on the best things the best affections: thou must love the Lord
thy God with all thy soul, all thy heart and strength; nay more, thou must
delight thy self in the Lord, which goes beyond love, Psalm. 37.4. delight thy
self in the Lord, make him thy chief, seek God himself, the peace of God,
the favor of God, the glory of God with most fervent affections.

Secondly, love and affect all things in God, and for God, and God only for
himself; thou must love nothing like him, much less above him, and least of
all against him: in all his creatures, in all his actions, in all his gifts
labor to taste his sweetness, Psalm. 34.8. true love of the word is to love
God in his word, the true love of our neighbor is to love God in our
neighbor, etc.

Thirdly, get your affections more to heaven than earth, as an higher and more
noble object, Col. 3.2. it is not enough to affect heavenly things unless thou
do it with the chiefest of thy affections. Set your affections on things
above, and not on things below, that is, comparatively: for two Masters cannot
be served with like affection, we must seek spiritual and heavenly things
simply and absolutely, as being simply good, and to be affected and asked,
whatsoever become of other things; but temporal and earthly with condition and
limitation, as being but conditionally good at the best.

IIII. Hate the worst things most. The worst thing of all is sin, it is
simply evil, and so is nothing else: we must then hate sin more than
punishment; sin simply and directly resists Gods glory, so does not
punishment, makes for it it in the manifestation of his justice. A wise man
should rather choose hell than Gods offense. Sorrow for nothing so much as thy
own sin, count nothing so shameful as that, and thy self for it; fear the
evil of sin more than the evil of torment, because evil of sin is more
evil.

V. Rejoice in nothing so much as in the pardon of sin, the righteousness of
Christ, the favor of God, and that thy name is written in the book of life,
Luke 10.20. Get Gods image into thy affections, frame thy affections to God,
for matter, manner, and measure, to love or hate most where God loves and
hates, for so does the man after Gods own heart.

First, God loves his Son Jesus Christ above all men and Angels, so must
then the Christian esteem Jesus Christ above ten thousand.

Secondly, God loves his word dearly as himself, being a resemblance of
himself in all his Attributes; so must thou love the word as God himself,
nothing so dearly, nothing in comparison: Psalm. 119. Oh how love I thy word,
all the day long it is my delight.

Thirdly, God loves the congregation and assemblies of his people, the places
of his worship, he lays the gates of Zion above all the habitations of Jacob,
Psalm. 87.2. so must thou dearly love his house, and the place where his honor
dwells, esteeming one day there better than a thousand elsewhere.

Fourthly, God loves his Saints so dearly that he will not dwell in heaven
without them, so must thou love the Saints dearly for the image, and in
imitation of God.

On the contrary, the Lord hates every sin with an infinite hatred, yea his
soul abhorres it; so must thou avoid and hate every evil way, even all the
ways of falsehood, yea the appearance of evil, and the very garment spotted by
the flesh.

2. He hates the society and congregations of wicked men, they shall not come
into his presence; so must we hate the company and society of wicked men, Psalm.
26.5.

3. He hates wicked and false doctrine: Revel. 2. Thou hate the doctrine of
the Nicholaitans which I also hate.

4. He hates the wicked manners and fashions of men, though never so much
approved and applauded amongst men: so must thou hate the works of them that
fall away, they must not cleave to thee, Psalm. 101.3. Thou that love the
Lord, must hate all that is evil, Psalm. 97.10.

VI. Bring thy affections often before God, appeal to God and his word for the
right carriage of them, Ioh. 21.15. Lord, thou know I love thee. thou
know I love thy word, thy servants, thy house, thy glory: So Lord thou
know I fear thee; as Joseph feared to sin against God: and Nehemiah, I
fear God. Lord thou know I hate sin, and sorrow for nothing so much as
sin: and then bring them often to the rule of the word to confine and bound
them. The word teaches that the measure of our love to God is without measure,
but the measure of all our love to other things is, so far as it may stand
with the love of God in summo, that is above all, it teaches that all earthly
joy is with reference to God our chief joy. The word will measure our anger,
and confine it to a small time, the Sun must not go down on our wrath, Ephesians.
4.26.
it allows us to be angry, but not to mingle our sinful corruption with it.
Do this the rather, because our affections must be presented before God one
day.

Examination of our affections by the former rules.
Now let us examine our selves, and try our affections by these rules before
named.

First, Ask we our selves, what it is we love or hate, whether our affections
are set on the right objects, and carried toward God, or against evil as they
ought to be.

1. Has the Spirit carried us not to a dislike, but to an utter hatred of all
sin: none is so bad but hates some sins. The prodigal hates
covetousness: The Jew can hate a Samaritane, and mixed worship: The Pharise can
say, I thank God I am no extortioner, no adulterer: But just hatred excited by
the Spirit is general of whole kinds against all that is called sin; as the
lamb hates all wolves, and we hate all serpents none excepted. The Law bound
the Jew to hate all uncleanness, to touch none, but that defiled only the
body: the least of this uncleanness impureth the most precious soul of man.

2. The Spirit never raises hatred of evil, but out of the love of good to
which it is contrary. Ask we our selves then, whether do we love or hate that
which we may lawfully love or hate because God loves or hates it; for many
can dislike many foul evils, and yet be far from good. Many can forbear
evil because the law of nature proclaims against it, the law of men condemn
it, rulers punish it, shame attends it, a graceless man can do it. So to love
religion, love the truth because the law favors it, the kingdom embraces it,
and for the present it is the safest; all this is but policy, an Atheist can
do it. But grace embraces truth, because it is so, and because the Truth
himself honors, promoteth and prospers it, and commends it to our love
and trust.

3. For the manner, do we love and hate as God loves and hates, as he loves
not vices for persons sake, so he hates not persons but vices. We know what
works are hateful to God, but not whose persons belong unto him; therefore
we must hate the works of them that fall away, but show all love to their
persons still.

All which discovers a great deal of corruption in our affections.

First, Many hate sins in another, and not the same sins in themselves, and
this is the hatred of the person and not of the sin.

Secondly, many seem to hate evil, but not out of love to goodness, some say
they hate Popery, but are far from the love of the truth; they dislike gross
profanesse, drunkenness, adultery, but have no affection to true godliness,
hatred of evil is joined with cleaving to good.

Thirdly, many hate most where God most loves, as persons for grace sake: and
two sorts of men are the butts of the hatred of this age.

1. Zealous and godly Ministers, because their Ahab hates Eliah, Have thou
found me O mine enemy? the more they love, the less they are loved: for a
Minister to hate men's sins, or to speak the truth, does it deserve such
hatred? If we should love men's sins, we should hate their persons, and if we
hate not our brothers evil, we could not wish his good.

2. A generation of men who are so precise, hate swearing, to be strict in the
Saboth, to detest Popery, to be frequent hearers of the word, to set up Gods
worship in the family, to cleave to the Scriptures, and get out of the way of
evil men? In this way which they call heresy, must we worship God. 3. All
this zeal against zeal is kindled not with a coal from the Altar, but fired
with a flame from hell, John 15.19. Because I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

4. How general is the hatred of grace, by graceless men that pinch and
reproach good affections? zeal they call distemper, sorrow for sin is but
melancholy, and next to madness; love of the word is but preciseness, and
more than needs; love of good men but faction and partiality; hatred of every
evil work but singularity; holiness a kind of heresy, purity, hollownesse,
and all that is naught. How unlike is the world to God and Christ, who
commended shows of goodness in the young man; never quenched smoking flax,
but kindled it and enflamed it: and whosoever hates grace in another, first
hates it in himself.

5. How generally do we love and cherish in our selves what the Lord hates?

First, has he not specially manifested his hatred against an outward form
of religion, severed from the power and life of it? Esaias 1.14. My soul hates
your feasts and new Moons, his own institutions, because they were severed
from faith, truth, and inward holiness? But how general is the profession of
religion without power? prayer of words not of spirit? hearing without
conscience of doing? washing the outside when all is foul within?

Secondly, how great indignation has he testified against people unfaithful
in the covenant, as a jealous husband hates the wife of his bosom that plays
false with him? Ier. 12.8. yet how universal is our unfaithfulness to God?
the contempt of grace? the slighting of the means? the Apostasy and turning
back of the kingdom from God? So as we see how our affections are swerved
from the rule, and what great need we have to be stirred up to a more careful
watch over our affections.

I. Mischief of disordered affections.
Consider therefore and see the mischief of disordered affections.

First, how powerfully they draw us from Christian duties; as, how they
interrupt prayers, 1 Pet. 3, 7.
which was the Apostles argument between man and wife: an heart troubled with
passions cannot be familiar with God, nor behold his face no more than a man
can see his own face in a troubled water. Consider how they hinder the
powerful working of the word, 1 Pet. 2.1. Therefore lay aside all malice,
envy, etc. and then receive the word: A full vessel can receive no liquor;
sweet water in a fusty vessel is but lost: seed cast among thorns comes
to naught: how they unsettle the heart in grace, pulling it off from confidence
in God, love of the truth, from exercise of grace, from the joys and
consolations of the Spirit: For as no man can see the beams of the Sun when
the heavens are covered with clouds; so cannot the soul discern the shining
beams of Gods love when it is clouded with passion.

Secondly, how potent are unruly affections to draw us from our duty, so
suddenly and violently do they carry us into many sins; how suddenly are
great professors snatched into the love of the world, and so become Apostates
as Judas and Demas? How does the love of the world draw on a number of sins,
and drown men in lusts and perdition? How suddenly was David snatched into
foulest sins not watching his affections? How was Peter pulled from his
purposes and promises by inordinate self-love to the denial of his Master?

Acquaint thy self with the difficulty of guiding the affections aright, II.
Difficult to guide the affections aright
for though the common error think it the easiest thing in the world, yet the
whole power of nature cannot reach it: for what a divine wisdom is required,
holily to temper the affections, and keep them even: To temper faith and
fear, that they enterfeare not: to mingle love and hatred, that they entrench
not one another; to hold the balance even between Moses zeal, and Moses
meekness: to contend for faith, and not be contentious: to be courageous and
bold, and yet suspicious and always fearful: to be christianly patient, and
not stoically insensible: The same Spirit must afford this wisdom that
appeared in the shape of a dove and of fire.

III. Necessity of well ordering our affections.
Consider the necessity of this care and carriage of our affections: 1. In
beholding the numbers of occasions which daily thrust in upon us, to thrust
them besides their right objects, and enthrall us in pride, unjust anger,
envy, wantonness, carnal love, fear, etc. And were there no such outward
occasions, who feels not the spirit in him lust after envy, and after the
world, and after all forbidden fruits? so as all care is too little wisely to
watch and prevent the continual disorder of the whole man by his affections.
2. What great necessity is it that wise Christians difference themselves from
common men: it is a great weakness to corrupt our affections by the
provocations of wicked men; to shoot in their bow, to do as they do. But
the godly must be different from them, not fear with their fear, nor joy with
their joy, nor kindle anger by theirs, nor curse when they curse, but bless
and pray, nor walk in their way: for as wild beasts cannot hurt him that
keeps out of their walk, so wicked men cannot seize on us to wrong us, if we
enter not into their way and walk.

IV. Comfort in affections well guided.
Consider the praise, the comfort of all religious duties. Yea, First, that the
practice of all religion it self stands in affection and desire, Christian
perfection is in affection, not in action, much less speculation and
contemplation; and hence receives his denomination, Job 28.28. The fear of the
Lord is wisdom. All wise and religious walking is included under the
affections: of the fear of the Lord to the duties of the whole law are all
comprised under the affection of Job. Romans 13.8, 9.


Secondly, the comfort of these duties rises out of the affection rather than
action. Art thou a Minister? whether is thy comfort more to speak of good
things than to affect them? what if thou have Angelical abilities to discourse
of faith, love, zeal, hatred of evil, and thy self scorn and hate these
things when and where thou see them? If I had all gifts and want love, (says
Paul) I were nothing; knowledge puffs up, but it is love that edifieth. Art
thou a hearer, and would have comfort of hearing, what do thou affect in
hearing? to censure the Preacher, curiously to feed thy judgment, or to
enable thy discourse, this will not do it: But to hear with pure intentions,
of feeding the soul, of doing duties to get our hearts sanctified, our
affections whetted, our obedience bettered, and to get the power of godliness,
and the power of the life to come within us, all which the Lord knows is the
intent of a very few.

Thirdly, the acceptance of these duties is more by the affection than the
action; and the action without the affection is as a body without a soul: yea
where the action was gloriously performed, the Lord still wanted some
proportion of affection; as in many of the Kings of Israel. Such a one did such
and such good things, but not with all his heart and affection; and then all
the labor is lost, the reward perishes, and thy expectation is frustrate. And
in the feeblest actions of his children the Lord sees a good compensation made
of the defect, by the sincerity of the affection.

V. The sweet fruit of diligence in this duty.
Consider the fruit of this care worth all our labor in it: for, First, As one
disordered affection draws on another, pride begets anger, anger begets envy,
and envy begets hatred, and so murder: So one good affection begets another,
love begets fear, fear begets humility, and humility is a fruitful mother of
many virtues: So good affections beget good actions, good actions good habits,
good habits a good unblamable life.

Secondly, this care settles and fastens the affections upon solid objects and
comforts, if the matter of our joy, love, fear, desire and delight be God, the
fruit is internal and eternal, this joy none shall take away. But the wicked
man's heart in laughter is sorrowful, and for continuance is as of thorns
crackling under the pot, and so are all affections displaced on wrong objects,
so they lose both affections and objects.

Thirdly, look what way we will, the well guiding of our affections seasons
our lives with much sweetness.

1. Look at God, it holds Gods affection to us: how well is the Lord pleased
when our desires and affections are conformable to his? How acceptable is our
obedience to him when we are holy as he is holy, merciful as he is
merciful; when we walk in love as he has loved us? when his affections are
the rule of ours, and so are framed to his will, for all his affections flow
from his righteous will.

2. It holds Gods presence with us in his ordinances: Rev. 2. the Church of
Ephesus had fallen from her first love, and yet a little spark was left, she
hated the doctrine of the Nicholaitans which he hated, and therefore the Lord
will not remove the Candlestick, at least if she recover her affection. And
this is our case, the Church of England is wonderfully fallen from her first
love; and why does the Lord spare our Candlestick, and hold up our light, and
peace, and the Gospel, above all Countries about us? surely though we are
fallen from our first love and zeal, yet a little spark of love is left in
some poor despised ones, which holds life and soul in us; and some hatred of
Romish Nicholaitans: for by the blessing of God, the body of the kingdom, the
laws, and doctrine of the kingdom, hates the doctrine and works of the
Nicholaitans; and for this weak affection yet God spares our Candlestick. But
let us quicken our hatred more, for as our first love is in great part gone, so
if our hatred of evil go to, all is gone, God shall see nothing to spare our
Candlestick.

3. It holds us with God in the sweet fruition of his ordinances, it kindles
and keeps in us love, fear, zeal in his service, which is the life of our
service and souls: and in all these the affection is more respected than the
action. It holds us fast to the truth. What is it but zealous affection that
will make us buy the truth at any rate; what is the truths keeper but love;
what else but love makes us labor for it, suffer for it, die for it?

4. Strong and earnest affections to God make us profitable to men, provokes us
to mercy, compassion, beneficence, helpefull to all that need us.

5. It makes us enjoy our selves, by patience we possess our souls, love
holds God in possession; charity makes us possess our brethren, and patience
puts us in possession of our selves. Sanctified affections uphold the heart
with joy unspeakable and glorious, and lead a man happily to an happy estate.

6. The well guiding of affections begins the life of heaven upon earth; for
the life of heaven is when the soul so cleaves unto God, as to become like
him, when we shall never love any thing but what he loves, nor hate but what
he hates, and this perfection we must begin even here upon earth.

III. Now after the spirit and soul, we are to consider these directions by
which the body and outward man may be kept blameless. All of them may be
reduced to that precept in the 1 Timothy 4.12. Be examples unto others in
conversation, and in communication: the outward man must exercise inward grace.

First, for conversation, that is, either private or public, and in both, a
Christian must set himself a pattern of godliness: 1 Pet. 1.15. Be holy in
all manner of conversation, in Gods house, thine own house, in thine own
closet and privacy, Psalm. 101.2. David walked wisely in the midst of his house.
Isaac in the field alone meditates and prays, Genesis 24.63. yea the women must
be in such behavior as becomes holiness, 2 Tit. 2.3. Rules for conversation
are 1. General. 2. Particular.


The general rules are five.

Glorify God in your bodies and spirits, God must be glorified in our bodies.
for they are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. And then we glorify God in our bodies.

First, when we consecrate them to his service, leading an holy and godly life,
that as he is holy we be also holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.11.
Ephesians. 1.4.6. to be holy to the praise of the glory of his grace.

Secondly, when we outwardly acknowledge and publish the glory and majesty of
God, offering him the calves of our lips, the sacrifices of praise, and
telling what he has done for our souls, Psalm. 50.23. he that praises me
glorifieth me.

Thirdly, when by our holy conversation we invite others to glorify God, when
men seeing our good works glorify our heavenly Father, Matthew. 5.16.

And the reasons of the precept are strong. Reasons


1. Our bodies they are his, by creation, redemption

2. They are not only his, but his Temples. their gods; though some that would
go for Christians care not how Gods house lies: their kitchins and stables
shall lie handsomer than Gods house, if they can hinder it in themselves or
others. Now our bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost; and where should God
be glorified and praised, and receive oblations, but in his own Temple?

destroys the Temple of God, him will God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17.
and one way or other will the Lord testify his wrath against his own sacred
Temple so profaned: Christ will whippe buyers and sellers out of his Temple;
and if they return he will overthrow the Temple it self, and a stone shall
not be left upon a stone. How suffered the Lord Jerusalem the holy City to be
burnt, the Arc the most holy place to be carried captive when they were
profaned? Do thou rob God of that glory which he expects in the Temple of
thy body, his hand will be against thee in severity. And as the more holy the
place profaned, the more wrath brake out: so the more profession of holiness
thou make, if thou glorify not God in body and spirit, the more severe shall
be thy ruin.

Ierom in an Epistle to Paulinus tells him that from the time of Adrian to
Constantine the great, those most famous and privileged places above all other
were most profaned and rejected by God. So as in the very place of Christ's
resurrection there was erected an image of Jupiter: On the hill where the
Cross was set up was erected a marble statue for Venus, goddess of lust. In
Bethlem famous for Christ's birth, was set the grove of Adonis, where the women
at a set time every year were wont to lament Adonis the Parramour of Venus.
Even these places of the resurrection of Christ, of his passion and his birth,
the Lord makes them eye-markes of his judgments. If God spare not the most
holy places, if profaned; upholde his glory in the Temple of thy body, else his
jealousy will not spare thee.

The second general rule, is, in Romans 6.13. Take The Apostle speaks to those
that are regenerate, who are said to do that which Gods grace makes them able
to do: And first, draws their eyes back to the state of nature and
corruption in which lately they were, while sin reigned in their mortal
bodies: to which as to an Emperor, 1. they yielded obedience, 2. took up
weapons: that is, their own members, and powers of body and mind in the
defense of sin, as resolute subjects to that commander. Secondly, and then
draws them to do as much now for grace, unto which they are called, as they
did for corruption while they went freely after the motions and commands of
sin. Give up your members weapons of righteousness. The Apostle implies that
every regenerate man stands in a pitched field, wherein the Commander or
General is grace or righteousness, the quarrel is for God, his glory, his
cause joined with our salvation: the weapons are our own members, which we
must give up to righteousness. That is, First, we must take new commandments
from grace, as the soldier depends on the mouth of his General for his
direction. Secondly, we must frame to ready obedience, be the service never so
difficult or dangerous. Thirdly, stoutly and courageously fight against sin,
as formerly before regeneration we did for sin, and acquit our selves like
men. And good reason: for, 1. Kings are maintained and held up in their throne,
First, in peace, by the ready obedience of their subjects: Secondly, in war,
by their willingness to fight for them: If subjects will do neither of these,
the King must fall. So whatsoever profession we make of grace, if thus we
withdraw our members from the rule, from the quarrel of grace; grace is
deposed from his reign, and sin stands in his state and power. 2. Weapons
and Arms are used in defense of the King and Country, and the friends of the
King and Country, but not against them; it is high treason for a subject to
take up Arms against his Prince, none will do this against the King or his
friends, but robbers and common enemies: So it high is treason for a man to
employ the members of his body against Grace his General and Commander; and
therefore the Apostle exhorts us to give up our bodies and members as weapons
of righteousness, being called unto grace, let the whole outward man follow
the commands of grace.

Thirdly, in our whole course and conversation Romans 8.1. Walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit. Men deceive themselves while they content
themselves with a supposed presence of the Spirit, while there is no walking
after the Spirit, which is a going after the Spirit as a guide and leader of
their speeches and actions: for that man who must be freed from the
condemnation of sin, must be freed also from vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
The power of sin must be beaten down in the life, and vanities of life and
pleasure must be suppressed, which still thrust in upon them that profess the
teaching of grace, who sometimes are carried after carnal delights, strange
apparel, lightness of carriage, dancing, gaming and excess of pleasures
which the spirit should have mortified, and brought in a clean contrary course
prescribed in the word, and exemplified in the examples of the Saints; but
especially in that unerring pattern Jesus Christ himself, who was led by the
Spirit in every motion, even the least. For think we that the Spirit renewes
us only within and not without? does he make us believe as Christians, and not
live as Christians? does the sap and juice of a tree only quicken it within,
and not cause it produce fruits outwardly? Thou have not received the Spirit
of Christ, if it be not unto thee life unto righteousness, Romans 8.10. that is,
make thee lively and active in all the ways of godliness. Faith is not as a
light under a bushel; therefore show me thy faith by thy works. Grace is as
a light in a clear lantern which from within enlighteneth without.

Now the rather must we labor for renovation without as well as within: 1.
Because flesh and blood unrenewed shall not enter into heaven. 2. The disorder
of the outward man and members argue a sinful and disordered soul, seeing the
body is but a servant of the soul, and does nothing but by the Masters
direction and appointment; an evil eye issues from an evil mind, and a
corrupt tongue moves according to the abundance of the heart. 3. No outward
deformity is comparable to this of sin in the members, which makes the body
to God indeed vile and contemptible, as a dead and loathsome corpse is to man.

Fourthly, to keep the outward man blameless beware of all unchastity and
impurity of body; and on the contrary, watch unto chastity and civil honesty.
1 Cor. 6.13. The body is not for fornication, but for Christ the Lord; and the
Lord for the body: That is, the body is ordained for the Lords use, and ought
to be employed to his glory. And the Lord for the body: to redeem and
sanctify the body as well as the soul; and consequently to rule the body and
command that as well as the soul, being the Lord of the body as well as of the
soul.

And the same Apostle says, the body is a member of Christ as well as the
soul: Shall I take a member of Christ and make it a member of an harlot, verse
15? Can any thing be more opprobrious unto Christ than to transform him into
an harlot? Can any thing derogate more from his glory and majesty, or be more
contrary to his most holy nature?

Again, Christ's body was Gods Temple, Ioh. 2.21. Destroy this Temple, because
the Deity dwelt in it (...), bodily; and of this Temple Salomons Temple was but
a type. So thy body is Christ's Temple, in which he dwells by his Spirit (...),
virtually. Now the light of nature teaches to preserve Temples pure and
clean, but grace much more to preserve spiritual Temples clean and holy. And
therefore as Christ when he went into his Fathers Temple, made a whip, and
whipped out buyers and sellers, and money changers, who had made his house a
den of thieves; so do thou in Christ's Temple, which is thine own body,
beat it down, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
and overthrow the wanton and straggling corruptions of it; whip out those
roving lusts, which make the house of Christ as a den of harlots and
filthiness. Coloss. 3.5. Mortify your earthly members, fornication,
uncleanness, and all inordinate affections. Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication and all
uncleanness, let it not once be named as becomes Saints.

The fifth Rule. Magnify Christ in thy body Phil. 1.20. As always so now
Christ shall be magnified in my body. Thy body is mortal, frail, fading, yea
a vile body, Col. 3.21. yet in this body Christ will and must be magnified.

How Christ is magnified in our body.
Quest. How? Answ. 1. By keeping the heavenly treasure of the knowledge of God,
and the attendant graces in these earthly vessels: as Paul, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have
this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of
God. 2. By holding out the word of life, By profession.
and carrying the name of Christ in an holy undaunted and constant confession
and profession in the place where thou live, as Paul did through the world.
3. By expressing in this frail body, By action.
not the doctrine only but the life of Jesus Christ, conforming thy self to
his blessed example, in humility, holiness, charity, piety, patience, and
other virtues; that all men may see and say, surely this man is a member of
Christ, he lives the life of Christ, he resembles the pattern. 4. In this
weak body of thine carry about the mortification of Christ Jesus, By passion.
2 Cor. 4.10. suffer afflictions for the name of Christ, and bear in thy body,
as Paul did, the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. fulfill in thy body the
rest of the sufferings of Christ, carry the badge of a true Disciple, yea if
God call thee, offer up thy body and life a thankful sacrifice, not in life
only but unto death, if thereby thou may magnify Jesus Christ. Thus did the
faithful Saints and Martyrs, offering themselves, the sweetest sacrifice of
all others: Yea our Lord himself coming into the world, Heb. 10.5. said,
Burnt offerings thou would not have, (that is, now after the coming of
Christ) but a body have thou given me, that in this my body I might offer that
expiatory sacrifice, of all which the other were but shadows: Even so say
thou, Burnt offerings God calls not for, but he has given me a body to offer
unto him, and give up unto him in life and death, in way not of a Propitiatory,
but of an Eucharisticall sacrifice of praise, thereby to magnify his name. 5.
Thou magnifiest him in thy body, when thou magnifiest him in his body; as when
thou admirest the graces of his servants, honor his members, delightest in
them that excel in virtue, helpest and releevest the poor Saints; all which
he takes as done to himself.

These are the general Rules, now of the special, for special parts.

To keep the several parts of the body blameless, the word is plentiful in
several precepts, Rules to keep special parts of the body unblamable.
but especially injoynes a strait watch over the senses which are the windows
of the soul. But that the discourse may not swell beyond a reasonable
proportion, I will only cull out, 1. two principal senses, and 2. two
principal organes and members of the body, and give some short rules
concerning them; and in them we shall see it is no easy thing to keep the body
blameless, neither in them nor in the rest which I must be silent in. The two
senses are the sight and hearing, the senses of discipline: and the other two
members are the hand and tongue, the which being well ordered by the word, much
blame would be cut off from the lives of men, which they now stand guilty of.

First, for the eye to keep it unblamable: We must watch it well; for you must
know that of all the sciences there is none so quick a messenger to the heart
and soul as the eye, by reason whereof it requires a strait watch. God has
given to the eye power to see every thing, but cannot look into it self, and
therefore he has given to man understanding that he may look into himself
by the directions the Scripture does afford us, which be of two sorts, and both
of them within that in Job 31. that because the eye is a most swift messenger
unto the soul, and most slippery, as Job, make a covenant with thine eyes not
to behold vanity. Covenant must be made with the eye.
And because all thy watching is too little for so quick a member, pray the
Lord that he would turn away thine eye from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37.

Wherein is this watch?

I. To pull away thine eyes from unallowed objects. First, beware of an
hypocritical and deceitful eye, as in Prove. 6.12. there is one that twinkleth
with his eye, this is an eye quick-sighted to deceive his brother. See thine
eye be single, as Christ teaches, that is, such an eye as may discern to do
that thou do, that it be just, 2. by just means, 3. do it with all thy
heart uprightly: 4. within compass of thy calling: and if thou can get this
single eye, the whole body will be likewise single.

II. There is a lustful or an adulterous eye: 2 Pet. 2.19. we read of unchaste
persons that have eyes full of adultery. First, there be them that have eyes
full of spiritual adultery, gazing upon Popish pictures and images which they
hang up in their houses as alluring harlots, corrupters of the heart, which is
an opening of the door to idolatry, and a sign of a man willing to be
deceived. But the eyes of the Church are as doves eyes, Cant. 1.14. chaste and
pure not gazing upon idolatrous pictures. Secondly, corporal adultery, that
delight in lascivious pictures and filthy portraitures of naked men and women
in whole or such parts as may incite the corruption of heart, and feed it with
contemplative adultery: we need bring no oil to this flame: the more
lamentable it is that the Devil has got such pictures into request in this
wanton and unclean age; for where can a man go where he may look off them,
which a manifest sign of adulterous eyes. 2. Such are their eyes, who are
adulterous living pictures, that so attire and disguise themselves to lay open
their nakedness beyond all modesty to ensnare the eyes and senses of others:
say not thou think no hurt in it, except thou be sure others think no hurt
by it. 3. Such are their eyes that read lascivious and wanton books, teachers
of adultery and lewdness; that frequent stage plays, with their beastly acts
and actions, wherein all gates and walls are cast open to the Devil: beware of
this eye by which death and poison enters into the heart.

III. There is a covetous eye, which is not satisfied with riches, Eccles. 4.8.
neither does he say for whom do I thus labor: this eye defraudes the soul
of pleasure, and is an evil sickness: As Ahabs, who was discontented with a
kingdom for want of Naboths vineyard. There be three things that never say
enough, the horseleach, the fire, and the grave, and add the fourth, a
covetous eye, which as Jobs Elephant, Job 40. thinks he can swallow the whole
flood Jordan: Let a covetous man have but a moate of dust or earth in his eye,
what trouble is it to him? yet he thinks to thrust a whole Country (could he
get it) into his eye, and see never the worse. Take heed of this covetous eye,
there is no greater an enemy to faith and contentation, or any good exercise
than it is.

IV. There is an envious eye, Matthew. 20.15. Is thine eye evil because mine is
good? such an eye as Satan cast upon the happiness of man, when he was fallen
from his own. Take heed of this sore eye that cannot abide the light. Basil
says, that whereas many evils are in it, yet only one good thing goes with
it, it is the greatest plague to him that has it.

V. There is a sleepy, a dull and a negligent eye, not open or quick to behold
with fruit and profit the noble works and actions of God: whereas God has
made the eye of a round figure, and of quick motion, that it might easily move
it self any way, or every way, in viewing the works of God, in beholding the
afflictions of his people, and the necessities of his brethren.

Choice objects for the eye.
is, to labor to hold and fix the eyes upon allowed and profitable objects.
As, 1. God made our eyes to look upward, and has given man's eye one muscle
which the beasts eye wants, that it should not fix it self as theirs upon the
earth; yea has compassed the eyes with brows and lids to fence them from dust
and earth, that though we look sometimes on the earth, yet the least dust or
earth should not get into them: Psalm. 123.2. to show that our eyes should be
lifted up unto him* and in seeing his creatures behold himself (...) them*
Esaias 40.26. Lift up your eyes aloft, and behold who created all these things:
the invisible things of God, his power, divinity, and eternity were made
visible to the very Gentiles by things created, Romans 1.20. And shall Christians
only look on these things as they, to make our selves inexcusable? shall we
look upon the Sun, and not on him that made it?

2. Let us fix our eyes on the works of God in and for his Church, for the
strengthening of our faith and confidence; as John 2.23. they that saw the
works of Christ, Many of them believed in his name, seeing the works he did.
For the Lord does nothing for or against his Church, but according to his truth
revealed in the word; the Lord does no work in his Church, either of judgment
or of mercy, but they are as it were the very commentaries of the Scriptures:
and therefore all the works of God that we can behold in or for his Church
do notably stir up our faith in him.

3. God has allowed us our eyes to behold our brethren, to behold their
graces, to see their good example, to affect, embrace and encourage them, to
imitate them, to glorify God for them; thus our eyes should imitate the eyes
of God which are upon the just, Psalm. 34.16
to affect, protect and reward them. Yea we must hold our eyes upon our
brethrens misery to pity and releeve them, we must not turn our eyes from our
own flesh, as the unmercifull Priest and Levite did from the wounded man, who
were condemned by the pitiful Samaritan.

4. Our eyes we^^ given us not only to be organes of sight, but to be
fountains of tears, in beholding both our own sin and misery, and the
sin and wretchedness of our brethren. The Jews eye beholding the brazen
Serpent was a watery and mournful eye, because he was stung by the Serpent:
so ours much more, whose sting and pain is mortal and inward. And can we
behold any creature, and not see in it the express prints and marks of our
own sin, which still must add to our grief?

And for others. Good Lot was vexed daily to see the unclean conversation of
the Sodomites: and David's eye gusht out with rivers of tears, because men kept
not the word, Psalm. 119.126. These sinful objects every where should be the
grief of our souls, and as swords piercing our hearts, which we can too
easily conceive pleasure in.

5. Our eyes should be ever looking homewards and heavenwards, and toward the
end of our way; as quick travelers gaze not on things before their feet, but
hasten to the end of their way. This is by heavenly conversation, and constant
expectation of our Lords return to take our account; we should long after
Christ, and the place of his abode, there should our hearts be where our home
is, our house, our husband, our father, our eldest brother, even Christ
himself is.

Thus to order our eyes, consider first, the Eve: she saw the fruit was good,
and forgot the commandment. Potiphars wife cast her eye immodestly on Joseph,
and said, Lie with me. Genesis 39.7.
David saw Bathsheba washing, and was all inflamed. It can look to all things
else, but not to it self, that thou might look to it so much more: And if
the eye spy not nets laid for us, it self becomes a net. Ambrose.

Secondly, an evil eye is made a sign of an evil Mark. 7.22. out of an evil
heart comes an evil eye: and if the eye be evil, the body is dark, Matthew.
6.23.

Thirdly, a man that gives his heart to God will Prove. 23.26. My son give me
thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways. And if thou give him not
both, he cares for neither; and if thou give him not thine eye as well as thy
heart, thou will lose thy heart quickly: the adulterous woman will steal away
thy heart, though thou seem to give it to God, if thou watch not thine eye.

Fourthly, know that if thou will not look to thine eyes, he that made the
eye must needs see thee, Psalm. 94.9. he sees the least unlawful look. Lots
wife cannot turn her face backward but he sees and smites. This is Salomons
argument to the young man that will walk in the sight of his own eyes, that
God will bring him to judgment, Eccles. 11.9. if thou will walk after the
sight of thine own eyes, do; but know that for thy quick and nimble and
unallowed looks thou shall come to judgment.

Directions for the custody of the ear.
Now the directions for the ear.

The heart cannot possibly be kept in good state without diligent observation
of the senses, no more than a City can be defended where the ports and gates
are cast open. And as in the keeping of a gate of a City, diligent care must
be taken whom they let in, and whom they let out: So in keeping this sense we
must know, 1. when

First, we must keep shut our ear against the voice of the tempter, that
Satan and sin enter not by this wicket; Eve not doing this, death entered into
her soul and all ours.

Secondly, we must keep out the entising and alluring of sinners, which are
as the Sirens songs: Prove. 1.10. My son, of sinners entise thee, consent not.
And take heed of evil rotten and poysonfull communication, let no evil
corrupt communication pass through thine ears; for evil words corrupt good
manners, and the want of learning this counsel is the bane of all modesty and
civility in this age: for this corrupts first the heart, and then the
conversation; it is like fire cast into a barrel of gunpowder, that sets all
on fire presently. A Christian must neither speak filthy language, nor hear
it.

Thirdly, keep out reproaches, slanderous and reviling tales, whisperings
against the good names of our brethren: for what difference is there between
carrying of Satan in the tongue, or in the ear? A good man will not slander
with his tongue, nor receive it into his ears. David sinned in the ease of
Mephibosheth by means of slanderous Ziba, whom he should have driven away with
an angry look.

Fourthly, we must not hear or give heed to false doctrine, errors,
heresies, and libertine opinions contrary to truth received: Deuteronomy. 13.3.8. If
thy brother, thy own son or thy daughter, or the wife that lies in thy
bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly,
saying, let us serve other Gods, etc. thou shall not consent unto him, nor
hear him, neither shall thine eye pity him, nor show mercy, nor keep him
secret, but thou shall even kill him, and thine hand shall be first upon him to
put him to death, and then the hands of all the people, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1.7.
Beware of this itching ear, which comes to Church rather to censure the
Preacher than it self: as Herod having John before him, sought some miracles
to please his curiosity, but sought not grace for his salvation, and departed
and left John as he found him; as the beasts unclean went out of the Arc,
unclean came they in, and so they went out. They sin against this rule that
desire novell doctrine, forsake the beaten path and simplicity of received
truths, and run into new and strange conceits and confused errors,
troubling with the faith of men the peace of the Church, and happy proceedings
of the Gospel.

Fifthly, especially beware of hearing Gods name blasphemed by oaths and
cursed speeches, or his religion or profession, or servants dishonored without
our defense: A godly heart is careful neither to sin himself, nor
communicate in the sins of others. In a word, in all the speeches we hear,
remember Job 34.3. The ear tries words as the taste tries meats, to let no
words go down into the soul which are not wholesome: else we are justly
blameworthy by neglecting this sense.

Secondly, we must learn to know when to open the ear. As,

1. To hear the word of God. This is called an hearing ear, and an obedient
ear, an ear inclined to hear wisdoms sayings, Prove. 4.20. Remember it is a
note of him that is of God to hear his word, he hears what the Spirit says
to the Churches, John 8.47. he is swift to hear, James 1.19.

2. There is a deaf ear, by which men become like the idols that have ears
and hear not: And this being a great plague is followed with a greater; the
ear turned from hearing the Law, Gods ear is turned from hearing his prayers,
his very prayer is abominable; what then is his person?

Now would you know whether you have this hearing ear or not; take it thus: It
is Swift, Patient, Notes to know the hearing ear.
Wise.


First, swift to hear on all good occasions; it

Secondly, patient in hearing our own sins disgraced, boared ear, like
Christ's, signified by that boared ear of the Jewish servant, Exodus 21.6. a
painful sign of perpetual subjection and obedience.

Thirdly, wise and discreet to hear Gods voice, Mary, when an Angel spoke to
her, she considers what is said, and says, What manner of salutation is this?
2. To keep our ear open to private admonition, exhortation, and reproof of
godly men, knowing that the rebukes of a friend are better than the kisses of
an enemy. 3. To keep our ear open to the cry of the poor, and their
complaints in hard times: Prove. 21.13. He that stops his ear to the cry
of the poor, himself shall cry and not be heard: a merciful ear is like
unto Gods.

The hand also, so noble and so nimble an instrument of action, must be kept
blameless. Whosoever will be outwardly unblameable, must, Keep the hand that
it be not 1. Idle.


1. Beware of an idle hand: Prove. 10.4. A sloathfull hand makes poor. Ephesians.
4.28. Work with the hands. God has made the hands to work that which is
good, and to minister to our necessities, as Paul's to him, Acts 20.34. by
painful walking in some lawful calling for the common good of mankind: not
the richest hand, nor the daintiest and softest hand is exempted from faithful
diligence in some profitable vocation. Our Gentry and Nobles, that need not
work for themselves, ought with good Dorcas to labor in making garments for
the poor. This is Gods way of plenty, prosperity and abundance: whereas
idleness is the Devils anvill, on which he forgeth infinite mischief; he
that is not in Gods works, is fit and active for the Devils work.

2. Beware of a cruel hand, smiting with the fist of violence; 2. Cruel.
the hand of men that are of a fierce and cruel disposition, men of a word and
a blow, yea of a word and a stabbe, like Ishmael, whose hand was against every
man, and every man's against him. Remember Prove. 29.22. A furious man, and so a
furious woman abounds in transgression: the sin of rigorous Masters and
Parents, whose rage often cares not to maime and wound servants and children,
or dull their senses by immoderate punishment, and multiply threatenings, oaths
and imprecations, and transgressions: such fierce and merciless men are out of
the way of Gods mercy. Therefore let all labor for a meek and quiet spirit.

3. Beware of a foul hand, a hand soyled with foul iniquity, deceit, fraud,
cousenage, 3. Foul.
and still abides unwashen. Thou can lift up no hands acceptably to God but
pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. yea sacrifice and his own ordinances, if done with
hands full of injustice and cruelty, they are rejected. Holiness becomes the
holy God, and that both within and without. Many like the Pharisees wash, and
wash often, but their hands are never the cleaner, they make a show and color
of repentance and sanctification, but forget that ever they were washed: Pilate
washes his hands, and presently goes to condemn Christ. Numbers of men
contemn Christ in his doctrine, his Ministers and members, and come to
Sacrament, and seem to wash and all is well. This is but to put on a fair
glove, the hand is as foul as it was.

4. Beware of a profane hand, seldom lifted up in prayer and praises: 4.
Profane.
this heavy hand fills the life with blame and sin. Psalm. 63.4. David
professes he will lift up his hands to Gods name: and this is the way to avoid
both sin and judgment; as Moses, Exodus 9.29. I will spread my hands to the
Lord and the plague shall cease. And it is just with God to cast him off, and
that his plagues should overtake him that neglects this duty.

5. Beware of an uncharitable and unmercifull hand, a shut hand, 5. Unmerciful.
seldom open to the relief of the poor members of Jesus Christ: Remember the
commandment, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Thou shall not shut thine hand from thy poor
brother. A number of men's hands are like the dry and withered hand of him on
whom Christ must work a miracle before he could stretch it out as the other.
Behold the judgment of God on many withered hands, which never stretched out
their hands, nor can, to any merciful relief, or any religious or holy
purpose, to uphold the service of God. Men of many thousands scarce cast in two
pence to the most needful contribution: whereas the property of a virtuous
woman, (much more of the godly man) is to stretch out the hands to the poor,
Prove. 31.21.

Thus we see how a Christian may be an example to others in conversation, both
generally and specially.

Watch warily the tongue an unruly member.
Now for the tongue: The rules of direction are;

First, consider to what purpose God bestowed speech upon man, I. God ordained
it,
and no creature else: As,

1. To glorify God above them all, in prayers, 1. To glorify him.
and praises: with the tongue we bless God, and make it our glory, by
upholding Gods glory, and resisting that which is contrary to it. How is this
perverted? When we reproach his word, or works, or speak against his
Saboths, his servants, his Ministers, his profession; or swear idly, vainly,
or falsely.

2. To edify men.
2. To edify men, our speech being a principal instrument of humane society,
and in respect of our brethren, for the communion of Saints: this is one
principal end why God has given us tongues, that we may not only pray for
our selves, but for our brethren. By the tongue we bless men, we pray for
them, we instruct them, comfort them, admonish, and rebuke them.

3. Speech is the instrument of reason and wisdom, and the interpreter of our
own minds, 3. To interpret our own minds.
and the utterer of the truth of our hearts; and therefore must be moved by
reason and wisdom in expressing the grace of our hearts, and the goodness of
our treasures within: as sweet waters do argue a sweet fountain; and
wholesome and pleasant fruits a good tree. Solomon calls good speech the fruit
of the mouth, Prove. 12.14. comparing a good speaker or tongue to a good tree,
far beyond all other trees in the fruit: they bring forth fruit to others,
this to a man's self; the good man shall eat good things by the fruit of his
mouth: they bring fruit once a year, this all the year; they bring forth one
manner of fruit, this all kinds of tastefull and useful fruit.

Secondly, avoid all abuse of the tongue, II. Avoid carefully.
by which so necessary and excellent an instrument of humane society is
perverted.

1. Beware of a swearing and a cursing tongue, 1. A swearing tongue.
accustomed to impious speeches against God. Shall the same tongue pray to God,
and vainly swear by God? Shall it bless men, and curse men too? The Heathens
could not abide him that could blow both hot and cold: Much less will the God
of heaven endure him that out of the same fountain sends forth both sweet
water and bitter.

2. A lying tongue.
2. Beware of a lying and deceitful tongue, uttering crafty and guilefull
words: Psalm. 52.4. of the wicked man it is said, Thou love all words that may
destroy, oh thou deceitful tongue. How did the Devil use a tongue otherwise
than in lying and deceiving? for when he speaks a lie, he speaks his own,
says Christ. And God will destroy all them that speak lies, Psalm. 12.3.
because nothing is more contrary to his nature, being truth it self.

3. A flattering tongue.
3. Take heed of an oily and a flattering tongue, that can sooth and smooth, and
justify an evil man in his evil: Prove. 29.5. A man that flattereth his
neighbor, spreades a net for his steps, as a fowler lays in wait, to
bring the bird into the net, and hold him in it: implying that this flattery
is the Devils invisible net, by which he catches and holds men fast in the
snare. For what man will not delight in any base lust, when he shall not only
not fear reproof, but be commended and graced in it?

But of all flatterers, none is so serviceable to the Devil as a flattering
Minister, who brings whole flights of foolish birds into the snare, and holds
them fast to death.

4. A slanderous tongue.
4. Beware of a slanderous and smiting tongue, of which, Ierem. 18.18. Let us
smite him with the tongue, because blows and strokes hurt not, nor wound a
man's body, more than the slanderous words hurt his name. The slanderer is a
monstrous creature; for a tongue he has a sting, for words he carries swords
in his mouth; his breath is poysonfull and loathsome as gall of aspes; yea he
carries a fire in his mouth set on fire from hell. One compares the slanderer
to the butchers mastiffe, he lies still in the shambles, he waits for the
blood of the beast, his mouth is ever bloody.

But especially when he slandereth godly men in their godly ways, he lies in
the Devils sin, who is an accuser of the brethren, Revel. 12.

And he is often paid with his own coin, that as he sits as a moth fretting
the names of others, his name is wounded and gnawed on by others: Whereas by
the same overruling power of God, a man chary of another name coming through
his hands, has his name often defended and tendered passing through the hands
of others.

5. Beware of a wanton and filthy tongue, addicted to unseemely and ribauldry
speech, 5. A filthy tongue.
full of corruption, both in the speaker and hearer: the one making no
conscience of foul words easily comes on to foul actions; the others good
manners easily corrupted by evil speeches, 1 Cor. 15.

Say not with thy self, Though I sometimes speak foolishly and merrily, yet
my heart is good, I live well and honestly for all that. I assure thee thy
heart and tongue are both of one constitution: and thou that say thou art so
honest of thy body, but neglectest thy tongue, carriest a world of wickedness
about thee still in that little member.

III. Use means to keep thy tongue unblameable: 4 Reasons.
Thirdly, use the means to keep thy tongue unblameable. For, first, it is a
little member, but unruly, and as hard to keep as a City without walls.
Secondly, by thy words thou shall be justified or condemned. Thirdly, all thy
religion and profession is in vain, if thy tongue be unruled. Fourthly, a
wholesome tongue is the tree of life. How careful will an husbandman be to
preserve a tree of delicate and precious fruit? Such a tree is a well governed
tongue. But if a man had the least sprig of the tree of life, by which he were
sure to thrust away diseases, pains, sickness, death, and preserve himself
in an happy, healthful, undying and immortal estate; oh how carefully would
he tend and charily watch it? But Solomon commends a well ordered tongue to
that whole tree of life, Prove. 15.4. for the fruit of a long and comfortable
life, 1 Pet. 3.10.

Quest. What are these means?

Four means.
Answ. First, set a watch before the door of David not to offend with thy
tongue: Psalm. 39.1. I purposed and vowed with my self to look to my ways,
and that I sin not with my tongue: and that man that will not sin with his
tongue, must set a strong watch before the door of his mouth. And consider
here, first, it is too much for a Christian to lodge corruption and filthiness
in his heart; and yet if some uncleanness will still hide it self in those
deceitful corners, choke it there, let not the tongue utter it, nor the mouth
vent it to the poisoning and infecting of others. Secondly, that a thought may
be corrected, but a word once spoken is irrevocable; and therefore wisdom will
examine every word first before it pass out of the mouth.

Secondly, take laws for our lips from God, Prove. 31. the godly woman, the
law of grace is upon her tongue, the word of God is the bound of her tongue and
speeches, both for matter, manner, measure and end of her speeches.

A man cannot learn a foreign tongue, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French,
unless he be taught the elements, or observe the rules of speech. Now to
speak gracious speech is not our native language, it is the language of
Canaan, to which we are naturally strangers, and can never get it of our
selves, unless we acquaint our selves with the rules of it in the word of
God. Who can speak familiarly with God, savourly of God, or Christianly with
men, without Gods own teaching in his word?

Thirdly, labor to get a good heart, for out of 15.18. and Prove. 16.23. The
heart of the wise guides the mouth wisely: for as the shop is furnished out of
the warehouse, so the mouth with speech out of the heart. Whence it must
follow, that the want of good and savoury speech argues a barren and naughty
heart. To speak the language of Canaan, be a Jew within, get a wise, pure, and
converted heart, and then thou art one of the people of a pure language, 3
Zeph. 9.13.

Fourthly, accustom thy self to good and savoury Peter, let thy speech bewray
thee a Disciple of Christ, a good Christian: see the matter be good and
pertinent, the manner seasoned and bounded with godly discretion, and the end
tending to minister grace to the hearers.

The reason of this rule is, First, because corrupt communication slippes in
for want of better communication which might have prevented it. Secondly, no
way so expedite to break off a bad habit, than by frequent contrary acts which
will grow habitual and familiar.

Thus much of the directions for keeping the outward man blameless. If any
think them not so necessary to be insisted upon, or taken up carefully into
his practice, let him remember: 1. That the heart is never renewed unless the
outward man be reformed. 2. It shall one day be said to him, Why take thou my
law into thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. why professest thou religion and salvation by
Jesus Christ, and hate to be reformed? 3. The time hastens, wherein every
soul present shall be judged by that he has done in the body, be it good or
evil, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
NOw we come to the second petition of this most excellent prayer, which is for
final sanctification, and perseverance in their grace received unto the end,
which he calls the coming of Christ.

This is the fifth time the Apostle mentions the coming of Christ, in this
Epistle; for in the end of all the five Chapters you shall meet with it: to
note, Note.
That a Christian should never set the second coming of Christ out of sight;
as being a strong means to keep him in a general preparation or readiness
to be found such a one as may carry the title of a good and wise servant.

But in this place persuading to full and final holiness it is most fitly
mentioned, Consideration of Christ's second coming has all encouragements to
godliness.
as having all encouragements, and answering all objections.

First, because this coming of Christ brings a recompense of reward to such as
are exercised, and hold on in holiness: the meditation of it

Secondly, many are the troubles and reproaches

Thirdly, whereas there is no greater enemy to sanctification than sin and
corruption; those that would hold out to full and final holiness, must
carefully watch against all sin: which they shall easier resolve upon, who
hold this coming of Christ in their eyes, seeing he therefore comes to
judge and revenge all sin.

Fourthly, to uphold them in the strife against sin: for whereas after long
combat the godly find little conquest against spiritual enmities, and this
often makes them faint and weary, and ready to give over: The Apostle in great
wisdom holds before their eyes that day, unto which if they hold fast their
grace, they shall obtain full victory over all their sins, and never know
more, neither the corruption nor molestation of them.

Fifthly, to add courage to their labors and endeavors for increase of
grace: for whereas by all their diligence and care in well-doing, they can
attain no great measure of grace, and that little which they have, is often
clouded with many corruptions, and sometimes interrupted: they might be much
discouraged, if they should not be held on in expectation of the day of Christ's
coming, wherein they shall attain the full measure of grace and holiness
which they strove for, and reap the full harvest of their labor and painful
seede-time.

Sixthly, he mentions the coming of Christ, as the period of their care and
faithful striving to be unblameable: not because they should hold out their
lives and labors till then; but to show, that as for the present they are, In
quo que^que inven^rit suu^ novissimus dies, in hoc eum comprehende^ m^^di
novissimus dies* quoniam qualis in isto die q^isqu^m m^ri^ur, talis in illo
i^dicab^tur. August.
so they shall be at that day: for in what estate the day of death leaves them,
the same shall the day of Christ find them: and therefore every one that would
be found unblameable then, must be so now.

Quest. Is there any doubt but that the godly shall be kept unblameable till
that day? or is it possible they should not persevere to final sanctification?
and if they shall, what need the Apostle pray so earnestly for it?

Answ. Perseverance in grace is twofold: 1. Continued, 2. Interrupted.


The children of God having the seed of God, which is the true grace of
sanctification by the Spirit; do sometimes lose many gifts of the Spirit, (as
we have heard) and sundry ways quench the Spirit, so as they hold not a
continued perseverance in the measure, degree, sense and comfort of their
holiness: yet they lose not all the gift of regeneration at such a time, nor
fall (...), i. wholly, for the seed remains; but persevere by an interrupted
grace, (...), that is, finally: though they fall from their first love, and
some degrees, yet are they restored; and finally become unblameable in the day
of Christ.

1. Because they are built upon a rock, against which the gates of hell cannot
prevail. The Arc of Noah resembling the Church, was made of square wood; a
square lay it any way lies firm. So the Saints abide firm in temptation,
says Augustine.

2. Christ has prayed that their faith should not fail, Luke 22.32. he has
prayed for their perseverance: John 17.15. not to take them out, but preserve
them in the world: and verse 26. that they may be one with Christ and God. So
as if God and Christ himself be stable in their happiness, so are they.

By virtue of this prayer it is impossible the elect should be deceived, Matthew.
24.24. And by virtue of it though Peter's or any other believers faith may be
foiled, it cannot quite fail. His faith may be wounded, Co^^^ti potest, non
excuti.
not dead; his confession may fail in his mouth, but his heart shall hold him
whom his voice denies. Gregory.

3. The promises of Christ are yea and Amen, for he is the true and faithful
witness, 2 Cor. 1.20. who has sealed and ratified them by his blood. But he
has promised that the elect shall persevere: Ier. 32.39. I will make an
everlasting covenant with them. Esaias 54.10. The mountains may remove, and the
hills fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, nor my peace fall
away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee: and John. 10. None shall
pluck them out of his hand.

Object. The promises on Gods part are firm, but we fail in our condition,
which is that we repent and believe, and never depart: for though the Lord
marry himself for ever in truth, mercy and compassion, Hosea 2.19. yet we
may depart, and the bond is broken on our part.

Answ. If the bond be broken on our part, then the Lord marries us not for
ever. 2. Contracts of marriage use not to be conditional, but simple and
absolute, else they are no binders. 3. All conditions required in us, the Lord
both works and maintains: Christ performs all conditions in his Church, he
makes her, cleanses her, saves her, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. 4. If the Lord depart not
from us, we shall not depart from him, for then we depart from him, when his
grace departs from us. And therefore David prays, Uphold me Lord, and I
shall be safe: and as he has promised not to depart from us, so he has
promised to put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him.

Object. Though none can take the sheep of Christ out of his hand, yet they
may cease to be sheep, and may of themselves stray away.

Answ. If once sheep, they are never plucked away; therefore never cease to be
sheep.

2. To these sheep are promised eternal life; therefore so long shall they be
sheep, even for all eternity.

3. The Fathers power is above all temptations, therefore suffers nothing to
make them of sheep no sheep, for then they might be plucked away.

4. Though themselves would fling out of the fold, being foolish and straying,
yet have a good shepherd, and by him are preserved in grace to salvation.

5. Even this prayer in the Text is a prayer of faith, and therefore the
Thessalonians must persevere. A prayer of faith argues both the presence of the
Spirit, whose voice the Lord cannot but hear, and the voice of a child whom
the father will not repel.

Quest. But if the Thessalonians shall persevere till the coming of Christ,
why does the Apostle pray so earnestly? it seems very needless, nay rather
such earnest petitions seem to make their case very hazardous, and imply they
may fall away.

Answ. Prayers for perseverance imply not any possibility of falling away, but
plainly show, (which the Apostle aims at here) that assurance of perseverance
makes no godly man secure or profane, but implies a condition of unblameable
walking, and preserving himself unspotted of the world.

that we should not depart from him. Contrary to the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, which teaches, that God gives us the first grace, by which we become
good, but we merit a second grace, by which of good we become better.

Not in vain for them that shall persevere to pray for perseverance.
though the elect cannot fall away.

First, because it is an obedience to Gods commandment. Reas. 1.


2
Secondly, a testimony that we depend on his strength and promise for
perseverance.

Thirdly, that we look to attain the gift in in Gods own means of
conveying them; 3
of which prayer is one of the chief. Would we not want grace, we must not
be wanting in prayer?

They are far wide that conceive prayer and perseverance repugnant, for they
are subordinate and assistant one to another.

Object. We find the Saints praying that the Lord would not take his holy
Spirit from them, that he would create a new Spirit in them.

Sol. Not because the Spirit is either quite taken away, or quite gone.

But First, because he is taken from them, not

Secondly, not in respect of the saving gift, but

Thirdly, the Spirit where once he is, is not quite

Fourthly, and lastly, by prayer we retain the Spirit, and the renewing grace
of the Spirit, both

4. This and all such prayers for perseverance more earnest, because we know
that God will grant us the grace prayed for. He will never pray, that believes
not that God will grant his prayer.

But the Saints therefore pray because they believe to speed. Eliah, 1 King.
18.42. knew it would rain, and told Ahab so; yet he goes and prays for it.
Christ knew his Father would glorify him, yet he prays he would so do: he
well knew none of his Disciples should perish but Judas, yet he prays to that
purpose. And this is not in vain, but a performance of worship to God, a
possessing of grace in a right title, and tenure, and a sweetning of the mercy
which we have gotten by prayer and prevailing with God.

The Apostle implies in Christ's coming, that Christ is now absent from us,
Note 1.
that is, in respect of his body, he is not present in earth, neither
circumscriptive, nor diffinitive, nor repletive: for then he could not come to
us, if he were with us already. True it is that Christ is spiritually present
with his Church to the end of the world, according to his promise of his spirit
and grace.

Christ is also sacramentally present:

1. Ratione signi, he is represented in the sign.

2. Ratione objecti, for he is the present object of our faith whereby we
behold and partake him being present in the word of promise. But corporally he
is not present, neither in the Supper nor any place where the Supper is
celebrated, nor in the bread.

1. Because Christ professed when he was to ascend, that he was to leave the
world, Reas. 1.
and go to the Father, Ioh. 16. but the bread is in the world, therefore
Christ now ascended is not in it.

2. He expressly denies that he should be with us on earth after his
ascension: Matthew. 26. Reas. 2.
The poor ye have always with you, but me not always. If they fly to their
old shift of invisible conversation, or quoad statum humilitatis, that is, in
respect of his humility; Christ spoke without any such limitation, Me ye
shall not have always.

3. Our high Priest is gone with his body into the heavenly Sanctuary, and if
he be not there, Reas. 3.
he cease to be our high Priest, Heb. 8.4. If they say he is on earth, but
not visibly, what should an invisible high Priest do in earth, where all
Priests were ever visible.

4. Even the bread in which they say he is present corporally, Reas. 4.
is a sign and argument of his corporal absence, because it must be received
in memory of him. Now memory is of a thing absent, and therein we declare the
Lords death till this his coming, 1 Cor. 11.

And here we may note also, that Christ will come again according to his body:
Note 2.
Acts 1.11. and Hebr. 9.28. He shall come the second time to the salvation of
them that wait for him: he comes but twice corporally* once to merit
salvation, and again to perfect it.

1. Then let us wait for this coming, Use 1.
as a loving spouse longs for her husbands return out of a far Country.

2. Love this coming of Christ, when the glory of Christ shall break out as
the Sun in his strength, 2
which is now clouded and veiled.

First, by his bodily absence. Secondly, by the affliction and poverty of his
Church. Thirdly, by the insolency and pride of his enemies. But then his glory
shall appear, and shall be glorious in himself and all the Saints.

2. Because the innocence of the Saints shall then be cleared to the faces of
the wicked, and their labors shall be recompensed with invisible reward.

3
3. Prepare for this coming: and first, hence the Apostle moves all men every
where to repent, because God has appointed a day to judge the world, Acts
17.31. Secondly, persuades men to holiness, 2 Cor. 5.11. 2 Pet. 3.11.
considering the terrors of the Lord, what manner of men ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness. Foolish men now dream of too much
strictness and holiness, because they consider not this day of Christ's second
coming.

Note 3.
A third note is, in the Apostles argument, That only an unblameable holiness
will bestead us at that day, and therefore we must preserve our selves
unblameable till that coming of Christ, all things else leave us at that day:
Riches, honors, pleasures then forsake us, Nec vera, nec v^str^.
they are neither true, nor ours, says Bernard.

Only a good conscience and study of holiness, and practice of holy duties
go along with us to meet Christ in his second coming, then will a little
holiness, obedience, faith, and fear of God more comfort us than all the word
and glory of it can afford.

Christians must not only labor for full holiness but for final: that is,
Doct.
They must not be content with any measure of grace never so great, unless
they persevere in grace until the coming of Christ. John 15.4. Abide in me:
he^ says not only Come unto me, as Mat. 11.29. bu^ Abide in me. Revel.
22.11. Let him that is holy b^ holy still: and Revel. 2.25. Hold fast that thou
have till I come, and be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a
crown of life, verse 10. Matthew. 10.22. He that continues to the end shall be
saved.

1. This is the way of the just, which is as the light that shines more and
more until perfect day, 4.18. Look as the Sun rising is brighter and
brighter, and still dispelleth mists and darkness before it, till it come to
high noone, which is the perfect pitch of the day: so where the Sun of
righteousness rises in the heart, there is a daily profiting, and proceeding
in the knowledge and fear of God; a walking from strength to strength, from
faith to faith, till they attain the highest pitch of grace in this life, and
that tallness in Christ, which shall be most absolutely confirmed, and
perfected in that brightest and highest light and life of glory to come. But
the hypocrite is not so, he has some light, some little oil in his lamp, but
only enough to make a flash, or sudden blaze; but not enough to carry him
into the wedding chamber: sometimes he will wash and repent, but he soon
forgets that he was washed: sometimes he will have good words in his
mouth, some good actions now and then in his hand, and seem very good, but all
his righteousness is as the morning dew.



promise, Isay 40.31. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength as
the Eagle, they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not be
faint.

faith, which apprehends that living water, of which whosoever drinks he
shall never thirst more, because there is such a fountain in him springing up
to eternal life, John 4.4.

faithful, who be as trees planted by the rivers of water, and their moisture
is indeficient, their leaves fall not off. This was signified by the good
ground, Luke 8. distinguished from all the other three, that it brings fruit
with patience, when the best fruits of all the other came at last to nothing.
And this grace differenceth between such as formerly nothing else in show did
distinguish: for let an hypocrite set forth never so fair, and hold a place of
profession, and forwardness among the people of God, yet at the last he shall
prove like the unhappy passenger, that has seemed to sail prosperously all
his voyage, and no danger threatened him, yet at the length suffers shipwreck,
and is cast away at the mouth of the very haven.

3. Because perseverance approoveth the In principio delectatio, but in fine
probatio. Which tells us, that a man at the first may rejoice in the light
for a season, and in the taste of the word, and the powers of the life to come
may be very sweet; but all the proof and trial is at the end: the end shows
who be called according to means, and who are called of purpose. What one
said of true virtue, we may apply of true piety: Verae pietatis est non
caepisse, sed fecisse; nec fecisse, sed perfecisse. Whereas of hypocrites may
be said that to the Galathians, Ye did run well, who let you?

And what comfort is there of temporary faith, which gives over when there is
most need of it? What use of that illumination that leaves us in darkness at
the last? What were the foolish Virgins better for that oil and light, which
failed them before they came to the wedding chamber?

4. Because Satan lies in wait especially for our perseverance, his chief
scope and delight hypocrite goes about the business, as he that has resolved
and cast the accounts to walk in the way of holiness, and may hold on a long
time in the external profession, and some outward reformation; but at length
wanting soundness, a small thing turns him aside; he sets fair out of
Sodom with Lot, but looks back with his wife: they set fair out of Moab
with Orpah, but go not forward with Ruth to Judah. Now the Devil as a
passenger seeing a foundation laid, and walls reared, and there the building to
stand at a stay, laugheth, and scorneth, saying, This man begun to build, but
could not finish.

Object.
But you said, the Devil triumphs also in the apostasy of the godly; now I
thought they had never fallen away.

Answ.
They indeed wholly and finally fall not off as the former; but many are their
falls and backslidings through their negligence, by which they lose many
graces, and many degrees of such as they keep; even such as perhaps are never
restored while they live, and often bring the terrors of God into their
souls, and go to their grave with incurable temporary affliction: and does
not this rejoice Satan to see the Saints in the suddes? and to pass their
days heavily and uncheerfully? and as ever in darkness, in comparison of the
former light of joy in themselves, and of comfort, example and direction unto
others, while they stood valiantly against the forces of the Devil?

2. So much the more fiercely Satan assaults this grace, because he knows that
only perseverance overcommeth himself, and all his hellish temptations; no
marvel then if he would by all his strength and seven heads wrest this grace
from us. How needful then is it for us to stand fast in the armor of God
against these assaults of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.13.

Use 1. of reproof. Use 1.
1. General. 2. Special.
Our Nation has dealt with the light of the Gospel as the Jews did with
John's light, who rejoiced in it for a season.

Time was when in the beginnings of the Gospel our fathers received it with
love, joy, zeal, diligence, and most earnest affection: The violent took the
kingdom by force. But now how generally are we fallen from the love of the
Gospel, and turned religion into formality, and policy? Time was when men
hasted out of Popery as fast as the Israelites out of Egypt. Then was idolatry
cast out, then was not only the unclean flesh, but broth hated: then were
godly men busy at work to lay the foundation and grounds of Religion: then
were Gods worthies worthily and thankfully received, and esteemed, and the
restorers of Religion duly honored: then men used their peace to edification,
and growth in grace, and in the comforts of the holy Ghost.

But what do we now? have not many among us changed our hatred of Popery to
the hugging and cherishing of it? Do not we generally not only look back,
but run back to Popery, as Israel into Egypt. See not we Idolatry, and the
Breaden god, and the Altars, Vestures, and Priests encroach upon us, which cost
so much precious blood of Martyrs to cast out? Do not some question now the
grounds of Religion, and dispute our Catechism, which Turks dare not do? and
begin to determine that the differences between us and the Papists are not so
great and substantial? In stead of honoring Gods worthies, the restorers of
holy Religion, have not some of our pulpits, presses, and discourses disgraced
Calvin, Beza, and such as stood more stiff against Popery. Are there not they
that mingle not a little leaven, but abundance of poison of Popery, and father
it upon our Church? Are not the numbers of Papists increased upon us,
notwithstanding all the laws against them? that these sons of Zerviah are
grown in number and strength almost too great for us? Oh who can without
heart-sorrow compare our selves now with our selves then; as the old men wept,
when they compared the second Temple with the first?

Will not we yield this general Apostacy? let him that runs read it in
the effects of it. For,

1. Why has the Lord given up numbers to strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. to
believe lies, but that they received not the truth in the love of it?

2. For what other sin did the Lord abhor Israel, Psalm. 78.60. and forsook
his own Tabernacle? and why does the Lord thrust us from his care, but that we
have thrust our selves from his Covenant?

3. Why are we fallen from the honor of our Kingdom, and the ancient glory of
our Nation, but because we have not set up nor held up the honor and kingdom
of God amongst us, and therefore he has cast down the honor of our Kingdom.

4. Why is our peace within our selves disturbed by many discontents among all
sorts, but because we have not allowed the Lord a peaceable dwelling among us
as in times past.

5. Why cannot we now peep out of our coasts, but become a prey to a base
despisable company of robbers and thieves? and why does not God go out with
our navies, our armies which return home with loss and dishonor? but that
the sentence is gone out as against Israel, Judge. 10.13. Ye have served other
Gods, I will save you no more: Go and cry to the Gods ye have chosen, let
them save you in the day of danger.

6. Whence are those sins written with the point of a Diamond in the face and
forehead of our Nation? As,

1. Coldness in profession, lukewarmnesse in religion, denying the power of it.

2. A general scorning of the profession of grace. Oh that ever it should be
said in time to come, that after 60 or 70 years of the Gospel, it should be
attended, or rather chased out with such general scorn of faithful
Preachers, and professors of true religion, as no age of the Gospel can
pattern.

3. That general corruption in manners in the body of our people, too too
apparent in,

1. Cursed oaths in old and young, high and low, in open and shameful
manner, for which the land does and must mourn.

2. General pollution of the Sabbath by working, playing, journeying by water,
and land, and open profanesse; and weak hopes of reformation, unless we may
think these sins to die of themselves, but the land is like to keep her
Sabboths first.

3. The deluge of drunkenness, which has drowned our Land, and is risen 15
cubits higher than ever, which was sin wont to be covered formerly with
rags, now with silks.

Whence are all these, and many other heinous profanations of manners, but from
our Apostasy from God, from his covenant, from his word, from the profession of
holy Religion?

Oh that we could consider the state of revolters worst at last, that we
would return to our first love, and works, before the remooving of our
candlestick, and before our spuing out.

with God, but are fallen back to the world, or wallow in some lusts, as if
nothing were worth forsaking but Gods ways.

Let these consider, 1. How lightly they offend the Majesty of God, Heb. 10.38.
If any withdraw himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. The word
(...) is a military word from soldiers who recoyle and leave their standing,
in whom the Captain delights not: no more in our Christian fight can we by
retiring and recoyling please our Captain: But the Martial law for such is in
the text, They withdraw themselves to perdition.

2. Better it is not to begin in a good course, than to desist, and break off.
2 Pet. 2.20. It had been better not to have known: the latter end is worse
than the beginning: for they lose all their labor, all their hopes, all they
have wrought, all they have suffered, all is in vain to them. As a man having
made a long voyage, and sailed prosperously many hundred miles, but bringing
his ship within sight of shore, and thrusting into the haven, suffered wrack
in the havens mouth: this man has lost all his gettings, his wealth, his
journey, his labor, sufferings, his life, himself and all. Oh never content
thy self with good beginnings in the spirit to end in the flesh: Oh foolish
Galathian, will thou suffer so many things in vain? The Lord rejects that
blossom that never comes to fruit, as the husbandman cares not for that blade
that comes not to ripeness. Nay never content thy self with a fair progress
in grace, at any time to desist: For if a righteous man at any time forsake his
righteousness, all his former righteousness shall never be remembered; and he
that loses the last of his days, loses all the former. What were a man the
better if he had all grace in the highest perfection of it, and fall from it?
nay what cares Satan if a man had attained whole sanctification, not only in
part, but in degrees, if it be not continued in? Adam in Paradise, the more
holiness he lost, the greater was his sin and unhappiness. Nay the Angels
in heaven, what better were they for their absolute Angelical happiness, when
they left their first habitation?

3. Relapse into a sickness is far more dangerous than the disease, and to
relapse into sin is to relapse into the most dangerous sickness of all, and
far less curable than any. This incurable estate our Savior aims at Luke
9.62. no man that puts his hand to the plow, etc. from this relapse they fall
into that sin, that unpardonable sin.

4. The very season of our present times aggravates this sin of falling from
the grace of God, that makes it most inexcusable. What? to fall away so
willingly in days of peace? of means? of protection? in days of the honor
of the Gospel? What? to fly as a wicked man when none pursues? in a land where
truth and peace kisseth each other? where is neither danger, nor loss, nor
enemies near? so cowardly to part with truth, and fall from it to Popery? What
defense? what excuse is left for this sin? It were too much in times of
persecution, in Marian days, in the midst of those light fires, in the house
of inquisition, in France, in Italy, or in Spain, in Jerusalem, where Manasseh
makes the streets run with the blood of the Saints: But in the time of
peace, in the Sunshine, in the triumph of the Gospel to decline, and depart,
this has no excuse for the sin.

5. What a kind of creature is this, an Apostate, a Mermaid, half a man, half
a fish, a cake half baked, half a Christian as good as no Christian, an
Agrippa, almost a Christian, almost sanctified, almost saved; a Christian in
the morning of his life, but his righteousness being but as a morning dew,
dried up and withered before his evening; a diary Christian without all
acceptance? look on the Text again here is a sanctification, till the
coming of Christ: shall this great Sun of righteousness rising, and coming
in his strength and glory, find all our righteousness as a dew dried up, and
vanished? then must all our salvation vanish with it.

2. This may serve for instruction. Use 2.
Whosoever would have assurance of true grace, must labor to hold out, seeing
an hypocrite may begin well, and run well for a while, as Paul tells the
revolted Galathians, Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well, but only true grace ends
well.

Here for our furtherance I will set down two things.

First, The means of perseverance.

Secondly, the motives to excite us to the means.

Means of perseverance.
The means are three.

I. Lay a good ground, begin well: Col. 1.23. Be grounded and stablished in the
faith: 1. Lay a sound foundation.
first be grounded, then settled and stablished. A good beginning promises a
good ending.

Now to a good beginning are required three things:

1. Humility of soul, 2. stability of purpose, 3. sincerity of heart.

First, Humility lays a low and a deep foundation, in the exercise of sound
mortification: the most that fall off from their beginnings are such as have
but slighted the matter of mortification; and would not be at the pains and
cost of deep digging their hearts by serious humiliation. This our Savior
expresses in the Parable, Luke 6.48. The sound Christian is that wise builder,
who builded an house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation of it on a
rock, so as neither floods nor winds could shake it.

Secondly, Stability of purpose is a settling of the heart to follow goodness,
and has in it two things: 1. for judgment, 2. for practice.

1. A resting in the known truth, and not as reeds to be shaken and carried
away with every puff of false and vain doctrines, or strange opinions,
contrary to the truth received; the sin of this unstable and libertine age,
in which numbers specially of our youth, leave the assemblies, and creep into
corners to learn another doctrine from teachers in the twilight, against the
Sabboths of God, against the law of God, against the ordinances of God, the
word and Sacraments as now preached and administered. I seldom have observed
any such shuttle hearers, but have in the end come to naught, and even to open
profanesse, because they never laid a sound foundation, but were always busy
questionists, ready to turn all religion into ^trums, which was the very loss
of all sound Divinity among the Schoolmen.

2. A resolution in practice, whatsoever come of it, never to be carried away
with the error of the wicked, nor the sins of the age, times, calling, nor
the corruptions of his own heart; all which are violent streams which a
resolved Christian must row hard against. This was it which Paul and Barnabas
require of the new converted Antiochians, Acts 11.23. that with full purpose of
heart they would cleave unto God, both in judgment and doctrine, and in life
and conversation. This was the settled resolution of David, Psalm. 119.112. I
have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even to the end.

Thirdly, Sincerity of heart is necessary: which 1. casts out all sin by
repentance, sparing none, never so gainefull: 2. has respect to all the
commandments of God. A deceitful heart cannot hold out in good, duplicity of
heart suffers not a man to continue, for he is unconstant in all his ways,
James 1.8. This is when men look to have their joy in this world, and with God
in the world to come, when the end of their whole course is not sincere, but
they embrace goodness so far as may stand with their own estate, or the
disposition of the times, or constitution of the kingdom, and no further. Aim
at this entrance into grace, know that he only has begun well, that has
begun in truth.

2. Arm our selves against hindrances of perseverance.
II. We must arm our selves against all hindrances of perseverance, and such
things as pluck men away from love of truth and holiness. As,

1. Beware lest our hearts be hardened through deceitfulness of sin, Heb.
3.13. Sin is a sly thing of the Serpents brood, especially the sin of our
nature easily seduceth and deceives us. Romans 7.11. The Apostle complains that
it deceived him: for the sins of heart and nature lull men asleep in some
actual sins in which they lie securely, and so grieve the Spirit, weaken
grace, and hinder holiness.

2. Love not the world, nor the profits, honors and pleasures of it too well.
Demas forsook the truth, to embrace the present world. Judas by the same
corrupt affection fell from the Apostleship: Ioh. 12.41. Many chief Rulers
believed Christ, but durst not confess him, because of the Pharisees, for they
loved the praise of men more than God. Oh, that we did not so clearly see the
strength of this let in these days, wherein so many baulke the way of
holiness, and fall back almost to open profanesse, because they neither see
many men, nor great men yield approbation or countenance to such strict courses.

2. Shun lewd society, and familiarity with profane persons, if we would not
fall from our own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. there is not more strength
in any infectious pestilencious air to poison the body, than in this poisoned
air to kill the soul. Society with graceless men is a very blasting of
grace; fire is not more apt to burn, than we to learn their ways.

4. The labor and pains of holiness and mortification makes many weary of
the good way; but consider it is not in vain to serve the Lord, and there is
profit in walking humbly before him, thy pains shall be abundantly
recompensed; a small measure of holiness, with an upheaped measure of
happiness. Every man will be contented to swallow much pains for a little
earthly profit, and is the state of heaven worth no labor?

5. Persecutions drive many away; much seed which comes up fair, when the
sun of persecution arises, withers away. But against this, wisdom must
cast the costs, and prepare to defray the charges of this great building, and
the same Sun that dries and burns up the shallow seed, shall set and ripen
ours.

Many hear holiness reviled and spoiled of her veil and value, they hear
this sect every where spoken against, and would as far forget themselves as
Peter, to hear that voice, Thou art one of them, and perhaps renounce Christ,
and profession and all: for if even the very Disciples of Christ, and all they,
leave him and fly when afflictions comes near, Matthew. 26.56. what marvel if
they that want soundness shrink in the wetting.

Meditations to stablish against persecutions.
1. But here remember and look upon Christ, Heb. 12.2. who endured such
speaking against of sinners, not for himself, but for thee, lest thou be weary.

2. He that is now ashamed of Christ, Christ will one day be ashamed of him,
and then he that will no^ bear the reproach of a blast of words for him, shall
be filled with an everlasting reproach before men and Angels.

3. Sound judgment esteems it the greatest honor, to be highly dishonored
for Christ and his causes: Matthew. 5.12. Blessed are ye when men revile you,
and speak all manner of evil against you for my sake: rejoice and be glad,
great is your reward in heaven.

Object. I could better endure men's words: but I shall also sustain great
loss, if I should be so precise, I should lose my custom, trading, and
profits.

Answ. Will thou receive a religion, and not know it to be truth? or know it
to be so, and wilt not be ready to confess and profess it according to thy
place and calling, even in the midst of the different conceits of men?

2. The Saints knowing this to be truth, did for it joyfully suffer the
spoiling of their goods.

3. Put together in the balance, the loss of the world, and the loss of thy
soul; and consider whether is fitter to save, if thou can not save both: For
the loss of the world, is an abundant recompense promised by a sure
play master, but what recompense is there for the loss of the soul? Matthew.
16.26. Nay if thou should venture and give thy life for thy profession, if
God call for it; it is no less than thou ought, who ought to strive unto
blood, Hebr. 12.4. and yet this greatest loss were the greatest gain. Thus to
lose thy life is to save it, and to save it in this case were to lose it.

III. Procure to our selves and exercise the helps of perseverance, 3. Procure
helps of perseverance.
and keep them near us as our continual companions.

And for this end, First, let the word of God Psalm. 119.102. I declined not
from thy statutes, for thou did teach me.

Now the word sundry ways keeps us. The word upholds us four ways.
As first, by inlightening us to see our way, both to choose the right way, and
decline the wrong: Psalm. 119.105. Thy law is a light and lantern to our
paths. Secondly, by comforting and encouraging us in the good way: Romans 15.4.
Through consolation of the Scripture we receive our hope. Thirdly, by
preventing sin in us: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I
might not sin. Fourthly, by keeping out of sin, and redressing our way, Psalm.
119.9.

Secondly, labor to preserve in thee a love of illumination only, but sound
affection also to grow up in this as well as in that. For first, as a tree low
and deep rooted, is stablished and continued in fruitfulness, so when faith
and grace is deeply rooted in the affection of the heart, there will be
perseverance. Secondly, it is not good words, good actions, or good knowledge,
that holds out, but good affections will. Thirdly, what other is the cause of
so general backsliding in the world, which is the proper punishment of not
receiving the truth in the love of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

Thirdly, fear God: This is a wellspring of life, to make us escape the snares
of death, Prove. 14.27. and 19.23. Anchora mentis pondus timoris, Fear holds
the heart steady as the anchor the ship; and join thy self to such as fear
God, delight in such as excel in virtue and grace, these are able to
encourage, strengthen, direct, uphold, raise, and comfort thee in thy
difficulties, weariness and weakness, and set thee forward not by their gifts
only but by their example.

Fourthly, be instant in prayer for perseverance, so our Text teaches, for it
is the Lord that both begins and finisheth his own work, he not only
sets us in the way, Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 138.8.
but leads us in the way, and at length brings us into Canaan.

Fifthly, look still to the coming of the Lord Luke 12.36. Blessed is that
servant whom the Master shall find so doing. Do thou expect him from
heaven, and is not thy conversation there? do thou expect his coming in
glory, and meetest not him in grace? look thou for him as thy head, and will thou not as a member hold an happy union and fellowship with him? expectest
thou thence a Savior, and continuest thou not unto the end, seeing only such
shall be saved? Matthew. 10.22.

Now the motives to the means of perseverance. Motives to perseverance, 5.


First, this is a true sign of a true friend of God, Prove. 17.17. not only in
prosperity, but in adversity; yea this is the praise of a true friend: sound
love to Christ is a spark of Christ's love to us, of whom is said, John 13.1.
Whom he loved he loved to the end.

Secondly, this is the praise of true grace, which

Thirdly, there is none but desires that God would be constant to him in his
goodness, and show Chron. 15.2. If the image have never so golden an head, yet
if the legs be earth and clay, the stone in the mountain shall break it to
pieces.

Fourthly, who would sow his field, not to reap his seed again? who would
not reap his prayers, his tears, and the dripping seede-time ^f
mortification? who would not reap his hope, his patience, and other graces?
But all reaping is on condition that we faint not, Gal. 6.9. and therefore the
Apostle inferres that we must not be weary of well-doing.

Object. But alas, I cannot go so fast in the good way as sometime I did, nor
so steadfastly; I could hear more fruitfully, pray more cheerfully, keep my
times with God more carefully, bewail my sins more feelingly than now I can.

Answ. If thou go on, all is well, if thou stand not still, nor go back,
a sof^ pace forward goes far; only quicken thy self by all good means for
thy better assurance.

2. If thou be sure thou go to Canaan, though thou sometime haltest of a
limb with Jacob through weakness, yet comfort thy self, hold on, only see
thy heart be not halting.

Fifthly, want we examples to encourage us? we are compassed with them on
every hand. Examples to uphold our perseverance*
1. Look to God, and he perfecteth all his works of creation, government,
redemption, and salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.4. 2. Look at Christ, he finished the
work he had to do, Ioh. 17.4. he continued through many afflictions, setting
the joy before him, and despising the shame, continued in his obedience, till
he came to his consummatum est, all is finished. 3. Look to the Saints, and
neither must we be sloathfull, but followers of them, who by faith and patience
enjoyed the promises, Heb. 6.12. Job would not depart from his righteousness
while he lived: Paul's life was not so dear to him as the finishing of his
course with joy. 4. Look to wicked men, how constant they are, and continue in
their wicked courses, so as all means are too weak to pull them out; and
these shall condemn many a Christian, who is so fickle and inconstant in good.

VERSE 24. Faithful is he which calls you, who will also do it.
OUR Apostle here answers a secret objection that the Thessalonians might
make. How should we be blameless until the coming of Christ, seeing we have
all Satan's power against us, and the violence of the world, and our selves are
in a most changeable condition? Our Apostle assures them of perseverance in
these words, by three arguments; none of which are taken from their own
privilege, piety, or power, but from most sure grounds, all seated in God
himself: and they are three.

First, from his faithfulness and truth: He is faithful.

Secondly, from the effect of his faithfulness already begun: Who has called
you.

Thirdly, from the conclusion of his work begun: Who will also do it: That
is, He will finish and perfect his gracious work begun.

The first Argument prooving their perseverance, is from the nature of God, He
is faithful. Here are two questions:

1. Quest. Why the Apostle mentions Gods faithfulness in this place?

Answ. 1. To bring to their minds the promise of perseverance, and hold it
before their eyes: for Gods faithfulness ever has respect unto some promise.
Now this promise of perseverance is in Ier. 32.40. I will put my fear into
their hearts, that they may not depart from me: and Hosea 2.19. I will marry
thee for ever unto me in faithfulness. And in this promise they must seek
their steadfastness.

2. To assure them that his prayer for perseverance was a prayer of faith, and
grounded upon Gods promise; for no other prayer can have either comfort or
assurance. 1 John 5.14. This is the assurance, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. Matthew. 21.22. Whatsoever ye ask, if ye
believe, ye shall obtain it. And thus he teaches both them and us to frame
our prayers, if we would speed in our suites, namely to look at the promise
before we pray.

3. To set God before them in such a manner, as they may apprehend him not
only true in himself, in his word and promises; but one that will not
frustrate the faith and hope of such as wait and depend upon him, but will
carry them out to salvation.

2. Quest. How must we conceive God to be faithful?

God is said to be faithful four ways.
Answ. God is said to be faithful four ways: In himself, in his decrees,
in all his ways and works, in all his words and speeches.


1. He is faithful in himself, by an uncreated faithfulness and truth it
self, by one eternal and simple act; Differences between faithfulness in the
Creator, and in the creature, 4.
and differs from all created truth and faithfulness, and truth in the
creature.

First, because this is the Ocean and full fountain, from whence all the
faithfulness and truth in men and Angels issue and stream.

Secondly, this is the rule and measure of that; and the nearer that their
truth comes to this, the more complete it is.

Thirdly, this is unchangeable in the Lord, in whom is no shadow of change:
whereas in the creature it is changeable. The Angels that fell were faithful,
but soon changed: Adam by creation was faithful to his Creator, but soon
changed and departed from it. But the Lords faithfulness is unchangeable as
himself is.

Fourthly, whereas that in the creature is at least comparatively imperfect in
part, and weak; in God himself it is in most high perfection.

2. He is most faithful in all his decrees, for the counsels of the Lord must
stand, and must certainly be executed, both for manner, and times, and all
circumstances as he has decreed them: Esaias 14.24. The Lord has sworn,
Surely as I have purposed it shall come to pass. See verse 27.

3. He is faithful in all his ways and works, which all of them are
according to those decrees most holy and righteous. Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. As for example:

Look on him in the great work of creation, he is a faithful Creator, 1
Pet. 4. ult.

In the work of redemption, we have a faithful high Priest in things
concerning God, Heb. 2.17. who faithfully performs all his office, both in
expiating of our sins by one perfect sacrifice in earth, and now interceding
before God in heaven.

In the great work of our justification, we behold him just and faithful to
forgive our sins if we acknowledge them, 1 John 19. for God is so faithful
that he cannot but justify believers, having said that he that confesses his
sins, and forsakes them, shall find mercy, Prove. 28.

In the great work of protection and preservation of his Church in earth, He
is faithful and true that judges and fights righteously, Revel. 19.11.

Yea and in heaven, his faithfulness upholds their eternal happiness, 2 Timothy
1.12. I know whom I have believed, and he is able to keep what I have
committed to him against that day.

4. He is faithful in all his words and speeches: because,

1. They be the issue of a most faithful and righteous will, void of all
insincerity and unfaithfulness.

2. Never was word uttered by him, but it declared both the thing in it self,
and as it was in the mind of him the speaker.

3. Every word of his resembles his faithfulness. As, first, his commandments
are all just, holy, true and pure as he is; yea the rule of truth and
faithfulness to us, Psalm. 19.9. Secondly, his predictions all of them are
faithfully accomplished many thousand years after: as, Christ's incarnation in
the fullness of time: The Scepter departing from Judah, thousands of years
after the prediction, Genesis 49.10. Thirdly, his menaces and threatenings are most
faithful and true. The old world found them so after an hundred and twenty
years warning. Jerusalem overthrown 40. years after our Savior foretold,
that not a stone should be left on a stone. Fourthly, his promises are most
sure of accomplishment, and his faithfulness shines in them all. Abraham had a
son promised in his youth, God accomplished it in his age. Israel had a
promise of departing out of Egypt after 400 years, and the same night went out
with all his armies, Exodus 12.41. Hebr. 10.23. He is faithful that has
promised.

Doct. God most faithful.
God is most faithful and true. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful by whom ye are
called: 2 Cor. 1.18. God is true, and his word is not yea and nay. Revel.
19.11. He that sits upon the white horse is called faithful and true.

First, because of his most just and righteous nature, Reas. 1.
whose most righteous will is the rule of all his ways, Psalm: 145.17. And
because himself is absolutely holy, yea holiness it self, he must be holy
in all his works, as a light in whom is no darkness; from which image of God
so soon as the Angels themselves fell, they delighted in lies, falsehood, and
all unfaithfulness.

Secondly, 2
because he is most perfect and unchangeable in perfection, a nature most
simple, in which can be no composition, much less contrariety. Now if the Lord
should be unfaithful, he must be changed from himself, and so deny himself,
which the Apostle says he cannot do, and be God.

Thirdly, 3
his most pure and holy affection makes him most faithful: his love to his
children suffers him not to disappoint them in any of his promises; his just
conceived displeasure against sin and sinners suffers not one word of
threatening to fall to the ground: his zeal to his own glory makes him
magnify his truth and faithfulness above all things.

Fourthly, all imperfection is removed from him, 4 No imperfection in God to
hinder his faithfulness.
which makes the creature often fail in his purposes and promises: as,

1. Want of wisdom to foresee something, which if it come to pass does
disappoint us, and lay all our plots in the dust. But he is wisdom it self,
foreseeing all things, and forecasting all things, and ordering them so, as
nothing shall cross his purpose or promise.

2. Weakness or impotency may hinder us in effecting that we verily purposed
or promised. But strength is his, nothing can resist him: Is any thing
impossible to God? Luke 1.47. no, though he say, a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a child, it must be so, if all created nature say contrary.

3. Distance of place may make us fail of our purpose and promise: we cannot
be present always where we would and have purposed. But he is omnipotent,
fills both heaven and earth: Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I
ascend into heaven thou art there: if I go down into hell, thou art there,
etc.

4. Discontinuance in time may hinder our projects and purposes, we may die
before we can perform our promises. But he is for ever, and of his years
there is no end; his own eternal being gives an everlasting being and truth
to his promises.

Use 1.
Is God faithful? 1. Imitate our heavenly Father herein, in all our words,
works and ways, express faithfulness and truth; seeing we profess our
selves children of him who is faithful and just in all his ways. Let not us
by contrary courses disclaim and disgrace him: But,

First, see that all our words be faithful as his are, Our words must be
faithful as all Gods are, 4 Reas.
agreeing with the truth of the thing whereof we speak, and with the truth in
our minds: Beware of all lies and falsehood in earnest, or in jest. Consider,

1. It is a property of Satan's brood to love lies, whereof he is the author,
whose first sin was, not to stand in the truth: if we would be like unto
God, we must hate the Devils qualities, especially wherein he is most
contrary to God.

2. God hates lying, so as he rangeth it among most monstrous sins, that we
also should so hate it, Revel. 21.8. and 22.11. and fly it as a most hateful
and enormious offense.

3. The style of a Christian is to be of the truth, being sanctified by the
spirit of truth: And a mark of the remnant of Israel, that they speak no
lies, Ephesians. 3.13.

4. The danger: God will destroy all them that speak lies, Psalm. 5.6. and not
only keeps them out of the gates of the great City, but provides a lake of
fire and brimstone for them, for being most unlike God of all men, they shall
be cast furthest from him.

Secondly, b^ware of slipperinesse in our promises promises of God are in
Christ yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. our promises also must be yea and amen, firm
and faithful. Alas! that in the days of such light, men should be so light
and false in promises, so unfaithful in contracts and covenants, that words
and bands almost are but wind, as if men's honest words should be as sure as
bands only in days of darkness and superstition; or as if the word of truth
had chased away true and faithful dealing among the professors of it: or as
if Christian faith and fidelity could not live together in the same world, nor
in the same age. Does nature teach a man to be ashamed of a verbal lie, and
does not grace much more of an actual?

Thirdly, we must be faithful in our actions and special. Be faithful in thy
profession of godliness, lurk not as an hypocrite among the Saints, carry no
treacherous purpose to save thy self by denying or betraying the truth; give
it thy heart, hand, and tongue, and life, if it require it: beware of a
politic profession, never let thy practice disagree from thy profession.
Consider, Christ professed a good profession before Pilate, and sealed it with
his life and death, 1 Timothy 5.13. and will thou so nourish any secret fraud in
thy heart contrary to thy profession? and Paul tells Timothy, he had made a
good profession and a faithful before many witnesses. And this is a most
necessary doctrine, we know not how soon we may be called to it, therefore
learn it betimes, that we may be like our heavenly Father in faithfulness,
not only in times of prosperity, but in times of trial; for a Christian man
is that indeed which he is in trial: let us show our selves to be that we
seem to be.

Then in thy special calling be faithful: Christ was a faithful high Priest
in things concerning God, Heb. 2.17. and Moses was faithful in all the house
of God as a servant, Heb. 3.5. So it is required of every Minister or dispenser
of the secrets of God, that he be faithful, 1 Cor. 4.1. the steward of Gods
house must be faithful to his Lord, and to his family. It is not great pompous
titles that commends a Minister, but his faithfulness: Prove. 13.17. A
faithful Messenger is health.

And in thy private calling deal faithfully with all men, and in all things,
both great and small; so does God, who is not the rule only, but the witness
and judge: 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no man defraud his brother, God is the avenger of
all such things.

4. In friendship be faithful: God is most faithful David and Jonathan?

Among Heathens we read of a Daman and Pithias, of a Pylades and Orestes, of
an Euryalus and Nysus, of an Achates, who was a faithful friend to Aeneas, and
would not leave him in danger. But few such are to be found among Christians,
among whom faithful friendship is degenerated into policy and flattery. The
Heathens could say that they used not fire or water oftener than friendship;
would Christians could say so of faithful friendship: and yet they seem to
pull the Sun out of heaven, who would take faithfulness from friendship in the
lives of men. Would to God that Christians had not forgotten these natural
principles. We all profess our selves to be of the family of Christ, would it
were with us as in that, that but one of twelve were unfaithful to God and
their friend. But we see the contrary too too often.

Luke 12.42. Have thou much? many talents? be faithful in much, and thou shall
find much faithfulness in the Lord. Have thou little? be faithful in that
little, and thy Lord shall make thee ruler over much: when it shall be said,
Well done good and faithful servant, etc. Matthew. 25.23.

Oh that men would remember the doom against the evil servant, Matthew. 25.30.
Cast the unprofitable servant into utter darkness. Why was he judged so
severely?

1. Because an hypocrite comes among the good servants, and receives some
talents.

2. Having his talent, he hides it in the earth, earth eats him up and
buries him alive.

3. He is unprofitable, hinders his Lord, and makes him a loser, and does no
good to others; all which makes the sentence as just, as severe, and certain.

Use 2.
2. This faithfulness of God is the ground of all true religion, and hereupon
must the whole frame and all parts of it be laid.

This appears in five instances. 1. In all the doctrine of faith. 2. In all
the practice of faith. 3. In all the prayers of faith. 4. In all profession of
faith. 5. In all perseverance in faith.

I. All the doctrine of faith is grounded on Gods faithfulness.
First, we must ground all the doctrine of faith, all, the articles of faith,
all our judgment and opinion in matters of faith upon this faithfulness of
God; and this by holding fast in them all the faithful word, Titus 1.9. for
that only is the true religion, which is wholly grounded upon his word, who is
unchangeable in truth and faithfulness.

How could we believe all the Articles of faith, which are unconceivable, and
impossible to reason, if we ground them not upon Gods faithfulness in his
word? How should we conceive that the heavens and earth were created of
nothing? that the Son of God should become man? should be borne of a Virgin?
should by dying overcome death? by descending into hell should deliver from
hell?

How should we believe that our bodies clothed with corruption, and wrapped
in deaths garments, should rise again to eternal life? which Article the
Sadduces mock at? if we should not apprehend them as the word of him that is
faithful and true?

Contrary hereto, the maine pillars of Popery are set upon the unfaithful
words of men, of Fathers, Councels, Traditions, Popes: Whereas, Romans 3.4. Let
God be true, and every man a liar: Be he Father, or holy Father, further than
he speaks according to the faithful word. Nay if an Angel from heaven speak
otherwise, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8.

Nay, the Popish Church is so far from acknowledging this faithfulness of
God in the Scripture; as it never found a greater resister or opposite among
the sects, and opposite heresies in the world: For, bring in either Jews or
Turks, or any kind of heretics more vilifying Gods faithfulness in the
Scripture, and Papists shall not be the worst.

But did ever any of them accuse the Scripture to be a nose of wax? the
authority of it to be no better than Esops Fables, without the Churches
determination? to be a leaden and a Lesbian rule? to be a seed-plot of
heresies, and they to be heretics that stand to the voice of the Scriptures?
Do not they call the Bible the book of heretics? do they not burn the
Scriptures, as sometime did wicked Asa, Antiochus, Maximinus? Have they not
burned Christian men for having them? Let any such furious heretics against
Gods faithful word be brought in if they can: But certainly Papists must carry
the bell above all other in the world, for standing opposite to the
faithfulness of God in the Scripture, and be the most heretical, as who shut
the door against the truth, according to Chrysostomes rule, Haereticorum
haereticissimi, qui claudunt januas veritati. Chrysostom.

II. All our obedience of faith must be grounded on Gods faithfulness.
Secondly, on this ground we must lay all our practice and obedience of faith:
Both in respect of the object of faith, and the manner of man's oobedience.

1. For the object: We must therefore believe the whole word of God, contained
in the Law and Gospel, because it is of the nature of God himself, immediately
flowing from that eternal truth and faithfulness conceived in the mind of
God who is unchangeable. This is the argument of the Scripture: Because by
faith we give him the honor of truth, and we set our seal to God that he is
faithful, Ioh. 3.33. And thus he also honors us to give witness to his
faithfulness: and contrary, not mingling the word with faith, we make him a
liar, (namely, so far as we can) because we believe not the record that the
Father witnesses of his Son: and this is the ground why we must believe the
Scripture to be the word of God, because we do believe it to be true and
faithful as he is faithful.

2. For the act: because Satan himself believes historically the Scripture,
and acknowledges Gods faithfulness in it, we must specially apply the parts
of the word to our selves.

First, the promises, all which because he is faithful he will perform to a
thousand generations; not only believing them true in themselves, but even to
us, else we deprive our selves of them, seeing he promises nothing to
unbeleevers. Yea not only believing and applying them; but on the same
faithfulness of God grounding the hope and expectation of all those promises
which thy faith has already apprehended: For what is it else but this
faithfulness in God that makes our hope never leave us ashamed? Where had
Sarah strength to conceive and bring forth a son, being past age, but because
she counted him faithful that had promised? Hebr. 11.11. That is, she knew
that whatsoever God had promised, he would faithfully perform: and Heb. 10.23.
Let us keep fast the profession of our hope, for faithful is he that has
promised.

Secondly, we must also believe his threats, for though he use sometimes lenity
and patience to vessels of wrath; yet his faithfulness suffers not the least
jote of them to be unaccomplished. Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst
of her, early, even early will he bring forth judgment, and will not fail.

Has the faithful Lord covenanted wrath with the sinner? Hear thou his
word let fly plagues as thick as hail against the transgressors, and
think thou to escape? Was his faithfulness never yet impeached, and shall
it be so for thee? Hear thou that a large book of curses comes flying into
the house of the swearer, and dare thou swear? and into the house of the
thief, and dare thou be unjust? Surely if God have not lost all his
faithfulness, thou shall certainly find it: this is the act of faith.

3. For the manner of obedience of faith: when the eye of the soul is once
lifted up to behold this faithfulness of God, it will bestirre it self with
diligence in well-doing. By this argument the Apostle inciteth the Jews, Hebr.
6.10. God is not unfaithful to forget the labor of your love: and Matthew.
10.42. The giving of a cup of cold water has promise of a recompense, and his
faithfulness will make it good. No just Prince can forget the faithful
service of his subject: Ahashuerosh at length remembered Mordecai his good
service: much more will our God who is faithful. Eccles. 9.15. We read of a
poor man who by his wisdom delivered the City, but he was forgotten in that
City. But God because he is faithful is never so forgetful of him that does
good in the world.

Upon this ground we must lay all our prayers of faith; so our Apostle here in
the Text: III. All our prayers of faith must be grounded on Gods faithfulness.
for Gods faithfulness only gives us confidence of obtaining our suites. Our
own unfaithfulness in the Covenant might choke us in our suites, and stop
our mouths, and cover our faces with shame: But it is Gods faithfulness that
undershores us, seeing his promise has bound him to be found of all them that
seek him truly. Therefore Daniel, 9.16. in the name of the Church having
disclaimed all their own righteousness, binds God from all his displeasure:
Lord according to all thy righteousness let thy wrath be turned away from thy
City and Sanctuary. This will answer all the objections we can make against
our own prayers.

Object. I am unworthy to pray, or be heard, and my prayer is as unworthy as my
self.

Answ. True, but Gods faithfulness gives worthiness to both.

Object. But my sins hinder good things, they are a partition wall, and
stop my prayers.

Answ. Beg remission of sins, behold he is faithful and just to forgive
thee, 1 John 1.9.

Object. I have no comfort of my prayer, nor deserve any.

Answ. Cast thy self on this faithfulness of God, trust thy self with him,
Commend thy self unto him as to a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.

Object. But I see no means or way of escape or deliverance.

Answ. Pray as David, Psalm. 31.1. Deliver me oh Lord according to thy
righteousness: that is, that faithfulness whereby thou defendest thine own
children according to thy promise.

Object. But I see nothing but present death on every side, and am even cast on
my deathbed, creeping into the grave.

Answ. Now behold this faithfulness and be safe; it will make thee in peace
and silence to commit thy self wholly to him in life and death: Psalm. 31.5.
Into thy hand I commit my spirit, for thou have redeemed me oh Lord God of
truth.

IV. All sound profession of faith must be grounded on Gods faithfulness.
Upon the same ground lay a sound profession of faith. Sound profession stands
in two things.

1. A constant profession of truth. 2. Pure and upright conversation.
To uphold both these, behold Gods faithfulness.

Is God so faithful in his word and promises; let us then boldly confess, and
constantly embrace his faithful word. 1. Because it is of the nature of God,
truth and faithfulness it self: Why should we be ashamed to hold out this
faithful word, as many Politicians be? what need a man be ashamed of the
truth? Remember what Truth has said, He that is ashamed of me in my sayings
before men, I will be ashamed of him before my Father and his holy Angels.

2. How dare men fall off from the truth of the Gospel to Popery or profanesse
after the knowledge of it? what change is in the truth, that they should change
their minds and turn from it? Have not we a sure word of the Prophets and
Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.19. which is as immutable and unchangeable as God himself
is?

3. How venterously do men go on in their sin, notwithstanding the light of
the word, checking their consciences, reprooving their ways, as if some part
of the faithfulness of it should be abated to them? Is it not an eternal word
that endures for ever as God does, of which not one jot can be any more
diminished, than the very essence of God himself can? How dare wicked men come
unto the hearing of the word, professing obedience, and listen with such
attention, as if they would catch the word out of their teachers mouth: but
their contrary course in all their actions plainly witnesses, that they take
no more good, nor no more expression of it in their lives than if so many bruit
beasts came to Church, void of all understanding. Certainly if the word be true
which they hear and profess, either must they be as men dead in their tombs,
who understand not nor believe any thing; or mad men, that believing it run
so wickedly against it.

4. How desperately do numbers resist and repel the true and faithful word?
as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. so be there in every
Congregation resisters and adversaries. 1 Cor. 16.9. The Apostle Paul having a
great and effectual door opened, yet found many adversaries, yea the greater
door open, the more adversaries. And how can it be other, seeing 1. it is the
property of truth to beget hatred: Never was the Sun so beset with clouds, as
this word with enemies; and all the reprobates in the world fight against the
light, as the Priests and people, Jews and Romans, and all, persecuted and
crucified Christ the faithful witness and teacher of his Church; Revel. 3.19.
so it is not to be marvelled if true teachers that stand in the room of
Christ meet with adversaries proud and stiff, and implacable, wronging them
in their names, in their means, devising base and unworthy shifts to bind
their own hands from their good, as void of reason as themselves be of
conscience and equity: But their comfort is, (which the Lord armed Jeremy with)
they shall fight and not prevail, for truth is strongest, and that shall
conquer.

2. In sound profession is upright conversation, and this also is upheld upon
consideration of the Lords faithfulness. Genesis 17.1. I am God All-sufficient,
walk before me and be upright: he has given his word for our safety and
welfare in this way, and he never broke with his children. Be there never so
many discouragements, persecutions and difficulties in this way of
uprightness, his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler,
Psalm. 91.4.

Upon the same ground of Gods faithfulness we must lay all our perseverance
in the faith; V. All our perseverance in the faith is grounded upon Gods
faithfulness.
so our Apostle in the Text lays his ground of prayer for perseverance upon
the faithfulness of God: and 1 Cor. 1.8. he does assure the perseverance of
the Saints from the same ground: God will strengthen you to the end, that ye
shall be unblameable unto the day of our Lord Jesus, for faithful is he by
whom ye are called.

This faithfulness of God will answer all objections against perseverance.

Object. Alas! I am plunged in the pit of temptation with such foul and
violent temptations, as I shall never be able to hold out.

Answ. Now look upon this faithfulness of God, wait a while: 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able:
but with every temptation will give an issue.

Object. Alas! were I faithful, God would be faithful enough; but I am
unfaithful in the Covenants, and start aside continually.

Answ. But man's unfaithfulness cannot make him unfaithful, he has promised
that he will support the Saints, and put under his hand, that they shall never
be removed, nor utterly cast down: and man's faithfulness is not the cause of
his perseverance, but Gods faithfulness, who gives his Spirit that they shall
never depart from him: they bear not the root, but the root bears them. The
seed of God keeps them that they commit not sin, 1 Ioh. 3.9. they preserve
not their graces, but their graces preserve them; they cannot comprehend him,
he can comprehend them, and by his power preserves them to salvation.

Object. But alas! he is so long absent from my soul, that I must needs faint.

Answ. Can thou not discern his presence, yet behold his faithfulness that
will not suffer him to be so far from thee as thou think; God is within
call if thou pray to him; but if thou can neither call nor pray, yet groan
and sigh after him, for the Lord hears the very sighs of his servants: O
Lord, my sighs are not hid from thee, Psalm. 38.9.

2. If he seem further off, or stay long, it is not ad exitium, but ad
exercitium, only to try thee: as a father may try his child, but his love
lets him not lead him further into danger than he will lead him out again;
the childs trouble is the fathers cross, and in our trouble he is troubled,
Esaias 19.5.

Object. Oh, but I find many potent and politic enemies in my way, Satan,
sin, and the worlds violence, so I fear I may fall short in the end.

Answ. But Gods faithfulness will defend his own, he is a faithful
shepherd, and as David, will rescue and recover his sheep out of the mouth of
the Lion and Bear. Psalm. 91 4. He will defend thee under his wing, his
faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler. In the world ye shall
have affliction, John 16.33. as sure as on the sea are tossings by huge waves
and winds, and storms rising and raging against the passenger, insomuch that
billows shall seem to overwhelme them: But be of good comfort, I have
overcome the world, ye shall put safe into the harbor.

The second Argument confirming the perseverance of the Thessalonians, is
drawn from the grace bestowed on them already: Who has called you. Where for
the meaning are these things to be considered: 1. What calling is here meant?
and 2. How the Apostle knew that they were called? 3. Who it is that has
called them?

1. Quest. What calling is here meant?

Answ. There is a twofold calling to grace: 1. external, 2. internal.

The first is common to hypocrites and reprobates: Differences between
effectual calling and ineffectuall.
the latter proper to the elect. The former is a calling only according to
means: the other according to purpose. The one being external, brings men into
the visible Church: By the other being internal, men are called into the
invisible Church. The one is effectual to salvation, we being by it united to
Christ the head: the other ineffectuall, tying us only to the members.

The one flows from election, 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your calling and election
sure: the other does not, Matthew. 20.16. For many are called, but few are chosen.

The one brings to illumination of knowledge only: the other to illumination
of faith.

The one brings to be professors of Christ; the other to be members of Christ.

The one can only restrain corruption for a time: the other changes the
heart and life from evil to good for ever.

Now our Text means of inward and effectual calling:

First, because it flowed from election, chap. 1.4. Knowing that ye are elect
of God.

Secondly, because to them the Gospel was not in word only, but in the power
of the holy Ghost, and in much assurance, whereby they answered the calling,
verse 5. and chap. 2.13. they received it not as the word of man, but as it is
indeed the word of God.

Thirdly, it is such a calling as must hold out unblameable. This is a severing
of the elect from the world, to become members of Christ by faith, Ioh. 15.19.

Quest. How knew the Apostle they were chosen, and effectually called? for God
only knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Answ. God only knows who are his by himself, What way a man may know the
calling of another.
and from himself, but men may also know, to whom he pleases to reveal it.

2. God only knows who are his ex priori, by seeing and searching the heart,
and trying the reins, Ierem. 17.10. But though he know only by the root,
men may know by the fruit, Mat. 7.27.

3. God knows only by the judgment of certainty, infallibly: but ordinary
men can know only by the judgment of charity.

4. God knows his collectively, that is, the whole university of his chosen,
and no mere man or creature can in this sense know who are Gods.

Now for the Apostles knowledge of their effectual calling, know,

First, that the Apostles had a gift Apostolical, whereby they were enabled
sometimes to discern the final estates at least of some particular men: but
this was by extraordinary revelation. This is not here meant.

Secondly, our Apostle here walks not only by the judgment of charity, but
of certainty: for he says not, we hope or charitably conceive, but we know ye
are the elect of God, 1 Epist. 1.4.

Thirdly, he attained this certain judgment of their effectual calling by
the same ordinary means, whereby ordinary men may also be persuaded of their
effectual calling, and consequently of their salvation.

Quest. By what ordinary means did the Apostle discern it?

Answ. 1. He saw it in the isntrumental cause of their effectual calling, and
their carriage toward the same, chap. 1.5. they were not only called by the
voice of the Gospel, but they answered that call, for the Gospel was not to
them in word only, but in power, in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance.

2. He saw it in the effects of the Gospel manifest in them; as in their
effectual faith, patience, hope, diligent love, which are assured and
infallible tokens of effectual calling, verse 3. chap. 1.

3. In the sound and sincere affections changed by the Gospel, such as are joy
in the holy Ghost, patience in afflictions, yea joy in suffering the
afflictions of the Gospel, chap. 1.6.

4. In their Christian and holy conversation, they followed the examples of the
Apostles, and set themselves as examples to all that believed in Macedonia and
Achaia, chap. 1. verse 8.

Now what is it to be a sound Christian, but by faith to be set into the head,
and by love into the body of Christ; and by hope into the very fruition of the
glory purchased by Christ, from which alone the Apostle concludes them to be
the elect of God, verse 4. chap. 1?

Every Christian may and ought to know his own effectual calling, 4 Reasons,
Now by the same ordinary way may every Christian, yea and ought to know his
own effectual calling: for else,

First, those exhortations were vain, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make
your calling sure.

Secondly, either should we want the Spirit, or the Spirit should be wanting in
his office; who is therefore given, that by him we might know the things given
us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. one of the first whereof is our effectual calling.

Thirdly, the change by effectual calling is so setting of prisoners to
liberty, Luke 4.18. Can a man come out of a dungeon of ignorance, infidelity,
and snares of sin, and be restored to so glorious liberty of the sons of
God, and not discern it?

It is the opening of blind eyes, Acts 26.18. Can a blind man be restored to
sight, and not know it? John 9. One thing I know (says he that was blind)
that whereas I was blind, now I see.

It is the quickening of the dead, and raising of the buried in their graves.
Can he that is dead, cold Lazarus be raised to life after four days, and
move, and walk, and do all the actions of life, and not know it? Can a man be
quickened with heavenly life, and move and walk toward heaven, and not know
it?

May not a believer know his own faith, and thereby his calling, which ever
goes with inward calling? Mark. 9.24. Lord I believe, help my unbelief: he
discerned in himself the first motions of conversion and faith.

Fourthly, Can a man have any comfort of any

Quest. But may a man always know the time of his calling and conversion? A
man cannot know always the time of his calling, 3 Reas.
or may he know himself at all times after to be effectually called?

Answ. 1. Though some may know the very truly called of Jesus Christ: although
we know not precisely the time when.

Neither be foolishly censorious that another is not converted, because he
cannot point the very time of his conversion. I know a tree was planted,
because I see it grown, green and fruitful, though I know not the time and
hour, nor year when.

Consider, first, it is often with Gods children as with ours, who are so weak
and frail in the birth, that they know not whether they are born; nor for long
time after discern that they are borne, yet afterward they come to know their
life and birth. And so may Gods child in the instant of the new birth for
weakness and impotency not know it.

Secondly, the Spirit blows where it lists, but know thou the way of the
wind, or how the bones grow? Eccles. 11.5. The way of the wind is unknown in
this, that a man cannot justly determine the first moment of the first blast of
it: so cannot a man sometimes directly set down the precise time of his
conversion. This freedom of the Spirit allows him to wind himself secretly
into our hearts, and to come stealing upon us, sometime without any noise, as
Christ came in upon his Disciples, the door being shut.

Thirdly, the casting in of this grace into our hearts is compared by Christ,
Mark 4.26. to the casting of seed into the ground; so is the kingdom of God:
as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep and rise up,
and the seed should spring and grow, but he knows not how. Which plainly
shows, that although the Spirit may come rushing in with a mighty noise of
wind as Acts 2.1. yet he is most free to come in what manner he pleases, and
so still, as that a man cannot always set down the precise time of his
coming.

2. For the second: Whether a man once called always know his calling?

Answ. In ordinary course a Christian knows: A man truly called may sometimes
not know the calling it self, in two cases.
But in anomolons and extraordinary cases and times, a good Christian may
hardly, or not know it at all: as

First, in a strong fit or pang of temptation, which is to the soul as a
swooning to the body,

Secondly, after some gross or grievous sin,

The efficient of this calling is God, He who calls.

his purpose, and is called a calling according to purpose, It is God only
that can call effectually, 5 Reasons.
Romans 8.28. for as he purposed the end, so also the means tending to the end.

2. The power is his, and argues the work only to be his. It is a work of
new creation: who can create a new heart but he? he calls things that are
not, as if they were. Who can set light in the midst of darkness, but he
that said, Let there be light, and it was so? But effectual calling is a
translating us out of the power of darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet.
2.9. and the Apostle ascribes it to this power, 2 Corinthians. 4.6.

Who can fashion man to his own image, and repair that image decayed, but he
that made it at the first? Surely he only can inspire a new life into the
face of the soul by effectual calling that quickens the dead, Ephesians. 2.1.

3. The means is his, even the voice of God in the mouth of his servants:
Wisdom cries in the streets, Prove. 28. He that ^eareth you, hears me,
Luke 10.17.

4. The answer to the means is his, and by the work of his mighty power. Who
can make a dead man hear a voice but he? John 5.28. The hour is that the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God and live.

5. The estate whence and whither we are called declares it to be from God
alone. To free us from the servitude of sin, death, the Devil, the world,
hell and condemnation, implies a more mighty power, than all these put
together; even that divine and mighty power, that binds the strong man, and
casts him out of his hold.

And whither are we called? even to the grace of the Gospel, Galat. 1.6. to
fellowshippe with Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. to an holiness above the first
Adam in innocence, and to the happiness of the second Adam in the kingdom of
glory: and this can only be the work of God. 1 Pet. 1.10. The God of all
grace who has called us to his eternal glory: an excellent work, where is
such a workman.

Hence 1. See what is effectual calling. It is Saul being called to be a
King^ was changed into another man, and another Spirit was put upon him. So the
Lord puts forth upon every convert another spirit agreeing with the condition
to which he is called.

And hence it follows, that if the Lord call so powerfully, he leaves it not
in our power whether we will come or no; as the late refined Pelagianisme
would persuade us. Who can resist an almighty power? which is put forth in
effectual calling: can the creature resist the Creator of it self? can the
dead resist and not come forth of the grave, at the voice of the Son of God?

Labor to feel the mighty power of God in our effectual calling, by 4 signs.
2. We must labor to feel this power of God working in our effectual calling;
not conceiting our calling to be a matter of opinion, or imagination of things
absent: but labor to find the same power in our selves, which raised Christ
from the dead.

First, by acknowledging the voice of Christ in the Ministry: Cant. 2.8. It is
the voice of my beloved.

Secondly, by answering the call, as Samuel, Speak Lord, thy servant hears.
Acts 9. Lord, what would thou have me to do? Acts 26.19. I was not
disobedient to the voice.

Thirdly, by daily separation from the corrupt

Fourthly, by conjunction with the body of Christ not as wennes, or wooden
legs, but as quickened members.

3. Despair not of others, though far run on in their evil: their
conversion is but a call of God; it is as easy for him to create new hearts,
and regenerate them, as for us to call a man by his name: he can quickly call
that which is not, as if it were, which the Apostle applies to the conversion
of the whole body of the Gentiles, who lay in a woeful ruinous condition.

4. For our selves, be thankful that the Lord has vouchsafed to call us out
of our natural estate, to an estate of grace and glory. For a man to give an
hand to the maimed, an eye to the blind, were thank-worthy: but to give the
hand and eye of faith to a sinner, yea to give life to the dead is another
manner of work. See how the Apostle Peter, 1.1.4. breaks out into the praise
of God for this blessing above all other.

All rivers run into the sea, and all blessing to the full sea of blessing;
if we must bless him for the least temporal blessing, much more for
spiritual and eternal blessings; for blessing us in our souls, blessing us
in his Son, and in the blessings of the Gospel: here is a rich grace on Gods
part, an undeserved grace on our part, who were found when we sought him not; a
durable grace, seeing his gifts and calling is without repentance, the same
power upholdes the work that set it up, Romans 11.29.

From effectual calling, Doct. From effectual calling a Christian may
certainly conclude his own salvation. 5 Reasons.
a Christian may certainly conclude his own salvation. Romans 8.29. Whom he
calls he justifies, and whom he justifies he glorifieth. And from calling
we may rise to election, as the Apostle implies, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. and here in
the text, He has called you, and he will do it. And why?

1. Because of the nature of this calling. What Coloss. 1.13. Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom
of his dear Son: from kingdom to kingdom, from an eternal state of death
to an eternal state of life and glory.

calling according to purpose, not only as flowing from it, but also
declaring, that whosoever are thus called, God purposes eternal good to them;
and they may know it shall be made good to them, because this purpose is
infallible, and immutable.

Ioh. 6.37. Every one that the Father gives unto me, comes unto me, and him
I cast not out. If then thou know thou art once given to Christ, thou
know thy salvation: For this calling of God is without repentance, Romans
11.29. this gift is never cast away.

4. A man naturally arises from the effect to likely means judge of the end,
much more may a Christian by the infallible means judge of the certain end,
God leading him by this means to the principal end, which nothing can
frustrate, seeing all things fall out to the best to them that are thus called
according to purpose, Romans 8.28.

John 3.36. He that believes, has eternal life, and is translated from death
to life. And as the earnest penny confirms the whole bargain amongst men, so
the earnest of the Spirit gives us assurance of full holiness, and full
happiness, because he that has begun a work of grace in us, will perform
and finish it to the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6.

And this reproves not Papists only who deny that a man may be sure of his
salvation without extraordinary revelation: but even Protestants, Use 1.
who resolve never to trouble themselves about it: they will leave all to God,
The extreme folly of those that neglect the assurance of their salvation, 4
Reas.
and will not enter into his council, but rest in a good opinion and
ungrounded hope, in which if it happen well, they have well. But what a folly
is this?

For, first, What man in any outward title or tenure will content himself with
uncertainties, if he may be certain of a good estate? we would hold him a man
distracted, that would offer to claim and hold house and land without
evidences and conveyances. Is any man richer, because he dreams he is rich? So
to dream of the wealth of grace, enricheth none.

Secondly, What is the use of the whole Gospel, but to be Gods embassage,
certifying us of his free grace, in electing and saving us? what other use than
to bring us peace of conscience through justification of faith? and what peace
without assurance? 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you that
believe, that ye may know you have eternal life. So as the end of all
Scripture is not only to know that there is an eternal life, but that
believers have it.

Thirdly, Why are we commanded to give all diligence to make our election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. if it be either needelesse or impossible? When Christ
commands us to rejoice that our names are written in the book of life, does he
not imply, that a man may know it? and convince us that the want of this joy is
by our own default?

Fourthly, a man neglecting or despising this comfortable assurance, perverts
the whole Ministry. Do thou pray for remission of sins, and not believe
it? thy prayer is a dead carcass. Do thou profess in the Creed, thou
beleevest remission of thy sins, and by not caring to believe it, give the
lie to thy profession? Does the word preached command thee to believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that thy Redeemer lives, who loved thee, and gave
himself for thee? and will thou stick in an idle conceit, as if it were
needless to wade into this deep? Are the Sacraments but as seals set to
blankes without this assurance, and is it yet needless? Does the Apostle say
that he that knows not that Jesus Christ is in him, is a reprobate, and is it
an idle or a needless thing to prove it? 2 Cor. 13.5.

Quest. But where may I come to this assurance?

Answ. We send not men to poare upon the doctrine of predestination, nor to
soar up to heaven, to pry into Gods council. But thus. Look down into thy
self, examine if thou be effectually called; see what God has done in
thee, and so may thou judge what he will further do in thee, and for thee.

This is indeed an hard task, Effectual calling often hard to be discerned,
and why.
and requires all diligence, which the Apostle Peter calls for unto it.

For, 1. Satan seeks to pluck from us this comfort

And after our calling, persuading men all is deceitful or vain, God is not
at peace with them, nor they with him.

2. Most men rest in general outward calling

3. But chiefly, the likeness of outward ineffectuall Great similitude
between calling effectual and ineffectuall: 5 Instances.


Quest. Wherein is the likeness between effectual and ineffectuall calling?

Answ. First, by ineffectuall calling a man may come to the feast, and sit
down at Gods table, Deuteronomy. 5. The people came to Moses, and said, Whatsoever
the Lord commands, that will we do. But the Lord said, Oh that there were
such an heart in them! If the call were denied, or fairly excused and put off,
as some of the guests did, this were more discernable. But many come in among
true worshippers, and bring in lamps and some oil, and are the more hardly
discerned. Because, as the same Sun, earth, rain, root, moisture, brings up
the chafe, as does the wheat: so the same means of word and Sacraments
nourish the hypocrite, which does the sound hearted Christian.

Secondly, by ineffectuall calling a man may come to a great measure of
knowledge of the word, to consent to the truth of it, may preach it, yea
soundly handle it for the conversion and saving of others; may preach it in the
name of Christ, that is, for his glory, and by his grace. Many of those that
preached in the name of Christ, shall come in the last day and challenge
acquaintance of him, to whom he shall say, I never knew you. Nay perhaps those
that have built an Arc to save others, as Noah's Carpenters, shall be drowned
themselves. Yea more, a man may defend the word, as Julian, and receive within
him the seed of the word, and bring forth some fruits, as the bad ground did,
and all this is like effectual calling.

Thirdly, by ineffectuall calling a man may come Balaam.

He may crave pardon of his sin, desire the prayers of Saints, as Pharaoh and
Simon Magus: He may refrain himself in many sins, as Haman. He may fast,
and rent his clothes, and lie in sackcloth, as Ahab. He may do many things at
the direction of the word, as Herod for John, and yet be in the gall of
bitterness. And is not this like effectual calling?

Fourthly, by ineffectuall calling a man may attain to some kind of faith;
can believe Christ received the seed with joy, Luke 8.13. And some that being
not only enlightened, but taste of the good word, and power of the life to
come, shall quite f^ll away, Hebr. 6.6. And some we read of, denying the Lord
that bought them: that is, both in their own profession and persuasion, and in
the charitable judgment of others. This is so like effectual calling, as no
man but would think them sheep of Christ, as themselves do, but are not.

Fifthly, by ineffectuall calling a man may partake of the Spirit of God, and
be in some sort sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.29. He may
attain unto many excellent graces, as joy in hearing, sweet gifts in praying,
power in preaching, a kind of love of God, humility under the hand of God, as
Ahab; a reverencing of good men, as Herod reverenced John; a seemly external
worship of God; bounty and freeness to uphold the worship of God, and not
stick at thousands of rams, and rivers of oil: Unto a fiery zeal for the
Lord of hoasts, and upholding his worship, as Iehu, who seemed a servant, that
could not abide his Masters dishonor; but departed not from the sins of his
fathers. All which a man would think belongs to sound and effectual calling.
This likeness therefore of the one with the other makes effectual calling the
more hardly discerned.

Now therefore seeing this outward and ineffectuall calling brings us not into
grace with God without the inward. 2. Seeing it is common to good and bad,
Matthew. 22.9. Call in all you find. 3. Seeing it is unprofitable: as what
profit had Ismael of his Circumcision, Esau in Isaacks family, or Judas in
Christ's family, being profane. 4. Seeing to be in the Church, and not of it, is
to deprive himself of the chief privileges of the Church, which is remission
of sins, and life everlasting.

We must therefore labor to find in our selves such sure marks of effectual
calling, as yet were never found in hypocrites, that we may be sure our
calling is sound and saving, proper to the elect, a note and forerunner of
eternal glory.

Marks of effectual calling.
Quest. What are these marks?

Answ. 1. A discerning of the voice of him that For he that hears not Gods
word, is not of God, Ioh. 8.47. But besides hearing,

First, here is a spirit of discretion, putting difference between truth and
error, good and evil: Cant. 2.8. It is the voice of my welbeloved: and Ioh.
10.8. My sheep hear my voice, and a stranger they will not hear.

Secondly, there is a persuasion of him that calls, Gal. 5.8. which is beyond
hearing, called the hearing ear, which hypocrites want.

Thirdly, there is a yielding unto the persuasion, that it pass not without
some such effect as is not to be found in any hypocrite. The faithful have an
ointment given them, and see Christ in his voice coming every day nearer them
than other. 1 John 2.20.
It is the voice of my welbeloved: Cant. 2.8.
Behold he comes leaping over the mountains, skipping over the hills. See
this in some instances.

The Lord pleases to speak and utter his voice sundry ways, outwardly, and
inwardly.


1. Outwardly.

1. In the ministry of the word and Sacraments. 2. He calls by the voice of
his mercies, and corrections.
2. Inwardly, How an heart effectually called hears Christ's voice uttered
sundry ways.
by the still voice of his Spirit to the conscience.

Now we shall see effectual calling answers all these.

I. If God speak in the ordinary means and Ministry, 1. In the Ministry.
an heart effectually called hears the word, not only to know it, but to be
directed by it; not only to consent to the truth of it, as hypocrites and
Devils may, but to approve and like it: to receive it not into the ear only,
but into the affection; and not into the affection of joy only, as the
hypocrite, but of love, fear, trembling, and the rest: and not into the
affections only, but into the conscience, whereby they let it in further, and
allow it a deeper rooting than any hypocrite can do. And therefore in the one
it is an illumination like a blaze, soon extinct again: in the other it is a
clear light and lamp that carries them along into the bride-chamber. In the
one it is like a sudden flash of lightening, as soon gone as come: in the
other it is like the Sunshine, that shines all the day long for direction and
comfort.

For the parts of the word: the Law and the Gospel.

If God speak in the Law, an heart effectually called hears that voice, Of
the Law.
not only to see his sin, and sorrow for it, which an hypocrite may; but to
hate his sin, to loathe it, and leave it: yea not to leave many, or all but
one, all but our Herodias; but to forsake even the most beloved and bosom
sins.

He hears the voice of God in the Law as a rule of life, not only to
restrain corruption, but to drive him out to sound renovation, and reformation.

He hears the voice of the Law to get out of his estate of nature, and to get
into the state of the godly; not at death only as Balaam, but in his life; and
to apprehend so the end of godliness, as he uses the means to compass it:
whereas an hypocrite aims at the end, but either passes over or slubbers the
means.

If God speak in the Gospel, Of the Gospel.
an heart effectually called hears that voice offering grace and pardon to
it, which because it is weary and laden, this voice is as flagons of wine to
revive his soul ready to faint in him: but an hypocrite being not seriously
humbled, hears carelessly. The former hears this voice as an instrument of
saving faith, by which he believes Christ not only a common Savior, but his
in special: not to wish only, and make some offers, but to purchase the
pearl what ever it cost: he hears this voice, not to taste only some
sweetness of Christ, and the heavenly gift, (which an ineffectuall calling may
do) but to digest it, and live by it.

Ineffectuall calling may enlighten many, may affect many; but this persuades
the heart, and justifies many: Esaias 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many. That may consent to the word, and and receive it with
joy, but not with faith, not with love. That may taste it, but digest it not,
as believing Christ rather the Savior of others, than their own: or if they
say their own, they cannot prove it: but this mingles all with faith,
assenteth, and truly applies, and constantly retains it, when all the other
blaze is quite put.

If God speak in the Sacraments, Of the Sacraments.
he hears his voice there.

First, in Baptism, to obey his first call, to be gathered into the Church, as
the creatures into the Arc: But with this difference.

He hears this voice to be admitted not only into the external society of
the Church among true believers, as Simon Magus may, and Demas, and Judas, and
every unclean beast: but to put on Christ, and to be justified by faith, to be
set into the head, and so are both in the Church, and of it.

He hears the voice effectually, not only to the washing of his body with
water, but to the washing of his soul with the water of regeneration, and
first fruits of sanctification. He hears this voice, not only to make a
profession, but an actual renunciation of Satan, of lusts, of the fashion of
the world, and to bind himself an household servant of Christ all his days.

Secondly, in the Sacrament of the Supper, he hears the voice and discernes
it, to feed not his body only with the Lords bread, but his soul with the
bread which is the Lord. He hears the voice to renew his Covenant, and set his
seal unto it; to eat and drink worthily the flesh of Christ which is meat
indeed, and the blood of Christ which is drink indeed: and so grows up in
the Covenant as a true member of Jesus Christ. He feeds his faith by this
Sacrament, the hypocrite feeds his hypocrisy.

Effectual calling hears the voice of mercies, how.
The second way of Gods external calling, is by the voice of his mercies and
crosses. The heart effectually called hears the voice of his mercy:

Psalm. 116.1.

2. To make him cleave to his worship, not outwardly only, as Cain and the
Pharise, but inwardly and sincerely.

3. To frame him to cheerful obedience, whereas ineffectuall calling can make
men say, Lord, Lord, but they do not things commanded.

4. To make him zealous for religion, and hate corruptions not in others as
Iehu, but in himself, and that not by a fit, as a burning ague, but with a
constant temperate heat against all evil, because of love of good.

5. To make him thankful to God, and merciful to men, as God has been to
him.

Secondly, when the Lord calls by afflictions and And the voice of the rod, how
to open, and keep open the door, that is, the ear which was sealed. It is the
Lord, as says Eli, and not as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? He hears this voice
to make him stoop, and inquire, and hearken further, as Manasseh; and as Paul
stricken down, Lord, what will thou have me to do? He hears it to make him
fear the more, but not servilly and slavishly by the spirit of bondage, as the
Israelites at the giving of the Law, lest they should be stricken through with
darts; but with a childlike fear, lest they further offend him. He hears the
voice of the Spirit purging and cleansing him by afflictions, as by the Lords
fan, and whitening him by this soap of afflictions: Dan. 12.10.

II. The Lord speaks inwardly by a still voice in the heart: Effectual
calling hears the still voice of the Spirits motions.
sometimes by the motions of his Spirit, when the elect hear the voice behind
them saying, this is the way; they hear the voice, cherish and foster the
motion, and walk in the way.

Many are the motions of ineffectuall calling, but they are not followed, but
either resisted or neglected, and at last utterly quenched.

And checks of their own spirits.
Sometimes the Lord speaks by the secret checkes of their own conscience,
which the hypocrite by all means would choke and stifle: but effectual
calling listens to this voice, to the humbling of the heart, making the sense
of one or more gross sins to be as a weight of lead on their hearts to keep
them under; to the shunning of them, and terrifying of them from the like for
time to come: so as by sin, a way is made out of sin, and a passage made to
reconciliation, and grace which is given to the humble.

Thus have we described the first and most assured and infallible note of
effectual calling, namely, the true discerning of every voice and call of God,
with a gracious fruit and effect following the same.

A second infallible note of effectual calling, is a manifest and continual
change by this voice; great and wonderful is the change in a man truly called.
2. Wonderful is the change in a man truly called.
He is not the same man he was before: Gods voice and calling makes things that
are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. Was there not a great change in Lazarus,
when he was called out of the grave? yet the difference between Lazarus dead
and alive is not more, than between a man effectually called and uncalled: God
has quickened a dead man. Ephesians. 2.1.
This change will bewray it self sundry ways.

I. In respect of sin. Before effectual calling, oh how did he delight and
joy in his sin? 1. In respect of sin.
who was a more busy actour in sin than he? he could run to excess of
riot as fast as any; he was a loving partner and companion of evil men; he
hated none so much as those who would have reclaimed him from his sin; or if
sometime he were stung and pricked in conscience, he could confess and sorrow
for sin, but not hate it, not leave it. Perhaps some sinister respects might
cause him to restrain himself as Haman, but to a through reformation he could
never attain.

But now he is called not only out of the curse and guiltiness of sin, but
out of the bondage and service of sin; that now he serves not in the
oldnesse of the letter, but in newness of spirit: the more dearly he loved
his lusts, the more deadly he hates them, as Ammon did Thamar. Now he hates
that which he does. He dearly accounts of him now whom God uses as an
instrument to help him out of his sin: so the Iaylour, Act. 16. He gives his
sins a pass, and says as Ephraim to his Idols, Get ye hence: he loathes
his beloved sins past, hates the present, and avoides sin to come, with all
the occasions, be they never so secret, gainefull and pleasant.

II. In respect of the world: 2. In respect of the world.
what a change is there in a man effectually called? He was in the world, and
of the world, he could follow it as earnestly as any other: he gave the world
his heart, his hands, his thoughts, his time, his tongue; he minded nothing so
much as earth, he savoured nothing but earth, he spoke of nothing else
cheerfully; he treasured nothing but earthly things, he was unsatiable,
unmeasurable, unweariable in gathering earth and earthly things: but now God
has called him out of his own Country, as Abraham, in which he took so great
content: he is called out of the world, John 15.19. Now he is become a stranger
at home, his heart is estranged from things below, his mind is on things
above; godly thoughts and meditations begin to take him up; his affections are
weaned, that now he aims and desires other wealth than before; his tongue can
speak of heavenly things without tediousness, he treasures now in heaven,
and will be a gainer by godliness. Matthew being called forsakes his
unlawful, yea and lawful gains for Christ, chap. 2.9. Zacheus at a word
speaking, enricheth himself by impoverishing himself, and making restitution.

Happy is that man that finds this change in himself, that he has got above
the world, that though he have the world in his hand, yet he has cast it out
of his heart. Never could this be done by the strength of nature, never
worldling attained it.

3. In respect of grace.
III. In respect of Graces, which discover themselves, 1. in their kinds, 2.
in their soundness, 3. in their growth.

This grace will appear in setting forth the virtues of him that has called
us out of darkness into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. By virtue of this
holy calling we are sanctified throughout, as we have heard in the former
verse: so as there will appear,

First, A new life of grace. He that only lived the life of nature, 1. For
their kinds. New life.
but stark dead in respect of the life of God, and past all feeling, a
carcass without the soul of Gods Spirit, stinking in the grave of corruption;
has now heard a voice of Christ, saying come forth, and now the bands of death
are loosed, a new life of grace succeedes, that he may now say as Christ, Rev.
1. Behold I was dead, but am alive for ever.

2. A new light in the things of God. New light.
He that was blind, and could not see one step before him to eternal life,
has now his sight restored to him, that he can say with the blind man, One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see: John 9.
the man Jesus has opened mine eyes. Not his understanding only is restored,
but his spiritual senses are quickened, that now he can taste how good God is,
he can hear the voice of God, he can savor things of God, can feel the
pricks of conscience: and he whose tongue was tied from good speech, can now
speak of the things of God with understanding.

3. Grace will discover it self in all new affections. He that was an hater of
God, New affections.
is changed into a dear lover of God; which sincere love is made a manifest
note of effectual calling, Romans 8.28. such as are called of purpose are said
to be such as love God: and this love of God as a sweet perfume rectifies all
the other affections, it will express it self in a studious care to please
him in all things, and in a fear of displeasing him.

In a constant delight in his word and ordinances, being his love letters, in a
surpassing joy in all the means of our sweet fellowship with him, whom before
we shunned as an enemy.

In a love and admiration of his graces wheresoever, which are as jewels and
pledges of his love.

In an earnest and fervent desire of immediate fellowship with him whom we love
best of all.

New motions.
4. Grace will bewray it self in new motions, which is a new obedience unto the
voice discerned and believed, even in difficult, dangerous, costly, and
selfe-denying duties: for always with effectual calling there goes a power
enabling the Christian to the fruitful practice of the doctrine of godliness:
Acts 3.7. And from the inward obedience of the heart flows all outward
obedience in the life. Ineffectuall calling moves not, or is not from within,
but from some external plummet, or can produce leaves, rather than fruit, or
sound fruit; but not much, nor lasting, or in some things, not in all, as
Herod. But this moves and obeys sincerely, universally, constantly. Thus
will grace discover it self in all kinds through the whole man.

2. For their soundness.
Secondly, The graces of effectual calling discover and distinguish themselves
by their soundness. Hypocrites want soundness in the common graces they have,
and all for want of this change by effectual calling.

Ineffectuall calling may beget a kind of love of God, but that is not for
himself, but for wages; not as children love their father, but as hirelings
love a strict master. Whereas true love of God attending effectual calling,
works fear of offending him, not to be offended by him, delights in his
presence, in his ordinances, and love letters, and in his graces, as so many
jewels and pledges of his love.

Ineffectuall calling may come to some fear of God, but only by the spirit of
bondage, Romans 8.15. which true love casts out: as Israel in the Mount feared
revenge. But true fear of God says as Joseph, Has my Master done this for
me, and shall I do this?

Ineffectuall calling may attain some zeal for God, as in Iehu in Ahabs case,
but rather against others sin than his own; and for durance it is but as a
blaze in straw, as his being unsound lasted not. But zeal of effectual
calling hates sin in another, because it hates his own first.

Ineffectuall calling may attain a kind of love of the brethren, but this is
neither ordinary, nor well grounded: it is not for Gods image, and it is rather
a reverence of good men, than love of their goodness. Herod reverenced John,
but loved him not: neither can that love that is so light, and set upon
indirect ends and occasions continue, but will be easily changed into deadly
hatred, as Herod's was.

3. In their growth.
Thirdly, The grace of effectual calling will distinguish it self by the
growth of it, and proceeding in sanctification: Hence it is called an holy
calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. both in respect of the author, the holy Ghost, and of the
means, the holy word sanctified hereto, and of the effect; because it works
holiness in heart, and sanctimony in life: But also in regard of the end to
which Saints are called, namely, by the degrees of holiness, to rise to the
perfection of it.

A counterfeit may be washed over, and go for current, but it wants, 1.
weight, 2. sound, 3. substance: so counterfeit sanctification wants three
things, that suffer it not to abide the trial.

1. Union with Christ, being only tied by a thread of profession, not set or
incorporate into him, he has no substance of Christ in him.

2. Righteousness, which flows from the union with Christ, he lies under the
guilt of all his sins, Christ carries none of them away: if he be put in the
scale as Baltazer, he shall be found too light, and wanting of his weight.

3. The Spirit of Christ is given only to sons, he dwells not in that house
where is only a base sound of sanctification, in some common gift, only
suppressing open sins, but not inward lusts: whereas effectual grace, not
only checkes secret corruptions, but daily renewes the heart, and perfects the
image of God. Hence it is that many that seemed to answer the call, fall off to
nothing, because they were never good: whereas true holiness is like the
light, clearer and clearer till perfect day. And a man truly called, is like a
fair woven stuff, that wears most shining at the wale and ground, and cannot
but be best at last.

I. These are the marks of effectual calling: 1. Labor to find these marks.
labor in them, and take good pains to get them on thee, rest not in a common
ungrounded hope, nor grutch the time to mind those things seriously. For,

1. What a comfort of heart and refreshment of soul will this be in the day of
trouble, Reas. 1.
to see Gods covenant sealed upon thee?

2. What a resolution will it breed to contemn the world, the pleasures and
profits? 2
what a Christian courage against afflictions, yea death it self, against all
motions and commotions in States, in evil days, and perilous times?

3. What stability in holding our grounds of religion against all disputes in
the world? 3
against all stratagems of Papists at home or abroad? neither their masked
distinctions, nor colored devotions shall unsettle this soul; but it shall be
as mount Zion, stable upon sure foundations.

4. How sweetly would all Gods ordinances relish and taste, ordained for this
end? 4
how firmly should we hold our end and aim in our eye in all the means,
beginnings and way of eternal life? when we discover daily in our selves
assured and infallible marks that we are in the right way unto it.

II. If we find our selves by these notes truly 2. Finding the^, be thankful.
and effectually called, be thankful unto God for this great work, whereby
he has laid in thy soul such an infallible assurance of eternal life. Thou
look on such as are uncalled; see thy nature in them, they and thou being
dug out of the same pit: in their misery see thine own; thou should
swear, and drink, and curse, and revile goodness as fast as they, resist the
means of grace as resolutely as they, were thou left to the power of nature as
they be. But now thou see a difference made: and who has made this
difference? who separated thee? Oh, praise the Lord for his free and rich
mercy, who has poured out the riches of his grace, in thy effectual calling
to grace, Romans 9.23.

3. Pray for confirmation of them.
III. Pray earnestly, that he which has called thee, would also confirm his
own work: so Peter, 1.5.10. The God of all grace, who has called us to his
glory in Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish and confirm you to the end.

And add watchfulness against all such as would again carry thee away from
Christ, and the holy calling. It is the sin of many, of whom we may marvel
so with the Apostle, Gal. 1.6. How soon they are carried to another Gospel,
having lost him that called them into the grace of the Gospel. But what was
their sin to the sin of these in our days? For they were, 1. new converts,
we have had the Gospel as many years, as they weeks or days. 2. They fell
of weakness, we of wantonness, wilfulness, even against the power of the
Gospel so long working upon us. 3. They by joining Circumcision and Christ
together, which was formerly Gods sacred Ordinance; we by joining Christ and
Antichrist together, reconciling Christ and Antichrist together, reconciling
light and darkness together, patching our new garment with old patches and
rags of Romish devotions and superstitions, and as moles, undermining the
grounds of holy truths, for which the Lord might justly remove his
Candlestick.

[Who will also do it.] The third Argument of the perseverance of the Saints
in grace, removes all scruple, taking the whole work out of our hands, that he
who has the glory of the beginning, may also have the glory of the end. For,

1. As we could not begin our salvation, so neither could we end it; he that
was only able to lay the first stone in this building, is only able to lay
the last: Philip. 1.6. He that has begun the good work in you, will perform
it until the day of Christ.

2. It is safe for us, that it is in Gods hand to finish our salvation, who
has begun it; for were it put into our hands again, it would be quite lost
every day: and therefore the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by
the power of God to salvation. Doct. Gods faithfulness preserves to salvation
all that are effectually called, 4 Reas.


Gods faithfulness preserves to salvation, who are once effectually called.
Romans 8.30. Whom he calls, he justifies and glorifieth. Philip. 1.6. I am
persuaded that he that has begun this good work, will finish it to the day of
Christ* Heb. 6.9, 10. We are persuaded of you such things as accompany
salvation, for God is not unfaithful.

Reas. 1.
And the reason is drawn from the unchangeable perfection of Gods nature,
decree, will, and affection to the Saints.

No shadow of change in Gods nature.
I. In his nature is no shadow of change, especially in giving his good and
perfect gifts, James 1.13. and this unchangeable nature suffers him never to
forsake this work of his hands, Psalm. 138.8.

Object. God is unchangeable, but I find many changes in my self, such
dullness, deadness, frowardness, as if he should not forsake me, I fear I
shall wholly forsake him.

Answ. All the Saints of God have found the like changes in themselves, and yet
all their changes, nor all thy changes can never change God.

2. None can wholly forsake God, but such as are wholly forsaken of God: but he
never wholly forsakes the Saints, for he has said, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee, Hebr. 13.5. his desertion and their falls are but for a time, for
God in due time puts under his hand.

Nor in his decrees.
II. In his decree of the final salvation of the Saints, he is faithful and
unmovable. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation (that is, decree of Gods election)
abides sure, it stands on a sure foundation, and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his.

Object. Yea God knows, but what is that to us? no man knows but by
extraordinary revelation.

Answ. The Apostle adds a twofold impression of this seal in the heart of
man, by which he sets his seal to Gods faithfulness.

1. Invocation of Gods name. 2. A departing from iniquity, which being fruits
of effectual calling, he knows himself sealed up thereby to salvation.

Object. Stapleton says, God is faithful in his decree so long as we be
faithful, and deserve not that he should forsake us.

Answ. This were to make our perseverance depend on our faithfulness; whereas
our Apostle makes it wholly depend upon Gods.

2. This devise makes Gods faithfulness dependant upon ours, which is as
absolute as his own unchangeable essence is, and no unfaithfulness of man can
make him unfaithful, 2 Timothy 2.13.

3. This conceit plainly dissolves our Apostles Argument, which he has so
firmly knit together, God is faithful, and therefore he will do it: and God
has already called, and he will glorify.

And if we look into the Scripture, wherein this faithfulness of God
manifests it self, we shall see it descrying it self in two things, neither
of which will suffer his end to be frustrate.

First, in keeping the Saints from evil: 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. The Lord is faithful,
who will stablish you and keep you from evil. Does Stapleton still doubt that
those that have received true grace shall fall away? see here the faithfulness
of God puts it out of doubt, for it shall keep them from all such evils as
might frustrate their perseverance.

Secondly, in confirming the Saints in grace received: Who shall confirm you
to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Papists doubt whether the Saints shall lose their grace, but where then is Gods
faithfulness, who shall confirm them in grace to the end? This faithfulness
stirs them up to the means, excites them in their dullness, raises them
after their falls, and leads them by the hand to eternal life.

Object. The Arminians drawing the same line with these Bellarminians, object,
That God in all his decrees implies some conditions; and deals with a man as a
physician does in restoring a patient: He tells him he will cure him
conditionally that he follow his directions, keep good diet, abstain from the
feeders of his corrupt humor. But,

Answ. There is a difference between these Physicians; one cannot rule his
patient, but the Lord can and will keep his patient temperate, his grace shall
remove all lets and impediments of cure.

2. Gods promises of perseverance imply conditions of holiness, watchfulness,
unblameablenesse: But Gods faithfulness enables him to keep these conditions:
John 6.3. Whosoever are given unto Christ, shall be raised up at the last day.

III. In his will God is unchangeable, Nor in his will
he has bound himself by his promise and oath to effect the salvation of the
heirs of life. Heb. 6.17. God being willing to show to heirs of promise the
stablenesse of his counsel, bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation.

Object. I find my will so mutable, and so inclinable to gross evils, that I
have great cause to fear my falling away.

Answ. But art thou effectually called? then is this will of thine by Gods
overruling will confirmed to perseverance unto the end.

IV. For Gods affection to the Saints it is perpetual: John 13.1. Whom he
loved once, Nor in his affections.
he loves to the end. Ier. 31. His love it is everlasting love. This love
causes him to keep them as the apple of his eye. This love makes them love
him, and it will uphold them in his love. This is the first reason.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
The second reason is drawn from the power of God, which preserves them to
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. His strength is such as none can pluck them out of his
hands, The Father is stronger than all, John 10. 2 Timothy 1.28. I know he is able
to keep that I commit to him.

Object. I know he is able too: But will he keep me?

Answ. Yes, if thou be effectually called, this brings thee within compass
of Christ's intercession, Ioh. 17.14, 15. They are not of the world, I pray that
thou should keep them from evil. Has Christ prayed his father to keep
thee? certainly then he will keep thee safe: for he was heard in all things.

Object. God is strong enough I know: but I am weak, Satan is strong against
me, sin is strong in me, how then may I hold out?

Answ. 1. No man's weakness shall disappoint the strength of God, but manifest
it rather. 2. No strength of Satan can prevail against the faith of him that
is effectually called: for God is faithful, and will not suffer him to be
tempted above his strength, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Reas. 3.
Thirdly, The third reason may be taken from the gifts and calling of God,
which are without repentance, Romans 11.29. that is, such peculiar gifts as flow
out of Gods eternal love and election: whereas natural, moral, and many
spiritual gifts are sometimes lost. This calling of God according to purpose
is never frustrate.

Object. But though God repent not of his gifts, yet the gifts of God are in
themselves changeable, and men may cast away their gifts, and fall from their
faith and repentance, and shake off the calling.

Answ. 1. The gifts are indeed in themselves changeable, for nothing is simply
unchangeable but God himself: But they are all kept by another gift, namely of
perseverance, which crowns all the rest.

2. If the elect should cast away the gifts received, then should they be
tempted above their strength, and God should be unmindfull of his promise,
which is impossible. Nay Gods strength suffers them not to cast away their
gifts.

3. For shaking of the calling, if you speak of the inward calling it is
false; for then how should God abide constant to them? or his word be true,
which says, Whom he calls he glorifieth? Or how holds he under his hand in
their falls? Besides, he gives these gifts to none but such as know the worth
and use of them, and not to such as will reject them or cast them away.

Fourthly, The last reason is taken from the stat^ of a Christian, Reas. 4.
Christ raised dies no more, no more does the Christian.
who as a member must be conformed to Christ his head: for as Christ being once
risen from the grave, never returns again, or dies any more; so the life of
grace in his members, once called out of the grave of sin, never dies more,
no not in death, nor in the grave: It is the Apostles reason, Romans 6.8, 9, 11.
As Christ raised dies no more, so think ye.

Object. The prodigal son, after a son, was dead, and alive again, a
son lost, and found again.

Answ. It is a Parable, and nothing but the maine scope proves any thing.

2. The prodigal is every man lost in Adam, who by creation was the son of
God, but in Adam lost and dead, and in the second Adam found and quickened, if
by faith set into him.

3. This lost and dead child was so, both in his fathers opinion, and in his
own seeming: So may the child of God even after conversion seem lost and
dead, in his own sense, and others conceit, but is indeed alive and found.

Use 1.
First, This serves for humiliation of us who are so weak and wretched, as
having our salvation put into our hands, yet cannot keep it; so many
temptations from without, and corruptions from within, that it is Gods great
mercy that keeps us in grace unto glory: where then is our freewill to attain
salvation before our calling? can we not hold our salvation after our calling,
unless God hold it for us, and can we lay hold on it before our effectual
calling? Away with such Pharisaicall and proud conceits of Popery, that all the
glory and praise may be ascribed unto him, whose faithfulness can and will
present us spotless before the presence of his glory at the appearing of Jesus
Christ.

Let us cast down our crowns at the feet of the Lamb, and put off all
praise of doing any thing from our selves, and confess that unless the Lord
should add his last work to the first, all were lost. In natural life, our
selves confer nothing to our lives or being at first: and after we are, it is
Gods care that preserves us: for man lives not by bread only, but by every
word of God. Neither does man's life stand in abundance, Luke 12.15. Much more
in supernatural life, his work it is to preserve us, whose will is to save us.

Secondly, it serves for a ground of consolation, in that the author of all
our grace is faithful and unchangeable, Use 2.
he begins, and accomplisheth and works all our works for us. He not
only bestows a free grace upon his people, but undertakes to preserve and
perfect it. And therefore we may,

1. Rely confidently upon this faithfulness for all supplies; roll all thy
burden upon him, and he will do it, Psalm. 37.5.

2. By prayer of faith importune his faithfulness, not to forsake the work of
his own hands, till he have finished it. Hereby commit thy whole way unto
him, commend thy self, thy soul unto him in well-doing, and he will keep
it, 2 Timothy 1.18.

3. Rest thy self undaunted in afflictions, in dangers, and losses, seeing
Gods faithfulness will keep thee safe; he will keep thy salvation for thee:
Heaven is reserved for thy childs part, no great matter what other things be
lost or endangered.

4. Find thou want of strength in temptation? feel not thou the joy of
thy salvation? groanest thou under the burden of corruption? weakness of
faith? dullness in duties? go to this faithfulness of God, importune him for
needful grace: say to him, Oh, thou that art a faithful God, thou have called
me, and therefore do thou do it, finish and perfect thine own work in me.

Thirdly, Use 3.
for a ground of watchfulness and care over our selves, that we may not grow
either secure or idle, and say, If God will keep us, all is well; for he
keeps his own by means, and keeps none who have not a care to keep
themselves.

Quest. What are the means whereby God will keep me?

The means by which God keeps us, 4.
Answ. 1. He finisheth the work begun by the word, the arm of God which
began it. Observe the work of the word in thee, Keep the word, Prove. 4.6.
and it shall keep thee: attend the word, for the powerful preaching of
Christ keeps the soul till the day of Christ.

2. By his holy Spirit, who renewes our strength and graces: therefore stir
up the Spirit that is in thee, and cheer him in thy heart, by listening to his
motions, and taking his part against thy daily corruptions.

3. By the grace of faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept through faith to salvation.
Therefore nourish faith, quicken it, increase it, walk by faith, live by
faith; observe the growth of faith in the power of prayer, and strength in good
duties: this is the victory that overcomes the world.

4. By his daily providence, guiding us to such courses and companies, as by
which we may not be losers in grace, but gainers; keep thee in thy ways, and
he will keep thee in them, Psalm. 91.11. Beware of consenting, much more of
delighting in sin and sinners.

Use 4.
Fourthly, a ground of thankfulness for graces received, all which have flowed
from Gods faithfulness. Have thou faith, hope, strength, peace of conscience,
or comfortable assurance? ascribe all the glory to God, who has declared his
faithfulness in giving, and increasing, and upholding the same: whereas every
day our weakness and carelessness would lose it, every sin might forfeit it,
and every assault of Satan and seducers would easily rob us of it.

Prize this estate in grace, make it sure; a man will be sure of a good title
of any thing he holds: Rejoice in it, and in the evidences of it as well as
in it self.

VERSE 25. Brethren, pray for us.
IN these words the Apostle commends a duty of love toward their Ministers;
which must express it self in earnest prayers for them. In Brethren: to these
only the duty is directed; for they only can pray, or can be heard: the
wicked man's prayer, because he wants the Spirit, wants faith, is no son, none
of the brethren, his prayer is abominable.

For us: that is, Paul, Silvanus, Timotheus, chap. 1.1. men of highest place,
of most excellent gifts, and of rarest graces, the Ministers of their faith.
These chosen vessels and worthy instruments request the prayers of inferior
and ordinary believers.

3. What the things be which they must pray The Apostle beggeth prayers of
inferior persons, for 5 things.
and these are elsewhere expressed.

First, for gifts and skill in dispensing the mysteries of the Gospel, that
they may speak the word as it ought to be spoken: Ephesians. 6.19, 20. And for
me, that utterance might be given, that I may speak boldly as I ought to
speak. Did Paul need their prayers for that purpose, and do not ordinary
Ministers much more?

Secondly, for liberty and free passage of the Gospel in the mouths of the
Ministers, that without let and impediment the Gospel might be preached without
interruption or contradiction: 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Brethren pray for us that the word
of God may have free passage. This is called sometime the opening of a door
which was shut: Col. 4 3. Praying for us, that God may open to us a door of
utterance.

Thirdly, for happy success and prosperity of their labors in the hearts of
the Saints for their gathering. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Pray for us, that the word of God
may be glorified even as it is with you. Now the Thessalonians had received it
in power, and with much assurance. People must pray that by the labor of their
Ministers the conversion and salvation of men may be furthered: for Paul may
plant, and Apollos may water, but unless God give the increase, all is lost, 1
Cor. 3.7.

Fourthly, for the daily sanctification of their persons, that they may by
unblameable conversation remove the lets and scandalls which might hinder their
doctrine, and become examples to their flock in good life, and in expression
of all good works. So the Apostle, Hebr. 13.18. Pray for us, for we are
assured that we have a good conscience in all things desiring to live honestly.
As this is an argument, that you should pray for us, being innocent and honest
men; so pray that we may so continue.

Fifthly, for the protection and safety of their persons, for their works
sake, against persecuters and enemies. 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Pray for us, that we may
be delivered from unreasonable men: from absurd wicked men, which in all
corners rage against Gods standart-bearers, men of corrupt minds, resisting
the truth: and thus, Philemon 22. the Apostle trusted by their prayers to be
given to them out of bands, as Peter was delivered out of the lions mouth
miraculously by the strength of the prayers of the Church made for him, Acts
12.5. and Romans 15.30, 31. Strive with me by prayers, that I may be delivered
from the disobedient in Judea.

Whence observe, that men of greatest gifts and graces, Doct. 1. Men of
greatest grace need the prayers of weaker Christians, for three reasons.
that are in highest favor with God, have need of the prayers of the weaker
and meaner Christians. Paul rapt into the third heaven, and filled with
unutterable mysteries, contemnes not, but craves, and earnestly beggs the
prayers of the simple Christians, Romans 15.30. he intreates them earnestly, even
for the Lord Jesus his sake, and for the love of the Spirit to strive with him
by prayers to God.

Reas. 1.
Because men of greatest parts are far from perfection in gifts or graces.
Paul saw he had not yet attained, but may receive a daily increase; and
therefore stands in need of the prayers of others, for increase and further
degrees of the graces he has.

Even they are men subject to the same passions and infirmities with others,
Acts 14.15. Reas. 2.
The more grace and gifts they have, the more are they in danger to be puffed
up and forget themselves. Yea themselves being as frail as others, their
prayers are often weak and faint, and need many hands lifted up for them to
strengthen them: even Moses needs Aaron and Hur to sustain him in lifting up
his hands; Exodus 17.12.
for even his hands may grow heavy.

Men of greatest gifts are in the greatest fight, fair marks for Satan: Reas.
3.
Satan will be sure to stand at Iehoshuahs right hand, Zach. 3.1. and will
winnow Peter as wheat, Luke 22.31. He knows if he can cast down one of
these, he falls not alone, but many are like to fall; and that God is more
dishonored, and the Gospel more disgraced by one of these than many others:
and therefore these have most need to be supported by the prayers of the
Saints.

This meets with men of great and high spirits, because of the greatness of
their parts, Use 1.
they think themselves all-sufficient in themselves, rapt into their own
admiration: They have a notable gift of prayer themselves, and what need they
crave the prayers and assistance of others? But suppose thou had the
sufficiency of an Apostle, nay were rapt into the third heaven as Paul was:
Had thou one drop of the grace of humility as he had, thou would descend,
and out of sense of thy wants beg the prayers of the meanest Christians, and
that not coldly or formally, but with earnestness and vehemence as he did.

Use 2.
It teaches not to despise the meanest Christians, seeing the meanest may be
useful, and thou may receive a blessing by him sometime, by counsel, or
comfort, or example, at least by his prayers.

Use 3.
To encourage poor Christians to pray, seeing here were we see God is no
accepter of persons: He will hear as well the Thessalonians for Paul, and
Silvanus, and Timothy, as them for the Thessalonians; he gives as soon to the
meanest as to the greatest: these are as welcome to him as they, for he casts
none in the teeth.

Object. I am unworthy to pray for my self or others.

Answ. Thou prayest not in thy own worthiness, but in the merit and
intercession of Christ, which belongs to the poorest brother as well as the
richest.

Object. I am unable to pray, I want gifts.

Answ. 1. Prayer receives not virtue or answer, from excellency of gifts, but
from Gods promise, and from faith and affection in our selves: Not the words
but affections, and sighs which may be in men meanly gifted are regarded of
God.

2. Thou see here the Lord so far from refusing thee, as that he commends
the greatest matters to thy prayers; even to pray for those that in respect of
gifts can better pray for thee: Bring thou so much the more faith, more sense
of want, more thirst after grace, and thou bring better gifts to prayer,
than he that brings more words, Rhetoric, form and fluence of speech.

And here observe, Doct. 2. Christians must pray for their Ministers Reasons 3.
The duty of all Christians is to pray for their Ministers, yea for all their
Ministers. Pray for us: for Silvanus, and Timotheus, as well as for Paul; for
Paul envies not to them a room in the prayers of the Saints. So a number of
places before alleged do prove: And many reasons press the duty upon the
people.

First, howsoever the Ministry is Gods ordinance effectual by his power,
Reas. 1.
and Ministers as stars in his right hand safe by his providence and
protection; yet he has made it the duty of people to pray for their Ministers
as a recompense of their care and pains, and labor in the work of their
salvation; and as a part of the honor that people owe them, as fathers by
virtue of the fifth commandment: and in way of return of prayers for prayers.
So the Apostle had earnestly prayed for them in the former verse, and now
earnestly beggs prayers for them. So Ministers are the peoples mouth to God,
they stand in the gappe and breach for them, they by prayers procure blessings
on their people; it is equal and just the people should by their prayers
procure blessing on them.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, If we be bound to pray for all Saints, and private men, much more
for our Pastors and Fathers in Christ, by whom the Lord offers and conveyes his
best and most lasting blessings upon us; whom he has separated as one of a
thousand to declare to man his righteousness, to be lights to them that sit in
darkness, guides to the blind, and patterns to the flock: Ministers by whom
the Lord conveyes his saving graces into the hearts of the Saints.

Reas. 3. People neglecting this duty, lay themselves under the guilt of many
sins: 5 Instances.
Thirdly, People neglecting this duty, lay themselves under the guilt of many
sins.

1. In that every man being bound to respect the glory of God in the
furtherance of his pure worship; which cannot be done but by an able and
gracious Ministry, they sin against duty, that by their prayers strengthen
not their Ministers.

2. Every Christian is bound to be an help to the truth, 3 John: they plainly
detract this help, that withhold their prayers from their Pastors, their
teachers and maintainers of truth.

3. Every Christian ought to be compassionate to the souls of their brethren,
and by all means promote the salvation of men: And therefore out of compassion
of millions of souls who stand in need of powerful preaching, and without
vision are like to perish, ought to pray that God would mightily work with the
word in the mouths of his Ministers, to make it powerful, to rescue people
out of the snare of the Devil.

4. All those people make themselves guilty of the troubles, falls, and ill
success of their Ministers, that fail them in this duty of prayer: Thy
prayers might have upheld him, or helped them out of trouble, out of frailty.

5. Such as pray not for their Ministers, deprive themselves of the blessing
and happy fruit of that Ministry: the more earnestly people pray for their
Pastors, the more assurance of good and happy fruit may they expect from
their Ministry, and often of their Ministers themselves, who are worthily
removed from an unworthy people, that never prized them for their works sake.

First, This serves to reprove inconsiderate men, Use I.
who by neglect of this duty sign themselves to be out of the communion of
Gods people: they care not whether their Minister stand or fall, sink or
swim; leave him to himself, take no notice of his labors, trialls,
sufferings, his person, his work, his wages is no part of their care: they
have no hand lift up for him to God or men, but perhaps both against him.

These are at least inconsiderate. 1. That the blessing and benefit of a good
Minister is invaluable, and must be begged of all those that must share in the
benefit. One of the special clauses of the new Covenant is, that God will give
Pastors according to his own heart: and will he give such a special gift to
such as prize it not, nor praise him for it?

2. They consider not the weight of the calling, the charge of souls, for
which who is sufficient? The rage of Satan and all wicked men against this
great work, never sleeping, but always hindering the free passage of the
Gospel, both with open fury and secret devises: The many sharp assaults that
these leaders of Gods armies against the Prince of darkness and his forces,
are exposed unto: often in the forlorn hopes, not only bestowing their lives
and strength in preaching the Gospel; but often being bestowed for it, and die
to seal it with their blood. Did they consider this, they would pray in Peter's
words, Acts 4.29. Lord, grant thy servants that they may speak boldly thy word.

3. They consider not how deeply themselves are interessed in the welfare and
happy estate of their Ministers.

Is not the fall of the Minister commonly the ruin of the people? Can the
shepherds be smitten, and the sheep not be scattered? Can vision fail, and
people not perish? Can a watchman of a City or Castle be corrupted or
surprised by the enemy, and the City be safe? Or can a man be an agent or
accessory in the corrupting and surprising a Captain set to keep a Fort,
without treason to his Prince? Even so he that prays not for the prosperity
of every good Minister, shows himself in enemy to the Church, and no friend
to his own salvation.

Secondly, To reprove that cursed generation of men, who in stead of praying
for the prosperity of the Ministry and Ministers, who being sent of God in
mercy, are a principal blessing:

1. They repine and grieve as if some heavy scourge or plague were come upon
them; as the Devils did at Christ's coming, because they were tormented before
their time: It was never merry with them since there was such running and
thronging after preaching; now they cannot sit at ease, nor have room to bring
their beds with them: nothing is such a corrasive unto their hearts, as to see
Gods blessing, and success of a godly Ministry; and the people of God
flocking after his own Ordinance. This was the dust and daggers in the
Pharisees and hypocrites in Christ his time, that they could profit nothing, but
that the world run after him, John 12.19.

Oh that such men would seriously consider, that,

1. Whosoever esteem this excellent blessing a burden, a plague, it shall be
so to them: It offers it self now as a blessing, but shall turn to the most
intolerable plague that can befall them; even a witness, a bill of indictment
aggravating their damnation, burdening them with plagues and curses easelesse
and remediless.

2. There is not a more proper note of a Devil incarnate, and a man in state
of damnation, than to envy and grieve at the grace of God, at the prosperity,
success and growth of the Gospel. The Devils proper sin, Ye are of your
Father the Devil, his works ye do. John 8.


3. The time hastens on thee, when in terrors of soul, and agonies of heart,
thou shall wish one Sermon, one word of comfort, and know by the want of the
blessing the benefit of it, but perhaps shall never find opportunity.

Thirdly, others in stead of praying for their Ministers, curse them, revile
them, slander them, run to the Rulers every week to disturb them, as if they
were loath to be too far behind the Devil, or not to be chief instruments
in the ruinating of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Thus those that are bound to pray for their Ministers, that they may be
delivered from absurd and unreasonable men, are most ready to make a prey and
spoil of them.

But doubtless they are wicked and graceless men, near to a curse, a wonder
their steely hearts fear not some extraordinary judgment, and messenger of
Gods wrath every moment. 2 King. 2.24. When little children in their play
cursed and reviled the Prophet Elisha, bears came out of the wood and
destroyed them: how much less can the aged escape, who teach their children by
example to revile and scorn the Prophets and servants of God?

Fourthly, others will not revile them, but can spy wants and imperfections in
them, (as indeed there is in the best) can sit as Judges on his person, cast
him off for one weak in gifts, cold in his doctrine, careless in his life;
and so turn him off: But when did they pray for him, that God would enable him
to the work of his Ministry; that God would bestow the Spirit, to deliver the
word so as he might save his own soul, and them that hear him? And if they
fail herein, are they not guilty of all his defects which they complain of?
Surely would they spend as many earnest prayers for him, as they do words to
tax and disgrace him; who knows whether the Lord might not open his heart
and mouth for their comfort and profit? And what reason has the Lord to
minister comfort, and benefit by a man, when it is never desired? Thou find
no sweetness nor comfort in a Minister, thou prayest for none. How can thou
find without seeking?

Secondly, for instruction. Seeing our want and sin heretofore, let us
reform our selves, Use 2.
and provoke our selves to so needful a duty, daily to commend our Ministers
to the grace of God, as Paul and Silas were by the Church, Acts 15.40. The
first ground, and to do it aright,

1. We must love them heartily, our prayer must flow from love: where prayer
must be earnest, love must be earnest first; even as the love of fathers
begetting us and breeding us up to Christ, 1 Cor. 4. true love and prayer are
ever inseparable, it is impossible for a man to love another, and not pray for
him. Some say they love their Minister, and like preaching; but as the
worldling boasts of false liberality: when did thou ever pray unto God for
him, that he would be pleased to give him strength and ability, success,
freedom from molestation, from unreasonable men, and every good encouragement
in his place? scarce in all thy life. Then may I say to thee as D^lilah to
Sampson, How can thou say thou love me, and do not this thing for me?
How can thou say thou love me, and keep this thing from me? even thy
prayers, and best wishes.

2. The object must be right, the things prayed for. Many wish well to their
Ministers, and much love they show them, and pray for them, that God would give
them good livings two or three, and for means of further preferments, to raise
them to the fair of dignities, wish them good Lords and Patrons, and
countenance of great men.

Oh, the happiness of Ministers stands not in these things. A Turk or Heathen
can wish all these to their friends; and yet Christians wish no more: These are
wishes of carnal men. But pray thou for liberty, spirit, courage, power,
faithfulness to stand against men and Devils, that by force or subtlety would
discourage him from the work: grace and faithful dispensation makes an happy
Minister. Pray for this, and yet I doubt many Ministers themselves pray more
for the other than these.

3. With prayer thou must bring the other companions of love and thankfulness.
We must not deal by our Ministers as many answer beggars, God help you, but
give them nothing: you must yield us not only good words, and good prayers,
but audience, redence, maintenance, you must do that you pray for. It is but
hypocrisy to pray in a set form of prayer for all Bishops, Curates, and all
Congregations committed to their charge, if thou do not set thy hand to thy
prayer.

If love set thy mouth on work to pray for a Ministers prosperity, it will set
the hand on work to uphold his person, his comfort, his Ministry, his
cheerfulness in the work of the Lord; all thy pretenses leave thee but an
hypocrite, an enemy of righteousness, who art hyde-bound, and hand-bound, who
valuest not sundry years labors of thy Pastor at so many farthings. Heathens
and Savages would be loath to reject their Idolatrous Priests so far, but
either conscience, or shame, or fear, or company would force some expressions
of love to them. But Heathenish Christians, nothing can work them.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ACtions of renovation discerned in three things. 198 Actual sins more
violently quenching the fire of the Spirit above other, 3 sorts. 23 Every
action must be done, 1. by virtue of a word, 2. in Gods presence, 3. for Gods
glory. 110 Action to be good must proceed from a good agent. 115 Admiration
of men's persons no good rule, for 6 reas. 84 Affections crooked no safe rule to
follow: 3 reas. 81, 83 Affection to inferior things must shame us for want of
like affection in attaining better. 227 Affections must be narrowly watched.
256 Affections naturally exceedingly corrupted: 5 instances. 263 Sound
affection to grace discerned by four signs. 218 Afflictions sanctified set
forward sanctification 5 ways. 214 Aim of a Christian must be absolute
conformity between the whole word, and the whole man. 89 All things to be
believed or done must first be tried by the Scriptures: 4 reas. 61 All things
are to be tried, but all things must not be held. 125 All the Articles of
religion turned into a questionary Divinity among Schoolmen. 129 Alteration
and change of spirit, soul and body, a sure sign of growth in holiness. 217
Ancient Christians refused ceremonies used by Heathens: 3 instances. 160
Appearances of evil must be avoided as well as apparent evils: for 5 reasons.
147 Apostates their fearful danger, in 4 things. 319 Arts wicked with which
seducers come armed to deceive: 5. 63 Several Attributes of God to be
conceived according to our suites: 5 Instances. 178
B.
Baptism must not be required of a Popish Priest: 5 Reas. 158
C.
Calling effectual and ineffectuall differenced. 353 His own effectual
calling every man ought to know: 4 reasons. 356 Calling effectual the work of
God only: 5 reasons. 361 From effectual calling a man may certainly conclude
his own salvation. 363 Calling effectual often hardly discerned: 3 reas. 367
Calling effectual hears Christ's voice many ways uttered. 371 Ceremonies
ordained of God, so as Jews must differ from Heathens as well in them as in
doctrine: 4 Instances. 159 Woeful changes in the soul of Gods child who has
quenched the Spirit, 5. 17 Change in a man effectually called is wonderful: 1.
In respect of sin. 377 2. In respect of the world. Ibid. 3. In respect of
grace, in kind. 379 soundness. 380 growth. 382

Change, no shadow of it in Gods nature. 386 Nor in his decrees. 387 Nor in his
will. 389 Nor in his affections. Ibid.
Charity, how it believes all things: 4 cautions. 69 Christians must proceed
to full sanctification, for five reasons. 201 Christians must be as careful to
retain grace, as to attain it: 4 reasons. 232 Christ must be magnified in our
bodies 5 ways. 280 Christ not corporally present in the Sacrament, 4 reasons.
309 Christians must not only labor for full, but final holiness: 4 Reasons.
311 Christ raised dies no more, no more does the Christian. 391 Civility is
far from sanctity: 6 differences. 205 Comfort in affections well guided, in 3
things. 268 Comforts from Gods faithfulness, in 4 things. 393 Communication in
other men's sins to be avoided both before and after. 165 Conformity with
Idolaters must be avoided in 3 things. 156 To a good conscience are required 4
things. 239 Conscience clears his master 4 ways. 240 Consideration of
Christ's second coming encourages godliness 6 ways. 301 Considerations to
move people to pray for their Ministers sundry. 403 Contemplation of creatures
in their several ranks call us to progress in holiness. 222
D.
David sinned in numbering the people, in 4 things. 113 David's mourning for
Absalom blameworthy, for 4 reasons. 114 David refused to drink the water of
Bethlem, 3 reas. ib. Depth of learning pretended by seducers. 63 Difference
between the peace of Christ, and the peace of the world, in 6 things. 180
Difference between sound peace and sencelesnesse of conscience in 5 things.
185 Dislike of evil, if sound, discerned in 6 things. 219 Disposition to good
tried by five signs. 220 Directions concerning sanctification of the spirit,
5. 237 Distinction must be made between diffusing of grace, and decaying of
it. 32 Doctrines to be sound must all agree with the analogy of faith: 3
instances. 90 Doctrine of doubting of a man's own salvation is against the
analogy of faith. 91 All sound doctrine tyeth the two tables together: 6
Instances. 92 All true doctrine leads men unto Christ. 100 Sound doctrine is
most contrary to corrupt nature. 103 The soundest doctrine most soundly
comfort distressed consciences. 107 Sound doctrine must be strongly held,
for 3 reasons. 127 Doctrine of faith all grounded on Gods faithfulness. 343
E.
Ear to be shut: 5 rules. 288 Hearing ear known by 3 notes. 291 Elias sinned
not in calling for fire from heaven, but the Disciples did: two differences.
116 Eye must be watched in 5 things. 282 Why we must carefully order our eyes:
4 reasons. 287 Examples of Scripture warrant not our marriage with IIdolaters,
3 reas. 162 Examples to uphold our perseverance: 4. 330
F.
No fall so woeful as to fall from grace. 16 False rules of trial of things,
6. 73 Ancient Fathers avoided all conformity with heretics in their external
ceremonies: Instances. 160 Fantastical and foreign fashions of apparel
condemned: 5 Arguments. 122 Faithful is God 4 ways. 334 Faithfulness in the
Creator and creature differ in 4 things. Ibid. Faithfulness required in our
promises. 339 In our callings: 340. In our friendship: 341. In communicating
our talents. 342 Faithfulness of God preserves to salvation all that are
effectually called: 4 reasons. 385 Fearful is the condition of that man that
repines at a powerful and faithful Ministry: 3 reasons. 406 Fire of the
Spirit how quenched. 3 Fire of grace violently smothered how. 22 Folly of those
that neglect the assurance of their own salvation: 4 reasons. 365 Forefathers
way no sure rule of trial: 5 reasons. 77 Four excellent fruits in avoiding
petty evils. 152 Sweet fruits of well guiding our affections, 6. 270
G.
Gifts of the Spirit to be observed in our selves for 4 reasons. 26 Gifts of
God which and how without repentance. 390 Godly by the inhabitation of the
Spirit both honored, and comforted. 9 Godly must be careful not to quench the
Spirit: 5 reasons. 14 God called the God of peace: 3 reas. 175 Godliness makes
no man unpeaceable or turbulent. 188 Godly company a means of growth in
holiness, 3 ways. 213 God to be glorified in our bodies how. 273 God must be
glorified in our bodies: 3 reasons. 274 God is most faithful: 4 reasons. 336
Glory of Christ now veiled 3 ways. 310 True goodness grows from good to
better, and so is best at last. 227 No good must be held but after trial. 132
Good things must be carefully held and kept: for 5 reasons, 125 Good actions
spoiled in undue circumstances. 113 Graces of the Spirit compared to fire in 5
things. 3 Grace quenched in what degrees. 5 Graces of some kinds not wholly
extinct. 4 Grace as fire suffered to die of it self, 3 ways. 20 Grace in
others must be excited: 3 reasons. 37 Grieve the Spirit 4 ways. 25 Growth in
holiness rare: 4 proofs. 220 Grounds on which the prayers of people for their
Ministers must be raised: 3. 401
H.
Hand to be ordered: 5 rules. 292 The heart must be kept pure for the pure
Spirit of God. 10 For keeping the heart 5 general rules. 247 The heart how
bounded within Gods limits: 3 directions. 252 We must hate where the Lord
hates: 4 instances: 261 Hatred of evil known by the practice of the contrary
virtue. 165 Helps of perseverance: 5. 327 We must hold only that which is
good, and all that is good. 132 Humility in lowest degree pretended by
seducers. 64
I.
Jesuitical confusion of phrases has been the confusion of the world. 95 No
Jewels to be so carefully kept as our soul^s and spirits: 2 reas. 232: and 4
reasons more. 235 Image of God must be gotten not only into our nature, but
into our conversation. 277 Implicit popish faith refu^ed. 69 No imperfection
hinders Gods faithfulness: 4 Instances. 337 Illumination is not
sanctification: 4 reas. 205 In all indifferent things (...) are to avoid all
appearance of evil and scandal, with 4 limitations. 149 Indifferent things to
be forborne for edification with 4 cautions. 117 The inside to be washed first:
for 5 reasons. 236 Invocation of Saints departed derogateth from the glory of
God. 97
L.
Laws humane imperfect rules of life, for 4 reasons. 81 Lots of perseverance
to be removed: 5. 324 Loss of worldly things no loss to loss of spiritual
graces. 143 Love our neighbor as our selves, with what conditions. 116 We must
love most where God most loves: 4 instances. 260
M.
Man by nature more prone to any evil than to the least good: 3 reasons. 67
Manifold mischiefs which overtake the despisers of Prophecy: 5 instances. 45
Man of God, 1 Kings 13.6. praying in an Idolatrous Temple, no warrant for us: 4
reasons. 157 Marriage with Idolaters unlawful: 4 reasons. 161 Marks of
effectual calling reduced to 3 general heads. 370 Means of quenching the
Spirit, 3. 20 Means to blow up the Spirit, 7. 33 Means to embrace Prophecy,
5. 48 Means of holding that which is good, 4. 137 Means of maintaining sound
peace of conscience, 5. 185 Means of attaining a full measure of holiness.
209 Means to keep the tongue blameless, 4. 298 Means of perseverance in
general, 3. 322 Means by which God keeps his own; 4. 394 Meditations
helping the increase of holiness: 1. Concerning God. 3 2. Concerning our
selves. 4 3. Concerning holiness it self. 209
Meditations to stablish us against persecutions. 326 Members must be weapons
of righteousness, how and why. 275 Memory how to be kept unblameable, in 2
things. 245 Men of greatest grace need the prayers of weaker Christians: 3
reasons. 398 Merits humane against analogy of faith 91 Merit an ambitious word
in reference to man, not found in Scripture. 100 Ministers must not only
preach but pray for their people: 3 reasons. 172 Ministry powerful must be
conscionably embraced: for 3 reasons. 42 Mischief of disordered affections.
266 Motions of the Spirit much different in the godly and wicked, 4 instances.
18 Motions of the Spirit to be observed. 36 Motives to stir up the Spirit, 4.
33 Motives to careful use of means of quickening the Spirit, 3. 38 Motives to
full sanctification, 6. 221 Motives to perseverance, 5. 329 Motives to find in
our selves the sure signs of effectual calling, 4. 383 Monastical life
refuted by 6 reasons. 93 Multitude of voices not to be numbered but weighed. 56
N.
Naamans practice no warrant for us to be present at Idolatrous service, for
three reasons. 158 Name of a Christian has in it many motives to grow up to
full holiness. 226 Necessary duties must be done, though all the world be
offended. 148 Necessity of increasing in holiness: 4 reas. 203 Necessity of
careful keeping our selves, drawn from our selves in 4 things. 233 Necessity
of well guiding our thoughts. 4 reasons. 245 Necessity of well ordering our
affections: 2 reas. 268
O.
Obedience of faith all grounded upon Gods faithfulness. 344 Right objects of
our affections in which they must be most vehement and intense. 258 Choice
objects for the eye, 5. 284 Objections against perseverance answered. 304
Objections from infirmities of our prayers answered. 400 Outward man must be
kept blameless: 3 reasons. 300
P.
All peace must be from the God of peace: 3 reas. 179 No peace to be affected
but that which is an effect of Gods mercy in Christ. 183 Perseverance of Saints
set on 3 sure grounds. 303 Perseverance is never divorced from true faith: 3
reas. 312 Perseverance most assaulted by Satan: 314 Lets of it, 5.324. Means,
3.322. Meditations to stablish it: 326. Motives to it: 329. Examples: 330
People must pray for their Ministers: 3 reas. 401 People neglecting to pray
for their Ministers lay themselves under the guilt of many sins, 5 instances.
402 Perseverance of Saints all grounded on Gods faithfulness. 351 Places
choice and safe to keep good things in, 4. 140 Popish doctrine leads men away
from Christ: 6 instances. 101 Popery most pleasing to corrupt nature: 6
instances. 104 Popish doctrine a most desperate and uncomfortable doctrine, and
therefore false: 5 instances. 107 Pope, a strange mystical name, unknown to
the learned Papists themselves. 135 Power of Christ discernable in our
effectual calling by 4 signs. 362 Preservatives against decay in the measure
of graces, 3. 29 Present at Idolatrous service unlawful, with pretense of
keeping the heart to God: 5 reasons. 156 In all our prayers we must behold God
a God of peace. 177 Prayer a means of growth in holiness in 4 things. 212
Prayer for perseverance not in vain for them that shall persevere: 3 reas. 306
Prayers of faith all grounded on Gods faithfulness. 347 Prophecy what. 40
Prophets not to be despised. 49 Propound to our selves still an higher pitch
and degree in grace. 37 Prosperity of the wicked no true peace: 4 differences:
182 Profession of faith must all be grounded on Gods faithfulness. 348
Q.
To quench the Spirit more damnable than to want him. 16 Questions. Whether a
doctrine backed with consent of ancient Fathers, or the authority of Councels
or other Antiquity, may not be free from trial. 54 Whether any thing coming
backed with example of great men, or of the general multitude, or custom
ofttimes be free from trial. 55 Whether any thing coming with Caesar's
authority and superscription be exempted from trial. 56 Who must try all
things. 57 How a man may know another calling. 354 Whether a man called
always know his calling. 359
R.
Reason corrupt no right rule of trial for 3 reasons. 74 Recreations on the
Sabbath of what kind, 119 Regenerate said to be blameless in 5 respects. 196,
199 Renovation in all the faculties: 197 Renovation must be without as well as
within: 3 reas: 278 The retentive faculty of the soul strengthened by 4 means
140 Rules of trial whether the Spirit be quenched, reduced to 5 heads: 27
Rules in respect of our own sins showing the Spirit to be abated, 5. 31 Rule
of all trials what: 58 Our Rule must be ever in our hand. 88 Rules for trial
of all doctrines, 6: 132 Rules for holding good, 6: 90 Rules to keep the
affections unblameable, many: 257
S.
Sanctification unsound wants 3 things which should make it hold out: 382
Sanctification, the description explained in 4 things: 189 Sanctification of
the Spirit, why so called sundry reas: 190 Sanctification in perpetual motion:
4 reas: 191 Through sanctification in this life, in 4 things: 192 Full
sanctification in the life to come in 4 things. 193 Sanctification stocks up
the root of sin: civility only cuts off some waste boughs. 307 No Saint in
earth, none in heaven. ^^8 Saints have all the same Spirit for 4 reasons. 6
Scriptures the rule of all trials: 4 reasons. 59 Scriptures afford us five
safe rules concerning following our forefathers. 78 Show of evil in doctrines
must be avoided. 153 All shows of evil must be shunned in practice and
behavior. 154 Signs of the Spirits presence, 6. 1^ Signs of general
Apostasy among our selves, 6: 316 Silence of God must not animate sinners: 4
reasons: 85 Singleness of heart known by 3 signs: 249 Similitude between
calling effectual and ineffectuall: five instances. 367 Sins of others great
means to quench the Spirit. 24 Small evils to be shunned for 4 reasons: 156,
and 167 Speech given men, why: 3 uses. 294 Spirit, what is meant by it in
Scripture. 1 Spirit, the same in the godly and wicked, but differently. 7
Spirit subject to be quenched in the best. 14 Spirit of God is holy both in his
nature and operation. 15 Spirit discerned to be quenched both in the 1. number:
2. measure of graces. 27 Spirit referred to man what it means. 193 Spirit,
how taken away from the Saints: 4 ways. 307 Stage Plays ought not to be
frequented: 6 reasons. 121 Success no certain rule for actions. 85
T.
Teachers no way disparaged by trial of their doctrines, but the truth a
gainer by it. 70 Things to be tried what. 52 Thieves and robbers incessantly
stealing good things from us: 3 sorts. 142 Three things in a man's self call on
him for growth in holiness. 223 Thoughts how to be holily ordered. 242
Thoughts to be watched, and why. 243 Time of a man's calling not always known:
3 reas. 357 Tongue abused 5 ways. 295 Tongue to be ordered and watched for 4
reasons. 298 Trial^ whether the Spirit be quenched in regard of good motions.
29 Whether in regard of good duties: 4 rules. 30 Trial of things what. 52
Trialls of growth in holiness, 5. 16 Traditions unwritten rejected, 4 reasons.
61. and ^01 Transubstantiation against the analogy of faith. ^0 Truth not to be
tried by persons, but persons by truth. 54 True teachers not so assisted but
that they may deceive and be deceived. ^^ That is the true doctrine which
gives mos^ (...) ^^stances. ^7
V.
Universal election and redemption derogateth from Gods glory. 99 Usury
cond^mned. 96
W.
Well watching of the heart stands in 4 things. 250 The will to be rightly
ordered: 4 rules. 253 The will must determine with God and for God in every
thing: Instances. 254 The will renewed known by many signs. 255 The will of
man why it must be well bended: 3 reasons. 256 Wicked men esteem the godly
unpeaceable, because they will not lose their peace. 188 Christian wisdom will
avoid all beginnings and appearances of evil. 151 Seeking to witches condemned
by 6 reasons. 118 Whole man sanctified throughout in 3 things. 195 Word and
Sacraments in their reverent use do notably excite the Spirit in us. 33 Word a
means to increase holiness: 4 ways. 212 The word upholds us in our way, 4
ways. 327 Our words must be faithful: 4 reasons. 338 Working on the sabbath
day condemned: 7 reasons. 119 Worst things must be most hated. 260
GOod Reader, among some smaller faults in printing, which we desire thy
courtesy to pass by, two are observed as changing the sense.

Page 268. line 28. read those 4 lines thus.

All wise and (...) walking is included under the affections of the fear of
the lord; (...) the ^uties of the whole Law are all (...) prized under (...)
Love*

Page 319. li^e 3 (...) highly.


