THE BEAVVTIES of BETH-EL.

Containing: Sundry reasons why every Christian ought to account one day in the
courts of God, better then a thousand besides

Preached in Cambridge, and now published especially for the benefit of those
that were the hearers.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1609.

To the right worshipful Master FRENCH, Mayor of the Town of Cambridge and
the rest of the hearers of the Parish commonly called St. Peter's: Grace and all
good things.
RIGHT Worshipful and Christian friends, so soon as God gave me a calling to
become your teacher; I bethought me which might be the fittest course and
carriage of my Ministry, both for your best profit and mine own discharge:
and after a little deliberation, I easily resolved of three things. 1. to call
you to a love, and a cheerful frequenting of the holy exercises of Religion
in the house of God; by which as by a praeface I entered into my labors, and
this from the example of David. Psalm. 84. 10. 2. to teach you how to behave
your selves being present before God. from the example of Cornelius, Act. 10.
33. 3. to preach Christ unto you; which by Gods mercy I have also performed out
of Peter's Sermon following from ver. 33. to 44. Wherein I have (...) entreated
of the most fundam^^^al points of our Christian Religion: indeauoring in all
these to approve my heart unto the Lord, and my desire of your profiting even
to your selves. Of the first of these I have here given you a further view and
account; the other two depend one upon the other, and contain a labor of
longer time; besides that the eye of our experience has seen what a surfeit
and lothing this our age has taken of sound practical divinity: and therefore
only thus much I have presumed for your sakes to publish, to the purpose that
each of your families might have a copy for the helping of your memories; not
intending any further view of clearer light. But if the Printers have
ouer-intreated me to make the benefit (as they termed it) more common; then I
shall desire of such as for whom these things were not principally prepared,
the forbearance of any curious censure, seeing it was plainly fitted and
preached unto a plain auditory, and not intended to behold such an open light.
Wherein yet it may afford this use, that being a subject in which I have
observed none going before me by way of treatise; it may yield both occasions
and grounds to some more able instrument to enlarge and adorn so necessary
and so profitable an argument. Which heartily I wish; the rather, because in
these desolate days of ours, these beauties of Gods house, are by so many men,
and so many means obscured, as that numbers giuen-ouer to Atheism and
liberty, are bold not only to move (which were too much) but strongly defend
that our Saboth is either not to be kept, or not so straightly: that either our
Sermons need not to be heard or not so frequently: and that to walk according
to the light here shining, at least so accurately and strictly Ephe. 5. 15
(...).
as the Apostle prescribes, is too much precisenes: the which with sundry
other disguised conceits of vain men, if they shall prevail so far as they
threaten, surely our Bethels in short time will become Bethavens; our houses
of God, dens of thieves, and the voice of our Church will be no other then that
of Naomi. Ruth. 1* 20
Call me no more beautiful; for why should ye call me so, seeing the Lord
has humbled me, and the almighty has brought me unto adversity, how
glorious a work the^ would it be to join in the preserving of the beauty of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ? and that not by any artificial paynting of the
face of this chaste spouse (for that is fitter for the Romish Harlot) but by a
plain manifestation of her own face and native beauty out of the word, which
prefers her beauty before that of the Rose of the field, Cant. 2. 1
and the Lilly of the valleys, and affirms that the Lilly among the thorns
does not so surpass in beauty as she does among the daughters. Surely such a
glorious work as this shall not want a glorious reward. But to return to you
ye hearers, these brief notes being properly yours, to you they are of right
directed as a testymony of my love and inward affection unto you: the which (if
the Lord had thought meet) I desirously would have still testified by voice
among you, rather then by this my writing: by which I recommend these few
lessons to your Godly learning, and my self unto your prayers.

Yours in the Lord. THOMAS TAILOR.

Christian reader seeing that partly by the vnacquaintance of the workman with
my hand, and partly by the oversight of the Corrector, some faults are escaped,
I have noted such as chiefly alter the sense, leaving the other to thine own
humanity, and courtesy to correct.

Page 8 line 24, for ruthes read ruins. p. 15. put out of the margent Use 1.
p. 16. 24, for ayrie r. strait. p, 18, 1, for their, r these, p, 19, 22, put
out in. p, 21, 7, put out and. p. 29, 23, for caules, r. coats p, 31, 1, for
fortified, r. forfeyted, p, 60, 11, for covering, r* covenant, p, 65, vlt, and
66, 15, for perfection, in both places, r. protection, pa, 71, 22, for there,
r. the, pa, 225, 19, for truth, r, tents and l. 20, for countries, r. courteyns

Psalm. 84. 10. For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather
be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness.
THE Prophet David being through the practice and tirannie of his enemies
debarred from all access unto the public worship and service of God, amongst
the rest of the people of God, he makes a mournful and grievous complaint of
this his banishment, in the former part of this Psalm, accounting his estate
in this regard, more miserable then some of the brute creatures themselves,
which had liberty to build their nests, and lay their young near the altars of
the Lord, which benefit now he was deprived Verse. 3.
of. And recounting with himself the condition of such persons as then enjoyed
those liberties and privileges, he pronounces upon them one blessedness in
the neck of another; yea if with much inconvenience, through Verse. 4. 5.
drought and wet, which are signified by the valley of Mulberries, and the
rain covering the pooles; yea with much toil and difficulty they could enjoy
Verse. 7. 8.
such an earthly happiness. In the second part of the Psalm, he lifts up
an earnest request unto the Lord, to turn his ear, verse. 8. and his eye unto
him, verse 9. that so he would be pleased to draw him out of this necessity: of
which prayer this verse contains one reason. In which consider two things;
first the meaning, second the doctrines.

First by the Courts of God, and The meaning.
the house of GOD, is meant all one thing: And although by the house of God is
meant some-time the Church triumphant, John 14. 2. In my fathers house are many
mansions, that is, in heaven where the Saints enjoy the presence of GOD: and
sometimes the Church Militant, 1. Tim. 3. 15. That thou may know how to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God.
Yet here is it taken in neither of those senses, but more specially signifies
such a part of the Church militant, as where Gods people have obtained liberty
and freedom to worship God purely; joining together in the confession of their
sins, and of their faith, in hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments,
public prayers, etc. Thus Solomon calls the Temple the house of GOD almost
twenty times, in 1. Kings 8.

Thus David here calls the tabernacle, first the Courts of God, alluding to
the stately courts of Kings, in which were sundry courts, and among them one
for the people to assemble into, separate from the Sanctuary: and secondly the
house of God. Exo. 29. 45


First because herein the Lord had promised to dwell among his people, even as
a man dwells in his house continually. For which cause the Arc, (a sign of
his presence) was set in the Sanctuary, which the Lord calls by his own
name; Joshua 4, verse. 13. Forty thousand went before the Lord to battle
against Jericho, that is before the Ark of the Lord. 2. because he especially
reueiled himself here, and gave special testimony of his presence unto such
as purely sought him, in ye excercises of his worship. For where can a man be
either sooner or surelier found then at his own house? hence was the place of
Gods worship called the face of God, which we are commanded to Psalm. 27 8.
seek, from which Caine was cast out. Not that in such places were any false
Gen 4. 14
vizors or forms whereby God might be remembered: but because his pure
worship, praescribed by himself, and accordingly by his children performed, is
that ordinance, in which his face is seen glorious, and not out of it.

In this Court of God, in this house of God, David wished he might always
dwell, and that neither 1. unadvisedly, as Peter in Christ's transfiguration.
Master it is good being here: let us make three tabernacles: but he wist not
Luke 9. 33.
what he said. Neither 2. formally or for fashion, but most affectionately: yea
so ardently that the very vehemency of his desire, conflicting with denial of
it, brought leanness into his flesh, dryness into his bones, and consumption
into his parts; for so much the word (...) in the second verse implies; that
he was even wasted with the sighing and groaning out these most inward desires
of his soul: nor yet 3. does he propou^d his wish in simple form of speech,
for that would not serve him to express more then ordinary affection: but as
one most superlatiuely affecting above all other things this one; he
instituteth a double comparison. The former is drawn from the consideration of
the time. One day spent in these Courts of GOD, is better then a thousand
elsewhere: as though he had said. It were no great difficulty for me being a
King and the head of all Israel, to pass the whole term of my life in the
Palaces of the mighty, and in abundance of earthly pleasure; If I could (with
the most of the world) account these the matters of highest honor, and truest
happiness. But might I obtain one day, that is, never so little a time of the
days of my pilgrimage within thy Courts and tabernacle: where with the rest of
thy people I might join in ye pure worship of thy name; I would account my
self more honorable and happy, then to spend thousands of days in the company
of the profane, although never so great. The latter comparison is drawn from
consideration of the estate and condition of men: of whom some are in eminent
place and dignity, some in meaner and baser degree. David although he had good
experience of both: yet with all his soul, he would make exchange of all his
greatness and glory, with a mean and contemptible outward estate; so be he
might enjoy God in his ordinance with it. And therefore although he was a king,
yet all that greatness did not so take up his heart, neither lift it up: but
that he could be contented, nay desirous to be a doore-keeper in the house of
God, rather then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness; resolving that he
would rather hold the meanest room in the tabernacle; then without it to
possess the highest place of the earth: for where Gods tabernacle is not,
there can be nothing but tabernacles of wickedness. It may be true here which
some learned observe, that David in mention of a doore-keeper in Gods house, had
respect unto the Chorits, to whose custody this psalm was committed for their
incourageme^t against the contempt of lewd men: but whether he had or no, their
office being to keep the doors of the tabernacle, the truth 1. Chr. 9. 17 and
cap. 26. 1
is, he yt had preferred the very sparrows and swallows above himself, in this
regard that they might resort to the tabernacle, and make their nests there;
did much more account the Chorites far more happy then himself, because they
by their office were tied to be ever, day and night in their courses about the
tabernacle: wc privilege himself in this his flight (whether before Saul or
Absolon) could not enjoy. Thus the Prophet enforces his request and petition
unto God: that therefore he would please to vouchsafe him a comfortable return
unto the holy exercises of religion, that he might partake in the public
duties thereof with his people: because he accounts this blessing the
greatest happiness upon earth, yea next to heaven it self, although 1. never so
little a while. 2. in never so mean a condition. So much of the meaning: the
instructions follow. It is a note Doctr. 1.
of a good heart, to account the want of the word and ministry, the greatest
The want of the word most lamentable of al wants.
want and heuiest burden of al other. David for such affections was called a
man after Gods own heart: so earnest and so frequent they were with him: in
Psalm. 27. 4. he was in many wants, was driven from house and home, yea
destitute of all earthly comforts: yet he felt none of the^ in comparrison,
neither wished the supply of any of them: But one thing he wanted, which he
desired of the Lord, even that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to visit his temple.
And this was not so peculiar unto this man of God; but that it is common also
with other ye Saints of God. Jeremy bewailing ye estate of the Jews in
captivity, Lamen. 1. 4.
begins his lamentatio^ there where was greatest matter of mourning. The
ways of Sion lament because no man comes to the solemn feasts, all her
gates are desolate, her priests sigh: Infinite were the ruths which were upon
the city besides, in all that eighteen months while the siege continued, as
plague; famine, in which the pitiful women were glad to sees and eat their
fruit, and children of a span long: and Josephus. antiq. Iud. lib. decimo.
cap. decimo.
wherein those that were arraied in scarlet were glad to embrace the dung: much
more lamentable was that bloodshed when Jerusalem was taken, the Kings son
slain before his face; yea the King himself taken, his eyes put out, his
Ier. 52. 6. 11. 13.
feet put in fetters, and himself carried to Babel. Infinite and unspeakable
was the loss both of the City and Temple, when both of them were burnt
down, almost to the ground: and yet the Prophet conceiving of these as far
lesser evils, mentions none of them, until he has groned out most pitiful
complaints, for that the worship of GOD was ceased among his people, and that
which was a place of Gods presence, and delight; was now become a den of
heathenish Idolatry. The like we see in Dan. 9. 1. 2. 16.
Daniel, who when by reading in books he understood that the term of this
captivity was accomplished: he turned his face unto the Lord, and sought by
prayer, and supplication with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes; that the Lord
would turn away his anger, and wrath from the City of Jerusalem, and in that
long prayer he entreats not, that he with his people might be returned into
their former possessions and enjoy their houses, lands, orchards, vineyards
and commodities: but the greatest loss of all seemed to eat up all the
remembrance of these, even the failing of Gods public worship amongst them;
this was wholly in his eye, and this took up all his requests. He prays indeed
for the City Jerusalem: But because it was Gods holy mountain Verse, 16. and
because it was the City whereupon his name was called. Verse. 18. 19. yea
herein he could neither contain, nor yet scarce express his seruency, but with
strong cries entreated the Lord, for the Lords sake, that is, for his Christ
sake, he would cause his face to shine upon his sanctuary which then lay
waste: and this may be observed not only in the Prophets of the Lord, but also
in the Lords people, who, how-soeuer before their captiuities it was hard to
say whether they more despised Gods holy ordinances, or embraced their outward
profits; yet in their afflictions and wanderings in strange countries, the Lord
taught them this wisdom: that they looked not so much to their land and country
as to Psalm. 137. 1. 5. 9.
the Temple, to Jerusalem, to Sion.

Now who can deny that those are good hearts which are thus disposed, Why a
good heart so esteems it.
for 1. they are such as highly prize, and worthyly esteem these ordinances of
God, as the holy means to beget and confirm faith in the souls of believers,
yea the means whereby ordinarily the fellowship of the Saints with God, and
their mutual Communion one with an other is here begun in the Kingdom of
grace, and shall be perfected in the Kingdom of glory. 2. they are such as see
the necessity of Gods ordinances in the Ministry: in the want of we, people
must needs perish; as such as want both ye rule and guide to direct and lead
them unto true felicity. 3. They are such as have tasted (in some measure) how
sweet ye Lord is in these ordinances; or else could they never thirst after the
living God: they have met with God in Sion who has enlightened their minds,
persuaded their hearts; comforted their consciences; furnished the^ with
coat-armor of proof, against satan's subtilties and batteries, fortified them
against their own weaknesses, supplied them with preservatives against the
poison of evil example, which as a corrupt air infecteth not a few: beutified
them with the graces of faith, hope, love, humility, patience, sobriety and
the rest, clothed the^ with the righteousness of Christ whom their faith has
clasped and will not let go, in comparison of whom al gain is loss, and al
abundance mere necessity and beggary.

This doctrine serves to reprove a number Use. 1. Vndervaluers of the word
reproved.
of men who account of the word and the ministry of it so meanly, as the things
which they can be best without: and therefore where God in mercy has vouchsafed
them, many esteem of them as a sixth fingar, a superfluity, a burden: and speak
of them as the unthankful Israelites of Mannah: we see nothing but this Mannah
there is too much preaching, and what should so much of it do? And again where
God in judgment has denied this blessing of a faithful Ministry unto a
people, it is never asked after: but in many ignorant towns and parishes,
scarce shall we hear of a man that stirs up himself to seek after God. In
the want of never so base an outward commodity, men can complain, yea and lay
their counsels and purses together, to get their want supplied in season. Hence
is it that men are much in such complaints. Oh we want such a commodity in our
country, such a benefit in our parish, such a necessary in our houses, and will
be diligent with much money to redeem it! but never a word of the want of
instruction, of the want of a painful teacher, of the want of the knowledge of
God, of the want of the practice of piety either in the parish, or in the
family. Which argues the fleshlinesse of men's hearts, which in their desires
can soar no higher then earth and things below. A pitiful thing it is that in
the days of such grace, a man may ride so many miles together, and behold so
many people as sheep dispersed without faithful shepherds, to bring them
into the fold of Christ, or as so many goodly fields ready and white unto the
harvest, and yet scarce any labourer to inn them, and bring them into the barn
of Christ: of whom a man may say, to the sorrow of his soul, as Christ of
Jerusalem, yt the things of their peace are hid from their eyes: and further
many who are not without all knowledge nor the means, but take themselves to
have better part in Christ then the former, may here find the unsoundness of
their souls: for many reputed christians because they are not only within the
visible church, but pertak also in all the outward exercises of religion, hear
the word read, preached, receive the sacraments, content themselves in these
works done, without any great inward affection to any of them: men they are of
great indifferency; if they be under the ministry, they see good reason to
submit their outward man unto it, and to give it now and then some good words,
and upon occasion a meals meat: if it were absent they could also upon short
warning frame themselves to indifferency, and carry the matter without much
impatie^ce: wc if ever they had entertained in such affection as they that have
tasted the sweetness of God in it; they would wish to want the air to breath in
as soon as these sweet means no less necessary to a comfortable christian
life then the air to a natural.

To such men therefore I say, that let Use. 1.
them make what profession they will; let them rejoice in the peace and liberty
of the church: if in the church inioying the word and exercises of religion
thou prizest any thing in the world above them in thy affection; yea if any
thing be so sweet unto thy taste as these be; thou now by vnder-valuing these
invaluable privileges of Gods people declarest thy self (for all thy
profession) to be no better then cockle in the field, or chafe on the floor
of Christ. And again if in the want of these holy ordinances of GOD; thou
esteemest not (with David) that the greatest want is upon thee that can befall
thee; thou art but an unsound member; yea rotten at the coare of thy heart.

This doctrine teaches further yt it is a just cause of mourning when the word
Use. 2. Lament the want of the word abroad.
and Ministry either decay amongst any people or are interrupted, for this
brings the greatest want that any people can be exposed unto: the dissoluing
of the ministry is the peoples decay, Prou. 29 18. Where vision fails,
people perish. Hosee. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for want of knowledge. Can
there by any greater loss then the loss of a man's soul? or can there be a
greater want then for a man to be starued to death? or if this loss, this
want, be brought upon any man, can any recompense be made unto such a party
answerable unto either? what a grief then should it be to a godly heart to
see whole towns lie under that curse of God, Amos 8. 11. even under a famine,
not of bread and water, but of hearing the word of the Lord? for although
religion and exercises of it be safe in the places where we dwell, yet if the
absence of it elsewhere grieve us not, we lay not to heart the distresses of
Gods people as we ought, our bowels are too ayery, we are too privately minded,
and further if we hear or see any faithful ministry interrupted, we must
lament that the free passage of the Gospel is hindered: that that means
wherein the Lord conueyeth all his goodness into faithful souls is taken
away, and so a door opened to all iniquity: yea a flood-gate unto all
impiety. If any man's outward estate were broken, his wealth by force and
violence snatched out of his hands, here would be sense and sorrow (more then
enough) for the loss: shall then thy inward state be cracked? the liberties of
the ministry, and of the assemblies be infringed? the sanctuary of God
desolate? the exercise of pure religion together with Gods worship be hindered
or abolished, and all this cause no sorrow, nor set any grief to thy heart? Is
this such a disposition as becomes him who professes himself to be the
Lords? no surely: for such (as they have cause) fill their mouths with
complaints of the desolations of Sion. Psalm. 79. 1. 10 and 74. 1. 2. 6.
A just cause of sorrow was it to David, when he saw the enemy lift up axes,
and hammers to break down the carved work of the Sanctuary. As just a cause
when such a man as Joseph shall be evil entreated, who has been a means to
relieve a whole town in the time of famine. If at any time by their or such
other means Sion shall sit in the dust; the childen of the Church must show
their compassion in their mothers misery, weeping when she weepeth, and no
more be able to rejoice in her sorrow, then the Jews could compose themselves
to sing Hebrew songs in Psalm. 137.
Babylon, when they remembered Sion.

Eli a good old man (notwithstanding his weakness toward his sons) when the
Arc was carried to the battle against the Philistines, it is said his heart
feared for the Ark of God, (1. Sam. 4. 13.) and when tidings came that the
battle went against Israel, that Hophni and Phineas his sons were slain
and the Arc taken: it is said when he heard of the Arc he fell from his seat
and brake his neck: it was not the sorrow for his sons, but for the Arc that
brake his heart, that it failed him. He had likewise a good daughter in law
Phineas his wife, who when she heard of all these tidings, the text notes also
of her, that it was not the death of her father, her brother, nor her own
husband all at once, yt so went to her heart: but this was it which her mind
and tongue ran upon, and made her refuse all comfort; because the Ark of God
was taken, and the glory was departed from Israel. verse. 21.

The like is worthy noting in that faithful Captain Vriah, who when he was
called and commanded by David to go home and eat and drink and company with
his wife, he utterly refused, because the Arc, and Israel and Judah were in
tents, and his Lord Ioab and his servants in the open fields: and therefore he
could take no delight in any thing at home, because it was not well with the
Arc and Israel abroad. 2. Sam. 11. 11. Even so should we never think our
selves well, when it is not well with the Church, nor when the Gospel runs
not with free passage: which consideration should abate much of our present
carnal rejoicing in, as it did in worthy Vriah.

Daniel was well enough, highly in favor with the King, had liberty of
conscience even in that Idolatrous kingdom, to worship the GOD of Israel
purely, he was in no bondage nor affliction: but yet so long as GODS people
were in calamity Gods temple in desolation, Gods worship in contempt, he could
not but sorrow, fast and pray in their behalf. The like we read recorded of
that faithful captain Nehemiah, he was a great man in the Court of King
Artaxerxes, in an office very honorable and near the Kings person, for he was
his Cup Bearer; yet when enquiring of his people, he found they were in great
misery and reproach, and that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the
gates of it burned with fire, his zeal stirred up exceeding sorrow, even such
as he could not hide, but that the King (before whom no mournful spectacle
might come) did read the deep sorrow of his heart in his countenance: his own
advancement and honor could not comfort him, so long as he saw God dishonored
abroad, the City dedicated to his name, now defaced by Heathen Princes: that
religion which by himself was prescribed to serve him by, now decayed, and
that people which was his own peculiar, now to become servants to strange
Lords. Nehem. 13. wherein we read our own lesson, that our selves enjoying
the precious liberty of our assemblies, we ought to pity the distress of our
countrymen, who sit still in the shadow of death, and by our prayers and best
means, to relieve them, groaning out the desires of our hearts, and that all
Israel, even in our own country, might be saved.

Thirdly, if the want of the word, and exercises of it, be the greatest want of
3. Use.
all other: then such as have it must be wise hearted to make precious account
of it: and while they enjoy it, store Make much of the ministry settled.
themselves with such necessaries as shall after-wards besteed them. Men are
not so careless as to forget or fore-slack their markets upon the market day:
neither need many spurs to reserve something (as we say) against a rainie
day.

Why then do not such as profess themselves the children of wisdom,
forecast and prouidently foresee their future necessities? especially seeing
this ouer-sight will cost them so many tears, so much sorrow as their spirits
shall scarce be able to sustain them. How is it that we have not the wisdom
of men in us * to say within our selves, a rainie day may be upon us or ever we
be aware: it may be the sorrows of our mother the Church are not far of:
perhaps a famine of the word; a want of the ministry; a black darkness like
that of Aegipt is nearer us then we think off. For we have seen as bright
gleames as ours ouer-cast: yea as clear suns of the Church set and fallen in
the firmament, as that in the light of which we now walk: witness the
Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, the seven Churches in
lesser Asia, all which were far before us in the Gospel: but now under the
Turk and Pope are sunk to hell, in the profession of Mahometisme and
Anti-christianisme: yea of golden Candle-stickes which once held out the
glorious Gospel and word of truth, are become the very cells and dens of
devils. Or if the Lord for his own name and truths sake, forbear the
remoouing of our Candle-sticke, yet the sorrows of mine own soul may come
upon me, as the travel of a woman: the Lord may let loose, and set my sins
in order before me to the breaking of my heart; and vex me with fearful
visions: or else sickness may assail me, and bring me down to the gates of
death; my own deaths day, and consequently my judgment day is at door, and
cannot be far off. Let now every Christian well bethink himself, whether
in any of these straites he shall not need oil in his lamp: whether he
shall have no use of faith, of direction, of comfort, of patience, of sense of
Gods love, of assurance of pardon of his sin, of strength against such
temptations, as he (perhaps) never buckled withal before. I assure thee that
which thy own experience shall at that time become thy mistress in: that
whenever the Lord shall begirt thee, and lead thee into any of these
conditions; if the word be not thy comfort, thou art sure to perish in thy
trouble; and that all thy life had been time little enough, to have furnished
thy self against that day, yea if thou had begun to be heavenly covetous,
when thou beganst first to breath.

Would thou then be armed against sin, superstition, heresy, popery in
thy life time; and close up thine eyes in that holy religion of GOD which thou
have learned, and been brought up in: yea if times and religion should alter?
Would thou not in the day of thy sorrow be found unfurnished, and nakedly
laid open to all terrors of conscience, accusations of sin, and temptations
of Satan? Would thou not be given up to impatience, to a sense of Gods
wrath, to shut up thy days in an horrible apprehension of an hell in thy
soul aforehand? Oh then now while God offers his grace in the ministry of
the word, acknowledge the acceptable time and day of salvation: lay hold upon
wisdom while she calls; give her answer while she yet knocks; open the
door of thy heart, to give the best enterteinment thou can to this dear
Daughter of GOD: Store thy soul with knowledge; but especially with faith and
good conscience.

Make room in the house of thy heart by removing all the trash in it, such as
is infidelity, impenitency, earthlynesse, voluptuousnes and whatsoever
sauoureth of the flesh: then lay up in it provision for thy necessity; that it
may become a little granary, or treasury to which thou may always resort,
when either the public means may fail thee, or thou may be debarred from
them. Be dilligent in gathering this Mannah while the six days last, before
that day come wherein though thou seek it, yet shall not find it. In these
seven years of plenty, lay up (like a provident Joseph) for thy self corn
for the seven years of famine: wherein seven lean kine shall eat up the
seven fat kine, and be never the fatter. Pass not thy Summer singing with
the foolish Grasshopper, but with the Emmet prepare thy Winters store. When
Agabus prophesied Pro 30. 25.
of a famine, Act. 11, 28. the brethren were careful to provide against it:
so thou now hearing that a time of dearth will come, in which thou shall stand
in need of great store of grace; get thee a stock before hand to spend upon;
least when the time ouertaketh thee unprovided, Store thy self while thou have
the word.
thou begin to late to houle and say: O the time was when I had the Word, the
Sacraments, the Ministry, whereby I might have not meanly enriched my self,
and have been able to have been helpful to others, rather then my self to be
utterly destitute of provision in such times as this is: and this is my grief,
I had warning that these days of straightness would come upon me. Alas that
ever I should so have lost my time, that ever I should have refused wholesome
counsel: oh that I might once more enjoy the means again! Oh for one day in
the courts of Gods house! I would never neglect so great salvation.

And herein the folly of our nature bewrays it self that we are wiser in the
want, then in the fruition of good things; and that we cannot so rightly prize
a present benefit, as sighe after it when we have negligently deprived our
selves of it.

Caine cared not for the worship of The folly of such as slip their opportunity
herein.
God all the while he was in his fathers family, till he was cast out of it;
and then too late he cried out, that he was cast out from the face of God. Esau
contemned his birthright and blessing till it was bestowed, and then could
seek it with tears when it was too late. Saul forces not of Samuels prayers
for him till the Lord was departed and had cast him off. The Prodigal son
cares not for the dainties of his fathers house, till he was driven to feed
among Swine; and then he can desire to be among his fathers herd-men. The
profane of the world take days with the Lord: If they can be at leisure to
hear him another time with Festus, so it is, but for the present they cannot
intend it. Many Professors will not foul their dainty feet now for the word;
who I doubt not would afterward seek the blessing (if God should once deny it)
and yt with tears: the case being ye same with us as sometimes it was with
Israel when Number. 14. 40.
they had with GODS Commandment all the encouragements which Moses could use
to speed them forward unto Canaan; they would not go, but back again into Egypt
in all the have: the text says they refused ye land, v. 21. But when once
sentence was past, that they should never see yt good land. The^ they rose up
early in the morning, and were ready to go to the place which the Lord had
promised: now was there no stay with the^: neither ye Lords revealed will, nor
Moses persuasion could so pale them in or prevail with them, but that they
presumed obstinatly to go forward. The same people before the captivity, had
the Temple, the Arc, the Sacrifices, the Oracles, they cared not greatly for
them; it seems the times were much like ours wherein to call men to the house
of God, to speak of Pastors, preaching, Scriptures and holy exercises is to
glut and surfeit men, and so drive them from the love of all: but the time
comes on, that the Lord requires this contempt wc they dearly buy, he
casts them among Idolaters, and Scoffers, by which humiliation Psalm. 137. 1.
he brings back things past to their remembrance. By the rivers of Babel we
sat and wept in remembrance of Sion. What Sion? their cheeks were dry enough
before: but now in Babell they can weep, now away with music, now can the
harpes hang upon their willow trees without a finger to touch them; neither
their sweet melody of instruments, nor their pleasant walks, nor their
crystal rivers can affect them with joy, seeing they were now banished and
excommunicate from the public exercises of religion before the Lord at Sion.
And it were to be wished Verse. 44.
that even such as belong to the Lord did not vnderprize such gracious pledges
of Gods presence in the presence and plentiful fruition of them; who yet can
with sighs mourn after them, being withdrawn from their eyes, no otherwise
then when all Israel lamented after the Lord when the Arc was in
Kiriath-iearim, 1. Sam. 7. 2.

The Lord Jesus woing his Church most lovingly entreats entrance into her.
Open unto me my well beloved for my head is full of dew, etc. Oh no she has
put of her caules, she will not disease her self so far as to put them
on; she has waesht her feet, and means not to foul them: while she may
have Christ at the threshold she gives her self leave to sleep a little Cant.
5. 2. 3.
longer, and in her sleep she slips that most sweet opportunity: Christ leaves
her to her ease which might not be dislodged: but shortly after her soul
awaking, and she bethinking her self of her unkind answer, steps to the door
to let him in; but he is gone in displeasure; now her heart is gone with him
and smites her more then before; she seeks him, but finds him not; calls
him, but receives no answer: he is too near to be let in and received while
he is at the door; and therefore she must trudge up and down after him,
with much labor, and more grief, inquyring of every one she meets, whether
they have met with him whom her soul loves or no. By which example seeing
that too much of this folly is bound up in the hearts of the best of us; let us
strive to become more wise-harted in intertaining our privileges whilst they
be offered.

The Centurion could say when Christ was dead; this was the son of God, he
should have said so when he was alive. Let us acknowledge Christ while he is
present, and rejoice in Gods face, in the assemblies, in the ministry, least
when our unthankfulness has fortified them, we lament the loss when it cannot
be supplied: and this is the rather to be thus urged Ier. 7. 13.
and beaten upon; because it is with many a man, as it was with the people of
Act. 20. 24.
Ephesus: when Paul was taking his leave of the Elders of Ephesus, he told them
that he knew they should see his face no more: the^ they wept abundantly, but
especially were sorry at these words, that they should see his face no more,
even so a number of men are never sorry nor weep, are without al affections to
the Ministry and Ministers, til they be taking their leave and say they shall
see their face no more; and then they wish that they had taken more good by
their presence; and then if occasion were offered again they would be more
careful, and not forslow such oportunities: these consideratio^s are so much ye
more seasonable to you the present hearers, yt now at the first entrance of
this blessing you may lay hold of it, so as your increase in the end may be
much more abundant.

The second point of instruction out of the word, is this: that it is a note of
a Doctr. 2.
good man more to rejoice in the prosperity of the Church and the holy
exercises of A good heart reioiceth in the prosperity of the Church and
Ministry.
the ministry, then in all the delights among the sons of men besides. For who
can condemn in this holy man of God such an holy desire as this is? Nay who
can deny but that our affections and wishes ought to be in some measure suitable
unto his? And therefore that it is our part with him, to prefer the rejoicing
and comfort of one day within the Church, above a thousand elsewhere, not
excepting the Palaces of Princes: yea and that we might be so happy in the
fruition of this desire, to choose a very mean estate with it, rather then the
most glorious condition of the earth without it.

But what moved the prophet David, Ques.
or what did he see or find in this assembly, or in the Ministry that could so
ravish and affect him? For men of common eyes cannot see any such extraordinary
thing in them so violently to draw them; it may seem there was some secret
force, which drew out such affectionate desires in him.

It was indeed a secret force of the spirit of GOD, from whom such settled Ans.
and sanctified desires can only proceed: and yet we may not conceive such to
be immediate motions, and ungrounded flashes, but such as the Spirit raizeth
by means: Both first causing the beauty of GODS house to appear bright to
their eyes: and second, revealing to them the privileges which Gods people
there partake, and cannot again meet with them in any society besides.

The former appears, Psalm, 27. 4. One thing I desired of the Lord, and I
will desire it, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life.

But what moved David thus to wish this one thing? That I might see the beauty
of thine house: and although the beauty of the Sanctuary so far forth as it
was external, in regard of the matter, of the form, of the whole ordination
of it: yea and all the vtensils even to the very pinnes of it, which all were
of the Lords own invention and institution, and might therefore have drawn
carnal minds unto it (as at this day the sensible and plausible splendour and
beauty of the Church of Rome does many superstitious people) yet was never any
good and sincere heart (such as David's was) satisfied with external things in
Gods worship: well knowing that as God is a spirit; so nothing is there
pleasing unto him which is not spiritual: there are therefore other beauties
which the stranger enters not into ye beholding of; yea such as cannot be
beheld but with eyes as clear as crystal.

Quest. What are the beauties you speak of? Answ. They may be reduced Beauties
of the house of God.
unto these two heads: They are seen partly in respect of the parties present:
and partly in the things performed in such holy assemblies.

The persons present; are, first; GOD 1 the presence of God.
himself: whence such places are called Bethells, as David here thy house: thy
courts: and are no other then the presence chambers of this everlasting King of
glory. Here he sits in a chair of Estate, as formerly he sat between the
Cherubins: How can it then be but that the glory of the Lord should fill every
such house of his, as once it did the Temple 1. King. 8. 11. or where can a
faithful soul more securely, more joyfully rest it self, then in Gods own
resting place?

Secondly, Christ himself is here present: Math. 18. 20. Reave. 1 17. Luke 2,
96. 2. The presence of Christ.
for wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his name, he is in the
midst of them. He walks in the midst of the seven golden Candelsticks: And
no where else (if he be missing) can his parents and kindred find him then
in then Temple.

Now is not this a greater beauty then any which can elsewhere be espied?
wherein the second Temple passed the glory of the former: and yet ours exceed
the second! For how could the second Temple wanting 1. Gods presence between
the Cherubins. 2. the Vrim and Thumim. 3. the inspiration and raizing up of
extraordinary prophets. 4. the Arc it self the seat of God, which was taken
in the captivity. 5. fire from heaven to consume their sacrifices: how could (I
say) the second Temple wanting all these, be truly said to exceed the glory of
the former, which had the^ al? But only in regard of Christ's bodily presence
which by entering into it was to beautify it? And yet the effectual presence
of his spirit now with us, is far more powerful and glorious, then was his
bodily presence in that Temple.

Now seeing that Christ is the churches well-beloved, and is more then other
Cant. 5. 9. 10.
welbeloueds, even the chief of ten thousand; and has not left us direction
to meet him any where, save in the tents of sheapheards, and in the steps of
the flocks: Cant. 1. 7
should any christian soul (which is knitte unto him in spiritual wedlock;
the contract being already made, and the day of their marriage appointed, and
approaching) desire any socyetie more then his? Nay ought not every believing
soul to wish one hour spent in his socyetie and fellowshippe, rather then ten
thousand with any besides? So as hitherto David was not wide in his wish and
rejoicing.

Thirdly, the holy spirit of GOD is present in our assemblies; most
plentifully 3. The presence of the holy spirit of God.
pouring out of his full buckets the treasures of wisdom and grace; yea the
variety of graces accompanying salvation. Neither does this spirit ordinarily
display him-self elsewhere: who although he blows where he lists in
regard of the free and undeserved graces which he pours out: yet is it
ordinarily by means of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Censures publicly
exercised and administered according to the will of God.

Hence is it that we read still of the Word and Spirit: and water and the
Spirit joined together, because the spirit ordinarily puts forth the grace
of regeneration in the means of the word and sacraments. Now who has not good
cause, to wish (if not all his time) yet the most of it there spent; where by
the work and presence of the spirit, he may so happily enrich himself unto
life everlasting, rather then elsewhere, where is nothing but spiritual
poverty, nakedness, and beggary?

Fourthlie, the holy Angels of God are here present in our assemblies. Whence
4. The presence of the Angels.
the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. 10. wishes the woman to have power over her head
because of the Angels: that is, the woman in the congregation must cover her
head, as for other reasons, so for this which is not the least; in that the
Angels are present, and behold the order and behavior of men and women. But
why are the Angels present will some say? I answer not only in way of
Ministry and service unto the Lord, unto the elect, and unto his Ministry,
sundry ways both assisting and helping it forward, and withstanding such
enmities as otherwise resist it: but also after a sort to solace, and rejoice
themselves in the beauty of GODS house, so 1. Pet. 1. 12. Which things the
Angels desire to behold; speaking of the (...) desirous to stoop down.
Mysteries published in the Gospel.

To which makes that interpretation of the place in Hebrews. 12. 16. Yet once
more will I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. The meaning of which
words by the judgment of some excellent Divines, is this: that the voice of
God in the delivery of the law did cause the men on earth that hard it to quake
and tremble; but now in the preaching and delivery of the Gospel, the very
Angels in heaven, are after a sort shaken being ravished and rapt into the
admiration of it. Are there then such beauties in the asse^blies as that very
Angels themselves admire? and shall not men for whom they were instituted seek
both to espy, and be affected with them? and who can b^ame him that can come to
prize these beauties above all that the earth can afford besides? Seeing the
Angels themselves who are stripped from all earthly desires and delights, are
said to admire these, but never the other: such a man indeed is come nere to
Angelical perfection. Fifthly, The Saints of God here present Psalm. 16, 3 Psalm.
122. 4 5. The presence of the Saints of God upon the earth.
themselves in who^ al our delight ought to be. For as the Tribes of the Lord
used to go up to his house, that they might worship before him in his
Tabernacle and temple: even so now the people of God assemble themselves in our
congregations to the same purpose. Now when I say the people of God, I mean not
al hand over head, who promiscuosly come together; not withstanding they all
are his people by right of creation and preservation, and yet of them some are
openly and professed profane ones; Neither all those who join in external
profession and exercises of religion: of whom yet many are not inwardly purged:
in which sense the old world called them sons of GOD. That is, all the
posterity of Seth and Enosh, opposed to the daughters of men void of all
religion and piety. But I mean those of GODS election; that are called of his
purpose, that have obtained mercy, and who proceed on in the ways of
sanctification unto salvation.

These are called in Scripture an holy people, a chosen generation, a people
by purchase, the dove of Christ, his undefiled, his treasure: and their
property is described, that they fly as a cloud, and flock as the Doves
unto Isay. 60. 8
these windows. Which prophecy although it be properly to be understood of
the universal and general calling and concurse of the Gentiles unto the
Church, who should come with such celerity and swiftness as if a cloud were
with violence of winds carried from one side and region of heaven to the
other; and in such flocks and multitudes, as if a whole flight of piegeons
(driven either by tempest, or by an Eagle, or some other bird of prev) should
scour unto their columbarie, and rush into the windows: yet this property is
so peculiar unto persons once called and converted, as by which the holy Ghost
pleases to express them, rather then by any other title, that they are such
as flock to the windows of the Church, by which the Lord conueyeth to his
people his light of instruction, of consolation, of grace, of glory. So
elsewhere, the scriptures note them to be such as seek the Lord in his
ordinances, such as seek the face of the Lord, such as call one another to the
house of the Lord, and such as cheerfully and courageously march on, and will
not give out, until they meet the Lord in Sion.

Obs. If it be here objected, that these are but a few in comparison of the
multitude which resort unto the house of God: who belong no otherwise unto him,
then reteiners unto their Lords or masters, they wear his cloth, and now and
then give some formal attendance, but are no household servants.

An. I answer. That true it is that the best part for the most part, is the
least part, if we consider the truth of the thing: but yet Christian love
binds us to judge the best of all that join with us even in the outward
service of God, for we cannot enter into their hearts, but must leave them to
stand or fall to their own Lord, and forbear to judge them before the time.

Secondly, we must (notwithstanding the multitude of profane and
hypocritical persons in the congregation,) frame our judgments unto Gods, who
esteems the assemblies from the better part, and not from the greater; he
knew well that many more who were but Jews without, and in the letter resorted
unto the tabernacle; the^ those who were Jews within; yet it still retained
the titles of Gods house, and Gods courts.

Thirdly, It is a glorious thing to be admitted even to the outward profession
of religion, notwithstanding all are not of the Church that are in it. In which
regard Joshua calls all Israel the Lords possession, even because his
tabernacle Josh. 22. 19 Number. 23. 9 Zeph. 3. 9.
dwelt amongst them. And thus was it prophesied by Balaam himself, that
Israel should dwell alone, and should not be numbered among the nations, for
Israel was a people of a pure language. In all which the nation of the Jews
were advanced above all other people, because they were distinct and separated
from all other; both in their religion, laws, rites and condition of life, all
of them appointed and established by God himself.

How much more beautiful then and glorious are the co^gregations of Gods
people, in regard of such who are truly the Lords holy ones? allied unto
Christ, Saints by calling, and begin to lead even an heavenly life upon earth?
What is it that makes the Court more lovely and glorious, then all the rest of
the palaces of the land besides? It is not so much the stately building or
other braueries, but the presence of the King, Queen, Prince, Lords, Ladies,
and other their attendants answerably Gods courtsmore glorious then the courts
of Princes.
where the exercises of religion are established, are beauties no whit
inferior, but far passing the former. Solomon describing the glorious
condition of the church, compares it to the Courts of Kings and Monarchs of
the earth, but infinitely aduanceth it above them all, even in this
consideration.

There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Damsells without
Cant. 6. 7
number. As though he had said: If in any Court of the world instead of one
Queen (for ordinarily there are no more) there were threescore, and all
attendance proportional, though this were such a glorious and beautiful a
sight as never man saw, yet were it not comparable to the beauty of the Church,
every true member of which is a King over his lusts, and heir to the crown of
heaven.

True it is that this beauty of the Saints which beautifieth the assemblies is
partly blemished and stained, and partly hid and covered. The former by many
profane Esaus, that thrust themselves into the profession, who a while seem
to be living stones; but after appear but stubble laid upon the foundation.
These are spots in our meetings, who so far as in them lie, make the Church
resemble Nebuchadnezers image; whose head was of gold, but the belly and feet
of Iron and clay, which will not be tempered together but fall a sunder.

The latter, partly because this Kings daughter is glorious; but within, her
comeliness is like the Curteines of the Causes why the beauty of the Saints is
not seen of the most.
tabernacle, which outwardly were of courser stuff, but within costly for the
matter, and curious for the exquisite workmanshippe, and like to the beauty of
Christ himself in whom men saw neither form nor beauty, partly because
their infirmities cloud their beauty, and darken them in men's eyes, when yet
they remain most dear unto God: and partly because the sun of affliction
and persecution looks much and often upon them, which makes them seem
blacker then they are, and thus Christ himself was despised because men
judged him as plagued and smitten of God. Isa. 53. 4, and Job counted an
hypocrite of his friends. No marvel then it is, that such eyes as are not
anointed with the eye-salue cannot pry into this inward and secret object: no
marvel if eyes thus accustomed to false glasses be distempered; no wonder if
eyes still gazing upon such clouds be held from seeing the hidden glory of the
Saints, no otherwise then Elishaes servant was, who could not see the glory
which shone round about him. But such as are the Lords must herein express
the virtue and image of their heavenly father, who delights in his people as
in his portion; whom he accounts beautiful as the Lilly, and sweet as the
Rose. Even so all our delight should be in the Saints which excel in virtue:
let them be by infirmities, by afflictions black, yet in our eye they must be
comely: the shining graces of God in them ought as by strong cords to draw our
affections unto them: and if in our private course we ought to edify our
selves by this, and by our conuersing with them, partake of their graces and
increase or stir up our own: much more should we with all cheerfulness
partake with them in the public worship of God, by whose presence, behavior
and prayers our joy is more full, and our service more acceptable. Especially
seeing this whole Psalm shows how our Prophet from this consideration did
not a little provoke his heart and best affections unto the assemblies.

Now to end this point, seeing we are taught that here is the Court of the
King of glory, the holy God sits here in the holy assemblies, the holy
Angels of God are here present; the holy Saints of GOD stand here upon this
holy ground: how is it that we cannot conceive these meetings to be the most
beautiful places of the earth? How are we yet as blind as Moles, if we
epsy not and turn not our eyes unto such beauties? what a fearful delusion
is befallen them, who are so easily wone to the painted beauty of an harlot,
and despise the native beauty of the spouse of Christ? What a certain
damnation abide such, as by scorning the holy exercises of our public
meetings, and reproching the Preachers, and Ministers of them, seek to turn
this our glory into shame? but more of this in the uses following the doctrine.
Thus much we have spoken of the honorable persons present in our
congregations, the dutiful respect of who^ (if we wanted othermotiues) were
forcible enough to draw Godly hearts with cheerfulness unto our meetings.

Now the things which are performed in the congregation, are of the same
quality; even holy things: namely the whole public worship of God, standing
especially in the Ministry of 1. Word, 2. Sacrament, 3. Prayer, 4. Keys of
the Church: of none of which can any that knows them affirm truly, that it
wants power and persuasion to draw any godly heart unto it.

And first in these meetings it cannot be denied, but that we enjoy a most
comfortable and precious treasure of Benefits by the public reading of the
word.
the word of God, and that both read and preached, the weaker of which means
wants not his fruitful use in the Church, that whosoever ascribes not much
unto the public reading of the Scriptures: well considers not the necessity
of that ancient ordinance of God, who of old would have Moses read every
sabbath, and instituted a lecture of the law and Prophets. The which Act. 15.
21. Act. 13. 15.
ordinance of God, not only the holy Apostles: but the son of God himself
graced, yea honored not with his presence only; but also with his ministry;
for (as his custom was) he went Luke 4, 16.
into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read. And if here it
be asked, what are the special benefits reaped by this ordinance instituted
out of the wisdom of God: I answer. First, It is a notable means to come to
the knowledge of the history of the Scriptures, wherein the chief works that
ever the Lord did in the Church are recorded, whether of justice or of mercy,
especially those of our fall in the first Adam, and recovery by the second.
Secondly, to confirm our faith in all the points of Christian faith and
religion: the maine grounds of which we have fore-prophecied of in the old
testament, and are fulfilled in the new.

3. To direct our judgments in proouing of all things; and holding that which
is good, as the Baereans searched the Scriptures, to see whether the things
were Act. 17. 11.
so as Paul preached, which if it be a fruit of private reading (as the rest
also are) much more of public.

Fourthly, to train us to the more profitable hearing of the word preached.
Fifthly, to acquaint us with the phrase of the Scripture; so as we can both
understand, and speak the language of Canaan.

But who can speak of the glory of The benefits of the word preached.
our ministry, in regard of the word preached: which as a more ordinary and
principal means leads us along unto salvation, by a more full manifestation
of the promise of life: yea not only explayning things to clear them to the
understanding; but applying them unto the heart and affection, and urging them
upon the life and conversation of a Christian. The blessed work of which
institution will evidently appear, if we consider the objects upon whom it
works; and those be either the unconverted, or converted, or both.

In regard of the unconverted, it is the ordinary means to beget them to
God, by enlightening their eyes, opening their ears, mollifying their hearts,
and working faith in their souls, which comes by hearing. And what a blessed
work is this Romans 10.
whereby the sons of wrath become the sons of GOD? whereby those who are
laid low in hell by sin, are raised unto the glory of the highest heaven?
and whereby the just heirs of damnation are entitled into the state of
salvation, to receive inheritance among those that are sanctified, In this
excellent use is it called a Ministry of reconciliation, of peace, a word of
grace, of salvation, and of life. 2. In 2. Cor. 5. 18 Ephesians. 6. 15. Acts. 14. 3.
Act. 20. 32
respect of those who are converted: It is a powerful means of the spirit;
First to increase their knowledge, by the daily clearing of their judgments
from error, and ignorance; and leading them into all necessary truths.
Secondly, to strengthen and increase their faith, bringing it with daily
progress from the infancy and weakness of it, till the believer attain his
tallnesse and strength in Christ.

Thirdly, to call them from their daily wanderings and strayings, and settle
them in a godly course.

Fourthly, to prevent their falls, whilst they are here partlye furnished
with Christian Armor against temptations; for through the Ministry of the
word, Satan falls like lightning from heaven. and his strongest holds are
cast down: Luc. 10. 18 2. Cor. 10. 4.
partly while they are counseled in their doubts, finding the word in this
Ministry, especially the man of their counsels. Partly while they are
admonished of such ways as are disagreeable to such an high calling as they
have undertaken. Fifthly, to raise them out of falls, by discovering unto them
the nature and danger of sin, the working of their own infirmities, the
bitter root of original corruption: the poisoned fruits of it: and by many
motives continually provoking their repentance, which was the scope Christ's
forerunners Sermon; yea of his own preaching, and of his Apostles. Math. 3.
2. Marc. 1. 15 Acts. 2. 38
Sixthly, most absolutely to direct them through their whole Christian course.
If they be alone, it affords them matter of holy meditation; that they are
never less then alone, when they are most alone, except those can be alone,
who walk with God. And if they be to deal with others, it enableth them to
become great lights; ready and furnished to instruct, and comfort abroad, to
be as eyes to the blind: and feet to bring the lame to Christ: and at home
to teach and pray with their family, so as their houses become little Bethels,
and houses of GOD, in which the Lord is truly and constantly worshipped, and
both themselves and the Churches in their houses, daily edified upon their most
holy faith.

Now in regard both of the wicked who are by the word preached, more
hardened, and of the godly whose number by the same means are daily augmented
and accomplished, the appearing of Christ unto Judgment is hastened, which the
Saints ought to long after, as in which they expect, and shall attain their
full redemption.

Secondly, in the Sacraments we drink yet deeper of the Lords bounty,
Comfort by the holy sacraments.
who contenteth not himself to bring his children unto the faith by the former
means, unless also hereby he raise them unto a full growth in Christ. As a
tender mother accounts it not enough to bring forth her child, except she also
nursse and cherish it up unto man's estate. So has the Lord in these sacraments
to show the abundant sweetness of his love in Christ, after he has in the
word preached, made the covenant of grace known unto men; he also does most
surely seal it up unto their souls, by those Romans 4. 11.
seals of the righteousness of faith. The former sealing up their union,
ingrafting and fellowship with Christ, from whom as from a root, they draw and
suck the moisture of grace, without which they are but dead, and withered
branches. The latter assuring their continual grouth, and increase in him,
till they become tall trees of righteousness, and both of them further helping
both our understandings as glasses by which we see clearer into the mystery of
our redemption; as also our memories, as monuments before our eyes, with which
sense of learning our God would have us taught, as well as by the other of
hearing: as in the third place both of them not only spurring up every
believer to the performing of the covenant; but also strengthening him to every
good duty, whereby he may magnify this grace of God.

Thirdly for prayer, how unspeakable By public prayer how God is glorified.
is the glory of GOD rendered by the Church, gathered together, and how
wonderful are the blessings which are vouchsafed the Church from God, in and
by means of this holy duty, especially when they are assembled in the house
of prayer? In the former regard Psalm. 65. 2.
is it said by the Prophet, Praise waits for thee in Sion. For what greater
honor can befall the Lord, then first in petition to be acknowledged the
giver of every good and perfect gift? to be depended upon for all comfort,
instruction and every good grace: to be acknowledged the author and finisher
of our faith, the beginner and accomplisher of all our works, in us and for
us? and in the confession of our indignity and misery (even the best) to have
his free grace amplified, and his prerogative yielded him, whose privilege it
is to say; I will forgive? Secondly, in praises to be magnified by his whole
Church for the fruits of his free love, manifestly shining in his works of
creation, redemption, preservation, and salvation of his Church: yea and when
his people have done all they can in way of thankfulness for them; yet even
the best of them shall acknowledge, that they cannot find what to render unto
him for his undeserved love: Thus the Tribes go up to Jerusalem to praise
the name of the Lord. Psa. 166. 18 Psalm. 122. 4


In the second respect, what a singular privilege is it that we have leave
given us by our requests to speak and commune with our God? and where-as the
rich treasures of grace and good things are with him The members of the Church
abundantly enriched.
surely kept as under lock and key: how happily may we by this means unlock
and open them all unto our selves? Yea that when we cannot by any thing in us
or from us demerite the least blessing (we being less then the least mercy)
yet if we can but lift up one request of faith we have prevailed, and
overcome God himself in the greatest.

And if the prayer of one righteous man can prevail so much as the scriptures
testify of Moses, Jacob, Elias: how much more when two or three consent
together in private prayer? But when public prayer is presented up by many, yea
the whole church; how can that but exceed in strength? For as in experience we
see, many flowers bound together yield the stronger sent; and compound water is
sweeter the^ simple; many sticks make a great fire; and united force more
forceable: so every christian alone and a part in this duty is acceptable unto
God; but when many join in holy society, they are much more pleasing unto him,
much more joyful among themselves, and much more mutually encouraged to the
practices of piety, and love one toward another.

Public breaches are soon made up if many Moysesses stand up in the gap.
Public peace if it be wanting is speedily and happily procured when many
Eliases lift up requests unto the Lord, Prayers of the faithful are the walls
and munition of a people.
every one of which are as strong as the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel.
Public blessings are easily obtained when many Jacobs wrestle together with
the Lord: Fully resolved not to let him go until he have given them a
blessing. The public ministry is successefully Romans 15. 30. 2 Cor. 1. 11.
both settled and exercised when the Saints strive with their Ministers by
prayers to God for them: and when the faithful labor together in prayer for
the same purpose.

The private necessities also of any one private member of the Church, are
sooner supplied by the instance and importunity of the whole; and such as
cannot come upon their own feet (as the man sick of the palsy) are let
down by the cords of the churches prayer Luke 5. 19.
and set before Christ. A powerful and preuayling thing is it with the Lord
when a number of believers are in one place, and one accord, of one heart, and
one soul as it were in many bodies, to whom he has given one heart and one
way, yea one pure language to call on his name and serve him with one shoulder.
Fourthly, if unto Zep, 3. 9. Act. 2. 46. and ver. 32. Ier, 32. 39.
the three former we shall ad the last part of the ministry performed in our
holy meetings, we shall see both the glory of God further enlarged, and the
benefit of the church amplified. For here we have also to our unspeakable good,
the Keys of the Kingdom opening and shutting heaven; the power of binding or
loosing of sinners. The authority of delivering to Satan the obstinate sinners
and releasing the penitent. Now what glory is it to the almighty when his just
sentence is before hand denounced against the ungodly of the earth? Where by
himself is cleared in his judgment and the sinner more justly wrapped up in
the bands of death which he had no care to prevent.

And on the other side no less comfort it is for the humble soul in the same
Ministry of the Word preached to be fully released from sin, and absolved
from all his unrighteousness, and assured that whatsoever such sentence is
rightly pronounced in Earth is ratified also in Heaven.

These things being of such an high nature, as in which the public
worship of GOD is performed to his so great glory, and our own so great
good, no marueil if Dauip be so instant in his desire: and yet these things
were after a sort veiled and but shadowed in that ministry of the sanctuary.
For the Arc it self was with curtains, and there lay no high way unto it, no
not for David him-self: only men must look toward it in their prayers. And
within that Arc were 1 Kings. 8. 9.
hid and chested up the tables of the covering representing the Word, read
and preached: In the Tabernacle also was the golden pot of Mannah a special
type of our Sacraments: and the rod of Aaron shadowing the rod of the church
Discipline. How much more should we (were we not so blockish as men hewne out
of hard oaks) rejoice in such an open and glorious face of Jesus Christ? Yea
with the Prophet account it our Blessedness to dwell Verse. 4.
in the Lords house, where we may ever praise him: because hereby we come
nearest unto the life of just and perfect men in heaven; to the which while we
frame our selves aforehand, we have entered into some degree of their
blessedness, as also of our own.

Thus far we hitherto discovered those beautyes of the house of God, both in
respect of Persons present and holy things performed: which if men could see
with bodily eyes, (as they cannot be perceived but by such as have cleared
eyes) they would excite admirable love and affection toward them.

Now we are to entreat of the privileges, and benefits which Gods people The
privileges of Gods people in the assemblyes.
reap by frequenting the same: and the rather that such as perhaps little
regard the glory of God, shining in his ordinances, brighter then the Sun in
his strength, might yet for their own advantage and profitte be persuaded
with diligence and reverence in this his house to seek the face of the LORD.

Now although the privileges be as manyfold in number, as excellent in their
quallity: yet I will content my self to note four of them: and these four
rather then any other, because I see them to be such as moved in the Prophet
David above all other these holy and ardent desires; as in every of them will
plainly appear.

First, the benefit of light and instruction. The first work that the Lord does
1 Instruction.
in these little worlds (as once in the great) is to separate light and darkness
in such as are in Christ created again unto good works. For which purpose the
Lord himself by his spirit becomes the Schoolmaister of his people,
teaching them to know him in himself in his Christ: to believe, to work and
walk. Here in his house (setting a copy to all masters of familyes what to
do in their houses) he opens his treasures of wisdom, and teaches no
triuiall matters: But first, for their necessity, matters of life and death.
Second, for their dignity such mysteries as flesh and blood can never attain
unto; partly concerning God, as the doctrine of the Trinity. Partly concerning
Christ, as of his incarnation, conception, union of his natures, and partly
concerning our selves. As our resurrection, life eternal all which are matters
of faith. Third, for their use such as persuade the truth, preserve from error,
raize such as are feign, strengthen those that stand, comfort the afflicted,
pacify the conscience, confirm the certain hope of life eternal, and
deliver the deeds of it into our hands: and indeed the benefit of our
redemption and whole salvation by Christ were little worth without these holy
means whereby it is revealed and applied unto us.

This is that benefit which our Prophet expresses in the beginning of the
verse following. For the LORD GOD is the Sun That is look what the Sun is
to the World, that is the LORD GOD to his Church the Sun of the World is not
so necessary to lighten the day, as this Sun of the Church to lighten the
darkness and dungeon of the souls of men: without wc (seeing all our
heavenly lght is from it) our estate is far more uncomfortable then that of the
Egiptians in their Exodus 10. 23.
three days darkness: for here no man can all his days stir out of the
place where his natural corruption has set him. And where shines this Sun
but in the church, this is the Goshen Down go Dagon and Diana before the Arc.
where this light is: In the ministry especially it displayeth the beams of it.

Secondly, necessary provision both for sustenance and safety of soul and 2.
Sustenance and safety.
body. First for the susteining of the soul here, is milk, and stronger
meat: here we have the Lord pouring out all his goodness: Here the great King
prepares a great supper, kills his fatlings, prepares his milk and wine,
spreads his table, sets on it Jesus Christ the bread and water of life:
whose flesh is meat indeed; whose blood is drink indeed: Here he by his
ministers inuiteth and entreats men to ye banquet: here he fills the hungry
and thirsty soul with good things: works new strength of life and grace; as
rejoicing in God; peace of good conscience, joy in the holy Ghost,
watchfulness against sin, comfort in tribulation, quickness and strength in
good duties, boldness in good causes, and a life led and finished in faith and
obedience. Here the Lord clotheth the naked soul, and puts on it the Lord
Jesus Christ, whose righteousness becomes the costly and comely raiment of
it. Here he inricheth the poor soul with treasures of grace and godliness.
Here by the fire of his spirit he warmeth and reuiueth the staruen soul.
Here is the tree of life for the sick soul, the leaves whereof serve to cure
the nations. In a word; Christ offered and received in the Ministry, is food
and Physic, cloth and warmth, wealth and health, life and length of days,
yea all in all unto the soul of all his believing ones. And 2. for bodily food
and raiment with other necessaries for the life present, although those who ar
without ye church enjoy them; yet they have them not in that special blessing
and comfort, as the members of the church; who 1. have them by virtue of that
special promise: First seek the Kingdom of God, and other things shall be cast
on you: and 2. hold them by a right and title in Christ: and 3. are taught how
to employ them to the glory of the giver, all which make these blessings good
to them as they are in themselves.

Secondly, for perfection and safety: 1. Spiritual, here is a shadow and sweet
Satan foiled, armies of his forces discomfited.
refuge against the whole wrath of God appeased by Christ: here we see sin
subdued, death vanquished, righteousness purchased, great deliverance wrought
for the souls of believers: here we have strength in temptation, and victory
over our selves: for here is Gods grace reveled which is sufficient for us.

Now this salvation of God is not elswher to be heard off, but in the tidings
which we bring; nor revealed unto any but the true members of the church. In
Mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance. As for temporal perfection:
Joel. 2. 32.
whereas when men are cast out of the Icr. 15. 2.
sight of God (as unbelievers who are without the pale of Gods protection) they
ly open unto the sword, famine, captivity, to the dogs to tear, to the fowls
of heaven, and the beasts of the field to devour: so on the contrary the nearer
God the surer of safety; for judgments fly far from God. Hence is it that
to the members of the church, safety is promised under the shadow of the wings
of the almighty, especially while they are in the performance of public duties
before the Lord, and it is worthy our observing that the Lord in making that
law of the three feasts, wherein all the men three times every year must
repair before the Lord and continue each A far journey of many days travel. A
service of long continuance, seven days at a time, their wives might be
endangered, their virgins violated, their goods spoiled.
time in his worship together many days, preuenteth all their objections:
for they might say, but will not this give great advantage to the enemy to watch
such times to win their countries again, Which in any one of those three times
in our so long absence from our houses, leaving none to defend the^ but women
and children they might easily enter upon? Or were it not fit if there must be
three such meetings yt the people of one province should assemble at one of
them, and they of another at the second, and so in the third: then to leave the
whole country at once without men, and strength exposed to such certain
danger? No says the Lord: come before me every man thrice a year, for no man
shall desire thy land, when thou shall appear before the LORD Exodus, 34. 24,
himself would be the strength of it at yt time, and so watch it as the enemy
should not so much as desire it: the like we may observe in their gathering of
Mannah every day in ye morning wc was not only an obedience unto gods
commandment but a special resemblance and shadow of seeking Jesus Christ in ye
parts of his worship. Now herein seemed to lie no small danger toward them; For
either the enemies wc were continually troublesome unto the^ might take their
camps whilst the whole host was abroad gathering Mannah, or else they might lie
in ambush in the wilderness for the host about ye place where the Mannah fell:
yet for all their danger (and notwithstanding they had many skirmishes in ye
wilderness) we never read yt this was any disadvantage unto the^. The Lord so
watched them and theirs, that never by their gathering of Mannah nor in that
time and place they were disparaged, no nor set upon: for the eye of the Lord is
most upon them yt ar nearest unto him. Set thy self to gather Mannah in the
ministry thou shall not fail of Gods protection. And this the Prophet David in
the second place teaches in the verse following. For God is the Sun and shield.
And hereby he provoked himself often into the presence of God in the
assemblies, and the rather in that now he was so hunted out of every corner;
and every day brought him more danger then other, that there was often but a
step between him and death; he had great cause to long after that defense and
safety which the Lord reaches out to such as have liberty with good hearts
to worship before him in his Temple. Thirdly, strong consolation for all
conditions of life, even such as otherwise 3 Comfort for all conditions.
would be most vnco^fortable. For when the people of God are compassed with
such judgments and terrors, whether without or within them, as they cannot
tell what way to turn them; when changes of sorrows come thick and threefold
one in the neck of an other: when whole armies of temptations besiege them; so
as they see no way of issue and escape: here are they encouraged to set their
eyes upon ye Lord; who pitying them as a father the child which he loves; will
not suffer them to sink in their sorrow; but holds them up by the chin, that
they perish not in their trouble. For here come they to know 1. that the Lords
manner is first to give strength, and then the burden wc shall not be above
that strength. 2. that the Lord must rule in his house, and necessarily must
administer out of his justice as well correction as reward, and draw even his
dear ones unto him as well by the rods of men, as by the cords of love; which
is a singular prop unto their patience. So as they can be well contented under
it. 3. yt though their troubles be never so great, yet he will deliver them out
of al in due season. 4 that he will make these afflictions soueraign and
wholesome unto them; and turn even their sufferings to their best; all things
fall out to the best to them that Romans 8. 28.
love God. Thus the Lord makes good his promise to such as conscionably seek
him in his ordinance, as one whom his mother comfort so shall you in
Jerusalem. Isa 66. 13. Psalm. 119. 92.
Whereas if the word were not their comfort they were sure to perish in their
trouble.

Besides here the people of GOD reap the comfort of their prayers; for as a
King receives petitions at the Court; or as a master of a family is ready to
hear and receive all the complaints and requests of his children and
servants: even so the LORD in this house gives free access unto himself;
and for their encouragement herein freely promises, that he will be ready to
hear their prayers, behold their sighs, put their tears into his bottle, send
no man away empty, and cast none in the teeth for his importunity so it be
guided aright.

Seeing thererfore that here are such consolations to be attained as the
whole World besides cannot give, nor take away; so certain, so seasonable, so
spiritual, so perpetual: Which of us have not as much reason to wish the
fruition of such a gracious presence of GOD were it but for one day, above all
other all our days as David did? This holy man well knew that one day was but
short in comparison of many days: But yet their rejoicing with the Church in
the Church assemblyes for one day was worthily to be preferred before the
rejoicing of many days without the Church; in that the weight of this joy
recompensed the shortness of it self; and counteruailed the length of the other,
being unspeakably glorious. This third privilege is that wc he in the third
place mentions as a steel spur to his affection: where in the next verse he
adds that the Lord is (not only the Sun and shield) but grace in his church,
that is, graciously accepts in his Christ, 1. the persons, and then the
prayers of such as are assembled in spirit and truth to worship him and call
upon his name.

Fourthly, Blessedness and salvation wc is not ordinarily out of these
assemblies 4. Eternal happiness.
to be attained. A true saying it is, that, none can have God his father, that
has not the church for his mother, neither can any testify himself a child
of the Church; but by the dutiful acknowledgment of her whenever God shows
her face. When Jacob was awake out of his sleep in which the Lord had appeared
unto him: He said, This is the house of GOD, this is the gate of heaven, in
like manner may Gen* 28. 17.
we conceive and speak of these places in which it pleases the LORD so
graciously to appear unto us; this is no other then the gate; these are surely
the suburbs of heaven. Out of Per portam ecclesiae intramus in portam paradifi
August, de tempore sermon. 137.
the Church is no salvation, whosoever remained without the Arc, (a tipe of
the visible Church) was drowned. The Lord saue^th none whom he first adds not
unto the Church. And the Scriptures attribute salvation (but yet ministerially)
to the womb, breasts, and lap of the Church, which is the Mother of us Gal.
4. 26.
all. And of Sion is it said, that many are borne in her. And this last was not
the Psalm. 87. 5.
least motive which stirred in our holy Prophet these instant desires. The Lord
is grace and glory; not only because the Lord is the glory of his people, here
and hereafter; Nor that only in the Church the Lord reueileth his glory, but
also because he leads his children unto it by the means there by his wisdom
appointed.

Now considering the places whereon our feet stand are holy ground, the
persons present holy and glorious; the duties performed holy and spiritual;
the privileges of Gods people so preacious and abundant in all these
regardes, can we do less then wish our portions and shares in them? and does
it not now seem a most reasonable and religious wish to spend if it were but
one day here, rather then a thousand elsewhere? or shall we still need many
goads to provoke us to love, or rejoice in Jerusalem, where we may thus suck
and be satisfied with the breast of her consolation, where we may milk out
and be delighted with the Isa. 66. 11.
brightness of her glory?

If we would have our hearts justify us in this holy rejoicing, our labor
Use. 1.
must be to see daily further into these beauties of Gods house, which may
ravish our hearts with the love of it above all other places in the earth.

The Scriptures not in a few places aduanceth and highly extolleth such
assemblies A good heart would turn their eye to the beauties of Gods house
as wherein God and his people are met together to the former purposes; and
all that our hearts and affections might be moved to enquire and find out
such excellencies here, as the mouth of the Lord himself has so frequently
recommended unto us.

The Prophet Isay says, that the Isa. 2. 2.
house of the Lord is prepared in the top of the mountains, and exalted above
the hills. Which place may receive some light by that comparison, which the
Prophet David makes Psalm. 66. 16
between Mount Sion and mount Basan, and many other great hills. Why hoppe ye
so ye hills? this is Gods hill. By Mountains are meant the greatest Empires,
and most flourishing Kingdoms of the earth abounding with wealth and power;
which all in Basan are made inferior to Sion: not that either in spaciousness
of ground, or multitude, or goodness of people, or strength, or riches, or
outward pomp and glory, Sion was comparable to any of them: for the kingdom
of Israel was the least and fewest, and as badde and wicked Deuteronomy 7. 7. and 9.
4. 6.
as any people under heaven: It was bounded and shut up in a small model
and compass of ground, and for strength and power, came far short of the
great kingdoms of Assyria, Aegipt, etc.

How then was it so advanced and exalted above the mountains? surely herein.
This is Gods hill; and so made high above all nations, in praise, name, and
glory. Gods dwelling in it was the wealth, strength and beauty, yea I add the
blessedness of it: for blessed is that land whose God is the Lord. Thus also
was Capernaum said to be lifted up unto heaven, only in regard of the
presence, doctrine, and miracles of Christ. So in our Bethels God himself is
the beauty and glory of every of them: his administration here far excelling
Solomon in all wisdom, the owner of it being the true Solomon, the God of
Israel, who as a great householder, out of his goodness fostereth, out of his
wisdom teaches, out of his power rules, and out of his rich mercy tendreth
the complaints and requests of every one within his gates. In this house all
the household servants have one livery and garment, the righteousness of
Christ to cloth them; all feed at the self same table, and eat childrens
bread: all have one elder brother Jesus Christ the first borne of many
brethren: all have one sort of servants, the Angels who not only go before
them and at their heels, but as a guard are pitched about them: all have one
inheritance, and become heirs and fellow heirs with Christ himself. The
wisdom and glory of which whole administration if we could as well behold as
the Queen of Seba did the orders in Salomons Court: we could not but account
them blessed, that might here be admitted into place of service; to hear the
wisdom of the King of glory, and Prince of peace, who dwells within these
everlasting doors: Which heavenly delights while men know not, no marvel if
they affect them not. But on the contrary, one coming to behold them in any
evidence, as little marvel is it, if with David they would enjoy them with
exchange of all earthly pleasures. For who is it which has never so little
tasted of the goodness of God, that loves not the Lords habitation, and the
place where his honor dwells? ye that thirsts not after God and his
presence, as the Heart brayeth after the Psalm, 42. 1.
rivers of water?

Secondly, if our hearts be sound Use. 2.
in this rejoicing, then can we not but in heart and affection join our
selves upon all good occasions unto the Church of God in her meetings, as such
as would partake of her privileges, for this is a note of a converted person.
The believers continued Act. 2. 42.
in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers.
And if such multitudes of sundry sorts of people, and such as could not find
their names in the genealogy, came out of Aegipt, and out of Babylon with the
Israelites, only because they saw GODS blessing following that people: How
much more should we be provoked to join our selves to such societies as are
assembled to worship him in spirit and truth: seeing it is not any temporal
blessing which runs into our eye, but spiritual and eternal; neither any
out-warde privilege, which we alone may make account of (as they) but such as
is inward and heavenly, yea such as rayseth us unto the condition of the
sons of the living God, Hose. 1. 10


But those men's hearts are not right within them that need but the Con^^^t.
wagging of a straw to keep them from Church, much less of those who place
their felicity in turning away from GOD, from his ordinances, and the place of
his true worship, what-so-euer their pretenses may be. And here it shall
not be amiss to meet with some of them, especially such as are scarcely to
be met with-all even there where some writers have to very fruitful
Preachers plea.
purpose set themselves to answer the most objections of this kind.

1. And first to admonish such as need no other thing then their own
wilfulness to excommunicate and banish themselves from the house of God, and
assemblies of the faithful. Of these the first sort profess themselves
touched with zeal of the Seperators.
glory of GOD: they have observed the wild beast of the Forest to have broken
down our hedge, thrown our pale to the ground; and with a profane foot,
trodden down and rooted up all our holy things; they see no beauty, but all
deformity and nakedness in our Churches; which yet they will not vouchsafe
that name; but sties of unclean beasts, cages of filthy birds, and rudiments
of Babylon. Thus they vex themselves above measure, in seeking Ministers,
callings, people of God, and Churches: and because they cannot find a man in
the market, they separate from our assemblies.

To which I answer, that though it be It is enough for thy Church to be without
spotte or wrinckle in heaven.
not the condition of our or any Church to be free from all blemish and spotte,
yet is he as blind as a Mole, and palpably deluded, that can espy no beauty
therein. What? is our Mother so black as she has no comeliness? or because
perhaps she wants some beauty, has she lost her face? sure I am, that where
there is the face of God in the midst of his people there is a face of the
Church: and where God is present, there is the house of God: But in our
assemblies we have God present teaching his people: yea we have Christ
present in the word and Sacraments, even crucified before our eyes, who is the
image of his Father. We have the presence of the blessed spirit of God (which
they cannot deny) enlightening the understandings, softning the hearts,
comforting the consciences; pouring forth his graces of faith, of hope, of
love, and that in abundant manner in this his own ordinance upon many
thousand souls which are daily added unto the Church: and therefore whatsoever
we yet want, let us thankfully acknowledge that we want not the presence of
God, nor the house of God, nor the face of God, before which his people present
themselves with liberty, and protection joining together in the pure worship of
his name, to his endless praise, and their own unspeakable comfort.

Howsoever therefore Satan works according to his accustomed craft to
trouble our sight; let us be more wise and wary then to be led from the
beholding of the face of God, and so wilfully depart from this our rejoicing.

And let such as are so ready to be mislead, acknowledge with thankfulness
their spiritual father that begat them to God: their Mother the Church that
bare them: her breasts the Testaments that gave them milk, and that she is not
since their birthe so weakened, but that she is as able to preserve them as to
bring them forth: and to feed them with stronger meat, so to bring them to
their tallnesse in Christ.

2. An other sort of them who Reeusants.
wilfully by excommunicating themselves out of our assemblies, deliver
themselves to Satan, are Popish minded persons, who because they cannot see
neither their little breaden God in our Sacraments; nor their wooden gilded
Gods in our worship: and because they cannot hear GOD speak Latin in our
Churches; nor our Ministers inuocating Saints and Angels in our Prayers:
therefore sure here are no foote-steppes of GOD: nor so much as the rudements
of his worship and service: hence they refuse all communication with us in
Papists must see their God because they cannot believe him.
word, Sacraments, Prayers, and Church service; and join themselves in a
worship wherein they need not be at the pains to seek a God sitting so
high as in the heavens, seeing they can have him at home in a box; who if he
chance to putrify or corrupt; or be devoured of Mice, they can have a new one
made by the Priest and Baker together every day.

A worshipp in which if they have Implicit faith.
no knowledge, no faith of their own, the knowledge and faith of the Church
will besteede them; nay if they can believe as the Church believes, although
they know not what the Church does believe: a worship wherein if they
neither can pray themselves, nor yet get CHRIST to be an intercessor for
them: yet they can procure a thousand Mediators besides of Saints, Angels;
and if these should fail, they have the Virgin Mary at a dead lift to command
her son in the right of a Mother to clemency. A worship wherein if they can
neither abstain from sin, nor yet repent of it in truth, yet if they can pay
well, a little penance shall acquit them. A worship wherein if they never were
good, nor did good: yet their Church has a treasury, which (upon another
condition,) can supply them of good works, which some man who in his life time
was too good bequeathed to such purposes. Oh vain worship, and full of
delusion, not more plausible to the corrupt nature of man, then dishonorable to
the high Majesty of God!

And were these things true, who could blame him that has resolved to live and
dye a Papist? but alas that poor souls should be held in such chains of
darkness and death! The Lord in his good time open the prison doors, and
strike off the boults from so many as belong to him, that they may see
themselves set free from such woeful estate, as wherein they lay bound by
Satan and his instruments even under damnation.

And yet more fearful is the condition of such of them as have had their
error discovered by the clear sunshine of the Gospel, and yet are settled
upon their lees, upon no better ground then like so many Barzillaes, 2. Sam.
19. 35.
that they have been so long accustomed to the worse, that they despise the
better; their senses are past them, they cannot taste the truth, they cannot
see the wisdom of GOD shining round about them, they cannot hear the voice of
the charmer; in Gilead they will dye, before they will choose to live in
Jerusalem: in superstition they began; they continue in error; they will dye in
wilful blindness, and will be buried in the graves of the idolatry of their
forefathers.

The Lord once appeared to Jacob, but he was not aware of it, the Genesis 28. 16
reason was because he was a sleep: the Text says. Then Jacob awooke out of
his sleep and said, surely the Lord is in this place and I was not aware, and
this is the case of many a superstitious person.

God appears unto his Israel in Bethel in his house: but they are not aware
of him, they see him not, they will not believe he is among us. But what is
the reason? not because he is not there; but because they are a sleep and in
their dreams; but if ever GOD awaken them, they will be able to utter Jacobs
confession: and upon better advise to say: How fearful is this place? It is
no other but the house of God, and this is the gate Verse. 17.
of heaven.

3. Others are more profane and secure, then wilful and refractarie, and
though not so much hatred, yet little more love bewrays it self in them then
in former sorts: and least they should seem also to be mad without
reason; they are not without sundry colors and pretenses which they think
are reasonable enough to absent themselves from our assemblies. And therefore
they ask; What can we not be Christians Ob.
unless we trotte so often to Church? have we not the Scriptures and other
good books at home to read upon, can we not pray at home?

Ans. They may as well ask; Can Good christians cannot be heavy to the Church.
we not have an harvest unless we have a seed time; and rain, yea the
first and latter rain? or can we not live unless we have meat? I say no:
No more can thou be a Christian unless thou take the ordinary means
appointed by GOD, and unless thou subject thy self to that policy and order
which God has set in his Church. Would thou go for a good subject, and yet
not submit thy self to any of the Kings laws? God has set us a public
ministry in his Church, and has appointed Pastors, and teachers for thy
gathering if thou belongest to life: and is it meet that any private exercise
should cross so public ordinances? No the wisdom of GOD admits no such
inconvenience in making his laws, and delivering his orders unto his Church.

Ob. But though it cannot be denied, but it is sometimes good to go hear a
Sermon: yet what need so much preaching? what, would men have us Saints on
earth? our forefathers (who we hope are well, and wish our selves no better)
never were troubled with Sermons, and our selves have lived some thirty,
forty, fifty, or A needless allegation that so much preaching is not
needful.
sixty years in good case and credit, and yet were never so forward to run to
Sermons; we hope to GOD we can learn to love God above all, and our
neighbor as our selves, and pray to God, and carry good hearts to Godward
without all this a do.

Answ. Can I believe any man that says he sees, when I see him shut his eyes?
can I think that a man has any true knowledge of God, who desires not to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord JESUS CHRIST? How can I
believe that that man is in earnest, or if he be that he is in his wits
that shall thus plead against his life; I hope I have eaten meat enough
heretofore, and got strength enough and now I need no more: and therefore I
will never eat more, nor drink more while I live: if a frantic man should
come to such conclusions, any man might say well thou shall then live but a
while. Do thou not see this holy Prophet who was advanced both in knowledge
and holiness above the most living; and dwelt as an Angel in the World; yet did
not he acknowledge himself greatly to stand in need of stirring up by these
means given of God for that end? And yet thou a man of little or no faith, a
nouice and petty in the school of Christ, if yet you ever entredst into it,
art so full and complete as thou can or need go no The ignorance of our age
more dangerous then of our forefathers, theirs was simple, ours affected.
further.

As for thy forefathers they had not the means as thou have: and if any of
them perished without them, yet their stripes are fewer then thine shall be
who contemnest them. If they had had ye means offered, it is likely they would
have been more fruitful in them, or If not, it had not been for their case
(no more then thine) to have despised them. And lamentable it is to see how men
suffer satan to ouer-reach them in a matter of such moment as is their freehold
in heaven. If any man had house, land or legacy befalling him, would he reason
thus? Why I care not for it I have lived now 40. or 50. years well enough and
in good credit without it; I am too old now to change my estate although for ye
better; never man made such a foolish reason: and yet such fools are men that
upon this ground they stand against their greatest, spiritual and eternal
good. Whereas if they had the wisdom of men in them, they should rather thus
conclud: have I all this while lived without knowledge of God, faith in Christ,
conscience of my ways? oh it is high time now to awake out of sleep.

And to such as can easily learn to love God above all and the neighbor as Not
easily learned to love God above al and thy neighbor as thy self.
themselves; it is not a thing so soon learned as they pretend. Is every man a
good mason or carpenter that can say, I know as much as the best workman can
teach or tell me, to build an house is but to lay the foundation, and lay on
the roof: or is he therefore a good husbandman yt can say, I know as much as the
best husbandman can teach me; for what is husbandry else but to sow and to
reap? But here a mean conceit will reply and say, yea but there are very
many things required before a man can do either of these two works: which if
you know not you can never be commendable neither in the one nor the other. So
I say a number of things go before the love of God and the neighbor, as faith,
repentance, prayer, knowledge of Gods will and word, knowledge of Christ in
whom our works must find acceptance: and more these duties of love must be
expressed in infinite actions through the whole life, all which if a man be
not particularly instructed in, his love of God and his neighbor is but in word
and tongue, but there is noe deed nor truth in either.

And for their prayer which the hope they can acceptably perform, the truth
is, let them pray and fast to it, so long as they turn their ears from
hearing the law: such prayers are not only rejected but abominable. As
acceptable as the Pro. 28. 9.
fervent prayers of those devout women that would have stoned Paul. And lastly,
whereas their hearts ar so good to Godward, in that also ye spirit of God
gives them the lie, who affirms that without knowledge the mind is not good.

Ob: But if I had an Angel to teach me, or some more excellent and powerful
means then this of hearing a weak and frail man; then I would hear, believe
and obey.

Ans: This indeed is an old subtlety of the devil by which he has Gods
ordinance to teach man by man, not by an Angel.

I say, 49. 6.


in all ages mightily hindered the work of the word in the hearts of
unbelievers.

The prophets themselves seemed in the eyes of the people too small to raize
up the tribes of lacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel. And the
rich man's brethren would rather be taught by one from the dead, then by Moses
and the Prophets. And therefore seeing this deceit secretly steals upon
many a man; and is not so evidently discovered as it profitably may be; I will
endeavor the more fully to manifest both the folly and falsehood of it.

And first I say this is a foolish conceit of restless spirits, who yet take
upon them to be wiser then God himself: who (howsoever the word might seem
to carry much more authority in the mouth of an Angel, then of an ordinary
Minister, who is but a weak man yet) herein bewraied his infinite. 1. mercy.
2. love. 3. wisdom, in establishing this holy ordinance, and no other
perpetually to continue in his church unto the end of the world.

His mercy shines out in this; that knowing our infirmity, and whereof we Gods
mercy herein.
are made, it pleases him to condescend unto it. He might by terrible voices,
out of lightnings, thunders and earthquakes, such as would break the rocks
themselves before him, force our obedience, or send his Angels furnished with
power and strength for the present execution of vengeance upon all such as
deny their present obedience to their word: but in compassion unto us he
chooses to teach us by a still voice; by a more familar and fit instruction
for us, even by such as our selves, of our own nature: far meeter for our
weakness then if he should either in his own Majesty teach us; or by
natures fo far superior unto us as the Angels. And this appeared plainly in
giving the law, when the people once hearing the voice of God came trembling to
Moses, and made request in these words. Talk thou with us and we will
hear, but let not Exodus, 20. 19.
God talk with us, least we die: and it was generally received of old; that
if any man did either hear this voice; or see the face of the great God: the
great Dut, 5. 26. Judge, 13. 22.
glory would so ouerwhelme him, that surely he could not live after it. Yea
Moses him-self could not have beheld the back-partes of the LORD, if the LORD
had not hid him in the cleft of a Rock, and covered him with his hand till
he passed by.

His love toward man manifests it self herein: that he vouchsafes Gods
love herein.
to put his voice in the mouth of man, rather then of Angels. What an
advancement is it to the nature of man, that the high GOD should sanctify
their tongues, to deliver his good pleasure to the sons of men? to be trust
them with such high mysteries, and matters of such blessed and saving use to 1 Timothy, 4. 16.
themselves and others?

His wisdom discovers it self in this ordinance sundry ways. 1. In that
The wisdom of god herein.
teaching man by man he preuenteth the danger of deceit and delusion which
we should lie open unto if we should be taught by revelations, or visions, or
appearance of Angels. For Satan is an Angel of light; he can also assume him a
body, and in it by Gods permission broch lies, and as though he were among the
sons of God, father them upon God. Blessed be that wisdom of God yt has
delivered us a more certain word of the Prophets and Apostles, shutting out al
rouing Enthusiasmes and revelations not contained within it self; and has
set up a Ministry in which his Church shall be taught by man, subject
indeed to error but far less dangerous then the former: in that we have a
certain rule to try the Spirits by whether they be of God or no: according
to which rule and word if they speak not, there is no light in them.

Second, hereby he shows the mighty power of the word which (although it
seem in the hand of a weak man, a foolish mean of men's conversion) yet by
this foolishnes of preaching the Lord saves such as believe: This Paul
teaches. We have this treasure in earthen 2. Cor. 4. 7. 27.
vessels that the excellency of that power might be of God (that is known to
be of God) and not of us: and this one thing has confounded all the wisdom
of flesh, to see such weak and vile and despised things bring such great
things to pass. 1. Cor. 1. 27.


And thus all the glory of the work of conversion, redoundeth unto God, to
whom indeed of right it appertains. Thus the Apostles usually turned off
that praise and glory which men preposterously would have fastened upon them;
that all the power of their word and works might be ascribed unto God. When
Peter had healed a Cripple that lay at the beautiful gate of the Temple, all
the people came running, Act* 3. 12
and gazing on him and John, too much admiring their persons from whom they
had seen such an evident work: which when Peter perceived, he checketh their
ignorance. Yea men of Israel, why look you so steadfastly on us as though we by
our own power or godliness had made this man go? And wishes them to look upward
to the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who had glorified his son Jesus; in
whose name they had done this miracle.

So likewise when Paul at Lystra had healed an other lame man: the people Act.
14. 11. 15.
conceiving that the Gods were come down in the likeness of men, brought
their Bulls with garlands, and their chief Priest to offer sacrifice to him and
Barnabas: which when the Apostles saw, they rent their clothes and staid them
from yt horrible Idolatry. Oh men why do yea these things? We are even men
subject to the like passions that ye be, and so proceeded to preach the true
God, and his son Christ unto them. Even so when men behold such mighty power in
that word which is dispensed by men subject to the same passions with
themselves; that it is able to conquer the whole world and bring it to the
knowledge and obedience of christ; to subdue nature and corruption of it; yea
battereth the strongest holds of satan and destroys his Kingdom: easily may
they conceive there is more power with it then any can be in such poor men,
and that is indeed the power and strong arm of almighty God.

3. The wisdom of GOD hereby would prove and try our obedyence, whether we
will hear his Ministers being men like our selves, no otherwise then we
would hear himself, or Christ, or an Angel speaking from heaven. Whether we
will receive his Ministers as the Galatians did Paul. Gala, 4. 14.
He came and preached in the frailty and weakness of flesh, yet they
despised him not, nor abhorred him; but received him as an Angel of God, yea as
Christ himself: not considering so much the means of their persons, as ye
truth of their doctrine, which must be as carefully received, and as certainly
held as if Angels from heaven, or Christ himself did deliver it. Yea the
Apostle Paul is peremptory that if an Angel should come from heaven and cross
any whit of his doctrine by teaching either a contrary, or another doctrine then
he did, he must be held accursed. Gal, 1. 8.


Ob. It will be here alleged that indeed they might so certainly receive
Paul's doctrine on his word, for he was privileged that he could not er in
delivering itas our ordinary ministers may.

An. To which I answer that even we (secondarily) are to be heard and received
with the same respect and certainty so far forth as we follow and deliver to
the Church the doctrine of the Apostles. For herein we also are the Angels of
the Lord of hosts, and Ambassadors Malac, 2.7, 2 cor, 5. 21.
in the stead of Christ.

And all the parts of the Ministry in our hands (we following the word) are
as sure and infallible, as if an Angel or Christ from heaven should execute
them. If we threaten it is as if ye Lion of ye Tribe of Judah should roar: if
we comfort it is as sure and sweet to the believing soul as if the Angels
should comfort us as they did Christ in his agony. Yea or Christ himself
from heaven, as he did the women that sought him after he was risen. If we
admonish, exhort, persuade, it is all one as if Christ should do it, who has
said: he that hears you, hears me. And in every of these the sheep of
Christ hear his voice, who is the great pastor of the sheep, and not so much
ours, and with John, 10.
the spouse of Christ says: this is the voice of my well-beloved.

4. Hereby the wisdom of God would give us to conceive that seeing we are
taught by man; the one half (as ye Queen of Sebah spoke of Solomon) of the
blessedness prepared for them yt love God is not, nor cannot while we live
here be made known to us; seeing it cannot enter into the heart of man, much
less be uttered with his tongue. And therefore we should raize up our hearts
after that blessed revelation, wherein Christ himself shall become our
teacher, and reveal The office of Angels is not to preach but to set men and
protect them in Preaching.
unto us our full happiness.

And further as the mercy, love and wisdom of God has established this
ordinance, so also it will not be amiss in a word to see how he has ever
maintained this his own order in his Church.

And first the Angels have another office designed them by God in the Church
then to usurp the Ministry. And although the LORD employed them in private
messages unto private persons; yet I remember not that ever in the public
Ministry their office was to preach, but to set men on preaching, and preserve
them in teaching: we read that they were to reveal from God to his Prophets
some part of his will: which the Prophets were to deliver to the Church, but
the Church was not to depend on the ministry of the Angels but on ye Ministry
of man. One Zach. 2.4.
Angel commands another to teach Zachary a prophecy which he must deliver
unto the church concerning the building and repayring of the City and Temple,
Go tell this young man. But nether of the Angels might publish this prophecy
unto the church.

So the Eunuch sitting in his Chariot Act. 8. 26.
reading the Scriptures and not knowing what he read; an Angel sends Philip
to teach him. But why did not the Angel teach the Eunuch himself? Was it
because he could not? Or if he could might not he in such an extraordinary
time have saved Philip that tedious journey between Gaza and Azotus, which were
distant a sunder about six and thirty miles? Yes he could have taught him, but
he would not, nor might not; but sends him an ordinary means, teaching us
that if there be a Philip we must from him seek instruction, and not from the
mouth of an Angel.

In like manner an Angel in a vision Act, 16. 9.
stood before Paul like a man of Macedonia, and prayed him saying, come and
help us in Macedonia; which was a calling of Paul to teach that people in the
way of God. But why did not the Angel himself in whose mouth the Word would
seem to carry much more authority, and who would have been much more respected
then Paul; why does not he go and preach in Macedonia? Surely because it was
as far as his calling extended to set Paul to this business; and he would
not meddle with a calling destinated unto man.

The Lord Jesus himself when he undertook that function in which he declared
himself the chief Doctor of his church; would first take flesh and become man;
and in that flesh declare his fathers name to his brethren. To which purpose
the Apostle says: that God in these last days has spoken by his son: that is
very familiarly by his son made man. Yea further when he was ascended into his
glory, he would from thence show himself powerful to Paul to the casting
him to the ground, to ye humbling Act, 9. 6.
of his heart by terror and astonishment, and so to the preparing and fitting
of him unto instruction: but when he comes to be taught he sends him into the
City: he leaves al yt function unto Ananias. Wherein he expressly in his own
example teaches that it was his good pleasure that, that ministry of Pastors,
and teachers which he had a little before his ascension established in the
Church, for the gathering together of his Saints, for the work of the
Ministry and the edification of the body of Christ should be inuiolably Ephesians,
4. 12, 13.
preserved in the Church till his coming again, wherein we shall all meet
together in the unity of the faith and knowledge of the son of GOD, unto a
perfect man and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

And lastly as we have already sufficiently Untrue that those who would be
taught by Angels would believe.
showed the folly of such who will needs be wise above and against God, so also
in one word the Scripture shows us how false that is which they allege. For
those who have Moses and the Prophets and will not believe the^, neither would
they believe if one should come from the dead. So we say that those who will
not believe the Lord speaking in our Ministry, let an Angel come from
heaven, let a devil come from hell, yet will they not believe. And the
reason is plain; because in the begetting of faith we must not consider the
maked word; but as it is joined and accompanied with the spirit of GOD whose
work properly it is. Now seeing that the spirit ordinarily works in the
means appointed by God; it follows that who-soeuer despises the means in
which the spirit works, wants that spirit of God which ordinarily works
not without those means, which spirit so long as they want, they would not
believe Angels nor men, dead nor living, neither Moses, nor the Prophets,
Objections of idle and lazy protestants.
neither Peter nor Paul, no nor Christ himself if he were living again upon
the face of the earth. And thus having somewhat more largely satisfied yt
allegation, we come to take out of the ways of two sorts of protestants such
Lions as they feign, to lie between them and the Church. The former sort are
idle and lazy Protestants, that are so far from being at the cost of seeking
and sending for the word: that when it comes to seek them, and freely
offers it self unto them; yet will they not disease themselves to stir
over their threesholds for it. Salvation comes almost every day even into
their houses, but they by shutting it out of doors make themselves unworthy of
it, nay rather they will live stark beggars, and die in their spiritual
poverty, then receive our treasures offered them freely. And truly too common
is the experience of the lamentable fruits hereof in very many (in their own
and others account) Christians, whose hearts and loves are full fraught with
noisome lusts threatening destruction; that the field of Salomons sluggard was
never more ouer-growne with weeds and thistles, and nettles; then the thoughts
and courses of these idle and sluggish Protestants with weeds of earthlinesse,
voluptuousness, pride, envy, atheism, hypocrisy, and such other not a few,
most noisome both for their sight, and sent unto God and his people; and all is
because their sinful negligence suffers them not to come under Gods pruning
knife in the ministry of the word.

Ob. But that we may see that idleness has sewed her self some pillows to
lay her head on; they allege it is an unreasonable wearisome thing to be
tied to two sermons every Sabbath day, and perhaps to one beside in the week
day: they know those (whom they trust to God come to heaven) and yet have
sermons but once a month at the most, or once in the quarter, and one sermon
well learned, were far better then all this preaching.

Answ. To which I answer: first; if such men and women conceived aright of this
ordinance of God, and that in it the Lord of this great house had appointed us
his stewards to break unto his family the bread of life; they would be far
enough from such profane reasonings, sauouring so rankely of the flesh. For
did we ever hear a man in his wits reason thus madly? why I hope we may
live with a great many fewer meals, then two every day. I hope to eat meat
once in a month, or once in a quarter were very sufficient; and one meal well
eaten were better then all these meals. Now if we would think him mad that
in earnest should thus reason against his life: how can we think him any
better, that upon no other ground is resolved to starve his soul being his
better part? which yet no less needs his daily bread then the body does.
The Jews must go forth every morning to seek Mannah, and to gather it; which
they did cheerfully: for although they sometimes unthankfully fell out (like
children with their meat,) yet it seems they grudged not their labor of
gathering it daily: nay whereas they were commanded to gather it only on the
six days, and in the sixth day double for it self and the seventh, yet they
run out the seventh day too, against the commandment to gather Exo. 16. 27.
it. God might have given them an harvest of Mannah once a year, as he does
of grain unto us, or once a quarter, or once a month: but his wisdom saw it
good to put them to more pains to gather it once a day. And wherefore? not
only because he would have them depend upon him for their daily bread: but
also because it was a type of Christ himself, who is that true bread which
came down from heaven: Ioh. 6. 48.
whom both they and all believers were daily to hunger after, and daily to
seek in such means as himself has appointed: as whose obtaining and finding
is well worth our daily pains and industry. And surely the very Jews shall
rise up in judgment against all such Christians who will be at no pains to
seek and find Jesus Christ the true bread of life, of whom whosoever tastes
he shall live for ever: whereas the other were so painful, without reasonings
to meet with that food which was but a shadow leading unto him: and of which
our Savior says; Your Fathers eat Mannah in the Ioh. 8. 49
wilderness and are dead.

Secondly consider whether the ancient Ancient believers at more pains then we.
believers came to heaven so easily as our dainty Protestants mean to do.
We read that those who were to worship in the old Testament, must rise and get
them out of their houses, and build altars unto the Lord: they must be both at
pains and costs in the Genesis 12. 7. 8 and cap. 26. 25. and cap. 35. 3.
service of their God. So did Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Patriarchs: and
after them all the while that the ceremonial law stood in force, every male
must thrice a year appear before the Lord at Jerusalem, were his dwelling
never so remote or distant from the temple: yea they could go marching forward
without fainting through droughts and drops, and would not give over until
they met the Lord in Sion. Now if they took so much pains to seek Christ
in shadows and obscurity in comparison; it is surely worth our double pains
to enjoy the substance, truth, and shining brightness of Christ, as at this
day we do through the blessing of GOD in admirable evidence and clearenesse.
But although the Lord has granted us liberty to make shorter cuttes, and need
not so tire out ourselves in weary pilgrimage to seek his face, this is our
condemnation that we will not scarce go out of our doors to meet with our
GOD. The Queen of Saba that measured so many miles to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, shall certainly rise up in judgment against our people, who having
a greater then Solomon here, are so far from admiring, that they despise and
contemn his wisdom.

But not to go further in this point where be the spirits of the faithful
martyrs of the former age, who have passed the fire and water, and sword, and
banishment, and all to enjoy our liberties, which a number of us (their
posterity) count so slightly of as of the paring of our nails?

Yea, where are become our homeborne, and ancient professors, who in the
beginnings of the Gospel have accounted four, six, ten, or more miles, a
small Sabbath days journey to hear a Sermon? such sweetness they found in
the word, such a sweet face of God they beheld in his house, that they would
have gone a foot, nay bare-foote, rather then have missed of that comfort.
Surely the Lord has either taken away ancient professors without succession;
or else our eyes do see a fearful apostacy.

Thirdly, consider here whether ever any idolaters were so idle and secure
Idolaters more painful in their Idolatry then we in the truth.
in the worship of their false Gods, as many Christians professing the
worship of the true GOD. And here I might marshall the ranks of old and
latter ones, to whom no labors, no pains, no losses were accounted tedious
or burdensome: even while they offered their sweat and blood also in sacrifice
to the Devil. What shall I speak of those who mingled the pitiful cries of
their tender children with their Music, while they were cast into the fire to
be burnt up in sacrifice unto the idol Molec? what of the trauells and pains
of the Scribes and Pharisees, that would compass sea and land to make a
Proselite? What of Baals Priests lancing and cutting their flesh, before their
idol?

The blinded Papists at this day whip themselves, make their faces lean with
fasting, waste and consume their bodies with tedious pilgrimages to see some
dead and rotten bones, and visit some apish idols: shall now these satanicall
services be so available to harden the unbeliever against any crosses and
bitterness; that they will refuse no pain to go to hell? and shall not the
Lords own ordinances and true religion carry so much power with them, as to
bring those who profess themselves his people out of their gates to know the
right way to heaven?

Fourthly what does this heaviness unto these ordinances argue but hearts out
of heart with the best desires? for what we love and desire, no pains seems
painful for it. Many of these same persons will be well content to toil day
by day, fare hard, break their sleep, eat the bread of carfulness; and all
to lay a little money and wealth together; and sometimes they scarce know for
whom: and yet all this pains from day to day, is but a pleasure unto them,
because their hearts and affections are carried unto and set upon things below.
In like manner did the love of God and Christ take up the heart of any man (as
every member of the true Church is sick of this love) the sweetness of the
exercises of religion, in which it is more and more conveyed into believing
souls, would be sweeter then wine: that is, then most tastefull outward
delights. Nay this love would show it self stronger then death, nothing Cant.
8. 6.
but death (if death it self) can dissolve it; much water cannot quench it,
many floods cannot drown it* that is; Many crosses, afflictions, trialls
cannot utterly overcome or extinguish it. Yea a man's whole substance will be
contemned in regard of it. This sparckle of heavenly fire and seruencie will
constrain a man, to cleave unto the Lord in his ordinance, and grows in time
to such a burning desire of the glory of God as is able to carry a man beyond
himself, yea even to consume him, as David's zeal to Gods house did consume
him.

And would to God all such secure Christians would at length begin to A glass
for secure christians to see their danger.
conceive of their danger, which is fearful to such eyes as can behold it. For
first, they are for the present destitute of the spirit of God, and so of all
saving graces, and lie under a fearful damnation. Which truth is evident, in
that wheresoever the spirit of God delights to dwell, there he stirs up
the heart to some good measure of cheerfulness in well-dooing, and keeps it
in a readiness, and preparedness to every good work. For the office of the
spirit is not only to enlighten the eye of the soul, that it can behold the
beauties of Gods house, which it could never pry into before: but also to
work the will, and make it of unwilling a willing will. So as if before the
presence of the spirit a man were as loath to hear, pray, read, as a Bear to
the stake; now he is changed by that spirit which will not be idle: and is
become a man wanting often power and ability; but to will that which is good is
present with him: the reasonings of the flesh, are partly subdued: the
unreadiness which foiled his good duties before is in part foiled, and
according to the measure of knowledge and faith, is the measure of his
obedience daily increased: which things whosoever: he be that finds them
not in himself, he has not the spirit of Christ, and consequently is none of
his.

2. They are lead by the spirit of satan who rules in the hearts of the
disobedient, whose old policy it is by this very persuasion of ease, to keep
such from the pure worship of God, as he would make serviceable in all manner
of unrighteousness. When the Lord had commanded all Israel that they should
appear before him to worship him in spirit and truth at Jerusalem: the devil
devised a trick, of which he made Jeroboam his instrument, 1. King. 12. 28.
which indeed turned to the corruption of all the ten tribes with most horrible
idolatry. He pitties the pains of the people; and it is too much for you to
go up to Jerusalem. It is a more Verse. 27.
easy course and cut to make two Calves, and set up one at Dan, and an other
at Bethel, and worship there. By this argument drawn from their ease, he
won all the people of God from their allegiance and service of their true
GOD, to the worship of two Calves: and yet all was but out of policy, for he
feared if the people should go to Jerusalem to worship, that their hearts
would be turned to their LORD even to Rehoboam. Even so the Devil having
taken captive under his power such as are wilfullye departed from GOD, has no
way to keep them under his girdle, but by keeping them from sacrifizing at
Jerusalem, he fears if they should diligently frequent the holy assemblies,
and join with other of the people of GOD in the word, prayer and Sacraments,
that by this means they would return to their natural Lord. And therefore
he daily suggesteth and persuades them to favor themselves, it is too great
pains to go to Church, you can pray at home, read at home, go some time to
Church to avoid danger of law, and reproach of men, and it is enough. And as
he then prevailed, that the people went even to Dan, so at this day, a number
make Chapels of ease of their own houses; others can pray as well (as their
horses I had like to have said, but) on their horse backs, as in the Church,
whom for my part I can easily believe.

3. They have a seal of perdition upon them, whosoever forsake carelessly the
assemblies of Gods people here in earth, they shall certainly be separated
from them, when too late they shall wish they had been wiser then to have
accounted their ways foolish. Let us not forsake our fellowship as the manner
Heb. 10. 25
of some is, says the holy Apostle.

Why what danger is there now and then to keep from Church, I hope we may be
good Christians for all that? The Apostle tells us a reason, because this is a
withdrawing of our selves to Verse. 39.
perdition. It is to walk in the high way to destruction. And indeed what
other can such sworn enemies of Christ look for, when cold Christians are
sent away with such cold comfort even from the doing of those duties, which
the other either neglect or contemn? for if the Lord threatens his people,
that although they might serve him in some outward seemly sort, yet if they
did it not with cheerfulness, and a good Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
heart, they should serve their enemies: if such shall be sent away with a
curse on their heads, can such as will neither have part nor fellowship in
this business, ever look to be heirs of blessing? Let them repent therefore
of these their wickedness, and pray GOD, that if it be possible, the thought
of their hearts may be forgiven them.

Lastly, what pains take thou here but for thine own profit? think not
that thy godliness benefiteth Thy paints in religion profits thy self, not
God.
GOD, but thy own self: as thy Atheism hurts not him but thy own soul.
Thou hereby bring thy self where thou may behold the face of thy GOD,
whereby thy pains is plentifully returned with recompense. This face of God
when it was yet vayled, did so draw the hearts of ancient believers, that
neither distance of place, nor difficulty of way, nor tediousness of weather,
nor weakness or weariness of body could with-holde them from the beholding of
in the place where he had put his name.

And is the sight of the face of the Lord so happilye uncovered in our
Ministry, not worth the pains of looking upon? thy pains in this behalf
may entitle thee to all the privileges of Gods people before mentioned. And if
those were not enough for thee, yet the God whom thou seek (if thou so seek
him as he is found of thee) he is liberal and loving enough to make thy cup
to run over abundantly above all that we have spoken or can think, and
though all thy service is but duty and far under that, yet the LORD will not
take thy labor for naught. He challenges the servants in his Temple, whether
ever any of them did so much as open the doors, or Malac. 1. 10
kindle a fire for sacrifice freely and without wages; no he allowed them
liberallye for such vnder-seruices. How then may we think will he requite
such as are continually about him in his eye, and still behold his face in the
Presence Chamber of his Church?

The latter sort, which is also the last of which we propounded to speak,
are timorous and fearful Christians, who think it better sleeping in a sound
skin, then in a sound conscience: and because this diligent frequenting of
the Church, which we call them unto, is not without some reproach among the
profane and wicked Ob.
of the world: they are loathe to pull their warm hands out of their bosom to
set to this Ploughe. They will not in such a way as men count Timorous and
fearful protestants
haeresie; or Praecisenes serve the God of their fathers, they will keep an
even course and a good report while they have it, and Sermon-gadders, and
Sermon-mongers they will not be counted.

Ans. Weerevnto I answer that as it is not amiss to cast our costs aforehand,
yet must we so lay our counters as that we desist not from building upon our
foundation: and in casting these costs we cannot say that this course is
exempted from reproach: Nay seeing Satan's malice is no whit abated neither in
himself, nor in his instruments, we affirm that there cannot a child so
soon be borne into the Church, but the Dragon stands before the woman to be
delivered, to devour her child so soon as ever it is brought forth: and if
he cannot do that, he casts out of his Reu, 12. 4. 16.
mouth water like a flood, that she might be carried away of the flood. But
yet the comfort is they are the rebukes of Heb, 11. 26 and cap, 13. 13.
of Christ, both because they are uttered against him: he accounts them as
against himself and he helps his servants to bear them, becomes a porter
putting under his shoulder, as also disburdeneth no less displeasure against
the^ then if they were done against his own person. And this is rather a matter
of rejoicing, to partake of Christ's sufferings yea, it is a piece of the
blessedness 1 Pet, ^. 13. 14. and 2.
of Christians to suffer for well doing and to be railed upon for Christ's
sake: And therefore a Christian must with Moses esteem these rebukes of
Christ his greatest riches, although he had the treasures of a Kingdom
before him; else will he never be able to hold out unto the end of his
salvation: Never therefore profess the name of Christ into which thou art
baptized, if thou be ashamed of it before men, never profess love to Christ
any longer, if thou can not endure a word for his sake; never profess, so
fast to cleave unto him that thou will rather die with him then deny him, if
thou be Means against the former fear.
afraid of every damsels speech, put on humility of heart that thou may
be contented with abasement for his sake; that if any Michal shall mock thee
in thy rejoicing before the Lord thou may resolve that thou will yet be more
vilde; endure more lashes of the tongue, and more forrowes then so, if GOD
call thee unto it, rather then miss of such comfortes and matter of true joy
as before the Lord thou may meet withal. And pray for courage and
resolution to hold thee on, undaunted in thy godly course. And seeing thou
may be bold so long as thou haste a good cause and a good conscience, put
on Nehem, 6. 10. 11.
the spirit of that worthy Nehemiah. When he had a prophecy (though a false
one) that if he did not take the Temple for his sanctuary that night, the
enemies would come and slay him: his answer was: should such a man as I flee?
who is he that being as I am would go into the Temple to live? I will not
go in. So should such a man as I who profess the Ghospel, who have given my
name to Christ, who know the Commandment of GOD, and that this is the beaten
way to heaven; trodden by all such seete as ever walked in faith and obedience;
should such a one as I forsake the assemblyes of Gods people? And that for the
blasts of such as are of satan's sinogogue: If it stood upon my whole estate,
my liberty, and loss of life it self, I would not do it. I know whatsoever
men accoumpt of me whose corrupt judgments would condemn even the innocence
of Christ himself if he lived again upon the earth, if he should be
dilligent at Sermons, yet seeing ye Lord has honored me so highly as to
become one of his household; and seeing his word does justify my ways and my
diligence in his house, I am at a point, I care not what man can say, I fear
nothing he can do against me. I have a soul to save, I must look to that.

3. Use. If our hearts delight be in these Rejoice that others enjoy these
liberties with us.
assemblies, then we cannot but break out into the praise of God where ever
we see these ordinances established: we cannot but rejoice when others enjoy
them with us as being the means by which men are redeemed unto God, and made
Kings and Priests unto him. If David were alive again he would lead us
ioifully to Church. Of whom we never read that he danced but before the Arc.
The Communion of Saints cannot but cause and raize our hearty rejoicing for the
greatest good which can befall the Church.

Now what is yt greatest blessedness that God himself can either promise or
perform to the sons of men living in earth? surely even this, to set his
tabernacle amongst men, to dwell with them; and Leu, 26. 11. 12.
become their God. This is the knitting up of all his mercies.

But what speak I of the Saints upon earth, seeing the Saints in heaven make
it the matter of their heavenly songs, that out of all kindreds and tongues,
Reu, 5. 9.
and people, and nations, men are redeemed unto God. Do thou see the desolate
have children as well as the married wife? Do thou see the truth of the
church enlarged? see thou ye countries of Isa, 54. 1. 2.
her habitatio^ spread out? Perceiuest you the increase of her on the right hand
and on the left? Examine here whether thy heart breaks forth into holy
reioycings, in that the bars are put into the rings of the Arc, whereby the
glory of the Lord, after a sort walks amongst his people; in that heaven is
filling apace, by the accomplishing of yt number of the elect, and in yt the
coming of lesus Christ hastneth for the final redemption of his body. Til thou
find this you have not found that affection of the Prophet here commended
unto thee.

2. The truth of this affection will make us call others to have their parts
Call others hereunto
with us in these privileges. The Prophet David though he was a King yet
became such an humble companion of all them that feared the Lord, that he
Psalm. 12 2. 1.
thought it no disgrace to be called by his people to ye Tabernacle. Some
great Kings would have thought it no great policy to have given answer to such
popular motions: or if he had seen his people go, it were enough as for
himself he might have greater matters in hand. But oh how does religion beat
down high conceits! And makes even Kings take the Kingdom of God like little
children? David disdained not, but reioiced when they said to him Come let us
go to the house of the Lord. He lost no honor; no it was his truest honor in
the eyes of God, and hearts of his people; yt he gave them contentme^t and
encouragement, in such an honorable motion as yt was. Faith in the heart will
not so retire it self, but it will be kindling, and calling on others: whence
it is that we read in so many places of the Prophers, yt when people are
converted to the faith, these voices should be sou^ded from the^. Up let us go
and pray before the Lord and seek the Lord of hoasts; I will Zach, 8, 21. Isay,
2. 2. Micca, 4. 1.
go also: And, up let us go to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: but
especially it forces Especially their own family.
us to bring our own families carefully to ye place of worship, as those for
whom we must be more countable: it brings us to yt holy resolution of
Joshua: that although none will ioin with us in such ways; let them at their
peril do as seems them good: our selves and Josh, 24. 15.
our households will serve the Lord.

Use. 4. If our chief delight be in the A mean estate with these liberties to
be preferred before a better with out them.
assemblies of Gods people, then we cannot but prefer a mean outward estate
with the fruition of the exercises of religion before a wealthy and glorious
condition in the want of them: as our Prophet here preferred the meanest
office, even of doore-keepers, who were to be first, and last in ye tabernacle,
before a glorious and easy life in the Palaces of the mighty in which he
should be deteyned from the places of Gods worship. Even so whosoever would
carry such an heart as David (who was a man according unto the Lords own
heart) must esteem of a poor life under a powerful Ministry, more happy and
comfortable, then a rich condition in places of ignorance, which want the
means of their spiritual consolation. Moses was of this mind he would rather
suffer (adversity, want, reproach,) with the people of GOD, then enjoy the
treasures of Egypt by forsaking them.

It was also always a mark of ye people of God to follow him into the places
of his true worship, where he went Heb, 11.
before. If in Shiloh, if in Jerusalem; thither do all the Tribes repair, even
such as set their face to seek the Lord. But how do men proclaim that this
rejoicing 2 Chro, 11. 16.
never entered into their hearts, who with Lot choose Sodom before Canaan, and
delight rather in the Mountains of Samaria then in Sion hill which indeed is the
fruitful part of the earth? Some choose habitations for friends, air, waters,
woods, walks, fruitfulness, and some other special commodities, and hence
commend them and there seat themselves and set down their staff, although
Gods habitation be not there: the Ministry is counted as an hang-by: if that
be there they count it never the better; if it be absent it is never a whit
the worse, they care but a little too live in the common air of Gods people,
the familiarity of Gods friends, the pleasures of Gods house, the sweet
fruits of the spirit of God are not enquired after, nor tasted. Others retain
to atheists, scorners, papists; swearers, and if Peter can warm himself still
by Caiphas fire he can swear and forswear as they do. They never ask
themselves that question which the Lord asked Eliah, What do thou here
Eliah? they say not, what do 1. King. 19. 9.
I here in this cave? this is not a place where I should be, to live where the
Devil dwells, or where God dwells Reu. 2. 13.
not: they hear not the Lords voice speaking to them as unto Eliah. Up, get
thee to Sarepta, I have appointed there 1. Kin. 17. 9.
one to feed thee: They are well content to be fed by Ravens still. But here is
a fearful brand upon such who are contented to make exchange of heaven for
earth, and have resolved that they will be gainers in the world, though it be
to the loss of their souls. Whosoever therefore thou art, yt have any care of
thy soul; never live if it be possible under an idol, but where the word is
settled, and the ministry duly discharged. Buy the truth whatsoever it cost,
yea with the loss of many outward things: be a means to thy ability to
procure a standing Ministry to thy self and thine: what comfort could thou
have to live and dwell in a wilderness among wild beasts, without men, or
other comforts, in such a barren soil as no pains can overcome the
invincible stiffness of the ground? and yet in such a place were it more
comfortable for a godly heart to live, then amongst a wicked people wanting
means of grace and instruction. And if thou would dwell in the loueliest
part of the earth; choose such a place as which the Lord has chosen to
manifest his presence in, and wherein he has set his tabernacle. The tribe of
Benjamin was of all the tribes the beloved of the Lord, as Benjamin Deu. 33. 12
Genesis 44. 20
himself was the dearest to his father. But wherein consisted this
loveliness? in this, that the Lord should dwell between his shoulders. In
which Metaphor the whole possession of Benjamin is compared to a body; and the
metropolitan, which was Jerusalem, to the head set between two shoulders, in
which the Lord delighted to dwell. If any place therefore in earth should draw
our affections above others, it is that in which the Lord in his ordinances
draws nearest unto us: and if our delights be in the places where the Lord
delights not to show the presence of his grace, our affections come short of
our example here commended unto us. The face of God shining in his ordinance
must be our Naomi, to which we must say, Where thou go I will go, and where
thou dwell Ruth. 1. 16
I will dwell.

FINIS.

