THE VALUE OF TRVE VALOVR, OR, THE PROBATION AND APPROBATION OF A right
MILITARY MAN. Discovered in a Sermon Preached July 25. before the worthy
Gentlemen of the Military Company.

By THOMAS TAILOR Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of St. Mary Aldermanbury,
London.

Marti arma non sunt oneri.

LONDON, Printed by Aug: Mathewes for THO: JONES, and are to be sold at his
Shop in St. Dunstanes Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE GENEROUS MINDED MILITARY SOCIETY.
Gentlemen, that I should in your element speak that which you with so
unanimous consent importuned me, not to Preach only, but to publish: I cannot
ascribe (next unto Gods persuasion) to any other cause, then the concurrence of
our mutual affections to the noble exercise of Arms; which you and I
profess. You to manage: I to honor. Yet was I sorry your importunity
pitched on so slender an object. It was in vain to plead the worthlesnesse of
these notes; and how meritoriously they deserved the dark: Or to tell you that
it was against my mind and manner to send out single Sermons into public
view; especially, in a subject so unwonted. J see that Military men think
their booty often richer then it proves, and sometimes win by force, what
right might deny. And therefore as one under Sponte it, trahendus tamen nisi
eat.
command goes of himself where he would not: because else he knows he must
be drawn: so have I condescended to this your second desire. J was not willing
to increase it in bulk: but rather to contract what might have been enlarged.
Judicious Moneta optima quae precij and ponderis plurimum habet in parva mole.
readers, esteem of books as of coins, whereof those are most precious,
which have most weight and worth in the smallest quantity.

The only addition I intended was if I might add a grain. To the honor,
increase and encouragement of your company. The prosperity whereof every good
man (in these threatening times) cannot but advance. For as it is in the
natural, so is it in the national body. Though the head may advise well; the
eye see clearly, the tongue discourse discreetly, yet if the arms and limbs be
lame, it can neither defend it self, nor offend the enemy: so neither can
prudent counsel in the head of the kingdom; nor clear doctrine and direction
in the eyes of the Church; nor laws sharply pleaded, and executed, secure our
State: if martial men and affairs be lame, and unjointed. Every man knows
the posts of a mean house had need be heart of oak: and much more the studs
of so great a State, and pondrous fabric as ours is, had need be strong,
like to Iacin and 1. King. 7. 21.
Boaz the two pillars of the porch of that great Temple. The great God of
spirits put great spirits in you, and the rest of your noble profession. That
with the valor of David, the might of Sampson, the courage of Gideon, and the
success of Joshua, you may in Gods cause, and your countries service atchieue
great and noble works for the defense of the Gospel, the safety of our King,
the honor of the Kingdom: the taking of the prey out of the Lions mouth; and
the rescuing of the oppressed from the mighty man. And let all faithful
subjects and sons of valor say, Amen.

The lover of your valor, and virtue, THO: TAILOR.

THE VALVE OF TRVE Valor; or, the probation and approbation of a right
Military Man.
1. SAM. 14. VER. vlt. And whosoever Saul saw to be a strong man, and fit for
the war, him he took unto him.
SAVL of a private man was, by the especial appointment of God, and annoyting
of Samuel, lifted up to the pitch of a King. Presently the spirit of God
comes upon him, and he was changed into another man. He was still in the
maine but a bad man; but yet of many eminent good parts for government. He must
needs be the fittest whom God vouchsafes to choose for employment: and see ye
not him whom the Lord has chosen, and there is none like him among the people:
even Saul who was higher then any of the people from the shoulders 1. Sam. 10.
24.
upward, now designed by God to be the great General of the Lords battle:
and by whom the Lord saved Israel many times. This new Savior, for so he is
styled. Ca. 9. 16. With his new 1 Samuel 14. 23. 47.
heroical Spirit attempts his office succesfully. He foyleth the Phylistims;
subdueth the Ammonites; destroys the Amalekites; and atchieneth for Israel
many happy and noble victories. Himself was a valiant man, and an honourer of
the valiant: for so says the Text. Whomsoever he saw to be a strong man, and
meet for the war, him he took unto him.

In which words are 2. things considerable.

1. Saul's probation of his Military men. Whomsoever he saw to be a strong man
and meet for the war.

2. His approbation and advancement of them in the other words: him he took
unto him.

In the former observe. Who they be on whom Saul casts his eye: namely, on men
serviceable; described by two properties. First, They were valiant men.
Secondly, They were meet for the war.

1. They were valiant and strong men. That (...) Non grandes sed fortes.
is, not of strong bodies only, but of brave minds and resolutions: and of
stout and ready action. It is not Faex populi, the scumme and vermin of the
land that Saul casts his eye upon: such an impious and dissolute brood had
been dishonorable for the Lords battles. But Soldiers should be choice men.
For, first, If the Lord be to choose a Soldier, he will choose a valiant man; as
to Gedeon. The Lord is with thee thou valiant man. Go in this thy might and
Judge. 6. ^2.
save Israel; have not I sent thee? and where the Lord means to get a
victory, he first sends away the cowards and fearful from the host: as in
Gedeons army of two and thirty thousand, Judge. 7. 3.
two and twenty thousand timorous men departed: yea it was a general law of
Arms amongst the Israelites: that whosoever was afraid, Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
and fainthearted, he might return home; lest in the battle, he should make
his brethrens heart soft and faint like unto his.

2. A wise General well knows; that as there is no worth, so there is no
trust in effeminate cowards; who for their own safety care not to betray their
cause, their country, their King, their company, their Religion and all. The
Ancient in disdain were wont to call them Hares with helmets. Whose best
safety Galeatilep^res
was in their feet. You may arm, and put helmets and furniture upon such
fearful hares; but how can you make them stand when they are pursued?

3. Then is the Military business likely to prosper, when choice and worthy
men are sought out to be both Leaders and led. When Joshua is to go against
Amalek. Choose us out men (says he) and let us go fight. Well knew Joshua
that it were better not fight, then not Vires regni and et Romani ^eminis
fundamentum in prima detectorum (...) ti^ ^sistunt.
with choice men. And the Ancients report that the foundation of the
flourishing and conquering state of the Roman Empire was laid in their careful
choice of Commanders and common soldiers.

4. The honor: yea, and the success of an Army depends upon such choice men.
For it is the valorous spirit, and noble disposition that hates those base
lusts, and vices of drunkenness, filthiness, wantonness, pilfering,
inhumane murders, rauishments, perfidiousnesse, effeminate delicacy; and such
unmanly behauiours, as ordinarily follow the camps. A brave soldier fears
nothing but to be base. He Nil metuit nisiturpen^ famam.
less fears, and likes better a bloody battle in a just quarrel, then a
wanton banquet.

It is the man of true valor and courage that will express sobriety,
wisdom, vigilance, obedience, peaceablenesse, and morality at the least. And
an Army consisting of such choice men, shall in true noblenes and honor vye
with the Army of Scipio Assricanus, of which Plutarch says. That the meanest
of his soldiers seemed to be a grave Senator. But contrarily there is no
valor, no honor but disgraceful baseness in the sons of Belial.
Cup-Captaines, roarers, swearers, cursers, blasphemers, filthy livers,
quarellers, rough Ismaels, whose hand is against every man, and every man's
against them. Who like empty vessels make a great swaggering noyce, but are
worthles outcasts, empty gulls, men of complement and appearance, but without
substance; fitter to be gaylbirds, In linguae certamine seroces in
praetor^isleones, in Praeliis leporcs. Pet. Bles.
or apprentises to Bride-well; then to be admitted to the honorable service of
a soldier.

And for the success of the Army it is ordinarily suitable to the baseness of
such instruments, whom Curtius calls the excrements or outsweepings of their
Cities. Seldom shall we meet with Vrbium suaru^ purgamenta.
Hannibals motto. That they are laden with victories, who are laden with vices.
Wisely therefore did Saul lay a good foundation of his wars in Armis vicit,
vitiis victus.
the choice of valiant and able men: and we may then expect better success of
our Armies, and expeditions by sea and land, when our choice is more suitable to
his.

2. Property, And meet for the War. Saul (...)
knew that every man of courage was not fit for the War; but that something
more then courage is requisite to make a Soldier: and therefore he would also
see them fit for the War before he took them unto him. The Hebrew word
comprehends all particulars that belong to ability. Now there be two things
more which must concur to fit and enable a strong man to Saul's service.

1. He must be in relation to Saul. 2. He must be disciplined to him. His
relation to 1. Relation.
Saul, and tie, must be in. 1. Civil, 2. Divine bands. The former requires him
to be of the same country. The latter necessitateth him to be of the same true
Religion.

1. Saul takes in to him his own natives, and spyeth out fit men in his own
country and kingdom. And it is the wisdom of a General, if it be possible,
to press his soldiers out of the same country. For, 1. Natives are
absolutely subject to the sovereign power, and so by all laws of God and
nations under command; be the service never so dangerous or unpleasing.

2. A domestical soldier is in a nearer tie and bond to his country, his
King, his kindred, and his own fortunes. He is in the same boat which is
tossed and threatened with the tempest, and is someway interessed in the common
cause, and quarrel; whereas a stranger may conceive Mihi istic (...) seritur
nec metitur.
that he stands neither for his own King nor Country: and for his own
particular he shall be neither any great gainer nor looser fall the squares as
they will; and therefore it were folly for him to endanger himself too far.
And hence it is that from a curious or domestical soldier, his Commander may
expect both fortitude and faith; in strangers it has been often obseruable,
that though they Etiamsi iis peritia (...) tamen affectus aut fides.
have been valiant and skillful; yet have they overthrown great designs for
want of faith and affection.

3. It cannot but make him more careful and faithful abroad, when he is
liable to reward, or punishment, returning home. In one word antiquity has
observed it fatal to States, and a prognosticate of ruin, when they have been
forced to call in foreign forces for their aid and support. As that house is
near ruin whose own timber cannot uphold it, unless they bring from
elsewhere studs, and posts to vndershore it.

But especially Saul will have his soldier of the same, and not of a contrary
Religion. He must be a friend and favorite of Gods cause, and quarrel wherein
the Army stands. And indeed nothing makes a man so meet for the War as
true Religion. For, 1. Only Religion makes a man truly valiant; it alone
makes him sell his life cheap, and be prodigal of his blood for the cause of
God and his Truth. A man truly religious, can (for his Religion) and will give
his body to the fire in time of peace; and to the sword in time of War.

2. Religion only makes him truly obedient, and ordered out of conscience.
That as the Centurions servant if he be bidden come, or go, or do this or
that, he does so, yea this man will readily obey his Commander, though he die
for it.

And without this ready obedience he cannot (...).

Arist. Polit. 4.

Cant. 6. 4.


be meet for the War seeing a field without order, is like a battle without
a banner, which is so necessary to avoid confusion, as the holy Ghost
expresses them both by one and the same word which in the Greek and Chaldy,
signifies both Banner and Order.

3. Only Religion fitteth a man to die; as in the field he is ever in danger:
and will not suffer him basely to shift for saving his life; because he is
assured of a better and heavenly. And he is not mere for the War, that is
not daily fit to die. Saul has now made a wise and happy choice of his
military men, both of his own region and of his own Religion.

Now good choice has only found out such as may prove good soldiers; but it
is only good discipline that makes them so: and therefore before they are
meet for the war they must be trained, and disciplined in arms, to become
faithful, expert, and exercised in martial affairs. For it is not multitudes
of men, nor numbers of arms or names: nor an vnmannaged power, nor unskillful
strength that carries honor and victory out of the field: but art and
exercise; use and experience: which are the best mistress and teacher to make
them prompt and active unto any service; and a few such trained soldiers shall
do much more service then many men. The ancient Romans derived the issue of all
their victories and triumphs (next to their gods) to this; and acknowledged
that they climbed to that celebritie, height and transcendency of glory and
renown, because they were no less careful, or rather curious in disciplining
their soldiers; then in trayning and instituting their children. And hence it
was that the Parthians taught In pace decus, in bello prasidium.
even their children the use of the bow; as the Scythians theirs, the use of
the dart; and the Germans theirs, the use of the spear. And well knew Saul
that such trained men are the sinews of a State, and the maine strength and
glory of a Kingdom, or Army: that only such men were worthy to be taken in
unto him. Read for this the description of Saul's Military men. 1. Chron. 12. 2.
In Saul's time were choice men of valor, that could use the right or left hand
The Lion is strong among beasts and turns not his head at the sight of any
other. Pro. 30. 30 Hence it was the Scutcheon of the victorious Tribe of Judah:
and Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, for his courage, and
mighty victories.
with stones, arrows and bows. And verse. 8. There were appertaining to Saul
of the tribe of Gad stout men, and men of might* but they were also exercised,
and by wit and industry made meet for the war. For their courage they had
the faces of Lions: so for their actiuenesse and dexterity: they were swift as
the Roes on the mountains. Of these also were those seven hundred Beniamits of
Saul's own tribe, who were so skillful; as that with their left hands they could
cast stones out of slings at an hair breadth, and not miss. Well may a pious
Prince in a just quarrel promise himself success and prosperity, who is
attended with men so meet for the war.

Thus much of Saul's probation.

Secondly, concerning Saul's approbation or advancement of them. The Text says,
He took them in unto him. The Hebrew word is diversely (...)
expressed by Interpreters; and includes diverse degrees of honor which he
conferred Re^i vrbes ^apient. Adag.
upon them. As first, Collegit ad se, Pagnin: that is, he gathered or pressed
them into his service to employ them. Secondly, Recipiebat^nd se, Tremelius:
that is, he took them or received them into his pay: to encourage and reward
them. Thirdly, Sociabat cum sibi, says Ierom. That is, he took them near
about him as his companions and counselors, to honor and advance them.

In all which, he sets himself a pattern or copy to all Princes, and
supreme powers that would prosper in their wars, to draw into their favor,
presence, and honorable rewards, men of worth and valor; and to encourage
grace, and reward good deserts: affording them such place in their affections,
and remunerations as the nobleness of their spirits, and atchieuments do
worthily challenge and deserve. Thus David (then whom none ever prospered
better in his wars) had his Worthies in diverse ranks. He had his three
Worthies, most honorable personages for valor and magnanimity. He had also
his thirty very honorable persons, although they attained not to the first ^
Sam. 23.
three. But they were all in great request with him, and worthily advanced by
him.

Reason 1. Valiant Generals well know, that honorable rewards and respect, put
men upon services, not more noble then difficult: and therefore Saul proclaims
and performs a great reward (...)
to him that will undertake the combat with Goliath; by which means David came
to the kingdom: and David himself afterward being outbraued by the
Iebusites, propounded a most honorable reward to him who would first adventure
himself in that dangerous service. Whosoever (says David) shall smite the
Iebusites 1 Chronicles. 11. 6.
first, shall be chief and Captain. And so came Ioab to be David's chief
Captain, and General of his wars all his life. The like we read of Caleb.
Judge. 1. 12. Whosoever shall smite Kiriathsepher, and takes it: to him will I
give Achsah my daughter to wife. And Othniel Calebs younger brother took it,
and with it Achsah for his wife. Thus as the sea in it own nature is calm;
yet is raised up and mightily stirred by violent winds: so are calm spirits
raised and transported beyond themselves unto noble designs, if incited by the
hopes, and full gayles of honorable respect and recompense.

2. The God of heaven will not have the faithful service of men in any kind
forgotten. Nay, himself has recorded in his own book; the valor, acts, and
faithfulness of many worthies of ancient ages; never to be blotted out from
the eyes and memory of posterity. And by the same most oculate providence,
the names, memory, and vndying fame of infinite numbers more, live in other
civil Records and Chronicles of particular and several ages, and nations; and
so are likely to do till time shall be no more. Whereby what else can more
fitly be inferred then that inferior and earthly gods (the Princes and
Potentates of the world) should not digress from so wise and unerring a
pattern: but rather study and set themselves some way to remunerate and
promote every noble service, and servant, according to his worth and desert.

3. Experience of all ages ancient and modern, witnesses that it never fares
so well with Church or Common wealth: as when true valor is advanced by the
State; and men of desert are advanced, and graced according to their worth.
Whereas all things decay; and the politic body is in an apparent consumption;
when honors are cheap, and places of command are carried according to favor,
flattery, affection; yea, or Nobility it self without merit or desert.

4. It were an unthankful neglect of men of worth, who under God are the
safest guard both of King, and Kingdom: whose fortitude and faithfulness
puts them upon any noble service never so difficult at the beck of their
Prince. Such as those three hundred Romans whom Scipio Africanus showed to a
friend of his; Plutarch.
exercising their Arms, near an high steep Tower leaning over the Sea. There
is never a one of all these three hundred (says he) but if I bid him climb up
that steep Tower; and from the top of it cast himself down into the Sea, but
he will readily do it.

Add hereto only this, that no wise or martial Non caret manibus civit as
qua viris cincta est. Lytur.
Prince can neglect his walls and fortresses; he will not suffer them to
moulder or decay; but will seasonably strengthen and fortify them for his, and
his peoples safety. But men of valor and service are the strongest walls and
rampart of the Kingdom. Of whom we may say as Abigails servant of David's
soldiers. These men are a wall unto us by night and by 1 Samuel 25. 16
day. So as the neglect of a valiant man, is as the neglect of a breach in the
wall of the kingdom, or to pass carelessly a breach in the sea; either of which
is an inlet to destruction.

Now having opened the words, and showed the just reasons of Saul's trial and
choice of his military men; I will propound and prosecute Note. Military
profession very honorable.
but one observation from them which I conceive proper not only from the
words, but for this our errand and meeting; namely, to show what honor God
himself has put upon this military profession: as appears both in this
text, and in many other passages of holy Scriptures. Here, in that he has
deputed no other to oder it then his own chief vicegerent upon earth. For it
is Saul that by Gods appointment orders all the designs and matters of
war. 1. Sam. 9. 16. I will send thee a man out of Benjamin, to be the
governor of my people, and to save my The indicting of War belongs only
to the suprem Magistrate.
people. Plainly implying that the indicting and proclayming of war; the
choice of men; and the designing them to their several places and offices,
belongs only to the supreme Prince or Magistrate. And thus were the wars of
Israel ever at the command of Moses, or Joshua, or of the chief Judge, or of
the King for the time Numb. 31. 5.
being. So Moses as King in Israel commanded Ioshuah his General to press and
choose out of every tribe a thousand men, to make up an host of twelve thousand
against Midian.

And great reason. For, 1. This is the most ancient order, and most natural.
The first battle that ever we read of was ordered by the Kings: as the phrase,
Genesis 14. implies. The time when Kings go out to war.

2. The care of the Kingdom is committed by God to the supreme Magistrate, to
defend his people against the disturbers of peace: either within, by the sword
of Justice: or without, by the sword of war. Romans 13. 1. 11. 4.

3. It belongs not to private persons to Non cuilibe fas aperire belli portas.
move war: for they may prosecute their private right, at the public
tribunal of Justice. Neither is it in their power to denounce a public
enemy; and none is to be reputed a public enemy, till he be publickely
denounced by public authority. Neither is it in their power to gather
assemblies and multitudes together; which must be done in war. Much less to
kill, and spoil, even an enemy without public warrant: for that is theft,
and murder: except in sudden, and reserved cases, where the supreme Magistrate
cannot be consulted; or where the law of God and nature makes a man a
Magistrate in his own case. It is obseruable that Abishai might not by private
revenge defend the public and supreme Magistrate, nor the public weal in
him. He must not revenge Shemeis cursing 2 Samuel 16. 16,
of David without David. Hence was it that David showed exemplary Justice upon
him that brought tidings of Saul's death: though he also brought him Saul's
Crown, and his bracelets: yet because he confessed he helped to kill him, as
it were to favor him, in putting him out of his pain; David slew him. And the
same justice he executed on them that slew Ishbosheth, Saul's son, who
reigned in Israel against 2 Samuel 1. 14.
David: though by the fact the Kingdom was peaceably settled upon David: yet
because it was by their private spirit: their pretense of love, and respect to
David in it, 2 Samuel 4. 10. 11
secured them not, but they must die for it. We must remember our Savior his
definitlue sentence. He that takes the sword; shall perish Math. 26. 52.
with the sword. Which words our Lord uttered not to diswade or dishonor this
noble Military profession, (as the frantic Anabaptists pretend) but to honor
and heighten it; as not belonging to private men or motions; to weld and draw
at their pleasure, without the command or concession of the supreme power. As
Augustine most iudiciously Private impetu nulla ^egitima Potestate iu^ente, vel
co^cedente, peribit vel gladio humano, aut gladio vindicta diuina.
does comment upon that Text. Whosoever (says he) by his own private motion
is armed against the life of another, no lawful power either commanding him,
or giving him leave; he shall perish either by the sword of man, or else by the
sword of divine revenge.

But if we consult other places of Scripture we shall further observe many
passages, wherein the Lord, of purpose aduanceth the honor of this noble
profession. For, 1. He has by his own word, and appointment pressed out his
own people to war. Both by commandment to fight, and by giving directions
in fighting.

The learned observe that the Jews had two sorts of precepts; and both from
God concerning their wars. The former they called Milcamoth Mitsvah; Bella
precepti: that is, wars of precept, commanded wars. As Number. 31. 1. 3. The
Lord spoke unto Moses, Revenge Israel of the Midianites. The latter they called
Mitsvoth Milcamah, Praeceptabelli: the precepts or injunctions concerning
war. As Deuteronomy. 20. Are four martial laws concerning all their wars.

2. He gives his spirit to encourage men to fight: as Gedcon, Sampson, Saul,
thus behaved themselves valiantly, when the spirit of Judge. 14. 6. and 19.
God came upon them: that is, in an extraordinary 1 Samuel 11. 6.
motion and power.

3. He teaches men's hands to fight, and their fingers to battle; so as such
as are entered Psalm. 114. 1.
into this military school, are entered into Gods school: and your proficiency
here is acceptable unto God, and serviceable.

4. He pleases himself in that frequent style. The Lord of hosts, and
calls himself a Exodus 15. 3.
man of war: that is, an excellent warrior, exercised in war, stout,
skillful, prudent, victorious. And this is not a title without the thing: for
himself is in the field and fights the battles of his people. 2. Chron. 32.
7. With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us
and to fight our battles.

He denominateth the wars against his enemies; His own battles. So Abigail
to David. Thou fightest the Lords battles, and his 1 Samuel 25 28. Pr^lia domini
pr^liaris. Ier. 48. 10.
own work. Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently: and
cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood. Yea, he calls the
armies mustred, his sanctified ones, set apart by himself to military
employment. Isa. 13. 3. I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called
my mighty ones for mine anger. In a word, the very Chronicle or Record of these
wars, he pleases to own and call; The book Numb. 21. 14.
of the battles of the Lord.

The use I will make of this consideration Application
shall be to excite and inflame your noble minds, both to come in, and to
hold on in this most worthy exercise so honored of God himself. Think not,
(worthy Gentlemen) that it is out of our element who are men of peace, to
excite you to these honorable exercises of Arms: for in the Jewish Camps and
marchings; the Priests were by God himself appointed to sound the alarm with
Trumpets. Numb. 10. ^.
And when they were to go upon a service; one of the Priests was selected from
the rest; to stir Deuteronomy. 20. 2.
up the hearts of the soldiers by a Sermon or hortatory oration, and so
encourage them to the service: whom they called Meshiah Milcamah. That is, the
anointed of the war. Seeing Vnctum belli.
therefore your desires have appointed me such a one at this time. Let me
with your patience in a few words. First, Incite you. Secondly, Counsel you
and so dismiss you.

1. And first to incite and encourage you in this way, consider that of
Solomon. There is a Eccles. 3.
time of peace, and a time of war, and not a more constant vicissitude of day
and night, of light and darkness; then a continual intercourse of peace and
trouble. The fairest day may have his cloud, at least is ended in a black and
cloudy darkness. And hence has it ever been reputed the wisdom of a state
in peace, to provide for war: and to breed up such in peace as may be
useful in war: because preparations of war are not both suddenly, and
happily provided: but being once well provided beforehand; not only they Non
solum in bello valent, sed ne sit bellu^.
prevail in war, but that there be no war: for who dare to dare or
provoke that people to war, which is known to be expedite and ready to
revenge: whose same alone and Bellam samae profligant.
tried valor stinteth controversies and quarrels.

2. The most necessary use and end of military discipline enforces it self
upon generos P^ucos viros fortes natura pro^r^at.
spirits. Because nature brings forth but few meet martial men; but industry
and institution breeds many: neither can there be any exercise for young and
able men, either more noble then to be disciplined in the use of arms, to be
skillful in their Postures, in their Marches, in their Ranks, and readiness
for every Command: or more useful, seeing the skill and dexterity of arms
both keeps in awe the neighbor nations without; and preserves the peace at
home; which next to his peace with God, every good man, and Patria proximo a
d^is gradu est.
patriot must by all good means advance; whereas contrarily the neglect of
this discipline is pernicious both at home and abroad. For when men at home
waste their time in wanton, base, and esfeminate exercises (by which they
eneruate, and emasculate their spirits from manly atchieuements) being called
abroad to service are sit for nothing, but either to maime the public
designs, or else to mischief themselves or their follows by their laziness
and unskillfulness in the use of their arms.

3. For your further incitation you want no examples, nor companions in your
military exercises. If you could look into heaven, Luke 2. 2^.

(...),


you might see the Angels great in power and skill; those heavenly soldiers
never out of the sield, nor their ranks. But you may look unto heaven and see
the stars: the host of heaven fight in their courses and orbs, Judge. 5. 20.
against the Lords enemies. If you look lower to the heaven upon earth: the
whole Church upon earth is in arms in the great military yard of the world:
and is therefore called militant. And we her ministers are all 2 Timothy 2. 3.
in our ranks the Lords soldiers in a most hazardous sight, against all your,
and our spiritual enemies.

If you look round about you, all the creatures are called the Lords armies:
and from them himself is called the Lord of hosts above two hundredth and
thirty times in the Scripture: so as he must be out of all rank that affects
not this noble exercise.

4. You of this worthy society have with you, and before you, (beyond other
bands) the high Commander in earth of us all. Our Great Charles, defender of
our persons, and of our faith: who has vouchsafed to become your General and
noble Patron. You has he specially honored by giving you your colors; and by
calling you his Company. You he yearly encourages with royal remembrance
for the honor of your annual feast and meeting. His Highness has taken you
in unto him, to encourage, to honor, to employ you on occasion: because he
has seen you strong men, and meet for the war. Where will you find a more
Royal Leader? Seeing now that the increase, and flourishing of this military
society, in number, in honor, and in graceful exercises is the honorable
desire of his Majesty; Is there any brave spirit that would not satisfy his
Prince in so noble, and easy a desire?

If David shall but wantonly desire water out of the well of Bethlem: his three
worthies, Iosabam, Eleazar, and Shammah, will break through an whole Army of
Philistims; and unbidden, attempt a most desperate service, with extreme
hazard of their lives. But here is no such hot service: nor to so little
purpose, nor without the leave, and leading of the King himself: Who
vouchsafes to go before you.

5. We the subjects of the Kingdom honor you as a strong buttresse of our
wall. We esteem every one of you, worth so many men as in time of service,
and necessity, every one of you are able to lead. We look not on you as common
soldiers: but as Commanders, when ever any of you shall be commanded. We
take you in to us as we do gold, not by bulk or bullion, but by weight and
worth; esteeming every grain of your value and valor at the due rate and
estimate. We are more willing to behold a seemly appearance in your exercises
marching under your colors in the field: then to see you marching to a feast:
All which laid together may be as sharp and steeled spurs to quicken even
dull spirits to affect and undertake this so noble and necessary an exercise:
wherein whosoever is wanting (if ability and opportunity be not wanting) he
may be sentenced to be wanting both to his own reputation; Communis
vtilitutis derel^ctio contra naturam est, Cic. de Offie.
as also to the honor, and safety of his country; and to be an offender
against nature it self; the light whereof denounced them to be enemies who
were wanting to the Pro hostibus se habiturum qui reipublica defuissent.
Common wealth. So did Great Pompey esteem them enemies that having power and
opportunity failed the public.

2. But ^ow forbearing to press that point further. Let me add a word or two
of counsel; and let it I pray you be acceptable unto you. I will commend you
to God, when I have commended a few precepts unto your consideration.

1. The first of them is; that seeing God and man does honor you: you must
also advance your own honor: both the honor of your persons, and the honor
of this Society. Dishonor not your persons by vices, or disgraceful lusts;
fear baseness, swaggering, swearing, quarreling, drinking, rioting, and the
like. Remember that sin and shame are by God tied together with an adamantine
chain, Once a wound ever a s^arre, Proverb.
and wait one on the other, as the shadow on the body; and what God has
joined, you cannot sunder: the act of sin as a wound is transient, but the
scarre remains.

Dishonor not this society by negligence, idleness or slacknesse in your
appearances: but give your presence and attendance at your times appointed;
which is the sinews and strength of your company. Uphold the grace of your
Exercitus dicitur quod meli^r fit exercindo. Varre.
exercises, and better them, and your selves by them; for to what purpose are
you a company, or were your company, if it were not for your exercises. I have
heard that your worthy founder left you but two special rules and directions
for the advancing of the honor of your company. The former for the increase,
and upholding of your Band and society, by your weekly diligent appearance,
without failing in your set exercises. The latter for the upholding of the band
of love, and unity among your selves: avoiding carefully such jarres, and
quarrels as might disioynt you, or make you fall off one from another. I have
heard also that both these rules have been forgotten amongst many of you: and
especially by failing Non ut conuicium faciam, sed medicinam. Lipsius.
in the latter; you have almost over thrown the former. Yea my self have been
an eye witness of your slender appearance, and sundry others to their grief,
and the dishonor, I had almost said the disbanding, of your company: which
made me think of the complaint of Vegetius, concerning the neglected military
discipline of his time. But now amongst us, Disciplina hodie a^id nos non dicum
languet sedobiit, neque mala est sed nulla.
says he, the field discipline, I will not say languisheth, but is dead:
neither is it evil, but none at all. So I may say (but in no other respect but
of your want of appearance) your discipline has many times been, not faint,
but dead; not evil, but none at all. Now therefore worthy Gentlemen repair
your selves, your reputation, your company, and the honor and estimation of
it: both by joining together, and peecing in mutual and loving affections;
which will tie your persons together one to another: as also by joining your
selves in seemly appearance upon your exercise days. Christ has laid a
strait law upon you for the one: and you may lay a law by your joint consent
upon your selves for the other. That whosoever will be of the company; he may
appear so to be on the appointed days of appearance: or (without an approved
reason to the contrary) make up his presence by his purse. It were, I confess,
more praiseworthy to be voluntaries in such noble actions; then necessitated
by compalsion: but it were pity that that which should be the glory of our
action, (I mean the freeness of it) should become the overthrow of it. Let
therefore conscience to God, the service of your country, the honor of your
King, the love of Religion, and true noblenes of mind be a stronger tie upon
you; then if you were pressed, and held by force unto the action. Look upon
the state of this part of Christendom; tyrannized on by Antichrists forces:
behold the fury of the enemies against the Churches every where: take to heart
the inundation and floods of misery and destruction let in upon our neighbor
Churches; so as the Dove of Christ can find no rest for the sole of her foot.
Call to mind what has been, and is the lot of our neighbor countries: what
the hopes, and the aims of the enemy against our selves: and should not now
every able man fitted with conueniency, even out of conscience, hold himself
called by the face, and necessity of the times; to prepare himself with skill
in arms for the repulsing of such furious enemies: and for the defense of his
country, his King; and especially of the Gospel, and Religion of Jesus Christ.

We read of a band of men following Saul, Whose hearts God had touched. Who
will say they 1 Samuel 10. 1^
were not called though they were not pressed? show your selves such a band of
men whose hearts God has touched: and such as those two hundredth thousand men,
who with Amasa offered themselves willingly unto the Lord: 2. Chro. 17. 16.
that is, with a most free spirit to fight the Lords battles under Iehoshaphat.
Let not baseness of mind, nor covetousness, nor idleness, nor private ends,
nor private grudges, cause any either to keep off, or to fall off, either one
from another, or from the public action; the use whereof is so noble, and
necessary.

2. The longer I have been in this first advice, the shorter I shall be in
the rest. The second principle I would tender unto you to advance the honor of
your company, is: that you be careful both to fear God your selves; and to
draw in others among you that are religious and fearing God. The former,
because all true valor and fortitude flows from Religion and the fear of
God. By faith the Hebr. 11
Judges of Israel were valiant in battle, and turned away the forces of
aliants. This alone made Eliah, the horsemen, and Chariots of Israel; all
warlike provision, power and policy, without Religion is vain. And all valor,
and courage, without grace and Religion, is as a shadow without a body: or as a
body without a soul. Promote therefore by all your power, the power of the
Gospel first in your own hearts, and then in your families, and then in your
countries. Get grace, and be in grace with God: and then more are they, and
more powerful that are with you; then any, or all that come against you.

And next to this, get into your company men that fear God; the more of them
you can draw in; the more happy and flourishing will your company be. Such as
these will intend the public, and not their private ends: their virtuous life
will cast a lnstre upon your meetings, their religious speeches and godly
counsels will tend to edification. In a word, their holy example, course, and
discourses will make your meetings fruitful. Cast but your eyes upon your
other fraternity, that noble society of the Artillery yard; and observe how
God has increased their numbers, their renown, and true honor: how they
prosper in outward means, how lovely, comely, and graceful they are in their
meetings, how dex trous and able for great services. And whence is it? but
(besides the wisdom, valor, diligence, sobriety, and piety of their
Leaders, and Captains) because one godly man has persuaded, and drawn in
another: so as many of the band are not only civil and sober minded, but
truly religious, and noted for men fearing God, to whom the Lord has entayled
honor and prosperity. Him that honors me I will honor: but who so
despises me shall be despised. Let this persuade such as fear God to come in,
and draw others affected as themselves into this exercise, a readier way to
advance your society, cannot be directed.

3. While you prepare your selves against enemies without; know that you have
the greatest Malum nascens facilius oppr^mitur.
enemy within to grapple withal. This bosom enemy who is still at bed and
board with you, you must charge against daily, watch him narrowly, and take him
in hand betime, suppress Foris hostem si non habes, inuenies domi. Liuy.
the risings of evil motions, be serious in this encounter you never want an
enemy that you may never want exercise: if you find him not abroad, he will
find you at home; have him necessarily you must, aut socium aut hostem, either
as a companion or an enemy: but at the best a traitor. Raise up your whole
power, and stand in complete armor against this enemy: against whom (seeing
there is no hope of peace) there Vincit seipsum qui proficit in melius.
is no hope but in arms. Of al victories esteem that the most noble to
overcome thy self: and he overcomes himself, that ouergroweth his
corruptions daily; and stands strongly in the strength of Christ against his
own lusts, by whom he is more then a conqueror.

Valentinian the Emperor at point of death said he most gloried in one victory
amongst all In^micoru^ nequissimum de vici, car nem meam.
the great triumphs and victories of his life, and being asked what that was:
he answered, I have conquered my most wicked enemy, my own flesh, a noble
conquest indeed. It is not hard to overcome any other enemy if a man have
overcome himself: but it is impossible for any other enemy to overcome him.

4. In all use of arms acknowledge the Lord your highest General. Israel must
put on their Armati coram Domino.
arms before the Lord. so you must do all in his presence, and by his
direction; and this will Numb. 32 29.
be an aw-band to keep all in order. In other armies many things are done,
which other Generals know not, nor see: but this General sees all, hears
all, observes all. Learn therefore in all your warlike exercises of Israel:
to march or stand (as they in all their iourneys) according to the moving, or
standing of the cloud. Let Gods word be your watchword for your direction in
every thing: for then God is before Josh. 1. 7.
you, his presence is with you, and his blessing shall be upon you for good,
for honor, for safety, for victory and success in whatsoever you shall put
your hands unto, according to his promise, who is truth it self, the mighty
God blessed for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

