TAILORS TRAVELS AND CIRCVLAR PERAMBVLATION, through, and by more then thirty
times twelve Signs of the Zodiac, of the Famous Cities of London and
Westminster. With the Honor and Worthiness of the Vine, the Vintage, the
Wine, and the Vintoner; with an Alphabeticall Description, of all the Tavern
Signs in the Cities, Suburbs, and Liberties aforesaid, and significant
Epigrams upon the said several Signs. Written by JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. 1636.

THE PREFACE TO the READER.
Gentlemen and others (of what Sex, Estate, Condition, Calling, Degree,
Quallitie, Art, Mystery, Craft, Trade, Science, Function, or Occupation soever)
Greeting and friendly Salutations. First, I most humbly and thankefully
remember my thanks to all such as have formerly taken my Labors in such good
part, as I have felt their liking in their loving Bounty. Secondly, I do
express my Gratitude to as many as have accepted my Books at my hands,
although some of them have not, and many of them could not Requite me. And
thirdly, I do request as many as do receive this small Pamphlet to take into
their Consideration, that I do expect they shall pay me for it. I am sure
there has been within these 30. years more then 200. Impressions of Books
in my Name; For though I have ^ot written above 80. yet some of them has been
^rinted 10. or 12. times over, 1500. or 20^0. every time. Amongst which number
of Pamphlets, I ^m sure, that (first and last) I have given free^y for nothing
(never expecting any thing but ^hankes) above 30000. Books, (besides those
that I have been Rewarded for:) But so it is ^ow (my good Friends) that Age,
and some Charge ^rging me to make trial of your Loves, only for ^his one
small Toy or Trifle; And though it may ^eeme a Trifle to you, it was a Travel
to me in the ^ollecting and Writing: All which, with my self, I leave to be
considered upon your receiving ^f the Second Part, which I am at as busy as a
Be; always

Remaining yours Here and There Or Any Where JOHN TAILOR.

TAILORS TRAVELS through more then thirty times twelve Signs.
AS the Sun, in his Celestial Pro gresse, does with perpetual mo tion pass
through the twelv^ Signs of the Zodiac, and every year does beguirt the
large Cir cumference of his Heavenly Sphere; yet it i^ to be noted, that
twelve Signs only, and n^ more but twelve, are each one in his monthly
course, the places of his Perambulation, an^ circular Travel.

And as a Zany or Counterfeit, will (for sports sake) in a pleasant way,
imitate an Activ^ Nimble Tumbler in his feats of Activity So I, in Imitation
of the Sun, have in on^ Month progress'd through London, Westminster, with
the Suburbs, and the Borough of Southwarke; not as the Sun does through
twelve, but near thirty times twelve Signs.

I have found Aries and Taurus in Rams and Rams-head, Bulls, and Bul-heads; for
Gemini I have made shift with the Sign of Adam and Ev^ in Tothill-street at
Westminster, with all other double Signs, as Rose and Crown, Castle and
Miter, the Man in the Moon, the Crosse-Keyes, or any such signs wherein two
several things are depicted, they serve me in my Course for Gemini.

Cancer (or the Crab) was hardest for me to find out; nor did I much search for
it; for in my Horizon it appeared not, except in the crabbed frown of a woman's
face, or in the Rump or later end of a dear Reckoning.

For Leo, I have found more then a Den of Lions, Or, Argent, and Gules, Alias,
Golden, While e^nd Red.

Virgo, or the Maidenhead Sign, was hard, or scarce to be found near a
Taverne-Bush; but at last, Bush-lane afforded me one, which is as the Phaenix
of Arabia, alone, there being no more of that sign within the Hemispheare of
the City.

Libra was generally metamophosed in every Tavern, from weights to measures,
except at the Bar, where Gold was weighed to a grain; it is said that Astrea,
or Justice, fled from the Earth, and was turned into the equal, or Septembers
Equinoctial Sign of Libra.

The Sign Scorpio (or the Serpent) I conjecture to be transformed into green
Dragons; which Sign I have often past through in my peregrination.

For Sagitarius, I was forced to make use of the sign of the Archer, near
Finsbury-fields, or Grubstreet end.

Capricornus, is said to be a Sign in the Heavenly Firmament, containing
twenty stars; but if the Goat in West-smithfield had not furnished me, I had
been quite destitute of entertainment at Capricorn.

The Sign of the Fountain was my flowing (and sometimes overflowing) Aquarius.

In stead of Pisces, I was glad to make my Journey to the Dolphin and Mermaids.

Thus having declared my painful passage through twelve sorts of Signs, I
proceed further to speak of some other Signs.

A Catalogue of such Signs, as the Author has past by and through.
I have past by and through Vrsa Major, at the Bridge-foot in Southwarke, and I
have visited Vrsa Minor, in more places then one; I have found the Dog-dayes in
the depth of Winter, both at Westminster, and elsewhere. I have been in
conjunction near the Dragons tail. I have played the Man in the Moon; I have
passed through a Bakers dozen of Suns, besides the seven Stars, for my further
perambulation, through and by Angels, Kings and Queens Heads, Crowns, Ankers,
Antelops, Cities, Bells, Castles, Bores, Crosses, Crossekeyes, Cats and
Cardinals, Hats, Eagles, Fleeces, Faulcons, Chequers, Hoops, Cranes,
Christopher and Dunston, Globes, Griphons, Saint John, George and Gartar,
Field-gate, Turnstile, and Flowerdelice, Hearts, Horns, Harrowes, and
Horshooes, Katherine Wheel, Grasshopper, Lamb, Kings, Queens, and Princes
Arms, Saint Martin, Mouth and Miter, Pauls-head, Bishops-head, Nags-heads,
Pie, Pelican, Plow and Peacock, A Navy of Ships, A Brood of Swans, sweet
Roses, kind Salutations, Tractable Tuns, An honest Shepherd, A Windmill, good
Wrastlers, a fair Vineyard, A plentiful Vintage, and three Tavernes only
with Bushes without a Thief. All which, you that have leisure may find, and
when you have found, you may read at your pleasure.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that as in the Firmament there are not so many
fixed, as wandering stars: And oftentimes the most part (or all of them) are
darkened and involved round with Clouds, Vapors, Mists, and Fogs; so that they
are obscured from our sight. So in this lower Circle of my passage, I have
found Suns, Moons and Stars, in their bright and shining luster (as it were to
day) but upon the sudden some of my Suns have been eclipsed, with a Cloud of
Debts; bad Customers (or small Custom) has brought some of my Moons from the
full, to an unrecoverable Wane; too much belief in bad Paymasters has
obscured, now and then a star; and many other of my lesser stars have been too
often shipwrack'd, with running on a Rock of Chaulk, or too much scoring.

Amongst all these Changes and Mutabilities, I would have the Reader to note,
that all those Signs which are in this following Book nominated, were at the
writing hereof in Preterpluperfect being, shining and adorning our Terrestrial
Hemisphaere with most hopeful, resplendent, refulgent, and translucent Luster.
But if any planetary Influence has with malevolent aspect, cast a fog of
Obscurity, or perpetual Extinction upon any of my Signs, let no man blame me
(the Author) for I plead not guilty, either to the Retrogradation, or
Declination of any of them; for I have, and do love all the worthy Company of
Vintoners; that I desire they may ever be like the latter end of a Scriveners
Bond ( In full Force and Virtue.)

The antiquity of Wine is recorded memorably by sacred and profane Historians,
and vines have been planted, and vineyards allowed here in England by the
Permission of the Emperor Probus, at such time as the Romans had the
Government here. And there was a Record (and I think is yet) in Windsor
Castle, of an yearly account of the Charges for the planting Vines in the
little Park there; and of the making of Wines in many places of this Land; and
that Grapes grew so plenteously, that some of the Wines served for the Kings
household, the rest were sold for the King's profit: And that the Tithe of those
Vines and Wines were paid to the Abbot of Walthamstow, who was then Parson of
Old and New Winsor: And in the reign of King John, Wine was so plenty, that it
was sold for twenty Shillings the Tun, which is but one penny the Gallon: And
it was so cheap in the fifteenth year of King Henry the Seventh, that (much
of it being ^rought out of France) it was given to the Mar^iners (for their
freight) that brought it.

We are commonly entertained with Wine ^t Christenings, Weddings, and Burials,
so that Wine ushers us into the world, and kindly accompanies us all our life,
and after death brings ^s to our graves. Thousands of people do live ^y it, as
the Planters of Vines, the Keepers of Vineyards, Wine-Merchants, Vintoners,
M^iners, Coopers, Lighter-men, Wharfenge^ Shipwrights, Carpenters, Goldsmithes,
Pe^ terers, and Carmen: Besides, the great charge (...) Cranedge and
Selleridge; And which is not (...) be forgotten, Customs and Imposts.

Thus much shall suffife to speak of Wine^ Now for the Honor of Vintoners, I
find the^ have been many worthy and Honorable me^ of them; for in Anno, 1271,
the fifty six year of the Reign of King Henry the third, on John Adrian,
Vintoner, was Lord Mayor o^ London. In the eighth year of King Edwa^ the
third's Reign, 1334, one Reignold at the Conduit was Lord Mayor: In the
fifteen^ year of the same King, one John of Oxfor^ was Lord Mayor. In the one
and thirty year of Edward the third, 1356, Sir Henry Picar^ Vintoner, was Lord
Mayor; who for a perp^ tuall Honorable Memory of this Cities wo^ ^hinesse; and
for a Brooch, Jewel, or famo^ Ornament to the Right Worshipful Comp^ of
Vintoners, the said Sir Henry Picard di^ feast four Kings in one day with most
sum^ tuous Magnificence, namely, Edward the thir^ ^ing of England, John, King
of France, David, ^ing of Scotland, and William, King of Cypress, ^ith Edward
the Black Prince of Wales, the ^aulphin of France, with many other Princes,
^ukes and Peers, as may be read in Stowes ^d Howes Chronicle, and in the
Survay of ^ondon. In the year 1558, Sir John Stody, ^intoner, was Lord Mayor
of London. In the ^are 1395, the nineteenth year of King Ri^ard the second,
Sir William Moore, Vintoner, ^as likewise in that Honorable Office. In the
^neteenth year of the Reign of King Henry (...) eight, 1527, Sir James
Spencer, Vintoner, ^as Lord Mayor of London. And in the year ^94, in the five
and thirty year of the Reign Queen Elizabeth, Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Vin^ner,
did Nobly serve in that Honorable Of^ce of London's Maioralty. Besides, I find
that (...) the seventeenth year of Queen Elizabeth, ^laster Henry Prannell,
Vi^toner, was one of (...) Sheriffs of London.

As concerning Pious and Charitable works ^ne by this famous Company, and by
their ^ives, or Widows, he that list's to read the ^rvay of London, shall
find the memorable Records of (not only those before named) b^ of Master
Stephen Skidmore, Master Richa^ Jacob, Mistress Sibbella Jacob, with many other
which for brevities sake, I omit.

And thus I dedicate my self and this m^ Labor to that Right Worthy, and
Ampl^ Company, requesting them, and as many (...) loves them, to take nothing
in ill part, becau^ I know there was not any thing ill meant. An^ now I proceed
to my Alphabeticall and Ep^ grammatical Peregrination.

A
Angel in Long Aker. Angel in Shoreditch. Angel at the Tower Gate. Angel
near the Gatehouse at Westminster. Epigram.
Celestial sure these Angels are not yet,
Nor fiends infernal from the hellish Pit:
Though Sinners made them, they are clean from Sin;
Yet are they hanged, to show good Wine's within.
Anchor in West Smithfield. Anchor in East Smithfield. Anchor and Ship in the
Minories. ^ker in St. Olaves, at Bermondsey street end. Epigram.
Some men have found these Ankers very able,
To More them safe and fast without a Cable:
A man may Load himself, and Sleep, and Ride,
Free from Storms, Tempests, Pirates, Wind and Tide.
Adam and Eve at Westminster in Tuthill street. Epigram.
Our Parents first (as I think) never drank Wine,
And yet for Wine their Figures are a Sign:
As they forbiden were the Fruit to taste,
So we forbidden are, good Wine to waste.
Antelop in West Smithfield. Epigram.
The Antelop's a rare Beast, seldom seen,
Nor has it often in our Kingdom been:
A foreign Beast, a Sign, shows foreign Wine
For you, or me, or any Friends of mine.
Andrews Cross in Fetter lane near Holborn. Epigram.
Saint Andrews Argent Cross in th'Azure field
Is ancient, and a noble Christian shield:
There Is French and Spanish, to cheer heart and brain,
From the most Christian Cath'like, France and Spain.
Antwerp behind the Royal Exchange Epigram.
Antwerp, is Englished, Throw thy hand Away,
Rather then God, or King, to disobey:
At Antwerp Tavern meet shake hands, be merry,
There Is Clarret, White, Canary, and good Sherry.
Archer near Finsbery Fields, or Grubstreet end. Epigram.
This Sign does show the worthiest exercise
Is Shooting, and it shows unto our eyes,
When Archers in the field have won the Vpshot,
They may come to this Archer and be Cupshot.

B.
Bishops-head in Chancery Lane. Bell within Temple Bar. Bell without
Bishopsgate Bell in Saint Nicholas Lane, through into Canning street. Bell at
Saint Thomas in Southwarke Bell at Westminster in Kings street. Bell in Distar
Lane Bell in Newgate Market Bell Savadge Bell in the Strand. Epigram.
These Bells are never told with Rope in Steeple,
Yet there is od Iangling, amongst od kind of people,
And the^ 9 B^at once are daily Rung
With 2. strange Clappers, Pewter and the Tongue.
Bull head in Towerstreet Bull head in East-smithfield Bull head in Cheapeside
Bull head in the Borough of Southwarke Bull head without Bishopsgate. Epigram.
These Bull Heads nere had Bodies I am sure,
It Is strange Heads without Bodies should endure:
Yet it is not strange; for though the Sign be dead,
The Cellers foot below, holds up the Head.
Bull-blacke in the Palace at Westminster Bull-blacke in the Borough of
Southwarke Bull-red in Thames street near Coleharbour Bull-red in Saint John's
street. Epigram.
These Bulls were never Calves, nor came of Kine,
Yet at all seasons they do yield good Wine,
But those that suck these Bulls more then they ought,
Are Walthams Calves, much better fed than taught.
Bear in the Palace at Westminster Bear and Dolphin in Tower street Bear
near Fleetbridge Bear at the Bridgefoote in the Borough of Southwarke.
Epigram.
No Ravenous, Savadge, Cruel Bears are these,
But Gentle, Mild, Delighting still to please:
And yet they have a Trick to Bite all such
As Madly use their Company too much.
Bores head in West-Smithfield Bores head behind the Exchange Bores head in
East-Cheape Bores head at Criplegate Bores head in Old Fishstreet. Epigram.
He that will lay a wager sure shall win,
These Bores Heads shows that Hogsheads are within
He that does doubt let him the Celler try,
And it is much marvel if he come up dry,

C.
Crown in West-Smithfield. Epigram.
Within this Crown has many Crwnes been spent,
Good Wine, Attendance good, and good Content:
There Is Liquor of the best, from France and Spain,
Which makes this Crown full weight above a Grain.
Castle without Newgate Castle in Paternoster Row Castle in Cornehill Castle
near Paul's Chain Castle behind Saint Clements near the Strand Castle in
Fleetstreet Castle in Bredstreet Castle in Woodstreet Castle in White Chapple.
Epigram.
It Is oftentimes no Hazard or Adventure,
These Peaceful C^les q^tly to Enter:
They are not built for Defense, or Offense,
Yet all the Manhood is, in Going thence.
Cross White in Whitecrosse street Cross Red in Redcrosse street Cross
Tavern near Charing Cross. Epigram.
When men are overprest with Cares and Losses,
They may find speedy Comfort in these Crosses:
But such as bear no Crosses thither, then
Small Reason, it is, they should be welcome men.
Cross Keys in Bedford Berry, alias, Covent Garden Cross Keys in the
Strand, near York, or Buckingham house Cross Keys in Holbourne. Epigram.
These Keys were never made to open Locks,
Yet they may be the means to open the Stocks:
For he that drinks, swears, rores, fights, spewes and reeles
Hang such a Rascal, lay him by the heels.
Cat in Long Lane. Epigram.
Who scratcheth worst the Broker, or the Cat,
Good honest Reader, prithee tell me that:
The Broker scratches till a man be stripped,
For nothing every day the Catt is whipped.
Cardinals Hatt without Newgate Cardinals Hatt in Cornehill. Epigram.
The Cardinals hurt least, being far away,
And sure their Hatts will do less hurt then they:
We are much better pleased, with the bare Sign,
Then with the Hat, or Card'nall; There Is good Wine
Chequer in White Chapel Chequer in the Strand. Epigram.
The Chequer square, does many squares contain,
And good square dealing there does still remain;
Provided that you to the Chequer bring
The Exchequer Coin, the stamp of Queen or King.
The Christopher at Clearkenwell, at Turnebull street end. Epigram.
I Read that Christopher once usde the Trade,
A mighty dangerous River over to wade:
And having left the Water, it is thought meet
To set him up for Wine in Turnebull street.
The Coopers hoope in Leadenhal street near Limestreet. Epigram.
Good Wine does need no Bush, the Proverb says,
And I have known that house three thousand days stoop.
Without a Sign or Bush; only a Hoope
Shows there is good Wine will make a strong man
The Crane at Hoxton in the Parish of St Leonards Shoreditch. 3 Cranes in the
Vintage 3 Cranes in the Powltry 3 Cranes in the Strand near the Savoy Gate 3
Cranes in the Old Bailey 3 Cr nes in Chancery Lane 3 Cranes in Saint Olaves
street 3 Cranes in the Borough of Southwarke. Epigram.
The Cranes heau'd Wine (from Water) to the Cart,
The Ca^ to th^ie Cranes, hese Cranes to the Quart,
And other Measures, Thus is Wine divided,
And the divisions good, if not Misguided.
3 Cups in Holbourne.
D.
The Green Dragon in Chepeside Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. Dragon in White
Chapel Dragon on St Lamberts hill, and in Thames street, Dragon and Mermayde
in Thames street, at the foot of Paul's hill Dragon in Southwarke, near Saint
Giorge's Church Dragon in Drury Lane Dragon in White Friars. Epigram.
These Dragons only bite and sting all such
As do immod'ratly haunt them too much:
But those that use them well, from them shall find
Joy to the Heart, and comfort to the Mind.
Dog at Westminster Dog in Drury Lane Dog at Creed Lane end, near Ludgate Dog
within Newgate Dog in Chancery Lane. Epigram.
These Dogs are very Tame, and free from Spite.
And yet sometimes they dare their Masters bite:
Exceeding Gentle, being not abusde,
They bite when they are over-roughly used.
Dolphin in Thames street near Dowgate Dolphin in Old-Fish street. Epigram.
By Nature (as some famous Writers tell)
The Dolphin does love Man and Music well:
And at these Dolphins men may at their pleasure,
Have Wine and Music, both in Time and Measure.
St. Dunstane. Epigram.
The Devil with Rorers in the house may Rore,
The whilst good Dunston guards and keeps the door;
But sure Apollo did with Bacchus Join,
That there is kind Entertainment and good Wine.

E.
Spread Eagle in Grayes Inn Lane Eagle in Cow Lane. Epigram.
The Eagles eye upon the Sun dares stare,
If other Birds do so, they blinded are:
And men unto those Eagles Nests may come
Clear sighted, yet want sight ere they get home.

F.
Fountain in Fleetstreet Fountain in East-Smithfield Fountain in
Fanchurchstreet Fountain in the Old Bailey Fountain in the Strand near the
Savoy Fountain in Saint Annes Lane ueere Aldersgate. Epigram.
These Fountains are not Proud, like many a knave,
That brags of goodness, yet no Goodness have:
The Fountains promise Water, yet afford
Good Wine, and so are better then their Word.
Fleece in Bedford-Berry, Alias, the Covent Garden Fleece in Little Britain
Fleece in Cornhill, near Birchin Lane end. Epigram.
In peace a Man may peecemeale venture Pieces,
Spend Time and Coin, yet never win those Fleeces:
But those that do attempt with Moderation,
Shall find the Hazard but a Recreation.
Faulcon on the Bank side Fanlcon in Rosemary Lane. Epigram.
These Faulcons to the Lure did never stoop,
Nor do they Mue, Mute, cast their Gorge, or Droope:
Nor ever Mounted to the Sky (past Ken)
Yet all their Game is still to pleasure M^n.
Fortune in Drury Lane Fortune in Golding Lane. Epigram.
These Fortunes, are themselves nor good, or Ill,
Nor (like Dame Fortune) are they Changing still:
Yet do they make some Glad, some Sad, some Mad,
And are as they are used, Good or Bad.
The Flower De Lices in Finch Lane near Cornehill. Epigram.
French Flowers does show there is good French Wine to sell
Which he that tries will find, and like it well:
But if perchance your Pallat do disgust it,
There Is high and mighty Sack, if you dare trust it.
The Golden Field-Gate, at the upper end of Holborne. Epigram.
All is not Gold that glisters here I say:
This Gold Gate has no Latch, Bolt, Lock, or Kay:
Yet at all lawful hours (for lawful Gain)
It Is open, honest Guests to entertain.

G.
Globe in Fleetstreet Globe in Shorditch Globe in King street at Westminster.
Globe in the Woolstaple at Westminster. The Globe in Thridneedle street Globe
in little Eastcheape Globe near Holbourne Bars. Criphon in White Chapel.
Epigram.
As the Celestial Globe is various Mixed
With Stars, some more, some Retrograde, some fix^
So in these lesser Globes, men are still Changing,
Drunk, Sober, Mad, Sad, Merry, Reeling, Ranging,
George in Turnbull street George in St John's street George in Fleet Lane
George within Aldgate George in White Friars Epigram.
George is on Horseback Riding Day and Night,
And with the Dragon in perpetual fight:
Which shows that we should watch against fleshly evil,
To ride the World, and Combat with the Devil.
Greyhound without Creeplegate Greyhound in Bowlane Greyhound in the Black
Friars Greyhound in Fleetstreet Greyhound in Knightrider street. Greyhound in
Southwarke, or the upper Ground. Epigram.
These Greyhounds nere hunt Buck, nor course a Hare
Instead of hunting, they still hunted are:
And those that hunt them many times are bit,
Lamed in the Legs, and Creepl'd in their Wit.
Goat in Smithfield. Epigram,
When sickness does man of his health deprive,
Goats Milk is wholesome and preservative:
And sure this Goare such Liquor does contain,
As can both Glad and Mad, Man's heart and brain.
The Garter in Long Aker. Epigram.
The Honorable Garter first did Spring
From Famous Edward, Englands Warlike King:
He beat the French, and to requite his pain,
French Wine has ever since beat us again.
The Grasshopper in Threedneedle street, near Finch Lane end. Epigram.
This Grasshopper is not a skipping Vermin,
Whose Glory with the Summer does extermine:
Nor Heat or Cold can change his hue or shape,
Twill live upon the Liquor of the Grape.

H.
The White Heart near Charing Cross. Heart in Shoreditch Heart in White Chapel
Heart in Smithfield Heart in the Strand Heart in Tothill street at Westminster
Heart at Hoxton in St Leonard Shoreditch Parish Heart at Drury Lane end near
Holbourne Heart without Bishopsgate. Epigram.
Although these Hearts do never run away.
They Will tire a Man to hunt them every day:
The Game and Chase is good for Recreation,
But dangerous to make it an occupation
The White Horse in Lumbard street Horse in Old Fish street Horse Flying in
Woodstreet. Epigram.
Quite contrary to other Horses, these
Feed not on Grass, Hay, O^tes, Bread, Beans, or Pease:
The cost is small, their Provender to buy,
For all the Charges in the Drink does lie.
The Harrow in Charterhouse Lane Harrow in Gracious street Harrow in Little
Woodstreet Epigram.
It Is not a common use (as most men know)
That men should go to Harrow e're they sow:
Yet here it is in fashion every day
To Harrow first, and Sow when they do pay.
The Horshoe in Drury Lane Epigram.
He were a cunning man that could declare,
Whether this Shoe would best fit Horse or Mare:
Those that will know, they may go study there,
And catch a Fox, and so be never the near.
The Hoope in Them street, near Saint Magnus Church Epigram.
Here are not taught, Tricks, Sleights or active Feats,
No Legerd' maine, or Inggling sharking Cheats:
Drink moderate when thy Pensive mind does droop,
Or quickly learn to Tumble in the Hoope.
The Hearts Horns and Miter at the end of Carterlane, near Blackfriars The
Horn in Fleetstreet Epigram.
He that will whet his wit when it is dull,
Drink, for these Cornu copeia's still are full:
But if you whet away the Steel, take heed,
It will the Megrim and the Staggers breed.

I.
Saint John's of Jerusalem at Clerkenwell Epigram.
Knights of Saint John, Knights, Templers, Knights of Rhodes,
And Malta's Knights (there now is their Abodes)
And at this Place a House was built for them,
Then called Saint John's House of Jerusalem.
The Saint John's Head in Chauncery lane John's Head at Milks^ end John's Head
near Ludgate. Epigram.
He that in all his life never cared for Wine,
For Wine his memory is made a Sign:
Where such as to the Wine their lives do wed,
May lose their wit, although they keep their head.

K.
The Kings head in Shoreditch Kings head in Saint John street Kings head in
Rose-mary lane, or King of Sweden Kings head in King street, at Westminster
Kings head near Leaden hall Kings head within Bishopsgate Kings head without
Bishopsgate, near the Spittle Kings head at the end of Canning street, or
Walbrooke Kings head in Saint Clements lane near Lumbardstreet Kings head in
Pudding lane Kings head in new Fishstreet Kings head in old Fishstreet Kings
head on Tower hill, or near East-Smithfield. Kings head in Drury Lane. King of
Swedens Head without Bishopsgate Kings head in the Strand Kings head in the
Black Friars Kings head in Fleetstreet, at Chancery Lane end. Kings head at
Horsey Down Kings head in Holbourne Kings head near Alhallowes in Thamestreet
Kings head at the West end of the Covent Garden, or Bedford berry. Epigram.
These Painted Signs unto my view does bring
The Royal figure of a Mighty King:
The fight whereef, should men to Temperance win,
To come as sober out as they went in.
The Katherin Wheel at Saint Katherins Katherin Wheel in Tothill street, at
Westminster Epigram.
It is a Custom (e're since the beginning)
Women (not Men) should use the art of Spinning:
But Spinning is not practiced with this Wheel,
Yet (in short space) 'twill teach a man to Reele:
The Kings Arms in Saint Martins lane, or Martins in the Fields Kings Arms in
Cateaten street at Jronmonger lane end Kings Arms at Milford lane end, near
Saint Clements, Strand Kings Arms in the Borough of Southwarke Kings Arms in
Holbourne Kings Arms in Thridneedle street, near Broadstreet Kings Arms in
Saint Martins Epigram.
To the Kings Arms, bring the Kings Arms I pray,
For the Kings Arms must all the Reckoning pay:
Without the Kings Arms, not the Kings Arms hant,
He Is quite disarmed that does the Kings Arms want.

L.
The Golden Lion near York-house or Buckingham-house Lion in Lincolnes Fields
near the Cockpit Lion at Westminster in King street Lion in Fetter Lane Lion
in the Strand Lion in Silver street, near Woodstreet The White Lion at the end
of Tower street, near to the Hill Lion in the Crottchet Friars Lion in Canning
street Lion in Chancery Lane Lion at the Mill-bank at Westminster The Red Lion
in Shoreditch Lion at Billingsgate Lion in Grass street, or Gracious street
Lion near Saint Georges Church in Southwarke Lion at Saint Olaves Watergate in
Southwarke. Epigram.
These Lions are exceeding mild and tame,
Yet often (in Jest) they will claw a man stark lame:
Play with them temperately, or look to find,
A Lion in the end will show his kind,
The Lamb in Drury Lane Epigram.
A harmless Sign of a most fruitful Creature,
Yet contrary to Sheep and Lambs by nature:
They yield us clothes to wear, and meat to live,
And nothing else but drink, this Lamb does give.

M.
The half Moon in White Chapel Moon in the Minories Moon in Saint
Katherins Moon in Aldersgate street Moon in the Strand The Man in the Moon
in King street, at Westminster Man in the Moon in Che^pe-side Epigram.
Though these are but half Moons, yet to all such
They are full Moons, that dare to drink too much:
The Moon is ever changing day and night,
And he is a Man that stands in the Moon upright.
The Mouth at Bishopsgate Mouth within Aldersgate. Epigram.
These Mouths do (like two Monsters) live on Men,
They swallow them, and put them out again:
They gape, yet bite not; if they bite, I Am sure
They rankle not, my self have tried the cure.
The Saint Martin near Charing-Crosse. Epigram.
If it be true, some ancient Writers spoke,
That Martin to a Beggar gave his Cloak:
Those that have Cloakes, let them this Tavern find,
And there they and their Cloakes may well be lined.
Mermayd in Shoe-lane Mermayd at Billingsgate Mermayd in Cornehill Mermayd in
Cheapside Mermayd in Breadstreet Mermayd near Charing-Crosse Mermayd in the
Borough of Southwarke Mermayd in Watling street near Bowlane Mermayd in
Paternoster Row Mermayd at Aldersgate Epigram.
This Maid is strange (in shape) to Man's appearing,
She Is neither Fish, or Flesh, nor good Red-hearing:
What is she then? a Sign to represent
Fish, Flesh, good Wine, with welcome and content.
The Miter in Saint Stevens Alley at Westminster Miter near Aldgate Miter in
Loathbury at the end of Bartholmew-lane Miter in Fenchurch street Miter at the
lower end of Cheapside Miter in Breadstreet Miter in Woodstreet Miter in the
Strand, near to Denmark house Miter and Castle in Fleetstreet Miter in Saint
John street Epigram.
These Miters have no Privilege from Rome,
Nor are all Catholics that to them come:
No man's Religion here is called in question,
Here Is Wine to glad the mind, and breed disgestion.
The Maydenhead in Thames street, or Bushlane Maydenhead and George in the
upper ground in Surrey Maydenhead at Saint Giles in the fields Epigram.
Virginity's a Virtue, much Renowned,
A Maydenhead once lost, can nere be found:
But yet these Maydenheads (with little cost)
May be both lost and found, and found and lost.

N.
Nags head at Clerkenwell Nags head in Saint John's street Nags head at
Westminster Nags head at the corner, against Leadenhall Nags head in Thames
street near the Customhouse Nags head in Cheap side Nags head near Bassings
hall Nags head without Temple Bar. Epigram.
These headstrong heads all weathers will endure,
And where you leave them, you may find them sure:
They never kick or fling, yet with a trick
They often make sick men well, and sound men sick.

P.
The Princes Arms at Hoxton Princes Arms at Paul's Chain Princes Arms at
Saint Martins lane Princes Arms near the Church at Westminster Princes Arms
near the Bouling Alley at Westminster Princes Arms over against Denmarkehouse
Princes Arms in Holborne Princes Arms in West-Smithfield Epigram.
Often in the Field these Royal Plumes have waved
When Englands Foes have bin both banged and braved:
In memory whereof, we ever since
Drink Healthes to the Cambrian, or Great Britains Prince.
The Popes head near Smithfield Pens Popes head in Moore^elds Popes head in
Cornhill Popes head in Chancery lane Epigram.
These Popes heads are no Authors of Debate,
Nor Schilmaricks, or ^oublers of the State:
Yet there is good Clarret, and Sack Catholic
Will make a Mad man Tame, a Tame man strike.
The Pie at Aldgate Epigram.
This Pie is dumb, yet often she makes folks chatter
Much, to small purpose, quite besides the matter:
But temperate men excuse the harmless Pie,
The fault is their's that drink intemperately.
The Peacocke in Thames street near the old Swan Peacocke without Temple Bar
Epigram.
Though Argus eyes be in the Peacocks tail,
A man may drink there till his eyesight fail:
But if a man a good Decorum keep,
He Will see the clearer, and more soundly sleep.
The Plough without Aldersgate Epigram.
There Is many goes to Plough, and do not know
Where Corn (upon the ground, or trees) do grow:
Beware therefore, and look before thou leap,
And Plough and sow no faster than thou Reap.
Paul's head at Paul's Chain Epigram.
Paul's head an ancient Tavern, in request,
Well Custom'd, loving to each honest Guest:
But yet they care not for such Guests at all,
As rob and rifle Peter to pay Panl.
The Phoenix in Long Aker Epigram.
The rare Arabian Bird, expires in fire:
Reviving, she is both Young, and Dam, and Sire:
Then as the Phoenix is by fire refined,
So let the Phoenix liquor clear thy mind.
The Pelican in Drury Lane
Q.
The Queens head in West-smithfield Queeenes head in East-smithfield Queens
head again in East-smithfield Queens head in Queen street Queens head in
the Strand Queens head in Bishopsgate street Queens head in Thames street
near the Customhouse Queen Elinor's head at Queen hithe Queens head in
Paternoster Row Queens head near Holborne Conduit Queens head in
Red-crossstreet Epigram.
These Queens heads like the Kings heads are, I see
Both are one Sex, both Wood, both Painting be:
There is but little difference in the Signs,
And sure there is small odds amongst their Wines.
The Queens Arms in the Borough of Southwarke Queens Arms at the end of
Saint Nicholas Shambles Epigram.
The Queens Arms and her Armies were renowned,
Eliza's Fame did fill the worlds wide Round:
Through al her reign, France loved us, Spain did fear us
And at her Arms are both their Wines to cheer us.

R.
The Rose at Fleet-bridge Rose in the Covent Garden, or Bedfordberry Rose in
Saint Peter's street at Westminster Rose against Barking Church, at the end of
Tower street Rose at the Counter gate in the Powltry Rose in Newgate Market
Rose in Shoreditch Rose at Temple Bar Rose in Thames street, near the Tower
dock Rose at the upper end of Holborne Epigram.
He were a man of Art that had the skill
Rose water from these Roses to distill:
I know there is good Rose Wine, but for Rose Water
I often have stilled, and still find no such matter.
The Ram in Fleetstreet, at Ram Alley end Rams head in Saint Olaves in
Southwark Epigram.
At Ram or Rams head (be it known to all)
Are Wines Predominant and Capital,
To set a Horse man quite beside the Saddle,
And make a ^ootman's Pericranion Addle.
The Sun in Shoreditch Sun in White-chappell Sun in the Minories Sun in Old
Fishstreet Sun in Sheere lane Sun at Westminster Sun near Mooregate Sun near
Cripplegate Sun in Aldersgate street Sun in New Fishstreet Sun in Old street
Sun in the Strand Sun in Holborne Epigram.
The Grape is ripened with bright Phoebus Shine,
Which shows that at the Sun there is good wine:
Beware of being Sun-burn't e're thou go,
Drink civilly, make not thy friend thy Foe.
Star in the Minories Star at Chick lane end Star at Saint Katherins Star in
Fenchurch street Star in Little Eastcheap Star in Cheap Side Star in Coleman
street The 7 Stars by Smithfield Bars Epigram.
He that by these eight Stars can Calculate,
Judge of Nativities, and descant Fate:
Yet are their Influences good and bad,
Some gain wit by them, some lose that they had.
The Ship in White-cross street Ship at the Posterne gate near the Tower Ship
at Saint Katherins Ship at Bermondsey house, or the Arms of Bristow Ship in
the Dukes place near London Wall Ship near Saint Mary Ax Ship behind the
Exchange Ship in Long Alley, near Moore Fields Ship in Bishopsgate street Ship
in Fenchurch street Ship near Little Eastcheape at Rood lane end Ship in
Thames street, at Trinity lane end Ship behind Old Fishstreet Ship in the Old
Baily Ship in the Strand Ship on the Bankside Epigram.
Here is a Fleet of Ships, never crossed the Maine,
To bring Commodities from France or Spain:
They never feared Tempest, Pyrat, Rock, or Wrack,
Yet are well freight with French wine and good Sack.
The Swan in White-cross street Swan in New Fishstreet Swan at Westminster Swan
at Dowgate Swan in Knightrider street Swan in Old Fishstreet Swan in the Strand
Swan at Saint Giles in the Fields Swan in Holbourne Epigram:
These are strange Swans that neither swim or sink,
And all their maintenance is only drink:
And I in lofty Verse his praise will sing,
That can but pluck a Feather from their wing.
The Shepherd in East-smithfield The Salutation in Tower street Salutation
near Billingsgate Salutation near Mooregate, or London Wa^l Salutation in the
Strand Salutation in Montague Close, in Southwarke Salutation in Holbourne
Epigram.
When men do meet, and courteously Salute,
They at the Salutation may dispute:
Some for their profit, some for their love or pleasure,
Whilst all their wine is in and out of Measure.

T.
The 3 Tuns at Guild Hall gate 3 Tuns in Newgate Market 3 Tuns in Grass-street,
or Gracious street 3 Tuns near Charing-Crosse 3 Tuns in ^eetstreet 3 Tuns in
Paul's Churchyard 3 Tuns in Smithfield 3 Tuns in Petticoat Lane 3 Tuns at the
Tower Hill 3 Tuns at Westminster 3 Tuns at Saint Mary Hill, near Billingsgate
3 Tuns at Garlic hithe 3 Tuns in the Borough of Southwarke 3 Tuns at the
lower end of Great Woodstreet 3 Tuns near Holbourne Bridge 3 Tuns on the
Bank-side The Tun near the Banke-end in Southwarke The Tun in Thames street,
against the Customhouse Epigram.
These Tuns proclaim there is Tuns of Wine below,
Go in and welcome, try, and you shall know:
There shall you see a plenteous Spring that runs
From Pipes, Buts, Hogsheads, from the liberal Tuns.
Turnstile in Holbourne Epigram.
A Turn-stile is a Bar to keep out Beast^,
Which often times has more reason than the Guests:
When Wine makes men the Rules of Reason pass,
They Are far inferior to Ox, Horse, or Ass.
A Tavern with a Bush and no Sign, under the new Burse Tavern with a Bush
and no Sign, in Milford lane Two Tavernes in the Tower of London Epigram.
Where no Sign is, it is no ill Sign to me,
Where no Sign is, it is no good Sign to see:
But though the Signs are neither good nor bad,
There Is Win^, Good, Bad, Indifferent, to be had.

V.
The Vineyard in Queens street Vintage near the 3 Granes in the Vintrey
Epigram.
The Vineyard does the iu^ods Grapes produce,
The Vintage Presses, and makes Wine their Iuce:
If these yield no good Wine, I must say still,
The Vineyard's Barren, and the Vintage Ill.
Venice, the Sign near Saint Clements without Temple Bar Epigram.
The City Venice (Strong and Opulent)
Famed from the Orient, to the Occident:
And sure the Sign of such a Noble City
Affords good Wine, or else the more's the pity.

W.
The two Wrastlers in Lincolns Inn Fields Epigram.
Wrestling is held a Manly exercise,
A Game Olimpick, both for Praise and Prize:
But he that is most Skillful, Strong or Tall,
And Wraftles with the Wine, shall surely Fall.
The White Horse in Nicholas Shambles The Windemill in Loathbury Epigram.
No Mealy-mouthed Miller keeps this Mill I know,
And let the wind blow either high or low,
He Is kindly taking Toll, and at his Mill
Is Wine exceeding good, and Welcome still.

Besides these Tavernes before mentioned, there are four Houses in London that
do sell Rhennish Wine, inhabited only by Dutchmen; namely,
THe Stilliyard. The Swan in Thames street The Swan in Crooked lane The Sun at
Saint Mary Hill
Epigram.
Here Is the bright Crystal rincing Rhennish Drink,
The salt dried Neats-tongue, and West-phalia skink:
The Pickled Herring, and the Anchovea rare:
And (if you please) Potarbo, or Caveare.
They deal in Deal wine, and their dealing's Just;
And though their Faith be good, they seldom Trust.
THus (Gentle Reader) I have ran a Course
That would have tired (per haps have killed) a Horse:
For if the winged Pegasus (like Me)
Had watered been, he had had no eyes to see:
Or if Bucephalus had trotted so,
He had been lamed and foundered long ago.
Yet is my Task not done, for I must Play
A Second Part before I have my Pay:
Which Second Part shall to your view declare
The Tavernes in ten Shires, and where they are;
Within what County, in what Town, what Sign,
Or else (if not what Sign) who sels the Wine.
The Cou^ties are, Brave Barkshire, Hampshire, Essex,
Kent, Surrey, Hartford, Middlesex, and Sussex;
With Buckingham and Oxford; these are they
Which in my Second Part I must display.
FINIS.

