Three Treatises: THE PEARL OF the GOSPEL, THE PILGRIMS PROFESSION: AND A
Glass for Gentlewomen to dress themselves by. To which is added A short
Introduction to the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper.

By Thomas Tailor, Doctor in Divinity, and late Preacher of Aldermanbury Church
in London.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John Bartlet, at the gilt Cup in Cheap Side. 1633.

THE PEARL of the Gospel: OR, Jewel Evangelical. 1 Diligently sought 2
Joyfully found 3 Dearly bought
by the wise Merchant.

Infolded in Christ's Parable AND Unfolded by the Application of Thomas Tailor,
Doctor in Divinity, and late Preacher of Aldermanbury Church in London.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John Bartlet, at the sign of the gilt Cup in
Cheap Side. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mistress Elizabeth Backus, Wife to Master Samuel
Backus Esquire, and Justice of Peace: And to her three virtuous and religious
daughters, Mris. Mary Standen, wife to Mr. Standen, Esquire, and Justice of the
Peace; Mris. Flower Backus, wife of Mr. John Backus, Esquire; and Mris.
Elizabeth Bellingham, wife to Mr. Richard Bellingham, Esquire; Grace and Peace
from the Fountain.
Right Worshipful,
Pearls are small in quantity, but great in their quality, and smaller often
in the weight than in their worth* such an one is this which I have presented
unto you as a token of my due respect and unfeigned love to your self, and the
Church in your family. Pearls from earth fit not common persons; but this
from heaven belongs to al who mean to partake in the common salvation. As
this Pearl is yours in the common right of Saints, so this offer of it is
yours by a second and more peculiar right, as who first helped it out of the
dark into this light. Your earnest and often desires of some of the written
notes of this Treatise, drew from me a promise the thought of the payment
whereof, was my first thought of this publication. And now this Pearl being
yours, wear it as your chief ornament, the price of which ra^seth your own
price and recko^ing in the eyes of God and good men, above the Carbuncles and
Rubies. Pro. 30. 10
Other ornaments severed from this, are but beautiful vanities. The largest
revenues, the richest estates, the most ample treasures, the costliest
cabinets, filled with pearls and precious stones, sets the person wanting this
pearl, in no higher reckoning than common flints, or other contemptible
stones, with him to whom the Nations are but as the drop of a bucket, Isa. 40*
15,
or as the dust of a balance. So of all natural endowments, we may compare
them (as Solomon does beantie) to a ring of Gold, which outwardly commends
the wearer; But the jewel of this ring is this pearl of the Gospel, or the
life of the Gospel, in the life of the Gospoller. Let this Jewel be lost
once, or missing, the ring may be gilded and glistering without, but the
touchstone and trial will find that it was never gold. And because I know
that you have no greater joy than to see your children walk in the truth, 3
Ihh. 4.
I am assured, you will gladly afford them an equal share with you in this so
precious a commodity, and therefore have I taken them into this dedication.
Blessed are you that have your quiver full of such lovely arrows. Psa. 127. 5.
Of the virtuous woman is said, Pro. 31. 21.
Her children praise her. Were this a verbal praise of the mouth, children
might seem testes e sinu, and the spreaders of the partial praises of their
mother; but this is an astuall and solid commendation, and unsuspected, when
the shining virtues of the fear of God, sobriety, and modest conversation of
children, proclaim the grace, piety, and care of the mothers education. Among
that rich store of earthly comforts, with which God has beset you, you have
none co^parablie graceful to this, if you except your sweet society with your
grave and religious husband.

And now to you three daughters, worthy of such a Mother: When I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith, which dwelt, and yet dwells in your
Grandmother (whose reverend old age is crowned with an ancient and honorable
profession and practice of holy Religion above any I know in these parts) and
in your dear mother; and am assured it dwells in you also, I could not but
put you in remembrance, to stir up the gift of God that is in you: And exhort
you, as you have happily begun, to hold on in the way of grace, and see that
your works be more at last than at first. God has advanced you into the
fellowship of religious and complete Gentlemen your husbands, to fair estates
and portions in this world, but especially to a sure expectation hereafter, by
means of your inseparable conjunction to your Head and Husband Jesus Christ.
You must now advance him who has thus advanced you, and love him for himself,
who has loved you in his Son: and hold every new sense of mercy, a new
spur and provocation unto duty. In the way and pace in which you go, I must
acknowledge I pass and slip an opportunity, by passing oner in silence so
many commendable parts in you all, which make you worthy to be praised among
women fearing God. Pro. 31. 30
But my praises can. lift you no higher than your own virtues do, whose
diligent pains in gaining knowledge of holy things, conscionable practice of
sound religion, charitable refreshing of the poor members of Christ, and whose
humble, sober, wise, modest, and lovely carriage, (especially in these loose
days) are as so many tongues, and mouths, and pens (without mine) to publish
your due praises: and knowing that you will be better pleased, that I turn my
praises into prayers, for your progress and prosperity in the good way, I
shall endeavor to supply that want this way, heartily commending you to the
power of his grace, who only can further enrich you with the Pearl of the
Gospel: who also give you with the new year, new supplies of all holy graces,
till the new man be complete in Jesus Christ, in whom I rest

Your Worships to be used for your furtherance in the faith, THO. TAILOR.

THE PEARL OF the GOSPEL,
MATTHEW. 13. 45. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a Merchant man that seeks
good pearls.

Who having found a pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and
bought it.


Our Lord Jesus coming from the bosom of the Father, to reveal the mystery
hid from the beginning of the world, spent the whole time of his ministry in
discovering to the Church, the excellency, the vtility, and the necessity of
that blessed and saving truth, the daughter of eternity, without which the
whole world had lien in perpetual death and darkness.

This parable among many, The scope of this Parable.
and above many, manifests, that how base soever and vile the things of God
seem to natural men, yet there is such worth, virtue, price and beauty in
them, as the godly man, who only can discern them, will exchange all he has
with them, yea and part with all the world before he will part with them.

In which Parable conside^ four things: Four parts of the Text.
1. What is this kingdom (...) heaven. 2. What is this Pearl, and the
goodness of it. 3. Who is this Merchant man 4. What are his actions, nam^ly,
three.
1. He seeks good pearls. 2. He finds a pearl of great price. 3. He sold
all to buy it. For the first.


By the kingdom of heaven, What the kingdom of heaven is not.
is not meant the blessed estate of the Church triumphant in heaheauen: as in
MATTHEW. 5. 10. Yours it the kingdom of heaven.

Nor the Church militant and visible: as in MATTHEW. 13. 47. which is like a net
cast into the Sea.

Nor the time of grace under Christ exhibited to preach in his own person:
MATTHEW. 3. 3. For the kingdom is at hand.

Nor the estate of grace, wherein the elect be justified by faith, and are lead
forward by grace, toward the kingdom of heaven: as MAT. 13. 51. The kingdom
of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed.

Nor the kingdom of power, by which God in heaven as a King governs all the
world, and every particular creature in it.

But by it is meant the preaching and publishing of the Gospel, What it is,
called here, 1. A Kingdom. 2. A Kingdom of Heaven.


A Kingdom, 1. Why a kingdom 3. Reasons
for three reasons:

1. Because the doctrine of

2. Because it is a powerful out of the kingdom of darkness, and translate
us to the kingdom of his dear Son, Coloss 1. 13. and the Apostle calls
it, The power of God to salvation, To. 1. 16.

3. Because God has set it apart, 14. 17. but also to lead us through to the
participation of that kingdom of glory reserved in heaven for us.

Secondly, Why of heaven.
of heaven.

1. Because of Distinction from earthly kingdoms: it preaches Christ a King;
but withal, that his kingdom is not of this world: he rules not after a
temporal manner, but sits as King in the spirits of his subjects, and
rules the conscience, and holds up this scepter of his kingdom in the
hearts of men, so as this kingdom is heavenly and spiritual.

2. For Exaltation and advancement, lifting it up above all that earthly
kingdoms can afford, for worth and excellency: and so to stir up our
affections, and pull our eyes toward it; the very name of it should ravish us,
and commend the privileges of the Gospel unto us.

3. For Admonition and caution that the subjects of this kingdom should
receiu^ their laws from heaven, and cont^mning earth and ^arthly things,
should aspire, meditate, and frame themselves to heavenly conversation: this
very title of the Gospel should be of power to lift us above the earth.

What is meant by the Pearl
1. The happy estate of grace here. 2. The happy estate of glory hereafter.


Of which latter, see REV. 21. 21. the foundations of the new Jerusalem were
garnished with all manner of precious stones; Jasper, Saphir, Chalcedon, and
the twelve gates were twelve pearls, etc.

But here it signifies the happy estate of grace, in which we are still
seeking, and purchasing the pearl, and the good things of the Gospel, as
namely, the glad tidings of it; the offer of Christ with his merits; Good
things of the Gospel resemble a Pearl in five things 1. In value and worth
the gift gift of faith, justification, sanctification; and these are called a
pearl for sundry reasons:

1. For the value and worth of them, which pass all other treasures in
excellency and estimation. As silver is beyond brass, and gold beyond silver,
so pearls are beyond gold, and the good things of the Gospel beyond the most
precious pea^les: so says SOLOMON, PROVE. 3. 14, 15. The merchacaise of
wisdom is better than the merchandise of silver; the revenue of it is b^tter
than that of gold; it is more precious than pearls, and all thou can desire
are not comparable to it. What a world of wealth both spiritual and heavenly,
is manifested by the Gospel, which exhibiteth Christ, in whom are all
treasures of grace and glory? What a rich storehouse is Christ himself? the
least drop of whose blood was more precious than all the world? How preci^us
are all his merits, and plentiful for redemption? What a good thing, and
precious grace is faith, which storeth a man with all the good things of
heaven? How precious is the doctrine of salvation, which must not be cast to
swine; as MAT. 7. 6. Well does our Savior therefore call this a pearl of
Great price; for the most precious pearls in regard of these good things of
the Gospel, are but dust and clay.

2. For the rareness. 2. In rareness.
Pearls are not so common as pibbles, nor in the hands of common and ordinary
men; but fit for Princes and great personages; common men know them not, nor
the price, nor the use of them: even so the good things of the Gospel are not
known or obuious to every one, but Hidden mysteries, unknown to the most part
of the world, and a wisdom revealed to Babes. And as Pearls are easily
contemned of unskillful persons, who are ignorant of their price and use: so
the mysteries of the Gospel; offer them to the Gentiles, they esteem them
Foolishness: 1 Cor. 1. 23
to the Jews they are as a Scandal: Christ crucified, is the very scorn of
the world; only a few believers advanced to be Kings and Priests to God, know
the price of this commodity, Reu. 1. 5.
and lay out for it.

3. In regard of the hidden virtue and secret excellency of them. 3 For hidden
virtue*
The body and quantity of a Pearl is small, but the virtue and power of it
great: so the Gospel seems small, and contemptible, but it is the Power of
God to salvation: Romans 1. 16.
and faith in the Gospel draws virtue from Christ to open blind eyes; to
cure all spiritual diseases, to raise from death in sin; to drive away
devils, and break the force of temptation: all the Pearls betwixt heaven and
earth have not such power; only faith as small as a grain of mustard seed,
draws virtue from Christ: and grace, though it be never so little (if sound)
it is of power to open blind eyes, and to carry the Saints along unto their
salvation.

4. In regard of their excellent qualities, Four qualities of a ric^ Pearl*
as purity, 1. Brightness.
and cleerenesse, 2. Firmnes*
and orient brightness: 3. Greatness.
so The Law of the Lord is pure, 4. Roundnesse.
PSALM. 19. The doctrine of grace, for the brightness and perspi^^ity of it, is
as a resplendent gemme, which draws all eyes to it. Secondly, in Pearls is
Firmness and strength; so hard and firm are some of them as fire consumes
them not, nor much strength can break them: even so firm and sure are the
promises of the Gospel; 2. Cor. 1* 2
all of them are Yea and Amen: fire no^ water, prosperity nor adversity can
conquer them: so firm is saving grace, 2 Timothy 3. last.
which can never be shaken out of the heart. Thirdly, their Magnitude and
greatness; so great is the mystery of godliness; amongst all Gods secrets,
there is none so great, as this of man's redemption: in the beholding of which,
the Angels cannot yet satisfy themselves, 1 PET. 1. 12. Fourthly, Equality and
roundnesse much commend pearls. The Gospel is offered to all alike, to
believers and unbelievers; to masters and servants, rich and poor: it is no
fault of the Gospel, if thou be not saved by it.

5. In regard of their effects: 5. For the effects, which are three.
Pearls supply our needs at all seasons; 1. To enrich.
and therefore NONIVS a Senator of Rome, persecuted by M. ANTONIUS, provided
only for himself an Union of inestimable price, to carry with him in his
flight, by which alone he was rich enough: So the Gospel supplyeth all our
wants; Christ in the Gospel supplyeth us all things, provides for us bread of
life, and water of life, and garments of his own righteousness; he pays
all our debts, inricheth us with inestimable treasures, and naked Christ is
wealth enough.

Secondly, 2. To adorn.
Pearls serve for ornament, and honor, and show a man to be in dignity: some
hang them in their ears; some hang them in golden chains upon their breasts;
some set them in gold, and wear them on their fingers: So the Gospel is the
honor and ornament of a Christian, and makes up all his indignities and
wrongs: while he hangs it on his ear, by diligent and careful hearing:
while he fastneth this Union, and Pearl, and makes it shine by faith in his
heart^ and while he wears it as a ring on his finger, by conscionable
practice of the commandments of the Gospel; which is, to believe in the Son
of God, and love one another; this man is honored of God and all his Saints.

Thirdly, Thirdly; to cure and comfort.
many Pearls are of great use, and effect, to prevent poison, to preserve
natural strength, and recover it decayed: many of them great Cordials, and
others great comforters of the principal vital parts of man.

So the Gospel and good of it preserve the soul from the poison of sin,
preserves supernatural strength, restores and renews strength of grace
decayed; is the only heavenly Cordial to comfort the heart in gripes of
temptation, and accusation: it is the comforter in all afflictions; Psa. 119. 92
that a Christian may say of of it as David of the Law, Had not my comfort
been in thy law, I had perished long ago in my trouble.

Labor then to see the worth and price of the Gospel, Use 1.
that with Christ thou may prefer this Pearl of the Kingdom, above all
Pearls and Kingdoms, and value this Pearl of grace above all natural
Pearls.

Our Savior would have us see how carnal we are, while such supernatural
treasures are so slightly accounted, and at so little and low a rate with us.
How carnal is it to prefer other Pearls which are from earth, or sea,
before this Pearl which only is from heaven? How unwise are we, so highly to
value the Pearls whose matter is dust and slime, and whose beauty is by the
Sunne-beames included: and contemn the Pearl, the matter of which is the
eternal love of God by Jesus Christ: and the beauty, the light and grace of
Christ the Sun of righteousness, which for the orient brightness excels
the Sun shining in his strength.

Beside, never shall this Pearl be purchased before it be prized; nor ever be
of use to us until we have purchased it: as a Pearl keeps its shine,
beauty, and virtue, wrapped up in the darkness and bowels of the earth; but
no whit inricheth him that finds it not.

Also let us place our riches in the Gospel, Use 2.
which is so far above Pearls, Place our riches in this Pearl
as the substance is above the shadow: Pearls here do but shadow forth the
worth of grace, but there is no proportion between them in shining, use, or
beauty.

First, 1. The excellency of this Pearl above all other in five things
because opinion sets the price of the one; but worth on the other: the true
worth of the grace of the Gospel, heightneth it to him that can truly esteem
it.

Secondly, no Pearl can buy a grain of grace; but grace may bring riches and
Pearls; having the promise of this life as well as of that which is to come.

Thirdly, no Pearl can avail in the day of wrath: only grace opposed to Gods
displeasure stinteth it, PRO. 11. 4.

Fourthly, Pearls and treasures can no way further a man's salvation; many
ways do, and may hinder it: many for gaping after the world, lose their own
souls: but the wealth of the Gospel only saves souls, and there is no
other means besides it.

Fifthly, Peales may make a man rich in this world, and adorn the outward man;
but not the inward: neither will they go with us hence to do us any good;
here we find them, and here we leave them. But the rich Pearl of the Gospel
is indeed ours; and makes us richest in heaven: Ioh. 6. 68.
content thy self therefore with it as the blessed Disciple Peter, saying,
Master, thou have the words of eternal life, and whither shall we go? How
have the Saints esteemed and made grace their only jewel and treasure? Ps^.
119. 111. DAVID made the testimony of God his Heritage, yea the joy of his
heart. EPHESIANS. 1. 7. The Apostle calls it a Rich grace, and CHAP. 2. 7. The
exceeding riches of his grace: and COL. 1. 17. which riches is Christ in you.

But men that seek after grace are the poorest men, mean, and unprosperous in
the world.

No, they are the richest men, though never so mean in the world, they have
many ways to be rich, which the worldling wants. They have a rich
knowledge, 1 Cor. 1. 27. they have faith a rich commodity, more precious than
gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1: 7. they have Christ living in them and dwelling
in them; they have prayer a Rich storehouse; they have title, and are indeed
heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. And suppose they be afflicted, rejected, and
scorned amongst men; yet can they with MOSES, account the rebukes of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, HEB. 11. 46. Oh what a world of
sweet content lodges in the heart with Christ? in want of all things he has
all things. If one ask a Christian, What is thy Country? he may answer, Christ
and his Country. What is thy kindred? ANS. Christ is my kindred. MAT. 12. 50.
Behold my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters. What is thy wealth and
honor? ANS. Gods Kingdom is mine, yea God himself: he is al things to me,
here and hereafter.

Men cast up their heads, and look aloft, if they be Lords of some small
Manor, or possession: but to be a King or Prince of a piece of earth, lifts
them in their conceits above the tops of the clouds: But a poor Christian is
better contented with poor and naked Christ, than with all such high and
stately vanity.

We must also do for the Gospel as men will do for pearls and treasures,
Use 3.
take pains to purcha^^ and obtain it. Do for the Gospel as men do for
Peat^es.


1. What a deal of pains and travel do men take to Faires and Markets, 1.
Painfulnesse to procure it.
in hope of a little profit, of which yet they may be disappointed: but refuse
all cost, and travel for the Gospel? Oh that men would hear the call of the
Gospel, and seek for Faith above silver, and for Grace above fine gold; happy
is the man that finds the merchandise of grace and the commodity of faith,
which is above all commodities: alas, that such precious wares should lie
neglected, and never asked after, nay refused and thrust off, when God makes
offer to thrust the same upon us; while for every trifle we want, for every
shoostring, we can inquire, ask, and pray for: but content our selves with
goods wanting goodness, and with a full chest of silver, or gold; and a heart
empty of God and his grace: woe to so rich a beggar; and unhappy is that man
that has only not purchased what was only worth purchasing.

2. Lock up the doctrine and promises of the Gospel in faithful hearts and
memories. 2. Carfully lock it up in thy surest chest.
A man that has a Jewel of inestimable price will be sure to lock it up in
the surest chest he has; How careful then should we be of safe keeping the
instructions of Gods word? which we can lightly reject; and will be more
careful to keep the least piece of silver that ever we saw coined, tha^ the
most inualuable treasure of Gods word that ever we hard preached? But Mar^
pondred Christ's words, and laid them up in the closet of her heart.

Again, Use 4.
this tends to comfort poor Christians. Comfort to poor Christians
Thou art poor and despised in the world; but God has honored thee with a
Pearl, worth all the Kings ransoms in the world. Thou art a loser in the world,
the profits of it fly from thee, into other men's hands; But 2 Cor. 6. 10. As
poor, and yet making rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
Thou losest thy name, goods, and liberty; but this Pearl remains with thee
in all estates; thou art never so poor as thou seem, nor such a loser as the
world takes thee for: DAVID found the word his comfort in trouble, and that
kept him from perishing: yea, the statutes were his songs in the time of his
pilgrimage, PSA. 119. 50. 54.

This of the second thing.

3 Who is the Merchant?

Every Christian man and woman, who are in the way to heaven; Who the Merchant
is.
and in respect of their Trade of Christianity, are compared to the Merchant,
PRO. 3. 14. for the merchandise of wisdom is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof is better than gold. Luke 19. 13. And he called
his ten servants, and delivered them ten pieces of money, and said unto them,
Occupy this till I come. Christianity is a spiritual merchandising: Seven
differences between civil and spiritual merchandising.
I say Spiritual, to distinguish it from Civil; neither is it altogether so
like, but that there is much difference and dissimilitude between them: and
the difference is in seven things. 1. Persons:


1. In respect of persons: in civil society all must not be Merchants. The
Politicians call Merchants, (...) that, is, the fect of the body politic;
both to carry out needless commodities into foreign parts, and by exchange to
bring in more and other necessaries for them: Now all the body must not be a
foot; nor all the members of a natural body have the same function. But in
this mystical body it is far otherwise: for here every Christian ought to
be a Merchant, LVK. 19. 13. seeing every Christian man has received some
Talents of his Lord to traffic with; and charge also to trade, and occupy
with them till he come: And whereas in civil dealings, Ministers are excepted
and prohibited, that they must neither make merchandise of the Word, nor
entangle themselves with the affairs of this life; 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that
warreth inta^gleth himself with the affairs of this life, because he should
please him that has chosen him to be a soldier; These are in this
supernatural trading the chief Merchants, of whom men must expect, and
inquire of these chief and heavenly commodities.

Secondly, in respect of the commodities; Civil Merchants do only deal in
profits from earth, and for earth: in earth are they gotten, and in the earth
are they left; but these spiritual Merchants deal^ in commodities farther
fetched, namely from heaven, and for heaven; not left by us, nor leaving us,
till we get into heaven; the Apostle calls them, Heavenly things in Christ.

Thirdly, in regard of the manner of obtaining them, they do much differ:
these are often gotten by indirect means; as by false weights, measures,
counterfeit money, lies, and oaths; and this civil merchandising is one of
the Arts, or Trades, that may be well or ill used: But in spiritual and
supernatural trading, the Merchant aduanceth his estate by true and just
means only: every thing is weighed out, and taken in by the weights of the
Sanctuary, sealed by God himself for true and just; they are people of a Pure
language; casting deceit out of their mouths: here they are not crafty
Merchants to deceive their brethren, but true Nathaniels in whom there is no
guile.

Fourthly, Fourthly, effects.
in regard of the effects; Civil trading often times calls men from the
worship of God, and hinders it: LVK. 14. 18, 19. we may read of three sorts
that refused to come to the supper, two of them were Merchants; the one had
bought a Farm, and the other five yoke of oxen, and these must be excused:
But this ever furthereth it; for no man can attain to the means of salvation
(which is this supernatural merchandising) but by such parts of Gods worship
and man's duty, as the Lord has appointed in his word.

Fifthly, Fifthly, means.
in respect of necessary means to uphold and drive the trade withal: In
civil trading, money is necessarium subsidium; for when men needed not the
commodities exchangeable, money was invented to preserve contracts; without
which the Merchant cannot compass his commodities. But in supernatural
traffic, the Merchant ^yeth without money or money worth. Esa. 55. 1. Hoe,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no Silver,
come buy and eat: come (I say) and buy wine and milk without Silver and
without money: Not the least of these commodities are to be valued by money,
gold, pearls, and the desirable things of this life, PROVE, 3. 14, 15. for the
merchandise thereof is better than silver, or whatsoever men can devise or
desire besides it.

Sixthly, 6 Circumstances.
in regard of circumstances of time and place.

For the time: 1. Of time
Civil merchandising is to be exercised on the six days, not on the Sabbath
day. 13. Neh. 19, 20. And when the gats of Jerusalem began to be dark, before
the Sabbath, I commanded to shut the gates, and charged, that they should not
be opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the gates,
that there should be no burden brought in on the Sabbath day: So the chapmen
and Merchants of all merchandise remained once or twice without Jerusalem.

But for supernatural and spiritual trading, as all the six days are fit; so
the seventh especially is the Lords mart or market, to furnish all his people
with provision for the whole week following.

And for the place: All places are not fit for civil marts and merchants; but
the principal prohibited place is the Church, the house of God: Matthew. 21. 12.
Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that bought and sold
in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of
them that sold Doves: Christ would not endure his Fathers house of prayer to be
made a house of merchandise. But in spiritual trading, for heaven, all places
are fit for Christian Merchants, who should go no where but still be trading
for grace: and continually either be doing of good, or taking of good: But
especially the house of God is the most proper place appointed, for the
enriching of the heart, and increasing of the stock of faith and knowledge,
and of all graces.

So much for the dissimilitude between them: The similitude and rese^blance
between earthly and heavenly trading, stands in five things
Now the similitude and reason of this resemblance stands in five thing:

1. A Merchant man is a man that deals in great and precious commodities; The
Greek word is (...), not (...), the Merchant is no Peddler, nor chapman of
small wares, nor taken up in selling pins, or points, and toys for babes: but
tradeth for great things, for great bulks, 1 In greatness of the commodities.
and quantities, for great sums, and deals in most rich commodities.

So the Christian Merchant careful for heaven, aymeth not at the base profits
of this life; as silver, gold, and such corruptible things: for these things
are but sinall in his eye and contemptible, in respect of the business of
justification, of holiness, grace, and glory. These are that one thing
needful, L^k. 10. 4^.
and that better part that takes up his thoughts and desires: such a rich
Merchant was David, Psa. 4. 7. Thou have given me more joy of heart than they
hau^ had when their wheat and their oil did abound. Let other men peddle and
barter for corn, wine, and oil, the Christian Merchant has a commodity
beyond all this, in his eye: Psalm. 4. 6.
Lord lift upon me the light of thy countenance; Such a Merchant was Zacheus;
Luke 18. 8.
when salvation was come to his house; he cast away these pedling profits,
faster than he gat them; half he gave to the poor, and the rest he reserved
to restore fourefold. Phil. 3. 8.


Such a on was Paul, who counted al things loss and dung in comparison of
Christ; and to know the virtue of his death and resurrection. Such rich
Merchants were the Martyrs; who having heaven in their eye, esteemed their
goods liberty, yea life it self not worth having in comparison thereof. For as
a man if he were as high as the Moon, would see the earth but as a prick; so
he whose thoughts are in heaven, and his eyes on things that are above, within
the veil; esteems the earth but small, and despicable. For even as the great
light drowneth the lesser; so the bright shining of the Sun of
righteousness, drowneth all the lesser candles and comforts of this present
world.

Secondly, 2 In the skill of the commodity.
there is likeness in the skill of the commodity he deals in: for as a
Merchant greatly aduanceth his estate, if he have skill, and insight, what
commodities are like to be of the quickest return: if he know and lay out for
the best conditioned commodities of every kind: So the Christian Merchant
laboring for skill, knowledge, and sound judgment in the matter of Religion,
whereby he may be able to judge aright of Doctrines delivered, shall grow rich
in knowledge, and to a great measure of faith, and full of Christian wisdom;
whence the Apostle, (Phil. 1. 10.) prays, that they may abound in all
knowledge and judgment to discern things that differ: and thus they shall be
rich, and filled with the fruits of righteousness, ver. 11.

And contrariwise, for want of this skill, a Merchant dealing for great bulkes,
soon falls into great losses: But especially the Ieweller or Lapidary by
ignorance may soon overthrow his whole estate, in respect of many cheaters and
couseners, who can notably counterfeit Pearls, and make themseeme very orient
by false arts, and so put away at a great price a piece of a fish bone or
shell, or some piece of painted glass for rich Pearls and precious stones.

Even so, many spiritual Merchants decay, and break for want of this skill, by
means of many imposters and deceivers, heretics, false teachers, Apostates,
Libertine Preachers, and the Popish guides, furnished with all arts to deceive,
as with wit and speech, and other insinuatiue faculties, that make offer of
pibbles for pearls, and thrust upon men for the true Pearl of Gods word, the
glassie, and brickle co^ceits of man's brains; which because they have made to
glister, and have set a good color on them, they hold at as high a rate as any
Pearl can be valued; and now many inconsiderate persons are taken with the
beauty, profit, or some seeming pleasure, and so robbed and gulled of their
soundness, for the present; an^ of their expectations and hopes hereafter. Now
that we may not be thus abused, let us listen to those Apostolical precepts:
EPHESIANS. 4. 14. Not to be children, wavering and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, by the decei^ of men, and craftiness whereby they lie in wait to
deceive: and in 1 IOH. 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God: and, 1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 21. Try all things, and keep that
which is good.

Thirdly, 3. In conferring of their commodities.
the similitude is in their conuersing and conferring one with another: Every
Merchant will be speaking of his commodities; he will make offer of his
Pearls and wares of price, that he may put them off into other men's hands for
his own advantage. So the Christian Merchant will be talking and conferring of
this Pearl of the Gospel; as in CANT. 5. 6. The Spouse sp^ndeth her days in
breathing out the praises of Christ. A faithful Christian cannot hide grace in
a napkin, nor hold it so close to himself, but he must communicate it, and
make offers of it to others: Such good Merchants were the two Disciples going
to Emmaus, conferring of Christ, whom Christ joined himself with, LVK. 24. 19.
Such an one was Paul, offering the Pearl to Agrippa, and wishing all the
people were such as he was except his bonds, ACT. 26. 29. And the reason is,
whatsoever he can communicate to another, is his own clear gain: For this
is the difference between the secular riches and spiritual: A worldly rich
man is rich for himself only, and the more he imparteth to others, the less
is left for himself; But he that is rich in God, is not only rich in and for
himself; but these riches do more enrich him by enriching others, than
holding them to himself: and the more he communicates, the more remains; as
the oil in the cruse, and the meal in the barrel were not wasted with
spending, but rather increased.

Fourthly, 4. The earnest desire of increasing their estate of both.
in the earnest desire and endeavor of increasing wealth, they may be fitly
compared. The Merchant refuses no pains or peril, no labor or danger, no
cost or charge, no hazard by Sea or Land to purchase such commodities, as may
yield him return of profit and advantage: But especially Lapidaries and
Merchants, for Pearls, toil themselves by many weary iournies, and voyages,
into all lands and countries; and have their factors lying abroad every where
to meet with Pearls and precious stones which are of greatest gain and
advantage.

So the Christian Merchant has an insatiable thirst and hunger after the good
things of the Gospel; and with unweariable study and desire he trauelleth to
every Mart, where this Pearl may be met withal: he apprehends all
opportunities, frequenteth every Sermon, waits at the gates of wisdom: Pro.
8. 34.
he swalloweth easily matter of labor and charge, to become owner of the
Pearl; and he is instant in this painful endeavor: for here it is not as in
civil trading, wherein many Merchants having gotten money enough, give up their
trade, and take their ease in the Country: but so long as there is any good
coming in, he will be ready for it: and as the labor of the body brings
thirst, so the labor of the soul increases thirst after grace. Besides that,
grace is so sweet to a godly heart, as a Christian Merchant can never be
satisfied, nor ever give up as having enough; and as he knows the stream
from whence he sucketh, can never be drawn dry: so himself is ever in want of
some good things, or at the least of some measure of it; and is ever seeking
the supple of the same.

Fifthly, they agree in the care of preserving, and safe keeping the Pearls,
and wealth gotten: the Merchant does know he is in continual danger of
thieves and robbers; and that the more precious the commodities be, the more
eagerly they are assaulted: and himself for them often set upon; sometimes
with hazard, sometimes with loss of goods, and life it self: now he is so
much the more careful and watchful to bar, and lock up in the surest and
strongest places his richest commodities.

So the Christian Merchants are in continual chase and pursuit by Satan;
seducers, heretics, false teachers, tyrants, and al profane ones in the
world; Besides their own inbred rebellion and lusts, which fight against their
own souls.

Now then all these lie in wait so much more diligently, as the wealth is more
precious than any other, to rob these Merchants, not of silver or gold, but of
faith and hope, and all their graces, the least of which is much more precious
than gold, or the most precious pearls that ever lay hid in the bowels of the
earth: Yea, themselves are so furiously assaulted, as hardly they may escape
with goods or life, as we may see in Christ himself, and in the Martyrs, who
for his sake were bereaved, and stripped of all outward comforts of life, and
life it self.

Hence the wise Christian Merchant carefully fenceth himself with Gods fear:
Secondly, stands on his ground and guard of faith: Thirdly, lo^keth up his
graces and the Word in his heart: Fourthly, keeps watches with God morning
and evening in holy prayer and praises: Fifthly, with Christian fortude and
armor, he maintains the measure of grace received: By all which means he
not only disappointeth the enemy of his prey, Non minor est virtus, quam
quaerere, parta ^neri.
but also shows his own valor and virtue, which is no less in keeping and
retaining the good things of the Gospel, than in getting and attaining them.
Use 1.


Now if Christians be Merchants, then not Monks nor eremits; Merchants and
Monks very different.
not a cloistred people who live alone; and not to any other. Civil Merchants
must trade and converse together for the good one of another; and Christian
Merchants much more: I would these bellies had ears, and that these drones
would consider; First, Phlitic. 1.
how unnatural this course of life is, condemned by the heathens themselves.
Ossic. 1: Non nobis nati sumus, sed partem patria, partem parents, and^.
Aristotle could say, that Homo est natura animal gregabile, a man is naturally
sociable: and Cicero, that no man is borne for himself, but his Country,
kindred, and his neighbors, yea every man has a part in every man. Secondly,
what other more essential difference is there, between the life of man and
brute beasts; but the beasts life is a kind of single life for it self: but
man's life is a life communicatiue? Thirdly, these droues of idle cattle are the
unprofitable burdens of the e^rth; for, what gifts soever they have, all is
lost; what profit is there in a hidden treasure? Paulum sepultae distat
inertiae Celata virtus.
so wisdom and gifts denied to the Church and Commonwealth, to what are they
unprofitable? God has not given al gifts to one; but variety of gifts to
diverse: vt ego tuis, tu^me^s indigeris: God will have men taught, edified,
governed, by men, not by Angels: How then can he set up the duties of piety,
promote the good of his neighbor, o^ edify the Church by precept or example,
which flies society, and imprisoneth himself in wilful seeters; unnaturally
putting off manhood, and blessing himself in a fearful curse, as any
temporal almost can be?

Let all of us therefore carry our selves like wise Merchants. Use 2.


1. Imitate wise Merchants in three things.
A wise Merchant will know what stock he puts into trade; so must we take
notice what talent or talents we have received of the Lord to traffic
withal; what portion or proportion of gifts we have in our hands: and esteem
our selves worth so much as we have received of grace, and no more.

Secondly, the Merchant will not lay out his money but for a hopeful bargain.
Esa. 55. 2. Wherefore do you lay out silver, and not for bread, and your labor
without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is
good, and let your soul delight in fatness; taxing the folly of such as
labor and dearly buy external food, and provision; with neglect of the
wholesome bread and water of life.

So a wise Christian Merchant will spend his time and labor on that, which
when he has gotten will satisfy him; which if he bestow in outward things,
(suppose he does gain them) they cannot satisfy him. Eccl 5. 9.
He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied, and he that loves riches shall
be without the fruit thereof: And of all earthly things may be said that of
Solomon, The eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing:
only godliness brings with it contentment.

Thirdly, the Merchant will often cast his estate, his books, his shops, and
his reckonings to see whether his stock increases or decays: If he find
himself a gainer, then he is glad; if the contrary, he is heartlesse and
sorrowful.

So the Christian Merchant is much and often in trying his estate and standing
in grace; and is most glad when he finds in himself increase of grace,
knowledge, humility, faith, love, etc. but it is a death to him to go
backward, and to see his estate of grace rather to decrease than increase: he
has no comfort in his present unfruitfulness; much less in Apostasy and
backe-sliding: but his comfort and account to the Lord is only when he can
say, LVK. 19. 13. Lord, Use 3.
thy talent has increased ten talents. The poorest Christian is a very rich
Merchant.


Let this consideration also comfort godly poor men despised in the world:
thou that art a poor Christian, in a low estate in the world, labor busily for
grace: and thou may be as rich a Merchant, have as rich a stock, and deal
in as great and rich commodities (if poor in spirit) as the richest. Thou that
have no money, and but little credit in the world, may here make as good a
bargain and as gainful return for thy self, as he that has thou sands of
money beyond thee. The poor receive the Gospel, says our Savior, that is,
few but the poor in estate, none but the poor in spirit; for this trading is
without money, like the poor woman's curing, who speut all her money on the
Physicians, and yet was not cured; but Christ comes and cures her freely.
Again, art thou a poor man, have thou a great charge of children, and no
means to put them forth to trades? here is a rich trade: make Merchants of
them, teach them and bind them to this trade of godliness: this is the way to
make them prosperous in earth, and bring them happily toward heaven: Prou. 14.
26. The fear of the Lord is an assured strength, and his children shall have
hope.

Have likewise a care, Use 4.
that having bought and purchased the Pearl, Part not from the pearl once
gotten.
thou do not sell it again. Pro. 23. 23. Buy the truth, but sell it not:
likewise wisdom and instruction, and understanding, for what we sell, we
esteem it less worth tha^ that we sell it for: but we must value this Pearl
above riches, glory, liberty, Pearls, and life it self: by no means part from
wisdom, neither by our forgetfulness, security or ouer-sight any way:
Besides, we can sell it for nothing which is not uncertain gain, but this is
most certain and most lasting; and therefore not to be exchanged with any
other.

This of the third general.

The Merchant man's actions are three: Three maine actions of a wise Merchant.
1 He seeks a good Pearl. 2 Finds an excellent one. 3 Sells all he has
to buy it.


Every man naturally will be seeking some thing to make him happy: the natural
man has some natural Pearl or other, on which he sets his affection, and
in which he takes greatest delight. Some Merchants esteem pleasure their best
Pearl, some honor, some riches, and the most of the world seeking some perle,
light upon some counterfeit or other; wherein they content themselves, and
blind both themselves and others; which made an ancient Father cry out, Foelix
negotiator qui nouit quaerere non nociua vt ambitiosi, non inutilia vt curiosi,
sed salubria, vt sancti.
Happy is that Merchant that knows to seek not hurtful things as the
ambitious do, nor unprofitable things as the curious do; but the most
wholesome things, as do the Saints: but this a supernatural both seeker and
seeking and things sought ^ The thing sought is the grace of the Gospel: a
good Pearl indeed as before the seeker was, the wise Merchant.

But how can any man seek grace, Quest.
seeing Psalm. 14. and Romans 3. no man seeks after God.

Answ. No man by nature can seek after grace, Sol.
nor of himself once ask after it, because he is destitute of the spirit of
God, no more than the lost groat can ask after her that lost it, or a wandering
sheep after the Shepherd, or a dead man after life: So as those places are
meant of men before conversion and calling: for the elect seek not God till
God first seek them, and finds them. But this is to be understood of men
called, converted, already found of God, and moved by the Spirit of God: who
moved by God can now move themselves, and sought by him now can eeke him.
Which both sets out our infinite misery, who of our selves never mind the
means of happiness: and also magnifieth Gods mercy which is infinite: who
offering unto us a free grace, does truly say, I was found of them that sought
me not: and gives him also the honor of goodness, and of our seeking of him.
Doct.


Only the godly and all they are seekers of the good Pearl: Only the godly
and all the yare seekers of the Pearl.
they seek after God in Christ, and the grace of the Gospel; every where the
godly are called seekers of God, and seekers of wisdom, Prou. 2. and seekers
of the kingdom, Mat. 6. 33. and wicked men are described to be such as seek
not after God, Psalm. 14. 4. And why?

1. These only do see their own want and beggary, Reas. 1.
which is employed in seeking. No man seeks that he wants not, or that
first finds not in himself a want of grace. David desired grace as the
thirsty ground, Psalm. 143. 6
and grace is not promised, nor given to any but the thirsty. Psa. 55. 1.
Every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters. Psalm. 14. 2. First they must
understand (namely, their estate) and then seek after God.

2. All these, and they alone do see the excellency, Reas. 2.
as well as the need of this Pearl, and God has let them see, in some
measure, the worth of it. Why are men so earnestly carried to seek Pearls,
far and near, swallowing insensibly all toiles, dangers, and charges, but
because they know their worth and price, and that if they can light on them,
they shall be well paid for all their labor.

Even so, such as to whom God has made known in some mea sure, the worth of
this inestimable Jewel, are quickened daily to the unweariable inquisition
after it. Paul knew that one grain of grace would weigh down all world: and
therefore would procure it through all perils and dangers, through good reports
or evil, through wants and losses, even of the dearest things, and most
desirous in all the world; whereas Ignoti nulla cupido, none will seek that
he knows not, or not any goodness in it.

3 They only know, Reas. 3.
that without painful seeking, they shall never attain the Pearl: for as
Pearls do not lie on the face of the ground, but are hid in the bowels of the
earth, or in the sands; so the mysteries of the Kingdom lie not abroad for
every one to stumble upon unawares; but they are a hidden treasure, not
discerned by the natural man; nay, hated by the wisdom of the flesh, and
scorned by the wisest of the world.

Besides, that this is the condition upon which the Lord bestows his best
blessings: if we dig for wisdom as for treasures: Pro. 2. 4.
which words imply, that it is not easy to come by; he knows our nature,
that we lightly set by what we lightly come by: and if Pearls were as common
as pibbles, we should as lightly set by them as we do by the other.

4 The godly alone see, Reas. 4.
that without the Pearl, they cannot by any thing else be satisfied: for so
seeking, implies a discontent in the want of the thing sought for. Common men,
if they find health, wealth, friends, pleasures, and the like outward things,
are well contented; corn, wine and oil, to cheer their hearts: But these
wise Merchants seeing grace, no other thing contenteth them but grace; one
glimpse of Gods countenance through Jesus Christ, is sweet above all. And as he
that seeks a Jewel, does look still after it, (a thousand things come in
his way and eye, but he passes slightly over them, and sees them not, nor
seeks he them) even so does the Christian Merchant; and as the civil
Merchant attaining Pearls, does rest joyful in them as in such commodities as
will help his happiness in the world: So the godly Merchant finding this one
Pearl of the Gospel, which is the grace of life, goes away rejoicing, and
rests well appaid for all his labors and sufferings. He was before he light
upon this Pearl, the most unhappy man in the world; but now he cannot hide his
joy: but as the poor widow, which called in her neighbors to rejoice with her
because she had found the lost groat, Luke 15. 9. so can he neither wholly
hide, nor yet express half the joy he conceiueth in his new commodity and
purchase.

But many seek, Object.
and that with tears, that fail of grace, as Esau, and many shall strive to
enter (says Christ) and shall not be able: and To. 9. 31, 32. Israel sought
righteousness, but obtained it not.

Ans. Many seek, Sol.
but amiss, and therefore fail: Five conditions of right seeking the Pearl.
so Israel sought, but not by faith. Now the true condition of seeking as the
wise Merchant, and as the Word directs, stands in five things:

1. With an earnest and true love, 1 Affectionately.
desire, and estimation of the thing sought; this wilmake a man seek
diligently, and as a thirsty person, not coldly, carelessly, remisly. slightly,
or negligently; for such seeking shall never find: for why did the Church seek
Christ so laboriously, till she found him, but because it was he whom her soul
loved? ^an. 3. 3. The watchmen that went about the City, found me, to whom I
said, Have ye seen him whom my soul loves? And why did Mary seek Christ,
having lost him three days? Because she loved him, and rejoiced in his person
and presence; which made her heart so heavy in his absence, Luke 2. 42. Behold,
thy father and I have sought thee with heavy hearts. The Merchant, because he
loves and esteems of silver, does seek it carefully and earnestly, Pro. 2.
4. and the heavenly Merchant shall find grace undoubtedly, if he seek it as
the other does silver. Love is laborious; he that loves Christ and his grace,
will never cease to seek him, nor fail to find him: See the promise in Jer.
29. 12, 13 Then shall you cry unto me, and you shall go and pray unto me,
and I will hear you: and you shall seek me and find me, because you shall
seek me with all your heart. Who soever then ever means to find God and
his saving grace, must unfeignedly and heartily seek after him.

2. It must be sought in the likely place and means of finding: 2. Wisely in
the likely place of finding.
the ordinary place where this Pearl is to be found, is, the asse^blies of the
Saints: there God holds forth his scepter, and makes offer of the grace of
life. Where was the Church to find Christ with his graces at noone, Cant. 1. 7.
in her thirst, but in the steps of the shepherds? And these assemblies are the
suburbs of heaven, called therefore the Kingdom of grace: and he that refuses
the good offers of grace, in the word, sacraments, prayer, hearing, reading,
conferring, and the like, shall never find it. No wise Merchant will slack any
good opportunity of advancing his estate; now the likely means in wise seeking
are diligently to be used, as

1 To search the evidence of the Pearl, and this evidence is contained in the
Scriptures, John 5. Search the Scriptures, for they witnessee of me.

Secondly, the grant of it is from heaven by prayer. Let us therefore go
boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may find mercy and grace to help in
time of need, HEB. 4. 16.

Thirdly, the covenant is by the application of these means singed, and
delivered, yea and witnessed by the blessed Spirit of God, by a blessed change
in the believing heart; by mortification, and subduing the corruption of
nature; by heavenly motions, heavenly mindedness, and gracious conversation,
standing not in a shell, a form or show, but in the kernill, power, and
substance of sound godliness.

Thirdly, ^ Princi^ally.
it must be sought first and principally, yea only sought and that for it
self: it must be sought first in time: As Psa. 63. 3. Early in the morning
will I seek thee. The Isralites must seek Manna, the first thing they do in
the morning. Esau seeks, but too late; the foolish Virgins do knock, but the
door is shut. 2. It must be sought in the first place. Mat. 6. 33. ^eeke ye
first the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof: Seek neither
other things before it, as worldlings, nor other things with it, as profane
Epicures, who would grasp heaven and earth together; nor yet seek it for other
things, as Hypocrites, who profess the Gospel for favor, credit, profit, or
some other (in respect of that) base things. But seek it alone for it self,
and in sincerity; for only such seeking finds it: Never will Christ be sought
for loaves, nor can the same eye look to heaven and earth together.

Fourthly, 4. Humbly
it must be sought humbly, that is, first out of thy self: a man that wants
water, will go to the fountain; the waters of grace must flow from the
fountain and wel-head, Christ Jesus: seek it therefore in him and from him. The
eye of faith spyeth it in him, and the hand of faith does take it up from him.

Secondly, it must be sought with godly sorrow and repentance for sin. Isa. 1.
16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil.

Thirdly, with reformation of heart and life. Ps. 14. 4. The workers of
iniquity are unfit and unworthy seekers of grace. 5. Constantly.


Fifthly, it must be songht constantly: Mary and Joseph never gave over seeking
Christ, until they found him, nor the Church till she found him: neither must
we give over seeking, having sound grace, for it is not in this seeking, as in
other things, where having found, we rest contented, and seek no more: but
here having found the thing we sought, we must seek still: for a Christian is
ever wanting of grace, if not in whole, yet in part; if not in substance, yet
in some degree and measure of it: and therefore this work (as the husband
man's) is never at an end.

This must needs condemn many of us, Use 1.
of extreme folly and sin: how few of us have sought after grace as after
silver? for silver we will take great pains, rise early, go to bed late, and
eat the bread of carfulness: but when do we so for grace? for silver we will
travel many miles on horse, and foot, to a market or fair, if we can but
gain or return half a handful of silver: but for grace we will hardly step
out of doors, or bestow the least pains, to frequent the places of Gods
Exchange. In seeking silver, every man will seek a good pennyworth: he is
careful that none ouer-reach him: he parts with his money as warily as may
be: and will be ready to lay hold on a good bargain, when it is offered. In
the matter of grace, how fearfully do many thrust it away with both hands,
wilfully forsaking their own mercy? Jona. 2. 8. They that wait upon lying
vanities, forsake their own mercy: that is, refuse the bargain of eternal
life offered, almost forced upon them and others, that seemed to have received
a good sum of grace, foolishly depart with it, and fall away either quite or
wholly, or else from their measure and their first love, these men are far
from seeking grace, and farther from ^inding it.

This should stir up our thirst Use 2, 2
after grace, to express our selves wise Merchants seized on the Pearl, which
that we may earnestly seek after, let us consider these five motives.

1. Christ seeks us, 5. Motives to prouok us earnestly to seek after grace
and desires us to seek him; and shall Christ seek thee for thy good, and not
thou seek him for thine own good? But Christ seeks us as a Hen that
gathers her chickins under her wings, MAT. 23. 37* and woe unto us if we
remain ungathered. The father of the prodigal, goes out to meet his son
returning home, to encourage us to go out of our selves to seek him.

Secondly, the fearful revenge against such as seek not, nor inquire after
God, should move us to seek him: as ZIPH. 1. 6. in the fourth verse, I will
cut off the remnant of ^aal; and in the sixth, And them that turn back from
the Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord, and inquired for him. And if
they under the Law were so revenged, how much more shall we living under the
Gospel, Heb. 2. 3.
if we neglect so great salvation? If the Gospel be now hid, it is hid to
them that perish, 2 Cor. 4. 3. Oh what a fearful case is it, that the Gospel
should serve for the conviction of men, and not for their conversion? Oh thrice
unhappy man, that shall pervert this so abundant grace to his own
destruction: and yet the plenty of Gods grace in the Gospel shall condemn
thousands that never required or ^ought after it.

3. Thou should seek grace from God, but he seeks to pin his grace on thy
sleeue: God brings home the Gospel to thy house and doors; he sends
forth his servants, he continues to seek thee by continuing the means and
the season of grace: he seeks thee daily by his Word, his Ministers, his
blessings, his corrections, by the motions of the spirit, by the checks of
thine own conscience, and will thou not seek being sought unto? dare thou
receive such grace still in vain? 2 COR. 6. 5. or turn it to wantonness?
Jud. 3.

Fourthly, of this salvation the Prophets search diligently, 1 Pet. 1. 10. and
shall we to whom it more specially belongs, not so much as ask or inquire
after it? or shall we thrust it away as the Jews did, ACT. 13. 46. but not
without the most fearful revenge that ever hapened to any nation under the
heavens, under which they lie at this day?

Fifthly, for a man to abide destitute of desire and endeavor after grace,
shows that Satan, the God of the world, works mightily in such an one, and
has him in his power to hood-winke him, and hide from him the grace of the
Gospel, that the brightness of this Pearl should never shine to him, lest he
should convert and be saved: See 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. This of the first action: Who
having found a Pearl of great price.

The second action of the wise Merchant, is, he finds an excellent Pearl; Of
the Pearl, and of the excellency we have spoken: Now are we in this part only
to speak something of the finding of it. And by the Pearl, being meant the
grace of the Gospel, as we have heard, we learn this Doctrine:

That seekers of grace shall find it; Doct. 1.
and only they. Seekers of grace shall find it.
Psalm. 118. 5. I called upon the lord in trouble, and the lord heard me, and
set me at large: and Psalm. 138. 3. When I called, then thou heardest me, and
have increased strength in my soul: alomon seeks wisdom and finds it,
LVK. 15. 9. MAT. 7. 8. The woman that sought the lost groat, found it:
Whosoever asks, receives, and he that seeks, finds. Why?

1. Faithful seeking can never take God wanting or unwilling to give grace,
Reas. 1.
both because he has promised, and is able to p^rforme, above all we are able
to ask or think: His power is sufficient to supply all our wants: and Isay
65. 1. I was found of them that sought me not: and verse. 24. Yea, before they
call I will answer, and while they speak, I will hear.

If earthly fathers that are evil, Mat. 7. 11.
(both in comparison of God, and in their own inclination) can give good
things to their children that ask, much more our heavenly Father can and will.
How glad is an earthly father, when his children can seek after that which is
good for them? and our heavenly Father much more: Besides, God who has
promised cannot lie, ^itus 1. 2. now he should deceive his people, if they
should not find the grace they duly seek: but he has said, Mat. 5. 6. that
the hungring and thirsting soul shall be satisfied and supplied.

2. The Lord will not fo far discourage his servants, Rea. 2.
and disharten them, as never to let them find that they bestow so much true
pains in seeking: but he vpholdeth them in seeking, by supplying, some way or
other, some time or other, that they seek: his wisdom not only feeds his
children with hopes of an harvest to come; but affords them present food and
finding, even in this life, so far as will stand with hunger and thirst: by
which he incourageth them in their prayers, tears, labors and sufferings, and
without which finding for the present, impart, thesmoking wick should be
quickly quenched, and all the beginning of grace easily lost: oil is not more
necessary to feed a lamp, than the supply of grace is to feed grace. Psalm.
116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and prayers: and Psalm.
65. 2. Because thou hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Reas. 3.


3. The Lord will not so much withstand his own glory, as not be found of true
seekers, because his own glory is the maine end of all his mercy. Psalm. 22.
26. They that seek after the Lord shall praise him: namely, in acknowledging him
true in his promises and plentiful in his mercies.

But God is a free giver of grace, Object.
and before we can ask, we shall have it without seeking: what need we then
seek so diligently?

ANS. 1. Gods grace is free in respect of Merits, Sol.
not of Means: if God should not give us saving grace before we ask it, we
should never have it; and no man can seek grace but by grace: yet God gives
not grace to idle or sleepy persons, but to the vigilant and watchful: he is
not so prodigal of so excellent a Pearl, as to bestow it for nothing: or upon
those, who ha^ing tasted the sweetness of it, will not bestirre themselves for
more, that they may grow in grace.

2. Though God does bestow on us free salvation which costeth us nothing, yet
we must accept it in the means: which do excite and exercise our graces, and
suffer us to be neither idle, nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord.

But if we seek, our seeking is a cause of finding, and so Gods grace shall
not be free.

ANS. 1. Our seeking is no cause of finding, but a means or way in which we
find.

2. In seeking we do our duty, but merit nothing by it; for when we have done
all we can, we are unprofitable servants.

3. The promise of finding is not made to the seeking, Note.
but to the seeker, being in Christ: who finds for Christ's sake, not for his
own.

But I have sought long, Object.
and have not found.

Ans. There is a twofold seeking: Sol.
1. 6. Sorts of seekers amiss:
a seeking amiss, and then no marvel if thou find not: Esau sought with
tears, and finds not: many shall seek and strive to enter, and shall not be
able; and of these are six sorts; 1. wicked men being destitute of the spirit
of God, want their eyes cleared: and a blind man shall sooner find a Pearl
lost, then they this.

2. Some seek without light, as fond Familists and Anabaptists, who seek
grace in the dark corners of Enthusiasmes, and revelations, scorning the light
of the Scriptures and Ministry: in which the spirit only and ordinarily
offers himself to be found.

3. Some seek without the promise, and so without faith: Israel sought it by
merits, To. 9. 31.

4. Some seek without repentance. Isa. 1. 16. wash you, make you clean, and
then come and reason together.

5. Some seek it unseasonably, the door being shut, so did Esau when the
blessing was bestowed.

6. Some seek without sincerity. Hypocrites seek a while but give over, as
weary of so much pains; now the promise is made to none of these: the goal is
not given but to such as strive lawfully.

A second Kind of seeking that is which fails not, and that is in the true
and lawful conditions of seeking, as by the supernatural eye of faith, by the
light of Gods Word, in the right vein of finding, and in the places where the
Pearl lies, and in season of seeking, whilst the day lasts and the light is
with us: have thou thus sought, and art yet held off? I say God must be true
Qu^rentibus recta and recte, he that seeks, quae oportet, and quomodo
oportet, shall certainly find: and therefore I say to thee that seek good
things well: 1. Thou have found grace sufficient, 2 Cer. 12. 7
as Paul did when he seemed to be denied of the grace desired: thou have found
grace in some measure, at least insuch measure as may cause thee to hunger for
more.

2. God may delay to give thee a greater measure, and yet not deny thee; it may
be, that which thou seek is worth more labor than yet thou have bestowed:
distinguish now betwixt Gods Delays and Denials: hold on thy seeking, thou
shall find in good time.

Thirdly, The best seekers find but in small me^sure in (...) life and why.
the best and holiest seekers of all, find but for the estate of this life;
that is, in small measure, a taste, a first fruits, here is but a sowing in
grace. God leaves his children in many wants for the present, for diverse ends:

1. For their humiliation, as Paul had a prick in the flesh left.

2. To maintain hunger and thirst after more.

3. To long after the time of perfection, and full saciety, when they shall be
fully conformed to the image of God.

Fourthly, thou have found a promise of God to be fully satisfied at length,
Mat. 5. 6. in the mean time esteem thy seeking as a seed time, thy labor is
sown in heaven, thy seed is cast into the bosom of God: and if it presently
return not so much comfort, joy, and increase as thou desire; it is laid up,
and will bring thee good store, and a happy crop for hereafter: therefore be
not weary of well doing, for in due time thou shall reap, if thou faint not.

If no man seeks this Pearl aright, but finds, see a difference between
this commodity and all other. Seek any other thing in the world, with thy best
endeavor, and thou may fail, and not find, Eccles. 5* 9*
He that seeks silver, shall not be satisfied: Seek wealth, pearls, honor,
pleasuers, thou shall often fail of them: but seek the best thing, and always
speed. In all other things, many seek one thing, but find another: go to the
Physicians to seek health, thou may meet with death; to the Lawyer, to seek
law and justice, thou may find injustice and oppression: at some friends
hands thou may seek favor and friendship, but find hatred and enmity, as
Joseph sought at his brethrens, but finds them foes and enemies.

But in matters of grace, thou shall find the same things thou look for:
seek thou the Pearl, thou find the Pearl, as the Merchant did: nay,
find an excellent one, far better than thou lookedst for; the worth of
which is not to be valued in this vale of darkness.

Here is also a difference between seeking things at Gods hands, and at man's:
all that ask at man's hands speed not: though thou may ask never so justly,
as in the example of the unjust Judge. A poor man asks at man's hands mercy,
and misseth of it: knock at man's door, it is not always, open: But the gate of
grace is never shut; Gods ear is always open, and as a favorite sits in the
ear of the King, and speedeth in any suite, so does the godly seeker speed
with God.

This comfort poor souls seeking and panting after grace; Use 2.
so long as thou can seek, thou art sure to find, though the Lord hide his
face for a time, and seem to lock up his mercy from thee, yet uphold thy self
in seeking, and thou shall find in due season, Psalm. 9. 9, 10. The Lord also
will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in affliction.
Want thou strength against temptations? Seek by prayer the grace of
Christian fortitude: be strong in the cry of prayer; and as a thief will run
away when the true man makes a noise and outcry, so will Satan upon this
noise of fervent prayer cease his assault. Want thou peace of conscience,
cheerfulness in doing, or suffering? would thou see a sweet look from
God? or needst thou any other blessing for life or godliness? Seek it with
instance, do as the woman of Canaan, who sought grace at the hands of Christ,
and would not be repulsed, MAT. 15. 22. And the poor woman by her importunity
prevailed in her suit with the unjust Judge, Luke 18. 5. And how much more
shall faithful importunity prevail with the most righteous and faithful God?

But my seeking is so weak and sinful, Object.
that I shall never find: my sin quite marreth my seeking, and hinders my
finding.

Is there more weakness in thy seeking, Sol.
than in Jacobs secking the blessing? yet his weak and faulty seeking found it.

O that I could find any feeling or work of grace, Object.
but the strong heart of my corruptions is not yet broken: I have lost all my
labor, and found nothing but discomfort of it.

Let not thy soul prescribe and instruct the Lord, Sol.
how, or what way, or when to do thee good: but wait and strive, and find and
prevail.

Secondly, seek against sense and feeling, even out of the belly of the whale
of desperation it self, lay hold on the free grace of God, and thou shall
find an issue, and his sweet love dropping comfort, sweeter than honey combs
to thy soul. Use 3.


Thirdly, Grace not found because not sought.
see the reason why grace grows so thin every where, even because he that
has not attained grace, never sought it aright; the want is not in God, nor in
the means, but in thy self and manner of seeking: Non deficit dantis
miscricordia.
Non medicorum insufficientia, sed quaerentium negligentia culpanda: Blame thy
self for not finding, who have failed in the manner of thy seeking: for
perhaps,

Thou art full, and feel not the need of grace, as the Church of Laodicea,
Reu. 3. 17. (...)
and then how can thou seek? A beggar will not stir abroad, so long as he
has any thing at home.

Or art profane, and scornest the blessing, as Esau.

Or art a hater of it, and the seekers of it; turnest their glory into shame,
and art of the generation of them that hate them that seek the Lord.

Or art idle, and seek slightly, or formally; and can God attend that
prayer, or request, which thou carelessly and formally castest out, and thy
self attendest not? And here numbers of men lie under just reproof; as,

1. Such as never spent so much labor in seeking grace, as Saul did in seeking
his Fathers Asses, 1 Samuel 9. 4.

2. They that never spent so much time to find it, as they could for a handful
of silver, and yet hope they have it, or shall have it. When did thou break
thy sleep, disease thy self, put thy self into all weathers by night and by
day, for the Word, as thou have for wealth? When wast thou so good and thrifty
an husband for thy soul as for thy body? Never look for grace before thou
prizest it: and be sure thou have it not, who so vnder-valuest it.

Thirdly, Use 4.
let us examine our selves whether by all our seeking we have found the
Pearl, and that by these rules: 5. Notes of one that by seeking has found the
Pea^^^


1. He has found by seeking, who still seeks to find, for it is not here as
in seeking other things: here the finder gives not over seeking: but the more
he finds, the more he seeks; here is an insatiable covetousness, and a
covetousness warrantable.

Secondly, much joy and large affections to express the sense of so great a
commodity: the testimony of Gods Spirit witnesses our adoption; once receive
it, and it refreshes the soul with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 4.
5. and this joy will not be hid, as in the woman finding the lost groat.

Thirdly, the Pearl once found, there follows a contempt of the world, a
killing of the cares of this life, a fencing from the love of earthly things:
there is no true content in anything else, he that has found this Pearl,
esteems all other things, even the best of that the world so admireth, dung
in comparison of Christ.

Fourthly, being so rich a commodity, it enableth to good works and (as no
other Pearl can) it works the will also to be abundant in good works,
abundant in the fruits of the spirit, in the fruits of Sanctity, and holiness
of life.

Fifthly, it is of so precious virtue, as it is in every one that finds it,
an antidote against all the poison of sin, the grace of repentance presently
expels it: the grace of patience is a salve for every fore: the grace of
faith is a most sovereign Cordial; it is of virtue to renouate the whole man,
and all the parts of the man: it clears his sight daily, it makes him quick
of hearing, it sharpeneth all his senses in divine things; it preserves his
stomach and appetite to Gods word: it purges out his corruptions, renews his
strength as the Eagle: All these and a thousand more virtues has this
Hearbe-Grace wrought in thee in some measure if thou have found it, and so
abundantly recompenseth all thy labor.

He went and sold all that he had and bought it.] The third action of the
Merchant.
Our Savior continues the allegory of the wise Merchant, 1. Vadit ad forum
spiritualium per effectum.
who 1. has sought; 2. Vend^t omnia per aff^ctum and contemptum terrenorum
2. found the Pearl, 3. Emit per conatum and desiderium aeternorum.
and then sits not down: but (thirdly,) makes purchase. In the words are
three things:

1. He goes away, to the Mart and means where it is to be had.

2. He sells all in affection to it, and contempt of earthly things.

3. He buyeth it by a careful desire and endeavor after heavenly things.

For the meaning, 1. he goes away:] Self-denial is the first lesson in
Christ's school, Mat. 1^. 25
Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life
for my sake, shall find it; he that forsakes not his own will, reason,
affections, and evil habits, and does not cross his own desires, shall never
prize or purchase this perl.

2. And sells all.] That is, in comparison he contemmeth all earthly things,
and sets them at a low rate and value in respect of the Pearl, and does not
care much who have them, so he may enjoy the Pearl: let others get the wealth
of the world, he will be rich in grace; let others get corn, wine, and oil, if
he can get naked Christ, he has enough:

But is it necessary to sell all, Object.
to have eternal life? It may seem so: Mat. 9. 22. Jesus said unto him, if
thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me.

Ans. The Papists build a state of perfection upon voluntary poverty: Sol.
and hold it a counsel only fit for perfect Christians, and far more
meritorious than the keeping of the whole Law.

But first to answer them, and then the question.

1. It is a frivolous conceit to think, that any man may come to an higher
estate of happiness, by some other means than by keeping the Law.

Secondly, it is absurd to think that any work can be acceptably done toward
salvation, which is without the walk and compass of the law, which is so
perfect, that cursed is he that does dare to add to it, or detract any thing
from it.

3. Christ desired no more of the young man, than he did of his Disciples, who
said, verse. 27. we have left all to follow thee, and yet Peter had an house
still, and John, to which he took the Virgin Mary.

And therefore Christ would hau^ the young man to part with all, which he could
not hold, with his love and affection to Christ himself, and the Gospel.

Fourthly, that which Christ required of this Iusticiary, is not any devised
Evangelical counsel above the law; but a duty contained in the law: the sum
of which, is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and whereas
he had boasted, that he had kept all the law; Christ does send him back again
to the law, to let him see his want of love, both to God and his neighbor; to
God, if the love of his friends hinder him from following him, whom he
confesses a teacher from God: And want of love to man, if at Christ's word he
will not part with his money, especially if not at Christ his especial
commandment.

So as this is not a counsel to some perfect recluses or orders of wilful
men; but a commandment to all Christians, that must strive to perfection. 1
Cor. 2. 6. And we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect: who must not
only leave goods and lands, and houses for Christ, and the Gospel, but must
hate father, mother, wife and children, brethren, sisters, and their own life,
if they cannot hold them with Christ.

So much to answer the Papists.

Now to the question.

1. Who can deny wealth to be the gift of God, if it beheld without
covetousness, confidence, pride, and subordinate to heaven and heavenly
things? Or who can deny but riches may become helps to heavenly Tabernacles?
who can deny but good men may both have them, and use them? Abraham was a man
of great possessions, and Job, and David, men of most great wealth: and yet
godly men, and poor of spirit; goods therefore in themselves are not to be cast
away: but first in comparison, Wealth in four cases to be renounced.
rather than we will not attain, and retain the Pearl of the Gospel, we
must abandon all we have.

Secondly, when they prove an impediment to our calling, and holy profession,
we must renounce them, Heb. 11. 25
as Moses in this case refused to be the son of Pharaohs daughter, and to
suffer with Gods people: a traveler may carry a staff to help him in his
journey, but not to ouer-load himself: and he may bear some money in his purse
for his charges, but not burden himself with it.

Thirdly, in affection always we must renounce them, and hold them retiredly
and weignedly, using the world as not using it. 1 Cor 7. 3.
Let them be in our hands, not in our hearts; to lay down, or lay out; not to
lay up, or lay up our hearts with them.

Fourthly, actually, but not uncalled; we must leave them, not of our own
accord, but called by God, non sponte sed vocati: let us always see we have a
good ground, as if tyrants, or persecutors, keep us from inioying either
Christ, or our own estate; then in this choice, we must prefer a poor estate
in Christ, before a rich estate in the world.

And buyeth it.] Our Savior uses this word buying, not to signify, that we
can make any recompense, payment, or merit, to purchase eternal life: for,
first, that is infinite, we finite, and between these is no proportion.
Secondly, it is a free gift of God, Romans 6. 23. Thirdly, it is a buying, but
without money, Esa. 55. 1.
and money worth. And the poor are called to buy it, who have no money to
layout for it. Fourthly, this Pearl is such a commodity, as neither men nor
Angels can give any due price for. Fifthly, we can give God nothing but his own.

But Christ here speaks figuratively, namely, that this wife Merchant deals
as a buyer; The Christian man resembles a buyer in 4* things.
first he sees the want of Gods grace and Christ's merits: the thirsty are
called to buy, Esaias 55. 1.

Secondly, as a buyer, he periseth, valueth, and casts the worth* esteems
Christ at the highest rate, and all things else in comparison of him, loss,
and dung, Phil. 3. 13.

Thirdly, as a buyer he makes an exchange; not of money, nor money worth, but
uses all good endeavor, and labor, by prayer, and diligence, and the use of
all good means, to obtain the grace of the Gospel. Which price God does set
upon grace, and on which condition, an exchange is made. The believer puts
over his sins to Christ, and receives righteousness from Christ. 2 Cor. 5.
21. For he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we should
be made the righteousness of God in him.

Fourthly, the bargain made, is earnested; so the believer, able to give
nothing to God, takes from God the earnest of his Spirit, in some saving
graces; by which the whole bargain of eternal life is assured unto him.

From this selling all, Doct. 1.
and buying the Pearl, A wise Christian will part with all before he part with
Christ.
learn, That a wise Christian must, and will part with all he has, before he
will part with Christ. Prou. 4. 7. Above all thy possessions get wisdom and
understanding. The godly follow Christ out of Jerusalem, and out of the camp,
Heb. 13. 13. they sold their lives, and loved them not to the death for Christ.

Paul's possessions and his life was nos dear, Acts 20.
so he might finish his course with joy. And why?

1. Such sound judgment is restored unto every sound Christian, Reas. 1.
as he thinks nothing so dear to him as Christ, and his grace: and does
suppose himself rich indeed, if he attain naked Christ; and the dearest things
are base in this comparison. The Church of Laodicea will never buy gold and
white raiment, so long as her judgment is blinded, till she anoint her eyes
with eye-salue to see; and seeing once the worth, she is content to be at any
pains for it. The text implies, that no less pains be made for wisdom than
that of most industrious Merchants, who take long and dangerous iournies, and
voyages by Sea and land for Pearls, and swallow all pains and perils in hope
of attaining them.

Secondly, the Christian knows that he shall be no loser by the bargain;
other Merchants buying great commodities know not whether they shall be gainers
or no: and many seek Pearls with infinite losses and find them not: But here
is a certain and an undoubted gain, for whosoever forsakes house, wife,
lands, liberty, childeren, and life for Christ's sake and the Gospel, shall
receive an hundredfold with tribulation, and in the world to come life
everlasting: here is usury enough, not ten in the hundred, but an hundred for
ten: have this Pearl, and want nothing; want this Pearl, and have nothing.

Thirdly, this puts a difference between soundness and hypocrisy; the
hypocrite can sell much for Gods favor. Mic. 6. 6. they will give thousands of
rams, and ten thousands of rivers of oil: and their first borne, but will not
part with their sins. Ananias and Saphira can part with three parts of their
portion: but soundness esteems the Pearl better than the whole, were it the
whole world.

Fourthly, because it sees Christ forsaking all, liberty, life, wealth, heaven
and happiness for it; in the way of thankfulness, grace in the heart does
hold it self bound to forsake all for Christ.

This condemns foolish Merchants, Use 1.
who make a base reckoning of the Pearl: esteeming the Gospel worth nothing.
The Gadarens accounted every pig, and base profit better than Christ and his
Sermons: Profane Esau despised the blessing in respect of pottage: There are
other scornful Merchants, who scoff at such simplicity, as to forgo profits,
and delights, for vain conceits, as to strip ones self of the pleasures of
life, to run many miles to Sermons, where is none at home: Others would buy
the Pearl, if by it they might gain ease, reputation, and wealth, like the
Swallows that will take their Summer with us, but in Winter take their leave
of us: these measure Religion by their gettings, Mal. 3. 14.
and say with the old Jews, Use 2.
What profit is there in serving God? Many who think they have the Pearl,
deceived.


2. We may see it is not so easy a matter to have part in the Gospel, as
most men think: that utterly deceive themselves in this commodity: and this is
the cause why so few respect it. 1. Some men think they have it because they
have heard of it, but there is as much difference between finding and buying,
as between calling and answering. 2. Some hear, and like, and wish and praise
it; but as in a fair they see many rich commodities, but they pass by them
and bargain for none: so many approve of Doctrines in general, but lay out
nothing, nor lay aside any lust: they can commend a good Sermon, but will be
sure it shall do them no good.

Thirdly, there are others that come nearer, cheapen, love and bid somewhat;
but as hard chapmen nothing near the matter: rich men can cast some of their
superfluity sometimes to good uses; but not as the widow that had but two mites
and cast in all: this were too hard a bargain.

Fourthly, some would exchange some of their sins, but not all: others will
do some duties, as come to the Church, hear, pray, sometimes read at home, and
reprove sin: but come to chargeable or dangerous duties, to show love to
Christ in time of danger or disgrace, they are backward, and draw in the tender
horn for fear they be losers by him.

Let us therefore learn to hold Christ, Use 3.
and the Gospel as the only jewel, or pearl worth having; and to think our
selves rich if we sell our selves out of all, to purchase the Pearl: let us
thus advance our religion, and shut the mouths of our adversaries, that say we
will leave nothing for our religion, Object.
while they give all they have to the Church and pious uses. 5. Notes of a man
that has purchased the Pearl.


How shall I know a man that purchases the Pearl?

2. He changes his own merits, for Christ's merits apprehended in the Gospel,
and casts them away like dung: and with Paul, who lays his birth, kindred,
righteousness, civil virtues, and good works, and holiness in the skale:
but all is too light, and found loss weighed with Christ. So bring Wealth,
liberty, friends, life it self, into the sight of a sound believer: and if he
must leave these, or Christ and his Gospel, farewell they; he soon makes his
choice: As in the danger of life, Act. 27. 18. the Mariners cast out their
wares with their own hands, and the tacklings out of the ship: so we must
cast away all in comparison of Christ, our Lord and our life. Where note, that
the Papist that cannot disclaim his own merits, shall miss of Christ's.

2. He goes away rejoicing, all his affections are on it; his chief joy is,
that his Name is written in heaven, Luke 10. 20.
no affliction can remove this joy.

3. He desires nothing in comparison, beyond, or besides it; Simeon was
content with Christ in his arms; Jacob had enough, that Joseph lived: so the
believer has enough, that Christ lives in heaven, and in his own heart.

4 He retains his confidence to it; every thing else challenging his
confidence, is but a staff of reed.

5. He will never sell his purchase at any rate. Prou. 23. 23. Buy the truth,
but sell it not: Great Merchants, what they buy for great prizes, they will
sell for greater: but nothing is sufficient to buy the grace of the Gospel out
of our hands: what we sell we value under the price; but we must redeem it
above much fine gold, ^sal. 119 yea, above all that in the world is counted
precious.

This is also a comfort to poor* men, who may here light on a good bargain,
and make a good purchase for themselves, although they have no money: nothing
is set for the price but pains, endeavor, godly desire and affection. Christ
and his benefits freely pass to all, and are indifferently imparted to poor
and rich; nay, if either have the advantage, it is the poor man, for the poor
receive the Gospel, says our Savior: whereas, Not many rich, not many noble,
not many wise attain to have their share in it.

I have now according to the measure of the gift given me, set forth the
choycest and chiefest commodity in all the world, which no Fair or Mart can
match, if into one Fair all the treasures of the earth were brought to sale:
say not now as the buyer uses to do, Th^se Sermons were preached on several
Fair days
It is naught, it is naught.

I have set an easy price upon it, a little pains, a few good affections, an
upright endeavor, which is so low a price as your selves can wish. You need not
disburse silver, or gold, but may carry away this commodity in your hearts, and
your money in your purses too: as Joseph's brethren carried from their brother,
every man his sack of corn, and his money in his sack too: he that now
sees on the one hand his own want, and on the other the worth of the Pearl,
will come and cheapen, and buy, and purchase it at any rate, and will not leave
it behind him. But he that still esteems the Pearl, but as a common pibble,
will go home without it, or tread it under his feet. Of this man says
Salomoa, Pro. 17. 16.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool, and he wants heart? And
to this man I say, the day comes, in which thou shall say, thou once
refusedst a good bargain which was offered thee, and that was thine
unhappiness: but now attended with a greater, that it shall never be offered
thee any more; Be wise in time, and covet after the most excellent gifts.

FINIS.
THE PILRIMS PROFESSION. OR, A SERMON PREAched at the Funeral of Mrs. MARY
GVNTER, by Mr. Thomas Tailor. To which (by his consent) also is added, A short
Relation of the life and death of the said Gentlewoman, as a perpetual
Monument of her graces and virtues.

Omnis peregrina regio patria est eorum,
Et omnis patria eorum est peregrina.
Justin Martyr. epist. ad Diognetum. LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John Bartlet,
at the sign of the gilt Cup in Cheap Side. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lady LEITICE, Countess of Leicester, all increase
of Honor and Happiness.
MADAM:
Having importuned and prevailed with that Reverend Preacher, who performed
that last office for your LADYSHIPS late Servant, to afford me a perfect Copy
of his Sermon, (which for the fitness and worthiness of the matter, I thought
much pity to be buried with her,) and purposing to add a short Relation of
the happy Life and Death of my dear Wife, both which I thought were very
exemplary; I emboldned my self, to present the same to your HONOR not only
as a thankful testification, of my humble duty and service, for all those
gracious endowment, which I so happily enjoyed in her, (of all which, under
God, your Honor was a chief instrument) but also because I know that your
Honor, who gladly apprehended all the means of her comfort through her life,
would as gladly receive the true Narration of her assured Comforts and Conquest
in her so Christian death and dissolution.

Neither is the Sermon unfit for your Hunours perusal, whom God has honored
with so many days and years, and taught not to fear either the end of your
Pilgrimage out of this strange Country, or the near approach to your own
home.

Thus humbly praying your Honors acceptance of that which is most properly
yours. I pray the Father of mercy, to add to all your noble Virtues, the
continuance of your true prosperity.

Your HONORS in all humble service, H. G.

THE PILGRIMS PROFESSION.
PSALM. 39. 12. I am a stranger with thee, and a soiourner, as all my Fathers.
THis holy Prophet being by great distress of mind, and disease of body,
brought very low, (as appears in the whole Psalm) and so low as he was ready
to break patience, and to offend with his tongne; Verse 3.
yet after a doubtful combat between faith and frailty; his Faith steps above
flesh, and leads him out of himself, to wait upon God with holy silence: Verse
7.
and lifts him up to God in fervent and earnest Prayers, (which are the
breath of Faith) both for pardon of sin, Verse 8.
the cause, and for release from the affliction and plague, the effect of it.
And because the sense of misery was deep; Verse 10.
he strives with God, with great, vehement, and earnestness of spirit,
ingeminating his petition in this twelfth verse. Rising up in his requests by
degrees, as one that means to prevail with God (as another Jacob) and not
let him go till he have blessed him; and therefore first he desires the Lord
to hear his Prayer. But because the prayers of the Saints are often faint and
feeble, and without any strong motion, he desires the Lord to hearken to his
cry: the sense of his need urged strong cries, feruency, and importunity. And
further, because every strong cry is not heard, unless it proceed from a
broken and contrite spirit. He prays the LORD not to keep silence at his
tears: well he knew that prayers of faith, watered with tears of godly
sorrow, are eloquent perswaders, to dray a comfortable answer from God; they
cannot suffer him to sit silent long; who has prepared both a bottle to
reserve them in, and an handkerchiefe to wipe them away from the eyes of his
children. Try it after holy David; who will, or can, make every day a spring to
sowe^ thy prayers in heaven; and water them sometimes with an April shower of
mournful tears for thy sin, and misery, and ^hon have prevailed aganist
Gods silence; thou shall hear a sweet and comfortable* Answer in due season.

Now the words read are a reason of his earnest request, drawn from the
acknowledgement of the frailty, vanity, and breuity of his life, laid down by
a comparison taken from strangers or Pilgrims, of which number he professes
himself to be; and may well be called, The Pilgrims profession.

In tying which words with the former, it may be asked, first, what force can
there be in this reason, to move or incline God to mercy, because he was a
stranger with him; it might rather imply, that God should the more estrange
himself from him, and stand further from his help. Quis dubi tat q^od hie
psaltes posu (...) gnimca, tecum, idem esse quod Liphneca, id est, ocrum te
Buc^r.


I answer: 1. The Hebrew phrase I am a stranger with thee, signifies as much
as to say, I am a stranger before thee: or in thy sight. And not that he was a
stranger in affection, or conversation from God, as the wicked, who are said to
be strange childred, Psalm. 58. 3
and strangers from the womb. For how could David be such a stranger, who set
the Lord ever before him, Psalm. 16. 8.
and at his right hand, that he might not sin against him?

2. As it is a confession and testimony of his own humility and sense of his
misery, it is a motive to mercy: as if he had said, I am a stranger and need
help, because as a stranger, I lie open to many injuries and inconveniences:
but thou art the God of the abject; and thy property is as to cast down the
proud, so to raise up such dejected souls as I am, and therefore hear my
prayers, cries and tears.

3. As it ascribes unto the Lord the honor of mercy, it is a motive to mercy;
for holy David puts the Lord in mind of his own gracious inclination and
affection to strangers; Exo. 22. 11
for he has commanded us to be kind to strangers; Leui. 19. 33
and has in special manner undertaken the protection of strangers. Deu. 10.
19.
Ps. 146. 6. The Lord keeps the strangers: and therefore his faith binding
God after a sort to his own law and promise, assures himself of Gods mercy,
because he is a stranger.

4. As it is an acknowledgement of his own impotency, and the misery of his
life, it pleads strongly for mercy: as if he had said; Thou know, Lord,
that I am a stranger here, and so long as I am so, I cannot but carry a burden
of flesh, and a body of sin, and daily thereby deserve thy most heavy
displeasure: and therefore I beseech thee, be not so extreme against me, as in
justice thou may; but considering my frailty, mingle my corrections with
mercy. And whereas I discern also by my bodily weakness and infirmity, that I
am a stranger here, and of short continuance, I pray thee remove thy hand, and
let not all my life be miserable, but stay thine anger from me, Verse 13.
that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be no more. And upon
the same ground, Job makes the same request: Let him cease and leave off from
me, Job 10. 21.
that I may take a little comfort, before I go and shall not return, etc.

Secondly, it may be asked, How can David use this as a reason for his
recovery, which he used before, verse. 4. for the hastening of his death; for
because his life was short and miserable, therefore he desires he might die in
all haste.

To which I snswer, That great difference there is between David foiled by
flesh, and David supported by the Spirit, for we have in him lying under the
temptation, an instance of our own strong-hearted corruption; which out of a
good proposition, can draw most dangerous and wicked conclusions; For, out of
the consideration of the the shortness of his life, he could draw conclusions
of murmuring, impatience, and almost of desperation. But now David is another
man, and the Spirit of grace has conquered those assaults, and now he can out
of the same premises, draw the clean contrary conclusions, to support his
faith, patience and dependence upon God. For such is the wisdom of the
Spirit, that he can draw holy, sweet, and comfortable conclusions from those
principles and grounds, from which flesh and corruption uses to suck sin
and poison; and teaches the Saints so to do.

In the profession it self, Meaning.
consider for the meaning 4. things: 1. What a stranger is. 1. What is this
stranger.
2. Who is this stranger. 3. Where he is a stranger. 4. The community of this
condition; as all my Fathers were.


1. A stranger is he, that being absent from his own Country, is traveling
homewards unto it: for these two conditions are proper to a stranger: First,
that he is absent from his native soil, absent from his natural friends,
absent from his Fathers house, and absent from his own home an^ inheritance;
thus was Abraham a stranger in Canaan. Secondly, that he is traveling home as
a Pilgrim to his own Country; Thus was Jacob a stranger, whose whole life was
a travel in foreign Countries, out of any certain and settled dwelling, as
himself professes, Genesis 47. 9. The whole time of my pilgrimage is an hundred
and thirty years.

2. Who is this stranger? David says, I am a stranger, which may seemestrange,
if we consider that David was a King, and that in his own Country, and that the
Country of Judea; in comparison of whose inhabitants all the world besides were
strangers, as Mat. 27 7. 2 Samuel 21. 23.
For David was not now in flight before Saul, as when he played the fool in
the Philistims Country before Achish to save his life; nor in likelihood, in
chase before Absalom, as when being driven from home, he went up to the mount
of Olives and wept. Neither undertook he any meritorious journey in a
Pilgrims weed. For besides that, he was King of Jerusalem, and needed not make
any tedious Pilgrimage thither. Popish Pilgrims were not borne some thousands
of years after his Age. Peregrina ti^ad Imagines nulla funt ante 600. a^nos a
Christo nato Perk. Prob.
There was now no Sepulcher of our Lord to visit, nor no Image of our Lady, and
yet he professes himself a stranger.

3. But where was David a stranger? Himself says, Before thee: that is,
wheresoever he is before God, there he is a stranger: not in another man's
kingdom or Country, as of Moabits or Philistims, but in his own Country, in
Canaan he is a stranger; yea, at Bethlem in the City of David, and in Sion, the
Fort of David, he is a stranger. This he expresses, Psalm 119. 19. I am a
stranger upon earth: that is, in every part of the earth, even in mine own
house, in mine own bed, in mine own body and bosom I am a stranger with
thee. Wherein the holy Prophet both acknowledges the Lord the proprietary, Leu
25. 23.
of whom he held his Country and Kingdom. For it is as if he had said, I am a
stranger in thy Country: my Country is thy Country, and thy Country is my
Country: and now I do but soiourne a while with thee in thy Country, till I
return home and dwell with thee in my Country. As also he infoldeth a motive,
why the LORD should incline his ear to his Prayer, and show him favor,
because he is a stranger in the Lords Country: and therefore committing
himself to the protection and safe conduct of the Lord of the country, he
doubts not, but to find grace in his eyes, and by his means a comfortable
passage, til he come happily to the end of his way. For who should hear the
complaints of a soiourner, but he with whom he soiourneth?

4. But is it otherwise with David now, than with other men? no surely, but he
bears part in the common condition of his fathers. Although he was dear to
God, and the King of Gods people; yet he is no better than his Fathers; he is a
stranger as all his Fathers were. He means not the fathers of his flesh only,
who were all dead, and gone to their iournies end, but the Fathers of his faith
also; these holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their posterity, which
were the holy seed; who in their times accounted themselves strangers, Heb 11.
13 14
and declared themselves so to be, both in that they chused to dwell in tents,
Heb. 11. 9.
and not in houses or Cities, as the posterity of Cain did, for they held
themselves strangers on earth, and expecting every day the word of God to call
them hither or thither, at his pleasure, they would not cumber themselves with
buildings or purchases; but betook themselves to poor and portable tents,
which were soon pitched up, and as soon taken down. As also in that they
were contented to wander up and down as Pilgrims; restlesly from place to
place, insomuch as the iourneyes and travels of Abraham recorded in Stoty,
amounts to 1794. miles; Jacobs little less, whose posterity was a stranger in
Egypt four hundred years; and from thence were taken into the terrible
Wilderness; where they wandered forty years, and all the rest of them in the
wide wilderness of this world and vale of Baca, only passed through as Pilgrims
unto the hea^^^ly Canaan. All which our holy ^^^ophet reuoluing in his mind,
subscribes the same schedule, that he is a stranger also as they were.

Hence we learn, Doct. 1.
That all the Saints of God, and true believers, are strangers upon earth: for
so was David, and all his Fathers of his flesh, and of his faith, as himself
not only here in sense of his affliction professes, but elsewhere stirred up
by the sight and sense of Gods abundant mercy toward him, and in the (...) of
his solemn joy and festiuity, utters the same words, (...).
1 Chro. 29. 15. All things come of thee, and of thine own hand we have given
thee: for we are strangers before thee, and soiourners like all our Fathers. 2
Cor. 5. 6. while we are at home in the body, we are (...) from the Lord. And
indeed every Christian is a Gershom: that is, a stranger, and in a strange
land: in respect, first of the place, for they are absent from heavenly Canaan,
their own home and Country: here is not their Fathers house, nor their
brethren and sisters, nor their treasure: they are Citizens with Saints, Ephe.
2. 19
and heaven their home, where our Lord Jesus is preparing Mansions for them,
Joh. 14. Secondly, as for the world, it is but a way to their Country, and as a
wilderness through which the Israel of God pass toward their Canaan. They are
indeed in the world, but not of it: for they are called out of the world, 1. by
Christ's separation, Ioh. 15. 19. I have chosen you out of the world. 2. Christ
interdiction, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world. 3.
Christ's operation, Commorandi deuers^rium, non habita^ di Cicero do Senect.
Gal. 6. 14. The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. The very light
of nature saw and said, that nature has afforded us in this world only an
Inn, and not a dwelling: and should not grace much more acquaint us with Gods
decree and ordinance, which is, that man should be a while in the world, as in
a way to pass him unto his final estate elsewhere, or at most, but a
traveler in an Inn, which he is ready to leave the next morrow.

Secondly, in their own account and confession they are strangers, Heb. 11.
13. All these confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon earth. And
in the account of the world also they are strangers, which uses them strangely
and coursly, as David was a stranger to his brethren, Ps. 69. 8. And whereas,
were they of the world, it would know them, love them, and hug them in their
lap: they being strangers, it is another Egypt to Gods first borne, and knows
them not but to vex and oppress them.

Thirdly, in respect of the short time of their continuance, for as a stranger
abides not in a strange place (as the natives do) but hastneth through his way,
and so with his time cutteth and shortneth his journey; so the godly have here
no abiding city, Heb. 13 14
neither is this their resting place. For this cause the whole militant Church
is called a Tabernacle: and the Saints call the time of their life for the
shortness and discontinuance of it, Psalm. 15^* 1^
but a being in this tabernacle, because first, 2 Pet. 1. 13
as a tabernacle is but a soiorning place, set up for a shift to hide our
selves for a small while, as the soldier hides himself in a sconce or tent
only for the time of a siege at the longest: so is it with the tabernacle of
the body, set up for a small time, not so much for it self as for the inmate,
the soul which is contained in it. Secondly, as a tabernacle is a moveable
tent, pitched for a day; over night is set up, and perhaps the next day the
stakes are pulled up, and the cords are slacked, and the conering is folded up:
no otherwise is it with the tabernacle of the body, which no man knows,
whether it shall stand unmoved till the next morrow, no, nor till the next
hour.

Thirdly, as a Tabernacle is only a covering, but has no foundation to settle
vpon^ so Job speaks of our bodies, as houses of clay, whose foundation is in
the dust: Job. 4. 19.
that if God did not fasten the silver cords of them to his appointed time,
every blast would overthrow them every moment.

Fourthly, the godly are strangers here below in respect of their business,
and employment; a stranger is unacquainted with the affairs of the place where
he takes up his Inn, he meddles not with the government, the offices, the
passages of causes in the town where he lies as a stranger; but intends his
journey, and only cares how he may pass through: and if he have any business
there, it is only to advance his estate at home in his own country. And so it
is with the godly; they estrange themselves as much as may be from the world,
and the common courses of it: their callings they cast not off, because they
are commanded to abide in them with moderate care, to provide for themselves,
and theirs. And for earthly things they cannot be without them, while they
have a life to maintain by them; but yet they meddle no more with them than
needs must, and in the midst of their earthly business are not earthly minded.
Col 3. 10.
They are Burgesses of another Corporation, and all their trading and traffic
here is to make themselves a rich and sure estate there. They have a chief
business to do, which they principally intend, namely, to seek the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness of it; to repent of their sins, to believe in
the Son of God, and to make their election sure: whereto they give all
diligence, as they are exhorted, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Fifthly, the godly are strangers in respect of their affection: for, as
strangers long after home, and where ever their bodies be, their hearts and
minds are not there, but at home where their dear friends and estates are: So
is it with the Saints, whose minds, and meditations, and conversation are in
heaven beforehand: for there is their Fathers house, and there is their
inheritance, there is Jesus Christ their treasure, and no marvel if their
hearts be there where their treasure is. The worldling has his whole portion
in this life, and therefore he bestows all his heart, his thoughts, his
cares, his desires and endeavors upon the world; he runs after it with a full
desire. But it cannot be so with the godly man who is minded as was good
Nehemiah, 2. 3. Who although his person was in the King of Persia his Court,
and was a near attendant at the Kings Table, yet his heart was at Jerusalem.
And as Daniel, who while he was in the land of his captivity, yet he opened his
windows every day toward Jerusalem.

Quest. But are not wicked men strangers here upon earth, as well as the godly?

Ans. Wicked men and worldlings are indeed strangers here, if we look toward
God, they are strangers with him, strangers from the Covenant of God; and
stranhers from the life and ways of God. Or if we consider the time of their
continuance here, they have no more continuance here than others: they have no
Leases of their lives, nor no surer holds of their estates than others have.
The rich Glutton heard, Thon fool, this night shall they take away thy soul,
and all. Or if we consider the place in which they live, they are strangers;
for the East wind takes away and hurls them out of their place as easily as
any other. Job 27. 21*
And the mighty dye suddenly, and are taken away without hand. Job 33. 20.
And their houses and possessions which knew them once, shall know them no
more, but take in other strangers for a term of days, as they took in them.

But wicked men are not strangers as the godly are, in 4 respects

1. In their own account, or conceit; for, though their estate be as unstable
as any others, yet have they a strong conceit of continuance, and of taking
their rest for many years. They are described to be such as put off the evil
day, and make leagues with death, and are hardly brought to confess themselves
to be pilgrims and strangers.

2. In the worlds account they be not strangers, but neighbors and
Towne-dwellers. The world knows them, and loves them as her own: yea, ^ulleth
them in her lap as her children, she graceth them, enricheth them, and
aduanceth them as men of best deserts. In a word, she thinks nothing she has
too good for such fast friends, and diligent servants.

3. In their own affection they be no strangers; for how can they considering
they have no other portion but here? Ps. 17. 14. How can they but mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19.
to whom God has showed no better? How can they but give away their
affections, and bury their hearts in earth, and drown themselves in the
delights of it, that have no other God, no other heaven? What man will be
willing to give over a broken title, till he be assured and seated in a better?
which because they are not, like profane Esaus, they hunger after pottage, let
the blessing go where it will.

4. In their course and conversation they do not declare themselves to be
strangers. Al their study, their pains, their sweat and endeavor, is to get a
sure and contented estate in earth: they treasure all in earth; If they can
increase their corn, their wine, their oil, their coin, their commodities,
they rest as in a good portion; seldom or never seeking in earnest that good
part which should never be taken from them, nor they from it, if once they
could attain it. Thus much of the Doctrine, and this question. The Use
follows.

First, in that the godly man is a stranger and Pilgrim here, we learn sundry
duties. As first to practice Christian sobriety, in the affecting, Christian
sob^iety in 1* affecting.
enjoying, and using the things of this life. For, 1. a stranger in his way
affects not, desires not, looks not for great things for himself in the City
he trauelleth through; he lightly regards the honors, offices, revenues, and
privileges of it: his chief desires and affections are elsewhere: all the
privilege he expects there, is how to pass quietly and safely through: Enen
so ought the Christian Pilgrim by the weaned carriage of himself toward
things below, Heb. 11. 14
declare plainly (as the Patriarchs did) that he seeks a Country.

Seek thou great things for thy self (says the Lord to Baruk) seek them
not. Ier. 45. 5.
And why must he not? because he was but a stranger in that Land, now presently
to be given over into the hands of strangers.

Secondly, 2. Enjoying.
A stranger enioyes the things of a strange place as a stranger: he uses
other men's goods for a night, but he sets not his heart on them, nor takes
much delight in them, because he knows he must leave them next morning, and
may take none away with him: Even so a Christian stranger takes but a little
delight in his journey, because he thinks not himself at home, neither does he
enjoy things here as his portion, nor as his own, because he is to be countable
for them: and because he well knows, that too much delight in fleshly and
worldly pleasures gives life to corruption, and weakneth grace in him, he
attends that wholesome Apostolical exhortation, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved,
as strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the
soul. Thirdly, 3. Using the world.
a stranger uses the necessary comforts he meets with in his way as a
stranger; he uses them rather for necessity than for satiety, only for
present occasion, and that with moderation and sobriety: Even so a Christian
Pilgrim must learn to use the world as not using it: 1 Cor. 7. 31
and in the midst of his wealth and abundance, in the f^^ition of his greatest
delights and pleasures, to take his mind off them, and to lift up his thoughts
to heaven, the place of his abode. Which duty the Apostle strongly enforces,
Phil. 3. 20. Carnal men mind earthly things, and forgetting both heaven, and
the God of heaven, Make their belly their God; that is, drown themselves in
the pond and puddle of sensuality. But far be it from us, who profess the
teaching of grace, so to do; Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior; they have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17. 14
but our portion is in another, and contrary courses beseem men of contrary
Countries.

Secondly, In that we are strangers here, we learn another duty, which is, the
exercise of Christian patience and contentment in all estates, be it sickness,
poverty, reproaches, abuses or wrongs in any kind: a stranger is contented to
endure the wrongs that meet him in his way; he digesteth, and puts up all
patiently; he complains not, and much less seeks revenge: for he knows he
shall have little rest or redress till he come home: Even so the Christian
Pilgrim must learn patiently to endure the afflictions, and course and cross
vsages of this strange Country, 2 Cor. 4. last verse, the blessed Apostle was
contented to endure all indignities and wrongs: because he was of another
country, the high privileges and excellencies whereof, Eye has never seen, not
care has ever heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man. ^oh. 14. 4.
When the Disciples of our Savior took it heavily that Christ said he must
leave them: for now what could they expect but to be exposed and laid open to
all the worlds malignity, destitute of their Lords presence and protection? he
comfort them by the same argument, That this is not their place of rest, but
he goes to prepare a place for them. Heb. 11. 26.
Moses chused to suffer afflictions with Gods, people, because he was a
stranger here, and looked for a recomp^nce of reward hereafter. A cloud of
Martyrs as witness seal this truth, who were slain, hewn a sunder, wandered
up and down in sheeps skins, in goats skins, being destitute, afflicted,
and tormented; Veis. 35.
and would not be delivered, (namely, upon unequal conditions) because they
saw that God had prepared better things for them.

A stranger turns not against every Dog that barketh at him: let Doeg accuse,
and Shimei revile, let Curs bark, there is no hope to still them, the best way
is to contemn them, and attend and ride on thy way. A stranger shrinkes not
for every shower of rain, nor is disheartened with the roughness, Nu^ee^'a est
transibis:
and foulness of the way, but he will through thick and thin, through drops
and drout and all because he is going home. Neither must thou that art a
Christian Pilgrim, shrink for the storms of the world, nor the asperousnesse
of the way, which is all strewed with crosses; but hearten thy self as the
passenger, who usually says, it is never an ill day that has a good night;
and though many bitter pills of harsh and strange vsages must be swallowed by
these strangers, yet the consideration of home is as sugar in their pockets to
sweeten them all.

A stranger measures not his own worth, nor thinks worse of himself for
things befalling him in the way; but esteems and valueth himself, according
to his estate at home: So must the Christian stranger, live by faith, look
upon things not seen. Let the world undervalue thee, content thy self, that
thou have credit, and reputation at home, where thou art known, and thy worth
is known, which by no disparagement in the way can be obscured or diminished.

Thirdly, a third duty hence, that we are strangers here, is to learn to
estrange our selves from the world, and courses of worldly men. A stranger when
ever he travels, retains the manners, fashions, and customs of his own
country; a Christian stranger although he be in the world, yet he is not of
the world, he is of another corporation, and therefore though he walk in the
flesh, 2 Cor 10* 3* (...).
yet he must not war according to the flesh. He carries this body of flesh
about him as others do, but he must fight against flesh and the lusts of it,
contrary to the Patrons and defenders of the corruptions that are in the world
through lust. The world may and must enjoy our presence for a time, but must at
no time gain our conformity to it, Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves
according to this world; that is, the customs and guizes of it; because it
lies in wickedness, and the Christian is cast into another form of doctrine
and conversation. Art thou now solicited to follow the lusts and fashions of
this world? think with thy self, that thou art a stranger here, and of
another country: thou live under other laws: thou may not cast in thy lot
with the wicked of the world, nor give voice or suffrage in their meetings, but
be as Lot, who though he were in Sodom, was not of Sodom, but was perpetually
vexed with the unclean conversation of those wicked men. Art thou provoked to
swear, to drink excessiuely, to lie for advantage, to break the Sabbath for
gain, to uncleanness, or any other soul lust? Now say to thy self, I am of
the kingdom of light, but this is a work of darkness; this is an unlawful
act in my Country, and why should I practice it here? seeing my Lord and King
must needs know it: if I commit treason here against my King and Country; my
King has informers enough, and I shall lose my whole estate there, and be
banished out of my Country for ever. Shall I, (says Joseph) commit this sin
against my God, against my Master? Seeing my Master has kept nothing from me
but sin, I will not do this thing, I will not sin, and commit this high
wickedness.

Fourthly, A fourth duty is, that seeing we are strangers here, to learn to
affect our own country, and highly to esteem it. Every man by nature loves
his native country best, neither thinks himself so well in any foreign
land: and strangers, especially having parents, kindred, and great revenues in
their native soil, and being hardly entreated where they so^ourne, would be
glad to return home, and enjoy the sight of those whomu they have long longed
to see: Even so the Christian Pilgrim. Never did Israel more affect and extol
their own country in their banishment from it, and captivity in Babylon, than
the Christian stranger does affectedly desire, and prefer his heavenly Country
above this strange land, the Country of his captivity: For, he discerns that
this is not his Country: first, That is a man's Country where he was borne and
brought up; but whence takes a Christian his spiritual birth, or where is he
brought up but in the Church and kingdom of Christ? Earth gives him a birth
and being as he is man, but as a Christian he is borne of God. Secondly,
again, that is a man^ country where his parents, his ancestors, and dear
kindred dwell and inhabit. Now where dwells a Christian man's Father, but in
heaven? Where is his elder brother but there? Where are all his brethren and
sisters, sons and daughters of the same parents, but there? and therefore
heaven is his Country. Thirdly, further, that is a man's Country where his
principal estate, and goods are, where his patrimony and inheritance lies;
and where is the chief portion, the treasure, the immortal inheri^a^ce of the
Christian, but in heaven? And where else is his Country? Now then, a Christian
considering on the one hand, that he is in a strange Country, and how hardly
he has bin entreated in it, and so likely to be still; and on the other hand,
that he has a home and a father there that loves him dearly; and that his
elder brother Jesus Christ, and all his spiritual kindred, the Saints of God
are there: And besides that, he has a rich portion and a large patrimony, even
an immortal inheritance in heaven; how can he choose but to be reared in his
affections, yea, ravished to be there? desiring nothing in the world more than
to be dissolved hence, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. A Traveler
has his mind and thoughts still upon home, and says with himself, Home is
homely. And the Mariner, or Seafaring man in a storm, or rough Sea, has his
desires on the Shore, and his mind is not where his ^ody is. So is it with the
Christian Passenger, his mind is not where his body is: and if he cannot get
home in the body as soon as he desires, yet in his spirit, he will mind
heaven, and heavenly things: he will get as near home as he can: if he cannot
get into the heart of the city, he will be sure to get into the sub^bs, the
Church of God. If he cannot get suddenly into that Jerusalem which is above,
R^u. 21. 2.
he will get into the Jerusalem which is from above: and where his person
cannot be for the time, his conversation and meditation shall be in heaven;
Mat. 6. 21.
for, where his treasure is, there will his heart be also.

Use 2. In that we are strangers with God, we learn diverse things:

1. The sovereignty and power of God, who is the great owner and ruler of the
whole earth. Zach. 4. 14.
Kings, themselves, who are the highest earthly Lords, and commanders, are but
strangers with God, Psalm. 24. 1.
for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: And no man sits in his
own, but are Tenants at will under this great Landlord. The greatest of men,
yea, of Kings, are but as David was, soiourners in his sight, Leuit. 15. 23.
The Land is his, and we are but strangers and soiourners with him.

2. We must hence gather out our own duty toward God, in whose Country we
soiourne; and our duty is manifold:

1. To ask leave of God, to pass through his Country; so did Israel of Edom,
a wicked Prince and people, Numb. 20. I pray thee that we may pass through thy
country, etc. It is fit to ask leave where no right is. Besides, that by daily
prayer for Gods leave, and favorable love in our way, we both ascribe unto God
the honor of sovereignty and bounty; as also sweeten his mercies which he
gives us leave to enjoy, 1 Timothy 4. 5
all which are sanctified to us by the word and by prayer.

2 Bind thy self from trespassing in the way and Country through which thou
passest: So did Israel unto Edom, We will not go through the fields, Number. 20.
17
nor the vinyards: neitheir will we drink of the water of the wels: we will
go by the Kings way, and neither turn to the right hand, nor left, til we be
past thy borders. So must the Christian be careful he transgress not the
laws of the Country in which he soiournes, to stir up against himself the
wrath and revenge of the Lord in whose Country he soiourneth; bu^ frame
himself to please him, by whose leave he trauelleth through his Country. How
careful and digent were Joseph's brethren to please their unknown brother,
Genesis 44.
the Lord of that strange Country? Much more ought we to please our brother
Jesus Christ, the Lord of this strange country, through which we pass to our
own Canaan.

3 Cast thy care upon God, and I depend upon him for all needful supplies; so
did holy David here, because he was stranger in Gods Country, he therefore
casts his burden upon the Lord, desiring him to hear his prayer, and to
hearken to his cry, and not to be silent at his tears. A stranger ouer-loadeth
nor himself with cares, and carriages; but carrying a competent viaunce with
him, depends for all necessaries upon them where he soiourneth; so a
Christian stranger need be in nothing careful, Phil* 4. 6.
but in all things let his request be shwed unto God (the King of the Country)
in prayer. All (...) exexcessiue carfulness is to be avoided of a Christian,
yea, suppose the care be about things lawful, if it be excessive, it is
sinful, and unseemly in a Christian Pilgrim. Psalm. 37. 5.
Let thy chief care be, to commit thy way unto the Lord, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy care
upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee.

4. Be much in thankfulness unto God for all the comfortable blessings thou
receiuest in thy Pilgrimage: a stranger thankfully accepts all the favors
showed him in a strange Country: and so did holy David, when God had enabled
him to prepare abundantly for the building of the Temple, break out into
abundant praises; 1 Chro. 29, 13, 14.
We thank thee our God, and praise thy glorious name. But who am I? or what is
my people, that we should offer unto thee? for all is thine, and of thine own
have we given thee; for, we are strangers before thee, and soiourners, as all
our Fathers were. And surely, it well beseems the just to be thankful,
seeing they are strangers in the Lords land, and all the comforts they enjoy,
are his by right and possession, and theirs only by leave, and thankful
acceptance.

5. Be contented and patient, if this great Lord deny thee any thing thou
would have whilst thou passest through his Country; Number. 20. 21
so was Israel when Edom out of a churlish and hurtful mind, denied them
peaceable passage. But the Lord of this Country knows what is fit for us,
and never denies any thing out of a churlish mind, neither can deny any thing
good in it self, and good to us; and if he withhold any hurtful things, we
must be not only patient but thankful.

Use 3. In that we are strangers, and traveling to our country, as all our
Fathers have done before us, it appears that our wisdom will be to resolve
of pains and travel all the days of our life, and not to expect rest till
the night of death come, when dying in the Lord we shall rest from our labors:
and because this is not our rest, we must arise and depart hence. Mica. 2: 20
And seeing we can no more avoid this weary journey, than any of our Fathers
could do; we must rather bestow wise and careful thoughts, in fitting our
selves to our journey, and in behauing our selves through our way, than to
expect to avoid the tediousness and difficulties of it.

Quest. How may we fit our selves for our journey home into our own Country?

Ans. A traveler fitteth himself to his journey two (...) specially:

1. By casting off (...) behind him (...) burden or (...) 2. By providing for
himself things fit for his journey.

Of the former sort there be three especial encumbrances that the Christian
Pilgrim must lighten himself of. The first of them is sin, which as an
intolerable burden presses us down, and hangs fast on: and therefore the
Apostle counsels to cast it off, Heb. 13. 2.
if we mean to run the race before us. Now the way to lighten our selves of
this weight, is to exercise eueryday the grace of repentance and mortification,
and daily to take some sin or other in hand, and at least to slake and abate
the power of it, that if we cannot be rid of the sin in respect of the
presence of it, yet we may be rid of the reign and command of it.

The second, are earthly cares, profits and pleasures, which are as heavy
stones tied unto us, and pressing us from heaven to earth, making heavy and
sad the soul, and unwieldy in her motions. The way for us to lighten our
selves of these encumbrances, is daily and continually to eleuate, and raise
our thoughts homeward, and heauenward, and exercise our selves in holy
meditations, prayers, and praises, sundry times through the day.

For as he that would keep a Clock in true motion, must every day sundry
times windevp the plummets, which are still drawing downward; even so must we
do with our hearts; the cares and pleasures of the world are as plummets of
Lead, pressing down the soul incessantly, in her motion toward heaven; and he
that would continue his motion must daily wind up his heart toward God: and
by maine strength of grace fetch it up from earth, that it may be firmly settled
on heavenly things, delighting it self with the riches of heaven, and with
contemplation of those pleasures, that are at the right hand of God for
evermore.

The third encumbrance, is the fear of death, which presses us all our life;
and the Christian must lighten himself of this burden by looking beyond it to
his own home; by longing after the living God, whom none can see in the body
and live; by considering that the nearer he is to death, he is so much nearer
home: and what stranger fears to go home; or is sorry when after a long
absence, he is entering into his own City?

Secondly, A wise Christian will furnish and provide himself with necessaries,
and needful supplies, to help him through his journey.

There be five things especially which a traveler must fit himself withal,
that his journey may be less tedious, and more prosperous to himself.

1. The knowledge of the direct way. Now whereas no man knows the way to the
heavenly country, without Gods teaching, every one must go to God himself
first, and then to such as God has appointed to be the directors, and
instructors in this way. The former we see in holy David, Psalm 119. 19. I am
a stranger upon earth, therefore hide not thy Commandments from me. He knew
well how hardly a blind man could perform a far and dangerous journey, and
thus it is only the Commandment that shows the way to this heavenly Country.
Why? was David a blind man, or did he not know the ten Commandments? Even
David who was not stone blind, but much enlightened, was blind in part, and
still earnest, that the LORD would further open his eyes, Ps. 119. 18* 34* 35.
to see the way more plainly and clearly than yet he did: And though he knew
the words, and true sense of the ten Commandments, yet he desires still to be
led further into the particular use, application, direction, and obedience of
them, and of all other parts of the Word, Verse. 96.
which he says, is exceeding large. And for the latter; As a stranger in an
unknown Country, and way, will ever be asking the way of every one never so
simple, who knows the way better than himself; and will observe the senerall
marks, and statues, by which he may know, whether he be right or no: So must
every Christian Pilgrim be inquisitiue of his way; for which purpose he must
frequent the ministry of the word diligently, which God has erected to be as A
light in a dark plabe; as the Pillar of the Cloud and fire by night and by
day, to direct us through this dry and desert wilderness; as Ariadnes threede
to help us through this troublesome Maze and Labyrinth; and as a voice behind
us, saying, This is the way, walk in it. An inquisitiue Christian will be
still consulting with Gods Ministers about the way of God: and conferring with
private Christians, be they never so mean in place or appearance, concerning
their great journey between heaven and earth; and will take special notice of
the marks of their way, as whether it be the narrow way, or the broad way;
whether it be strewed with crosses, or pleasant to the flesh; whether it be a
clean way, or a foul, dirty, and miry way of lusts; whether it be an old
beaten way by the feet of ancient believers, the Prophets, the Apostles, and
holy men, yea, of Jesus Christ himself; or a new broken and devised way,
unknown unto them, and the Scriptures; whether it be a right way, Hos. 14. 9.
or a crooked path of by-lanes, and turnings to the right hand or to the left;
whether it be a lightsome, or a dark way, and the like. Pro. 4. 19.
Thus inquisitiue and careful will a Christian Pilgrim be of the best
directions he can get; as the poor iaylor will know of Paul his prisoner, what
he may do to be saved; and it is none of the lightest plagues of God, to have
an heart unwilling to ask about the way of heaven.

A second comfortable help in an unknown way, is a good guide. The Christian
stranger has need of a guide, and the best guide is God himself, yea, and
more, God is the only guide. In any other way or journey, the natives or
inhabitants can guide a stranger from place to place, but here none but God can
be our guide, Psalm. 25. 9. He will guide in Judgment, and teach the humble
his way.

Quest. But how then may a m^an get God to be his guide?

Answer. By two special means:*

1. By earnest Prayer: David knowing that none but GOD could guide him,
prays, Psalm. 143. 8. Show me the way that I shall go. And verse 10. Let thy
good Spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness.

2. By constant subjection to Gods word; for GOD goes before us by his word,
as he did before Israel in the Pillar of the Cloud and fire, and willing
obedience to Gods word, makes God our guide.

Thirdly, A stranger in his way needs his viance, or provision for his
expe^ce. The word of God is the Christians viaticum, and supplieth all his
needs, it offoords him food in his hunger, being the bread of life, and the
Mannah that came down from heaven; it yields him drink in his thirst, being
water of life, and whosoever thirsts, is called to these sweet waters of
consolation, drawn out of the wells of salvation; it affoords him Physic in
his souls sickness; strength in his weakness, and never leaves him that
learneth upon it, without sufficient means to help him through his journey.

Fourthly, a traveler has need of a weapon to defend himself, and to wound
or keep off his enemies. The same word of God is a special part of our
spiritual armor; it is the sword of the Spirit. And as David said of Goliahs
sword, Oh, there is none to that, give me that; so there is no sword to this
for the repulse of all spiriall enemies, and for the sure defense of him that
shall buckle it close unto him. Besides that, it directs him to obtain and
fasten unto him all the other pieces of Cstristian armor, so as in no part he
lie open or naked to danger.

Fifthly, A Treueller has need of good company, which is pro vehiculo, as good
as a Wagon or Coach, to carry him with the more ease through the tediousness
of the way. The same testimonies of God are sweet companions, and help to
deceive, and pas^e over our time comfortably; if we can talk of them in the
way, and in the house, and in the field; and if we can whet them upon our
selves and others, if we make them The man of our counsel, and meditate on
them night and day: he is never alone that has God and Christ conferring,
counselling, and directing him in the Scriptures: neither is he alone, who
when he is most alone, is in Soliloquie with God: this man wants neither
company nor comfort.

Now how happily shall this man compass his journey, and go singing through
the most tedious ways of his Pilgrimage, Ps. 119. 14.
that has thus fu^nished himself with the understanding of his way, with a
faithful and unerring guide, with sufficient provision for his expense, with a
serviceable weapon, and with a sweet and cheerful Companion?

Use 4. In that we are Pilgrims in the way to our Country: In this way we must
learn to demean our selves as wayfaring men, and imitate the Pilgrim in
these particulars.

1. To be stirring early for our journey, and take the day before us, that we
may dispatch our journey before we be benighted. It is our Lords counsel to
work while the day lasts, because the night comes wherein none can work,
Joh. 11. 9. And his own practice propounded for our imitation, John 9. 4. and
imitated by the Saints, whose praises are in the Scriptures. Holy David served
out his time according to the counsel of God; that is, while he lived he was a
servant of God, for the good of the age in which he lived. 1 Pet. 4. 2.
And the Apostle Peter exhorts, that henceforth so much time as remains in
the flesh, we spend according to the will of God* Well did the holy men
consider, what an advantage it is to set out in the way of God early, even in
the morning of the life: What a sweet comfort it is to be early graced; that we
have but a short day passed away in a few hours to travel in; that this day
stays not, but hasteneth from us; that this day is the only time to walk
in; and that this day being shut in, there is no more time to work or walk
in, and therefore did bestirre themselves lest they should fall short of their
intended journey.

2. As a man in his journey, will be glad of any good company that will go but
part of his way with him: So must the Christian in his journey, be glad of
company in his way to heaven; and heartily embrace the fellowship and society
of the Saints, which mean to go through with him. Indeed if a man would
choose to sort himself with evil men, he might get more company, but they go
the contrary way; but a wise traveler will rather choose to go with one, or
two, yea or alone in his right way, than go a clean contrary way for company.
Let us be glad to meet our contrymen in this through-fare, be kind to them
for the same Country sake; and as we shall easily know them by their language,
habit, and conversation, so let us heartily affect them, and vndiuidedly cleave
unto them.

3. In this way be glad (as a stranger in a strange Country) to s^nd home upon
every occasion offering it self: send home thy prayers, thy daily desires, thy
thoughts, thy meditations, thy praises, thy sacrifices, thy loue-tokens. And
because some thing is to be done for thee at home now in thine absence, beseech
Christ thy best friend, to set forward thy business there, and to look to
thine occasions, lest all go to wrack, by preparing a mansion for thee; by
making intercession for thee; by sending out his Spirit for thy direction and
comfort, till thou returnest home unto him; eternal praises and thanks for
such great favors, so freely conferred upon thee.

4. In this way be content if sometimes thou art weary, as one that goes up a
steep hill: if sometimes thou sighest and pantest in thy painful travel,
through a foul way, and stormy weather: Let the tediousness of the way make
thee desire the ways end, and to covet to be at home with Christ, which is
best of all. But be sure in thy weariness thou sit not down, much less look
back with Lots wi^e; Phil. 3. 13.
but press hard forward to the make, as one resolved to go through and
persevere to the end: considering that after an hill comes a valley, after
foul way comes fair, and after a storm a fair shine and gleame again:
Psalm. 30.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy returns in the morning. Heb. 10.
36
If we have need of patience for a while, it is but to enjoy the promises. 2.
Cor. 1.
If the sufferings for Christ increase, Psalm. 31.
so shall also the comforts. And many are the troubles of the righteous, but
the Lord delivers them out of all. The end which crowns all thy labor is
worth all thy pains and patience.

Use 5. Seeing all the Saints are strangers here as all our Fathers have been:
Here are sundry grounds of comfort arising hence to believers.

own country; and if he were once at home, he should put up no such wrongs
and indignities.

2. Against the troubles and

1. That all the fury of the enemies, exiling and banishing the godly, can but
make them strangers, and so were they before, wheresoever they dwelt in any
place of the earth. It is no great addition of misery to banish him, that was
in banishment before; or to drive a man out of one strange place into another:
He that is already a stranger upon earth in affection, can easily become
actually a stranger, if God call him unto it.

2. When the enemies have exercised all their rage, they cannot banish them out
of GODS Country; but they are strangers before GOD, who is equally present
with them in one corner of the earth as well as in another, to protect them, to
provide for them, to pity them, and guide them home to their own Country.

3. Although the enemies would be endless in their rage against the Saints:
and were they to live ever, they would ever nou^ish and exercise an immorttall
wrath against the people of God, yet can they not inflict so much mischief on
them as they desire: For besides that themselves are mortal, and besides the
justice of God breaking quickly to pieces the rods of his wrath, and casting
them into the fire: the godly themselves are but strangers here, and of short
continuance: so as, suppose their sufferings be sharp, yet they be but short.
The rods of the wicked shall not always lie upon the lot of the righteous
(as they desire they should) seeing the godly are strangers as well in time as
in place, and themselves not continuing, their misery cannot be continual.

3. In the many losses of these is safe enough at home. Nay, in that great and
final destruction of the whole world by the dreadful fire of the last day;
When the heavens shall pass away with a noise, 1 Pet. 3. 10
and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth, with the works that are*
therein shall be burnt up. When all other men shall be loosers of all their
whole estates, only the godly (because they are Strangers here) they shall
escape all these things, and be no loosers at all.

If some whole City should be consumed by fire, when the whole multitude of
Inhabitants sustain loss, and beggerie, by (...) Accident; a stranger (...)
but passing through the (...) and has his estate and (...) elsewhere, he (...)
at all: So the (...) in that day, (...) nor (...) who had no other portion but
in this life.

4. As his estate is safe, so likewise Lot that he was a stranger, Genesis 19. 9
and scorned as a stranger by the Sodomites; for when all they were scalded
with a shower of fire and Brimstone, the Lord being merciful unto him, his
person was in safety. Sever thy self from the condition of sinful men;
estrange thy self from the condition of sinful men: estrange thy self from
their courses, walk as one delivered from this evil world, if not yet in
respect of place, yet in respect of new qualities* thou shall have GODS
protection, and see the sa^uation of the LORD, when all the wicked Inhabitants
of the earth shall call for the hills to cover them, and the mountains to fall
upon them, Reu. 6. 16, 17.
to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is
come, and who can stand?

FINIS.
A PROFITABLE MEMORIAL OF the Conversion, Life, and Death of Mistress MARIE
GVNTER, set up as a Monument to be looked upon both by Protestants and Papists.
I Could not better spend some part of the dais of my mourning for the loss of
my dear Wife, then in setting down briefly some Passages of her course and
Pilgrimage, that the happy memory of her graces and virtuous life might ever
live with me, both for incitation and imitation. And if my desires were strong
to make them more public for the direction of some others, I hope it will
rather be charitably ascribed to the working and stirring of my affection
toward her Ashes, than to any vanity of mind, or ostentation in her.
Besides, I am sure, that if a Protestant had been seduced from us (as she was
called out of Popery) and had lived and dyed so zealous in that Religion, as
she did in this, the adversaries would have made their advantage of it, and
published the same as one of the miracles of their Church. And I see not but it
may be as lawful for me, as it may prove profitable for others, to set down
the known Truth concerning her; that as she was in her life, so also she may
happily continue now after her death, an happy instrument of Gods glory in
earth, as I am assured she is a vessel before him filled with his glory of
heaven.

THis gracious Woman was for birth a Gentlewoman, Her birth.
but descended of Popish Parents, who dying in her infancy, she was committed
unto the tuition of an old Lady, Popish education.
honorable for her place, but a strong Papist, who nousled and misled this
Orphan in Popery, till she came about fourteen years of age; at which time
this Lady died. Upon which occasion, God (having a merciful purpose toward
her conversion) by his good Providence, brought her to the service of that
Religious and truly honorable Lady, the Countess of Leicester, who
entertained her with more than ordinary respect, both because of her young
years, as also because she was allied to Sir Christopher Blunt, then husband
to the honorable Countess; at whose request his Lady had taken her into her
care.

To this Honorable Countess she came a most zealous Papist, and resolute, as
soon as possibly she could apprehend a fit opportunity, to convey her self
beyond the Seas, and become a Nun; for she then thought that that was the
surest and likeliest way to get Heaven: This religious care of the honorable
Countess as she did all her life thankfully acknowledge it, so it is very
obseruable both for the high commendation of her honor and for the imitation of
others of her honorable rank.
which as she had an earnest desire to attain, so would she take the nearest
way which she thought would bring her thither. But she could not so closely
carry her secret devotions and intentions, but that by the careful eye of her
Honorable Lady, they were soon discovered, and not sooner discovered then
wisely prevented; for presently her Lady took from her all her Popish books,
Beads and Images, and all such trumpery, and set a narrow watch over her, that
she might be kept from her Popish Prayers, and not absent her self from the
daily Prayers of the Family, which were religiously observed: further,
requiring her to read those Prayers that her honor daily used to have in her
private chamber with her women.

Her Ladyship also carefully prevented her from her Popish company and counsel
by word or writing, for neither might she write nor receive any letter without
the view and consent of her Honor.

She also constrained her to be countable for the Sermons which she heard in
the house, which were constantly two every Sabbath day, (for the increase of
the sound knowledge of God, which is the only Hammer of Popery.) And hereby
she in short time obtained great ability to communicate to others the
substance of those Sermons which she heard, the rather because it was
constantly observed by all the women in that honorable Family, to come
together after the last Sermon, and make repetition of both.

And this she did as yet for fear, but still with this reservation, that she
would keep her heart for Popery; and trusted that God would be merciful unto
her (as Naaman) in this which she did only through fear and constraint. But
God (who in his own time works in his own means) began to work in her
first a staggering in her old way; For, when she saw the holy conversation of
that Reverend Preacher, Master I. W. who was then Chaplin to the Countess,
she began to persuade her self, that surely this man's godliness must needs
bring him to Heaven. And then the reverend respect of the man made her begin to
give some better ear to his Doctrine, to examine his proofs, and to reverence
his Ministry; whereby in short time, it pleased God that she was won to
believe the Truth, Her new birth.
and renounce her former superstition and ignorance. And as it is the property
of a true Convert, being converted her self, Io^. 1. 45.
she endeavored the conversion of others, and was a great help and furtherance
to the public Ministry that way: For this was a thing which that honorable
Family took special knowledge of; and there were many that had great cause
to bless God for her in that respect.

Now presently Satan (that Dragon that watches to devour every man-child
which shall be borne unto God) begins to rage, Reu. 1^.
and reach at her with strong and violent temptations: Her long and strong
temptations.
and first he terrified her in that she had sinned the sin against the holy
Ghost, for she had played the deep dissembler; and being in heart a Papist,
yet joined with the Protestants whom she held for Heretics, and all this
against her knowledge* and conscience, and so fiercely and incessantly he
followed this temptation, as that she was persuaded it was impossible that
ever this sin should or could be pardoned. And this temptation was pointed
and sharpened with that dreadful and foul suggestion of self murder, as if
the remedy of the sin against the holy Ghost, were to destroy ones self. While
she was thus long tossed and tumbled in these waves and billows of Satanicall
suggestions, wherein she was so low cast and dejected (still concealing her
grief) as she almost despaired of recovery; It pleased God to direct that
Reverend Preacher (who was her Father in Christ, and whom she ever after
embraced with the most entire love of the most natural Child) to entreat of
this sin, and to show what it was, and by whom and in what manner it was
committed. To which Doctrine she diligently harkening, and by examination of
it, and her self, finding that she had not so sinned after illumination, nor
with obstinate malice against God or his Truth, (which when she was most
superstitiously devoted, she desired to find out) it pleased God to quiet her
mind for that; and so led her over that temptation.

But Satan that departed from our head, Jesus Christ, only for a seaon, was
not long away from the molestation of this his member, but returned and brought
seven worse spirits (were it possible) than before, and now his name may be
Legion; for now he would confound and oppress her with multitudes of
blasphemous thoughts, and doubts. Now must she believe there is no God: That
the Scriptures are not his Word, but a Policy: or if it were his Word, who
must interpret it? or how could she a silly woman get the understanding of
such deep mysteries as are contained in the same? Besides, as she was of mind
that she was gotten out of one error, so she knew nothing but that she was
misled into another; for, how could she be sure that this was the truth which
she now professed, seeing there are as many, or more learned men of the one
opinion as of the other, and all of them maintain their opinions by the
Scriptures. Thus was she vexed and exercised with Armies of roving and
unsettled conceits for five or six years together, till God, (whom she often
solicited for direction and assistance in the combat) brought her to this
resolution, that she would hold these conclusions, whatsoever disputes Satan
might weary her withal: That there was not only a God in himself, but a God
that was her God: and whatsoever opinions there were in the world, that there
was but one Truth, and that was to be learned out of the Scriptures; and
though there were much in the Bible which she did not understand, yet she was
persuaded, that if she would diligently read and search the Scriptures, with
earnest prayer to God for a good understanding in them, she should attain
thence a measure of knowledge, s^fficient to bring her to heaven; and holding
strongly these grounds, she found the temptations waste away by degrees, and
her self daily more strongly settled upon the foundation.

Neither was she only by the grace of God a Conqueror in these temptations,
but I may say with the Apostle, in a manner more than a Conqueror by them;
for, God (who brings light out of darkness) made these temptations a sweet
seasoning of her whole life. By occasion of which, she tied her self to a
strict course of godliness, and a constant practice of Christian Duties, which
she religiously observed even till her dying day.

For first, Her religious life.
that she might be stablished in the Truth, and confirmed against those former
waverings and weaknesses, she vowed, that God assisting her, she would every
year read over the whole Bible in an ordinary course, Extraordinary diligence
in the Scriptures
which course she constantly observed for the space of fifteen years
together, beginning her task upon her birthday, and reading every day so many
Chapters as to bring it about just with the year. By which exercise she
gained a great increase of knowledge, and no less strengthening of her faith;
for she did not read carelessly or negligently, but always kept a note of what
places she did not understand, and would still be inquiring the meaning of
them, as she met either with Ministers, or such as she thought were able to
inform her in the same. And her custom was ever before she opened her Bible,
to send up a short prayer unto God, for the opening of her blind eyes, to the
understanding of those sacred mysteries, that so they might be as a Lantern
to guide her feet in the ways of holiness, until she had attained her
desired happiness.

And not herewith contented, as a good Mary, she pondered the Word of God in
her heart; for by her great industry in the Scriptures, she had gotten by
heart many select Chapters, and special Psalms; and of every Book of the
Scripture one choice verse: all which she weekly repeated in an order which
she propounded to her self: and being asked why she was so laborious in
getting and retaining those Scriptures in memory? Her answer was, that she
knew not what days of trial or persecution might come, wherein she might be
deprived of her Bible, and other good books and helps; but so much of the
Scriptures as she could get into her heart she knew no Tyrants or Enemies
could bereave or rob her of. (God make thee that read, and me that writes
this, so Christianly provident, as in these days of plenty to lay up somewhat
for the days of straitness and famine.) Secondly, Her instance in her private
Prayers.
from that time of her trouble she resolved upon Daniels practice, wherein
she was also constant; namely, besides the family duties, which were twice a
day performed by the Chaplin in that Religious house in which she lived till
within one year of her death; And besides the private Prayers that she daily
read in her Ladies Bedchamber, she was thrice every day on her knees before
God in secret, like a true worshipper, whose delight was to be in Gods
presence. By means of which daily exercise, besides all other comfortable
fruits, she attained a singular sweet gift in prayer, whereby she could both
strongly wrestle, and happily prevail with God, whose grace suffers himself
to be overcome with the prayers of his weak servants.

And because she knew that Religious fasting is the whet-stone of Prayer, she
tied her self to set apart six days in every year, wherein she was
extraordinarily humbled in fasting and prayer, for her own sins, and the
sins of the times. At all which times she was in special manner earnest
with the Lord, that he would be pleased further to reveal unto her his whole
Truth, needful for her salvation, and keep her constant in the obedience
thereof unto the end.

And because she knew that the right and worthy Receiving of the Sacraments
affords a Christian special strength, and much stabilitie in the course of
godliness: as she diligently apprehended that comfort when she could
conveniently receive that Sacrament; so for many years she had laid a band
upon her self, never to receive it, but the day before to fit, and examine her
self seriously, deeply humbling her self before the Lord in fasting and
prayer all the day long.

Thirdly, The tenderness of her conscience.
the trouble of her conscience, made her ever of a tender conscience: fearful
she was of offending God and her own conscience; and watched her self
narrowly; and to keep her self in awe; for the space of five years before
her death, she kept a Catalogue of her daily slips, and set down even the
naughty thoughts which she observed in her self, that one day in every week
she might extraordinarily humble her self for all the failings of that week,
and this with such moderate abstinence as might best fit her weak body to
humble and fervent prayer. And all these private Religious duties, she
performed so secretly, that none but her bosom friend knew of their
performance. As she was thus fearful of sins present, and to come, so her
conscience was tender in respect of sins past, as may appear by this
memorable instance; Whilst she was a child bred up in the chamber of that
old Lady, she was entised by lewd servants who fed her with figs, and other
such toys, fit to please children withal, to steal money out of the Ladies
Cabinet which often stood open in her Chamber, and which they knew she had the
fittest opportunity to do of all other: whereunto her childishness giving
way, she found it not missed, and so continued it for seven years or
thereabouts, without any great check of Conscience. But when the light of God
came in, and made a privy search in the heart; and made her able to take her
self with the fact; now she was ashamed and confounded in her self, and her
stirred conscience gave her no rest, nor could she conceive any hope of quiet,
because she saw she had done that which she could no way undo. If she
looked at the sum of money taken and given away, she conceived that by
continuing in that course seven years together, she might have wronged that
Lady thirty or forty pound. If she thought of restitution, she was no way able.
Thus she carried the burden of this sin a long time, easing it as well as
she could with a resolute purpose, if ever God pleased to make her able, to
make restitution to the heirs of the deceased Lady. And accordingly so she
did. For when that honorable, and bountiful Lady, whom she long served, gave
her a large portion when she bestowed her in marriage, she forthwith made
choice of a Reverend Minister, whom she employed therein (enjoining him
secrecy) and because she would be sure to make full restitution, she
delivered him sixty pounds, to tender unto this Ladies heir, as from a
concealed servant of the Ladies, who had unjustly taken it away from her. And
when the Gentleman returned ten pounds of it again, such was the tenderness
of her conscience, that she would receive none of it to her own use; but gave
it away to poor and pious persons and uses. And this childish error, God
turned to her good; for in all the two and twenty years of her service unto
that honorable Lady, she never durst make use of any thing that was under her
charge, were it small or great, but set it down in writing, and once every
year did make it good, either in the kind, or in some other thing which she
bought for her Ladyships use.

Fourthly, Her hari^able d^sposi^ion
the sense of her own weaknesses and wants made her of a pitiful and
charitable disposition toward the wants and miseries of others. She had ever
a large heart to the poor, especially the godly poor; she never did see or
hear of any that were in want, but her heart did mourn if she had not to
releeve them, neither was her hand shut, for she did yearly lay aside a
portion of money to the uttermost of her ability (if not beyond) for their
relief. Thus she lived holily, happily, and desiredly: Neither could so
gracious a life be shut up but by an answerable, that is, an happy death and
dissolution, whereof I will add but a few words, and so leave her to her
happiness til we meet happily again.

True it is, that the life of a Christian should be a continual meditation of
death, Her lingering sickness.
as it is a continual motion to death: and such was the latter part especially
of the life of this Christian woman, who was of weak and sickly constitution
many years before her death, which made her so much the more prepared for her
last combat and sickness, which lasted ten weeks; in all which time she
certainly apprehended and expected her dissolution, it being the principal,
and almost only subject of her discourse, six months before it came. But
thirty days before her departure, she finding her pains increasing, and
growing very sharp and tedious, she spent an hours talk with me concerning
her desire for the things of this life; and having said what she purposed, she
thus concluded her speech: Now, sweet Heart, no more words between you and me
of any worldly thing, only let me earnestly request, and charge you, that as
you see my weakness increase, you will not fail to assist me, and call on me
to follow the Lord with prayer and patience; For, now I know, that Satan will
show all his malice, because his time is but short against me, and he will
easily espy my weakness, and make his advantage of it, and therefore now
especially help me with your counsel, comfort, and prayers.

In all the time of her sickness, our gracious God who as a fast friend
stands closest to his servants, when they have most need of him, showed his
gracious presence with her, as in all other comfortable supplies answerable to
that depth of distress, so especially in hearing and answering her prayers,
and desires of her heart.

There were four requests which we observed she especially preferred unto God
in her sickness, Four requests especially she made to God in her sickness,
and heard (...) them all.
and in none of them was denied.

The first, that she might be armed with strength against Satan's assaults,
which she expected death, she began to be dejected in the sense of her own
dullness, and thereby began to call in question Gods love toward her, and the
truth of Gods grace in her; for said she, were I the Lords, why should not I
lift up my head now, seeing the time of my dissolution draws on so near? But
these complaints continued not above six hours, but she had much
cheerfulness and comfort again, which she expressed, both in earnest and
excellent Prayers, (wherein her gift was more then ordinary for her sex) as
also in many cheerful thanks and praises to God for his great mercy, for
that he had now so chained Satan at this time of her great weakness, that
having been formerly molested, and daily vexed with his assaults, for the
space of above six years together, now he would not suffer him to rest on her
with his malice above six hours.

Her second request was, discontent to any that were about her, and much less
to charge God foolishly, in whose hands she was as the clay in the hand of the
Potter.

for me, but for your selves, for I shall very shortly be more happy than the
wishes of your hearts can make me, and therefore cease your mourning, and help
me thither by your prayers as fast as you can.

Her fourth request was,

And as she prayed, God gave her her memory to the last gasp, Her happy
departure
that she dyed praying; for a little before her departure, she called us that
were about her, and hasted to Prayer, for now (said she) I shall be gone
presently: (which words we then believed not) but Prayer being ended, she said
with more strength than she had spoken any thing four hours before, Amen,
amen. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. Lord Jesus have mercy on me,
and receive my soul. And thus with her last breath and words, her soul was
carried into Abraham's bosom in the Heavens, to which her eyes and hands were
lifted. This was the life and death of this sweet Saint, as it was observed and
now faithfully witnessed by her mournful husband, who wishes both his life
and latter end like unto hers.

FINIS.
A GLASS for Gentlewomen to dress themselves by.

By THOMAS TAILOR, Doctor in Divinity, and late Preacher of Aldermanberry in
London.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John Bartlet, at the sign of the gilt Cup in
Cheap Side. 1633.

A GLASS for Gentlewomen to dress themselves by.
BEcause I know that sundry women fearing God fail in the matter of their
attire and ornament, because they want direction* which might lead their
consciences in stead of the common error of riotous times: And because it is
requisite that all that profess the Name of God, should be more careful of
adorning their profession, than their persons: I have here set down a few
brief directions in general for their help that are willing to be ruled by
God and his Word; and are more desirous to approve themselves unto him, than to
please themselves, or others, with his high displeasure.

I.
First then, such must know, that the practice of godliness depriueth no
person of the good creatures of God, neither for the necessary, nor delightful
fruition of them, (for, it only gives right, and liberty in them) but it
orders the use of them, and the users of them; and sets them in the due
place of their goodness, wherein only they are beautiful and lawful.
Rebecca, Genesis 24. 30 and 41. 42*
a woman fearing God, wore ornaments. So Joseph and Mordecay, Ester 8. 2. and
Daniel 5. 29.

II.
Know, that we are not at our own hand in the use of outward ornaments, but
under rule and appointment. God prescribes women how to dress their heads, 1
Pet. 3. 3. and takes order for the habit of the body, and finds fault with
the dressings of the daughters of Sion, Isay 3. And threatening the Princes and
Kings children clothed with strange apparel, Zeph. 1. 8. speaks to our
Gallants that build towers upon their heads, or erect them as with large
horns, or any way take up an unlimited liberty in their dresses, with some
special vanity, and offense, For such dressing of the hair, the Lord
threatens the dainty women with baldness and shame, Isa. 3.

III.
Such must know, that as the kingdom of God stands not in any of these
outward things, 1 Cor. 88.
so they must not be suffered to hinder the kingdom of God in our selves or
others: And though they being things so indifferent in themselves, as they
commend us not to God; yet in the use of them all, we must exercise certain
virtues in which we must be acceptable to God; and avoid such vices in the
abusing of them, as will else discommend us before him. For suppose they be
things in their nature neither good nor evil, neither commanded nor forbidden;
as, Whether I should wear cloth or leather, whether a plain band or a ruff,
whether single or double, whether white or yellow; yet in the use of any of
these outward and indifferent things, my action is either good or evil,
according to my exercise of virtue or vice in it. How indifferent things become
evil to us.
Neither can any thing be so indifferent in it self, but it may become evil
and sin in me many ways: as,

1. By my election and choice of it without assurance of my liberty in Christ,
or with doubting whether I do well in using it, or no.

2. By my intention, which may be corrupt and vicious in my self, and
prejudicial to others.

3. By many accidentary events: as, if others be by my use of lawful and
outward liberties occasioned to sin, or thrust forward in carnal
licentiousness. All which I rather propound to be wisely considered for the
removing of that common objection and conceit, That the things are not great,
and God cares not so much for the dressing of the body, so I keep my heart to
him and give him content in my soul. As if these persons conceived, that the
body is not the Lords as well as the soul, or that that soul can be Gods,
when the devil has the dressing of the body.

IV.
We must know, that although the Word of God af^ord not particular directions
for every particular habit and artire, yet we may not think it a defective
rule, or short and wanting to guide us even in the least or lowest action of
our lives: because it supplyeth us with many general rul^s, to all which we
must reduce every particular action of common life, for the allowance or
refusal of it. And therefore for the help of such as are teachable, I thought
it might be profitable to apply unto those generals, and bring to their trial,
this particular of habits, and attires; unto which, while they are squared,
none have so much right to use them as women fearing God: but if they depart
from those rules, they are not so unseemly in any, as in them.

The general Rules are these, reduced to four heads.

1. Some concern God: 2. Some our selves: 3. Some our brethren: 4. Some the
ornament it self. For unto all these we must have respect even in our Attires
and Ornaments.

I. In respect of God, we must attend three rules:

1. The first concerns our warrant, and is this: No ornament must be used,
but by warrant and leave from God. Our warrant is from the Word; our loaue is
by prayer: the rule for both is express, 1 Timothy 4. 5. Every creature of God is
good, sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Whence it follows, that
whatsoever ornament, attire, or fashion, is not warranted to the heart by some
part of the Word, the ground of faith, or for which it cannot send up a prayer
of faith for Gods blessing upon it: that cannot be warrantable to a godly
heart. Which of our Gallants, in their strange fashions, ponder that of the
Apostle, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, Col. 3. 17.
do all in the name of Christ: that is,

1. By the warrant of his Word.

2. With invocation of God in the name of Christ.

2. The second rule concerning God must look to the right end, namely,

No ornament or attire of any fashion or color may be used till the heart be
assured that this be the proper end, That in adorning the body, it honor God.
1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. The word whatsoever, being a word of universality, fetches in
the smallest action of life, in which we are bound chi^fly and principally to
intend, and set up the glory of God, for which end he created not our selves
only, but all his works, first to himself, and then for us. Whence it
follows, that whatsoever fashion, attire, or ornament does spot or stain the
glory of God, the Gospel of God, or our holy profession, that is unwarrantable
and unlawful.

3. The third rule concerning God, is, That

No ornament may be used to correct Gods workmanship, which even a skillful
Artificer would take il at any man's hands. It is true, a woman may nourish her
hair, for it is her glory; and may seemly adorn her self with her own, for
so was the Church in Christ's eyes; yea, and in want of their own, if for
seemelinesse they borrow of oothers, Cant. 4. 3.
it may be excused (so modesty be not exceeded:) but of very wantonness or
pride to dislike their own, or to affect such ornament of strange hair as
their natural and proper hair will not reach unto, argues vanity and
coffeehouse with the work of God, saying unto God, Why have thou made me
thus, or why have thou made my hair of this color, and not of that?

And much more to grow out of liking with Gods workmanship on their faces, and
by painting to refine them to their own fancies, is an immodest sin condemned
in whorish Iezabel. 2 Kin. 9. 30*
We deny not but it is lawful to cover a blemish, or hide an hurt or deformity
in seemly manner: but by defacing Gods workmanship, and by stamping pride on
their faces by painting and colors, can by no color be warranted. Say not, It
is custom; for all custom must be ruled by the word of Christ, who said, I
am Truth; and not, I am Custom. Nor say, I must be handsome and comely, and
therefore I may; for this is but to cover pride under this pretense. Neither
say, I am young, and may take liberty; Tit. 2. 4. 6.
for young men and women must be sober as well as other. Nor say, I must please
my husband. True; but it must be in the Lord, and in things honest and
lawful. Or can it please any husband, to come before him in a visard, a
borrowed and adulterate face and fashion?

II. The second sort of rules respecting our selves, are five.

1. No ornament or attire may be worn, till the heart be resolved that it will
be fitting and pleasing to the holy Ghost, whose Temple the body of every
believer is. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of the
holy Ghost? Now because this holy Spirit cannot take pleasure in any ornament
but such as becomes holiness, neither indeed can any other beseem this
Temple; therefore all good Christians will make conscience of what they offer
to adorn this Temple withal, and be sure it be no light, strange, odd, or
swaggering fashion or attire, taken from light and wanton persons, that they
present the blessed Spirit of God with, for the beautifying of his temple.

And besides, seeing every believer has put on Christ as a garment, Romans 13,
14. it will be the wisdom of every Christian to see that his ornament be
suitable to his apparel, that neither his ornament shame his suit, nor his suit
disgrace his ornament. Every thing in a Christian, from a Christian, on a
Christian, or about him, should savor of Christ, and express him. Be sure
that thy ornament suit with the same mind that was in Jesus Christ. Phil. 2. 5.


2. No Ornament may be used with affection, or affectation. 1 Pet. 3. 3. the
Apostle forbids broydred hair: and 1 Timothy 2. 9. he forbids not that
only, but gold, and pearls, and costly apparel. Which we must not understand
as if he simply and absolutely did forbid and condemn the wearing of gold, or
chains, rings, bracelets, billimen^s, spangles, and the like: but the thing
forbidden, is the affecting and study of these things.

When women (for to those he writes in both places, as being more impotently
carried away with this vanity than the other sex) not only take pleasure in
outward ornament, but study bravery, and strive to be as brave, or beyond
others, at least not behind them in vain and new-come fashions, which is a
sign of a sluggish and delicate mind, given up to the delights of the flesh,
and far from mortification.

Our Lord, in Matthew. 6. 28. allows not Christians to bestow their thoughts on
apparel which is more needful than ornament. And his Apostle commands us to
use the most necessary things as not using them, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Then must we
restrain our selves even in lawful liberties, when we find our selves prone
to be brought under the power of any of them, as 1 Cor. 6. 12.

3. No ornament or habit may be worn against shamefastnestnesse and modesty. 1 Timothy 2. 9. The women must array themselves in comely apparel, with
shamefastness and modesty. We know, that since the fall, nakedness is a
shameful thing, and sin has cast shame on every part, and calls for a
cover over al but for necessity; and garments were ordained to hide nakedness,
not to display or discover it. And me thinks it cannot stand either with
religion, or modesty, or with the shamefastness of that sex, so to attire
themselves, as to display their naked breasts, and some somewhat lower; or bare
their arms beyond that which is fit for every one to behold. I cannot enter
into the heart to judge any: but I much fear whether they are, or have ever
been dejected with a deep sense of their souls nakedness, and therewith
ashamed and confounded before God, that are not ashamed to uncover their bodily
nakedness (beyond that which is comely) before men.

4. No ornament or attire may be used to the impeachment of our good name,
which is better than the most precious ointment, Eccel. 7. 3.
or ornament* as if it carry a brand of pride, wantonness, lightness, or
inconstancy, or a note to be an inuenter or follower of new and strange
fashions: whereas the Apostle would have the outward habit and attire express
the fear of God which they profess, 1 Timothy 2. 10. and would have women to
bewray the hidden man of the heart in all their outward attires, 1 Pet. 3. that
is, the new creature, and divine nature, which is hid and seated within, but
showed forth in virtuous behavior, and sober carriage. But alas, how do they
provide for their reputation, that (as Chrysostom complains of some women in
his time) so lightly and wantonly tire themselves, that when they come into the
Church or Oratory, they seem rather to come into dance than to pray. And the
evil is greater, that the hurt falls not only on their own names, but on
the name of God also.

5. No ornament or attire may be used to the wasting of our outward estate, or
the abuse of Gods blessing in riot or prodigality, or the disabling us from
being helpful to others. The reason is, because we sit not in our own, but
are stewards of these things, and must be countable how we expend them. The
godly heart must be sure therefore to lay out nothing for attires, or
fashions, but that which it may comfortably bring in accounts unto God.

Besides, the word of God lays necessary injunctions upon us to do good, and
distribute to the necessities of the Saints; to be rich in good works, thereby
both to testify the truth of our faith, as also to be furthering our own
reckoning. Now what an unanswerable oversight were it, by excess and
superfluity in things (comparatively) unnecessary, to disable our selves for so
necessary duties, and prevent our selves of so large and comfortable
retribution,

III. Now follow the rules concerning our brethren.

1, No ornament or fashion may be used to offend our Christian brother. Romans
14. 21. It is not good to do any thing (suppose it more necessary than
attires) with offending the weak brother. If the heart suspect or discern,
that this or that attire may or do offend any Christian; if the just cause of
the offense rise not out of the thing which may be allowable enough, but out of
his weakness that takes the offense, the precept of the Apostle binds it, to
tender the weakness of his brother, and now to forbear his or her lawful
liberty; and upon very good and grounded reason. 1. Because charity is better
than outward ornament. 2. The nourishing of our brothers faith, is far more
precious than the nourishing of out own flesh. 3. The edification of our
brother is to be preferred before our own pleasure. So, as a conscience well
informed will be very tender to offend a weak brother by undue and untimely
use of his liberty, although himself be persuaded well of it.

2. No ornament, atire, habit, or fashion, may be used to the strengthening of
any vain minds in their newfangled and strange guizes. Romans 12. 2. And
fashion not your selves to this world. A godly mind may not like, or be like
vaine-minded persons i^ their fashions, form, and courses; no not so much as
enter into their way, Prou. 4. 17. nor be companions with them in any of their
works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 7. Now as it will be a sorry plea for thyselfe in
thine account to say, I thought I might do this or that, because I saw some
before me whom I thought well of; so will it justly increase thy judgment,
that thou have by thy practice strengthened the hand of sinners, and harde^ed
them in their sin, whom by thy sober and seemly carriage thou should have
actually and really reproved* Yea, and in that rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.
26. Lot all things be done to edification, thou art cast as guilty, who have
destroyed him by thy example, whom thou should have edified.

3. No ornament or attire may be used, which may become either a share to our
selves or others. There are some habits framed to draw* yes, to get lovers, and
to occasion unlawful desires. The daughters of Sarah detest such whorish
habits, and are careful that by nothing about them any eye or heart may be
entangled. Their endeavor is not to avoid only apparent evils, but appearances
of evil. To discover by our habits some naked parts, 1 These. 5.
as many do, is a danger of temptation to many beholders. And as in the Law,
he that dug a pit and left it uncovered, must answer for the ox, or ass,
or beast that fell into it: so here; although they are beasts that fall into
the pit of lust upon such spectacles, yet are they not free, that covered not
the pit. Neither will it excuse, Veneni poculum porrexit aspicientibus, et si
nullas fit ^nuentus qui ^iberet, Chrysostom, in Matthew.
to say, But I intend no such thing by my habit; for if thou know it may be
an occasion of moving evil lusts, and do not prevent the occasion, thou art
blameworthy as the first in that sin. Thou have filled a cup of poison to
the beholder, although there be none to drink it, says Chrysostom.

IV. Now follows the last rank of rules, concerning the ornaments or attires
themselves.

1. No outward ornameut or habit may be used upon the body, which is severed
from the inward ornament of grace upon the soul. The Apostles no where mention
this argument, but they commend this to the chief care of Christian women, to
be more sollicitous and curious in adorning the soul with grace, than the
body with gay clothing: and plainly teach that the true ornament of a Christian
woman, 1 Pet. 3. 3.
is her sanctification, Prou. 1. 9.
which beautifieth the hidden man before God. This is the ornament for her
head, and chains for her neck. This is the borders of gold, and studs of
silver, which make her comely in the eye of Christ, Cant. 1. 10, 11. Yea, this
is her grace among men, Pro. 31. 25. And when savor shall prove deceitful,
Verse. 30.
aad beauty to be vanity, then shall a woman fearing the Lord, be praised. All
ornaments of nature, all artificial colors and couers are but filthiness,
where this is wanting. See Prou. 11. 12. A jewel of gold in a swines snout, is
a beautiful woman without inward comeliness. Sever this from outward
ornament; and though she may please her self a time in her conceit of
bravery; I shall assure her, she shall have no rejoicing in heart, no hope in
death, no joy in God, no boldness in judgment. Take the counsel of Christ in
time, Reu. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me white garments, etc.

2. No ornament or attire must be worn against the judgment and example of the
modest, frugall, and grave persons of our own rank. Phil. 49, We must think
and do whatsoever things pertain to good report, and whatsoever things have
any virtue or praise in them. Now to imitate the most modest, sober, and
virtuous of our rank, is virtuous, and prayse-worthy, and of good report:
whereas to inuentors of evil fashions, or imitators of light, wanton, garish,
or proud persons, in their proud or fantastical fashions, brings a just blot
upon the person, and a gash into the name and repu^ation, which will no^ easily
be healed. And how just is it, that such as will pride themselves, and glory
in themselves, against the glory of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel of Christ
which they profess, should meet with shame and contempt amongst men of sound
judgment, and be sent away with a little contemptuous flattery only of such
wantons as themselves?

3. No ornament must be used which is not as well expedient as lawful. 1 Cor.
10. 23. All things (meaning things indifferent) are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient. Even such things as are lawful, may be inexpedient
for a mean estate and condition, whether it be in degree, or in ability.

What an inconvenient excess is it, to wear gold for ornament, when they want
silver for necessaries: now to wear jewels for pride, and then pawn them for
need; to rufflle it in silks, when they can scarce pay for cloth; to make an
idle show and ostentation of abundance, when indeed they are in great wants? Is
it fit for such to follow fashions? No, but as we must eat according to that
with which the Lord has blessed us; so must we also in our attire and habits.
The Lord has called such persons to fr^gality and thriftinesse, and to suit
their clothes and ornrments to their present estate. Even a civil wise man
will fit his mind to his estate, if his estate be not fitted to his mind.

Besides, costly ornaments fit not every degree that are able. As it was a
disorder for Nabal to keep ^ feast like a Kings, 1 Samuel ^5.
(although he was able) so in attires and ornaments, for mean persons to suit
themselves with great personages, breeds a great deformity, and lets in a
confusion in degrees, and a neglect of distinction of persons, offices, and
dignities, which the God of order has set amongst men.

Add hereunto, that such things as are lawful, may be iuconuenient at some
times. It was noted riotous in the glutton, that he went in purple, and fared
deliciously ^uery day. Luke 16.
There be wedding garments for times of joy and feasting; but some times are
mournful, and call for mouruing garments, John 3. and Dan. 9. 3. It is more
than inconvenient to be in pomp, excess, and delicacie, when there should be
weeping, humility, fasting, and renting of hearts and garments. I trust godly
women will be content by looking upon the afflicted estate of the Church of God
every where at this day, to restrain themselves in their excesses in their
lawful liberties, and follow the Lord calling them to consider the afflictions
of Joseph.

FINIS.
A SHORT INTRODVCTION to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

By THOMAS TAILOR, Doctor in Divinity, and late Preacher in Aldermanbury
Church, London.

LONDON: Printed by I. B. for John Bartlet, at the sign of the gilt Cup in
Cheap Side. 1633.

A short Introduction to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Question.

WHy are you called a Christian?

Ans. I am so called of Christ, Act. 11. 26.
to whom I am knit as a member of his body.

Q. What is the means of this union between Christ and the Christian?

A. The means is twofold.

1. On Gods part, Ioh. 1. 13.
the blessed Spirit of God. Romans 8. 9.


2. On man's part, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
the excellent gift of saving Faith, Ioh. 6. 35.

Q. How is this Faith wr^ught in us?

A. By the ordinary way of preaching the Word. Romans 10. 14.


Q Gal. 3. 2.
How is it strengthened?

A. Both by the same word preached, and by the worthy receiving of the
Sacraments.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. An ordinance of God, Genesis 12. 9.
by which Christ and his saving graces are by certain eternal rites signed,
Romans 4. ^1.
sealed, and exhibited to believers.

Q. How many Sacraments be there?

A. Two, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. Must none receive the Sacrament of the Supper but Baptized persons?

A. No; because,

1. The same covenant is solemnly renewed and ratifi^d in the Supper which was
made in Baptism.

2. None can grow up into the Church that are not borne into it.

3. No uncircumcised person might be admitted to the Passover. Exo. 12. 48


Q. In the Supper of the Lord, what must you specially consider?

A. Two things:

1. The signs or outward Elements.

2. The signs by them signified, which are, Inward, Spiritual.

Q. What are the signs or elements?

A. Bread and Wine.

Q. Why did Christ make choice of both these?

A. To show, Ps. 194. 15.
that in himself is all sufficiency of grace and spiritual nourishment: for
bread strengthens the heart, and wine makes the countenance glad.

Q. What are the things signified by them?

A. The body and blood of Christ, Ioh. 6. 55.
the true and only food of the soul.

Q. Is the Bread and Wine turned into the very body and blood of Christ?

A. No, for then the Signs were abolished, and so no Sacrament remained.

Q. But are they the ^ame they were?

A. They are changed, but ^o^ in substance, but only in end and use.

Q. But do these Elements make a Sacrament?

A. No, unless they be administered and received according to Christ's
institution.

Q. When are they used according to Christ's institution?

A. This use stands,

1. In the observation of the requisite actions about them.

2. In application of them according to their proper significations.

Q. What be the requisite actions about the Elements?

A. They be either the actions of the Minister or Receiver.

Q. Which be the actions of the Minister?

A. The same which our Lord observed in the first institution; and they be
^oure, and all of signification.

Q. What is the first?

A. Separation or taking the Bread and Wine.

Q. What does this action signify?

A* An action of God the Father, whereby he has from all eternity separated
and taken from the common mass of mankind, Psalm 2. 7.
Jesus Christ, Ioh. ^. 27.
to the high office of mediation.

Q. What is the second action of the Minister?

A. Sanctification or blessing of the Elements: as Christ, when he had taken
them, gave thanks, or blessed them.

Q. What is it to bless the Elements?

A. To consecrate the Bread and Wine for this spiritual banquet.

Q. How are they sanctified?

A. Every creature of God is sanctified by Word and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4, 5*


Q, What word is this?

A. The word of institution, declaring the will of God touching those signs,
as also of commandment so to use them.

Q. What is this prayer?

A. It is both petition for blessing of these signs in this holy use, as also
thanksgiving for Gods unspeakable love in ordaining his dear Son to be a
sacrifice for our sin.

Q. What does this action signify?

A. Another solemn action of God the Father, whereby he actually sent in
fullness of time his beloved Son, with fullness of gifts above all measure to
work the great work of our redemption.

Q. What is the third action of the Minister?

A. To break the Bread, and pour out the Wine.

Q. What does it signify?

A. The breaking of his blessed Body, and the shedding of his precious Blood,
which is the most bitter passion and death of Christ.

Q. What is the fourth action of the Minister?

A. The distribution and delivery of both Bread and Wine.

Q. What does that signify?

A. A solemn action of God, whereby he offers Jesus Christ unto all, and
gives him and all his benefits unto believers.

Q. Now tell me what are the requisite actions of receivers?

A. The same which the Disciples observed in the first institution.

Q. Which were they?

A. They were two:

1. The taking of Bread and Wine.

2. The eating and drinking of them.

Q. What does the taking of them signify?

A. An inward action of the soul, whereby the faith of our hearts, as the hand
of our souls, apprehends and receives Christ for our spiritual food and
nourishment.

Q. What does the other action of eating and drinking signify?

A. Our near union with Christ, when by the faith of our souls we apply him
so straightly to our selves, that we become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone, even as the bread and wine become one with our substance.

Q. You said that all these actions must not only be duly observed, but
applied also according to their significations.

A. Yea, and this must hold the mind intent through the whole action of
receiving the Sacrament, in uniting of the signs and actions, with the things
signified by them.

Q. How may we do this?

A. In all the actions of the Minister* I must conceive the actions of God
mentioned before; and in my own actions receiving, I must conceive the inward
actions of my own faith.

Q. This indeed seems most necessary in the act of receiving, and therefore
explain it first in the actions of the Minister.

A. 1. When I see the Minister take the Bread and Wine, I must conceive an
action of God, taking and setting apart his Son from the mass of mankind, to
be the Redeemer and Savior of the world, and my self in particular.

2. When I hear him bless the Bread and Wine, I must conceive God the Father
sanctifying his Son with all gifts and graces, above all men and Angels,
needful for the greet work of redemption of sinners, and of my self in
special the chiefest of them.

3. When I see him break the bread and power out the wine, I must conceive
that action of God, breaking his Son to pieces, with the infinite weight of
wrath and curse due to my sins as well as any others.

4. When I see him distribute these signs; I must conceive that action of God,
offering Christ and salvation to every one, upon condition of faith and
repentance; and exhibiting and giving him to the says of my own heart.

Q. And what must you conceive in the actions of believing?

A. 1. In taking of the bread and wine, I must conceive the hand of my faith
now reaching out it self to apprehend Christ and all his benefits to my self
in particular.

2. In my eating and drinking, I must strive to feel the power of my union
with Christ, strengthening and renewing my soul with new life of grace, and
power of godliness, as the food does, applied to an healthful body.

Q. What must every Receiver do before the Sacrament?

A. Eueryone must prepare himself.

Q. Why must every one prepare himself?

A. 1. In obedience to Gods commandments, 2 Cor. 11. 8.

2. To avoid the danger of being guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as the
unworthy receiver is, ve. 19.

3. We must not be hasty with our feet here, no more than in the hearing of the
Word, seeing Christ is here more fully offered, and to more senses, Eccles. 4. 7.

4. By the example of the Saints. Psalm. 26. I will wash my hands in innocence,
and so compass thy Altar. Also according to their ordinary preparation before
the Pasteouer, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6.

Q. How must every one prepare himself?

A, By examining himself in his 1. Knowledge. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance. 4.
Charity.


Q. Why must every one examine his knowledge?

A. 1. Because without knowledge the mind is not good, Pro. 19. 2.

2. The setting of a seal argues the agreement and entrance into a covenant
formerly made and understood.

3. Monuments to help the memory imply knowledge, for memory is only of
things known.

Q. How must he examine his knowledge?

A. Whether he have a co^petent measure of knowledge, both

1. In general, concerning God, in his nature and persons; and concerning
himself, both as he was in the state of disobedience, and as now he is in the
covenant of grace

2. In special, concerning the matter, use, and fruit of this Sacaament.

Q. Why must every one try his faith*

A. 1. Because without faith there is no pleasing of God in any thing, Heb. 11.
2.

2. As the word audible, so this visible word is unprofitable, unless it be
mingled with faith: Heb. 4. 2.

3. Christ is received only by the hand of faith, Ioh. 1. 12. and a man
receives no more tha^ he believes

Q. How may he try his faith?

A. 1. Whether he believe salvation in Christ alone and no other, and whether
he rest himself wholly upon the free mercy of God, and full merits of Christ,
disclaiming all that is in himself or any other.

2. If he have peace of conscience by the testimony of the Spirit, that his
sins are pardoned, Romans 5. 1.

3. If he have hungri^ and striving, without security or ^esumption, for a
further sense (...) measure of faith: for the least degree of sound faith
longs for more.

Q. Why must every man examine his repentance?

A. 1. Because as the Passe-ouer was eaten with sour herbs, so must our new
Passe-ouer with godly sorrow, Exodus 12. 8.

2. In the Sacrament of the Supper we come to look upon him whom we have
pierced, and must therefore mourn, Zach. 12. 10.

3. The renewing of our Covenant in this Sacrament is nothing but a returning
unto God again, from whom we have departed by our sins.

Q. How may a man examine his repentance?

A. 1. Whether he be rightly affected to his sin, and be wrought to a

1. Knowledge and acknowledgment of his sin and misery.

2. Sensible sorrow and deep grief for (...) according to God.

3. Dete^^ion of all former sins, espec^^lly those that have been most
famili^r and delightful unto him.

2. Whether he find a through purpose of change of life, and the beginning of
new obedience.

Q. What are the signs of this new obedience?

A. They be four: 1. Sound obedience is free, not forced.

2. It Is sincere, not fained.

3. It is universal to the whole law of God, not partial to some few
commandments.

4* It is constant and perpetual, not temporary or by starts.

Q. Why must every man examine his charity?

A. 1. Because faith, which is here specially required, works by love, Gal.
5. 7.

2. Christ commands to leave the gift at the Altar, and be first reconciled
to our brother, Mat. 5. 23

3. This Sacrament signifies not only our union with Christ our head by
faith: but our communion also with the members by love. As many grains make
but one bread, and many grapes one vine; so many believers eat but one bread,
and drink but one cup, to signify the strait union among themselus, 1 Cor.
10. 17.

Q. How may a man examine his charity?

A. 1. Whether he love all, and malice none.

2. Whether he seek peace with all, and study to keep the bond of love.

3. Whether he forgive his enemies, as God in Christ has forgiven him.

4. Whether in his heart he love the Church of God, and testify it to his
power.

Q. Now what must a man do after the Sacrament?

A: He must, 1. Thankfully show forth the Lords death, and walk worthy of
Christ. 2. Observe himself whether he have received increase of grace, and
strength against sin, and whether he have added any thing to his repentance and
obedience.

Q. What if he find he have not so done?

A. 1. He must examine his examination, and suspect his vnpreparednes, weakness
of faith, security.

2. Seek out and hunt out some secret lusts which resist Gods ordinance,
bewail and confess his sin, and heartily desire forgiveness.

3 Pray earnestly to find the sweet fruit of the Sacrament, even the strength
and comfort which attends the worthy receiving the Sacrament

Q. What if a man find he has received this comfort from the Sacrament?

A. He must, 1. Be the more thankful to God. 2. Love God so much the more. 3.
Frequent the Sacrament more often, and more cheerfully.

FINIS.

