DAVID'S LEARNING, OR THE WAY TO True Happiness: In a Commentary upon the 32.
PSALM.

Preached and now published by T. T. late Fellow of CHRIST'S College in
CAMBRIDGE.

To which is prefixed the Table of method of the whole Psalm, and annexed an
Alphabeticall Table of the chief matters in the COMMENTARY.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Henry Fether stone, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Rose. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE VICOVNT WALLINGFORD, Lord KNOLLYS, Baron of GREYS,
Master of the WARDS and LIVERIES, Knight of the noble Order of the GARTER, and
one of HIS MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council, Grace, Mercy, and Peace,
here, and everlasting.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
GReat is the affinity of soul and body, nearly coupled and wedded by God,
like Husband and Wife, for better and worse till death depart them. Like
Hippocrates his twins, they weep and laugh, stand and fall, live and dye,
and every way sympathize together. Both have their several life and nutriment,
both have their several sickness and diseases, which tend to the issues of
death. Among all other unclean issues, both of them have their leprosy, one
the better known by the other. In neither any substance, Elephas, or
elephantiosis.
but in both an accident corrupting the whole substance.

Bodily leprosy is from the corrupt and poisoned humors in the body:
Spiritual is from the corruption and poison of the soul. The former quickly
spreads over the whole body: The latter over the whole man. The former
infecteth only some men: The latter has poisoned all. The former corrupts
the breath, by which others are infected: The latter poysoneth and infecteth
many others, not only by breathing out corrupt speeches, but also by corrupt
example. The former was to be discerned by the law of leprosy, Leuit. 13. The
latter, namely, the knowledge of sin is by the law moral, Romans 3. The former
is hard to cure, and the most earry it to their death natural, as Gehezi, 2.
King. 15.
Azariah: The latter is an harder cure, and therefore the most carry the
running sores of sin incurably unto death eternal.

This disease being so loathsome, so dangerous, the Lord charge all Israel,
with special care, both to discern it, to prevent it, and (if it were
possible) to cure it. They must discern it by sundry marks, both for the
certainty and curablenesse. First, for the certainty; We need not half so
much caution or curiosity to be persuaded of our spiritual leprosy, which is
too too apparent: Only those many ceremonies put us in mind how much more
requisite our diligence ought to be in finding out and hunting out our
special sins.

The special marks which we read of, to show whether the bodily leprosy be
curable or no, are these: First; If, rubbing the place of Rules of inquisition:
the leprosy, it grow not red, it is held incurable. 1.
So if sinners, being rubbed and admonished, blush not, nor be ashamed of their
sin, there is little hope of their amendment. Secondly; If 2.
pricking the place with an Instrument, there come out still a corrupt
moisture, there is little hope of cure: So if after the preaching of the law,
and pricking the conscience of the sinner, the corrupt issues of sin still
prevail, there is less hope of the sound cure of such a sinner. Thirdly; If
after pricking with a needle there 3.
come forth blood, it is a sign it is curable: So if sinners, pricked with
the needle of the law, cry out of the pain of their sins, and see the need
of the blood of Christ, and lay hold of it for salvation, their spiritual
leprosy is in the way of full cure.

Secondly, when it is discerned, the Lord Rules of prevention.
takes order to prevent it from others: first, They must uncover their heads,
that men might not mistake them, and in token also that God had thus humbled
them: for that ceremony was a sign of humility. Secondly; They must cover
their lips, that by their breath they might not infect others. Thirdly; They
must have a rod put into their hands, that men might avoid them, as children
do the rod. Fourthly; They must proclaim themselves unclean, and give
warning to others. Fifthly; They must be shut up many days, and excluded the
host utterly if they be incurable, as King Ozias, 2. King. 15. A notable type
of the suspension and excommunication of impenitent and desperate sinners,
shutting them out of the Congregation of God, lest they infect and poison
others with the contagion of their sin.

Thirdly, after discerning they must speedily Rules of cure.
attempt the cure, wherein the Lord enioyneth them, first, To go to the
Priest, signifying, that Jesus Christ the High Priest of our profession, is the
only Phisician of this leprosy of sin. Secondly; They must rent their
garments; a sign of great sorrow for sin, and of casting off their own
rags, that they may be covered with a wedding garment, even the garment of
salvation. Thirdly; There must be a vessel of water, which must be sprinkled
on the party, and of oil with which he must be suppled. This vessel is the
heart, the water signifies the blood of Christ, the lauer of the Church, the
sprinkling of this water notes the washing of the conscience from dead works:
and the oil signifies the glad tidings of the Gospel: all which the Lord
uses in this great cure. Fourthly; There is required the shauing of all the
hair of the Leprous, that no infection any way cleave to him: which notes the
purging away, and daily paring of lusts and superfluities, by the grace of
sanctification, which are to the soul, as excrements are to the body. And this
is the law of the Leprosy. This one Psalm presents in one view the whole
truth of this excellent type, wherein holy DAVID clearly discovers the foul
leprosy of his soul, which is so odious in his eyes, as he pronounces him
the only happy man that has got a cover and Verse 1. 2.
cure. Loath he was for shame, according to the 3.
law, to proclaim himself unclean, he would hide his uncleanness, and hold
his tongue as 4.
long as he could; but all this while there was no hope of cure: for being let
alone, it ate up his marrow, consumed his bones, and dried and drunk up his
moisture as in the drought of 5.
Summer. Now when there was no other remedy, he goes to the high Priest,
confesses his uncleanness against himself, who immediately answered him as
that leper, Mar. 1. 42. I will, be thou clean. And as that leper could not
hide his joy, but no sooner was he gone then he began to publish the matter: so
this leper no sooner was cured, but he calls every one, to 6.
teach them in the like estate how they may procure the like remedy. And then
according to 7.
the precept of Christ to the leper, he offers the gift which MOSES
commanded, even the sacrifice 8. 9.
of prayer and praise: and exciteth others 10. 11.
by sundry arguments to do the same.

These Meditations I have presumed to dedicate to your Lordship: first, For the
service I owe unto Your Lordship, as one who^ you pleased to favor as a souls
Physician, whose business is to prevent or stop up the loath some issue of this
disease, which has ouer-spred every man's nature, so as no man can say, My
heart is clean: neither are great Men freer from diseases of the soul then of
the body. Secondly; 2.
To testify my true and humble affection in putting into your Lordships hand
DAVID'S learning, fit for Princes and Counselors, directing the high way to
true happiness. For it shows, first, the entrance into this way, which is
godly sorrow, confession, and mortification of sin: secondly, the marks of
it, that it is the strait, the straight, the lightsome, the cleanest, and
shortest way of all: thirdly, the end of it, which is gladness, pleasure, and
joy, which none shall take away. Thirdly; To put Your 3.
Honor in mind, that as the world has made you almost as happy as it can,
raising you, first, out of an ancient, Noble, and religious Stock: secondly,
unto a goodly Inheritance: thirdly, into the grace and favor of your Prince:
fourthly, unto the most Honorable place and service, with such late access of
Honors, as few of Your Noble Rank are before You: So Your Lordships care be to
annexe that Honor which is from above, from which there can be no fall: whereas
daily experience shows how miserable the world sometimes leaves her greatest
favorites. Fourthly; To provoke and pray your Honor, that imitating the
gracious footsteps of your Noble Father, and following your own religious
beginnings, you proceed with full purpose of heart to cleave to the truth of
God, and with hearty and earnest affection continue to embrace the true Church
of Christ, which the Antichrist of Rome oppugneth and oppresses, yea, and with
unweariable endeavors to persevere in the practice of that holy faith and
religion, which you have professed and loved, which is the one and only faith
learned of God and his holy Scriptures; the only Catholic and saving faith;
the only ancient, because the only Prophetical and Apostolical faith; the
only true Christian faith, which the Truth himself has taught, and ratified
by his precious blood, even the blood of the Covenant; the faith not only
preached and written by the ancient Fathers, but professed and practiced by all
the faithful in all ages. As for that Popish faith, falsely called Catholic,
we are sufficiently able (through God) to prove it a new Samaritanisme,
patched up of Iudaisme and Gentilisme, thrust upon the blind side and part of
the world, under the title of Christianisme. And yet in these our so perilous
and last times, what great numbers and persons are daily carried away from the
faith of Christ, into that Apostacy and Idolatry of that great Antichrist? I
wish other parts of the Land could not bring in evidence to this bill of
complaint as well as ours.

Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, I beseech God to strengthen your
Lordships heart and hands to withstand by all your Greatness, this Gangrene,
and long to continue you under His Majesty by your faithful Counsel a
muniment to the decayed estate of our Church, an ornament of the Commonwealth,
a prop of Religion, a pillar of Justice, a father of Wards and Orphans, and a
comforter of comfortless Widows, the Noble Leiftenant of our Country, and
high Steward of our Corporation. And the same God preserve you unblameable in
your spirit, soul, and body, until the day of his appearing.

Your Honors humbly at commandment, T. T.

To the Christian Readers, Grace be multiplied with all Gods blessings.
MY Christian Readers, with whom I have for some years now traveled that
Christ might be formed in you, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you, is,
that ye may be saved. To this end have I bended my thoughts and labors, as one
that have desired to be faithful in seeking not yours, but you as your selves
(I trust) will witness with me. How Satan has many ways bestirred himself
to hinder us from attayning that maine end, he is of small judgment, but of
less observation, that has not discerned. The malicious man never cease
sowing of Tares, but especially when Gods Husbandmen sleep, and keep not
their Watches in their Lords field. Many of his enterprises against us I will
conceal, and, as one jealous over you with an holy jealousy, I thought fit to
note unto you an ancient stratageme of his, plotted against you, to draw you
(if it were possible) from the simplicity and sincerity of the Gospel
received: which you must so much the more vigilantly watch against, as he
confidently hops to cause you to fall by it. Satan sees the curiosity,
sicklenesse, and inconstancy of man's nature, that it is not content with
ancient necessary truths, and that good things please us not long, but new
conceits and doctrines like us well: and therefore he labors in all Churches
to mingle and blend with Gods received Truth, humane conceits and nouel
opinions; by which practice he soon brought the Church of Galatia to revolt
to another Gospel. Or if Satan cannot Gal. 1. 6.
do the great mischief which he would, quite to cast the faith of Believers
from off the foundation, he will do the less which he can, he will surely
disturb them, and trouble their minds with impertinent and unnecessary, to
call them from more necessary and pertinent truths; and hinder their
edification whilst he holds them in a kind of suspense and doubt of maine
points, which should have bin long since as fast fixed in their hearts, as Boaz
and Iacim, the two Pillars set up in the porch of Salomons Temple.

I will, passing by all other conceits wherewith you have been encombred,
fasten at this time upon that straggling device of Universal Election and
Redemption, and reach unto you such help as my self have been led out of
this Labyrinth withal; that you may also be able to put foolish men to
silence. I may not suffer my Epistle to grow into a Volume or Treatise, and
therefore, referring you to other learned Treatises for the Doctrine, I will
stand here as your Defendant, to answer such maine, or rather vain,
objections as you have or may be troubled withal.

Those who would have us believe, that every singular man is elected and
redeemed, lay this sandy for a sound ground. Object. First, Every man is bound
to believe he is elected, and therefore he is elected. Every man is bound to
believe he is redeemed, and therefore he is redeemed. Every man is bound to
believe that Christ dyed for him, and therefore CHRIST dyed for every singular
man. Answ. Master Perkins in his book of Predestination answering to this
sophisme, finds just fault with the manner of reasoning, which is wholly
vicious, neither can it be concluded in any true form of Syllogism. And it
may be easy in this kind of sophisme to conclude any thing, be it never so
absurd. As for example: That which God commands a man to do (as well as
believe) is true: But God commands every man to keep the whole Law: and
therefore that every man keeps the whole Law, is true. Every man is bound to
believe his own salvation: Therefore it is true every man shall be saved. Let
them loose these knots by one and the same answer. For they are parallel. But,
leaving the manner of the reason, we will a little examine the matter in both the
parts of it.

That (say they) which God commands a man to believe, 1. Proposition.
is true, or else God commands a man to believe a Lie, and condemns a man for
not believing a Lie. Answ. Fie upon such Pamphlets unworthy Christian eyes or
ears, which blindly and blasphemously cry out upon God as a Liar, a Teacher of
Lies, a Deluder and Tenderer of Lies and Falsehood, if they cannot obtain
Paradoxes strange to Divinity, and turn the truth of God into a Lie. But in a
word, their Proposition is ever true in respect of Gods intent of binding them,
but not of the event of their believing. Object. Why does God command men to
believe this or that, and not intend that they should do so in the event?
Answ. It is no absurdity neither in Commandments of faith nor of obedience,
to command that in precept, which in the event he intends not. For the
former: When Jonah went and preached, Yet forty days and Nineue shall be
destroyed, was not every one in Nineue bound to believe, that within that space
their City should be destroyed? And seeing in the event the City was not
Mandatu^ dei, est 1. Probationis. 2 Praestationis.

Prius datu^, non vt illud facto ipso exequamur, sed vt obsequiu^ probet:
posterius, vt facto ipso illud impleamus.
destroyed, shall a black mouth step out and say, God commanded them to
believe a lie? or, if they should not have believed and repented, had they
been condemned for not believing a lie? For the latter: God commands Abraham
to kill his Son, wherein all men see, He intended not the obedience in the
event, (for himself hindered it) but only the trial and proof of Abraham. So
does God look for the act and obedience of Faith, a fruit of the Spirit, from
the Reprobate, destitute of the Spirit, when he comma^deth them to believe; or
rather, intends he not to tie them, to try them, convince them, and make them
justly damnable for breaking not only the Commandment of the Law, but of
Faith also? Secondly; The same Commandment of believing to diverse persons is
true, but in a diverse manner, and so diversely binds: It binds the Elect to
believe, that by believing he might atteyne salvation: It bids the Wicked
also believe, but, to the end, that by not believing, he should be made
inexcusable. Object. But in this latter sort does not the Commandment of God
plainly fight with his decree, when he commands that which he would not have
done? Answ. Gods revealed Will is never contrary to his Decree or good
pleasure, but often diverse, both in the manner of propounding, and in the
means of proceeding, and in the events, as appears in the retrait of
Hezekiahs sentence, Thou shall dye and not live: For promises are understood
with condition of faith, and threats with exception of repentance. The like may
be said of deliberatiue propositions, such as that to Moses, Let me alone that
I may destroy them: for Exodus 32.
sometimes the Lord, in revealing his will, concealeth some part, sometimes
limiteth; yea, and sometimes changes his revealed will, when it includes some
condition depending upon some event.

Object. But is not this to delude men, to command them to believe who cannot
believe? And would not a man think him a mocker, that should say to a stone,
Believe, which he knows cannot? Answ. 1. This impotencie, that the world
cannot believe, is voluntary, and imbred in us, God is no cause of it, and
therefore deserves no excuse. 2. God has most glorious ends of propounding the
object of faith, that is, Christ and his merits generally to all, and not to
delude men: as first, to manifest the riches of his grace, who would have none
to perish, but rather come to the knowledge of his truth. Secondly, to glorify
his truth, setting it in the light, as the Sun in the heavens to be seen of
all eyes. Thirdly, to rebuke the wickedness of the world, and convince it of
sin, by setting up a public ministry, by which unbelievers might be made
inexcusable, and justly perish by their own fault, who will not receive
salvation offered. So much of the former Proposition. Now to the second, or
assumption.

But every one is bound to believe his own election and redemption. 2.
Assumption.
This Proposition is to be understood with two cautions: 1. A man is bound to
believe his own election and salvation, not primarily, but secondarily:
namely, he must first become a believer, a member of Jesus Christ, and a
penitent sinner, and then believe his election and salvation. For he must
believe it as a true Proposition, and not as a thing utterly false. 2. He is
bound to believe his own Redemption, unless himself put a bar or hinderance
in his own way, as every wicked man does. The reason of this is, because he
must only believe his own salvation to whom God has promised it: for what is
it to believe, but to lay hold upon the promise? But what has God promised to
any wicked man so persisting? All the threats and curses of the Law are his
portion. Again, the promise of eternal life is made first to Christ, and then
by consequent to all that believe in him, and are members of his body, and to
no other. And surely, I take this to be a great feeder of this error, because
men consider not the difference between the Commandment and Promise of God,
the former being more general then this latter; for the Commandment is to
all, believers and unbelievers; but the Promise is only to believers.

Object. But the Promise is general, and Christ is proclaimed and preached a
common Savior to all men.

Answ. The Promise is general in propounding it, as is meet, first, because
the elect are mingled with the wicked: and secondly, because hereby the wicked
shall be made inexcusable, seeing they cannot plead ignorance or want of
means. But one thing is universal in respect of the means, another in
respect of efficacy: for the promise of the Gospel is not effectual to all
persons, but to all sorts of persons. Secondly; One thing it is to be
promiscuously expounded and propounded to all; another to be certainly
received and perceived of several believers.

So much of the first objection, from the necessity of believing every man's
particular redemption.

The second objection is taken from the universality of Gods election, thus
framed: Whosoever are elected by God, are redeemed by Christ: But all, and
every particular man is elected: And therefore every particular man is
redeemed. The proposition, or former part of the reason being true, we put
them to the proof of the assumption, namely, that every particular man is
elected; Which they thus attempt. Whomsoever God loves, him he has elected:
But God loves all, and every particular man; For a special attribute of God
is (...). Answ. God loves all men, but not alike: for we must distinguish of
Gods love unto man, which is twofold: 1. Universal or general, by which he
loves men as his creatures. 2. Special and particular, whereby he loves them
as new creatures. By this special kind of love he loves only his elect, and
no wicked men, who yet as his creatures are loved of him, but not in such
effects of love as the elect are.

The third objection is taken from the generality of the death of Christ:
Christ (say they) died for all men; and therefore all men are redeemed.

Answ. Christ dyed for all men; that is, all kinds and degrees of men, but not
for every several and individual person: for then could there be no place
left either for election or reprobation, seeing, where all are taken, none are
either chosen or left. 2. The reason of the Name of Jesus was, because he must
save his people from their sins. And the Evangelist says, he shed his blood
(not for all, but) for many for the remission of sin, Mat. 26. 26. Yea,
himself affirms, He gave his life only for his sheep, Ioh. 10. and that
he prays not for the world; that is, the wicked of the world, and much less
dies for them: To which purpose well Pro quibus Christus passus est, pro ijs
interpellat etiam Spiritus.

Ambros. li. 5 epist. 23.


said Augustine; In coelo interpellat pro te, qui in terra pro te mortuus est.
3. It is the voice of the Church, Reu. 5. 9. Thou have been slain, and
redeemed us unto God by thy blood out of every Tribe, Language, People, and
Nation: She says not, Thou have redeemed every particular man in every Nation,
but out of every Nation, and Language some. 4. Caiaphas himself prophesying by
the instinct of the Spirit (as another Balaam) said, that Christ must dye, to
gather into one (not all the sons of men, but) all the sons of God dispersed.
But the wicked are not the sons of God; and therefore Christ was not to dye
for them.

The fourth objection is taken from the validity of the merit of Christ: If
Christ (say they) paid a price of infinite value, sufficient for the sins of
the whole world, and every singular man, then he has redeemed the whole world,
and every singular man. But he has paid such a price: therefore, etc.

Answ. The price which Christ paid, was for the efficacy infinite, as being
the blood of a Person that was God: but this efficacy is twofold: 1.
Potentiall, by which it was in it self sufficient for every particular person
in the world, or in a thousand worlds, if we suppose so many. 2. Actual, and
this is only where it is applied. In which latter respect it was decreed by
God, and purposed by Christ, to be paid only for the elect, and such as are
predestinate to eternal life: for he purposed not to be a satisfaction to any,
to whom he is not sanctification, Heb. 9. 13, 14. but no wicked man is
sanctified. Neither did he purpose to die for any, for whom he purposed not
to rise again, or, whose persons he sustained not both in his death and
resurrection, and to whom the virtue of both is not applied, and at one time or
other apparent in their death to sin, and rising to newness of life. In a
word, If Christ purposed effectually to die for wicked men, then he failed of
his purpose, both in the matter of his Redemption, as also in the effect of it.
The former, because whereas the whole Redemption of Christ, wrought by his
death, stands of two parts: 1. A freedom from sin, in respect of the power
of condemning, and 2. In respect of the power of reigning; he failed of both
the essential parts of Redemption in such as they say he redeemed. A strange
redemption (I trow) must that be, where is no freedom from sin, neither in the
guilt nor in the reign of it. The latter, in that parties who (they say) are
redeemed, must yet be condemned for those sins from under which Christ is
risen, and so was actually absolved from them: then which an higher indignity
cannot be ascribed to the Son of God, or the merit of his suffering, or
resurrection.

The fifth objection is taken from the universality of Christ's calling; he
calls all unto him, and therefore he died for all. Answ. The antecedent is
false: for many have lived, who never heard of the Name of Christ, as the
Gentiles before Christ, and now many barbarous parts of the world want the very
mention of him, as our Travelers have found. But to the consequent, that also
is as false: for howsoever Christ call all unto him within the bosom of the
Church, yet not al in the like manner. For calling is twofold, either common in
respect of the means, or special, in respect of effectual working: By the
former all are promiscuously called; by the latter only the godly. Secondly,
consider Christ himself in calling two ways: 1. As he is one Cod with the
Father, and holy Ghost, and thus he calls good and bad. 2. As the head of his
Church and Mediator, and thus he effectually calls the elect only, who are
members of his body, and embraced in a singular love.

The sixth objection is taken from the general communication in the nature of
Christ, thus* Christ took every man's flesh, and therefore every man has part
in that work of Redemption in that flesh performed. Answ. In the great work
of man's Redemption, two things must be considered: first, the Instrument, and A
communione naturae ad (...)
that is the flesh of Christ: secondly, the principal Agent, which is the
Spirit and power which herein puts forth itself. If we look upon the former
in it self, our Savior himself says, The flesh profits nothing further
then it is joined with the Spirit and life of Christ, which wicked men want,
and therefore notwithstanding the former, can have no part in this Redemption.

The seventh objection is taken from the latitude or extent of the grace in the
second Adam, which (say they) must not be short or inferior to the guilt in
the first Adam: But all, and every particular man is made a sinner in the first
Adam, and therefore all, and every particular man is made righteous (and
consequently redeemed) in the second. Answ. The grace brought in by the second
Adam, is to be considered two ways: first, in the weight of it; secondly, in
the number of such as partake in it. In respect of the weight and excellency
of it self, it is not less to the sin of Adam: for there is far more power
required to the putting away of many sins, yea, innumerable sins, of all the
elect by justification, then to propagate one sin unto all by natural
pollution. Whence the Apostle notably prefers Christ's power above Adams,
Romans 5. 16. who not only abolished one sin brought in by him, but infinite
more But not as the sin so was the gift. And the reason is, because that (...)
Adami came in by nature in singulos, but (...) Christi comes not but by
special grace. But now in respect of the number redeemed, the benefit of
Christ is less, and so the gift is not so large as Adams fall: for then all
should be vessels of mercy, which is most false. Against which if that in Romans
5. 18. be objected; As the offense of one came upon all to condemnation, so the
benefit abounded to all to the justification of life: The answer is easy; for
the Apostle in the very next verse shows who he means by all, namely, many:
So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 2. That word all is
not absolutely to be taken, neither is by the Apostle, but with reference unto
the limitation of the 17. verse immediately going before; namely, to all them
which receive the abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, which words
are an elegant Periphrasis of believers, who alone reign in life through One,
who is Jesus Christ. 3. Whereas all is opposed to all, as by the first all, is
meant all Adams seed by nature; so by the second all must be meant all Christ's
seed by grace, that is, only the Elect: and thus the opposition is truly and
aptly reconciled.

And thus far have I waded for your sakes in this deep and grave question,
whom as in all other truths I wish firmly stablished against the foolish
whisperings of vain, conceited, and unsettled persons; who when they have run
through all their schismatic, Lutherane, and Libertine opinions, shall go
near (with many of their Leaders) to end in plain Atheism. To these I only
wish at this time, humility and conscience: The former would not permit them
then only to think themselves somewhat, when they can cut out to their
Teachers their task, (as their work to their Apprentises) and define to them
what doctrines are fit for them to teach, and which (because themselves cannot
taste them) are unfit for them to meddle in. The latter would fashion them to
the practice of piety according to wholesome doctrine, and not suffer them to
lose themselves in fond conceits far above their own apprehensions.

As for you who have given your selves to God, and us your Ministers, be
encouraged in your godly course, as such who have your hopes in your eye: fear
not the reproach of men, or rather of Christ himself, but stand fast and
immovable in the work of the Lord, as knowing your labor shall not be in
vain. Walk wisely, redeeming the time; you have many eyes watching for your
falls, especially the eye of God, and your own conscience observing you.
Account it your true honor, to honor God and your honorable Profession, by
keeping the Doctrine received, even the Truth of Christ as it is in Christ, and
showing your selves copies and patterns, yea the very models of it by your
good conversation in Christ. Practice that great and new Commandment, the
badge of Disciples, by loving one another, retaining those strong synewes of
Christian society, Meekness and Mercy. Consider the confusion coming upon
an house divided against it self, and how strong the consent of brethren is in
things both of God and of men. Be much and often in thankfulness to God for
the liberty and peace of the Gospel, and that you live in the days of such
means and protection of them Reject not wheat for some tares. Pray to God
(which is all you have to do) in things which might be better, and praise him
that they be no worse. Think the Churches peace next precious to the peace of
your own consciences. And only magnify Truth above Peace, because God has
magnified it above all things. Frequent the Ministry as Gods arm stretched
out for your salvation: Affect the Word, not for persons, but for truth; not
for knowledge, but for conscience; not for speech, but for practice: so as your
holy obedience coming abroad, you may set a Crown upon the heads of your
Teachers, who watch over you, as they that must give account. Beware of this
evil world, let the holy covetousness after the best things eat out the
hungry desires of it. Account godliness the only gain; the best wealth, to
be rich in God; and the best revenue, to be abundant in good works. As for the
evils of the times, O complain of them to God, as ye be sure the world be not
the worse for you, but the better, as they that are going to a better world: In
which journey I wish you all good speed, cheerfulness and constancy; and in
the end of it, the hoped and happy rest of Gods people, purchased by the blood
of the Lamb: in whom I ever rest,

Yours in all Christian bands, T. T.

The method of the 32. Psalm, followed in this Commentary.
The parts of the Psalm are two, 1. A general doctrine 1. Propounded in verse.
1. 2. 1. The matter of it, Blessedness. 1. Cause, 1. Whose wickedness is
forgiven. 2. Whose sin is covered. 3. Whose sin the Lord imputes not.
2. Effect or fruit, And in whose spirit is no guile.
2. The man to whom it belongs, described by the
2. Proved by the Prophets experience of two things: 1. Of Gods wrath for his
sin: in it verse. 3. 4. 1. The touch of his conscience for sin, described by
the 1. Cause, While I kept close my sin. 2. Grieuousnesse: by 1. Effects. 1.
Change in his body. 1. Bones consumed. 2. Moisture turned into drought of
Summer.
2. Roaring of his voice.
2. Continuance, All the day long.

2. The reason. For night and day was thy hand on me.
2. Of Gods mercy in pardoning it: verse. 5. where, 1. The means, Confession,
in which 1. The time, Then. 2. The ground of it, I said, I will confess,
acknowledge, not hide. 3. The matter, My sin, my iniquity, my wickedness.
4. The manner: in respect of 1. God, To thee. 2. Himself, Against my self.

2. The end, Remission, And thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin.


2. The general use fourefold. concerning 1. Prayer: in it 1. The practice;
where the 1. Inference, Therefore, by my example. 2. Person praying, Every
godly man shall make his prayer. 3. Person to whom, To thee. 4. Time when, In a
time when thou may be found.
2. The promise, Surely in the floods of great waters, they shall not come
near him.
2. Affiance in God 1. For the present, Thou art my secret place. 2. For time
to come, 1. Thou will preserve me in trouble. 2. Thou will compass me with
songs of deliverance.

3. Obedience to God, where, three 1. A Preface to the instruction. In it the
1. Person teaching, I, David. 2. Person instructed, Thee, every Christian. 3.
Matter, in three particulars, 1. I will instruct thee, that is, by precept. 2.
Teach thee the way to go in, namely, by my example. 3. I will guide thee with
mine eye, that is, keep thee in that way.

2. A dehortation 1. From brutishness, Be not like the Horse or Mule. 2.
Wherein 1. Vnteachablenesse, Which understand not. 2. Vntractablenesse, Whose
mouths thou rulest with bit and bridle, lest they come near thee.

3. The reasons 1. From Gods judgments upon impenitent sinners, Many sorrows
shall be to the wicked. 2. From Gods infinite love to repentant sinners,
described 1. By their quality, They trust in the Lord. 2. Measure of mercy,
Mercy shall compass them.


4. Praise of God the end of all, where 1. The persons 1. Righteous men. 2.
Upright of heart.
2. The duty, threefold, expressed in three several words Be glad. Rejoice.
Be joyful.
3. The limitation, In the Lord.



(...) THE HIGHWAY TO HAPPINESS: Containing THE EXPOSITION OF THE 32. PSALM.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Psalm of DAVID to give instruction.

INscriptions are as keys to open a door into the Psalms. This Title agrees
with the Argument of this Psalm. For it is the chief wisdom and learning of
the Church, to know how to come to be happy, as this Psalm teaches, which in
the inscription is commended: First, From the matter. Secondly, The Author.
First, The matter, that it was David's learning, and penned to teach the
unlearned: for it is not the will of God, that the unlearned should want
knowledge. Yea such a learning as is not euery-where to be had, but only is to
be drawn out of the Word of God. For nature and humane reason teaches it not,
nor can understand it, no nor can endure to hear, that God should not respect
any worthiness or merit of man, but freely forgive sin to make a soul
truly happy. Secondly, The Author was David, here named, that we might know,
that this chief doctrine of all other was not framed or delivered to the
Church from an obscure and unknown Author, but proceeded from the holy Ghost,
who guided the Penmen of Scripture: and by this Penman commended also to the
use of the Church, that so our faith might be more certain: for never can the
heart be stable in any doctrine, which it is not persuaded to be an Oracle of
God. Whence observe.

First, That as all the Scripture is profitable for doctrine, instruction, and
comfort, so more especially the book of Observe.
Psalms, being inspired by God to this purpose, and All use of Psalms must
edific.
therefore must all of them in public or private use tend to our edification.
First, In the public use of the Congregation, 1. Cor. 14. 15. I will sing with
the Spirit, but with understanding also, and 26. When ye come together, as any
has a Psalm, let all be done to edifying. Secondly, In private; either in
the family, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. speaking and admonishing your selves with
Psalms, etc. or apart alone. I am. 5. 13. Is any merry? let him sing:
prosperity must not force us to forget God, but remember his loving kindness.
Hence have we the examples of the Disciples of our Lord, singing a Psalm after
the receiving of the Sacrament together with himself, Mar. 14. 26. And Paul
and Silas in prison sung to God, Acts. 16. 25.

To confute such as set out filthy, amorous, and lewd Ballads and Songs,
Fictions, Loue-bookes, etc. which tend to the corrupting of men and youth
especially. David's songs tended to instruction in the highest point of heavenly
wisdom, and the use of these would bring the other out of request: and it
should teach Parents, that would not have their Childrens bodies poisoned, to
be much more careful their minds be not herewith infected.

Secondly, Their sin is justly condemned, who either in public or more
private meetings sit like ciphers or mutes, when Psalms are sung; who neither
sing themselves nor attend to those that do, nor have any care to help their
understanding or their affections, but are as senseless as the seats they sit
upon: these highly take the name of God in vain; or else they run out at the
Psalm, as not concerning them: has the Lord fitted the Psalms forthy
instruction, and dare thou despise that high learning offered in them?

Thirdly, Those who in singing only respect the story of the Psalm, as they
do other Scriptures, not instructing, comforting, or admonishing themselves by
applying the matter to their hearts, but sing without all grace in their
hearts: and lastly, those that respect in these songs music more then matter,
that are led away by sound, not by sense; by the ear, not by the heart; that
are filled with vanity, not with the Spirit, and sing to man, not to God.

Secondly note, that David, though furnished with variety of learning,
accounts none learning but this, being Obseru. 2.
indeed a special knowledge to be instructed, and instruct No learning to
David's learning.
others in. He calls all conditions of men to learn this doctrine, which so
nearly concerns all, and is of such special use, as without it, every thing
increases a man's misery, and having it, he is only happy. Hence is this
knowledge called wisdoms, or knowledges, Prou. 9. 1. as though it contained
all comfortable knowledge in it.

And indeed if we measure knowledge by the use, that must needs be the best
that makes us best, and brings in best profit; but that does this learning: for
how vain are the deepest Philosophers in all their knowledge? What are they
but liars, while without this they dispute of truth? Vicious persons, while
they entreat of virtue? Ignorant, while they dispute of knowledge? and
miserable Creatures, while without it they grope at true blessedness?

What were a man better, if he were able to comprehend the frame of the World,
measure the parts of the Earth, to discourse of the course and motions of the
Stars, if the sense of unpardoned sin proclaim himself a damned wretch,
and a guilty conscience tell him to his face, that Heaven is ashamed of him,
the Earth is weary of him, and his own sinful burden bears him down to
Hell?

What profit were it to be able to discern all diseases, and all remedies, and
attain all the skill of physic to cure the body, when a man's own soul is
wounded to death without remedy?

What helps it to be wise in worldly matters, and skillful in cases of Law,
to avoid unjust sentences and wrongs, when a man is condemned in himself, by
the comfortless accusing of his own conscience?

See the vanity of rich and worldly men, that spend their days in gathering
perishing riches, and drop into Use.
the grave before ever they think of this Learning: and the folly and madness
of the most, that count nothing worthy to be known but these earthly
learnings; spend all their time and studies in them as the Heathens did, till
they become almost as heathenish.

Secondly, The shame it is of many profound Scholars, who in their ministry
seek to be approved for other learning, in Tongues, Fathers, Arts, etc. (which
in their places are excellent gifts:) but this only skill, this Danids
learning, how to direct a troubled conscience to his peace, and a miserable
soul to his happiness, is not their aim; they have no skill nor will this
way.

Thirdly, And hearers who would be taught in any learning but this, admire any
teaching but this, whereas only this can make them wise to salvation, and only
this knowledge has life eternal accompanying it: that is, a learned tongue,
that studieth out cases of conscience, and speaks a word in due season. This
is the learning and instruction of this Psalm, and therefore is worthy all our
attention and diligence to carry away the several instructions of it. So much
of the Inscription.

VERSE 1. 2. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.

Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose spirit
is no guile.


This Psalm has two parts. 1. A general doctrine. 1. Propounded in the two
first Verses. 2. Expounded in the three next.
2. The general use, which is fourfold. 1. Concerning prayer, verse. 6. 2.
Affiance in God, verse. 7. 3. Obedience to God, v. 8, 9, 10 4. Praise of God,
which is the end of all, verse last.


The general doctrine is first set down in the precept in the two first
Verses; and secondly, proved by example in the 3, 4, and 5.

The doctrine in the Precept is this. That eternal happiness (called in the
Text Blessedness) stands in the forgiveness of sins. Which forgiveness
of sins is set forth by three phrases, tending al to express the same thing,
namely the perfect justification of a sinner in the sight of God, whose sin
is here said, first, to be forgiven: Secondly, covered: And thirdly, not
imputed: and then amplified by the inseparable fruit or companion of it, which
is the sanctification of the soul, in these words; And in whose Spirit is no
guile.

First therefore, we are to speak of the person, and secondly of his
blessedness. The person is he, whose wickedness is, first, forgiven:
secondly, whose sin is covered: thirdly, whose sin is not imputed: and
fourthly, In whose spirit is no guile.

VERSE 1. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven.
THe word translated Wickedness, signifies sin in an high degree, and is in
Scripture used for disloyalty or treason to a King, disobedience to Parents or
Masters, perfidiousnes or treachery to such friends, as to whom we owe the
greatest testimonies of thankfulness.

The second word translated Forgiven, signifies to be loosed, eased, or
lightened. Wherein is employed this point of doctrine, that

Sin is an intolerable burden, which oppresses the Doctrine.
sinner with an infinite weight. The Prophet Isay calls Sin is an
intolerable burden.

Isay 1.


the people of his time, a people laden with iniquity: and our Savior calling
sinners, does it in this form, Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden.

Heb. 12. 1. Sin is said to prosse down. In which sense also the day of
sins final destruction, is called the day of refreshing, and of finding rest
to our souls.

And that sin is such a burden, it further appears by these reasons
following.

First, because it presses down impenitent sinners into Reasons.
Hell, and there for ever holds them under condemnation; nay, the weight of
it pressed the Angels themselves from heaven, who are now held under chains of
black darkness for ever.

Secondly, it brings such a burden with it as all creatures cannot stand
under, namely the wrath of God, which makes sin so heavy, the which being
laid upon Christ himself, he felt such a load as made him sweat water and
blood.

Thirdly, it is attended with the burden of conscience, which it burdeneth with
terrors, fears, accusation and guiltiness; the weight of which is so heavy,
as Solomon says, A wounded conscience or spirit who can bear? all other
infirmities the spirit of man can sustain, but this is impossible.

Fourthly, it burdeneth the sinner, first, with the burden of Gods word, which
are the curses and threats of the Law; and secondly, with the burden of Gods
hand, which are the load of affliction and executions upon sinners, Verse 9. by
which he breaks the wicked, and bends his children toward their duty.

Fifthly, as a burden it keeps under the sinner, that he cannot bestir
himself in good duties, nor walk in Gods ways. But with this difference: the
wicked move not at all, the godly but weakly; they feel it not nor complain,
these groan and sigh and cry out, Oh who shall deliver me? the good I would do
I cannot: the evil I hate, I do. And if the sins of the godly repented of
be so heavy, what are the sins of impenitent sinners?

There is no liberty in sin, but bondage; it binds to the curse, to
guiltiness, horrors, shame and sorrow: Use 1.
none are such slaves as sinners, and yet they think there can be no freedom,
but when they may do what they list, and are indeed the sons of Belial, that
is, men lawless, or without yoke: but by such Libertine courses they lay the
most heavy yokes upon themselves; all the Mountains in the world will be
nothing to their burden.

Labor to feel this burden, which is heavier then all Use 2.
the gravel on the Earth, and sand in the Sea. Never a one here present, but
we are laid under the burden of Adams transgression, under the weight of our
own corruption, original and actual sin, under the burden of the wrath of
God, of accusing consciences, of Gods curses threatened and executed, bound hand
and foot as men ready to be pressed to death; are we senseless and feel
none of this weight?

If a man lay under an hundred or six hundred weight, and never felt it, nor
groned, nor struggled, to get from under it, he is a dead man; so he that
carries the burden of his sins, and feels no danger, no bondage, groans not
under the Law of his members, is senseless of his imperfections and
corruptions, this man is dead while he lives, as Paul speaks of widows
laden with lusts, and living in pleasure; so this man abides under death till
this hour.

What is the reason then, that the most men never feel Quest.
this burden? never felt doubting nor trouble of conscience? nor torment of
heart? they loved God ever, they have grace at will, they serve God as well as
the best, they believe strongly, they want no oil in their lamps; they would
be sorry to be tempted as some are, to be so mopish and pensive; they have
peace in their consciences.

The reasons are: First, because they are dead without Answ.
the life of God and grace, without sense and feeling of Why men feel not such
an heavy burden as sin is.
this heavy burden, which is felt only by grace, not by corruption; and
according to the measure of grace is the measure of this sense: the less sin
is felt, the less grace; and so may thou accordingly judge of thy self.
What is the reason that men can cry out of the stone in the reins, but never
or seldom of the stone of the heart, but because they have natural life,
which affects them with the sense of the one, but want supernatural life,
which should strike them with the sense and pain of the other? A spiritual
burden, no marvel if it be not felt of them, that are all flesh, destitute
of the spirit.

Secondly, they see not their sins in a right glass, but in a false glass,
which lets them see them only in the profit or pleasure; or as in one of those
trunk optic glasses, which make great things very small, and things at hand
as if they were far off: whereas if they did behold sin in the true glass
of the Law, and of the curse of God, of the eternal damnation of sinners, and
of Christ's death for sinners, they would not account any sin small, nor the
judgment of them far off. This sight and view of sin makes the godly cry
out, and continually bewail the captivity they are in, as Paul himself did,
who was alive without the Law, but the Law struck him down, and made him cry
out of himself as a miserable man.

Thirdly, most men never meditate of their own estate, nor consider of their
own condition, to apply the Law to their lives, to see their crookedness and
faylings, as they do who are in the way to happiness; they want will or
skill, time or conscience; if it hap well, so it is. The godly meditate of
their own estate, and apply the Law to their own sins, which made David,
Psalm. 38. 5. cry out, that his sins were too heavy a burden for him to bear:
so, could men try their own strength with the burden of their own sins,
they would come to a little more quick sense of their estate; and with holy
David here pronounce him a happy man that is eased.

Fourthly, the strong man is gone away with all, and hence comes in this
vnfeelingnesse and peace, and he luls men asleep in false persuasions, wherein
they go on unto death. What say many miscreants? Hell is not so hot, nor sin
so heavy, nor the Devil so black, nor God so unmerciful, as the Preachers
say: or if all this were so, they are not alone, others have as heavy burdens
as they, they shall have company whatsoever become of them: and though they
hear the burden of the Word of the Lord daily, and see the burden of his hand
lie heavy upon others, yea and often upon themselves, yet are they as
senseless as dead men, upon whom if you lay all the weight of the earth, they
feel nothing.

O beware of this fearful judgment, which is a great part of this burden,
the which the less it is felt, the greater it is, and know that there is no
man, that shall not feel the burden of his sin one time or other, though the
wicked do never, till it be too late. Shall the Lord himself be pressed under
the burden of thy sins, as a Cart laden with sheaues, and art not thou? Amos
2. 13. shall all other dumb and senseless creatures groan under the burden of
thy sin, as Romans 8. 20. and art thou thy self more senseless then they?

Feeling this burden, seek means to be delivered and Use 3.
disburdened; and this will he do, that finds this burden pressing and
oppressing him. The means is, to come to Christ as he calls, Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, etc. Come, not with the body
and feet, but with, first, Repentance: secondly, Faith.

First, come in confession of sin and godly sorrow, Means to be disburdened
of sin.
come groaning and bewayling thy sin and estate, come creeping to God with thy
burden on thy back; confess thy sin and forsake it, this is the way to
find mercy: thus David found ease, verse. 5.

Secondly, come in Faith, hungring and thirsting after righteousness; lay hold
on Gods mercy and Christ's merit, which are as two shoulders to bear it quite
away. Fear not, but, as the people said to Bartimeus, Be of good comfort, he
calls thee. He calls thee in the Word, he gives a gracious promise, Come
to me, I will ease you; he seals up his promise by the Sacrament, in which
thou shall find him ready to give thee ease, that longest and gronest after
him. Does any sin oppress thy conscience? thou hear and see in the Word
and Sacrament, how he was made sin, that is, a Sacrifice for sin for thee.
Does any burden of misery or cross, inward or outward press thee? he
offers himself to ease the laden, to pacify the perplexed conscience, to
strengthen the heart, and to remove or mitigate all our burdens for us;
according to the prophecy, Isay 53. 4. 11. He has borne our infirmities and
carried our sorrows: the word is sebalon of sabal, to carry as a Porter does a
burden, used in both places.

But alas! every man must carry his own burden: Object.
how then can Christ?

Legally every man must carry his own, the Law requires Answ.
personal obedience and satisfaction: but Euangelically Christ our surety
bears them, and therefore come to him in the Word and Sacrament, with Faith
and Repentance.

Once finding ease of this burden, lode thy self no Use 4.
more: Christ having cured the blind man, and eased him of that burden, bids
him, Go thy ways, and sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee. Heb. 12.
1. The Apostle (...).
advises, if sin press down, and so incumber us, to cut off this
compassing sin.

If a man be to deal with a great burden, he will once or twice try his
strength with it; if it be too heavy for him, he will let it alone. Have thou
ever felt the ouer-burden of sin, even the least: (with which, had thou
the strength of all Men and Angels, thou could not encounter, nor stand
under it) and will thou again meddle with it? Besides, have thou not, when
thou art at the lightest, sufficient burden of that original sin, of which
Paul said, Romans 7. 21. Evil is present with me? it (...).
lies euery-where upon thee: and of actual sins without number? that still
in stead of disburdening thy self, and lightning thy lode daily, thou addest
to the heap, and it is never big enough, as though all thy sins had no
weight at all?

O, but this is nothing, a small sin, an oath, an idle Object.
word, rash and hasty anger, to play the good fellow, to drink with my friend,
lose my time, credit, etc.

If thou could bring me an instance of any one sin Answ.
that had no weight, thou should have good leave to wed thy self to it,
never to depart: but no sin is so small, but has such a weight as will
press to the bottomless pit; bring me any sin the wage of which is not
death; an idle word, for which thou must not give account; any trick of youth,
for which thou shall not be brought to judgment. Sand, even every little sand
has his weight, and, though small in quantity, yet if great in number, will
drown the ship of the greatest burden: but what if all the sands of the
Seashore were in one ship? must it not sink? and are not thy sins for
weight and number, like the sands of the Seashore?

If sin be such a burden, then help thy brother from under this burden: the
Law of God enioynes thee to Use 5.
help and pity the beast of thine enemy, if thou see it faint under a burden,
and, a merciful man is pitiful to his beast; and ought not thou to help
much more, and pity, and ease to thy power, the burdened soul of thy brother?
have thou more sense of the groaning of a beast, then of thy brother? Gal. 6. 2.
Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of God. Ephesians. 4. 2.
Support one another through love; that is, first, bear 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
with their wants and weaknesses, their infirmities, etc. Secondly, put under
thy shoulders to help to bear their necessities: another part of the burden
of sin, Romans 12. 13. Thirdly, help his burden of sin from off him, by
admonishing, reproving, exhorting, and praying. Thou shall plainly reprone thy
brother, and suffer not sin upon him. Oh, how unmerciful are they, that make
but a jest of men's sins? Would we laugh, to see a man pulling a millstone
upon himself, and crushing himself all to pieces? Jude wishes us to pull
others out of the fire, and not to throw them in. Others there are that force
men to sin, as to drink more then one can bear; and so he does indeed, he
drinks the poisoned cup of Gods wrath. Do thou rejoice to draw thy friend
to drink a cup of poison? thou art a murderer of his soul and body. Masters
that force their servants to break the Sabbath, whereas they ought to help
them from under their burdens, they lay heavier lodes on them.

If sin be such a burden, take knowledge of the infinite Use 6.
love of God and Christ, who has taken upon himself all thy burden, and be
thankful.

How? Quest.


First, By becoming Gods servant, and taking his Answ.
yoke on thee, that is sweet and easy: will any man's servant suffer another
man then his Master, to lay burdens and oppress him, and make him his drudge?
Do thou profess service to God, and yet let Sin and Satan toil thee with
such infinite burdens, under which thou can not stand? yield thy self to
Gods Will and Word, and this will ease thee of those burdens. Secondly, walk
as a man released of thy heavy burden, and now at ease and liberty: How
thankful was David when he escaped the burden of one sin? 1. Sam. 25. 22.
Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou, who
have kept me this day from shedding innocent blood: and as Peter was ravished
with joy, when the Angel unburdened him of his bolts, and set him free out of
prison, Acts 12. so must thou admire the goodness of God in this thy release
from a far more miserable burden and bondage. Thirdly, because thou have still
some burden of corruption, which incumbreth the best, thou must be still
lesning it, and see that it be in continual consumption. Fourthly and lastly,
desire Christ's coming, when all the burdens of sin, all the guiltiness, the
filthiness, the molestation, and corruption of it shall be abolished, and thy
self set into the perfect liberty of Gods sons, to enjoy the fulness and
highest degree of that blessedness, which our Prophet David here pronounces
upon all them that are loosed and eased, from under the burden of their sins.

And whose sin is covered:]
THe second phrase follows, by which the remission of sins is set forth.

How can sin be covered, since God sees it, and Quest.
cannot but know all things, past, present, and to come?

God is al an eye, and nothing can shut his eyes against Answ.
his will; but then sins are said to be covered, first, When they come not
into account. Secondly, When Tum tecta peccata dicuntur, cum Deus nolit punire,
August.
God does not punish them. Thirdly, When Christ's obedience, active and passive,
is as a veil or cover, so hiding them as though they were not at all. To this
purpose, the Lord promising to his people free remission of sin, uses this
phrase, I have put away thy transgression like a Isa 44. 22.
cloud, and thy sins as a mist: that look as the Sun or Wind disperseth
dark clouds, and makes the heavens as fair as if they were never clouded: so
the grace of God disperseth the sins of his people, which as a cloud covered
and hid his face from them.

This phrase of covering sin, implies two things: First, that sin is a
most odious thing in the eyes of God. Secondly, that every man, that would be
happy, must have something to cover and hide it from his eyes.

First, Sin is an odious thing. Doctrine.


First, because of the filthiness of it, signified, first, in Sin a most
odious thing.
the legal washings, lauers, purifications of garments, vessels, persons,
etc. Secondly, in the comparisons, wherein it is likened to leprosy, to filthy
clouts, to the Leopards spots, and to the Black-Moores skin. Thirdly, in those
many Petitions; Wash me, cleanse me, purge me with hysope, etc.

Secondly, look what way a man can, it is filthiness; first, in respect of
God, whose Law is violated and broken. Secondly, of the sinner himself, whose
soul and conscience is defiled, and every thing that he touches, till his
sins be pardoned, as the Leper in the Law was till he was cleansed. Thirdly,
in respect of others; by giving scandal, and occasioning uncleanness, and
filthiness in others, by example and imitation.

Thirdly, it is odious; because it is a shameful nakedness, which it ever
carries with it. Adam and Eve before their sin were naked, but not ashamed;
presently sin makes them see, and shame in their nakedness, and sew
Fig-leaues to cover them.

The Israelites making the Calfe, were naked; that is, Exodus 32.
destitute of that holiness, which should have been in Gods people, and of
the protection and favor of God: the nakedness of their souls made them naked
to judgments. Yea, the best fruit of sin in those, whom God raises up by
repentance, is shame and sorrow. What fruit Romans 6. 21.
had you of those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?

Labor to see thy filthiness, of nature and of practice, Use 1.
of knowledge and ignorance, of youth and of age, and cry out with the Leper, I
am unclean, I am unclean, and run the next way to the lauer of the Church,
the Fountain which is opened to Jerusalem and Judah, namely the blood of Jesus
Christ, which cleanses us from all sin; here only is the purification of all
unclean issues. And add hereunto the daily and diligent use of all the means
of sanctification; get thee to the clean waters; first, of Faith, which
purifies the heart. Secondly, of the Word of God: Ye are clean by the word
which Act. 15.
I have spoken. Thirdly, of prayer, Psalm. 51. 2, 3. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity; cleanse me from my sin, purge me with hyssope, etc. These are the
fair crystal waters, the only clear and mundifying waters, That run from
under the threshold of the Sanctuary.

If sin be such a shameful nakedness, be not the Use 2.
servant of sin: this is the Apostles reason, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had you
in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Beware of boldness in sin, be
not impudent in it, but ashamed of the nakedness of it. Bold sinners Jeremy
compares to the shameless Whore: Thou had Ier. 3. 3.
a Whores forehead, thou would not be ashamed. The Sodomites were impudent
and shameless in their brutish sin, and this was the height of it, that
brought fire and brimstone.

Yet it is not every shame, which is commendable. Caine was ashamed, but
repented not; A thief is found and ashamed, but abides a thief still, says
the Prophet. Ier. 2. 26.
But the profitable shame of sin is that which brings repentance: hereof
speaks Jeremy, chap. 31. 19. After I converted, I repented, I smote upon my
thigh; I was ashamed, yea even confounded.

Let it teach us to cover and array our selves with the Use 3.
contrary virtues, and to embrace righteousness, piety, and virtue: these
make not ashamed. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, that is, is a
pure worshipper, shall not be ashamed. Continue in well-doing, and seek
eternal life; this brings glory, and honor, and immortality, Romans 2. 7.

Every man that must be happy, must have something to Doctrine. 2.
hide and cover his sins from Gods eyes; and nothing in the World can do it,
but Christ and his righteousness, typified Every one must get a cover for his
sin.
in the Arc of the covenant, whose cover was of gold, and called a
propitiatory, that look as that covered the Tables, that were within the
Arc; so God couers our sins against those Tables: so in the cloud covering
the Israelites in the wilderness, signifying God covering us from the danger
of our sins.

Hence Christ is called a garment, and we are commanded, First, to buy this
garment, Revel. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold and raiment: that is,
do as men do in buying of the commodities they want: First, see thy want of
it, by viewing thine own nakedness. Secondly, esteem it in the just value of
it: and thirdly, exchange all thy sins for this righteousness. Then,
secondly, to put it on, Gal. 3. 23. that is, by Faith, and Repentance, 2.
and with Christ to put on the graces of his Spirit. Col. 3. 12. Put on tender
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, etc. We must buckle Christ to us, and
never put him off again.

This garment, first, hides our nakedness: Secondly, protects us from the
injury of weather and Gods wrath. Thirdly, it gets a blessing for us, as
Iaacob did in Esaus garments.

This teaches us how to judge our selves, namely, so Use 1.
far as we are not found in Christ's righteousness, to be most unhappy and
loathsome creatures, yea the vilest of all, the Devil and the Damned excepted.
Our sin vncouers us, and turns us naked into Gods wrath: if once he fix
his eye upon it, it makes him destroy his creature, it couers us with shame and
confusion.

But how far are men from seeing their estate? how miserable in not seeing
their misery? never perceiving how naked and uncovered they be. Were it not
thus, how durst they provoke the eyes of Gods glory? Isa. 3. 8. Doubtless
Jerusalem is fallen, and Judah is fallen down, because their tongue and works
are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. They durst not sin as
Zimri in the sight of God, and of Gods people, in the sight of the Sun, and
in the clear day; by horrible uncleanness, drunkenness, thefts,
blasphemies, and the highest contempts of God, as they do. But blindness in
sin makes sinners so bold and impudent, that they shame not in most
flagitious courses.

But farther off are they from happiness, that justify, defend, and glory in
their sins. A good man cannot abide the shape of his own sins: for he
sees himself a misshapen creature by them, whereupon he daily seeks a cover
for his deformity, and thinks no cover sufficient: But many wretches are
senseless and shameless, and glory in nothing but in their shame, and shame
at nothing, but that which should be their glory.

If thou would be happy, never be at rest till thou Use 2.
have obtained some sound assurance, that thy sins are covered.

Here many deceive themselves, and shrowde themselves in false couers. First,
some if they can cover them before men, and hide them from man's eyes, if no man
remember them thereof, all is well, they forget them and the danger is past:
but a good man would rather have his sin put out of Gods sight, then all the
worlds; he stands not, nor falls to men, but to his own Lord. Oh look to thy
cleanenesse, or uncleanness before God, discover the matter to the Physician,
be sure that no man sins without witnesses, at least God and his conscience
sees him.

Secondly, some think a civil life a good cover, if they live honestly and
neighbourly, and do no harm, though they sin, God will spare them. This is
a false cover of simple men, like Adams fig-leaues: God can and does see many a
wicked heart through a civil life.

Thirdly, others labor to cover their sins by ceremonies; they give alms,
say some prayers, do some good deeds when they die, etc. but all this is as
thin a cover as the former.

Dan. 4. 24. Break off thy sins -- by mercy toward the poor. Object.


This shows not the cause, but the means of pardon. Answ.


Secondly, he speaks not in regard of God, but of Men, against whom he had
been tyrannical, to whom he counsels him to make some satisfaction, by this
means to manifest the truth of his repentance, but not that he could satisfy
God. Neither can Saints, Angels, Merits, or humane Satisfaction, cover sin,
which is the Popish cover. The sound cover we speak of, is above all that Man
or Angel can bestow on us. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, and raiment, to
cover thy filthy nakedness. Revel. 3. 18.
Means to get thy sin covered, are these.

First, labor to see thy sins in the numberless number and horrible nature
of them, and what a fearful Mean to get sin covered.
thing it is to have God beholding them: for no Leper can be so vile and
loathsome in thine eyes, as thou art in his, while thou art in thy sins
uncovered.

Secondly, uncover them often to God by humble confession; the more thou
vncouerest them to him, the more thou couerest them, and the more will he
cover them: and withal have them often in thine own eyes, if thou would
not have them in Gods; for both these are joined as helps one to the other.
Psalm. 51. My sins are ever in mine eyes; and then follows; Against thee,
against thee have I sinned: thus judge thy self, if thou would escape Gods
judgment.

Thirdly, because the whole life of a Christian is a way to blessedness, every
one must every day be careful in covering somewhat: daily corruptions show a
necessity of daily couerings, the best of Gods Saints, after that they had a
cover, still prayed to be covered, and Christ those, who have God to their
Father, to pray for forgiveness of sins. David, after sin pardoned, still
prayed, that the Lord would cover the sins of his youth.

Fourthly, he that would have God cover his sins, must cover his brothers
sins so much as he can. Men have nimble eyes to rip other men's sins to the
bottom, whereas love would cover a multitude of sins. Can we look for a Sea
of mercy from God, and will not let one drop fall on our brethren?

VERSE 2. To whom the Lord imputes not sin:]
THis is the third phrase, wherein the Prophet sets down free remission of
sin. In the words are two things; first, what must not be imputed; Sin.
Secondly, who must not impute it; the Lord.

But before we enter into the phrase, one question may be moved.

Why does the Prophet use such variety of phrases, as, Quest.
easing, covering, not imputing of sin? any one seemed enough to express his
mind.

For sundry weighty reasons: as, First, to shake, if it Answ.
were possible, the drowsinesse and deadness of men, who are without sense of
this doctrine: for the most have cast their conscience on a sleep or slumber;
and while they turn away from the judgments of God, or favor their own
lusts, are far from seeing the danger of sin; and their vnfeelingnesse
causes them to sing peace to themselves: therefore the Prophet implying sin
to be, first, an unsupportable burden: secondly, a loathsome nakedness and
filthiness: and thirdly, a desperate and infinite debt, would drive out the
lazy to seek peace with God, and never hold such peace with their sins.

Secondly, to show how hardly a troubled conscience receives comfort in this
persuasion, that his sins are forgiven, and therefore needs more force and
perfwasion; whence it is, that as needing a special prop, in the Lords prayer,
that Petition is backed with a reason, Forgive as we do for give: and
secondly, we have not only Gods promises for this Article as for others, but
his oath also: for he has sworn to put away our sins, though he cannot
lie, that we might have strong consolation.

Thirdly, that by all these forms of speech we might conceive a plenaric
pardon and full remission of all sin, guilt and punishment, temporal, and
eternal. If we be eased, then the punishment is forgiven as well as the fault;
else were there little ease. If God see it not, he seeks out no rods for it.
If the sin be covered, so are we also from punishment. If the Lord impute not
sin, how can he justly punish it? only guilt binds to punishment, but here
is no guilt; it is forgiven, it is covered, it is not imputed. Besides,
remission and satisfaction are opposite; that is not remitted, which is
punished.

Lastly, the Apostle adds, Coloss. 2. 14. that the bill or bond is cancelled:
if the handwriting be cancelled, there remains no action. Fourthly, to note
the persons to whom, and the degrees by which this happiness is attained. The
persons are such as are weary, laden, burdened, and brokenhearted; those, not
who lie snorting and sleeping in sinful pleasures, nor such as swell in
conceit of their wealth and righteousness, are puffed with an opinion of
felicity; but such as see their poverty, and inabilitie to discharge their
debt; such as who by the stirring of their conscience and spirit of bondage,
have been driven out to seek happiness in Christ, and out of sorrow gained
their joy.

Now, the stairs to rise to this blessedness are in these three words:
First, being pursued by the wrath of God to the sacrifice of Christ, that by
faith apprehended, eases him of his burden: Secondly, the blood of the
covenant purges him from an evil conscience, and the robe of Christ's
righteousness couers the corruption of his nature, so as God with a clear
countenance can behold him: and thirdly, because he is still subject to sin
and pressed as with a weight, the Lord imputes not his weaknesses to him, but
makes them as if they were not, and thus gives him heaven before heaven: by
these degrees he justifies the ungodly.

Now to the phrase it self. The word imputation signifies properly an
accounting, reckoning, and allowing some thing to another of favor, as
merchants, who when they will forgive a debt, do not put it into the
reckoning, and so do not impute it. Here it is used metaphorically; and not to
impute sin is an action of God, whereby he puts out of his book and
reckoning the sins and transgressions of believers, and by imputing to them
the righteousness of Christ to become theirs, makes all their unrighteousness
as if it had never been; as contrarily, when he requires the sin, and
inflicteth the penalty, he is said to impute it.

How can God account of sin as no sin? or if he Quest.
do, how can he be just?

It is proper to God to account of things that are not, Answ.
as if they were, yet without any violence or impeachment to his justice: for
though he impute not the sin to the believing sinner himself, yet he does
to his surety Jesus Christ, of whom he exacteth his whole debt.

One cannot be wise by the wisdom of another, nor Object.
learned by the learning of another, and therefore it seems one cannot stand
righteous by the righteousness of another.

Christ and the believing Christian are one, as two ordinary Answ.
men cannot be: and therefore the righteousness of Christ, imputed to the
believer, is the believers own righteousness, by reason of that union which
is between Christ the head and the members.

But the same soul that sins, shall die. Object.


This must be understood with these exceptions: first, Answ.
if he continue in his sin without repentance. Secondly, if he become not a
believer in Christ.

But there is no man but abides a sinner, so long as he Object.
carries the body of flesh about him.

So soon as a man is justified, he is unguilty before Answ.
God; and further, that sin, which is present with him, is in-dwelling sin,
but not reigning, so as he is not denominated from it.

But every man does daily fall from his righteousness, Object.
both by reason of inherent corruption, and of actual sins which pass from
him; and therefore fails of the former imputed righteousness.

No, the covenant of God is an everlasting covenant, Answ.
more stable then the Mountains, and no unfaithfulness of man can make God
unfaithful. Isa. 54. 10. The Mountains shall remove, and the Hills shall fall
down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of
my peace fall away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.

The phrase of not imputing sin, implies this doctrine, Doctrine.
that Sin is a debt: and often the word (debt) is put for sin: as Matthew. 6.
in the Lords prayer, Forgive us Sin an infinite debt.
our debts: what Matthew calls debts, Luke calls sins. Matthew. 18. 24. In the
Parable; the King begun to reckon with one that owed him a thousand talents.
Luc. 7. 47. Of the sinful woman; many debts are forgiven her, (...).
therefore she loved much. Luc. 13. 4. Think ye that those, on whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, were greater debtors then the rest?

Now we may not think, that sins are therefore called debts, because we owe
them to God, to whom we owe all love, fear, obedience, and duty, but by
similitude Reasons.
and resemblance from civil debts: for first, every debt arises of some
contract between the creditor and 1.
the debtor: so God is the great creditor, Man is the debtor, whose debt
arises out of the contract and first covenant of works, Do this and live.
Secondly, every creditor has a bill, bond, or book, wherein the debt stands
2.
to be seen, and there remaynes vn-cancelled and vn-crost, till the debt be
satisfied. The bill or bond between God and man, is his Law, which shows the
parcells of this debt, and how it rises: it shows the forfeiture, and the
total sum, whereto the sinner is bound to satisfy.

The Moral Law is Gods bond against us, the handwriting of ordinances which is
against us, Col. 2. 14. and contrary to us.

The Law shows the parcels of this debt; namely, that we are bound.

First, to the obedience of the whole Law, in perfect love to GOD, and our
neighbor; whence Romans 13. 8. love is called a debt to our neighbor; this debt
we still owe notwithstanding our transgression.

Secondly, the Law shows that sin is a debt, in regard of the corruption
which accompanies the transgression, and the blot which the sin committed
leaves in the offender, which is attended with an aptness either to the same,
or any other sin, by reason of the former act. That this is a debt, appears
because the Law requires perfect purity and sanctimonie, which we owe unto
God, though the hearts of us all be full of corruption and unholiness.

Thirdly, the Law shows the forfeit, which is the guilt, binding over the
sinner to punishment both temporal and eternal. This curse of the Law by
reason of transgression we are indebted to undergo, we owe unto Gods justice,
by reason of sin, eternal death, without which Gods justice cannot be
satisfied.

4. The Law shows how, and wherein we wrong our neighbor, and binds us
straightly (besides the satisfaction to God) to a recompense of the wrong done
unto him.

Thirdly, sin is a debt, because it brings a man every way into the seat of
a debtor. First, it argues and brings 3.
a man into a weak state, which is very comfortless: what a grievous burden
is debt above a man's ability? Secondly it makes a man hide his head for shame.
Thirdly, he loses his liberty, that he dares not go abroad. Fourthly, he
fears the Sergeant and the Iayler continually: and fifthly, at length he is
caught and clapped up in prison, and thence comes not out, till he has paid
the uttermost farthing, but there is laid in bonds and chains of darkness for
ever.

Fourthly, because till sin be discharged and satisfied 4.
for, the sinner has all these sins upon him: but as a debtor once
satisfying the debt by himself or a surety, and compounding with the creditor,
is as free as if he had never come in debt; so for sin once discharged, the
sinner is never charged with it any more.

Now sin is discharged two ways: First, when the debtor himself satisfies
in his own person, according to the strict letter of the Law. Thus the damned
men and Angels discharge their debt to God, who because they are able to pay,
are kept in perpetual prison, and damned everlastingly, as a man dying in
prison satisfies all: But no living man can thus satisfy Gods justice, if God
shall straightly mark what is done amiss. When we have done all we can, we are
unprofitable; there is not a clause in the bond, which we have not forfeited a
thousand times over, and so have we broken in anfinite Law, sinned against an
infinite God, deserved an infinite punishment, which no finite creature can
sustain, neither man nor Angel.

The second way of discharging this debt is Evangelical; namely, when another
satisfies for the debtor: and thus the debts of believers are discharged,
through the satisfaction of Christ, who has paid the uttermost farthing for
the Elect. And this is the not imputing of sin here meant, which is all one
with the free remission and forgiveness of it.

But Math. 18. 26. the servant said; Master, have patience Object.
with me, and I will pay thee all: therefore we our selves may pay our own
debts.

First, it is a Parable, and this is not the maine scope. Answ.


Secondly, fear forced the servant to promise more then he was able to
perform. But if no servant be able to pay one talent, much less is he able
to pay 10000. yea the Parable teaches, that he that ought but 50. pence, was
as unable to pay it, as he that ought 500. Luke 7. 41.

But is this not to impute sin, to judge a sinner as no sinner? not to
require the sin, not to inflict the penalty? Object.
how will this stand with Gods Justice?

It is proper to God to account of things, that are not, Answ.
as if they were; so also of things, that are, as if they were not, without any
violation of justice, it being an Evangelical imputation, not Legal (for
that would not stand with justice) whereby GOD accepts Christ's satisfaction in
full payment.

But is this no imputing of sin, seeing we pay the Object.
whole debt in our surety? is this a forgiveness of a debt, to exact it wholly?

It is a free forgiveness, and no imputing to us that receive this grace, we
confer nothing to it, it cost us nothing Answ.
but good acceptance. God the Father saw nothing in us, why he should not
impute our sin, but give us so free redemption. God the Son saw nothing
that we could return to gratify him again in any measure: so in regard of
God and us, it is a free forgiveness and no imputation to us, though it be
not so to Christ.

If sin be a debt, then note the misery of sinners, and Use 1.
our woeful estate before God by reason of sin, being no better then
desperate banquerupts, laden with debt and danger, and unable to satisfy the
least farthing. What remains, but either the mercy of the Creditor, or
perpetual prison?

Thou that can say, thou owe not all the world a penny, I challenge thee,
and arrest thee of an infinite sum, and the forfeite of a bond above all thy
substance, if thou had the Kingdoms of the earth at thy dispose, and were
the god of the world. I ask no more witnesses then thy own conscience, First,
to prove the debt: and therefore it is time to bestirre thee, and look about
thee to procure thy liberty. If thou have paid all thy debts to men, think
of Gods debt at length, for this must be satisfied, and thou shall know that
delay is no payment. Thou that would never come into bonds for any man, thou
have not kept thee out of bonds, which will cast thee into everlasting bands, if
thou look not the better and timelier to thy self.

Secondly, see the carelessness of most men, that run Use 2.
on still in sin and increase their debts, which endanger them to Gods
justice and wrath, like prodigal dingthrifts that never regard how much they
run upon the score, and never think that a day of reckoning and payment will
come. If we see a man, who is a borrower of every man, and takes no care to
pay any man, we will conclude he must needs break one day. And many who
scorn and shame at such courses with men, are bold with the Lord, and run in
with him still: but let the Creditor care for his debts, they will not torment
themselves with them. Many deceive themselves and think GOD respects not their
sins, especially if they be small ones: but small or great, they be written
up and stand in Gods debt-booke or inventory, till they be wiped away: the
least debt imputed casts thee into perpetual prison. Besides, see thou not
what a fearful debt one sin of ADAM has brought upon us all? Secondly,
considerest thou not, how the LORD enquires to punish sin in the third and
fourth generation, even as the fathers debt is required of his son and
posterity? Thirdly, thou that owe the least, do thou not owe too much
already? and if thou sum up thy Debtbooke, thou shall see thou had need
run in no farther: for thou art so far in as thou must be sold for it, or
else CHRIST must for thee. Fourthly, thou that think sin a small thing,
and a trifling or dribbling debt, consider of the blood of Christ and the merit
of it, which must wash away small sins as well as great. Consider the forfeit
in the exquisiteness and eternity of the torments of hell, and then tell me
how small a mote sin is.

Thirdly, seek to come out of debt, and that is, by seeking pardon of our debt,
Math. 5. 25. Agree with thine Adversary, Use. 3.
while thou art in the way. The adversary is the Lord, who will prosecute and
put his bond in suite against us (and the greater the Creditor, the more heavy
is the debt:) it will be our wisdom to agree with him in the way, whilst he
friendly reasons with us in the Ministry, lest Death the Lords Sergeant
arrest us and we be cast into perpetual prison, into hell, never to be
released. Pray and entreat him (as Christ has taught) to remit our debts, not
to impute, not to require them, not to exact our forfeits, not to sue our bond,
nor cast us into prison, but to pardon our faults and punishment, and accept of
Christ's satisfaction, whereby he has cancelled that handwriting, which was to
be laid against us, and by fasting it to his cross, did cross out all our
reckoning; and seeing he must be satisfied, pray him to take it out of his
Sons coffers, who is become surety for us.

Fourthly, acknowledge a wonderful mercy of God to forgive and not impute so
great a debt; for a rich Use. 3.
man to forgive a poor man a debt of a pound or two, would be thankefully
taken: our God rich in mercy forgiues our debt not by pieces, and not because
he cannot get it from us, but freely and fully forgiues the whole debt, Luke
12. Did not I forgive thee all? yes, the good Samaritane will discharge all for
us.

Now, in way of thankfulness what remains for us to do, but; First, beware
of running into further debt? A man that has felt the burden of debt and has
bin in bonds, will make hard shift to keep out: and do not thou heap up
wrath against thy self.

Secondly, though we shall daily by corruption run upon scores, yet we must
take heed our debts stand not too long in Gods Book vnraysed, but daily renew
our repentance and so wipe them away.

As they be daily written, let them be daily blotted out, let them not be
like the sins of Judah, written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
Diamond.

Thirdly, if thy Creditor forgive thee all, Luke 12. go thou and do the like,
be merciful as thy heavenly Father is merciful. In wrongs and injuries
offered, abstain from malice and revenge; count the wrong and injury as if it
were not, impute it not; for thus thy heavenly Father does with thee, and thus
thou desire he should do for thee. Would thou have an Ocean of mercy
fall upon thee? and wilt not thou let a drop fall on thy brother? Thus shall
thou testify thy thankfulness, and thus as Romans 3. 5. our unrighteousness
shall commend the righteousness and glory of God, which is not in the nature
of our sin so to do; for our sin rather rewards him with shameful
contempt and dishonor; but, First, both in respect of his admirable goodness
in pardoning so great sins: Secondly, and our thankful acknowledging of
that grace in walking answerable and worthy of it.

The second thing in this phrase is,

The person that must not impute sin, is the Lord, Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am
he, that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. So Chap. 48. 9. 11. For my Names sake will I defer my
wrath, and for my praise will I refrain it from thee, that I cut thee not off:
For mine own sake, for mine own sake will I do it.

For, first, not all the Angels and Saints in the World, Reasons.
whether in Heaven or Earth, can forgive the least sin, because they cannot
satisfy the debt, nor cancel the bond.

Secondly, the Scribes and Pharisees saw clearly (though blind in many other
things) that none but GOD could forgive sins, Luke 5. 21.

Thirdly, the Lord is the father of mercies and the God of all comfort, whereas
there is no comfort without pardon of sin. And with thee is mercy, Psalm.
130. 3. that is, with thee alone, to whom it is proper to say, I will forgive
sin.

Fourthly, who can forgive sin but he? who is a God like thee, that passest
by the iniquity of thy people? who can remit a debt, but he to whom it is due?
If another do it, he abuses both the Creditor and debtor.

Whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted: therefore Object.
Ministers can remit sin and not God alone.

God only remits sin by his proper authority and power, which is here
meant; the Minister only ministerially, Answ.
declaring that which God does. Can Ministers remove burdens, give a cover
large enough, and remit another debt?

Is my sin against a Priest or against the Pope of Rome, that he must bestow
pardon on me?

Shall I hide me under the Saints wings? or what bond of theirs have I broken,
which they can release me of? Nay rather, say, First, Against thee, against
thee have I sinned, and prays for mercy only from him. Secondly, If I owe a
man nothing, I care not for his forgiveness and forbearance. Thirdly, There
mercy is a poor mercy, I need a rich mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. God rich in mercy, 1.
Pet. 1. 3. who of his great mercy has begot us. Theirs is too strait a mercy,
I need those large mercies, of which David speaks, Ps. 119. 156. Thy
compassions are very large.

And now having spoken of the person, whose sin is thus freely remitted, we
come to speak of the blessedness promised unto him.

Blessed.
NOw we are to enquire, First, what is meant by the blessedness pronounced on
such a man as has this ease, cover, and acquittance from his sins. Secondly,
the instructions to be learned.

By blessedness is meant an effect of justification, namely, that happy state
and condition of a man, arising from all those heavenly blessings in Christ,
which are chained together, To. 8. 29. 30. as from Gods prescience,
predestination, vocation, justification, sanctification and glorification. This
blessedness of a man in Christ has two degrees. First, in this life, which
may be called a blessedness of grace. Secondly, in the life to come, which is
a blessedness of glory. The former, is here principally meant, which may be
reached in this life, and necessarily draws after it the other, as he that
draws one link of a chain, draws the whole.

Pardon of sin is such a gift as makes a man fully happy: Doct. 1.
for the Text clears it thus. Pardon of sin makes an happy man.


First, that which remoueth all misery and burden, makes a man happy; such as
are the curse of God due to sin in this life and the life to come, the
guiltiness Reasons.
of conscience, horror of soul and expectation of vengeance, 1.
which is hell before hell, etc. But this does pardon of sin, it is the ease
of our burden.

Secondly, that which brings into favor with GOD 2.
otherwise an enemy, so as God and man can now walk together as friends, God
can look with a clear countenance on man, and man look up with sweet comfort
in his God. This makes a man a happy man; the light of Gods countenance is
better then life: But this does pardon of sin, which covers all our
nakedness and deformity.

Thirdly, that wherein we are justified before God, is 3.
our blessedness; but in not imputing of sins is our justification, as the
Apostle from this place proves, Romans 4. 6. 7. Hence is it that Zachary in his
Song, Luke 1. 77. says, that God by remission of sin teaches the knowledge
of salvation.

Fourthly, and lastly, even nature will draw this confession 4.
from the worst, that the best to be happy need pardon, that if God straightly
mark what is done amiss, none could abide, and that every man by the Law is
accursed.

Secondly, and much more does the Scripture teach, that before God have begun
his grace with a man, his whole life is hateful, his mind and conscience
polluted; yea and after, every thing is imperfect, so as the best works need
pardon.

Thirdly, and most of all the experience of the godly confirms this truth.
Never did any man feel the burden of sin, and Gods wrath in his soul for
it, but he could say, his happiness was to be eased. Never did any see the
ougly face of his sin, and Gods angry face beholding it out of Heaven as a
consuming fire, but he would proclaim him happy, whose sin is covered.
Never did any feel Gods Tribunal set up in his conscience, and God and his
conscience casting him for his insufficiency, but he did place his peace and
happiness in Gods not imputing his sin unto him.

If blessedness stand in the pardon of sin and imputation Use 1.
of righteousness, then not in merits and satisfactions. This use the Apostle
draws out of this place, Romans 4. If righteousness stand in the hiding of
sin, then not in meriting it. Besides, there are but two ways of discharging
debts, either forgiveness or payment; If I pay, it is not forgiven.

Popish doctrine stands here against the light of the Scripture, in the
Camps of natural reason, which suggesteth, that something must be done by a
man to his own justification, as the young man, What good thing shall I do to
be saved? And the Papists never asking God what they should do, set themselves
on works satisfactorie, which he never enjoined, as Donations to Churches,
Pilgrimages, Fastings, Pater-nosters, Auees, Creeds, Inuocations, Visitations,
and Oblations to Saints, keeping and kissing, yea, praying to Relics, Merits
of Saints, Works supererogatory, Purgatory, Vows, Vigils, Masse-chantings,
Jubilees, martes of pardon, and a thousand such Symoniacall tricks, to make a
sale of remission of sins, all which wage battle and war to this learning
of David. Of all these in general will one day be said, Who required these
things at your hands? these things so derogatorie to the blood of Jesus Christ,
which cleanses us from all sin. Secondly, to the nature of justification,
which is the full absolution of a sinner before God, by reason of Christ who is
made our righteousness by imputation.

Thirdly, so derogatory to the truth of the doctrine concerning good Works,
which are far from justifying or meriting. I speak of good Works, even of
grace, which, first, are imperfect in number: secondly, in degree; not being
done with all due intents, nor the whole heart and strength, neither can be,
because the heart is partly spiritual, partly fleshly; the best works
therefore have flesh and corruption in them, and whatsoever is defiled,
performs not the Law, needs a cover, and cannot in it self be accepted.
Thirdly, they are imperfect in the person. No good work can proceed from any
but a good worker, and a justified person: first, make the tree good, and then
the fruit will be good also: therefore they cannot justify, seeing the person
is already justified. And the Sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt
iustificandum.
justified person, when he does the best, is unprofitable, he cannot answer
one of a thousand: and if the Lord should mark what is done amiss, who could
stand? The best work has matter of humiliation, which may exclude all our
rejoicing. Paul knew nothing by himself, but had practiced works of grace
many, yet says, he was not thereby justified.

But they say, God has promised a reward of life eternal Object.
to good works.

Let them show a place, where it is promised to the Answ.
work, but to the worker, being a believer, to whom Christ's righteousness is
imputed, in which regards all such rewards are mere mercy.

But Christ has merited, that our good works should Object. 2.
merit.

That is false: for then Christ merited, that our good Answ.
works should fulfill the justice of the Law, which they cannot, being stained
with sin, and that they are dyed in the blood of Christ, makes them not
meritorious of eternal life, but that they bring not eternal death.

David prays, Psalm. 7. 3. to be judged according to Object. 3.
his righteousness.

Righteousness is either of the cause, or of the person: Answ.
David here speaks of the former; for he had a good cause and conscience,
though Saul pursued him to the death: but he speaks not of the righteousness
of his person before God, of which Job speaks, when he says, that if he
should justify himself, namely, before God, his own clothes would defile him.

The last judgment is by works, and therefore justification. Object. 4.


These are diverse works of God: in the first, namely, in the justification of
a sinner, he does accept and make Answ.
a sinner just, and this is only by Christ's righteousness; in the latter he
declares him just: and this may be by works; so Saint James, Let me see thy
faith by thy works; thus they justify before men, not before God.

A man is condemned for evil works, and therefore saved for good works.
Object. 5.


If a good work were as perfectly good, as an evil is perfectly evil, he
should; but not being so, we are saved Answ.
by Christ's good works, which were perfect. Let us detest therefore that
doctrine, that misleadeth us out of the plain path to salvation, and cast
down our selves at Gods feet, confess our sin, pray for pardon, and plead
not merit, but mercy. Let us fly forth of our selves to Christ our head, life,
and salvation, he is the carcass whereunto we must resort; let us with Paul
account our best works but dung, and much more all Popish devices. He has
nothing in Christ, who has any thing in himself, and he that will not rest in
that righteousness restored by Christ, has no part of blessedness.

Secondly, if it be a blessed estate to have sins forgiven, then must a man
certainly believe the pardon of Use 2.
his sins: for this blessedness is to be enjoyed in this life (as we noted)
and no man can hold and enjoy that he has not. The Church of Rome teaches,
that to doubt is a virtue, and so withholds a man from the sense of this
happiness.

Their reasons are these. We must work out our salvation Obie ct. 1.
with fear and trembling.

This fear is not in regard of Gods mercy and our salvation, but fear of
sin and his displeasure: and this is Answ.
not contrary, but stands with assurance of forgiveness of sins. Psalm. 130.
Mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.

It is presumption to believe so. Object. 2.


It is obedience to Gods Commandment. 1. Ioh. 3. 23. Answ.
This is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son: now, to
believe in his name, is more then that he dyed for sinners; else do the
Devils believe as much as we, but they cannot believe that Christ dyed for
themselves.

None knows Gods mind concerning him, and so Object. 3.
can have no assurance, but may only hope well.

No man knows the secret will of God, but his revealed Answ.
will he may know, namely, that whosoever believes, shall be saved; the
application of which draws necessarily this conclusion, Therefore I shall be
saved, being a believer: which is infallible.

Experience shows, that the most faithful and best Object. 4.
are full of doubtings; therefore, there is no certain belief.

Doubting and Faith may stand, and will dwell together; else would not Christ
have said, O thou of little Answ.
faith, why doubtedst thou? every Christian consists of Flesh and Spirit,
therefore Faith will be assailed with doubtings, and yet in the end triumph.

Hence we see, as we are to labor for pardon of sin, so also for assurance
of pardon, else can we have little peace in our selves, and a comfortless
happiness. Am I the richer, because I know many other be? or fuller, because
many eat? I must take comfort in my own wealth, strength by my own food, and
joy in my own pardon.

Thirdly, we must every one herein place our happiness, Use 3.
even in Gods mercy pardoning sin, and accordingly set our hearts and
affections upon it, longing after this assurance above all things in the world.
If a malefactor were condemned, and at the place of execution, what is it that
would make him happy? What wishes he above the world? only a pardon from
his Prince; gold and silver, lands and honors, can do him no good; only a
pardon is the most welcome thing in the World. This is every man's case, we are
Traitors and Rebels to God, our sins have proclaimed us Rebels through heaven
and earth, the Law has condemned us, we are going on to execution, and every
day nearer then other; wherein then ought we to place our happiness, if we
well weighed our estate, but in a gracious and free pardon? We would strive for
pardon as for life and death. Miserable men they be, that place their felicity
in any thing else. For consider, that notwithstanding, first, the greatest part
of men place their happiness in wealth, pleasure, honor; and these carry all
their hearts: yet this is an earthly and sensual, and far from Christian
happiness, which cannot leave a man unhappy in the end, as all these do.
Secondly, the most wicked ones that the world has had, have enjoyed the
greatest outward prosperity. Thirdly, the most dear servants of God have
been strangers in the world, and met with the strangest entertaynement.
Fourthly, those whose portion has been outwardly most prosperous, yet never
thought themselves happy out of Gods mercy pardoning sin; an example in
David; he had riches, honor, pleasu re, a crown, kingdom, subjects,
treasures; but did he place his fclicitie in these things? No, but in the
forgiveness and covering of sins; in whose steps we must tread. Fifthly, he
that would build a firm house, must lay a sure foundation; and will thou lay
the foundation of thy happiness in the dust? Lay it in wealth, they have
wings; and when they fly away, so does thy happiness: why do thou trust a
fugitive servant? Lay it in pleasures, it will end in sorrow; and the Apostle
says, It makes a man as a corpse living, dead while he lives. Lay it in honor;
what a vanishing thing is that, like the footsteps of a ship in the Sea,
carried with a strong gale? Yea, lay it any where but in God and his assured
mercies, it will prove a tottering happiness, and the fall of such an happy
man shall be great.

Secondly, others think themselves most happy in the committing of sin, and
practice of their iniquity; and these are most miserable captives to the
Devil, so far from thinking their happiness to stand in the pardon of
sin, as that they place it in the practice of it. Hence is it that Monsters
of men, Devils incarnate, profess to swear, quarrel, drink, riot, whore,
and take them the greatest enemies to their happiness, that would help to
pull them out of the snares of the Devil. I would know what other happiness
the Devil has, then incessantly to sin against God, and draw so many as he
can into his own damnation; which express image he has stamped on numbers,
marked to destruction.

Fourthly, let us check our hearts, that can find so Use 4.
much joy in these earthly things, and so little in these heavenly gifts of
Gods love, such as are election, vocation, justification, adoption,
sanctification, which are called the pleasures of Gods house, and they blessed
that enjoy them: and surely well may they suspect themselves to be as yet
unpurged, that find not a joyful sense of it.

Alas, will the believer say, I find little comfort of this doctrine, I find
my heart much more affected to earthly things, I find not this joy of my
salvation, the sense of Gods favor in pardoning my sin, warmeth my heart but
a little; what may I think of my self? may not I hope my sins are pardoned?

It is true ordinarily, that a reconciled soul possesses Answ.
felicity with great joy, and the heart seized of Gods love, holds the
consolation of it; yet these rules must be held to uphold the weak Christian.

First, the gift of pardon and love, is given often before Rules to uphold the
weak Christian not feeling his reconciliation.
the comfort and joy of it: when grace is as it were in the seed, and men in
the beginnings of conversion, begin to have right in the tree of life, and to
be adopted, it is not so soon discerned to come up to a joyful harvest, but
first is a blade, then an ear, then corn in the ear. And a time there is,
when a soul which is partaker of true grace, is busied and taken up rather
with sense of sin, desires of grace, and seeking of helps and proppes to
believe, then with the joy of any thing attained. True desire argues the
presence of the things desired, and yet argues not the feeling of it: and that
a man may have that gift, which is not felt, appears in David, who by Nathan
was told, that his sin was pardoned, and yet long after, he prays for the
forgiveness of it, that is, for a more full sense of the forgiveness.

Secondly, the gift of Gods free grace is not given (in respect of us) all at
once, nor in the same measure; and therefore the comfort of it is not all
alike, or at once: for the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith, and so justification and reconciliation, are in the means more and more
revealed, and the comfort is proportionable to the gift. Thou have not such
strong comfort of thy estate as some other, or as thou desire; thy gift of
knowledge and understanding of Gods love perhaps, is lesser then his; comfort
thy self, stir up thy self in the means to enlarge the gift, and thy
comfort shall be enlarged. Hence is it, that the Apostle to the Ephesians, 1.
18. prayed, that they whose faith and love he had commended, might have their
eyes opened to see the hope of their calling by the Spirit of revelation. Get
further knowledge of thy estate, and so thou shall attain further comfort.

Thirdly, the state of a Christian soul is not all alike, there is a Christian
combat, wherein sometime faith preuailes, sometime doubting; sometime grace
has the better, sometime corrupt nature. When faith is foiled of infidelity,
or kept under, sense of reconciliation fails with it. The light of the mind
is often eclipsed, as in Jonah, I am cast from the sight of God; and David said
Jonah 2. 4.

Psalm. 116. 11.


once, all men were liars. Now the eye of the soul being so dim, the
comforts of God must needs be ouercast and clouded: but as the Sun breaks
from under a cloud, so does light to the troubled soul: and comfort grows
often to a confident glorying, and a joyful triumph, as David, Return, O my
soul, to thy rest.

Fourthly, as the carriages of a man's conversation be diverse, so be the
apprehensions of his comfort: sometimes it is more attended, and carried more
purely; sometimes care is remitted, and the course more corrupt. Common
infirmities hinder not so much the comfort of salvation, as great sins do,
as appears in David's adultery, Restore me the joys of thy salvation. If thy
comforts be small, it is likely thy corruptions are the greater: here look to
thy former graces, feelings and works. Be diligent in awaking thy soul,
shake off worldly delights, which bring it on sleep, and the deceitful show
of righteousness, which bewitcheth it: set thy self before God, and thy
dullness before thy self; say, Oh, what have I done all this while?

Fifthly, the Christian is an happy man, whatsoever his Use 5.
outward estates be; else has David misplaced happiness.

And herein is their happiness, that they are in favor with God, and can
never be cast out of favor again: all happy men are in a sure estate which
cannot be lost. This happiness of grace is surer then that of nature, which
Adam had in innocence; that was lost, because in his own keeping: this is
seated in the favor of God, which is unchangeable; unto which we are preserved
also by the power of God. True it is, the godly may have many afflictions, 1.
Pet. 1. 5.
and have, as Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, David, Abel, but none of them, neither
inward nor outward, can hinder their happiness, nay, they shall all further
it, Romans 8. all things turn to the best. The worldlings folly is palpable,
he thinks himself most happy, when his corn, wine and oil is increased; as
for this light of Gods countenance, it is in the last of his accounts. As for
the godly, they count them of all men most simple, and most miserable: and
indeed if a man had no other eyes then of his body, no eye of faith, he could
not think such blessed, whom the world hates, whom the earth casts off, whom
their Country scarce acknowledges, their own kinsfolk will not know, whom
their friends forsake, enemies kill; who are made meat for the sword, fuel
for the fire, and seldom have liberty to enjoy fire and water, or the
commonest benefits of nature in safety. They only are in men's account happy,
whom all men flatter, who bathe, yea, drown themselves in carnal delight,
who can tumble in their gold and silver, whose mouth runs over with
laughter, etc.

But these, who are entered into Gods teaching, can hold against their own
reason and sense, that they are blessed, that hunger and thirst after
rightcousnesse, that mourn now, that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, those of whom men speak all manner of ill for Christ's cause and
Gospel. They judge not good or evil by any thing before them: they think
Lazarus a godly poor man, an happy man, when as Dives was a miserable miser.
Their felicity is not outward, but inward, not earthly, but heavenly; it
depends not on man, but on Gods favor, who has forgiven their sins for his
names sake.

Judge therefore of thy self and others with a righteous judgment: if heaven
approve thee, care not if earth cast thee out? if God justify, who can
condemn? if Christ will confess thee, let thy friends deny thee? Thou have a
sure word and promise of God, by which thou may apprehend in sorrow, joy; in
trouble, peace; in nothing, all things; in death it self, life eternal. Get
faith, and thou shall clearly behold thy happiness, if all the world should
set it self to make thee miserable. Get faith, and thou shall think him only
happy, whom God so esteems, although the worlds misery is, to place
happiness only in misery. Get faith; and thou shall see not only Christ
himself, the blessed Son of God, when he was rejected of the world, and lifted
on the Cross: but even his members then happy in Gods favor, when the World
most frowneth upon them. Faith in the heart only gives a relish to this of
our Prophet, Blessed is the man, whose sin is forgiven.

And in whose Spirit there is no guile.]
Here is an inseparable fruit of a justified person, and a note of a blessed
man. First, by spirit, referred to man, is sometime meant the minds, or
understanding part of the soul, with the most inward cogitations of it: so 1.
These. 5. 23. that your whole spirit, soul and body, etc. and in all places,
where spirit and soul are mentioned together. Secondly, sometimes for the
heart and inward affections, Romans 1. 9. whom I serve in my spirit. Thirdly,
sometimes for the soul it self, God inspired into Adam a living spirt, Genes.
2. Luke 23. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. 1. Pet. 3. 19. He
preached to the spirits in prison, that is, souls. So here it is to be taken
with the understanding, heart, will, conscience, affections, and the rest of
the faculties: and the soul is called by this name, to show the nature of it,
that it is a spirit, as the Angels, nay God himself is; far more excellent
then the body, and yet much more neglected.

Secondly, by guile is meant three things in the Scripture: First, in words and
promises, deceit and false-hood, when one thing is spoken, another meant. 1.
Pet. 2. 22. in whose mouth was found no guile. Secondly, in actions and
practice, when one thing is done, another pretended: 1. Pet. 2. 1. Lay aside
all guile and dissimulation.

Thirdly, in thoughts and purposes, when the reasonings and inward frame of the
heart is unfound and deceitful.

This last is here meant: for the better understanding of which, we must
enquire: First, what it is: secondly, some several practice of it: thirdly,
the uses.

First, the guile of the spirit is an inward corruption in the soul of man,
whereby he deals deceitfully with himself Description of guile of spirit.
before God in the matter of salvation. I say, it is an inward corruption in
the soul, which shows both the kind and seat of it. First, for the kind;
it is a spiritual deceit, and opposite to inward sincerity and uprightness:
Secondly, the seat of it is the soul and heart, which since the fall is
deceitful and wicked above all things, Iere. 17. 9. hence James calls
sinners double-minded, chap. 4. 8. and hypocrites are described by two hearts.

And this may sufficiently cast down proud flesh, seeing this guile has taken
the chief holds; every man's soul has in it the seeds of all sin against
the first and second Table, none excepted. Whosoever comes of Adam, has all
Adams corruptions, whereof this guile is compact, so that if a man look only
at himself, he that is to day a Protestant, may to morrow be a Papist; to day
a Christian, to morrow a Devil; were it not for the promise and power of God,
that preferues his to salvation. And in that this deceit lies, at the root of
the heart, it is more fearful, both in that it has chosen a secret hold, and
scarcely can be discerned, as also is in place secretly to infect and poison
whatsoever can proceed from that root, as indeed it does. Yet few or none
complain of this deadly disease, or will be known to be annoyed with it:
the nature of which is, that the more raging and killing it is, the less it is
felt. Further, I say, by this guile a man deals deceitfully with himfelfe in
the matter of salvation. For there is a guile between man and man, but this is
more sinful and dangerous, both because it is a deceiving of himself by the
lying and slattering of his own heart; as also that it is before God, as if
he would deceive him too; as also in regard of the subjects, in the matter of
salvation.

To deceive one self of his goods, lands, or outward profit, is an ouer-sight,
but nothing to the loss of his soul, heaven, and happiness: and this is that
our Text aims at: if these words look to the former, he is a blessed man,
that has pardon of sin, and is not deceived by the guile of his heart in
this point, plainly implying, that there is such guile in a man's heart, about
this persuasion of the pardon of sin, that not only others, but himself
also may be deceived in his own estate, and so kept from feeling or seeking
his blessedness in Gods favor.

Many are pitifully beguiled and think surely to be saved, and cry, Lord,
Lord, but are sent away with workers of iniquity; GOD knows them not. The
Church of Laodicea beguiles her self with conceit and confidence in her own
sufficiency, being but poor, naked, and miserable: and such is the power of
this corruption, in the heart of a natural man, that when his sin is found
hateful, he flattereth himself in his own eyes, and has pretenses and
colors to turn off uprightness, Psalm. 36. 2.

The particular practices hereof we will refer to four heads: the first, in
respect of a man's estate before God: secondly, in respect of sin: thirdly, of
virtue and grace: and fourthly, in respect of the work of the word and Spirit.
That we may better know the nature hereof, we will cast eye upon some notable
parts of this deceit, which in all this regard it sends out in the most, from
the which in some degree the best are not exempted.

First, when a man is a vile and wicked person, in Gods 1. Guile of spirit in
respect of God.
eyes, this guile makes him think himself highly in favor with God, John 8.
The Jews bragged they were the sons of Abraham, when Christ told them they
were of their father the Devil. The Pharise could say, Lord, I am not as this
Publicane, when he was a limb of the Devil. And this guile is fed by sundry
other delusions: As first, by a conceit of righteousness; while men measure
themselves with themselves or with some 1.
great sinners; so did the Pharise: or by the crooked rule of civil
righteousness; he looked at extortioners, unjust, adulterers and the
Publicane: the common speech is, now I am no swearer, no thief, no drunkard;
no I would not for all the world be so bad as some of these professors, so
covetous, contentious, such a dissembler. So for outward righteousness, as the
Pharise looked at the Law, he paid tithe of all, and dealt justly, these pay
tithes and dues truly, give every man his own, keep their words, are good to
their neighbors, and good to the poor, keep good hospitality; but all this
while are alive (as Paul says) without the Law, not Romans 7. 9.
considering what righteousness God there requires, and not seeing the
corruptions of their hearts, neglect inward lusts, rising up against God and
his Law. Whence only it is, that poor men, who live in the breach of all Gods
Laws, despise the Word, neglect Prayer, profane the Sabbath, swear without
sense or touch, and serve their lusts, yet can carry all with this conceit they
mean no harm; whereas if God ever open their eyes to see their faces in a
true glass, they shall see how sin deceived them, and shall pronounce the
sentence of death against themselves, and the flower of their righteousness.

Secondly, this deceit is fed by the bounty, favor, and 2.
blessing of God, who prospers them in their labors, houses, in themselves
and others. O if I were not in Gods favor, he would not prosper me so long and
so sundry ways! Thus they will know love or hatred by the things before them.
This is the guile of rich men, whose houses being peaceable without fear,
pride compasses them; but little know they the end of their fat pastures, or
of their lifting up, vt lapsu grauiore ruant, that they may catch the greater
fall. These seek not their peace in the pardon of sin, but have set up
themselves a-fatting till the day of their destruction.

Thirdly, what way soever God deal, the heart 3.
will deceive it self: For let God change his hand, and bring crosses and
trials on a man, which should shake him up from drowsinesse and security, yet
hence without further ground many will presume of Gods love: for why? does not
the Lord love those whom he chasteneth? and I hope I have my punishment here;
when indeed the Lord does curse them in their counsels and attempts. And thus
men throw poison into the Lords cup; whereas were these signs of love,
amendment would accompany it, sorrow for sin, fear of offending, and
diligence in good duties; in a word, their security would rise of the pardon of
sin, and not of punishment of them.

The second guile is in respect of sin: the work of 2. Guile of spirit in
respect of sin.
it is manifold; and that, either before the sin be committed, or after.

Before the sin; First, it flatters a man and tolles him on many ways.
Before sin.


First, it bears him in hand, that great sins are but small and venial,
which the sinner easily believes, for he 1.
would have them none at all. Hence charge men with swearing, railing,
drinking, gaming away the Sabbath, their answer will be, I would I had never
done worse! etc. Gross sins with them are but infirmities.

Secondly, that if it be greater, yet GOD will not regard 2.
it, conceiving of God as an idle Essence, that had shaken off his power of
judging the World. The fool, Psalm. 14. 1.
that is, every natural man says in his heart there is no God, to see or
require: such frozen persons that say God will do neither good nor evil,
Zephanie threatens, that Zepha. 1. 12.
God will visit them as with lights, lest any thing escape him, and will tear
them and none shall rescue them.

Thirdly, when men shake hands with hell and death, absoluing themselves from
guilt, while they favor 3.
themselves in their lusts: though the Lord say, Sword, go through the Land,
yet it shall pass over them; such as bless themselves, when the Lord
pronounces the words of the curse, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. The Lord will not be
merciful to that man. Yet, what a number of Ruffians, Contemners and
Prophaners of the Lords Ordinances, Scorners of Religion, Out-facers of
godliness, Drunkards, Adulterers and Swearers, whom the Lord has shut Heaven
against, go on in a graceless and ventrous presumption, by this guile kept
from seeking peace in season with God; though the Lord say, hell was made for
them, they say, I shall escape hell. Isa. 28. 15. Whether of these words shall
stand?

Fourthly, they think nothing more easy then repentance: this sin if I do
it, is not unpardonable, I shall 4.
repent and find forgiveness hereafter, GOD calls at all hours: so he
neglects all counsel; those exhortations come not near him; Seek the Lord
while he may be found; to day if ye will hear his voice, etc. I gave her a
time to repent, but she repented not. The Lord would have purged Revel. 2. 21.
them, but they would not be purged; till his severity sudenly cut them off
as unprofitable Trees, to the burning.

Would a man be so careless of his body, as to suffer a disease to prevail
by weeks, and months together; because, so long as there is life, he may
seek help and recover? no, he will seek present help, be he never so
young: but for the soul, men put off care from age to age, and because they
can repent hereafter, they will do that whereof they may repent: and whereof
indeed they shall repent though too late.

Secondly, after sin, the guile of the soul is not After sin.
sleeping, though the conscience often be: for whereas after bodily harms men
are for the most part wiser, here they are more foolish, unless the deceit be
more timely discovered. They can warily abstain from whatsoever has bred them
sorrow or sickness: but here the deceit of the heart, first nourishes and
hides, yea, makes 1.
cloakes and vizards for sin, to which it is more prone after every new
practice. The truth is, if every sin might be seen in it own colors, it
would be as black as a Devil; but that sin might go down the cleanlier
and stay in the bowels, the heart ioynes with Satan in the varnishing and
coloring of it. Hence is it, that Cutthroat covetousness goes masked under
the habit of good husbandry, fornication but a trick of youth, scarce an
oversight, riot and excess is counted liberality, drunkenness but
good-fellowship, pride but comeliness or ornament at most, and black vices
are grown near of kin to the most beautiful virtues.

Secondly, after sin committed, the wiced heart can 2.
defend it; all Eues brood sucked this from her. When God came to her, the
Serpent gave her to eat; when he comes to Adam, his wife gave him to eat, it
seemed but reasonable; when he comes to Cain, Who made him his brothers keeper?
Come to the covetous man, he has Scripture for himself, He that prouides not
for his family, is worse then an Infidel. Come to the Drunkard; why? was not
Noah and Lot drunk, and many good men besides? Come to the Swearer, he is
safe, so long as he swears nothing but truth, and by that which is good, be
it bread or fire or salt, etc. Come to an Athiest that never kept Sabbath in
all his life, so that with him there is but little difference between it and
another day of the six; why? was not the Sabbath made for man, and not man for
the Sabbath? he can serve GOD on his horseback, none but he and his horse
together: another laden with all unrighteousness tells us, how the best sins
seven times a day. Thus is sin grown witty, and strong within the walls of a
false heart, and fears no colors nor forces.

Thirdly, If any sin hap to make any gash or skarre in the conscience, that
it troubles a little the sinner; the 3.
heart is not backward to seek to apply remedies, in which are as little
help, more danger: for it seeks to stop the mouth of the conscience, and to
choke and stifle the voice of it: First, by calling in other distractions to
take him from such melancholy; it sets Cain on building a City, and Saul to
fetch in Music: so it calls in company, gaming, merriments and other
exercises, like water to a dropsy. Little is the ease of forgetting that
pain, the cause of which remains; it will certainly return again.
Secondly, by contenting a man with some short humiliation, and as unsound as
short, to flatter God withal, only forced by fear and self-love. The Jews
confessed their sins, and promised to do so no more: but they dissembled
with their double hearts, and their goodness was like the morning dew. How
many such flashes made Pharaoh? how many sickemen on their beds have in their
affliction sought God? but it was only for ease, and to get out of his hands,
or for fear, because they saw no way to get out, affecting deliverance, not
repentance, nor seeking sound reconciliation and peace, but a truce; for no
sooner recovered, but they are out in the field with God again, all the time of
their straitenesse being quite forgotten. And let softhearted Protestants, that
at some Sermons can melt with great motion to tears, and yet afterward make
little or no conscience of their ways, but yield liberty to their lusts,
think upon this point, and consider how the deceit of spirit ouer-reacheth
them.

Thirdly, by satisfying with some outward ceremony and formal service, which
when they have done, they shall find, that God is not friends with them. Some
after sin committed, and accusing them, by saying or framing a prayer, though
without heartbreaking, faith, or the spirit, draw a skin over their heart,
and there is peace for a time: others, whose whole life was spent in
oppression, and every penny worse got then other, if about the time of their
death, or after, they give a little money to the poor, or be liberal for a
guilding Sermon, they have peace without any satisfaction or restitution
according to the law of repentance. What they have wickedly got, they leave to
their heirs, who are made happy by their fathers going to the devil, as the
proverb says. They never loosed their bonds of wickedness, and now are
chained in the bonds of black darkness for ever.

The third guile of the heart, is in respect of virtue 3 Guile of spirit in
respect of grace.
and grace, whereby the unsound heart does rest it self upon counterfeit
virtues: for the wickedness of every man's heart by nature is such, that let
it be never so vicious, yet it will counterfeit any virtue.

First, it will make a man outwardly seem a true worshipper 1
of God, it will bring the body, and frame it to Out ward.
reverence, when there is none within; it will make the lips draw near, when
the heart is far removed; it makes Congregations and people sit before God,
when their hearts are gone after their covetousness. Idols in Churches are put
down, but idols in men's hearts are set up: and this is the reason why the Word
and Prayer are so forcelesse; we have men's bodies now and then when they list,
but seldom or never their hearts.

Secondly, it will make a man outwardly seem 2.
a good Christian, when inwardly he is a Judas or Demas: an unsound heart will
make a man profess religion, but utterly neglect the work of it, the form of
godliness contents him without the power; so he have a lamp of profession, he
cares not for oil in it: it suffers him to get knowledge, and rests in that
without conscience; it suffers him to pray, but publicly more then
privately, and to neither joins watching to his prayer; yea, he can show the
shell of any duty, but never cares for the kernel.

Secondly, inwardly it can counterfeit the most excellent Inward.
graces; as, first, faith, when it has never a jot; it will presume of Gods
mercy, and thinks this presumption 1.
faith. What man says not, he believes, that he shall be saved? but all men
have not faith, says the Apostle: therefore it is a shadow without substance.

Secondly, repentance: a man in sickness will cry out of himself and his
sins; he will promise if he live, to 2.
become a new man, and practice godliness: but when God has restored him, his
wicked heart carries him as far back as ever he was: here was a show of
repentance, but it was counterfeit.

Thirdly, love, where is nothing but deuillish malice: two neighbors are
fallen out, and are at deadly hatred; 3.
at the time of the Sacrament, both of them dissemble love and charity: but
after it, they are as malicious and mischievous as ever they were before.

Fourthly, strength in temptation where is none. Peter 4.
while he was with Christ, would die with him, before he would deny him: but
when the maid daunted him, he saw that that was but a flourish, and that he
was not so well acquainted with the wiles of his heart as he should have been.
And so of the rest of the graces.

A fourth guile of the heart, is in respect of the work of the Word and
Spirit; when the deceitful heart forces 4. Guile of spirit in respect of the
work of the Word, Spirit.


the sinner to rest in the restraining of some corruption, in stead of renewing
grace: for example; the Word by a common work of the Spirit, planteth some
kind of virtues, as temporary faith, joy in the word, reverence to Preachers,
love to Professors, releeuing them, speaking for them, and helping them every
way; and yet such are not cleansed from their filthiness, all their hearts are
corrupt, all is joined with deep hypocrisy. Herod heard John gladly,
reverenced him, took him for a good man, and did many things: but his heart
was right in nothing, for it claue to that special sin of keeping his
brothers wife.

And as the heart is, so is every action, so is the joy, love and labor; some
sinister respect it has, and does not good purely, and for it self. Thus our
Savior witnesses, that the good and bad hearers are both in appearance
fruitful, and for a time: but the one is purely affected in bringing fruit, so
is not the other.

But do not the best find such deceit in doing good, Object.
as that they have great cause to bewail it?

Yea, but although relics of natural hypocrisy mix themselves into their
actions, yet they sway not the heart, Answ.
but are striuen against; and the maine motion of the heart is sincere, and
chooses good for goodness sake, as in the other it is not. Now when a wicked
heart finds in it self knowledge, consent, confession and defense of the
word, al which were in Julian the Apostate, he rests in this as saving
knowledge; whereas it is a common gift, whereby the Lord will have his truth
witnessed by the enemies of it.

Again, when a guileful heart comes to a sight of sin, to fear it, to terror
of conscience, grief and vexation for sin, it rests in that as a sound fear
of God; whereas it is a servile fear like that of the devils, and the vexation
is not for sin, but for the punishment of it: it is a common work of the
Word and Spirit to prepare the wicked to just damnation.

Further, when a guilefull heart sees many corruptions cast out, many sins
broken off, many things reformed; it rests it self as in a work of
regeneration: whereas this is a common work of the Spirit incident to the
wicked, whom if God should not repress, there were no living for the godly on
earth. Haman did refrain himself from Mordecai; most sins seemed to be
mortified in Judas, but yet he was possessed by the devil. Infidels live
honestly and ciuilly, abstain from wrongs, violent lusts, etc. But here is no
renewing grace, which mortifieth all corruptions, and reformeth every thing; and
thus was it not in Herod, Judas, and the wicked. Besides, as in regeneration,
the whole child is borne complete in all parts; so does the Spirit begin his
work at the root of the heart, and within, and not without, as in Infidels,
and works not only in suppressing and restraining sin, but also in
oppressing it, and renewing the heart and life.

And here it shall not be amiss to add some further notes of restraining
grace, not renewing. And first, in 1 Notes of grace restraining, not renewing.
respect of sin it self.

A conceit that gross sins be but infirmities, though they live and lie in
them, bearing themselves upon this, that the just man falls seuentimes a day,
and rises again: Prou. 24. 16. falsely understood.

Thus many approve not the excess of sin, as vainly to swear the greatest
oaths, insatiable griping and gaping after the world: but why hate they not all
oaths, all covetousness which is idolatry: but because there is not a spirit
renewing the heart, which mortifieth all deeds of the flesh, all oaths, all
lies.

Secondly, in respect of their affection toward sin, 2.
namely, a pretense of hatred of sin, when it is but a rash anger. For
example: Of all sins, which the ministry is taxed for of the common people,
there is none so noted and exclamed against, as their hardness, worldliness,
gathering of goods together; and the sin is so severely observed above all
other, as that an honest contented man can scarce be free from this imputation.
But now, though the fault be heinous and too common, what is the reason the
multitude so exclames upon it? is it because they hate the sin? surely no:
for their own feet are as deeply sunk in the same mire, and they care not
for plucking them out. Angry they are, that another out-gathers them; but if
they hated the sin, themselves would not gather so fast.

Further, many seem to hate some of their sins, and sometimes trouble their
sins and gross corruptions, and wish it otherwise and accuse themselves.
Many are offended at some errors of Popery, some vain inventions, idle and
hurtful traditions, but others are justified. Here is a show of hatred of
sin, of error, but it is only a rash anger: for

First, he that hates one sin or error, because it is so, will hate all which
he knows so to be: hatred is against kinds, we hate all serpents, all poisons,
all enemies: so said David, I hate all vain inventions.

Secondly, one or two evils may be disliked of him, that hates no sin, and
the sin hated but not as sin, as Absalom hated Amnon for his incest, but
himself more incestuous.

Thirdly, if thou did hate these sins and errors as enemies, why do
thou not raise thy power against them? cry for Christ's crucifying power
against them: a perfect hatred will never be satisfied without death or
diuorcement. If thou hate her in thine heart, why do not thou put her
away? If thou hatedst thy sins, thou would forsake them.

Thirdly note, in respect of the word; when men taste the good word and the
powers of the life to come, they 3
take this to be the Spirit of adoption, and a sound affection. But observe the
difference and falsehood: whereas in Gods children all their affections be
affected with it, and they feed on it unto eternal life, in these it
affects their joy only, and that for a time. Gods children love it, believe
it, rejoice to meditate of it, rest on it by the confidence of their hearts,
long for the accomplishment of the promise, grieve when they do any thing to
hinder that accomplishment, and hate all doctrine against it; whereas the bad
ground only is said to joy in it as in a nouelty.

Fourthly note, in respect of Gods children; namely, when men love them only
so far, as may serve their 4
own turn, for some by-respect or other.

Rules to know our love to be restraining grace, not renewing.

First, every reverence of a good man or child of God Vnfailing marks of fained
love.
is not love. Herod never loved John, but reverenced him; for he saw that in
him, which struck him, that to have spoken against him, had been to bark
against the Sun. God will have the innocence and grace of his children to be
justified by his enemies, and theirs.

Secondly, one or more good men may be favored of those, that love no good
man. Why did Nebuzaradan favor Jeremy? because he loved good men? No, but
because he had foretold the victory.

Thirdly, every good speech in defense of good men, is not a fruit of love in
the speaker. Pilat loved not Christ, but yet seeing his innocence, asked what
evil he had done, washed his hands, and was willing to deliver him. Some good
words are drawn out of the desert of good men, not out of the speakers
affection. Some out of policy, not out of love* when men force a friendship,
and will speak well, when inwardly they envy the meat they eat, and the
clothes they wear.

Fourthly, that is no love of good men, which is not a love of their goodness.
Oh, such a man were a good man, but he is too strict; I could love him, if he
were not so plain with me, if he would let mine eyes alone, and not meddle
with my lusts: he were a sufficient man, if he were a little wiser: what need
he lose his friends? thus subtle are men to disclaim goodness, under pretense
of loving good men.

Fifthly, thou can not love goodness in one, unless thou do love it in
every one; he that scorneth and disgraceth by wicked terms, the persons of
most Professors, loves not indeed the goodness of any one, let his pretense
be what it will. The love of the Spirit is from Christ in God, and for God.

First, to let many poor ignorant souls see their estate, Use 1.
they say, they are not book-learned, and know not so much, nor can speak much
as other men can: but they mean well, and have good hearts to God: but is not
this to justify a heart full of deceit? Oh, but I see no such thing in my
self. No matter; that is thy deceit, who art so bewitched with an enemy, who
while he laughes in thy face, privily stabs thee, and wounds thee to death.
No, no, thou art never right, till thou be at war with thy own heart, and
till thou can say, and see that thou carriest the greatest enemy thou have in
thy bosom; a deceitful heart is at bed and board with thee, lies down, and
rises up, walks abroad, and stays at home with thee. And as it is the most
enemy to thee, so must thou be to it. Paul was never right, till he found this
rebel in himself, and that many years after his conversion.

Secondly, knowing that the spirit is so guilefull, and Use 2.
the heart so deceitful, suspect it in every thing, watch it the better; deal
with it as with an untrusty fellow, in whom thou have found some notable
tricks of deceit; work out thy salvation with fear and trembling: Blessed is
the man that fears always.

Say not with thy self, I see not this sin in my self; therefore it is not:
or, I see not wherein I have failed in this or that; for all that, thou may,
seeing the heart is deceitful above all things: and who can see it? carry an
holy jealousy of thy self, and suspect thy self, as Job did his sons; It
may be, my sons, my self have sinned; offer sacrifice, or rather, apply
Christ to thy soul for thy failing in the best actions.

Thirdly, seeing the heart is thus deceitful, it teaches us Use. 3.
not to insult over others in their falls, seeing our own hearts may play
false with us. Let no man say, that he will never do this and this, as he sees
others do, but suspect his heart, lest it carry him to worse things then they.
Peter said, he would rather die, then deny his Master: but the deceitfulness
of his heart would not let him perform his purpose, which deceit he knew not
before; for then he would not have taken it so ill, when Christ foretold him of
it. David would have thought scorn the day before his fall, that any should
have told him, that he should lie wallowing in so foul sins, as he did the
day after. Hazael was far from the sight of that guile which lay hid in his
own spirit, when being told by the Prophet, what monstrous wickedness should
be done by him; he asked, Am I a dogs head, that I should do 2. Kings 8. 13.
this? Let us therefore make this use of other men's weaknesses, Oh, if such have
so dangerously fallen, in whose hearts I never saw such foul things, as I see
in mine own, why should I be high-minded, and not rather fear? Romans 11. 20.

Fourthly, labor for a sincere heart void of guile. Here consider three
things: First, the notes or marks of it: Use 4.
secondly, the benefit of it: thirdly, reasons to labor for it. First, the
notes.

First, in duties: It has an upright endeavor, and sincere 1. Notes of a
sincere heart.
desire to approve it self to God in all things; whereas a guilefull heart
looks more at men in good duties, then at God, more at men's commandments,
then Gods, at men's approbation, more then Gods. We seek not to 1. These. 2. 4.
pleasemen, says Paul, but God who sees the heart: We care not to be judged
by men, but stand or fall to our own Lord; whereas Saul knowing himself in
disgrace with God, would have Samuel to honor him before the people.

Secondly, in respect of sin: A sincere heart hates all sin wheresoever,
even small and secret; especially it 2.
is more severe against his own lusts then any other, he hates his sins
past, and bewaileth them, his present sins to break them off, he hates that he
does, he hates sins to come, to prevent them, and watch against them: whereas
a guilefull heart can hate even motes in his brothers eye, but not his own
beams; auoides open sins, not secret; smaller he makes small account of, if
he can avoid greater, which make greater noise, and bring greater shame. This
man can rejoice in memory of sin past, and brag of it as a mad pranke, which
should be as a dagger to his heart: whereas David's heart smote him for cutting
off Saul's lap, and as soon as he had numbered the people: and Peter's, as soon
as he had denied Christ. This man can rejoice in conceit of a future sin,
whereas David and the Saints vow and swear to keep the commandments. He has
his present darting sins, which he will continue in, and not let go, let
God and man say what they will.

But is no heart sincere, but that which is without Object.
sin?

It is not the committing of one sin, or presence of more, that makes an
evil heart (for then none should be Answ.
upright:) but the habit and custom of sinning: and this is, when, first in
his understanding he is wise to do evil, but knows not to do well: Secondly,
when he still wills that which is evil: Thirdly, when his affections still
move unto it: Fourthly, when he walks in evil, as a servant of sin, at the
command of it. So is it not with the godly, with whom power is often wanting,
but to will, desire and endeavor is present.

Thirdly, a sincere heart professes religion for it self, and delights in
good men and good things, as the 3
Word, Sacraments, and godly company, because they are so, and because they see
some part of Gods image in them. Whereas a guilefull heart, not having denied
it self, professes for by respects and worldly causes, addicted unto, not
called out of the world; it loves good men, not for their goodness, but for
the respect they have in the world, or some other occasion respecting
themselves.

If then thou would know, whether thou have a sincere heart or no; first,
observe thy actions both in their nature and end: first, in their nature, if
they be single 1
and pure, so is thy heart: as is the fountain and the root, such are the
streams and the fruit. Secondly, in their end: an honest heart ever aims at
Gods glory directly, whereas a guilefull heart ever propounds bad ends of
good actions.

Secondly, observe whether thou make conscience secretly of all sin, yea
most seriously of those, to which 2
thou art most inclined, whether thou have condemned thy self in dust and
ashes, whether thou have resisted and prevailed, or else lie still under the
power of corruption.

Thirdly, consider whether thou daily renuest thy purpose of not sinning
against God, as thou renewest thy 3
days, and whether thou watchest over thine own heart with an holy suspicion,
and wilt for Gods will break thine own.

Fourthly, mark whether thou love God in his image, ordinances and children,
even then when the 4
world scorns and hates all these: here is a good note indeed of a sincere
heart.

Secondly, the benefits of it. First, this sincere heart 1 Benefits of
sincerity.
brings the person into acceptance with God: for whom does he approve, but such
as walk before him uprightly? Abraham, Noah, Enoch, Zachary, Job, and these
are his delight: Prou. 11. 20. Secondly, whatsoever work 2
has such a ground, is acceptable, yea, and called perfect in the Scripture.
And indeed sincerity is all our perfection: sincere persons are called perfect
in the way: Psalm 119. 1. All true worship must be done in spirit and truth:
John 4. 24. as,

First, prayer must be a lifting up of the heart, and a pouring out of the
soul. If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear me. Prayer
proceeding from fained lips, is abominable.

Secondly, if we come to hear the Word, our hearts must not go after
covetousness: Ezech. 33. 31.

Thirdly, if we come to receive the Sacraments, we must have special eye to
our hearts: for what was Judas the better to sit down with Christ at the
Passover, when his heart was on his money?

And if the inside be not clean, but the heart be unsound, all actions and
words must be suitable. Hence even the graces we have, must proceed from a pure
heart, or else are not accepted. Faith must be unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1. 5. wisdom
without dissimulation, Iam. 5. 17. love unfeigned in deed and truth: 1. John 3.
18. repentance an unfeigned rending of the heart, Joel 2. else all our labor is
lost.

Thirdly, all the promises of God are made hereunto. 3
Of protection: He is a shield to all them that walk uprightly: Prou. 2. 7. Of
direction: The uprightness of the just shall guide them: Prou. 11. 3. Of
deliverance from evil, Verse. 6. The righteousness of the just shall deliver
him. Of supply of good: He will give grace and glory, and no good thing shall
be wanting to them that walk uprightly: Psalm. 84. Of peace and joy of
conscience: 2. Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, etc. Of perseverance: Colors
and shows cannot be stable, but they that are in and of the Church, shall
abide.

Thirdly, reasons to labor for a sincere heart. Motives to sincerity.


First, Gods commandment, Genes. 17. Walk before me, and be thou upright.
Psalm. 51. 6. Behold, thou love 1.
truth in the inward affections. Conformity of manners must go with
reformation of the heart.

Secondly, it is a part of Gods image, who is most single 2.
and true; and the beauty of the Church, is to be all glorious within: herein
she is conformable to her head, in whose mouth was found no guile, 1. Pet. 3.
Every son of the Church must be a Nathaniel, in whom is no guile: John 1. 47.
and a true Israelite, even pure of heart: Psalm 73. 1.

Thirdly, our text affoords a sound reason, in that sincerity of heart is
joined with forgiveness of sins, 3.
and is a forerunner to blessedness, Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the perfect in
the way. It is a fruit and mark of faith. Sincerity is a veil to cover all
sin; because of this, God couers and cures all our iniquities, as 1. King.
15. 14 They put not down the high places, (which was a great sin)
nevertheless, Asa's heart was upright with the Lord all his days.

Fourthly, if we would be distinguished from hypocrites, we must labor for
sincerity; wicked ones may 4.
outwardly strain beyond us, make fair shows, and have a kind of faith and
joy, etc. but we must outstrippe them all in sincerity of heart.

Fifthly, if we would have our duties comfortable to our selves and profitable,
when men object them unto 5
us, and we meet with but small comfort in the world because of them, let us
labor to become true Israelites: 2. Sam. 6. 20, 21, 22. David was mocked for
dancing before the Arc, but his uprightness bore him up. Job had no comfort
in his troubles, but only his sincerity: Until I die, I will never take away
mine innocence from my self, Job 27. 5. This also was the only stay to
Hezekiah in the day of his straitenesse.

Sixthly, God has appointed a day to try thy heart, 6
and the soundness thereof, to turn out all the windings of it, and he
abhorres the double heart, that turns it self upon deceitfulness, as a door
upon hinges; therefore look to the singleness of it beforehand.

Seventhly, and lastly, only they that walk uprightly, 7
are Citizens of heaven, Psalm. 15. 2. but as for the hypocrite, he shall not
come, or not stand before God, Job 13. 16.

Fifthly, if thou have thy heart at some command, yet Use 5.
give it not scope, but keep it still above all keeping, fense and hedge it
about, or else it will deceive thee. Take heed lest there be in any of you an
evil heart of unbelief, and so you be deceived through the deceitfulness of
sin. Above all custodies keep thy heart; watch it in all things: never ask
the question, which David did concerning the men of Keilah, 1. Sam. 23. 11.
Will they deliver us? for assuredly our hearts will deliver us.

Motives to the diligent custody of our hearts: First, 1 Motives to a diligent
custody of the heart.
How easily does a little yielding ouer-carry us to great sins? give the
heart an inch, and it will take an ell; a false heart asks but a little at
first and seems modest, but it is to draw on to greater. We have seen a
little sore as big as a penny grow to a gangrene, which eats up the whole
body; and a little sin suffered, is a gangrene that takes one part after
another, till the whole soul be eaten up. What mischiefs have we heard of by a
little spark? What sowrenesse in the whole lump by a little Leaven? Open a
sluice, and the waters run amain, as the waters from under the Sanctuary,
from the ankles to the knees, and so to the loins, and then it becomes a great
stream; and surely the proverb is true for the most part in sin, Over
Shoes, Over Boots.

The enemy cares for no more then one breach, or one gate open to enter at:
this is as good as if all the walls were cast down; enemies be easier kept out
then thrust out. And the reason is, because God often punishes small sins
with greater, as Peter, having once denied his Lord, could not stay himself
from a second and third denial: a just correction of his want of watching at
the first: Therefore, beware of the conception of sin.

Secondly, as want of watch brings small sins to 2.
great ones, so it brings great grace often to a small measure, yea to nothing:
If men remit of their heat a little, they come from zeal to luke-warmenesse,
from that to coldness, and so to be frozen in sin. How many, who falling
back from their first love and beginnings, have remitted the performance of
religious duties, in former times seen in profession, and in godly practices,
but after proved: first, weary: secondly, idle: thirdly, senseless: and now
are openly profane, and thus have made shipwreck of their souls? And what
matter, whether the ship be cast away at once by violent tempests, or drowned
by drops and degrees?

Thirdly, how slily can the heart vnwatched, contriue 3.
and carry away sins of high nature, and like the Harlot that thinks none
saw her, wipe the mouth, and it was not she? Why may it not do a little
evil, that great good may come of it? Some can go to Mass, and do as others
do, communicate in all the idolatry of it, to learn to loath it, and laugh
at it. Some can run to Plays, to see filthy vices acted, to hate them the
more, and as though it were so, some can give way to such Varlets to make
collections, that grudge the collections for Sermons. But do you not think
now that the false heart has chosen her self good Schoolmasters? For who
ever heard, that chastity was learned in the Stews, or honesty at Plays? He
is a mad man, that can no other way try the heat of fire, then by leaping into
it.

Fourthly, consider the greatness of deceit within, 4.
the snares without, and the effects of being taken by them, and the hardness
to recover the heart once let loose. All this will enforce the doctrine
strongly.

First, the deceit within is wonderful, seeing the whole frame is evil, the
understanding, conscience, memory, will and affections; our Temples by the
fall are become a stable, yea all evil dwells in the soul, a vast Chaos and
confusion, inclinable to most odious and loathsome sins, whenever Satan
shall move us, who by his interest in our flesh, and our acquaintance with
sin from the beginning, is seldom disappointed.

Secondly, the suares without are every where: All places are full, the Street,
the House, the Board, the Bed, the Closet, the Church and Pulpit: All duties
are full, as Prayer, Alms, Feasting, Fasting: All actions, Eating, Drinking,
Trading and Sporting; so as no watch can be sufficient.

Thirdly, the effects of being taken, as shame, grief, wounds of conscience,
broken bones, sharp corrections which are to follow, torment of Soul, and
(without serious repentance) of Soul and Body in Hell: this is the sour sauce
appointed for such sweet meat.

Fourthly, once let the bridle of watchfulness go, the heart will run away
like a wild Horse, and a long time ere thou can catch it again, and bring
it into temper and tune for so good service again.

Fifthly, the heart must be still kept, that the whole course may give
comfort: for the heart of the wicked 5.
may be upright in some particular action, as Abimelech in taking Sarah, Genesis
20. 6. but it is not the aim of our lives; but the godly, howsoever in some
particular actions they may show deceit, yet their comfort is, that the main
course and carriage of their lives is upright, as David was upright in all
things, save only in the matter of Vriah; general guile possessed him not, but
in one particular action.

But by what means shall I thus keep my heart? Quest.


First, often hear and read the Word, the sincere Answ.
Milk, in it self, and in the effect: Heb. 4. 12. The Word Means of keeping
the heart in good order.
is lively, a discerner of the thoughts, it makes a man better acquainted with
himself, and grow up in sincerity: it is the hearts glass: by it as by the
Lords Heifer we shall know the riddles and deeps of our hearts, 1. Cor. 14
Paul's idiot seeing the thoughts of his heart revealed, falls down, and says,
God is in you. The Word of God, first, yields thee light, it is as a light in a
candle-sticke; nothing is hid, which before it is not revealed. Secondly, it
humbles the heart: no gold can be rid of dross, till it be molten and
dissolved; crooked things are made right by wresting and wringing: so the Word
brings the heart to uprightness by bowing and terrifying it. Thirdly, it
purifies the heart, by working, confirming, and increasing Faith.

Secondly, set thy self often before God, and him at thy right hand, whose
eyes see the hearts and secrets of men, to show himself strong with the
upright. 2. Chron. 16. 9. Abraham if he would be upright, must first walk with
God: Moses saw him that was invisible. And indeed hypocrisy rises from secret
Atheism: Ananias and Sapphira tempted God in their hypocrisy; and impossible
it is for a man to speak and do in Gods presence, and not sincerely.

Thirdly, set before thee often the last Judgment, in which all things and
persons shall appear naked, and be not as they seem, but seem as they are:
thou may collude with men, but Gods pure eyes cannot be deceived: see Paul's
example, 2. Cor. 5. So think of after-recknings, and how narrowly things shall
be looked too, and what a hard man the Master is.

Fourthly, call thy self often to examination, try thy heart and reins, to
see thy guile cleerer, to bewail and strive against it. Try thy works of
obedience, observe thy comfort and peace in them; observe how thou art
affected, when thou take thy self tardy in them. Say to thy self, Oh my
work must be clean, though it be not fine, it may not be blurred with
hypocrisy.

Take account of thy self Morning and Evening, be severe in examining it,
keep an audit in thy conscience, summon thy senses, look to the windows, let
not in any deceit by them, or if thou have, thrust it out and look better, and
the rather because of the untrustiness of thy heart: he that is trusty,
needs seldomer to be reckoned with: and therefore Josiah, 2. King. 22. 7.
gave charge that no reckoning should be taken of them that had the money; for
they dealt faithfully: but an untrusty Pilferer, or a slippery Gehazi, such as
our heart is, had need be reckoned with every day.

Fifthly, mark the ways, and frequent the company of the Godly and upright;
these will neither flatter thee in thy corruptions, nor suffer them upon thee,
if thou will take up either their Precepts or Example. This David knew was a
good help to keep himself upright. Psalm. 119. 79, 80. Let such as fear
thee, turn unto me and such as know thy testimonies. Let my heart be upright
in thy statutes, etc. Psalm. 101. 6, 7. Mine eyes shall be on the faithful: he
that walks in the perfect way shall cleave to me.

Sixthly, deal with thy heart as with a slippery man, whom thou dare not to
trust: take bonds on him; so here bind it by vows and promises, cause it to
enter covenant with God. Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn, and will perform to
keep thy statutes. Register these bonds, reuiew them, At such a time, on such
an occasion of sickness I promised thus and thus, Oh false heart, how have
thou forgotten thy vow?

Seventhly, being to deal with so unconstant a thing as the heart is, do as
with an unconstant man: we take him when we find him in a good vein, and lay
hold on the opportunity; for let him go an hour, he will be of another
mind: so with thy variable heart, when it is warm with any good motion, let
it not slip; when thy heart is prepared to prayer, sorrow, reading, let not the
opportunity die, but as David, Psalm. 57. 7. O Lord, my heart is prepared, I
will arise and give thanks: if the Spirit be quenched, he will be grieved.

Eighthly, pray often that God would open thine eyes to see thy hidden
corruptions, and anoint them with eye-salue, that thou may discern thy
sins, even when thy deceitful heart has apparelled them with the cloak of
virtues. Pray with DAVID, Lord renew a right Spirit within me. In one word to
persuade to these practices, Consider how we are troubled to be called
hypocrites; but what else does the Lord but call the best of us so, when he
says, the heart is deceitful above all things?

Again, what an indigne thing is it for a man to be beguiled of himself? Men
cannot abide to be deceived of others, yet most are deceivers of themselves,
and that in a thing which should be so familiar unto them. Is it not a shame
to be deceived in the knowledge of himself, and his own estate? In a matter
of such moment as the salvation of his own foul? What marvel, if Satan and
all other deceive those, who are so willing to deceive themselves?

VERSE 3. 4. When I held my tongue, my bones consumed in my roaring all the day.

For thine hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is turned into
the drought of Summer. SELAH.


Our Prophet confirms his former Proposition by his own experience: First,
of the misery he was in, in respect of Gods wrath for his sin in these two
Verses. Secondly, of blessedness in respect of remission, Verse. 5. It is as if
he had said; I know what a miserable burden sin is, by woeful experience: and
the guile of my heart ouer-reached me, and made me know to my cost what it is
to hide and keep close sin; I was night and day in a little ease, my body
failing me, my spirit not sustayning me, but so tormenting me, as that I rored
out for pain; my misery, while I carried my sin, was intolerable.

Whence in general note: First, that a Christian must Doct. 1.
not only hear and learn the Word, but also have experience A Christian must
have experience of Gods Word in his own person.
of it in his own person, as David here teaches, not by Precept only, but by
his own example: so, Psalm. 119 75. I know, Lord, that all thy judgments are
good; and Psalm. 34. 8. Taste and see how good the Lord is: make trial in your
souls, and find it in experience. And this is, when men will be informed and
reformed by it; then they taste the sweetness of the Gospel. But many of
great experience in the world, have no insight in the business of salvation,
as being a thing which they think concerns them not. Secondly, note that
every Christian 2.
must make himself an example of the Word he hears and professes; he must
be a burning and shining light, to give light to others, that there may be no
Christian duty of Faith, Love, Obedience, Humility, Patience, etc. but he may
show his measure and degree of it in his own life and conversation. Thou being
converted strengthen thy brethren. Thus every private Christian shall be a
Teacher in his place, and able to strengthen others, and say: I have prevailed
with God by humility and silence, and so shall you: I have prevailed against my
sins by humble prayer and confession, so shall you: I have obtained comfort
in distress by these and these means, and so shall you: I preserve my peace
with God by such and such courses, as himself has appointed, and so in time
shall you. Thus must every Christian by wise observation and application of
Gods Word and Works to himself, show himself an example and copy of the
rules of Christian life: Masters of Families to them that are about them, and
Parents to their children; Christ came from heaven to be an example of
meekness and lowliness; Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and ye
shall find peace to your souls. God himself teaches men by his own
example, to rest on the Sabbath as he did, to be holy as himself is holy, etc.

Far are they from this, that make themselves examples of scoffing the Word
and Professors; examples in lying, swearing, drinking, oppressing; examples in
Sabbath-breaking, gaming, whoring, and the like: whom we leave as hopeless, to
the Lords rebuke, who will take them at the rebound, and make them examples of
his plagues, to as many as they have been examples in sin, even to Men and
Angels. Are these the fruits of so long hearing, of praying, and coming to
Church? Are these the lessons thou learnest? Is this the return of thy prayer?
Take up betime with thy self, lest God be enforced not to take up with his
displeasure against thee.

In the two Verses are two points, First, the touch of conscience for sin.
Secondly, the reason: for thy hand, etc.

The touch of conscience is described: First, by the cause, While I kept close
my sin. Secondly, by the grieuousnesse of it; as it is set forth,

1. By the effects, which were two, 2. By the continuance of this touch day and
night. 1. The change of the body, seen in 2. The roaring of the voice. 1. His
bones consumed. 2. His moisture dried up.


First, for the cause, While I kept close my sin, that is, Doct. 1.
while I dissembled it and confessed it not. Whence note, A godly heart cares
not to shame it self, so as God may be glorified.


First, the disposition of a godly man's heart, he cares not to shame himself
to all the World, so God may be glorified. David publishes to all the world
his sin and shame, his hiding of sin, and his guile of heart. Why does he
thus forget himself and his fame? He was a King, had glory, wealth, and honor.
Oh, but he was a Christian, he had piety and holiness in his heart; where he
can glorify God, he will abase himself; if he can edify others, he will cast
down himself. The like we see he did in the 51. Psalm, and many other
places. The like did Moses, Daniel, and other holy Penmen of Scripture set
down their own sins and shame; so Paul, I was a Persecutor, an Oppressor, a
Blasphemer; who could say more against him then himself did?

But meaner men then Kings are ashamed to be known of any sin, and flatter
themselves, Because they are great, therefore scarce men: but David though a
King, who had carried his sin so secretly as none knew it, none could compel
him, yet is willing for God and his Church, and a good conscience to shame
himself: And teaches us thereby, that even the greatest, though they might
without being detected conceal their sins, yet in some cases must confess
them; and that they should more tender the quiet of their consciences, then all
the honor of the world, more respect Gods glory then their own.

Cases of open confession are these: First, in case of public offense: so
Achan confessed and gave glory to God. Secondly, when knowing our own sins
and Gods mercy, we confess them, to comfort others: so Paul relates of his
persecution, blasphemy. Thirdly, to witness our sound and through turning to
God, we must not be in some case loath to acknowledge our faults in the face of
all the World.

Many are frank oftentimes in complaining of themselves, and acknowledging of
their corruptions; but far short of this holy man: for it proceeds not of
hatred of sin, but often from boasting; or, It proceeds not from just
ground or settled judgment, but from too light an opinion, that our selves are
sinners: or, It often goes with lesning or excusing the sin or ones self, and
not with exaggerating of his sin (as here) to the sound breaking of his
heart: or, It has not Gods glory, and good of the Church for its end, but a
man's own glory: for many upon slight occasion will confess their faults, that
themselves may be better thought of for it, and to conciliate a good opinion
of themselves. Therefore in thy confession to others take these rules with
thee; See the ground, affection, the manner and ends be good and just; else thy
heart is not eased, but burdened the more.

Secondly, we may hence note, that a guilefull security Doct. 2.

Guilefull security may cast a godly heart on a slumber, till God awaken it


may hold the conscience of a converted person in a slumber of soul, so as he
shall be hindered from repentance, till God by some forcible affliction waken
him: This we may see in David here: So Joseph's brethren held a long time the
sin of selling their brother, till the affliction wakened them; before which
time they could tell their Father and their Brother, We are twelve brethren
and one is not, and, One is dead; as if they had not sold him. Jonah sleeps
under the hatches, though the storms rise, the waves beat, and the ship be
troubled, and the goods lost; till God by the Mariners bid him, Up sleeper, and
the lot find him out. So Professors often leave their first works, and slack
their first love, till God come against them, etc.

A reason hereof is: First, ignorance and blindness in Reasons.
the best, which suffers them not to see sin in the nature 1.
and degree of it: only light discouers darkness, and therefore being light
but in part, even the best cannot but fail in finding out their own sins.
Secondly, a 2.
kind of hypocrisy, and guile in the heart of the best, which David here
acknowledges: for the best would often seem better then they are, and would
rather be sinners then so reputed. Thirdly, an affection to sin through an
old acquaintance with it: for every man's nature, 3.
so far as it is unregenerate, is in love with sin: Job calls it (20, 12.)
a sweet morsel, which the wicked hold under their tongue and will not let go:
And the regenerate themselves part with sin indeed, but (as our Savior
implies) as from their eyes and right hands. Fourthly, because of the effect
of it: for sin discovered 4. Pudor conuersionis and confusionis.
brings shame. What fruit had ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
And to avoid this shame, men would hide their sin, which is a filthiness and
a nakedness. Fifthly, a security and negligence in the heart: men are loath to
dig so deep, to search narrowly their hearts to 5.
find out sin, a tedious work it is of mortification, and so are loath to
trouble their sin or themselves. Sixthly, and lastly, because the nature of
sin (to which 6.
the best give way) is, to dead the heart, to quench the Spirit, and to
extinguish his graces.

And therefore, first, believers must not flatter themselves, but be still
awaking themselves to seek after Use 1.
God; we must enter into our hearts, and consider our ways; we will keep
reckoning what we run on the score with men: but rare are they which think
how deep they are in Gods books, such bad husbands are we for our souls.

Secondly, we should use means against this guile, Use 2.
which preuailes against the best: first, the counsels of the Word must not be
neglected.

Secondly, the motions of the Spirit must be entertained and cherished: for
that is a monitor in the ear, and sets before us the way and our aberrations.

Thirdly, the checkes and pricks of conscience, which attended unto, would
often awake us, and says, Thou art Use. 3.
the man, This and that sin lies at the door.

Thirdly, we must not bid adieu to the remembrance of sins past and pardoned,
but ever bear them in mind so far, as to work out godly sorrow, holy
bashfulnesse, and lowliness of mind; and so far as may be a spur to more
fruitful obedience for time to come. Thus David, though his sin was forgiven
him as Nathan told him at first, yet ever remembered and set before him his
murder and adultery. Thus Israel acknowledged the desire of a King to be
their sin. Thus Paul often remembered his blasphemy and persecuting.

For this, let us be often opening and looking on our wounds, seeing the
neglect of them, and hiding of them is lewd carelessness, and mortally
dangerous. It is no news, that a soldier is shot or wounded: but to see him
go with it, never regard nor dress it, is a forelorne negligence, and
condemned as a desperate folly: so for us fighting in this world, to come by
knockes and maimes is no marvel; but to hide them, and let them go and
ranckle and fester, not complaining of them, not uncovering them to the Surgeon
and Physician of souls, is spiritual frenzy and madness. See we not, that
our souls in their swaruing from God, are like bones beside the joint? the
longer they go, they prove more painful; therefore take them betimes, they
are set more easily.

Thirdly, note, in that David is said to be silent, and Doctrine. 3.
not confess his sins of murder and adultery, almost Gods child may hold
some outward parts of godliness, and yet not see and confess his sins for a
time.
of an whole year, that a man, even Gods child, may hold some outward parts of
godliness, and yet for a time by a slumber of conscience lie silent, and not
indeed come to see and confess sins. All this year David came to the
Temple, there prayed and praised God, and confessed sins, he laid not aside
all his family duties: but out of doubt performed some or the most of them, yet
he confesses he was silent; for while a man lies in sin, his prayer is as no
prayer; his confession is no confession: first, his prayer is not accepted
before God: Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will
not hear my prayer. Secondly, the Sacraments do him no more good, then they
did Judas. Thirdly, Gods word, because it is not mingled with faith, is
unprofitable; it is as pure liquor, put into a fustie vessel: and lastly,
sin separateth between God and him: Isai. 59. 2.

Thou come to hear the Word, to pray, to keep Use.
the Sabbath in the public service of it, and thou think thou have done a
great matter: but if thou come with an impenitent heart, a sleepie and
slumbring conscience, thy prayer and confession is all silence, God hears
nothing; if thou speak to God, speak with thy heart, else he hears thee
not.

Think we not, that Joseph's brethren held on a form of Religion, while their
sin troubled them not for so many years? and what was all their prayers and
confessions all that while but silence? and so many Christians, who fall from
many goodly beginnings, will take such order, that they will keep so much
religion, as they may be thought to have some fear of God in them, but either
covetousness, or some other sin holds them, which they repent not of, as
hinders for the timely seeking of reconciliation with God.

Many also go on in a form of Religion, confess their sins in the Church,
and join in other good exercises in private, yet in some one sin their
conscience slumbereth: and though they be not altogether hardened, and without
all touch of fear, or desire of favor, yet are they very coldly moved to
confess sin, or seek peace; they go slumbring on, and wear out much time
without comfort of their duties, and are loath to be stirred, till God take them
in hand, and judge them for not judging themselves, and force them by violence
to that, which it had been more for their ease voluntarily to have undertaken.

Now we come to the effect of hiding sin, which is trouble both inward and
outward, even in Gods own children.

But here first note what is the end of afflictions in Note.
them, to wit, not the punishment of their sins, which The end of afflictions
is to shake the godly out of their security.
are all remitted by one satisfaction of Christ: but to shake them out of their
sleep of security, and to draw them out of the thickets, in which they would
willingly lie hid.

Yea, but they be fruits of sin, and part of the curse Object.
of sin.

In themselves indeed they be the fruits and effects of Answ.
sin, but now their nature is altered, and of curses, by Christ are changed
into crosses; the Lord, who brings light out of darkness, brings this good
out of them, that they help forward the repentance, mortification, and
conversion of sinners unto God: Psalm. 119. 17. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Now good is diverse: first, natural: secondly, spiritual: thirdly, moral:
fourthly, sensible: fifthly, by event or accident.

First, natural is that, which is infused into every creature in the creation;
their nature, use, quantities, qualities, all are good; so are not afflictions
in their nature, being the punishment of sin.

Secondly, moral good is whatsoever is agreeable to the moral law; so are not
afflictions, they are not prescribed in the moral law.

Thirdly, spiritual, whatsoever appertains to life everlasting, as faith,
hope, love, etc. thus be not afflictions good, spiritually.

Fourthly, good to the sense is, whatsoever pleases the sense of man; so was
apple good to the eye: thus no affliction is good and pleasant to the sense for
the present: Heb. 12.

Fifthly, they are good by event and by accident, partly, by Gods ouer-ruling
providence, that can turn them to good; and partly by grace in the elect, who
make a good use of them.

First, to say with the Papists, that the afflictions of the Use 1.
godly are so many temporal punishments, and satisfactions for sin, is

First, to derogate from that only satisfaction of Christ, and from the
perfection of it. Secondly, to lessen the merit and desert of sin, which is
death eternal. Thirdly, to miss Gods end of afflicting his children, which is
not to punish that, which is already punished in Christ, but to purge that,
which still cleaves unto them, and hangs fast on.

Secondly, when thou art any way distressed and touched, Use 2.
especially in conscience, come back to thine own sin, say with thy self:
Surely I have either not repented at all, or not fully of all; this is, because
I have held my peace, and have not confessed my sins to God, or not forsaken
them. For when afflictions have done that for which they are sent, when they
have opened the ear, and humbled the heart, as a messenger which has done his
errand, they depart, Leuit. 26. 41. the Lord threatens the Jews, that because
they have walked stubburnely with him, he will walk stubburnely against them:
but how long? till their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they willingly
bear the correction, praying for their sin, then he will remember his
covenant: Job 33. 14. The Lord speaks once or twice to a man, says Elihu, and
if one say, I have sinned and perverted righteousness, and it did not profit me,
then he will deliver his soul: here is a way for ease.

Thirdly, willingly accept the prouocations of conscience, when they stir to
renew repentance, not benumming Use 3.
thy soul, or hardening thy self by continuing without reconciliation: Answer
the summons of God, hold thy peace no longer; for this increases the rods, and
tieth affliction fast unto thee.

Fourthly, this being a prerogative of Gods children, namely, that evil shall
be turned to their good, as good Use. 4.
to evil to the wicked, be not dismayed in afflictions, but comfort thy self
in the Lord thy God, and in this, that the present affliction tends unto, and
ends in good, because it brings forth the fruits of unfeigned righteousness.

Now the grieuousnesse of David's touch of conscience is set out, first, by the
effects: secondly, by the continuance of it.

The effects, 1. The changes in his body, in his 2. The roaring of voice. Bones
consuming, Moisture dried.


These fruits of his sin are witnesses of Gods wrath that pursued his
conscience. First, My bones consumed: these effects note the inward and extreme
sorrow of the Prophet, which pierced his very marrow: so Solomon has it, Prou.
17. Heaviness dries the bones; because it eats up the spirits, which should
nourish and moisten them. And it made his bones like the bones of an old man,
whose spirits and strength are spent: for so the word signifies and insinuates,
Consenuerunt ossa: such was his sorrow, that whatsoever was firmest and
strongest in him, was shaken, even his very bones.

Thus Psalm. 51. 8. he would hear (that is, be by the Spirit persuaded) the
voice of gladness, (that is, tidings of Gods favor) that the bones which he
had broken, might rejoice: that is, that the strength he had lost, might be
recovered, and his pain, which was like the breaking of bones, might be
eased. Job also complains, that his grief had drunk up his spirit: and
Psalm. 102. 3. David says, that his bones were burnt like an herth, because of
Gods displeasure.

And my moisture turned to the drought of summer.] That is, look how the Sun
in Summer parcheth and dries leaves and herbs; so is my natural moisture,
(which should moysten and cherish my body) drawn out and dried up by the
parching heat of Gods displeasure. The like he complains, Psalm. 22. 16. My
strength is dried up like a shell, or a potsherd, which is baked in the fire;
that is, There is no more moisture in me, then there is in a baked potsherd;
he was almost resolved into dust already.

Hence we may note, what a wonderful torment, the Doct.
torment of conscience is; no grief in the world, is like to No torment in the
world like the torment of conscience.
the grief of conscience.

Job 6. 4. The arrows of the Lord stick fast in me, says the holy man: and,
Oh that my grief were well weighed! Hezekiah said, that the Lord dealt with
him as a lion, crushing his bones, Isa. 38. 13. And Prou. 18. 14. A wounded
spirit, says SOLOMON, who can bear?

And what is the reason of all this?

First, because here is a combat with God, and with Reas. 1.
his wrath hand to hand.

Secondly, the body and spirit, and all is down the wind: it might be, that
a good heart would bear 2.
out the body, but here the heart is quite dejected.

Thirdly, we have the experience of many, who have sought the pangs of death,
to avoid these pangs of conscience. 3.
Judas could find no ease but in a desperate death in hanging himself. Revel.
9. 6. Such as wish to die, seek death and cannot find it: they follow it, but
it flies from them; and all this in the pain of a despairing conscience. But
here come three questions to be resolved.

First, How can it be, that the wicked bind upon themselves such heavy
bundles of sins, and carry all so Quest. 1. Why wicked men feel no such
burden of sin unpardoned, as the godly, of sin pardoned.
easily, whereas the godly find such bitterness in sins forgiven? how comes
it to pass, that the godly feel such sorrow in sin pardoned, and the wicked
feel nothing in sin unpardoned?

For these reasons: first, because now is the time of Gods patience and
forbearance, of his bountifulness and long-suffering toward the vessels of
wrath. Secondly, Answ.
now is the time of their rejoicing: but when the days of their banqueting
are gone about, then shall come many heavy messengers to tell them of fearful
news; there comes a day of wrath, when they shall reap as they sowed, and
drink the dreggs of Gods wrath to the bottom of the vial. They treasure up
sorrow with their sin, and their grief shall be full: That sin that now
sets no sorrow to their heart, shall hereafter be a worm ever gnawing, a fire
never going out, a River of brimstone kindled by the wrath of the Lord of
hosts, and a perpetual weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Secondly, how comes the body to be troubled by the Quest. 2.
mind?

First, by the strait union, and sympathy between the Answ. 1.
soul and the body united into one person: for while the How the body comes
to be troubled by the mind.
soul is possessed with fear, sorrow, languishing, weariness and heaviness,
it is impossible, that the body can take any delight in the comforts of nature,
but that sleep shall depart from it, or be not so short as troublesome: the
meat and drink shall be tastelesse or loathsome, or mingled with tears: I
forgot to eat my bread, says David, Psalm. 102. No comfort shall be
comfortable to him: for when the spirit, which should sustain all a man's
infirmities, fails him, what can sustain him?

Secondly, by the righteous judgment of God, who corrects together those who
have sinned together, 2.
and as they have been undivided in sin, so are they not divided in the smart
of it. The body has been a servant to the lusts of the soul, and so receives
the wages of sin with it. David abused the vigor, strength and health of his
body in the sins of adultery and murder, and now the Lord chasteneth him in
both.

Thirdly, how comes it to pass, that all the godly have not this torment for
sin, that they are not thus struck Quest. 3. Why all the godly are not a
little terrified with their sins.
with terror, nor so affected for sin, as to have their strength impaired,
and their body dried?

First, their persons are not alike, and therefore Gods dealing with them is
not alike: some are more obscure in the world then other, and have only more
secret exercises; Answ.
some are more fitted by God to be special vessels for his glory, in whom he
will shine to his whole Church, as David, Hezekiah, etc. and these he will
specially work upon, to make them patterns of his mercy, both in leading them
in and out of trouble: for first, hereby he lets the world see, that great
grace is joined with great corruption. Secondly, that the best have matter of
correction in them. Thirdly, that he will not spare to rebuke sin in those
that are nearest and dearest unto him. Fourthly, he will have others to look
upon them, and Gods dealing with them, in their casting down and raising up.

Secondly, according to the difference of sins, may be the difference of
sorrow: many men of greater grace then others, have fallen into greater sins
then others, and their knowledge being more then others is, their apprehension
of the sentence of the Law has been deeper, and so of wrath due to their
sin. Besides, in some others, some special corruption which has often
prevailed, or the constitution of body, may add a sting to the sorrow of mind:
some are naturally more fearful, as melancholy constitutions, and so their
impressions are deeper, and of longer continuance.

Thirdly, although in ordinary Christians, before sense of remission, there is
a sufficient measure of labor, and weariness under the burden of sin, yet
some of all kinds God will exempt from such depth of grief, that he may show
himself free in all his working.

O that men would hence come to fear the pains prepared for sinners! for if,
first, a drop of Gods displeasure, Use 1.
let fall, secondly in love, thirdly, on his own children, fourthly, for a
moment, do so amaze them, and drink up their spirits, their souls and
bodies; how much more shall the Ocean and deep sea of Gods wrath against his
enemies for all eternity, consume and torture them in hell? Blind people of
the world will not know what hell means, till they be in it.

Secondly, let us learn to have compassion on such as are troubled in spirit,
seeing such is their heaviness, as presses Use 2.
down both soul and body; let us apply our selves to comfort them, as David
did here in his own person and example. Many think this sickness to be but
passion, conceit or melancholy, and because it changes the body often, they
think it to arise from the body: but there is no disease like to this, for
symptoms and torment: First, they all are natural, this supernatural.
SeSecondly, they from the constitution of the body, this from the constitution
of the soul. Thirdly, in them the humors first or imagination (as in
Melancholy) are distempered, in this the conscience first, and the humors
after. Fourthly, they all may be cured by natural remedies, and bringing the
body to a temperature, all natural medicines under heaven cannot cure this
sickness. Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor: to relieve the
sick conscience is mercy indeed. Christ had the tongue of the learned given
him to speak a word of comfort to such weary souls, and was sent to bind up
the broken in heart; and not only ministers, but every Christian has received
of his anointing.

Thirdly, in that David's sickness of body was from Use 3.
the sin of his soul, learn that health is a special blessing of God,
seeing we ever carry that about with us which might change it: the first and
most noisome humor, which breeds bodily diseases, is sin the disease of the
soul; and therefore if God change his hand, and bring weakness upon our
bodies, we must not fix our eyes upon second causes, not on abundance of
peccant humors, but look back to our sins and life past, consider how
silent and impenitent we have been, turn to God, bewail and forsake sin,
resolve to use our health better, and our strength for God, and not against
him; and thus the sickness of our body shall turn to the soundness and
health of the soul: else woeful is the state of that man, who being sick both
in soul and body, is brought near to the gates both of death and hell. And in
our recovery, let us take up that lesson of our Savior, Go and sin no more.

Fourthly, if this touch of conscience be so great, then Use. 4.
must that conclusion be true, He must needs be a blessed man, whose sins are
forgiven, whose wounds of soul Christ has taken upon himself, by bearing
properly the wrath of God for them upon the Cross. But alas, who thankefully
acknowledges and walks worthy of the love of his Lord, whose spirit was
heavy to the death, that our spirits might be lightened, whose conscience was
submitted to this heavy trouble, that we might find peace of conscience in
him; and whose-selfe was made an offering for sin, that we might be wholly
discharged from it?

In my roaring.]
AN argument of extreme pain, that made the Prophet utter a fearful noise,
like the roaring of a Lion. And by roaring is meant, bitter crying and
lamentations through sense of pain, without further apprehension: for as yet
no further was this holy man come. Men use to vent much sorrow by weeping and
crying, and so David made trial, if by this means he could help himself to
ease, but all in vain; sorrow for sin is not always cast out with tears, the
conscience of sin unpardoned bites, whether thou criest, or art silent, and
therefore thou must come to another remedy.

First, note. David, while he lay slumbring in his sin, made a great noise, but
he calls it roaring rather then godly sorrowing, more like and fit for beasts,
then for men.

Every godly man's sorrow for sin is not always godly sorrow: and indeed,
when men cry and lament Doct. 1.
only in sense of pain, without further motion of Gods Every godly man's sorrow
is not godly sorrow.
love in the heart, or bending the Spirit to sue after God; or when the Spirit
grieved with-draweth himself (as it is often in the godly, and here in David:)
it is rather a brutish noise, common to men and beasts, then any voice
acceptable to God.

Secondly, when sorrow is a fruit of impatience, or 2.
distrust, or joined with murmuring, or excess, or any other sinful quality
(as some godly men's sorrow has been) it is no godly sorrow, let the object
be what it will.

Thirdly, when sorrow, even for sin, brings neither 3.
glory to God, nor comfort to the heart, it is not godly sorrow; for that does
both; but here was a sorrow in David, which did neither: for still he hid his
sin, and it was not yet accompanied with so much as confession of sin, and
much less with forsaking it; the matter of accusation was no whit abated.

Fourthly, that sorrow, which proceeds from the sight 4.
of sin in general, but not in the particular, cannot be godly sorrow: for
thus the wickedst on earth will confess sin, and semble sorrow for it. But
this was David's sorrow; he was not so destitute of mind, or so past himself,
as that he could not, or did not generally acknowledge himself a sinner in
this time, but seeking to hide his particular sin, his sorrow was but roaring.

This may, first, incite us to examine our sorrow, whether Use 1.
it be godly sorrow or no, acceptable to God, and comfortable to our selves.

How shall I know whether my sorrow be godly sorrow, Quest.
or no?

Know it by these rules: Answ.


First, godly sorrow has a right object, which is God Rule 1.
himself offended, and here is a difference between the Infallible rules to
discern godly sorrow by.
sorrow and sense of the godly, and wicked, as in their sickness. The Lion
roares, and the beasts fear: it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
God; therefore the wicked fear and sorrow, because God is become their enemy.
Plainly: it is Gods power or Gods justice, which makes them fear and sorrow,
before whom the Hills melt, and the Rocks break asunder, and the Earth burns
before his eyes, and who can stand before his wrath? And their sorrow is for
themselves, that they cannot make their part good against him in holding of
their sins; self-love is the moouer of their sorrow: But the Church is sick
of love; that is, there is in the godly heart a sense of Gods love, and a
motion toward God offended: In this heart, loving friendship with God, the
grief is, because by sin it has changed his love into displeasure. Zach.
12. 10. The Spirit being powered on them, they shall mourn for him; that is,
when the godly shall come to see what evils and miseries their sins brought
upon Christ, and how odious their offenses have been toward him (for it was
not so much the Scribes, Priests, Romans, and Judas, that brought Christ to
his death, as the sins of the Elect:) then shall they weep for him. The
Spirit of God ever directs men to God.

1. Sam. 7. 6. The people of God are said in the day of their fast to draw
water, namely, out of their hearts, and to power it before the Lord; whereby is
meant, that they wept bitterly for their offenses against the Lord. Psalm. 51.
4. David says, Against thee, against thee have I sinned: he needed not have
been so much troubled for his sin, either for shame (for it was not known
but to God alone) or for punishment; for none could call him to account: but
this wounded him, he had offended his merciful God. Genesis 39. 9. Joseph, being
tempted to folly, said, How shall I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? the wrong, that he should have done his Master, was nothing in his
eye to Gods offense: But Judas sorrowed not for his Master, but for himself.

Secondly, as God is the object of godly sorrow, even God loved for himself,
so God is the Author of it, Rule 2.
working it in nature; whereas worldly sorrow is natural, rises from nature,
and tends to the preservation of nature, very little looking beyond: It
looks with Cain, more at punishment then at sin; present distress more
affects it then Gods indignation: but this is supernatural, a plant of God,
and an impression of his finger.

How may I know that my sorrow is from God? Quest.


When it is wrought in Gods means, and they be ordinarily Answ.
three: First, his Word: Act. 2. 37. When they heard PETER say that, they were
pricked in heart. Secondly, his Rod. Lam. 3. 1. I am the man that have seen
affliction in the rod of thy visitation: this is the hammer, that beats the
Word home to the head. Mark, I say, his Rod; and to know it to be his,
besides the former we may take another note; that it makes all other rods easy
and light, and swallows up carnal vexation, as Moses his Serpent did the
Sorcerers: when men lay on with their rods of indignities and injuries, it will
not suffer impatience, revenge, moodinesse, that men refuse their meat and
drink, and part from their sleep; here is worldly sorrow; now a dram of
godly sorrow, bewayling sin, would weight down a talent of this. Thirdly,
Gods Spirit is another principal cause, by whom God works godly sorrow in
his children; therefore he is called the Spirit of mourning and supplication;
and this makes both the Word and the Rod effectual, and this Spirit may be
seen in godly sorrow, strengthening, comforting, quieting, and refreshing the
heart with inward joy and contentment, and bowing it to obedience.

Thirdly, as godly sorrow comes from God, so it goes to God again, and leads
to God. The sorrow of the Rule 3.
prodigal Son, after he came to himself, made him go to his Father, with
tears in his eyes, and repentance in his heart, and confession in his mouth; I
will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee. Hos.
5. 15. Surely in their afflictions they will seek me diligently. Take heed of
such sorrow for sin as drives from God: if thy sorrow hinder reading, prayer,
hearing, godly conference; yea, if it bring thee not on thy knees and further
all these, though it be for sin, it is from the Devil: for godly sorrow
keeps God in sight still.

Fourthly, it is limited by God, it exceeds not the bounds of moderation;
sorrow for sin may not pass Rule 4.
measure: for Gods Word does bound it for the measure, which it may not go
beyond: now it is unbounded and passes the limits, first, when it vnfitteth
the body, or mind to good duties, or to a good and cheerful manner of doing
them: now God loves a cheerful giver. He made the soul and body to help one
another in his service; and as the body must not oppress the soul by
surfeiting and drunkenness, so the soul must not oppress the body by pining
and overthrowing the state of it. Though we must destroy the body of sin,
that is, the lusts of it; yet we must not destroy the body of the man; for that
is murder, and the way to run into further sorrow.

Secondly, when it makes us forget consolation: Heb. 12. 5. Faint not, when
thou art rebuked of the Lord. Grief for sin must not swallow us up, 2. Cor.
2. 7. And the reason is, because that sorrow, which is not joined with some
assurance of reconciliation, is sinful and faithless; and where this is,
there cannot but be consolation: Heb. 12. 5. He speaks unto us, as unto
children.

Thirdly, when it exceeds in time, and we suffer it to dwell with us, and upon
us; whereas if we sorrow for a night, we must expect joy in the morning, and
fear, if we find it not, that it is more our own impatiency and corruption,
then any other just cause; for faith in his work still expects better, and
hops still.

Fourthly, when it takes away all joy from a Christian, even while it is
present, it is not godly sorrow. Our commandment is, Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice
always, and again I say, rejoice. Why is the Apostle so earnest in doubling
this precept, but because he saw this Christian rejoicing so necessary at all
times, as without it no good duty can be done well, neither hearing, nor
prayer, nor thanksgiving, whereof it is the ground? and again, because the
godly, to whom the exhortation is directed, (for the wicked need not to be
urged to carnal joy) are so beset with trials, that if they do not still lift
up their dumpish hearts to the Lord, they cannot but be overwhelmed?

But this is strange, that we must joy even in sorrow; Object.
how can a man rejoice and sorrow at the same time?

Indeed carnal joy and sorrow cannot stand together Answ.
at the same time, but Christian joy and sorrow can Reasons why Christian joy
and sorrow may and must stand together.
and must: for first, suppose the sorrow be from without, in respect of those
persecutions and afflictions that the godly are beset withal, even herein they
have a sign of blessedness, a cause of rejoicing, and a commandment so to
do, Matthew. 5. 12. Paul and Silas sang in the prison, the Martyrs in the
flames, and John Baynam, as if he had been in a bed of Roses when he was at
the stake.

Secondly, if the cause be inward, from sin and corruption, which is the most
just cause, yet even then Christian joy may and must relish a godly man's
sorrow, in that by the pardon of sin he has escaped the wrath to come. If a
man for some heinous offense were ready to suffer the most exquisite torments
that man could devise, if his dear friend should come with a pardon, but that
will not serve the turn, unless he put himself in his place, and endure all
that torment for him, here is cause of rejoicing, that he has escaped the
torment, but of sorrow, that by his wretchedness his friend should be so
tormented. So it is between Christ and the Christian. Or as if a man condemned
to perpetual prison for debt, a surety should be content to sell his goods
and lands to deliver him; here is joy for his deliverance, but sorrow, that he
should be such a banquerupt and waster, thus to use his friend.

Thirdly, is there not cause of joy even in heaviness, when the Christian
heart can consider what a covenant and league of friendship he is entered into
with the Lord? how sweet must his love be to him now being a friend, that so
loved him when he was his enemy, that he gave his only begotten Son to death
for him, to remove the curse of sin?

Fourthly, is there not cause of joy to think, that now, though I am troubled
with sin, yet I have the Spirit of Christ, to witness my adoption, and to
seal up to me my privilege, to be called his son, and to become coheire
with Jesus Christ? and in the mean time is every way mindful of my good; so
free-hearted, that ask what I will, that is good for me, I shall have it, his
ear is open to hear my moan, to fulfill my desires; and is preparing that
great glory, whereby I shall in due time be like the holy Angels, ever
beholding the face of my heavenly Father?

Fifthly, godly sorrow ends in God, it goes not away, Rule 5.
but with sense of Gods love and favor, whereas the other departs with ceasing
of pain and change of outward things. It is not the increase of corn, wine,
or oil, that can content the heart, seized with godly sorrow, but only when
God lifts up the light of his countenance upon it.

Sixthly, the fruit of godly sorrow is repentance never Rule 6.
to be repented of, that is, a new life unchangeable, a return to God not to
return again to folly; whereas hypocrites are purged, and forget they are
purged, and so return again to folly.

By these notes try thy sorrow, whether it be godly sorrow or no.

Secondly, if the sorrow of the godly for sin be not Use 2.
always godly sorrow, what shall we think of the wicked man's sorrow? How do
the ungodly deceive themselves, thinking, that when they cry aloud in their
pain, and can speak some good words, that it is repentance, and that God
hears them? But it is as the roaring of cruel Lions, such as Esau's, when he
lifted up a loud voice, and wept in the loss of the blessing, but kept revenge
in his heart, and could threaten his brothers death. Hos. 7. 14. the Lord calls
it the howling on their beds, as Dogs and Wolves use to do in the sense of
pain, and threatens, that when they call, he will not hear: as if he should
say, Let them semble never so much feruency, it is but as the roaring of beasts
out of the tumult of heart. If this noise had a good rise or ground, it were
well, the sorrow were deep according to the greatness of the evil: but it is
only the violence of affliction, that mooues this vehemence of affections,
sense of pain, not sense of sin, affecting of deliverance, not of repentance.

Now the reason, why this sorrow is so helpelesse, is, because it stirs not
the heart out, to seek for reconciliation with God in Christ, and then the
greatest pleasure must be in withdrawing themselves so far, as they can from
God, as Adam after his fall, could not endure the presence of God, but hid
himself among the trees of the Garden. How can this sorrow end in joy, which
drives from the fountain of joy, and when as much comfort is taken in God, as
a guilty felon takes in the sight of the Judge, who is to pronounce the
sentence of death upon him?

This is a heavy and comfortless sorrow, and the beginning of sorrows
everlasting; which yet many content themselves withal, as godly sorrow: but it
brings repentance to be repented of, and is a sorrow to be still sorrowed for;
if there were no hell nor judgment, a wicked man would never sorrow, his sin
has no place in his sorrow, nor God offended.

Thirdly, is not the sorrow of godly men, always godly Use 3.
sorrow, out of which they can reap joy and comfort? how then can men reap
any joy out of carnal and contrary means? as many, being troubled with these
grudgings of conscience, get them to worldly comforts, to thrust away the sight
and memory of sin; they get them into merry company, and suppose that by
drinking, dancing, banketing, and gaming, they shall forget their grief: but
so does he, that for a dropsy, drinks a cup of cold water; he has brewed his
grief, and drinks his sorrow; his pain returns, and he roares for it, and
is worse then ever he was. And if every sorrow for sin ease not the sinner,
then much less can the delight in sin do it.

Fourthly, if every sorrow for sin will not remedy Use. 4.
the sin, which is of all other the most likely means, then let any thing in
the world be applied to the grief of conscience, besides the right remedy
(which afterward David finds out) and it does but enlarge the sorrow. David
had worn out much time in hiding his sin, and had drawn all the couers he
could devise, over his conscience: but all in vain, his sin returns again,
and all his means are so far from easing his grief, that they increase it,
and bring matter of roaring. So then, carry thy sin in a cloud as long as
thou can, thy conscience will find it out and tell tales; then, find out as
many pretexts and couers as thou can, to defend or diminish it, they are but
figge-leaues, too short and thin a cover.

Nay, cover all with an external show of Religion, and observance of outward
worship, as David did; yet the gash of thy sin remains as his did, it will
at length bring such pain into thy soul, as will make thee roar, as though
thy bones were broken. In one word, sin cannot be covered, nor the conscience
eased, but only by Christ's righteousness obtained, and put on by faith and
repentance, every thing else increases matter of biting and accusation.

So much of the effects of hiding sin, in changing the body, and roaring of
the voice: Now of the continuance of the trouble.

VERSE. 4. For night and day was thy hand upon me.]
HEre is another amplification of the Prophets misery and sorrow. It was no
light sorrow, which pearsed to the marrow of his bones, and made him express
it, not in ordinary cries and voices, but made him roar out more like a Lion
then a man. But this makes it sad and heavy indeed, that it was continual,
and without release or intermission. And the reason of all his sorrow, was the
heaviness of Gods hand.

Hand.] The hand, being a member of man's body, and the instrument of manifold
actions, is referred to God, and signifies sometime, first, his effectual
purpose and counsel concerning things to be done: so Act. 4. 28. etc. to do
whatsoever thy hand and counsel determined. Secondly, his actual power,
working all things according to that counsel of his will; so Act. 4. 30. so
that thou stretch forth thy hand. And thus God has a twofold hand. First, of
blessing and protection, with which he fills every living thing; Psalm. 104.
28. Thou openest thy hand, and they are filled. Secondly, a smiting or heavy
hand; and this is twofold.

First, a revenging hand, and so it is a fearful thing to fall into the hand
of the Lord. Secondly, a correcting hand, meant in this place, whereby he
scourges and buffeteth his own children. Now the sense of Gods power
punishing or correcting, is called Gods hand: as 1. Sam. 5. 11. The hand of the
Lord was sore at Ekron, because of the Arc: And an heavy hand in resemblance,
because when men smite, they lay their hand heavier then ordinary. Hence we
may note three points of doctrine: first, that all afflictions are Gods hand.
Secondly, that God lays his hand heavily often upon his dear children.
Thirdly, that God often continues his heavy hand, night and day on them.

First, All afflictions are Gods hand: Amos 3. 6. Shall Doct. 1.
there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Isa. 28. 21. The
Lord shall stand as in mount Perazin, and be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon,
that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his
strange act: that is, execute his justice which we enforce him unto, whereas
showing of mercy is familiar to his nature, more proper and familiar to him: he
is loath to revenge, as in mount Perazin David did upon the Philistims, when he
smote them, and called the place the Mount of division, 1. Chron. 14. 11. or as
in Gibeon, when he slew the Canaanites with hailestones, and made the Sun and
Moon stand still, till Joshua had slain them all, Josh. 10. 12, 13. 1. Cor.
11. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord.

The reasons hereof are these: Reas.


First, they are from Gods hand purposing and ordaining 1
them: Romans 8. 29. We are predestinate to be like the image of Christ; that
is, in suffering. 1. These. 3. 3. No man should be moved by these afflictions:
for your selves know, that we are appointed thereunto.

Secondly, they are from Gods hand executing them, as Isaiab 45. 7. I make
peace, and create evil, I the Lord do 2.
all these things. So also Genes. 45. 8. Joseph said to his brethren, God sent
me before you. Job confesses the like, Chap. 1. 21. The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken away, 2. Sa. 16. 11. The Lord bade SHEMEI to rail upon
DAVID: Hosea 6. 1. He has spoiled, and he has smitten.

Thirdly, afflictions are from Gods hand ordering and disposing them: first, in
their causes, circumstances, kinds, 3.
manner, measure, and time both of their beginning and ending.

Secondly, in their ends and issues, which are, first, his own glory in
manifesting his mercy, justice, wisdom, power, etc. Secondly, the everlasting
salvation of his children, whilst by afflictions,

First, he stops them in their course of sin, as with an hedge of thorns,
Hos. 2. 6. that they should not break over into the pleasant pastures of
sin, therein to be fatted to the slaughter.

Secondly, he brings them to a true hatred of sin, when they taste the
bitter fruit of it.

Thirdly, to the exercise of mortification, and desire of heaven and heavenly
things: and thus they are judged of the Lord, that they may not be condemned
with the world.

Yea, but afflictions are evil in their nature, the curse of sin, and
flashes of hellish torment; so the Lord calls Object.
them evil, and makes the days of the afflicted evil, they are enemies to the
joy, peace and comfort, which the godly at length shall eternally enjoy; how
then can they be the hand of God?

True afflictions are in their nature evil, but not evil Answ.
so simply and absolutely, but that there is some respect of good in them: for,
first, as they proceed from the chief good, whose will is the chief rule of
all good, and every thing is therefore good, because he wills it, thus are
afflictions good; yea, evil of sin is so far good, as it is willed by God.

Secondly, as they are punishments inflicted by a righteous judge, they are
good: thus all execution of justice upon Pharaoh, Saul, etc. is good.

Thirdly, as they are chastisements, coming from the hand of a merciful
Father upon his children, they are good: for a father does good, and his duty
in correcting his child.

Fourthly, as they are ouer-ruled by Gods wisdom and power, they are good;
not only harmless, but profitable, and by his blessing, are means to draw
us nearer the chief good, by furthering both our graces here, and our glory
hereafter.

Fifthly, as they are sanctified by Christ, they are good: for had they been
simply evil, Christ had not been so laden with them: but as himself was
consecrated by them, so himself consecrateth them to the wholesome use of all
believers: and so they are finally good, because they are a part of that
strait way, that leads unto life.

But how can afflictions be the hand of God, when Object.
such wicked instruments, as all wicked men, and the diuill How afflictions can
be Gods hand, when the devils hand, or wicked men's be in them.
himself, band themselves against the Church?

Ans. Very well: for first, it is not against the honor of the Judge and course
of justice, that some base slave be used for the hangman and executioner.

Secondly, it cannot prejudice the justice and goodness of God, but rather
magnifies his wisdom and power, when by the most wicked wiles of the devil
and his instruments, he brings his own righteous will to pass; here is a
mighty work of God, that can draw light out of darkness.

Thirdly, it exalts his justice in the overthrow and just destruction of such
as exercise their malice against his servants: for while they hate and malign
them unjustly they heap up coals upon their own heads.

This teaches us, that we must with the Prophet acknowledge Use. 1.
every affliction befalling us, to be Gods hand. It is easier to feel a
sorrow, then to conceive or see Gods hand inflicting it: men think it enough,
in general to say and believe, that the world, and all things in it are ruled
by Gods providence: but, come to apply it to this or that particular, there
they fail. If prosperity come upon us, and things fall to our mind, we can
thank God: but when the cross comes, we are willing to see any thing but God:
then we run upon inferior causes; either we are wronged by wicked men, or it
came by our own oversight, or by the unconstant wheeling about of worldly
things. As if a man beaten should altogether look at the staff, wherewith he
is smitten, and not at the hand moving and ruling it: or as the foolish Curre
bites at the stone, and looks not after the thrower.

Never sever thy cross from Gods hand, though there be never so many
instruments: Joseph looked beyond his brethrens sin, and said, The Lord sent
me before you; Job beyond the Sabeans and Chaldeans robbing and stealing, and
said, The Lord has taken away; David beyond Shimeis wickedness, and said, The
Lord has bidden him. Christ himself looked beyond the Pharisees, Priests,
Jews, Judas, and the soldiers, to his Fathers cup, which he must drink. John
18. 11. So, if we can see Gods hand, the affliction will be borne meekely: but
if we gaze on men or means, it will be intolerable, and we must needs break
patience. 1. Sam. 6. 7. The Philistims would try, whether Gods hand struck
them, or it was a chance, thou needst not do so.

But may we not look at second causes?

Yes, but not as the hand, but as rods in the hand of Quest.
God: as Isai. 10. 5. Ashur is called, the rod of Gods wrath: Answ.
and whilst such rods serve our heavenly Father, in chastizing his children,
and amend them, themselves are torn in pieces, and worn to the stumpes, and
quickly after cast into the fire. For a man therefore to fly upon wicked men,
and to complain of them, is, rather to confess their sin, then his own;
and to show, that he knows, what was their duty better then his own. To
fret and storm at second causes were, as if a man deeply wounded, should
chafe at himself, because he avoided not the blow, or should fall to biting
the sword that sticks in his flesh, whereas his business were to pluck it
out, and run to the Surgeon.

Let us therefore consider of these three things. First, that all power is from
God, and in his hand.

Secondly, that none have any power against us, but John 19. 11.
from above.

Thirdly, that the just Judge of the World would not afflict us, if there were
no cause in our selves.

Secondly, here is a notable ground of patience, in that our afflictions are
the hand of God: 1. Pe. 5. 6. Humble Use 2.
your selves under the mighty hand of God; that is, with meekness and
silence buckle and bow under it: for,

First, it is his hand, who is infinite in glory, power and Majesty, and may
dispose of his own as he pleases: and it is to no purpose to struggle by
murmuring, or impatiencie, to get out of his hand.

Secondly, it is the hand of our Father; thus Christ sustaineth himself, Ioh.
18. 11. Shall I not drink of the cup that my Father has given me to drink?
It is a cup, a measure, tempered and measured by our Father; if it be a little
bitter in the top, the bottom will have a pleasant farewell; it is given us of
him to drink, and therefore we must needs drink it.

Thirdly, it is the hand, that shall not be further stretched out to smite,
then it shall be to save us: this comforted the Church, Isa. 59. 1. Behold, the
Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; the same hand that imbraceth
the Church, is under her head, Cant. 2. 6.

Fourthly, the Saints grounded their patience hereon, Psalm. 39. 9. 10. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it: Remove thy stroke away
from me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. So Isa. 38. 15. Hezekiah
rested himself on this, What shall I say? he has said it, and he has done
it: and Eli, 1. Sam. 3. 18. It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good.
Also 2. Sam. 15. 26. If he say, I have no delight in thee, lo, here am I, let
him do to me as seems good unto him.

Thirdly, if all afflictions be the hand of God, then we Use 3.
see whither to go for release, we cannot expect it at the hands of men or
Angels, but from God; none can take off Gods hand, but himself, Hos. 6. 1.
Come, let us turn to the Lord; he has spoiled, and he will heal us; he has
wounded us and he will bind us up: Job 10. 7. there is none that can deliver
out of thine hand.

How does the Lord rebuke those, who will not acknowledge the hand that smites
them? Isa. 1. 5. Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? ye will fall away
more and more ye seek not unto me. Asa insisted in the hand of the Phisician
to remove Gods hand: but his example teaches, that even lawful means must
not prevail against Gods hand: where God himself is not chiefly. sought, men
go no further then the hand of a man oppressing them, and seek deliverance
that way; which is as if a malefactor should seek to the executioner, and not
to the Judge, who has power to pardon, or repriue or hang him.

Others run unto unlawful and wicked means, to the Witch, the Wise or
Cunning man and woman, who are no better then devils incarnate, and yet are
more sought to, every one of them, then all the Ministers in a Country, as
though all the devils or gates of hell could stir Gods hand, or break his
arm.

Oh, but they do good and help us. Object.


Indeed God permits them so to do, to men's further Answ.
hardening, and remooueth one hand that is sensible, to lay on one which is
far heavier; the deliverance is by breaking the prison, to be clogd with more
burden some fetters. The general rule for all troubles, is Psalm. 50. 15. Call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify
me.

Fourthly, in all deliverances out of trouble, repair to God with
thankfulness, who has removed and stayed Use 4.
his hand; so did Moses, Exodus 15. 1. So did Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 18. 19. 20. and
so did the nine Lepers. Thankfulness is the only impost, that God requires
at our hands. So much of the first point.

Secondly, God lays his hand heavily often upon his own dear children as
here upon David, and upon Job, cha. 6. 2. Oh Doct. 2.
that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid Gods hand is often
heavy upon his own children.
in the balances together! it would be heavier then the sand of the sea, etc.
So also cha. 16. 12, 13. He has taken me by the neck, and beaten me, and set
me as a mark for himself: His archers compass me round about; he cutteth my
reins, and does not spare, and powers my gall upon the ground. He has broken
me with one breaking upon another, and runs upon me like a Giant. All which
phrases imply: first, that his inward and most noble parts were afflicted: and
secondly, that God in his sense was become his enemy, and could not be more
fierce against him then he was. Isa. 38. 15. Hezekiah complains, that God had
bruised all his bones like a Lion. Psalm. 6. 3. David shows, that his
affliction was violent both in his body and soul: My bones tremble (says he)
and my soul is sore vexed: and Psalm. 116. 3. he affirms, that the pains of
hell had caught hold on him, that is, such temptations, distresses and horrors,
as most nearly resembled the very pains of the damned. What a heavy hand was
that upon Jonas, when he was cast into the sea, and was in the Whales belly
three days and three nights, when he cried out of the belly of hell, and said,
that he was cast away out of Gods sight?

And why does the Lord lay such heavy things upon Quest.
his children?

For sundry Reasons.

First, there is deep corruption lurking in the best, Answ.
who not feldome are cast upon so dead a sleep of security, Reas. 1.
that they cannot be wakened with a little shaking, till by most grievous
afflictions the Lord break their bones, consume their strength, and bring them
into such grief and pain, as sets them a roaring. A wonderful thing, that
those, that have tasted the sweet love of God in Christ, which should always
allure them, and remain as a provocation and perpetual spur to follow after
God, should so far be carried back with lusts, as that unless God seek them
out, and whip them home with sharp scourges, they were likely to perish with
the world. Let us see in our example: David, dear to God, having not shaken
off the delight of his sin, would cover it, if he could from Gods eyes: (for
he cannot peaceably enjoy that sin, which he thinks God sees;) but God
makes him know, that he sees it, and because small checks of conscience will do
no good, he lays on to the breaking of his heart with his bones, and spares
not for his roaring. It is our own fault, that we need so great crosses to
subdue so great corruptions: for as the vntamednesse of some colt is such, as
if he be not sore ridden and beaten, he would never be broken; so is it with
our corrupt natures, which as hard knots must have hard wedges.

Secondly, smaller troubles have often a smaller work, 2.
small things cannot make great hearts stoop, a small fire will not purge away
dross from gold, but it must be quick and pearcing; a small wind does not
fan away the chafe of vanity, a small correction or smart makes the child
more froward, till sounder correction subdue him; small trials do not so
exercise faith, nor send men out of themselves to God: for as none for the
scratch of a pin, or a little headache, will seek to the Phisician or
Surgeon; so a sinner in smaller grieuances of the soul will scarce think he
needs go to God. Job 33. 14. God speaks once or twice, and then makes the
obstinate sick with smiting them he will have his blows felt: the strong
purgation at last works out most health and soundness.

Thirdly, the greater the affliction is, the more odious does sin appear to
be unto God; a strong poison 3.
must have a strong antidote: the more the godly are stricken down for sin,
the more are they stirred up to godly sorrow, to hatred of it, to zeal against
it, the better and more watchfully do they prevent sin to come, and look
better to themselves: as a good Physician oftentimes lets blood, not to make
a man sick, but to prevent sickness.

Fourthly, the greater the trial is, the better experience have they of
themselves: for first, God afflicts the 4
body heavily, but it is for the soul; the soul would never perceive the own
evil, but for the evil of the body, nor feel the misery but by the body.

Secondly, in great trials there is experience of a great combat between the
flesh and the Spirit; where any faith is, it will lift up the heart in
invocation, silence, and an expectation of the good hand of God: but the flesh
will be complaining of Gods absence, desertion, and deferring his hand and
help: here is sense of the spirits willingness, and the weakness of the
flesh.

Thirdly, there is great experience of their graces in great trials, that both
themselves and others may take knowledge of their constancy and patience. Thus
Job was made a mirror of patience, and a pattern of constancy, which he could
not have been, if the trial had not been so sharp as it was. Then the Mariners
skill is best tried, when the tempest is vehement; and the valor of a Captain
is best seen in the hottest skirmish.

Fourthly, in great trials, there is great observation of Gods dealing, of the
comforts of God, and of the strength of God, and therefore the Lord brings many
of his, as it were, upon the stage and theater of the world, that they may be
instruments of his praise, and may by their experience be able to teach others,
how they shall find God in affliction: for as one piece of iron cannot be
soldred and fastened to another, unless both be made red hot, and beaten
together: so one Christian cannot be so soundly affected to another, unless
both have had experience of the like misery.

Fifthly, Gods children have great afflictions, and are pressed with an heavy
hand, that God himself may be 5
clearly seen to be their deliverer, when in the eyes of all flesh they are
lost; therefore they see themselves in the red Sea of affliction, and in a
wilderness of temptation, and sometimes with Jonas, in their own and other
men's sense, drowned in the bottom of the sea, in the belly of the Whale, that
as Lazarus lay four days in the grave, that Christ's power might be
manifested in raising him: so also may the goodness of God, who after two
days will revive us, and in the third will raise Heb. 6. 2.
us up.

Sixthly, as great afflictions make way for abundant 6
mercy from God to us, so also for abundant thanks from us to God. If one cure
a trifeling matter, it neither so binds the patient, nor yet commends the
Physician: but if any be cured of some deadly, and almost-vncurable desease,
then we profess we could never have met with such a Phisician in all the world
again, and we are accordingly thankful.

Seventhly, were it not for great afflictions, we could never know the power of
Gods Word in quickening us, chearing and comforting us in them, that it is the
Word of life, is most evidently seen in death it self.

First then, let us hence take a view of the wickedness Use 1.
of our nature, and of the working of it, even after our calling and
conversion, and cease to wonder, that the Lord often brings violent afflictions
upon his own children, which he sees most necessary to awake them out of
their slumbers, and quicken them to their seeking of sound peace and
reconciliation. David himself, before he was afflicted, went astray like a
lost sheep.

Secondly, we may learn hence, that vehement afflictions, Use 2.
and Gods heavy hand is no sign of his hatred to Gods heavy hand no sign of
hatred to his children: Why.
his children; good David had Gods heavy hand lying sore upon him. For,

First, all outward things fall alike to all, and no man knows love or hatred
by the things that are before him: Eccles. 9. 2.

Secondly, in judgment he remembers mercy, Hab. 3. 2. and afflicts in
measure, though our sins have been beyond all measure, and deserve, that our
crosses should be so too: Isa. 64. 9, 12.

Thirdly, his wisdom knows the due quantity and proportion that will do
us good, and though there wants no will in Satan and wicked men to pass it,
yet the misery shall not exceed Gods limit, who has said to the proud waves,
Hither shall ye come, and no further.

Fourthly, he has a several measure for the godly and the wicked: for his
children he measures judgment according to their strength, to the wicked
according to the measure of their sins: but as the best garden and flowers
lie open to storms and hail to fall on them as well as the wilderness, so
the dearest of Gods Saints to afflictions.

Thirdly, if the Lord chastize, and punish his children Use 3.
so heavily, the whole burden of whose sins Christ has borne in his body on
the cross, where shall the wicked and ungodly appear, 1. Pet. 4. 17? How
heavy shall his hand lie on those, who with high hand sin against him? the
weight of the mountains shall be nothing to it; to which they shall say, Fall
upon us, and cover us. If the way to heaven be so strawed with crosses and
heaviness, what is the way to hell and of wickedness strawed with, but woes
and curses? Shall not many prayers and tears, much sorrow and strife against
sin, nay nor the request of the Spirit, and the intercession of Christ, keep
off such bitter things from them, who seldom, and not without some resistance
break out? What then shall become of those, who never pray, never sorrow for
sin, but sell themselves to commit wickedness? if infirmities be so lashed,
what shall rebellions? If weaknesses in his children, what shall wickedness
in his enemies?

Fourthly, this admonishes the godly not to be too Use 4.
much discouraged, if they lie under an heavy hand: but consider of these four
things,

First, that to expect continuance of outward prosperity, 1
is earthlinesse, or self-love, yea, a mere folly, seeing it is a privilege
of the Church triumphant.

Secondly, that through many afflictions, we must enter 2
into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14 22. and therefore that there is more cause
of discouragement in the want of them, then in their presence.

Thirdly, that no new thing befalls them: Dearly beloved (says Saint PETER)
think it not strange concerning 3
the fiery trial, which is among you to prove you, as though some strange
thing were come unto you: But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, etc. 1. Pet. 4. 12, 13.

Fourthly, consider, that neither our unhappiness is to 4
be measured by the things of this life, nor our happiness: for then of all men
were we most miserable; neither let us think wicked men to be happy by outward
wealth, etc. seeing such things are cast upon all in common, both prosperity
and adversity.

Fifthly, we may hence observe a difference between Use 5.
Gods heavy hand on the godly, and on the wicked: for Differences between
Gods heavy hand on the godly, and on the wicked.
howsoever, these afflictions on both are all one, if we consider,

First, the matter of them: secondly, the threatening of the law, laying them as
punishments of sin upon every one offending: and thirdly, in respect of
sense and feeling, as there is no difference between the smart of slaves and
of sons. Yet there is much difference:

First, in the person inflicting this heavy hand, who is to the one as a
severe Judge that smites out of the rigor of justice, but to the other, as a
gracious Father, out of love correcting them: with the one he is angry out of
his affection and disposition, hating sin, and revenging for it; with the
other, only in their sense and apprehension.

Secondly, they differ in the persons bearing this heavy hand: the one is
gold, not consumed in the fire, but 2.
accepted through Christ, and made more pure and bright by the fire of
afflictions; the other refused, ordained to hatred, and as dross wholly
consumed with this heavy hand; vessels of wrath were never in Gods purpose
intended to be refined by afflictions.

Thirdly, there is a difference in Gods end and aim: the one he lays his
heavy hand on, to destroy the very person 3
for the sins sake, and his quarrel is against the party; on the other, to
destroy sin for the persons sake, and his quarrel is only to the sin: on
the one, to satisfy his justice, because they have offended already; on the
other, to signify his mercy, and to prevent future offenses.

Fourthly, they differ in the fruit and issue in both. In 4.
the one by afflictions, their corruptions break out more; as wind increases
the flame, and oil (though liquid) cooles not, but more heateth the furnace:
so the wicked are the worse for afflictions, they fret and murmr and repine:
but the godly are bettered by them, they acknowledge the hand, exercise
patience, prayer and praise, and are daily more and more purified, constantly
waiting on God, till he increase their strength, or decrease their cross. In
the one it is as the lightning, which sets the house on fire; in the other as
the lightning, to purge the corrupted air of our hearts.

The third doctrine follows, and that is this, namely, that Doct. 3.


God lays his heavy hand upon his children a long time, God lays an heavy
hand a long time upon his own children.
and with much continuance night and day, as David says and felt it: the truth
hereof we may see in particular persons and in Churches.

First, the troubles of Job were long and painesul night and day, as chap. 7.
13. When I say, my bed shall comfort me, then thou fear me with dreams. And
Verse 19. Thou will no let me alone, till I can swallow my spettle. Good Hannah
carried not only the burden of barrennes, but also of vexation and affliction
by Peninnah many years, as the Text proves, 1. Sam. 1. 7. A daughter of
Abraham was bowed by Satan 18. years, Luke 13. 8. Another woman that had an
issue of blood 12. years, was cured by Christ, Luke 8. 43. good Aeneas was
sick of the Palsy 8. years, Act. 9. 33. and a man that was lame 38. years
by the poole of Bethesda, was cured, John. 5. 5.

Secondly, the whole Church has felt long and tedious smartes: Lam. 3. 3.
Surely he is turned against me, he turns his hand against me all the day.
The children of Israel were in Egypt 400. years, and 70. years in Babylon.
The ten general persecutions lasted almost 300. years. And why is this so?

First, sometimes Gods children in their falls harden Reas. 1.
their hearts, and grow stiff in their sin, which was David's case here, and
then the Lord hardneth himself to grow stiff in displeasure; as Leuit. 26. If
ye walk stubbornely against me, and will not obey me, I will then bring
seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins. Oftentimes GODS
children would sit silent, if the Lord would be as silent as they: but whom
he loves, he will bring back the way that they are gone, and great hearts
(we know) will not stoop for a little.

Secondly, Christ has not taken away the lingering of 2.
trials, but the malignitie and poison of them; yea, himself through all his
life was a man full of sorrows: and we must not look to be better; he
deserved them not, we have.

Thirdly, God would have us in the continuance of our 3.
trouble, to see the continuance of our sin; were our correction always
short, we would not be persuaded of the greatness of our sins. Plasters
use to continue, and not fall off till the wound be cured; and if a right use
of afflictions were attained once, a joyful issue would soon follow: but some
lust is not denied, and that adds a sting unto them.

Fourthly, God by the continuance of his hand would hold us in a continual
exercise of grace, as of humility, 4
faith, patience, prayer, repentance, etc. it being with a godly man, as one
that has a precious Jewel, which he is careful to keep in his hand, so long
as he watches, none can get it from him: but when he sleeps or slumbers, his
hand opens, and it falls out, any man may have it. By continual blowing, the
fire is kept in, but it dies by discontinuance.

Yea, grace is not only held on work by affliction, but is also by the same
brought forth into example, as Jobs patience, and the Canaanitish woman's faith,
Mat. 15. 23. Christ was not so instant in repelling her, but she was as
constant in faith, prayer and humility. And hence it is, that the Lord
commonly lays not so heavy a hand upon bruised reeds, weak Christians: but
often deferres help to those, that are strongest in grace, and dearest to
himself; as men put the greatest timber, and the heart of the Oak to the
greatest stresse. Abraham stays for the promise, till the performance is
impossible in nature, because he must be a Father of the faithful. Iaacob
waits fore the promise above 20. years, and is a servant, and a stranger,
before he enjoy Canaan. Who were they that cried, How long, Lord how long? how
long will thou forget me? and shall I never be remembered? has God forgotten
to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? Psalm. 77.
7, 8, 9. And, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These were the voices
of the dearest servants and sons of God.

Fifthly, the longer the Lord delays deliverance, the more comfortable will it
be when it comes: the hardlier 5
we get a thing, the surelyer we keep it; that which we procure by many
prayers and tears, we keep more carefully, and make mere account of; whereas
lightly come by, lightly set by. The evil we hardly avoid, we are more
watchful against for afterward, whereas a disease soon cured is not much
cared for, to prevent it.

Sixthly, and lastly, God by the continuance of his heavy 6
hand upon his children, would have us acknowledge how heavy and continual
those torments are, which are prepared for impenitent persons. If repentant
sinners be laid under such lingering evils in this life, what shall the wicked
and ungodly endure? If the Lord show himself so stiff to his children, that
often he will not be entreated of a long time, how will he pursue the
hard-hearted sinner, that still stiffeneth his neck against him? surely his
wrath shall abide, and settle upon such, and come upon them to the uttermost.

But how will all this stand with those many places of Object.
Scripture? as that the Apostle calls our afflictions light and momentany, 2.
Cor. 4. 17. and that God endures but a while in his anger, Psalm. 30. 5. and
that for a moment he hides his face, Isa. 54. 8. does not both this text and
our own experience show, that they belong and tedious? and therefore I am
either no child, or else God may lay tedious evils upon his children.

First, evils cannot belong, where life is so short as a Answ. 1.
spanne: if our days be evil, yet are they but few, says How long
afflictions are but short and momentany
Iaacob.

Secondly, they are long to sense, but not to faith, though they last all the
life, faith expects a blessed fruit, 2
and is supported by patience.

Thirdly, they are long, if they be compared with the 3
continuance and term of our life: but not long, if they be compared (as in
that place of the Apostle they are) with that eternal glory, and neuer-ending
happiness which follows them. This is Gods Arithmetike, with whom a thousand
years are but as one day.

Fourthly, afflictions are long, if we look at themselves alone, and not at
our sins; but compare thy sufferings 4.
for weight or continuance with thy sins, thy afflictions with thy
transgressions, and they will seem short and light.

Fifthly, they would not only seem, but also be long indeed, if we should not
see Christ in them, lightning 5
and shortning them: but when we see Christ sanctifying our lingering
afflictions and sorrows, and carrying a way the eternity of them by his
suffering, which was short for time, but infinite in merit, then they are short
indeed, even a moment, seeing they last but a part of this life, the whole
being but short and momentany.

First then, those who are near unto God, have no reason to flatter
themselves, or bear up themselves upon Use 1.
his favor, when they embolden themselves to sin against him. For he looks
to be glorified in them that come near him: and though he take not away his
grace, yet he will scourge them with such rods, as they shall think him to
break their bones.

Secondly, if Gods hand be on thee, which thou would have removed, take heed
of delight in sin, or coldness Use 2.
in goodness, harden not thy self in thy departure from God; for then thou
shall surely find him hardening himself, and walking stubbornely against thee.

Thirdly, in lingering evils judge thy self, and thy lingering in sin: if the
Lord were not merciful to us Use 3.
as he was to Lot, we would never go out of our Sodom; and therefore all this
is righteously upon us.

Fourthly, this serves to comfort the godly, who are Use. 4.
longer exercised with trials, both inward and outward: Oh they think God
never dealt so with any, and cry, How long, Lord? and will he never be more
entreated? Yea, but stay a little.

First, know that Gods ways are above the reach of flesh and blood. Secondly,
compare thy sufferings with thy sins, and thy afflictions with other godly
men's, yea, with Christ, the dear Son of God, the^ thou will see, that no
affliction has befallen thee, but as great or greater has befallen thy
fellow members, and thy Head also. Thirdly, know this for certain; were
health, peace, and prosperity as good for thee as troubles, thou should
have it, but thy present estate is best for thee: and does God envy that to
his children, which he throws to his enemies? see we not numbers, that it
were better for them to be bound on their beds, and perpetually sick and
bedrid, then to abuse their health and strength as they do? have not thou also
abused thy health, peace, etc. and thereby forfeited them?

Selah] An Hebrew word. Some think it to be a note of Music, because it is
most used in Meeter or Song, and the Jews put it in the end of their Epitaphs
either Selah or Amen. Some take it for a note of perpetuity, in the praise of
God, for ever and ever. Some for a word of asseueration, for vere or Amen. It
is most probable, Maxim.

Tremell.

Attollere.

Vatabl.


that it was a note of intention, or lifting up of the voice, coming of the
root Salal, to lift up: for wheresoever it was met with, the Singers were to
exalt their voices, signifying, that here was required more, then ordinary
intention of the mind and consideration: Where this note is, al things are
worthy more special observation. And it is here added, as Bucer says, first,
to show what a torment it is, rightly to feel the burden of sin. Secondly,
what weight this doctrine has, and how worthy it is of our consideration.

VERSE 5. Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity:
for I thought, I will confess against my self, my wickedness unto the Lord,
and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. SELAH.
NOw we come to the second branch of David's experience, in the sense of Gods
mercy hiding his sin: the means to come by it was acknowledging, not hiding,
confession; the end hereof, remission.

The former has these four parts, 1. The time, Then. 2. The ground, I
thought, or, said. 3. The matter, or what he will confess, his, 4. The manner,
Sin, Iniquity, Wickedness. 1. In respect of God; to thee. 2. Of himself;
against my self.



The latter, which is the fruit of all, in these words; And thou forgauest,
etc.

Then I acknowledged my sinne]
WHen I was in such perplexity all day and all night, then, and not before.
Hence we may learn, that

The sense of misery must go before the sense of mercy. Doct.
God first called Adam, and said, Adam, where art thou? Sense of misery must
go before sense of mercy.
in what estate? and then promised him a Savior, Psalm. 126. 5. They that sow
in tears, shall reap in joy. Mat. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn: for
they shall be comforted. Prou. 28. 13. He that confesses and forsakes his
sins, shall find mercy. Psalm. 51. DAVID, before he could be restored to the
joy of his salvation, had a deep sense of his sin, a deep sorrow and touch
of conscience for it.

And good reason that this should be so: for

First, touch of conscience, though it be no grace, yet it Reas. 1.
is a preparation to it, and makes way to it, as the needle to the thread: and
the Divines call it truly a beginning of grace, that is of preparation, not of
composition. And indeed, till legal fear has through serious sense of sin
made a man fear even for punishment, and despair in respect of himself, he
is never in earnest stirred to consider of, and much less to desire, the
promise of salvation, published and propounded in the Gospel. And hence the
Lord, partly by his Word, does drive men to their wits ends, as Acts 2. 37. at
Peter's Sermon, the conuerts said, Men and brethren, what shall we do? and
partly by his works upon them, as the Iaylor, Act. 16. 29, 30. and Manasseh, 2.
Chron. 33. 12, 13. God binds him in chains, and sends him to Babel, and in his
captivity he humbled himself, and sought the Lord; when he was in affliction,
says the Text.

Secondly, the promise is made only to the hungry, 2.
that the Lord will fill them with good things, Lu. 1. 53. Now till a man come
to see his misery by sin, he can never get out of himself, he never sees
in what need he stands of Christ, he hungers not, nor thirsts after him and
his merits, he prizeth not his blood, and therefore is without any part in him,
because he is not capable of him. If any man thirst, I will give him to drink
of the water of life, says our Savior, John 7. 37, 38. see Isa. 55. 1. A
beggar, so long as he has any thing at home, cares not greatly for stirring
abroad; and so long as we find any content in our selves, and see not our
utter beggary, and that how without Christ we are ready to starve, we are
but weakly importunate with him.

Thirdly, the heart of every man by nature is like a fellow field, which must
be ploughed up, rent, and harrowed, 3
before the seed of God come there; he sowes not among thorns, nor will cast
in his heavenly seed of grace or comfort, till our surrowes be ploughed,
neither can all this renting and ploughing be without sense of pain. For this
purpose has the Lord set up a ministry in the Church, to charge men with
their spiritual sickness, and special sins, as he sent Nathan to tell
David, Thou art the man; and as Christ himself said to the woman of Samaria,
that she was a woman little better then a harlot: here was the Lords plough,
that subdued their clods, and prepared their ground for the seed of grace:
this is the Lords sacrificing knife, to make wounds in the conscience, to pare
away the dead flesh, and so to make way to sound cure.

Fourthly, the converting of a sinner, is the curing of a sick and wounded
soul, and the Phisician is God himself, 4
who, that his cure may be sound, first searches and lanceth, and stirs in
the wound, which puts the patient to much pain, before he power oil into it,
and bind it up. Many are the gashes and mortal wounds of our souls,
inflicted by Satan and our own corruption, and we must, and shall feel the
smart of them, before we be thoroughly healed.

To this purpose has the Lord placed the conscience in a man's soul, to tell
him what he has done amiss, and to follow him with hue and cry, yea, to
apprehend him, and set up a gibbet in his soul, to which it adiudgeth him, and
all to bring him into himself, to seek and sue for pardon.

Fifthly, and lastly, God will be honored in the humble, 5
confessing of that which is amiss, 1. John 1. 9. If we acknowledge our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive them. DAVID himself must
confess, that he had done very foolishly in numbering the people. Nay, he will
have an healing of their error, an undoing of that that is done, and a building
up of that which they have destroyed, as Saul, the more zealous persecutor, the
more zealous preacher; Zacheus, the more heavy oppressor, the more hearty
restorer.

First then, we see that God deals here, as in all the matter of our
salvation, to set forth his mighty power Use 1.
in bringing the joy of his elect out of sorrow, as at first he did light out
of darkness: as by Christ's death he works out our life, so he kills us
also to make us alive: as once he set his Bow in the heavens, a sign of
present rain, yet a perpetual and general sign, that the world shall never
be drowned again; even so the Lord gives his children the covenant of life,
but through death; a righteousness, but by a sense and groaning under
unrighteousness; a present blessedness, but through sense of misery; an
happy resurrection, but through dust and corruption. Thus he foundeth their
soundest joy in sorrow, their laughter in tears, their happiness in
unhappiness and misery: all the former weight that lay upon David, does but
make him seek relief and preserve his peace when he has regained it.

Secondly, here is a ground of sound comfort for Gods children in sorrow, if
it be godly sorrow, that Use 2.
they may say with JOB, After darkness I shall see light, this sense of
misery shall lead me to the sense of mercy, this sorrow may last for a night,
but joy shall come in the morning; after two days he will revive us, and in
the third we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6. 2. I know, this hand, which is so
heavy upon me, is under my head, to bring me light out of this darkness, and
life out of that, which for the present is more bitter then death it self.

Notes of that sense of misery, which shall have sense Marks of that sense of
misery which shall find mercy.
of mercy, are these:

First, it works a displeasure against a man's self for displeasing God, as 2.
Cor. 7. 11. What indignation has this wrought in you? that is, an holy blaming
of our selves, and judging our selves worthy any punishment; and this not in
general only, but even in particular sins, and in all the sins, that we
can know by our selves, as a Surgeon in curing tumors, brings the matter to a
head.

Secondly, a constant purpose not to sin for a world, but to cleave unto God
with full purpose of heart, Acts 11. 23.

Thirdly, a change of the whole man in affection and action: what a change was
wrought in the Iaylour upon his conversion? Acts 16.

Fourthly, a trembling at the Word, Isa. 66. 2. This was in Eli: and good
Iosiahs heart did melt at the reading of the Law; the Conuerts hearing the
words of Peter, were pricked in their hearts. Acts 2. 37.


Fifthly, it feels and watches the work, and stirrings of corruption, it
auoides occasion of offense, and seeks occasions of God, it grieves as often as
it falls or offends even in smaller things. Joseph fled from his Mistress, and
David's heart smote him, in cutting off the lap of Saul's garment.

Sixthly, it looks not to outward things more then needs must, it is not
comforted but by Christ, and waits patiently for Christ, being no whit hasty
to use unlawful means, but depends upon God. David comforts not himself in
corn, wine, or oil, but in Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. It is instant with God
in prayer, as the Canaanite, Luke 7.

Find these notes in thy self, and thou may support thy self in the
deepest distress that is: for if thy soul thus truly mourn for sin, thou
art in the highway to blessedness.

Thirdly, this rebukes the common error of men, who Use 3.
account conversion, and the attaining of happiness, a matter of nothing; men
think that heaven stands by their beds-sides, it is but a light Lord have
mercy; whereas never he went to heaven, that sailed not by hell: it is a
burdened soul, that seeks and gets ease; a weary soul, which Christ
refreshes; a soul pressed with an heavy hand, that sues for mercy. No man
can taste of the sweet fruit of mercy, that has not tasted the bitter fruit
of sin, and of a wounded and distressed conscience. And whosoever has not
felt the grief and smart of his sins, may justly fear he never truly
repented; and thou that say, thy sins never troubled thee, thou thankest
God, shall find, that there is more trouble behind.

Fourthly, labor to feel thy spiritual misery and Use. 4.
wants, that with Lazarus thou may get thee to Dives Motives to get a sent
of our spiritual misery.
his gate, and examine thy self if thou have felt it. How loath are men to
feel the smart of sin, to hear the law come upon their conscience, for
fear they be set into dumpes and melancholy, to feel the cross, whereby God
breaks the stubbornness of nature, and subdues it?

Alas, poor souls, that nip true repentance in the blossom, and blast it in
the beginning, that think they are very near heaven, when they are loath to
point their foot into the first step, which is to mourn, and to be cast down
to hell in their own sense, and in the feeling of their own sins: till
which time thou have not moved one foot or finger toward eternal life;
therefore know,

First, that thy case is dangerous, and thou art still in thy sins, who wilt
not let the word come home to thy heart, and wilt not suffer Gods Spirit to
meet thee in the Ministry, and can not endure the power of the Word to
wound either thy soul or thy sin, but it has been in vain to thee; a
certain sign of a man as yet out of the state of grace, as it is Romans 1. 28.
Such as regarded not to know God, he gave them up to the lusts of their hearts.

Secondly, know that an accusing conscience for sin is better then a dead
conscience; a sleepie, benumbed, or seared conscience, is the most grievous
plague that God can strike a man withal in this life; his wrath follows
drowsy consciences, to give them up to a spirit of slumber, and at length to a
reprobate sense. Psalm. 81. 11. My people would not hear my voice, Israel would
none of me; so I gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, and they walked
in their own counsels.

Thirdly, let us be moved to make search into our misery, considering,
first, that if we shead not tears on earth, God can never wipe them away in
heaven: and if we do here shead tears for sin, God carries an handkerchiefe
to wipe them all away; such April showers bring the May-flowres of grace and
comfort.

Secondly, that our souls in their swaruing from God, are like bones out of
joint; the longer they go unrespected, the more painful they prove.

Thirdly, for the health of the body, men will purge and sweat, and make shift
to swallow, and get down bitter pills and potions: so the vomit of the soul
is the grief of repentance, take it betime, and the danger is less. Were the
medicine of repentance grievous to take, yet in regard of the everlasting
health, to which it restores us, we should like wise men, take the sweet
with the sour, and choose this rather, then to feed on such sweet meats as
please the palate, while they be tasted, but cause at length vomits more
bitter then death.

Fourthly, how highly does God esteem of a man or woman of a broken heart? 2.
King. 22. 19. Good Iosiahs heart melted, and God had a care to take him to
himself from the evil to come. Isa. 57. 15. I walk with him that is of a
contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and give life to the
contrite heart. Now follows the ground of David's confession, which is first in
order.

I said, or thought.]
THat is, I purposed, I resolved. David had been in a long conflict in himself
what to do, he could neither part with his sin, nor yet hold it: in a woe case
he found himself, and as a man whose bones were broken, yet loath he was to
go to the Surgeon; feign he would have hid his sore, but the pain would not
suffer him. Long he reasoned with himself how he might carry away his sin
most quietly, but found no peace in hiding it, but still his terrors were
increased; and then he grew at last to the best resolution, that neither fears
nor terrors, nor sorrows should any longer, as an hedge shut up his way to
confession; he will no longer be tossed between fear and hope, doubts and
desires, deliberations and resolutions; but now (I said) that is, I thought in
my heart, I spoke with my mouth, and presently I resolved and acted, that I
would present my self before God in humble confession of my sin.

The same phrase we have, Luke 15. 17. when the lost son had lost himself in
straying and wandering from home, and had spent his money and strength on
harlots, and was now a fitter companion for swine then any thing else; and when
he who had wallowed in the mire of his sin, and fed himself with the swil of
iniquity, was now rightly sorted for his bed and board with swine, cast out of
men's company, and none pitying him to give him so much as husks to eat. Now
he begins to consider what a woeful estate he was in, he thinks of his fathers
house: but with what face can he behold the face of his father? he considers of
the servants in his fathers house, but he is not worthy of a place among them:
these and such thoughts would have kept him from his father, but, necessity so
urging, and famine sore pinching him, upon consideration he came to the like
resolution, I said I will go to my father, that is, I resolved to go, and so
he went; so David said he would confess, and confessed. Hence we may see in
the first place, that

Sound consideration brings forth sound resolutions. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that men
were wise, that they understood Doct. 1.
this, that they would consider their latter end. Psalm. 119. 59. Sound
consideration brings forth sound resolution.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: and Psalm. 4.
4. to still Gods enemies, he bids them examine themselves, and be still.

And the reason hereof is good: for

First, consideration is an applying of the understanding Reas. 1.
and the mind, to the things that are offered, and makes the mind intent upon
them; it is a candle held to the mind, to give it light in the thing to be
done, and in the manner of doing it.

Secondly, it informs the judgment, the chief office whereof, is to try
and compare things together; which has ever been the circumspection of the
wise, as David compares his present estate with the former. It is the
definition of a mad man to be without judgment, to follow his fancy, and to
be led by appearances without trial: so the prodigal son, when he began to
consider, is said, to come to himself, Luke 15. 17. till which (...).
time he was as a mad man out of, or, besides himself: therefore Elthu
counsels his friends, Job 34. 4. thus, Let us seek judgment amongst us,
and know among our selves what is good; that is, Let us try Jobs speech how
true and just it is.

Thirdly, sound consideration inclines and determines the will according to the
light of the mind, and the sound informing of the judgment, and accordingly
perfecteth the action. He were a mad man, that knowing he has apiece of poison
in his hand, would incline his will to eat it. Now when consideration has
soundly enlightened a man's mind, informed his judgment according to that
light, and determined his will according to that judgment, it must needs bring
forth sound resolutions, purposes and actions.

Again, see the truth of this doctrine in sundry instances: First, a man that
is to go a small journey, will consider, whether he be in his right way, what
time he has to go through in, what places are most dangerous, how near he is
to his iourneyes end, what is the use of his journey, and accordingly he
resolves for his furniture and expedition: So, if a man consider of his journey
to heaven, of the difficulty of the way, the danger by thieves or robbers, of
the shortness of his time, how near his ways end is, etc. he would speedily
resolve of repentance, and amendment of life, which without this consideration
is not only deferred, but also utterly neglected.

Secondly, a man that considers of the harvest, of the return and profit of
his husbandry, will also consider of the seed-time, and of the sowing of his
ground, he will not spare his seed, as distrusting the harvest, or fearing to
lose it. So, whereas many are bad husbands, because they never consider of the
harvest, others expecting an happy harvest in the Kingdom of heaven, sow to
the spirit, consider this their seede-time, and, while they have time, will sow
their seed, cast it liberally on the ground or waters, distribute to the
necessities of the Saints, and after many days they find it with increase an
Eccles. 11. 1.
hundredth thousand fold.

Thirdly, wise men think thieves and fellons to be mad men, that seeing every
Assizes so many hanged for theft, yet will steal and rob, and this is, because
they consider not the end: but he that considers the unavoidable danger of
the law, the severity of it, the eye of the Judge upon him, the irreuocable
sentence of death, and the shameful execution of it, resolves to depart out of
the way of such danger. So, what makes the wicked to be accounted mad men in
wise men's eyes, but their foole-hardy rushing into a thousand rebellions and
treasons against God? they know, that one sin is able to damn them, had they
ten thousand souls and bodies, and yet they rush into thousands of sins; it
being with them as it is with him, that knows one or two grains of poison
will kill him, and yet eats a pound of it, because he considers not the end.
Whereas, if men did consider the danger of sin, the curse of the Law, the
torment of conscience here, and of hell hereafter, durst they so adventure upon
sin? But I speak of a sound consideration: for it is true, that most men in
gross believe an heaven, an hell, a judgment, an account, and a punishment:
but not, not digesting it with due meditation and application to their own
souls, it does them no more good, then Physic put into a man's pocket can
help him to his health; all this knowledge is locked up in the brain and
breast, and is as insensible, as fire in a flint-stone, if it be not beaten out
by sound consideration.

All this serves to stir us up to consider of our ways, Use.
and of our estates, and of the actions that we do: for Motives to consider
of our ways and estates.
these respects:

First, inasmuch as without it, no state of life can be rightly ordered: the
Mariner, if he consider not his compass continually, and his course by it,
runs into 1
remediless dangers; and so it with us in our voyage to our haven of Heaven.
The Merchant, if he consider not his affairs by his count-booke of gains or
losses, his debts and wares, will soon prove banquerupt; so we in our
spiritual traffic, without sound consideration, shall soon be blown up. If
Eve had considered of the Serpents words, had she, and had we by her been such
losers? Had Adam considered of Eues gift, had he been so deceived? If Abraham
had considered the counsel of Sarah, would he have taken Agar into his
bosom? What does all this prove, but that, if we were as rich as Adam in
innocence, yet wants of considering our estate would lay us to spoil?

Secondly, it is a prerogative that man has above all 2
creatures, to have a faculty of examining his actions by consideration, and
yet how little does man respect this privilege, without which he were to be
sorted with beasts or mad men? especially, in sound consideration for the good
of his soul: the beast lives by things present, man should consider the end
before he begin.

Thirdly, without consideration no action can be done well, or succeed
happily, no spiritual action; because 3
it is not in faith, if it be done without consideration: as for example,

First, we can never hear the Word well; if first, beforehand we consider not
whom we come to hear, and to what end, namely, to further our salvation:
without this we come but as to a play. Secondly, in hearing, if we consider
not our selves to be in Gods presence. Thirdly, after hearing, if we consider
not of what we have heard, and that God will judge us by it.

Secondly, in prayer we are commanded, first to consider, and then to pray, as
Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: For this consideration must offer both matter of
prayer, and also stir up affection and desire, else it will be but a dead and
cold prayer.

Thirdly, in the Sacraments, we must first examine and consider our selves, of
the Covenant, of the seals of it, of our faith, worthiness and repentance;
and afterward we must consider the fruit of it, else all is but hypocrisy and
unsound. By all which we see, that it is only sound consideration that brings
forth sound worshipping of God.

Fourthly, sound consideration preuents much sin, 4
and much punishment, and draws a man out of sin and judgment:

First, it preuents sin: for if a man did seriously consider of sin, what
pain, and loss, and shame, and sorrow 1.
comes by it, he would not meddle with it, being so heavy, so dangerous. There
is a History of a virtuous woman, that being solicited to folly by a younker,
called for a pan of hot coals, and desired him to put his hand upon them but
one hour; he refusing that, she replied, How much less will you be able to
endure hellfire for evermore? and so he desisted.

Secondly, it preuents punishment, or the judgments of God: the Ninevites
considered of the threatening of 2.
Jonah, and so prevented the threatened destruction.

Thirdly, it draws out of sin, as Hos. 2, 6, 7. the Church of the Jews
seeing her self so crossed and hedged 3.
in with afflictions, that she could not follow her idols, then she considers
her present misery, and the small hope and help from them; then she says
(that is, resolves) to go and return to her first husband: for it was then
better with her then now.

Fourthly, it draws out of judgment: Ier. 12. 11. They have laid it waste,
and being waste, it mourns unto 4.
me: the whole land lies waste, because no man sets his mind on it: that
is, considers deeply of the cause of its desolation in his heart.

Fifthly, we have so much the more need to be stirred up to consider of our
ways, because there is no vice that 5.
does appear, or dares to appear in his proper color, but apparelled and
masked in the likeness of some virtue: as no counterfeit coin is offered to a
man in the copper-colour of it, but washed over with silver or gold. Now if we
consider not of things offered us, we shall easily be deceived, yea, surprised
of enemies under the color of friendship.

Thus seeing the necessity of sound consideration, to set us yet more forward
in so needful and so neglected a duty, observe these directions:

First, let us labor to see the dullness of our nature, to cross it, and
stir it up, and think the duty so much 1 Sundry godly directions to help
us, in our consideration of our selves.
the more necessary and excellent, as our natures oppose, or are heavy unto
it. What? shall a man consider of his houses, rents, fields or garments? and
take no time to repair himself, and hurts sustained by inconsiderateness?

Secondly, set some time apart to consider of thy estate more seriously. Joshua
and David had as many distractions, 2.
and more weighty affairs to intend then we have, and yet they meditated in
the Law of the Lord night and day: a shame for many Christians that take care
how to pass their time, never passing any in consideration of their estate;
this were a good pastime indeed.

Thirdly, make choice of good matter for sound consideration: as first,
consider of God: first, of his presence; 3. Choice matter of consideration.
this kept Joseph from sin. Secondly of his mercy, to fear him. Thirdly, of
his love, to love him again. Fourthly, of his works: first, of Creation;
delight more in a spiritual, then in a natural use of them. Secondly, of
government; for there is no day or time that passes, but we may make special
use of Gods works, either on our selves or others.

Secondly, consider of thy estate with God, whether a change be wrought in
thee, being the child of wrath by 2.
nature, what marks thou have upon thee to distinguish thee from them who are
not the Lords, whether thou be in the state of grace, how thou growest in
it, or whether, and how far thou art gone backward, what assurance of
remission of sin, and what strength against sin thou have, whether thou
lie foiled of any corruption, whether thou resoluest of amendment of life,
how thou have kept or broken thy vows with God, what use of Gods mercies or
corrections thou have made, whether it have not been better with thee then now,
and whether thou may not be in far better estate, were it not for thy own
default.

Thirdly, consider of thine actions; for the matter, whether allowed by the
Word; for the manner, whether 3
done in faith and obedience; for the end, whether thou aimest at wealth,
pleasure, or preferment in the world, rather then at Gods glory, and to be rich
in God: for God aims at his glory in all things, and so must we.

Fourthly, consider of thy calling, first, general as thou art a Christian,
whether before thy profession, thou 4
cast the costs as a wise builder and captain, Luke 14. whether thou have the
power of godliness, and art not content with the mere form of it, whether
thou adornest thy profession, or disgracest it by inconsideratenes. Secondly,
special, in which thou spendest most of thy time, whether thou seruest God in
serving man, whether thou art faith and just, or unjust and unfaithful in
these less things, whether thou sanctifiest it by prayer, whether thou
dependest upon God for daily success and blessing, or leanest to thine own
labor, whether thy end be to enrich thy self, or to make it as a means to
please God, and pass thee through the world.

Fifthly, consider thy latter end, and therein,

First, the recompense of reward: so did the Patriarchs, 5
Heb. 11. 16, 26 and so moderated their hearts in doing their duties, and in
suffering afflictions.

Secondly, consider of the account that is to be made of every idle word and
thought, much more of every wicked, swearing, revenging word and thought.

Thirdly, consider of the day of death, the uncertainty of life, the leaving of
that wealth, for which thou strainest thy conscience, and the need of much
comfort in such an uncomfortable hour, how that peace of conscience at that
time will prove the best wealth.

Fourthly, consider of the day of Judgment, when all things shall be naked,
and every man shall receive according to that which he has done in the flesh,
be it good or evil.

These and the like considerations will bring forth sound resolutions of
bettering a man's estate, if any thing in the world will.

A second point of doctrine arising out of David's resolution, is this: Where
Gods Spirit has taken place, it Doct. 2.
preuailes at length against all the corruptions of the Gods Spirit at length
preuailes against corruptions of flesh.
flesh.

David was a long time hindered from going to God: first, by the greatness of
his sin. Secondly, by the strength of corruption, against which he was not
fully resolved. Thirdly, by the unworthiness of his person. Fourthly, by the
greatness of Gods anger and revenging hand. And fifthly, by the sentence and
curse of the Law. Yet on the other side, by the secret work of the Spirit in
his heart, unto all these was opposed: first, the greatness of Gods mercy.
Secondly, the merit of Christ's sacrifice. Thirdly, the promise of the Gospel.
Fourthly, the nature of faith, which believes above and against sense.

These being committed together, after a doubtful combat, faith foiles
infidelity, hope despair, the Gospel the Law, the promise the threatening,
and life kills death, that now he says, resolves, and professes he will
come and confess his sin. This truth also we see in the Church, Cant. 5. 3.
etc. Christ calls her to open unto him, and tells her of the drops of the
night, and labor he had taken to come unto her: Oh, but she had put off her
coats, washed her feet, and was loath to stir and disease her self, till
Christ went away in displeasure; yet putting in his hand by the hole of the
door, and secretly affecting her heart, her heart was affectioned to him, then
she arose and sought and found him.

So in Peter, how was he ouermastered by his flesh? a man would have thought
him utterly lost, when he denied and forswore his Master, and cursed himself:
but Christ looked back upon him, and the Spirit began to show himself as
before, and got the masterie.

And all this stands upon very good reasons: for

First, the Spirit in Christians by regeneration is more excellent then by
creation, both in respect of the beginning, Reas. 1.
and of the end and continuance: the former we have from the first Adam,
mere man, the latter from the second Adam, God and man: by the former, Adam
had power to continue if he would, but had not the act of continuance: but by
the latter, Adam had, and we also have both the will and deed of continuance.
So 1. Ioh. 3. 9. They that are borne of God, sin not; that is, finally, or to
death, because the seed of God is in them.

Secondly, the Spirit of grace may by corruption be 2.
hid a long while, as the Sun under a cloud, but it shall break out again,
because of those many promises which God has made to the godly: as first; Mat.
17. 20 Faith, if it be but as a grain of Mustard-seede, shall rise to a great
tree to shelter the soul under.

Secondly, that if there be any fruit of grace, though it be never so weak,
yet he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break a bruised reed, Isa. 42.
3. but cherish it as he did the young man, Mark. 10. 21. and dress it to be
more fruitful, John 15. 2.

Thirdly, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16.

Fourthly, that the godly in their declinings to the right hand, or to the
left, shall at length hear an inward voice of the Spirit, saying, This is the
way, walk in it, Isai. 30. 21.

Thirdly, the Spirit of grace (I mean not of restraint, 3
but of renouation) is a seed of all virtue, because it is in stead of
original sin, which is a spawne or seed of all sin: now as life is in the
seed, which seems to be a dead thing; so is the Spirit alive and quickening,
when it seems far otherwise: hence it is called the spirit of life, which as
it raised Christ from a natural death, so it does raise his members at first
from the death of sin to the life of grace, and much more from the sickness
of sin to the soundness of grace.

Fourthly, the many titles, which the Spirit has pleased to make himself
known by, clearly confirm the 4.
truth propounded, especially these four. The holy Ghost in the Scriptures is
called

First, the Spirit of strength, to strengthen and confirm the elect, be they
never so weak, and to foil their corruptions, be they never so strong. 1.
John 4. 4. Stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.

Secondly, the Spirit of liberty, to loose the captives, that if a man be
never so miserable a slave and in bonds, where this Spirit comes, he will loose
the fetters of corruption, that grace shall have the upper hand, and the Spirit
shall master the flesh. 2. Cor. 3. 17. Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
liberty.

Thirdly, he is the Spirit of comfort: When the Comforter shall come, etc. to
show, that when life is ready to be gone for want of comfort, then he comes
with new life and comfort.

Fourthly, he is called the Spirit of supplication, which makes us able to
pray, even when we are at the worst and weakest; nay, himself makes requests
for us, Romans 8. 26. So that if our prayers be so weak as they can yield
little comfort or help, yet his requests are prevailing enough.

First then, this serves to confute such as hold, that Use 1.
grace can be quite shaken out of the heart, as though the lust of the Spirit
did not continue as long as the lust of the flesh, Gal. 5. 17. as though the
grace of regeneration had no privilege above the grace of Creation, as though
God had made no promise unto it for perseverance, as though the Spirit of God
were a dead or dying spirit, a spirit of weakness, a spirit of bondage, a
comfortless spirit, without all motion and desire in the heart.

Secondly, this comforts Gods elect, who have ever had Use 2.
the gift of the Spirit: though thou art toyled with corruption, and feel
the Spirit gone, yet be of good comfort, he will come again, and not absent
himself for ever. Many are the heart-sorrowes, which many that are dear to
God, are broken withal, both in respect of evil and of good.

For the former: the evil they would not, that do they; they are vexed with
wicked thoughts, desires, motions, and actions; and vow to leave sin, to
serve God better then they have done, to forsake evil company, and to follow
the means of grace and amendment: men say they will obey, even in coming to
the word, and in hearing it they say, they will learn and practice: but their
sayings, vows, and promises come to nothing.

If good meanings and purposes would serve the turn, they were well: but you
see nothing done, the motion is no sooner kindled then quenched; they are
monstrous persons, all mouths, and tongues and voices, without hands and feet.
The Convert son said, he would go to his father, and went; the dutiful
son is he, who says, he will go into the vineyard, and goes: but the
sluggard fears many Lions: Oh there is a bear in the way, and so many
strawes are so many hedges of thorns to hinder him in any good resolution. Let
the sound Christian learn better things of David, and feed his godly motions,
first, by the Word: secondly, by prayer: thirdly, by heavenly meditation.

Now follows the third point in the confession, namely, the matter of it, and
that is set down in three several words,

My sins, mine iniquities, and wickednesse] (or, rebellion: for the Holy
Ghost uses a most forceable word to set out the vileness of this sin, the
iniquity of my sin:) David would confess all kinds of sin, all manner of
sin; whence we may learn, that

Serious confession of sin reaches unto all sin, known and unknown, and
sets it before it self in a most Doctr.
odious manner. So the Prophet here in three phrases all Sound confession
reaches unto all sin.
tending to one thing, joined together, notes the seriousness of his
confession, and that he confessed in earnest: besides, by the nature of the
words in Hebrew, he rises in the degrees of sin, till he come to peshagin,
which are the highest sins that Gods child in incident unto; rebellions,
treasons, or disloyalty. And further, from one sin he goes to all; he
would feign have hid one sweet sin, but he saw such mischief in that, that
he resolves now to discover all for the sake of that one, and, if the way to
get out of one be to confess it, the next way (he thinks) to get out of
all, is to confess all.

The same course he takes in the 51. Psalm, wherein, being touched in
conscience for his Adultery, and Murder; he goes further and begins at his
original sin, saying, I was warmed in sin, and borne in iniquity: And in
the same Psalm he sets his sin before him in the scarlet color of it,
Deliver me from bloods: Why? he shed but the blood of Vriah; yea, but he
calls to mind the blood of many that attended that worthy Captain, who all by
his occasion fell with him: at least the plural number shows the bloudinesse
and heinousness of that sin, as Genesis 4. 10. The Lord said to Cain, The voice
of thy brothers bloods is come up before me; that is, for Cain to kill his
Brother, was as odious as to have slain a number of other men; and the Lord
would put him in mind of the many streams of blood, that ran this way and
that way from his godly Brother Abel: and as the Lord there speaks in the
plural number, to aggrauate the odiousness of his sin, so does the holy
Prophet in the same form of speech utter his sin, to make it as odious to
himself as might be.

The like example we have, Daniel 9. 5. where the holy Man makes a sound
confession in the name of the whole Church then in captivity, and in it
amplifieth the sins of the people, and rises by sundry stays and degrees to
make them out of measure sinful; thus,

First, we have sinned:] there is error and departing from the right way.

Secondly, we have done iniquity:] there is a crooked course, and perverse
walking undertaken.

Thirdly, and done wickedly:] here malice is joined to weakness, an endeavor
in the birth of sin, and an artificial working of it out.

Fourthly, we have rebelled:] here is obstinacy and war against God, as
Rebels take up Arms to shake off the yoke of lawful government.

Fifthly, by departing from thy Precepts:] here is obstinate malice against the
Law written and clear light, here is a willing sin, they wilfully cast
themselves headlong, though they see the danger.

Sixthly, we heard not thy servants the Prophets:] a grievous sin against the
Law explained and applied by Gods servants, who came in his name, that is:
First, by the authority and Word of God: Secondly, they were most faithful,
and applied themselves not to the common people only, but also to Kings,
Princes, Fathers, and People, that is, to all sorts and orders of men without
respect of persons: And all this in the Plural number, All we are guilty,
none excepted: thus in so many words he heaps up the number and greatness of
their sins.

So in Ezra 9. 6. Oh my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes
to thee: For our iniquity is grown up over our heads, and our trespass is
gone up to heaven; from the days of our Fathers we have been in a great
trespass unto this day. Oh, but know to thy comfort: First, that it was so
with Paul after he was regenerate: Secondly, consider of these three things.
First, whether thou hate and detest these evils in thy self: Secondly, whether
thou resist them, and suffer them not to be in quiet: Thirdly, whether being
overtaken with them, thou renuest thy repentance. Find these things in thee,
and thou may justly say with PAVL, It is not I, but the evil that is in me.

For the latter: the good which they would do, they cannot do, their hands
are as fast bound as if the spirit of liberty were quite gone: but be not
dismayed: First, can thou also not do the evil that thou would?
Secondly, do thou find the will present with thee? If this be so, here is a
motion not of the flesh, but of the Spirit, let not frailety of the flesh
discourage thee.

Yea, but if I may know, that ever I had the Spirit, Object.
then I hope he will come again: therefore, how shall I know, that ever I had
the Spirit prevailing in me?

Know it by these works of the Spirit: First, one work Answ.
of the Spirit is to cast down high things that are exalted How to know whether
ever a man have had the Spirit of God.
against God, and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 5. Have thou then subjected thy reason, affections, and
delights unto grace? have thou denied thy self, that whatsoever the Spirit in
the Word suggesteth, it is thy whole heart to undertake it? then assure thy
self, the Spirit has been in thy heart; and will come again: Secondly, this
is the new Covenant, and another Condition, that where the Spirit is given, he
writes the Law in our hearts, Ier. 31. 35. he brings in a new light, new
inclinations, new affections, the man is a new man, and his life a new life.
Did thou then ever find a change in thy self, that thou would not for
a world be the same man thou vvast and hold the same courses? Find thou
that thy ignorance pleases thee not, and thy will conformeth it self to Gods
will? then fear not, for the Spirit has been with thee: Thirdly, the Spirit
is a Spirit of supplication, Zach. 12. 10. Have thou then had a care and true
desire of reconciliation? a true sorrow, that ever thou offendedst so good a
God? a purpose of heart to cleave unto him, and to keep his favor which thou
iudgest better then life it self? Oh cheer up thy self in this, this fruit
grows not out of thy Flesh, but from the Spirit: Fourthly, Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 16. Examine
thy self by this, has the flesh and the corruptions of it any dominion over
thee as a voluntary vassal? Art thou a willing slave to it? Do thou
accomplish and fulfill the lusts of it? If these things be so, thou never as
yet have had the Spirit.

Alas! I have some strife, but I am too too often foiled. Object.


Well, thy case is good enough: only hold on to strive and to strive
faithfully, this struggling is a sign of some Answ.
life.

Secondly, know that the whole brood of corruptions cannot be subdued on the
sudden, but as the Israelites wasted the Canaanites by little and little: so
the Holy Ghost destroys by little and little, roots out and foyles these
cursed enemies of our souls, but not all at once, lest we should want
exercise, and so grow idle and secure.

Thirdly, use the means to get not only the presence, but also the prevailing
of the Spirit.

Oh that I knew what means to use! what are they? Object.


If thou would have the prevailing of the Spirit, take Answ.
these courses:

First, be humble in thine own eyes, empty thy self Means of the Spirits
prevailing.
of pride and vain conceits; the promise is, that God gives grace to the
humble, nay, he dwells with the humble and broken heart, Isay 57. 15. that is,
abides and continues with it.

Secondly, be diligent in the ministry of the Word of reconciliation, which
the Apostle calls the ministry of the Spirit; for it is as fuel to feed and
strengthen the Spirit, yea as bellows to blow up the graces, which else lie
idle. 2. Tim. 1. 6. Stir up the gift of God, that is in thee. 1. These. 5. 18.
Quench not the Spirit; Despise not Prophesying: mark the neerenesse of Spirit
and Prophecy.

Thirdly, observe the motions of Gods Spirit, and feed them, and from motions
proceed to resolutions and practices: not the worst man but has some good
motitions, as Balaam; and Saul acknowledged that David was more righteous then
he: but imitate thou good David here; he follows the motion that he had, he
said he would confess, and confessed; So the Prodigal Son had a good motion,
he remembered his estate he had been in, and his Fathers house, but (said he) I
starve here; then he resolves to go to his Father, and went. Go and do thou
likewise, this is to add thy strength to the Spirit; and thus a convert is not
merely passive in working out his salvation, but active, once being acted.

Fourthly, pray earnestly for the Spirit: for he is powered on thirsty grounds,
as Isay 44. 3. I will power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground: and Luke 11. 13. If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him?

I acknowledged my sin, neither hid I mine iniquity.]
HEre is David's confession it self; he did not resolve, and suffer his
resolution to dye, but he said he would confess, and confessed: but many are
of another spirit, they resolve, profess, promise, 1. Tim. 1. 13. Paul says
of himself, I was a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, an Oppresser, but I was received
to Mercy: Here were three heinous degrees of sin; the sight of which made
him confess himself the chief of all sinners, verse 15. and made him admire
and magnify the Mercy of God, who vouchsafed so abundant grace to such a
desperate wretch as he was: and of this kind are the confessions of all the
godly.

The Reasons of this point are very good:

First, a Reason hereof is drawn from the nature of grace, which Reason 1.


First, works alike against all sin: and he that has grace to confess one
sin aright, by the same grace confesses all; he that truly hates one
sin, truly hates all; If a man truly feel the weight of one, it makes him
groan under the burden of all much more. For all sins are of the same
nature, so as repentance cannot be sound, if any one sin be laid hold on;
which made our Prophet, being humbled for one, to repent of all. Thus also do
the Israelites in their conversion, 1. Sam. 12. 19. Pray for thy Servants (said
they to Samuel) that we dye not: for we have sinned in asking us a King,
besides all our other sins.

Secondly, the grace of sound conversion suffers not starting holes and
hollownesse in the soul, but works it to sincerity: Now the sincere heart
deals truly between God and it self; it knows that God loves truth in the
inward parts, therefore it will confess fully and frankely without hiding or
lessening any sin. Again, it knows that God loves a free will offering, and
therefore it will offer a free and hearty confession, and there can be no
better sign of sincerity then this.

Thirdly, sound grace is an open enemy, and at war with all sin,
especially the sin which is next it, and will not spare to disgrace it by all
means; it will show true hatred against it, that if confession will discover
the loathsomenesse of sin, it will not be nice in it, but bring it into
discredit with it self. And where grace is more abundant, there is more
abundant sense of sin, and this sense brings abundance of words like so many
swords and weapons against it, every one expressing greater hatred of it then
other as David's words here.

Secondly, another Reason hereof is drawn from the nature of sin, which,
first, is a debt as we have heard; 2.
a debt which is impossible that ever we should be able to pay; this debt
stands upon our heads in Gods debtbooke: Now it will not stand with an honest
disposition to deny or seek to outface or lessen a due debt to any man, and
much less will it stand with a godly disposition to deny or conceal our debts
to God, with whom we cannot play false if we would. And therefore it is as
little as a man of a broken heart can do, to go to the Creditor, and in
humility confess the debt, and crave pardon and forgiveness: So Christ our
Lord has taught us to pray, Forgive us our debts, which implies confession.
And David prays the Lord to blot out all his sins; wherein he secretly
confesses, that he has a large score in Gods book, which he is utterly
unable ever to satisfy.

Secondly, sin is a loathsome filthiness and un cleanness, and a good heart
is ashamed of every nakedness of the Soul, which it sees Gods eye to be
upon: and, because it knows that the next way to cover this nakedness, is to
uncover it (as the whole experience of David in this Psalm teaches,) it
labors by confession to cover all, whereof it is or may be ashamed: and
indeed all true confession must proceed from the shame and confusion of face
for sin.

Thirdly, sin is a gash or wound in the soul: and a man having many wounds
or diseases, seeks the cure of them all, howsoever of the greatest first and
soonest, yet he neglects none, because the least of them is dangerous and
painful: so it is in sin, the confession of which is as the laying open of
a sore, that the plaster may be fitly laid on: a man that would have all
cured, will not hide any, but uncover even the least.

Thirdly, God will have his children in some measure 3.
like himself herein and resemble his own image, that, as he esteems of
sin, not as a light or small thing, but the most vile and odious thing in all
the world, and so he ever speaks of it and carries himself to it: so shall
his children in their measure: and for this purpose

First, he usually puts forth his work of justice, and lays an heavy hand
on the soul (as on David here) and, when the eye of the soul beholds the
Lord frowning upon it without, and the conscience within accusing, then shall
nothing be small, little sins shall be counted great enough: that which Satan
did extenuate, to make it as small as a grain, and as light as a feather,
shall now swel thicker then the Mountains, and seem heavier then all the sands
of the Sea.

Secondly, the Lord will have his children to know the price and worth of
mercy, before he bestow it upon them; he will make them hunger and thirst
after it above all desires, he will have them to see their sins in as
hateful and ougly a visage as may be: for the more the sight of sin is, the
more earnest is the desire of mercy.

Thirdly, God will teach his children, in the serious acknowledging of their
sin, so much the more to glorify himself: For, the more we confess our
own baseness and vileness by sin, the more we magnify the power and
goodness of God in pardoning the same.

First then, this serves to confute the wicked doctrine Use 1.
of the Church of Rome, taught and defended at this day, concerning merits and
supererrogations, which most diametrally opposes it self to all this doctrine
of sound confession, whereas the Parable, Math. 18. 27. shows that the master
must forgive all the debt, or else nothing but perpetual prison is to be
expected.

Secondly, this reprooues the confessions of mostmen, which are in gross and
in general: They are sinners as Use 2.
other men be, without any touch or feeling of particular sins; which,
though it be taken for a sufficient confession, yet indeed is such as the
vilest Atheist may perform; nay I say, a reprobate and castaway, that shall
never be saved, shall do this and more, as we may see in the examples of
Cain, Pharaoh, and Judas, who came to particulars in their confessions, and so
go far beyond these men. Nay, numbers of these, that post off their sins
in the lump, with such slubberd confessions, cannot tell wherein they have
particularly offended. Yea if they were examined, they would make you believe
they had kept all the Commandments of God. If thy body were sick to death,
and the Phisician came, it would not content thee to tell him thou art sick,
and no more; but thou would show him thy particular grief and disease, with
the special manner and circumstances of it: and this must thou do also by all
possible means, before thou carry away the cure of thy sin, and be restored
to spiritual soundness.

Thirdly, contrary to this sound confession, are many other vile practices of
men, who are in love with their Use 3.
sins:

First, such there be in the world, that hood-winke themselves, and would
rather lose both their eyes, then with either of them see the foulness of
their sins; they will smother the checkes, and stifle the voice of their own
consciences; they follow their sports, their pastimes, their merry company, and
take any course to thrust away the remembrance of their sin by any means
possible; but alas! they return again, because the guilt remains: how should
a man repent of that sin, which he will not see, lest he should sorrow?
small is the ease and comfort that a poor fellon gets against the sentence of
execution, by shutting his ears lest he should hear it; he were mad, if he
should think to escape hanging by so doing; his only way were to humble
himself and beg pardon.

Secondly, others there be, that can sport themselves with their sins, and
boast of them; and this is as if a thief should boast of his robberies: here
is a confession of them, but such as is the committing of the same over again;
for there wants nothing but the same opportunity again, seeing there is the
same affection.

Thirdly, others can justify and defend, yea patronize and plead for their
own sins, and others, by writing, preaching, example, and countenance: What
says one? I am not alone, I have company, I love not to be singular, I do but
as others do; it is the fashion to swear, at least by faith and troth, and
not to do it, were to be out of fashion; I hope, if I never do worse to do
well enough, I hope God is not so straite-laced as you be. And some are not
ashamed (if they be put in mind of themselves, and be rebuked for their
swearing, drunkenness, or pride) to say, What need you care? you shall not
answer for my sins, you have enough of your own to care for: all who must
know, that their case is most fearful: for

First, an evil and a naughty heart it is, that can cloak and excuse sin,
and far from true humiliation, as may Danger of hiding or lessening sin.
appear in Saul, who in stead of aggravating his sin, found out many
excuses, The people did it, and, It is to offer sacrifice to the Lord, 1. Sam.
15. such is the power of corruption, which we sucked from our first Parents:
the Serpent, says one; the Woman, says the other, gave it me: as though they
had reason so to do.

Secondly, it is a most dangerous case to lessen a man's own sin: for it
suffers him not to see his misery, he takes himself to be in good case, and
to stand in need of no repentance. For such Christ came not, Math. 9. 12. they
be whole men, and need not the Phisician: But I pray you, is not that the most
dangerous sickness of all, when a man has no feeling of his sickness?

Thirdly, it is a sign, that such a man lies under a severe judgment of God,
seeing the only way not to be judged of the Lord, is to judge our selves, 1.
Cor. 11. 31. Nay it is a thing to be observed, that even when the sentence is
even coming out against the wicked, then will they excuse their sins: Math.
25. 44. Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or in prison, or naked, and
ministered not to thee? and presently these shall go into everlasting pain.

Fourthly, how unlike are these men unto God, who sets out sin in a most
odious sort? how uncomfortable to Gods Law, that sets an eternal curse upon
the head of the least sin? how far from the disposition of the godly, who
think nothing so vile and hateful as sin? And how serviceable to Satan,
whose trade is to advance sin and color it?

Fourthly, this teaches us to reverence that ministry, which would set our
sins distinctly before us, which Use 4.
helps us to sound confession and remission: A necessary doctrine; because, as
men naturally love nothing better then their sins, so they can abide nothing
less then the discovery of them: Hence Ahab hates Micaiah, for he never
prophecyeth good; that is, he dealt plainly without flattery; hence the world
hated Christ, because he testified of it that her works were evil. So, many
now a days are discontented, The Preacher is too peremptory, some say too
saucy and busy, and takes too much upon him, what need he speak of such and
such things? certainly he receives information, and opens it in the Pulpit;
he is ever in the Law, and binds me too hard; I would think his feet
beautiful, if he would bring tidings of peace. But here is a man loath to know
himself and his sins, and far from holy David's mind, who says, Let the
righteous smite me, for that is a precious oil, Psalm. 141. 5. he desires as in
Zach. 1. 11. that all the world might be still and at rest, and never a
Trumpet, or voice like a Trumpet to waken it, to show the people their
transgressions, and the house of Iaacob their sins.

These men say to the Ministers, as the Sodomites did to Lot, Shall he judge
and rule? Genesis 19. 9. and as Corah and his accomplices said to Moses and Aaron,
Ye take too much upon you, Numb. 16. 3. therefore come, let us break their
bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3.

But know whosoever thou art, that thou must look for no peace by us, till
thou warrest with thy sins: Shall we preach mercy to thee, that feel no
need of mercy? Shall we cast a pearl to a swine? Thou that art of the frozen
generation, that need a Boanerges, a son of thunder, why expectest thou a
Bar-Ionah? Unto the Horse belongs a whip, and to the Ass a bridle, and a rod
to a Fools back, prou. 26. 3. Were thou an humble soul, and hungry after
Christ, then our word would be as good news out of a far country, Prou. 25.
25. but till thy wound be lanced, and the core thrust out, wise Surgeons will
never power in oil; do thou let the plough of the Law break up thy fallow
ground, and then blame us if we bring not the seed of the Gospel.

Now follows the fourth point in David's confession, the manner of it. First,
in respect of God: Secondly, of himself. For the first: First, he will
confess before the Lord, and make his sin known to him: Secondly, he will
not hide it; the one amplifying the other, as it is also in these phrases. Thou
shall dye, and not live, John confessed and denied not; so here, I made known,
and hid not; the doubling of the phrase shows, that he doubled not, but did
that he did to the purpose.

In that David says, he will confess unto the Lord: Doctr.
note, that all true confession of sin must be made unto All sound confession
of sin must be made unto God.
God. So Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned.

And what is the reason hereof?

First, because it is God, that is most offended with Reas. 1.
sin, his Law is transgressed, his displeasure incurred, and his revenge
provoked; and what reason have I to confess a debt to him, to whom I owe
nothing? God is the party offended, therefore I must go to him alone.

Secondly, he only can properly forgive sin: Who 2.
is a God like unto thee, that passest by the sins of thy people, says the
holy man? The Jews that were blind in many things, yet could see well enough,
that only God could forgive sins: and indeed who can remit a debt, but he
to whom it is due? therefore S. John says, If we confess our sin, he is
faithful to forgive us, Chap. 1. 1, 9.

Thirdly, confession is a part of prayer and divine worship, whereof it is
said, My glory I will give to none other. 3.
Isa. 41. 8.

Fourthly, this is manifest by the sense of such as truly confess, who need
many compassions; but, great are 4.
thy tender mercies, O Lord, Psalm. 119. 156. and he is rich in mercy, Ephesians.
2. 4. All the mercy that can come from Man or Angel, is but a poor mercy, a
little mercy, which can do no good to the satisfying of the debt, or
cancelling the bond. Men and Angels are but children, in whom are drops only,
but God is the Father of mercies, in whom is the sea and seat of mercy.

But how can a man make his sins known to God Quest. 1.
by confession, seeing he knows them before?

First, it pleases God so to speak of himself, and to Answ.
suffer us to speak of him, as we our selves are capable. Thus he brings
himself in, like an earthly Judge; who, though he know the facts of the
prisoners, yet seems for the orderly course of justice not to know them: as
Genesis 18. 21. Come, Let us go down and see, if it be according to the cry of
Sodom: how can he go down, who is every where? and how can he but see, who
is all an eye? but thus he speaks after the manner of men. So he says to
Abraham, Now I know thou love me, who sparedst not thine only Son for me.
God knew Abraham's love to him before, but now Abraham knows, that God knows
it.

Secondly, men are said to hide their sin, when they seek to extenuate or
lessen, or conceal any necessary circumstance of it: or seek colors and
shifts, that it should not be presented naked and bare as it is, in the Lords
sight: and then it is said to be hid from God, not that it is so indeed, (for
it is so much the more manifest to God:) but because it is so in the corrupt
judgment of the sinner; which folly soon took hold of Adam after his fall,
who thought himself well hid from God with trees, and his sin with leaves.

But seeing God knows all so well, why must we confess Quest. 2.
to him?

First, not to make God know any thing which he Answ. 1.
knows not, but he will have us perform homage and duty to him, as an
absolute Lord, and sovereign Judge. So Joshua said to Achan; My son,
confess, and give glory to God, Josh. 7. 19.

Secondly, that our selves may take better knowledge of our sins, and humble
our hearts in the sight and 2.
sense of them.

Thirdly, because this is a means, in which himself will be found merciful,
and which he has appointed for 3.
us to attain ease and comfort by: we must take David's course here, if we
would obtain an happy discharge of sin, as he did.

But was not David far ouerseene, to confess only Quest. 3.
to God? Why did he not go to the Priest, and tell all his sins in his ear?

Auricular confession of all a man's sins in the ear of Answ.
a Priest, as necessary to salvation, was not known in Non dico confitearis
conseruo tuo qui exprobret, sed dicito Deo qui sanat, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50.
David's time: besides, he knew he had not sinned against the Priest, and
therefore he cared not for his forgiveness; it was not the Law or bond of any
Priest that he had broken, and therefore what had he to do to forgive him?

Do you then condemn all confession of man to man? Does not S. James say,
chap. 5. 18. Confess one to Object.
another.

We allow confession of sins to men: First, public: Answ.
Secondly, private: in sundry cases. Public confession, thus

First, for the setting up of Gods glory, with the shame 1.
of a man's self. Thus did the holy Penmen of the Scriptures, Cases of public
Confession to men.
writing of themselves, proclaim their own sins to all the world, that God
might thereby be glorified, and his Church edified. And Gods special
providence has detected in sundry persons those sins, which they have kept
close by them, and forced them by a free confession unto men, to glorify God,
as may be seen in Achans example. Gehazi, not confessing his sin upon
examination of his Master, to whom God had detected him, was stricken with
Leprosy: Ananias and Saphyra with death: Jonas by his confession to the
Mariners, glorified God; and the fruit was, They feared God exceedingly.

Secondly, men must sometimes publicly confess 2.
their sin unto men, for the good of the Church; as, when Christians have
publicly offended the Church of God, they are to give public satisfaction by
open and free confession: for hereby

First, the truth of their Repentance is testified. Benefits of public
confession to men, four.


Secondly, Gods mercy is publicly implored by the whole Church, which is
forceable.

Thirdly, a whole Congregation is instructed, and warned to take heed of like
sins.

Fourthly, the love of Gods people is notably confirmed again to the party.
Upon such a public confession and humiliation, was the Incestuous person
received in again, 2. Cor. 2. 6. it is sufficient, that the same man was
rebuked of many: and Act. 19. 18. it is recorded of the believers of Ephesus,
that being stricken with a great fear, they came and confessed their works
before the multitude. It is much to be desired, that this public confession,
being an ordinance of Jesus Christ, were more practiced in every congregation,
then it is, or is like to be: for if those that sin openly, were rebuked
openly, others would fear, 1. Tim. 5. 20.

Secondly, we allow also private confession of man to man, in two cases: 2.


First, in private injuries between man and man: for by our sins we may
also wrong men, as David did Vriah; 1.
and here it will be meet to come and confess our fault to the party wronged,
to testify: First, our repentance: Secondly, our sound reconciliation. This is
intended by the speech of Christ, Luke 17. 4. If thy brother trespass against
thee seven times a day, and he come and say, It repents me, thou shall for
give him. Yea, God himself sends Abimilech to Abraham, whom he had unwittingly
wronged and offended, to reconcile himself to him, Genesis 20 7.
that he might obtain Abraham's prayers: So likewise he sent Jobs friends,
having wronged him, to Job, to confess their fault, and get him to entreat of
Gods peace Job 41. 8.
for them.

Secondly, in trouble of conscience, to find peace, it is fit to use the help
of some special man, minister or other, and being a man of wisdom, gifts,
and secrecy, to confess to him both the trouble of conscience, and the cause
of the grief: Of this the Apostle James says, Confess one to another, and
pray one for another. Now in this case, Iam. 5. 16.
although the Minister should be the fittest man, as having a learned tongue
and studied in the cases of conscience, to minister unto a weary soul a word
of comfort inseason, and has special promise to be heard, as being a minister
of reconciliation between God and his people; and it is not for nothing, that
the Lord uses this reason to Abimelech, Go to ABRAHAM, for he is a Prophet:
Yet that place shows, that the troubled conscience is not to be tied to one
person, nor to a Priest, but to be performed also to private Christians.

Hence we may see, how far all this differs from 1. Difference of
Christian confession from Popish and Auricular.
Popish Auricular Confession: For, first, we hold it not a matter of absolute
necessity, to confess unto men, as they do; but that there be cases, wherein
it may be convenient or necessary. Secondly, we urge not confession of all
sins, with all the circumstances to be necessary, 2.
yea, the very thoughts and intentions of the heart; which is

First, the rack and gibbet of consciences, and no easer.

Secondly, it is fit for such as would know all the secrets of States, Kings,
and Kingdoms: all a Kings revenue cannot maintain so many intelligencers, as
make known so much to the Pope, as this common leager of confession, in all
States, and Courts, and Houses, yea, bosoms of men and women.

Thirdly, it is a fit means to know the disposition of all persons, by which
they know where to have fit agents for their villainies, fit Patients for their
lusts, resolute Catholics to stab Kings, and blow up Parliament houses: But
we leave it free, and to be only of those sins, which most trouble the
conscience, and hinder the peace of the soul.

Thirdly, we inioyne it not at set times, as once a year 3.
at Easter, but only when the forenamed occasions are offered.

Fourthly, we say it may be made, not to a Priest only 4.
or Friar, and their own Parish Priest; but, if the Minister be a fit man,
then to him; and, if he be not, then to some other Minister, or in the defect
of such a one, then to some ordinary faithful Christian, to whom he may
discover his trouble, with the cause of it.

And if all this be so, that confession must be made to Use 1.
God: then consider before thou sin, that thou must go back to God again,
after thy departure from him by sin: the Prodigal goes from his Father, but
he must come back again; if there be a going from God, there must be a
returning to him; if thou hide thy sin, thou must again uncover it.

Secondly, if sin must be confessed unto God, then do it sincerely as before
God. In all things, the heart Use 2.
and tongue ought to agree, because the Lord made the one, to express the
other; and so our Prophet in this confession suffered not his tongue to run
before his (...).
wits, but he thought he would confess, and confessed: so in all the parts
of Gods worship, the first thing respected is the heart; whereas contrarily
many in confession, public or private, have one thing in their mouth, another
in their heart.

Again, thou sinnest before God, before his face, in his sight, the Lord
looking on, and standing by; there is nothing which is not naked to his eyes,
no darkness nor night can cover thee, for that is as day to him, with whom is
no darkness: and therefore it is a bootlesse thing to seek to hide thy sin
from him, he heard thee lie, swear, and forswear; he saw thee drunken, and
committing uncleanness; thou could not fly from his Spirit, his fiery eyes
did look on thee, himself stood at thy elbow.

Thirdly, if thou confessest unto God, then in confession ever set thy self
before God, and this will season it Use 3.

Necessary attendants of Confession. Romans 6. 21.


with necessary qualities: as first, thou will bring shame in thy face, and an
holy blushing, as it is said, What fruit have ye of those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? And it is hollownesse and impudency to offer to confess
foul sins, without blushing and shame before God. Oh, said the holy man
Ezra, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee: A good heart,
seeing Gods eyes to be set on his nakedness, stands aghast, and ashamed in it
self, and there is no quietness to it, till it be covered with the garment
of Christ's righteousness: Ezekiel. 16. 61, 62, 63. Then thou shall remember thy
ways, and be ashamed, and confounded, and never open thy mouth any more,
because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have
done, etc. Secondly, if thou set thy self before God in confession, it
will breed anguish and sorrow of spirit, for that sin which is confessed, as
the conuerts, Act. 2. 37. were pricked in their hearts in conscience of their
sins; there will be inward grief for offending a good God, and grieuing his
good Spirit.

Thirdly, it will bring in a purpose to leave and forsake that sin which is
confessed, and all other. Can a man, setting himself before God, confess that
sin which he purposes to live in and hold and not forsake? this is but to
ask leave to sin.

Nay, the setting of a man's self before God, will bring in a resolution to
renounce all sin, as Hos. 14. 9. Ephraim shall say, What have I more to do
with Idols?

Fourthly, it will bring in a secret, but most earnest desire of forgiveness,
for it cannot but consider in God: First, the Majesty offended: Secondly, the
danger of his wrath, which is a consuming fire, and an execution of all the
plagues written in the book of the Law: and thirdly, the riches of his mercy,
in providing so precious a means of redemption, which neither man nor Angel
could once think of, 1. Pet. 1. 18.

Fifthly, it breeds a reforming of that which is amiss, and an healing of the
error, as Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. Lord, half my goods I give to the poor:
according to the counsel of Samuel 1. 7. 3. If ye be come again to the Lord
with all your heart, put away the strange gods from among you.

Sixthly, it breeds an holy fear for time to come, because it beholds Gods eye
upon every sin, his anger on every one, till by the blood of Christ he be
appeased, his mercy in forgiving, that he may be feared; and this fear abates
the rage of sin: nay, it will fear the occasion, and hate the appearance of
evil, 1. These. 5. 22. and the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23.

Seventhly, there is a mourning and complaining under the burden and bondage of
sin: Oh, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! says Paul: and
Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear?

Eighthly, there is great desire, 2. Cor. 7. 11. namely, a longing to satisfy
Paul and the rest of the members of the Church, with desire to be restored to
their favors and fellowship.

Ninthly, Confession to men: For duties of Piety and Charity must go
together, or else all is abominable, as appears, Ier. 7. 9. 10. Will ye
steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me
in this house, which is called by my name, and say; We are delivered, though we
have done all these abominations? So Isay 1. 11. What have I to do with your
sacrifices? etc. for your hands are full of blood, verse. 15.

Against my self.] This is the second branch of the manner of David's
confession, he will confess against himself. Hence note, that He that will
truly and soundly Doctr.
confess his sin, must become his own utter enemy, he must A true
confessor must be his own utter enemy.
set himself against himself as much as possibly he can. So did DAVID here,
he shamed himself to all posterity, and spared not his own name, though a
King, so GOD might have the praise of his mercy, and the Church the benefit of
his example.

Job 42. 6. When Job was reproved for his inconsiderate words, he brake out at
last into this speech, I abhor my self, and repent my self in dust and ashes.
He is a great enemy, that hates man; but far greater, that abhors him: yet
so was Job to himself. Daniel in his prayer says, I am confounded and ashamed
to look up to heaven, shame and confusion of face belongs unto us this day,
Dan. 9. 5. etc. So close does he follow the matter against himself. 1. Tim. 6.
13, 15. Saint Paul rippeth up his own grievous sins, in such sort as his
greatest enemy could not have spoken more against him, then he spoke against
himself. He was not contented to call himself a vile person, but (as though
he had said too little) he adds that he is the chiefest of all sinners. Who
could more accuse the poor Publican then he did himself? Oh, I am not worthy
to lift up mine eyes to heaven, Luc. 18. 13. and the Prodigal Son, I am not
worthy to be called thy Son, Luc. 15. 18, 19.

And good reason it should be so: for

First, sound confession is called a judging of our selves, Reason. 1.
1. Cor. 11. 31. Now in the course of judgment, there are four things, all
against the party to be judged: First, arraignement; and this in confession
is, when we present and summon our selves before the bar of Gods justice:
Secondly, examination; and this is, when we narrowly inquire of our selves
what we have done: wherein as the Kings Attorney sifteth out, and exaggerateth
every circumstance of the crime against a Traitor, to make it seem as odious
as may be; so should we sift out every circumstance of our sin, to make it as
vile to our own eyes as may be, so as our hearts may be convinced: Thirdly,
conviction or pleading guilty, and confession; and that is, when with the
penitent Thief, our souls can say, We are righteously here, and justly laid
under Gods indignation, worthy to be cast into Hell. And never was he truly
humbled, that is, more ashamed to confess sin, then to commit it: Fourthly,
there is an execution and holy revenge, 2. Cor. 7. 11. and this is, when we
beat down our bodies, and mortify our members, and undertake good duties,
that the like occasions may be prevented for afterward. These parts of an enemy
does every humbled soul take up against it self, when it judges it self
before God; and who can be a greater enemy to himself, then he that does so?

Secondly, it is an essential difference between the 2.
sound confessions of the godly, and the slubberd confessions of the wicked;
the godly renounce themselves and their sins, but hypocrites do not, they
never learned the first lesson of Christianity, which is selfe-denial, their
minds are set upon evil works, and therefore how can they be against them?
They repent not but with a repentance to be repented of.

Thirdly, all the accusers and enemies, that the child of God has, if they be
put together, cannot object half 3.
so much against him, as he can against himself; men may speak much, but not
so much as himself. And therefore if he deal truly between God and
himself, he will so shame himself, as all his enemies cannot. And for this
end, God has seated the conscience in the middle of the soul, as a Judge of
the actions, and has given it an eye, to pry into the secrets of the heart,
and cleared this eye in the regenerate, to discern more evidently the own
estate, and given it a voice to follow the sinner with hue and cry, to make him
pronounce the sentence of guiltiness and death against himself; and all this
is to justify God in any judgment he brings upon us, and to glorify him when
he brings us out by any deliverance: But as for the wicked, the eye of
conscience in them is dazeled, or quite put out, and lets them go on to their
condemnation.

Fourthly, a godly man must become his own greatest 4.
enemy in confession of sin, because grace must carry a man further then
nature can do: nature can make a man hate sin, but other men's rather then
his own, Genesis 38. 24. Judah thought whoredom worthy of burning (as it was the
custom in those days,) in his daughter in law Thamar, but not in himself;
when the tokens he had left with her were brought forth, then he could
confess she was more righteous then he, then away with burning; whereas, if
she were worthy to be burnt, then much more he. But grace looks rather upon
a man's own sins, then another, accounting them more venomous, poysonfull,
odious, and hate-worthy then another. We hate all Serpents deadly, yet not so
much those in another country, as these in our own, nor one that is ten foot
off, as that that is hard by; the nearer he is, the greater is our antipathie
and hatred against him. Now seeing every sin is a Serpent, therefore we must
hate every one, but that more especially which is nearest and upon our hands,
as the Viper upon Paul's, to shake it off as he did.

To come now to the Uses:

First, this lets us see what is the nature of sin, whatsoever Use 1.
men conceive of it; they think not of it as of sin, if it have either
profit or pleasure with it, but hold and hug it as a sweet morsel under
their tongue, they conceive a great sweetness in it; whereas indeed it makes
a man his own greatest enemy. If he never repent, it is an intolerable evil;
but if he do repent, he sees that the sweetness of it is bitter enough, such
as makes him say, that the pleasure of sin is very dear, and bought at too
high a rate.

A man can bewail any outward commodity being lost, and say as Iaacob did, I
have lost this and this child, all these things make against me; So, I have
lost such and such commodity, all these make against me: but, where is the man
that can say, Lo my sins, these are they that make against me? But let the
wise be persuaded never to think of sin as of a friend, to fall into too
familiar acquaintance with it, but know that it is such an enemy, as thy self
must be thine own greatest enemy for it, or else God will.

Secondly, must a man set himself against himself Use 2.
in his confessions? then this taxes the practice of many men:

First, of sundry, who will neither deny their sins, nor yet confess them.
They will not deny them for shame, because it is against their knowledge and
conscience; they should seem to pull the Sun out of heaven, and deny the
light of Nature, if they should say they do not sin; and as for confession,
they will confess none, though never so sinfully done, they deal gently with
them, and are loath to fall out with their friends; faults they will confess
them and ouersights, and infirmities which every man has, sins of weakness,
though indeed of wickedness, such as are done by the strength of corruption
never resisted.

Thus through ancient acquaintance they cannot leave them, they look so
amiable and lovely, thus they flatter themselves in sin: but if ever such
come to be reconciled to God again, they must put on another person, and deal
in earnest against them, before they can see God friendly in the pardon of
them, they must call a spade a spade, that is, confess sin to be such as
indeed it is; If the question be: what is the vilest thing in the world? The
answer must be, These sins; and, Who is the vilest person living, the answer
may and must be, Themselves.

Secondly, others have set colors on their sins, that they might never see
the hateful and ougly face of 2.
them: as

First, anger and hastiness, when a man is all on a sudden flame, and burns
all about him, for no just cause; What will he say? Why, it is but spirit, or
at worst heat of nature, and he cannot do withal, it is soon past and over.
Well, an enemy to his sin would conclude it to be spirit indeed, but an
evil one, and an heat which is kindled from the fire of Hell.

Secondly, excessive pride, though men out-runne their degrees, and out-weare
all fashions, in attiring themselves most immodestly, so that a man may read in
broad letters, and great characters, the lightness of a light mind, yet they
say, it is but ornament or complement, or at worst, the fashion. An enemy now
to sin would esteem it, as indeed it is, a fashion unbeseeming such as
profess mortification, and a fashion whereof the Apostle says, Fashion not
your selves according to this world, and not maintain them with Principles
drawn out of the Devils Catechism.

Thirdly, prodigality is but kindness of nature, covetousness but frugalitie,
drinkings after the manner of the Gentiles, but society and humanity,
Impudency and complement, but good education; Luke-warmnes in religion, but
good discretion and policy: and, though Christ gave himself to purchase a
people zealous of good works, yet it is thought a man's praise to be no meddler,
and to be zealous is counted nothing but to outrunne the bounds of godliness.
Thus Satan had taught the world a trick to harden men's hearts, and hinder them
from sound peace and repentance.

Thirdly, others so tender their names in their public sins (which are as
manifest as a nose on a man's face, as we 3.
say:) as they shrink from showing themselves in open confession against
themselves, and that when Gods glory, and the good of the Church, yea the
peace of their own consciences calls for confession. But far are they from
the affection of a zealous heart, which would make them turn against
themselves and their sins, in returning to GOD. This would have thought that
David should have had more care of his credit then thus to rip up his sins,
but David was of another mind then they.

Fourthly, those (truly so called) Puritanes and Catharists that need not
repentance, being whole men, in full conformity with the image of GOD, so
deifyed, that they cannot sin. These are to be branded with that odious name
of Puritanes, and not they that confess their sins, and labor to prevent
them for time to come. And Papists rather are true Puritans, who say they
fulfill the Law, and need not say, Forgive us our debts, because GOD is rather
indebted unto them by their works of supererogation: let men lay the vile
reproach of Puritanisme (which is an heresy) upon these, rather then the godly
not deserving it.

Thirdly, this is a ground of instruction, how to carry Use 3.
our selves toward them that are afflicted in soul, and soundly humbled, that
we aggrauate not their sins, or the danger of their estate, but rather
comfort them, seeing they can and do speak more basely, and think more
vilely of themselves then we can do. It is the part of a miserable comforter
to add sorrow to the afflicted. Old Eli should have had more compassion on
Annah, and not have been so inconsiderate as to say she was drunken: Oh my
Lord (said she) I am not drunken, but my soul is troubled within me, 1. Sam.
1. 16. It was the fault of Jobs friends, that in stead of comfort, they went
about to prove him an hypocrite; Of such the Church complains in the
Canticles, Thus I was wounded in the house of my friends. If Gods childrens
estate be already heavy, they lay it heavier on them: But, blessed is he that
wisely judges the poor.

Fourthly, seeing in confession of sin a man should become his own greatest
enemy, we must conscionably Use. 4.
use the means to become our own enemies, not the enemies Quest.
of our bodies, but of our own body of sin. Answ. 1
And what are these means.

These: Means of sound hatred of our own sins.


First, let us search and sift our selves, our estates and ways. Zeph. 2. 1.
Fan your selves, fan your selves, O Nation not worthy to be loved. Lam. 3.
40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Let us
carry lights into our souls, to see the secrets of them. Ier. 3. 13. Know
thine iniquity: How? by the Law of God, whereby (...). Arist. l. 1. de anim.
c. vlt.
comes knowledge of sin: the more insight into the Law, the more sight of
sin and misery: being right it self it is index sui and obliqui, showing us
what to do, and what is done amiss. See Ier. 6. 8.

Secondly, let us take knowledge of the rottenness 2.
and corruptnesse of our nature: for if we could see our nature aright, we
should find just cause enough to hate our selves, it being a stinking sink, a
filthy puddle, and an impure fountain that sends forth muddy streams, a
bitter root sending out odious fruit, such as whereby we show our selves
enemies to God and righteousness, having the spawne of all sin in our hearts.

Thirdly, meditate on the greatness of sin, examine 3.
in what degree and circumstances thou have sinned, and, as thou have risen in
the degrees of sin, so rise accordingly in the degrees of humiliation and
hatred of them, and of thy self for them. A low degree of humiliation will not
serve David and Manasseh, when their sins are in high degrees.

Fourthly, let us look upon our sins in the numberless 4.
kinds of them, in the fountain and streams of them, in wandering thoughts,
idle words, and profane hurtful actions; sins by omission of good, and
commission of evil; sins of knowledge and presumption or of ignorance, Psalm.
19. 12. for many sins we know not, which we must give up to the Lord to be
searched by him, and by his mercy either to be brought to our remembrance, or
graciously passed by; sins of youth, or past, to repent us of them; and of
age, either present, to groan under them, or future, to fear and prevent. In
regard hereof say, Lord, who knows the errors of this life? they are in
number as the hairs of our head.

Fifthly, let us labor to see the danger of our sins: for he that sees an
evil, will be the more careful to prevent 5.
the danger of it.

First, see the danger of sin in the infinite Majesty Wherein the danger of
sin consists: six things.
of God offended, for he will set himself stubbornely against all offenders,
that have not set themselves against themselves, in regard of their sins, and
put forth his wrath in flaming fire, to render vengeance upon the disobedient.

Secondly, in trampling under foot the blood of the Covenant, as an unholy
thing: God sent his only Son 2.
Christ Jesus from heaven to take our nature upon him, and to shed his blood
for us, and yet in sinning we tread it under foot: what a dangerous thing is
this? See Heb. 10. 29.

Thirdly, in quenching the motions of Gods good Spirit, who has often striuen
with us in the ministry, 3.
and betrusted us with his gifts and graces; Ephesians. 4. 30. 1. These. 5. 19.

Fourthly, in staining our honorable profession, which we should rather have
adorned and beautified, as though 4.
other men would not debase our profession enough, unless we do too. We
should walk worthy of our high Calling, 1. These. 2. 12. and in holiness,
whereunto we are called, chap. 4. 7. being Saints by calling, 1. Cor. 1. 2. and
ought to be holy, as he which has called us, is holy, 1. Pet. 1. 15. What a
shame is it to infringe so excellent privileges?

Fifthly, in repetition of sin, when we commit the same sin again and
again, every year, month, week 5.
and day, yea every moment of the day. Better had it been for us to have been
Gentiles and Painims, who never knew the truth, then to hear sin reproved,
and yet rush presumptuously into it, and after repentance to wallow again in
the mire; See 2. Pet. 2. 21, 22. it is a pitiful and lamentable thing, that a
man should wash himself from sin by repentance, and then go and pull Gods
vengeance upon him again by tumbling himself in them.

Sixthly, and lastly, the danger of sin is great, because 6 Sins against
many means.
we have sinned against such great means of sanctification, as namely, first,
against our vows, made in baptism, and renewed in the supper, or which we
have made of our selves upon certain occasions, that we would do such or
such things no more: all these we have kept very slenderly, or not at all,
whereas civil honesty requires performance of a promise, made to man: and is
it nothing not to keep touch with God, who has commanded us to keep touch
with men? Remember the precept, Eccles. 5. 3.

Secondly, against the light and checkes of conscience, and is this nothing?
Christ says, This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into
the world, and men love darkness more then the light: Romans 1. 18, 21. We
read, that God plagued the Gentiles for neglecting the means of knowledge by
the creatures; how much more will he punish us, that profess the light of
grace, and yet spurn against it, as if we were still in the night of
darkness? how many among us live in a number of sins more odiously, then
did many of the Gentiles, who could live somewhat ciuilly and honestly, in
respect of our outrageous enormities?

Thirdly, against many of Gods corrections, both in our selves, and in others:
when a child receives no good by correction, we think his parents will go
near to thrust him out of doors; so is it between God and us. See an
excellent place, Dan. 5. 18. to 29. Because we are no whit benefited by other
men's chastizements, the sentence is not far off, but is already pronounced
against us, We are weighed in the balance, and found too light.

Fourthly, against the great mercies of God: this doubles the sin in Gods
sight: 2. Sam. 12. 7. to 13. the Prophet Nathan exaggerates David's sin, by
showing him the particular benefits, wherein God had remembered him, and
concludes; the greater Gods love was, the greater was his ingratitude and
forgetfulness.

What a number of mercies have we in this one, that the glorious light of grace
shines so bright upon us in the Ministry, whereby we may be put in mind of
Gods exceeding love, and what he deserves at our hands, and what are our sins
against him, which give him just occasion to remove his blessings from us? Let
us look to it; if we do not use these large blessings conscionably, our sin
will be so much the more heavy in the punishment. Let us confess our sins,
and unthankfulness especially, and in our confessions, become enemies to our
selves, (for we see true confessions are to be thus qualified) and that by
these means prescribed, which may help us thereunto.

And thou forgauest the punishment of my sin.]
DAVID had made himself an enemy to himself, and now to obtain that which
he labored for, he makes God his friend; this is the fruit of serious
confession. Thou forgauest] The Word signifies to wipe off all the score,
namely, the debt of sin and of punishment. The punishment] or rather, iniquity
of my sin (as the Word may be better translated) that is, my wicked sin; as
if he had said, Though it was against my conscience, a foul, filthy, and
bloody sin, yet thou made it, as if it had never been.

God forgiueth sin two ways: first, in his own secret counsel, according
to his own decree; and this is, when he accepts the satisfaction of Christ,
for the sin committed against him. Secondly, actually, upon humiliation and
repentance; and this is, when he puts forth actual forgiveness in men's own
consciences, whereby he persuades them, that their sin is forgiven. And this
latter is here spoken of: David's sin was remitted before by faith in the
Messiah, but now the remission thereof is testified to his own conscience: and
hence he comes to retain his former joy, and his mourning garment is turned
into a garment of gladness; he had now a comfortable experience of his happy
estate. Now in that David thought and purposed to confess, and then it
follows presently, Thou forgauest: note that

So soon as ever a sinner does truly, and soundly confess Doct.
his sin, the Lord does presently follow with forgiveness: Remission of
sin follows a sound purpose of confession.
remission of sin does immediately follow a very intent and purpose to
confess it. Prou. 28. 13. He that hides his sin, shall not prosper: but he
that confesses and forsakes it, shall have mercy. There must be forsaking of
sin with confession, to show the soundnes of it, and then presently follows
remission. And why?

First, it is grounded on Gods faithfulness, who has Reas. 1.
made a promise, for this fruit of confession; 1. John 1. 9. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. As if he should say, God of his infinite mercy, has
promised to all true penitents and confessors, that he will forgive and never
remember their sins any more, he must stand to his promises, or else he
should be unfaithful: and he is just (says the Apostle) to forgive; a man
would have 1. John 1. 9.
thought, he would rather have said, He is merciful to forgive: no, but he
is just to forgive the sins of true believers, because they are all satisfied
for, their whole debt is paid, and Gods justice will not let him demand the
same debt twice, of the surety, and of the debtor.

Secondly, true confession is a fruit of sound conversion, 2
at the first act whereof, all a man's sins are done away, although the
tidings of it comes not so soon to his own conscience. This appears in the
example of David here; he no sooner said, that is, truly resolved to confess,
but the Lord remitted his sin, and prevented him, saying, Thy sin is put
away, thou shall not die: see the story, 2. Sam. 12. 7, 13. The prodigal
son says, He will go to his Father, and whilst yet he is coming, before
his confession, his father sees him a far off, runs to meet him, falls on
his neck, and kisseth him.

Thirdly, true confession is a sign of adoption. Now where this is, there is a
heart resolved to seek God, so 3.
that a man puts off all his former hatred of him, and the affections of his
heart are sanctified, to desire peace and reconciliation with God: this cannot
proceed from a heart that is now at enmity with God, as it was by nature, but
which is a friend, and reconciled. A wicked and reprobate person can desire
salvation out of selfeloue, and to save his skin, but not properly
reconciliation: but a godly man desires Gods love and friendship, and
reconciliation with him, for his own sake, more then, and above his own
salvation.

Fourthly, remission must needs attend sound confession; because this
confession is joined with some kind, 4.
and seed of saving faith, which, be it never so small, is a fruit of the
sanctifying Spirit, and makes a man partaker of Christ, and in him of God the
Father with all his blessings: for in this confession, as we have noted, there
is

First, a denial of a man's self, which is a work of the renewing Spirit,
which whosoever has, he is the child of God.

Secondly, there is in it an apprehension of Gods merciful nature with
application, and taking hold of it for himself; which application is either
not at all, or false in the wicked.

Thirdly, there is in it a true touch, which holds on in seeking God; whereas
in the wicked, there are some good wishes and confused apprehensions: but,
being without sincerity, fall off, and come to nothing. Whence we conclude,
that true confession of sin goes always with remission and pardon of it.

But, how can confession be sound, before sin be pardoned, seeing nothing can
be acceptable where sin is Object. 1.
not pardoned? it seems rather that confession should follow remission.

To answer this, we must conceive, that in God, the justifying of a man's
person, his sanctification, faith, repentance Ans. 1.
and confession are al given at once, at the same moment, because at the first
act of grace, there is a change in the whole soul: but in respect of us, of
our apprehension and application, one grace goes before another; as the crack
of thunder and lightning are both at one time: but we see one, before we hear
the other, because our sight is more quick and apprehensiue then ourhearing.
Likewise these graces are wrought all together by God, yet in regard of us and
our sense and apprehension, pardon comes after confession.

Secondly, God in the beginning of our conversion gives us that grace, the
which he does not presently give 2.
the feeling of. As a child in the womb lives and moves, but has no knowledge
of his life and motion: so Gods children are in a comfortable estate, but they
know not the comfort of their estate; Gods graces in them are in so small
degree, that they can scarce acknowledge that, which in truth is in them.

But we see, that numbers of men have confessed their Object. 2.
sins, and yet had them not remitted. Saul and Judas, and Caine confessed,
and yet remission of sin did not follow, they were reprobates.

The doctrine speaks of sound confession, such as they Ans.
had not: for first, it was not voluntary, but extorted: Unsound confession
discovered.
Reprobates cannot say as David, I will confess, but are drawn out by head
and ears of God thereunto; they would still have hid their sins if they could;
therefore their confession was no freewill-offering, and so not sound nor
accepted.

Secondly, it seeks not ease of sin, but ease of sense, desiring only that
God would take out of their conscience the horrors of hell, and it looks on
the punishment, not the offense done against Gods Majesty.

Thirdly, it proceeds not from a childlike fear of God, but servile, without
any true purpose of godliness. Saul indeed said, I have sinned, I obeyed the
people foolishly: but, though he thus confessed, yet he does fear the people
still; and therefore he says unto SAMVEL; I pray thee honor me before the
people: a true fear of God would have hated the occasion of sin, as well as
the sin it self.

Fourthly, it proceeds not from lowliness, poverty of spirit, or from meek
and humble subjection to God, as the godlie's does, who justify Gods
proceedings, clear him in his judgment, repose themselves in his mercy, and
wait with hope and confidence for a gracious issue, but with murmuring, pride,
and hardness of heart, as in Pharaoh, or with final desperation, as in Caine
and Judas.

But even the godly themselves will often bid battle to this doctrine, and
say, Alas! if assurance of remission Object.
follow sound confession, what shall I think of my self? I have long bewailed
my sins, and yet rest without this assurance; my case is not David's, either
my confession is not sound, or my person not in the state of grace, or this
doctrine unsound.

We must distinguish between the presence of a grace and the sense of it; a
grace may be there present, where Answ.
there is no feeling: there may be the presence of Gods love, faith, and
remission of sin, where there is no sense of them.

How can this be, seeing faith is a full assurance and Object.
certain persuasion? can a man be thus persuaded, and yet not feel it?

Yes: first, there may be faith, where there is no such Answ.
assurance, as many complaints of Gods children in temptation do witness
abundantly: Job and David thought, God had quite cast them away, and hid his
face in utter displeasure; here are believers and faith, yet no sense. Was
Christ's righteous heart ever destitute of faith? did his Father ever cease to
love him? surely no, we may Est quaedam derelictio, vbi nulla fuit tanta in
necessitate virtutis exhibitio, nulla Maiestatis ostensio, Ber^.
not think so, and yet he said, My God, my God, why have thou for saken me?

Secondly, Christ's promise is, Blessed is he that believes, though he see not.

Thirdly, We must distinguish between the want of faith, and the weakness of
it: vnfeelingnesse comes through weakness, and not always of the want of it.

Fourthly, Prayer for that grace, which seems to be absent, is a sign of the
presence; and, prayer for sense and feeling of pardon is a fruit of faith.

Fifthly, There be sundry degrees and measures of faith; some Saints are as the
week, which can smoke only and not flame, yet the least grain of faith lays
hold on Christ to salvation.

Sixthly, In temptation it is sufficient, that Gods children live the life of
God, though they know not that they live. In a swoune a man lives, though he
perceiues it not; it is sufficient, that other men know he lives; a little
embers lies under a heap of ashes; so Gods child has that in him, which shall
support and sustain him unto greater perfection, though he know not his graces.

First then, this serves to ouer-throw a doctrine of the Use 1.
Church of Rome, which is, that remission of sin does follow Confession ex
opere operato, that is, If one come and confess all his sins auricularly, then
the very work wrought does carry away pardon: But this is utterly false, that
God has tied remission of sin to the very work of Confession, because
Confession is effectual only so far forth as the person confessing is a
believer, sanctified, and justified. Else why was not Saul's sin remitted,
seeing it was confessed? the only reason is, because he, as also Caine and
Judas, were not in the state of grace. First then, pardon belongs to the
person, that is accepted through Christ, not to the work.

Secondly, Papists speak this of confession to the Priest, which is the rack
of the ignorant world, but David of confession to God which brings peace.

Thirdly, their Absolution, which is pronounced on Confessors, is most
blasphemous, and prejudicial to Gods royal and high prerogative. The blind
Jews could say, Who can forgive sins but God? And, Nathan said not, I, but,
God has put away thy sin. So that this their absolution belongs not to any
Prophet or Apostle, ordinary or extraordinary, nor to any of their successors;
no, not to Christ himself as man. Which is the rather to be observed, to meet
with their blasphemous opinion, for which they lay this ground.

Christ (say they) was God and Man. As God, he had an absolute power to forgive
sins: As man, he has a proper power, and that is deriueable to the Priest,
standing in Christ's place, to whom he delegates a power to forgive, as himself
had power to forgive; and for this that place is brought, Ioh. 20. 21. As the
Father has sent me, so send I you.

To answer this, We will not consider Christ as God; (for so there is no
question, but he may, and does forgive sin:) but two ways else: first, as
Mediator, God and man. Secondly, as man, altogether of our nature if we were
without sin. As Christ is Mediator and King of his Church, so he deriues to
his Ministers, not a power of remission, but a ministry of remission of
sins; not to forgive sin, but to pronounce, that God has forgiven it: this
only has he left to the Church. But as he is mere man, he has no power to
forgive sin, but as being the son of man, he is likewise the Son of God:
In the time of his humiliation he said not, I forgive mine enemies, but,
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

As for the place, which they abuse to their irreligious opinion, we must note,
first, that it is spoken of Christ to his twelve Apostles, and not of any
Evangelical Priests. Secondly, it imports only a similitude and likeness
between Gods sending of Christ, and Christ's sending of his Disciples, but not
any equality, that suppose Christ as man had power to forgive sins, yet not
that they should be equal unto him herein, and have the same power that he
had.

And the similitude stands in these four things:

First, Christ was before all Worlds, ordained to be a Mediator: so they were
ordained to the office of Apostleship, not of Priesthood.

Secondly, as Christ himself was immediately called to the public execution
of his office of Mediatorship, by the voice of his Father, as appears in his
Baptism; This is my well-beloued Son, in whom I am well pleased: so were the
Apostles immediately called by Christ's own voice: And this was their
prerogative above other Ministers, to come from Christ's own bosom, as he did
come from the bosom of his Father.

Thirdly, as Christ in publishing the Gospel, had supreme and absolute
authority to give Laws to his Church, from which there might be no appeal:
So his Apostles had from him an immediate assistance of infallibility, so as
they could not fail in their doctrine and writings; howsoever as men they
might err, yet not as Apostles; so that from them there lay no appeal.

Fourthly, as Christ was made a King and a Prophet, not only of the Church of
the Jews, but over all the Churches in all Nations: so the Apostles commission
was not tied to any one Country, but they must go and teach all Nations.

And thus it is true, that as God sent Christ, so Christ sent them; but all the
while here is no equality: for to make ordinary Ministers equal to Christ in
power, is to make them Mediators and redeemers, yea, gods.

Secondly, this overthrows another doctrine of theirs, Use 2.
teaching, that no man can be persuaded of the remission of his own sins,
unless it be by a special revelation, or by a moral certainty of works;
whereas we see David here had this persuasion of forgiveness by neither, but
by a certainty of faith upon true confession.

Thirdly, seeing remission of sins is a fruit of confession, Use 3.
we see the error of silly ignorant people, that say, they are as sure of
remission as any man in the world, they hope as well as the best, nay, are sure
to be saved with the first; if any get remission of sin, they are sure it
shall be they; and all this without sound confession. But how is this remission
sealed up unto them? by what pattents? they never had any doubting, no touch of
conscience for sin, no dislike of themselves, they never confessed to the
Lord against themselves; and therefore the Lord never answered them in assuring
them of forgiveness. There is nothing yet in their lives but wickedness and
rebellion; and therefore this is but a senseless presumption which destroys
their souls.

Others, not a few there are, that think to ease their conscience, by
lessening their sin, or excusing it. Some say before the Angel it was their
ignorance, and so mince their sin, and harden their souls, till the Lord be
angry at their words, Eccles. 5. 6. Others seek to forget God, while he
knocks and urges their consciences. If they can thrust him out of presence,
and put out the remembrance of himself, and the fear of his judgment, Oh
then they be safe. But how are these men woefully deluded, that think
themselves safest and best, when God is farthest off them?

Others, when sin comes afresh upon them, draw their thoughts, and turn
their sails another way, as when Saul's furious thoughts come upon him, they
must be appeased by David's music, whereas remission must be gotten by
confessing, and not by committing of sin. Some must have Iesters to fill their
hearts full of folly, to take God and all good motions and remembrance of sin
out of their souls; whereas, of all the delights that ever Solomon tried his
heart withal, we never read that he kept a Iester or Fool. Some, when a
warning piece of humiliation is shot off by God, have no better way to resist
it, and to drive away the qualmes of conscience, then by sorting themselves
with drinkers, gamesters, and good fellows, as they call them; and, as every
man's delight draws him, so is his practice. But this is no other then the
brawning of the conscience, far from lasting peace, which comes from
remission of sins, and remission comes not from commission, but confession of
sin.

If men, that are now called to confession and repentance by the Word, or the
Spirit, or any of Gods works on themselves or others, will yet do as the
hardened Jews, kill Oxen and Sheep, and drink wine in boules, and Isa. 22.
12, 13, 14
in the mean time deride the threats of God, and make a tush at these warning
peales, let them fear and tremble, the end of such laughter shall be
heaviness.

Thou forgauest me.]
THe person, that received this mercy, was David, a true believer, and a true
penitent sinner; which teaches us, that God remitteth not the sins of any,
but Doct.
such as being touched with true repentance confess No man's sin pardoned,
but the true penitent confessors.
them.

Job 33. 27, 28. God looks upon men, and if one say, I have sinned, and
perverted righteousness, and it did not profit me; he will deliver his soul
from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. He shall pray unto
God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy,
verse. 26. So also 1. King. 8. 47. If they turn again unto their heart in the
Land (to which they be carried away captives) and return and pray unto thee,
saying, We have sinned, we have transgressed, and done wickedly, -- then
hear thou their prayer in heaven, etc. This is the form of repentance set
down for the people returning unto their God, Hoshea 14. 3. Take unto you
words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously.

What? cannot God, without the condition of repentance Quest.
and sorrow and confession of sin, remit sin, and confer favor upon
sinners?

Yes, if we speak of Gods absolute power, whereby Ans.
he can do a number of things which he never will; he could have made 10000.
Worlds, when he made but one; he could raise up of stones children to Abraham;
Christ could have prayed for 12. Legions of Angels, and his Father could have
sent them to deliver him, or he could without them have delivered him from the
Cross, but would not. Thus if God would, he could remit sin without
repentance and confession, and that without all impeachment of his goodness;
because whatsoever he can will, is most just and good: but if we consider Gods
actual power, and his revealed will, which belongs to us and our children, he
cannot, because he will not: the Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
reasons hereof are these:

First, it will not stand with his eternal decree, by which he has tied the
means and end together; the end is salvation, the means to come to it is
faith and repentance. So God has decreed, that a man's body should live by
means; he could now preserve it without meat, drink, sleep, etc. but he
will not, because it is against his decree. Again, God has not eternally
decreed to save all, but out of all a few, a little flock: now if he should
remit the sins of the impenitent, and of unbelievers, then he should save
all, and so the way to heaven should be the broad way, and not many, but, all
should go in it; which was Origens error, directly against Orig. in. Libro
(...).
Gods decree and word.

Secondly, it will not stand with the justice of God, to forgive their sins,
who repent not of them, but rather love them, who obey their lusts, and follow
the leading of them most willingly: 2. These. 1. 6. It is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. If God have any
justice, he must exercise it against such Est tamen quaedam Specialis
Vniuersalitas, Ambros.
as hate him, and reject all his commandments: but to save all, would prove
him to be a God all made of mercy.

Thirdly, God could have no mercy, if he should forgive the sins of all,
good and bad: for there could be no difference between his mercy and his
justice; this is mercy to some, to pull them out of the common corruption and
curse of sin, and mercy only rejoices against judgment: if there were no
judgment, neither could there be any mercy. Besides, will it stand with Gods
wisdom, to bestow and give mercy to him that refuses and despises it, or to
fill with mercy the vessels of wrath?

Fourthly, where were Gods truth, if he should forgive the sins of impenitent
and unbelieving ones? what strength were in the curses of the Law, that the
soul that sins, shall die? to what use could the promises of the Gospel
serve? what use of the prayer of Christ for believers, that his Father would
keep them in the truth? why did he put such difference between men, that he
would not so much as pray for the World? What need of the death of Christ? of
whom the Apostle says, The Just died for the unjust, but so as they should be
righteous in him: or, what need of any part of his righteousness and obedience,
who fulfilled the Law for righteousness to every one that believes?

Fifthly, God has made it a privilege of the Church, and the members of it
only, to have their sins forgiven: So we say in the Creed, I believe the
Communion of Saints, and remission of sins. Isa. 33. 24. The people that
dwell there, shall have their iniquity forgiven: and 62. 12. They shall call
them, The holy people, the redeemed of the Lord.

Forgiveness of sins then is a part of the promise of God, made to those
that are in covenant with him: Ier. 31. 31, 34. The days come, says the Lord,
that I will make a new covenant; for I will forgive their iniquity, and
remember their sins no more. Yea, this Psalm in the first verse, makes it a
note of a blessed man, and a prerogative of the Saints.

Sixthly, if God should bestow remission of sins in Qui iam viuit prout vult,
viuet aliquando prout non vult.
general to all, what need is there of any grace, what use of the fear of
God, of faith, etc? then we might set open all the doors of licenciousnesse
and sin, and every man might do what he list without all restraint or
bridle. So that to tie remission of sin to repentance, makes not only for
our salvation hereafter, but also to correct and bridle sin here, and set us
into the beginnings of eternal life, even in this present World.

But how is this remission of sin free, if we cannot Quest.
have it without these conditions of faith, repentance, confession, etc?

Yet is it still free: first, because, though it be not given Ans.
without these, yet it is not given for these, as our justification is free,
though it cannot be had without faith, Fides iustificat non nisicorrelatiue.
because it is not given for the dignity of our faith. Secondly, even these
conditions are not of our selves, but the gifts of God, and so can merit
nothing. Thirdly, faith and repentance are required not to show for what, but
to whom remission of sins is bestowed, namely, to such only as have obtained
mercy, and for whom Christ has freely merited the same.

This serves to confute a gross and ignorant conceit of many, who say, That
God, who made all, will save all, Use 1.
and so lay all the care of salvation on God, and never trouble themselves in
using the means. Alas, poor souls! No, no, never think that thou can
divorce what God has coupled, namely, the end from the means; it is true,
which Saint Augustine says, He that made thee without thee, does not save
thee without thee.

Why, say some, did not Christ dye for all and every Object.
man? and shall not they be saved, for whom Christ dyed?

To this the Schoolmen say, that Christ dyed for all Ans.
sufficienter, but not efficaciter: Christ's merits were sufficient to redeem
10000. Worlds, if they had faith to apprehend them, says Leo. But we speak of
the effectual shedding of Christ's blood, which was shed for many (not all) to
the remission of sins, Matthew. 26. 28. Secondly, Christ died for all, that is,
for all those many, says Augustine, namely, all the Elect, for the sins of
Totus mundus de toto mundo exemptus and redemptus, Amb.
the World of the Elect: for there is a World of the Elect, standing of Jews
and Gentiles, who are brought to faith and repentance. Thirdly, all and every
singular man cannot receive remission of sins, but only believers by the
hand of faith, some of all sorts of men: now the Apostle says, that faith is
not of all men; and therefore it is called the faith of the Elect: Tit. 1. 1.
Therefore let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6.

Secondly, by this doctrine we may see, that no man Use 2.
can be assured of remission of sins, but the true believer, who truly
repents of his sins. Every man indeed will profess in his Creed, that he
believes the remission of sins: but this is but a vain blast in the most,
whose sins bind them over to eternal death. Only the true believer has
the right marks of remission of sin, which are these.

First, he only is weary and heavy laden, and sees his 1. Notes of a man
discharged of his sins.
need of Christ, whereas the wicked are whole in part, or wholly, and need
not the Physician.

Secondly, only he has a spirit free from guile, which is made a note of
remission, verse. 2. Of all other 2.
we may say, as Peter did of Simon Magus; Thy heart is not right with God: one
man's heart is a temple of Gods Spirit; another has not the Spirit of Christ,
and therefore is not his.

Thirdly, only a true believer has the consequents 3. Fruits of remission of
sins.
and fruits of remission of sins, from which, as from fruits, we may go to
the tree: as

First, the first of them is regeneration, he is borne of 1.
God, and sins not, that is, he has not reigning sin with him, nor sin
unto death, because the seed of God is in him: as for others, who profess
remission of sin, they are slaves to their sins, and these have dominion
over them.

Secondly, another is a daily purging and clensing of 2
the relics and remainders of sin, as 1. John 1. 9. God is faithful to
forgive us, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: he that has his
sins covered, has them also cured. Of Christ it is said, that he came by
water and blood, etc. He that is made whole, goes and sins no more, that is,
he fears sin for time to come. Profess then remission of sins as long as
thou will: If Christ wash thee not, thou have no part in him; if thou be as
John 13. 8.
foul as formerly thou wast, every man but thy self may see what thou art.

Thirdly, a third fruit is faith working by love, and this love works:
first, toward God, who is much loved, 3.
because he has loved and forgiven much, Luke 7. 47 and much praised for so
happy a change. But the wicked are haters of God, and never care for his
prefence, for his word or children or Sabbaths, and yet they hope vainly for
forgiveness of sin. Secondly, it works toward man, and manifests it self
in forgiving our brethren and enemies. The godly look upon the commandment,
Ephesians. 4. 32. Forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave us. But
alas! many pray, Forgive us as we forgive our debtors, and therein plainly
curse themselves; for their minds lust after envy and wrath, and hence are
those common speeches; I may forgive him, but I will not forget him, and, He
may come in my Pater noster, but not in my Creed: A manifest sign, that God
has not forgiven thee at all, and that his forgiveness of thee is not to
forget thee nor thy sin.

Thirdly, here is refuge for a weary soul, and a burdened Use 3.
conscience: do thou want the voice of joy and gladness in thy soul, and
lie groaning under the burden of sin? be not dismayed, for in that thou
can approach Gods presence in the full and free accusing of thy self, in
complaining of thy self, and judging thine own soul, here is a sound ground
of comfort, thou art he, who has right into the tree of life; thou art he,
on whom the Lord will look in mercy, thy repentance and faith intaile pardon
of sin unto thy soul.

Fourthly, is it so, that God remits only the sins of Use 4.
repentants? then above all things labor to attain this grace of repentance,
and testify it in sound confession before God; In the Courts of men,
confession brings shame and punishment, but in Gods, a cover and reward. In
great Princes Courts, no mourner might come; and therefore Joseph must put off
his prison-garments before he come to Pharaoh; but none but mourners are
accepted in Gods Court; mourn therefore, and bewail thy sins; this alone
can assure the heart of remission of sin.

Oh, I have repented long of my sins, but feel no Object.
such assurance.

Yet fear not, but join to these endeavors these Answ.
helps:

First, use conscionably the Word and Sacraments, which make known and seal
up to the believer the pardon of sin by Christ; meditate and feed on the
promises which are made to the penitent.

Secondly, grow up in humility, every day be more low in thine own eyes then
others, and beware of pride, because it becomes thee to be humble: for the
more contrite the spirit is, the fitter it is for Gods Spirit to dwell in.

Thirdly, use earnest and daily prayer for the earnest of the Spirit, to
witness unto thy spirit, that thou art the child of God: for he, being the
Comforter, must bring these comfortable tidings to thy heart, he must apply the
promises of life and salvation.

Fourthly, take heed of actual sins, which grieve the Spirit, and are as
water to quench the comforts of the same; especially beware of presumptuous
sins, which wound the Spirit most, and most prevail over thee: Psalm. 19. 13.

Fifthly, exercise thy self to godliness, and to the duties of sanctification
in thy general and special calling, and this will assure thee of the presence
of the good Spirit leading thee.

These things if thou failest in, blame thy self if thou walk heavily and
uncomfortably; God will be found in his own ways, and no other.

VERSE. 6. Therefore shall every one, that is godly, make his Prayer unto thee
in a time, when thou may be found: surely in the flood of great waters they
shall not come near him.
Having spoken of the maine Doctrine of this Psalm, concerning the
justification of a sinner before God, wherein David places true blessedness,
we come now to the sundry uses of that Doctrine, in the rest of the Psalm,
being the second part of it. The first of them concerns Prayer, in this
verse, where of there are

Two parts: First, the practice of a godly man, Therefore shall every, etc.
Secondly, a promise made unto it, Surely in the flood, etc.
In the former are these four points: First, the inference of it, Therefore,
or, for for this cause. Secondly, the Person praying, Every godly man. Thirdly,
the person to whom he must pray, To thee. Fourthly, the time, When thou may
be found.

Therefore:] that is, because I have had experience of thy love, and thou have
answered me graciously in my request, every one that is in the like misery and
touch of conscience as I was, shall use the same means as I did, to obtain
the same mercy. This dealing of thine with me shall be an instruction, and
encouragement to every humbled soul, to take the same course for comfort as I
did; David's experience shall teach all the godly to seek God in their
distress: Hence note, that*

Those are the best teachers, that can speak from experience Doctr.
of the Lords working in themselves. Psalm. 91. Those are the best teachers that
can teach from their own experience.
The Prophet teaches confidence and security in God, to those that are under
the secret of the most High, but the best ground he thought was to lay it on
his own experience, verse 2. I said to the Lord, O my hope and fortress, that
is, I had a good cause so to say; and then follows, Surely, he will deliver
thee from the snare of the hunter, etc. So likewise the Apostle Paul being to
persuade, that the remnants of corruption cannot condemn the regenerate man,
Romans 8. 1. he inforceth it from his own experience, thus, For the Law of the
Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of sin
and of death; as if he had said, Of like things and persons there is the like
consequence, My infirmities are not imputed unto me to death, no more shall
yours.

The reasons of this point are these:

First, he that has a flame in his own heart, may easily Reason 1.
kindle another, and he that does not first edify his own heart, shall not
be so meet to edify and speak to the heart of another; a godly man's zeal
will warm such as are by, when another shall speak but coldly.

Secondly, this man shall deliver the Word with much certainety and assurance,
because he speaks with feeling. 2.
A man may out of reading and light of understanding be powerful in speech,
and yet want the seasoning of grace, and speak of many delicates which are
upon the Kings table, whereof himself never tasted: but he that has tasted
and fed on them, shall both speak more, and more certainly, and be better
believed.

Thirdly, he that has experience of the Word he teaches, will build every
way, not only by doctrine, 3.
exhortation, and reproof: but also first, by example, which greatly preuailes
and urges men to glorify God in the day of visitation: Secondly, by Prayer in
secret with God for his people: his experience of the sweetness of godliness
inflames his affection as Paul's, whose love to his country was such, as he
could have been contented to be accursed for their salvation, he wishes all
like him, and that every man had part in Christ as he has, and as earnest is
his endeavor. And this prayer of faith has great power with God, and a promise
of blessing upon a man's self and his labors, which another wants.

Fourthly, God gives more special gifts and experience to special men to
this purpose, to enable men to his 4.
work: as 2. Cor. 1. 14. We were comforted in our tribulation, that we might
be able to comfort them that are afflicted, with the same comforts wherewith
God has comforted us: plainly noting, that he is not so fit to comfort
others, who has not experience of the comforts of God himself. The same David
professes of the matter of knowledge, Psalm. 40. 10. I have not hid thy
righteousness within my heart, but have declared thy truth and salvation, and
have not concealed thy mercy and truth from the great congregation: where he
shows, that his first care was to confirm and strengthen himself by Gods
promises, and, when God had taught his heart, he would and did publish, not
only Gods truth, but also his mercy and salvation unto others; namely, that
which his own soul had experience of.

Fifthly, a good teacher is the Phisician of men's souls: now a good Phisician
is the experienced Physician that 5.
can find out the disease and malady of sin, and has approved medicines
to cure a sinful heart, not so much out of books and reading, as out of
practice, that knows the danger of sin in himself, and thereby has pity
and love to remove it in another. And hence in the Law Ad hoc opus, quo quis
sanctior est, eo tardior est.
no man might be entered into the ministry before he were thirty years old,
that the Priests might first learn to teach and be of some ripeness and
experience, before they taught others. Whence Nazianzen says, Our Lord was
thirty years old, before he began to be a Preacher: and tu magister vis fieri
antequam discipulus: yet is it he that teaches all, had need learn of none,
and therefore we should learn before we teach.

But whether may an unregenerate Minister save and Quest.
convert a man?

I move this question the rather, because many can Answ.
scarce be persuaded to hear such, whose lives are scandalous, as being
unworthy to take the Word into their mouths, and unable to convert or amend
others. In satisfying of whom, I would not any way confirm or harten
Ministers, who being Phisicians cure not themselves, or who like the images in
highways point others the way, but themselves stir never a foot in it, or
like the file, which smootheth other things, but it self remains rough.
Howbeit even of these, I know no restraint in the Scripture or let, why they
may not be means of conversion to others: The Reasons that move me to
think so, are these:

First, the ministry is Gods own ordinance, and the power of it stands not
in the person of the messenger, 1.
but in the work of his own spirit. 1. Cor. 3. 5. Paul may plant and Apollos
may water, but God must give the increase. The fruit of preaching is not left
to the highest Ministers in the New Testament, not to Evangelists, no nor
Apostles. A gracious Prince gives a Pardon to a condemned person: Now suppose
he should send it by the very est miscreant in his Kingdom, does the Pardon
lose his virtue therefore? or were he not mad, who should therefore refuse it?
So, a Physician sends a sovereign potion or cordial by some rakehell boy in
the shop; does this hinder the work and virtue of the Physic to him that
takes it according to the direction? The case is the same, and shows that the
Word is not made worse by his unworthiness, who brings it.

And neither does the worthiness of the Preacher make the Word effectual* the
best being but earthen vessels, in whom God puts this heavenly treasure, that
the power might be known to be of God, and not of men, 2. Cor. 4. 7. and,
Romans 1. 16. it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes;
and not of man.

Secondly, the praise and glory of our conversion must 2
wholly be ascribed unto GOD, whereas this conceit would much turn it off
upon man. And if a man shall say, that an unregenerate Minister can go as far
in converting a man as a regenerate, it will not seem unreasonable, to him that
considers first, that God often does excellent good and great works by bad
agents, wherein he gets himself the more glory of his wisdom, power, and
goodness. Secondly, where God gives a man a calling, he may and does often
bless the work, which is his, though not the person working. Thirdly, that
the whole work of a man in converting others is external, which this man can
perform as well as he that is converted: for the true preaching of the Word
is the parent of faith, and wholesome doctrine is the immortal seed of our
new birth, which none denies but many unregenerate men do and can deliver.
Fourthly, that unless God give more then the most gracious Preacher can give,
nothing can be done; nay, that God gives more by a Minister then himself has,
be he good or bad. Augustine was first converted by Ambrose, and afterward went
far beyond him in light and in grace, and so David out-stripped his teachers,
Psalm. 119. 98, 99. And does not God herein make his glory shine, and manifest
himself to be the giver of all that grace, when the instrument conuayes more
then it self has?

Thirdly, why has the Lord thought good to send both sanctified men, and
unsanctified? Balaam speaks 3.
Scripture: Saul is among the Prophets: Judas teaches and works miracles
among other Apostles: and in the day of judgment many shall say, Lord, we
have preached and wrought miracles in thy name, whom Christ never knew, but
will say to them, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. Why does he make
the Word in a sanctified man's mouth oftentimes the savor of death? Why are we
straightly commanded to hear wicked men that sit in Moses his chair, and to do
what they say, if there were no savor of life in their work; and if that of
the Prophet were not true, Isai. 55. 10, 11. The Word of God (who ever brings
it) returns not in vain, but accomplisheth the work, whereunto he sent it;
and if the ministry of unregenerate men were always without efficacy?

We deny not but he may prepare to conversion, and build the converted, and
condemn the wicked; but, to Object.
win men to salvation, we are not persuaded of his ability.

What? is the Word in his mouth strong meat; and cannot it be milk too? and
why should God use him in Answ.
the one chief end of his calling, and not in the other? no reason can be
given.

Fourthly, the Apostle Paul, seeing many false Apostles preach (...), not
purely, but of envy and pride, 4.
Phil. 1. 15, 18. disdained not, but said, I rejoice that Christ is preached
any manner of way: Gaudet in re, non in modo, says one: He knew that if Christ
were preached, some would lay hold on him, and be called out of their estate of
Heathenisme and Gentilisme; and that though the preaching of these evil men
did not themselves good, yet it was good for the Church. They were like the
builders Doctor Ecclesiae been docendo and male viuendo, instruit Deum quomodo
eum debeat condemnare. Chrysostom.
of Noah's Arc, who built an Arc for others, and perished themselves. And why
was Paul so careful, lest while he preached salvation to others, himself
should be reprobate? 1. Cor. 9. 27. if a man might not himself miscarrie,
preaching salvation to others.

Oh, but God has promised no blessing to his labor, but a curse, Psalm. 1. 3,
4. the ungodly shall not prosper as Object.
the godly do.

First, the work of an unregenerate Minister, that is called by GOD, is Gods
work, and not only his. Answ.
Secondly, his work shall not prosper to himself, nor he in it; but I know
nothing, that can stop Gods mercy, why it may not be prospered to another.
Thirdly, those promises and threats in the first Psalm, concerning the
prosperity of the godly, and unhappiness of the wicked, are not directly
meant of outward things or earthly, but of inward and spiritual; and thus the
wicked never prospers in any thing he takes in hand, and thus the godly never
miscarry, but all things are turned to their best.

Luke 22. 32. Christ said to PETER; Thou being converted, Object.
strengthen thy brethren: therefore a Minister had need be converted, to do
good.

Not so, but Christ only promises Peter, that when Answ.
Satan has sifted him, he shall be raised again, and being restored out of his
fearful sin, he must by his example and experience, confirm sinners
against distrust and despair, as having known Gods special goodness, in
drawing him out of so great a gulf, as his denial was.

But the reward of saving souls and converting men, Object.
belongs not unto an unconverted Minister, namely, to shine as the Stars for
ever and ever; Dan. 12. 3. therefore he conuerts none.

The place is meant of faithful Ministers, who with Answ.
desire, faithfulness, and in Gods manner and means convert men, as the
former words of the verse intimate, They that are wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament: according to that of SOLOMON; He that wins
souls, is wise: Prou. 11. 30. that is, he is wise, first for himself, and
provident for his own good, and the blessed reward; and then for the Church,
discharging faithful service unto it: Such a wise man the Apostle Paul would
have Timothy to be; Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, and continue
therein: for in so doing, thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear
thee: 1. Tim. 4. 16. Nequicquam sapi ^, qui ^^ non sapit.
But the unregenerate man takes not heed to himself; and therefore is not
wise for himself, neither shall shine as the stars: besides, he that does a
good thing, but not well, does utterly lose his reward.

And thus I have fully cleared this question: Let none be so fond, as to refuse
the alms of the King, because he gives it by an Amner; or a precious gift of
his father, for the lewdness of the carrier: Elias refused not his meat,
because a Raven brought it, but looked unto God, who sent him with it: so do
thou hear the Word as Gods word, 1. These. 2. 13. not as man's, that it may
work effectually in thee; look not so much to the messenger as the message.

To come now to the uses of the point.

First, it shows, that it is great need, that a Minister be a good man, both
for himself and others, and have Use 1.
experience of God in his own soul. For if the Word be only in his mouth, it
may do others some good, but himself none: if in his book alone, then when
his book fails him, the Word fails him: but if with Marie, he ponder things
in his heart, the word which he keeps, will keep him. For this purpose he
must labor to find the Word, which he delivers, to be first effectual to
beget faith in himself; and add prayer for the Spirit, who works freely
where he will; else his Word, which God makes powerful in many of his hearers,
shall be a dead letter unto himself. And no marvel: For many wicked men may
and do speak of great points of religion, of the state of Gods children, and
of cases of conscience, but without any taste or experience, or comfort and
certainty in their own hearts of the things they speak; a form of knowledge
they have attained, which is merely historical, and a booke-learning, and
speak as they that tell of strange Countries and wonders, of which they have
read, but never saw them. Such men God often discovers, by letting them fall
off even from that they know; their speech, their practice bewraieth them to be
Atheists, as in heart they ever were, as may be seen by experience of many
great Lights that have done much good.

Secondly, let private Christians learn hence to observe their own hearts,
and Gods dealing with them, Use 2.
that they may be able to speak feelingly, in teaching and comforting others.
Let them learn to obey from their heart, the form of doctrine delivered, let
them be transformed into the truth taught and professed: he that does this,
will prove an excellent Light and pattern of godliness in the Church, be his
course of life never so private.

Thirdly, we must all benefit the Church by our experience, Use 3.
as David did communicate this his experience of Gods goodness to all: For
first, we receive no gift, but the whole Church has a right in it. Secondly,
by communication thereof we show our love, which is liberal and communicatiue;
Love edifieth, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8. 1. Thirdly, every member being
graced, graceth the whole body: as an ornament, suppose a ring on the finger,
deckes not the finger only, but also the person. Fourthly, the end of Gods
giving of his gifts, is to traffic for him and his people: did men think of
this, they durst not hide their talents, and be unfruitful as many are, much
less use them to the hurt of the Church, and disgrace of the godly, as not a
few do.

Again, in this inference (therefore) David give us to understand, that this
work of Gods mercy shall not only not die in himself, but survive for ever,
and refresh the godly of all ages; hence note, that

The ordinary works of Gods mercy upon his servants, Doct. 2.
are not recorded for them alone, but for every Every godly man must make use
of Gods mercy, manifested to any one.
godly man to make his use of them. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Things revealed belong unto
us and to our children. And Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever things are written
aforetime, are written for our learning, etc. We will prove this by an
induction.

In the Scripture there is matter first, of doctrine: secondly, of life: both
either of faith or of fact. That matter of doctrine belongs to our learning,
none denies; more question is of matter of fact and example: but the Scripture
puts it out of question, that the examples of the Saints are likewise recorded
for our instruction: we may see it thus:

All examples of Scripture concern either God or man: If God, it is some work
of mercy or judgment: If man, it is an example either of virtue or vice: Now
all these are for our instruction.

First, the works of Gods mercy to his children. I am. 5. 17. to teach us how
merciful GOD is to hear the prayers of his Saints; and to let us see how much
the prayer of the faithful, if it be fervent, avails, he induces the
example of Elias, who prayed, and shut and opened the heavens.

What tell you us of Elias, that was rapt in a fiery Charet? What are we silly
worms to him? Object.


Yea, but Elias was a man subject to the same infirmities, and therefore though
thou be a man subject to many Answ.
infirmities, pray thou also: for the hearing of prayer depends not upon the
worthiness of the person (suppose Elias himself) but upon Gods mercy in
Christ; that is, man's merits: So was Elias his prayer accepted, and so shall
thine. And to further our hope and confidence, in the same place is alleged
the example of Job: Ye have heard (says the Apostle) of the patience of Job,
and what end God put to it.

Ob. Alas! What tell you me of Job, a just man, fearing God, not a man like him
on the earth? Sol. Oh, but the Lord is very pitiful and merciful unto us, as
well as unto him, if we be righteous as he was. In our Text, David found
mercy when he confessed. Ob. Alas he was a man after Gods own heart, and a
special type of Christ. Sol. Yet he was but a godly man, and therefore shall
every godly man find the like mercy upon repentance as he did. Paul was
received to mercy being a grievous persecutor and blasphemer. Ob. Oh he was a
man rapt into the third heavens, a chosen vessel. Sol. But he was received to
mercy, that God might in him set out an example of his long-suffering unto
them, which afterward should believe to life eternal, 1. Tim. 1. 16.

Secondly, the works of Gods justice are written for our instruction, as 1.
Cor. 10. 11. All these things came on them for ensamples to us, on whom the
ends of the world are come. The Corinths might have said, What have we to do
with the examples of those, that lived in the Old Testament? we are baptized
and receive the sacraments, so did not they. Sol. Not so, but they ate the same
spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink in diverse signs: and
then he applies the examples, that if they sinned as their Fathers, they
should be as deep in judgment as they were. Luc. 17. 32. Remember LOTS wife:
many hundred years after, Christ calls his hearers to remember her. So 2. Pet.
2. 6. the Lord made Sodom and Gomorrah an ensample to them that should live
ungodly.

Thirdly, examples of the virtues of the Saints are written for our imitation:
Romans 4. 22, 23. Abraham believed, and his faith was counted to him for
righteousness. Ob. But he was fully assured, the Father of the faithful, and
an eminent man: what is that to us, who are far behind him? Sol. Yes that it
is: for this was not written for him alone, says the Text, but for us also, to
whom our faith shall be imputed also for righteousness. What if thou art not in
the degree of Faith, which Abraham was in? Be sure thou be a son of Abraham,
and it is not the strength of Faith, but the truth of it, if it be but a
grain, which lays hold on Christ. Moses his meekness, Jobs patience, and
Joseph's chastity are recorded for our learning.

But if we must imitate all the obedience of the Object.
Saints, we must imitate Abraham in killing our children.

The Doctrine extends it self only to ordinary facts, Answ.
and not to extraordinary ones, such as this and others are: the godly must
be imitated in all that obedience, which they yield to the common rule of
life, but not in special commandments. Ier. 19. 4, 5. The Jews after the
example of Abraham did offer up and burn their children, thinking, that
because Abraham pleased God in offering his Son, so should they: but the Lord
reprooueth and condemns their fact, saying, I never commanded this, nor spoke
it, neither came it ever into my heart; namely, not in the Law and
commandments which bind all; it was only a special trial of Abraham. That
place therefore is the ground of this distinction, to follow the Saints so
far as their examples are ordinary in virtue: yet we may make some use of
this fact of Abraham, as, to part with our chiefest delight if God call for it.
And so the Apostle limiteth the imitation of Christians; Be ye followers of
me, even as I am of Christ; we must not follow him being rapt into heaven, or
speak all tongues, etc. but so far as he expressed Christ's virtues in his
life.

Fourthly, the vices and slips of the Saints are recorded also, though not for
our imitation, yet for our instruction: For (as one says) the Patriarchs
instruct us, as well Instruunt Patriarchaeta^ errantes quam docentes.
erring as teaching us; for their slips show: First, that it is not the
strength of grace by which we stand, but Gods power: Secondly, that the best
needs mercy, and is far from merit unless, it be of death: Thirdly, that we
had need raise our selves up by repentance after every fall as they did:
Fourthly, we must hereby provoke our own watchfulness, and, while we stand,
take heed lest we fall: for if such great Oaks be shaken, what shall we poor
shrubs expect?

The reasons of the doctrine are these:

First, drawn from the scope of the whole Scripture: Reason 1.
all which, and every part of it, tends to make the man of God perfect and
fit to every good work, 2. Tim. 3. 16. Now if every godly man, or man of God
must be made perfect by the Scripture, then must every one make use of Gods
ordinary works to any of his servants.

Secondly, God is unchangeable, and the Spirit ever 2.
like himself; look as his course has been toward his children in times
past; so he will still deal, proceeding by the same rule of justice and
mercy: he never takes a wicked man by the hand, neither did any innocent
person ever perish under his hand; as a just God he punishes like sins with
like judgments, and remembers mercy to the godly, because mercy pleases him.

Thirdly, God would not only describe a way to life in the Scriptures, but
also has there set before us leaders 3.
and guides in that way; whence there is not a virtue in all the Scripture
commended in the precept, but it is exemplifyed and made to shine in some
pattern, and that for these two ends: First, that the godly might have full
and assured direction: Secondly, that the wicked, despising both holy doctrine,
and holy example, might justly be condemned.

Fourthly, God would set a testimony of his grace 4.
and glory in his children, whom because they give witness to his truth, and
proceedings, he calls a cloud of witnesses: Heb. 12. 1. First, because in
their life and conversation they witnessed by word and deed to Gods Church:
Secondly, in their death many of them witnessed by their blood: Thirdly,
hereafter they shall witness for or against us; The Saints shall judge the
world: and therefore every godly man ought to make use of their example.

And is this so? then this first overthrows that wicked Use 1.
and tyrannical practice of the Church of Rome, which takes away the
Scriptures from the Laiety, as unnecessary for simple people, though they be
the deeds of their inheritance, as if God had only entered covenant with
Monks, Priests, and Regulars, and not with Christian men and women, who may
not know either what God has promised on his part, or expects on theirs. But
if according to our doctrine all must make use of the foresaid examples, then
they must have the Scripture to know them by, being therein registered.

When God gave his Word to the Hebrews, he wrote it in the Hebrew tongue, a
tongue familiar to them, and gave charge that every one should teach it their
children, and derive it from one generation to another. After when GOD would
propagate it to the Gentiles, and the Monarchy came to the Grecians, God put
into the heart of Ptolomie Philadelphus to provide seventy two of the most
expert Hebrews, skillful in the Greek, to translate it into Greek, which
language was generally known in all Nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa: which
translation of the Septuagint is extant at this day. Afterward, when the Roman
Empire prevailed, and the Latin speech began by that means to be most common,
God would have the Scripture translated into Latin; to what other end, but
that it should be read and understood, and remembered and practiced of all,
because it concerned all?

But why do the Papists thus cofer up the Scriptures now? the true cause is,
that the light thereof may not discover their works of darkness: but what say
they? Oh it is dark and obscure, hard and knotty, a breeder of heretics, and
matter of strife.

What? did God give the Scripture for a remedy, and is it turned to poison?
did it once serve as a hammer to bruise errors? and now does it serve to breed
them? was it once profitable (...); to improve? and now to impair the truth?
Did God send it for a doctrine 2. Tim. 3. 16.
of peace? and is it now no other then a makebate? All controversies must be
decided by it, and peace established on earth with God and men. The Word is a
Lantern, and the Commandment a Light, and plain to the simple, Psalm. 19. 7.
and 119. 130. And is it now so dark, as no man can see his way by it? has God
given all rules of doctrine and manners of faith and life, and not only that,
but witnessed all his way with man in examples of mercy and justice,
encouraging piety and virtue, and punishing the contrary? and all in vain?
what could the Lord do more to make it easy and plain, and fit for
instruction, then he had done?

In a word, by removing the Scriptures, they do not only deprive men of
saving doctrine in the precepts, but also of the chief help of godly life in
the practice of believers.

Secondly, if every godly man must make use of Gods Use 2.
ordinary dealing with his children, then we must take the counsel of Bildad
to Job, chap. 8. 7. I pray thee look to the examples of the former age, and
prepare to search of thy fathers; namely, whether if thou be pure, God will not
awake to thee: look whether any pure in heart were ever forsaken of God, and
as thou shall find, so conclude, that God will deal with thee too; make this
use of their example.

And we must not only observe Gods ways with them, but also their ways with
God, following their ordinary examples in virtue, and watch our selves against
their vices. Many search into the lives of the Fathers, and there spy Abraham
perhaps lying, Noah drunken, and Solomon with many wives; and hence they
boulster themselves in sin: they allege the example of David for adultery,
and of Paul for rage against God and the godly: but this is to walk by the
dark side of the cloud with the Egyptians to destruction; therefore let us
turn to the light side, to the Saints graces.

Ye shall have some, that being exhorted to piety, and Object.
to a narrow watch over their ways, will say presently, Do any thus or thus,
as you would have us? why, then we shall be singular, we shall have no company.

I wish men would consider their ways by this rule: If Ans. 1.
thou see no godly man before thee, suspect that way, and get out of it: but
howsoever, few in the world walk in the straight way to life, because few find
it; yet look to the Word, and thou shall see on all hands, some or other in
that way, there thou have a cloud to follow, to go when it goes, to stand
when it stands, so thou be on the light side of it; a notable guide through
this pilgrimage of our life.

Oh, there is no example of such precise carriage, as Object.
you would have us take up, none but a few strait-lac't Ministers urge or keep
it.

Yes, look to the Scriptures, and thou shall find such Ans.
as have gone before any that are now living: it would be counted too much
preciseness now, to walk with God, as Enoch did, or for Masters to instruct
their families, and call them to an account for what they have heard, and yet
Abraham did so. If a man should be ever plodding in the Word, to draw good
lessons from it, he shall be counted but a Bible-carrier; whereas David
meditated on it day and night, and Marie laid up, and pondered the Word in her
heart: these would be surely accounted too precise, if they were now living.

Oh, but if a man stand on these precise points, he shall be generally
condemned. Object.


What then? David cast away all such by-respects, and Moses forsook all, even
Pharoahs court, to abide reproach Ans.
with Christ, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. the Apostle left all and followed him, and
the Saints always counted the reproaches of Christ above the treasures of a
Kingdom. They so ordered their families, that they would not brook a liar, a
swearer, a deceitful person, a profane and scoffing Ismael, all must be cast
out.

Oh, then we shall shortly do our work ourselves. Object.


But David did so, Psalm. 101. 5, 7. and other of Gods Sol.
children: are we not also counseled, Heb. 12. 16. that no profane person be
amongst us? Thus we see, that there is no such strictnes, but an example thereof
may be found in the Scripture: therefore let the world scoff and laugh while
it will, yet the godly must make use of these examples.

Thirdly, we must hence learn to be ready to speak of our experiences of God
to every godly man, that others Use 3.
may learn from us to trust in his mercy: so does David, Psalm. 66. 16. Come
and harken, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done to my
soul. Thus are Fathers charged to tell their children, and the children their
children, concerning the Passover, and the stones that were pitched in Jordan.
So Hezekiah said, when longer life was granted him: Isa. 38. 19. The living,
the living shall confess thee, as I do this day, the father to the children
shall declare thy truth. And by this means there shall be a succession of men
still upon earth, to tell of the mercies of God when we are gone; and so, while
we in our own persons shall do it in heaven, others by our means shall do it
on earth.

Fourthly, here is a note to know, when a man makes right use of the Scripture,
not only when he believes Use 4.
the story, (for so do the devils:) but when he affects it, applies it to
himself, mingleth it with faith to make it profitable, to admonish himself
and others by it. Hence issue three great benefits.

First, a Christian shall be in no condition, but he shall be able to
parallel his estate in some of the Saints, he shall see his own case in some
of them, and so shall obtain instruction, direction, and consolation by them.

Secondly, we shall testify to God and his Saints, when our lives shall be
exemplarie, and conformable to godly precepts and examples.

Thirdly, in the day of judgment, we shall have all the Saints, Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles to witness with us, and for us. In a difficult case, a
man would give all he has for a witness on his side; and we in this great
assise of life and death shall have the witness of all the godly; God shall
stand for us, the practices of the Saints shall justify our practices; if we
justify their practices here, they shall justify ours hereafter.

Every one that is godly.]
HEre is the person that must pray, the godly, and every one of them. The word
translated, godly, signifies in Hebrew two things: first, one whom God shows
mercy unto, a gracious man, in favor and grace with God: so the elect are
usually called vessels of mercy, that as a vessel is filled with liquor, so
are they with Gods mercy. Secondly, it signifies one that shows mercy, a
merciful man, which is a property of a godly man, who is like his father,
merciful as he is* the lionish and wooluish nature is put off, and he is
become humble, meek, gentle, as the Lamb and the little child, Isai. 11. 6.

Out of the former consideration we may note, that

Only the godly man is fit to pray, or, only he that Doct.
has grace, can pray for grace; vessels of mercy can pray Only he that has
grace, can pray for grace.
for mercy, and none else. Prou. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked, is an
abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto
him. Genes. 4. 4. The Lord had respect to Abel and his offering: but unto Caine
and his offering he had no respect. Now by faith Abel offered a better
sacrifice then Cain, Heb. 11. 4. First, His person was accepted, because he was
in Christ, and then his sacrifice. James 5. 16. The prayer of the righteous
avails much, if it be fervent. Ier 11. 11. Though they cry unto me, I will
not he are them. What is the reason? see it in the tenth verse, They turned
back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words,
etc.

The reasons of this point are these: First, he must be a Reason 1.
good man, that must pray a good prayer, a good tree that must bring forth good
fruit: a bad man cannot make a good prayer; for such as the root is, such is
the fruit.

Secondly, he only can pray aright, that has the Spirit of prayer, which
teaches us to cry Abba Father, this 2.
is the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15. neither does God know any other voice,
but the voice of his own Spirit. Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray in the Spirit.

Yea but it is said, Luke 11. 13. the holy Ghost is given Object.
to them that ask him; therefore he can pray and obtain the Spirit, that
wants him.

The scope of this place is not to show, whether the Answ.
holy Ghost or prayer go before; but to show how those that receive the
Spirit, are to be exercised; who, where he is, lies not dead or idle in the
heart, but stirs up desires and groans unspeakable.

But how can a man pray for the holy Ghost and obtain Object.
him, when he has him already?

By the holy Ghost is meant, first, the gifts and graces Answ.
of the holy Ghost. Secondly, the inward sense and feeling of him in the heart:
thus we may pray both for increase of his gifts, and for a comfortable sense
and feeling of him: for neither of them is ever so great, but we may still pray
for more, to have them increased. Shall we not pray for daily bread, because we
have bread? or shall not we say, Forgive us our sins, because we believe the
remission of our sins? yes, because we pray for Gods staff and blessing on
the former, and a more full and comfortable feeling of the latter.

Thirdly, only the godly man can pray, because he only has the promise of
prayer: all the promises of life 3.
in grace and glory, are made to godliness; the promise to be heard in prayer,
is made to the go dly man, Ioh. 15. 7. If ye abide in me, and my Word in you,
ask what ye will, and it shall be given you. How can he ask mercy, that has
no part in mercy? or how can he be heard in mercy, to whom mercy belongs not?

Fourthly, because only the godly man has faith, without which nothing can
please God: this faith assures 4.
us of that we ask, and issues from justifying faith; see 1. Ioh. 5. 13, 14.
That ye may believe in the name of the Son of God, and this is the
assurance, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.
Faith is an hand or arm, by which we lay hold upon blessings: if once we be
persuaded that God has given us Christ, we will easily believe that he will
give us all things with him; for he that gives the greater, will not deny the
less. Our Savior, when diseased persons came for bodily health or ease, was
wont to say, According to thy faith be it unto thee: so in all our requests,
the presence or absence of faith gives our prayer return: according to the
weakness or strength of the arm of faith, so is the coldness or abundance
of comfort to our heart: so that faith only gives taste and relish to the
prayer, which a believer makes.

Fifthly, Christ in his prayer teaches us to begin with Our Father, teaching
thereby, that he must call God Father, 5.
who must pray acceptably; and that includes sundry child-like affections, all
concurring in a rightly disposed person to pray, as first, Reverence and fear,
when he comes before his heavenly Father: A Son honoreth his Father; If then
I be a Father, where is mine honor and fear? Malach. 1. 6. Secondly, a
childlike boldness, coming through Christ to a Father full of mercy and
compassion, pitying his children more then earthly parents can, Isa. 49. 15.
By Christ we have boldness, Heb. 4. 16. Thirdly, love to God as to a Father:
for a godly man seeks not himself in prayer, but Gods glory with his own
shame. Fourthly, charity and love to our brethren: for when we come into the
sight of our Father, we dare not bring prayers in one hand, and malice in
another, but pray, Forgive us as we forgive.

Sixthly, only the godly man can pray acceptably, because 6.
he alone has removed the bar and partitionwall, that stood between God
and him, bringing repentance and godly sorrow for sin with him. The blind man
could say, God hears not sinners, that is, impenitent ones; but he hears
those that are repentant. Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard wickedness in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me. Incense in the Law was a type of prayer, yet in
Isa. 1. 13. the Lord tells the Jews, who came in their sins, that incense
was an abomination unto him: God hates our incense, our prayer, if we come with
profane hearts as they did; he neither receives it from us, nor we any good
thing from him; but a godly man has removed this rub.

First, Note hence the miserable condition of an impenitent Use 1.
sinner, and of an ungodly man, that is without remorse, and wallowes in
unconscionable sins: he cannot pray, he never prayed in all his life, he was
never in mercy heard in his prayer, but loses all his labor; and well if it
were no worse; for all his prayer is turned into sin, his prayer is
abominable, Prom. 28. 9. as often as he went about to pray, he did nothing but
multiply sin against God; he mumbled up a few prayers and fared accordingly.

If this be so, then it seems unlawful for the wicked Object.
to pray; if he pray not, it is condemnation; if he pray, it is no less.

He is bound to pray, but not to sin in prayer: in the second Commandment
he is enjoined to bow Answ.
down and worship God in prayer, and the third binds him ever to do it well,
lest he pray in sin, and so take Gods name in vain. Alas then, what must he
do? only the grace of repentance can reconcile these two, and draw the sinner
out of this maze, and make him pray aright.

Yea, but God hears the wicked oftentimes, and Object.
grants what they ask, as peace unto Ahab upon his humiliation.

God hears what a wicked man says in prayer, and yet hears not his prayer,
no, not when he gives the same Answ.
thing that he asks: for, first, all that the wicked get How God hears
wicked men, or rather hears them not.
from him, is external and common to good and bad, but no one favor of
special grace. Secondly, he gives them even that in wrath and vengeance, not
for their prayers sake. Thirdly, when they ask things good in themselves, and
evil for them, not knowing to use them aright, he grants in justice what it
had been mercy to have denied; as contrariwise, he hears his children in
mercy, denying them that, which they have sinfully asked. Fourthly, that which
he gives, shall turn to their woe and misery, and shall but heap coals upon
their heads, even wealth, prosperity, and dignity, all shall but make their
sin out of measure sinful; whereas all things shall work together for the
best to the godly, even crosses and afflictions. Fifthly, God gives nothing but
by virtue of the promise; no promise but is by Christ; a wicked man has no
part in Christ, and therefore neither in the promise: a plain case. Sixthly,
neither is the wicked man's prayer a means of granting the request, or
obtaining his desire, so as God still hears not his prayer: for how can that
prayer find access or acceptance, which is not preferred in Christ? but they
are fed only by a general providence as the beasts are. Psalm. 14. 4. The
wicked man calls not on the Lord; that is, either prays not at all, or as good
he did not. Let this be a motive to further our repentance: for else, if a man
utter never so many words of prayer, God will not hear him: how just is it,
that he that will not hear God, when he calls, should not be heard of God,
when he calls? that he, that is a profane mocker of God, God Prou. 1. 28,
29.
should mock him in his destruction? that he that turns his ear from the
Law, should have Gods ear turned from him? that he should ask and not
receive, that asks amiss?

How just was it upon the Jews, who were cruel and of bloody hands, that God
should hate their persons and prayers? and is it not as just, that unmerciful
men, Oppressors, Usurers, Ismaels, Quarrellers, whose hand is against every
man, and every man's against them; hard-hearted persons, that stop their ears
against the cry of the poor, that they should cry and not be heard? Surely,
the sentence is passed already, that judgment merciless belongs to him that
shows no mercy.

Secondly, this doctrine overthrows the idle conceit, Use 2.
wherewith numbers of men delude themselves; O, if they have but time at their
death, to say, Lord have mercy, then they shall do well enough, though all
their life they cast off all care and counsel. But what? Is the godly man he,
that shall pray and find mercy? and shall profane wretches, that have set
their faces all their days against heaven, think to be heard in the day of
their distress and death? How can thou then claim any one promise (and much
less all) when thou never keptest the least condition of faith and repentance?
How then shall God be just, who has said, that he will laugh at such, when
their sorrow comes? Besides, we must Difference between prayers of the
godly, and wishes of the wicked.
observe a great difference between the prayers of the godly, and the wishes
of the wicked.

First, the one is an earnest desire of the heart, prizing greatly that which
he desires; the other is but a snatch, or a sudden flash, out of an
illumination of the understanding, but not out of any affection of the heart,
because he vnderprizeth the thing prayed for, and will not sell all for it.
That which others get with much labor and strong cries, a wicked man thinks he
may only call for it, and have it; he will enjoy his lusts all his days, and
then the last day promise reformation. No, no, God is not so prodigal of
mercy, as to take thy leauings, and be beholding to thee for a little
lip-seruice; in all the Scripture there is but one example of one received to
mercy the last hour, think not that thou shall be the second.

Secondly, the one is a true desire with endeavor in 2
the right means, and care to refer it to the right end; he will obtain
heaven by Faith, Repentance, Mortification, etc. but the vngodlies proceeding
is but a iump, to the end without the means. Cursed Balaam desired to die the
death of the righteous, but he would leap over the life of the righteous; so,
many leap over the means, and think to come to the end immediately; but
twenty to one if they leap not too short. Simon Magus desired the gifts of
the holy Ghost, but to a bad end, to make gain of them, and that he might be
believed to be some great man, whereas a godly man aims only at Gods glory in
his own salvation.

And thirdly, if every true desire has assurance to obtain, because it must
be directed by the Word, lifted up 3.
by the Spirit, and encouraged by the Promise, then can no such unsettled and
uncertain wishes, bring any comfort to the heart, when a man has all his life
long resisted the Word, despised the means of Faith, contemned the Promises,
and grieved, nay, despighted the Spirit, how can he have any comfort by his
prayer? and, how can he have any elsewhere if not from that?

Thirdly, this shows us, that the way to be heard of God in prayer, is to be
godly, to bring Godliness and Use 3.
Religion, an heart mortified to sin, and quickened to grace, adorned with
faith, and settled in good conscience. David's example of finding deliverance in
trouble, and comfort in affliction of Spirit, belongs only to godly and humble
men, that shall confess and pray as he did. If thou will be heard of God in
prayer:

First, get the notes of Gods child upon thee, and thou Means to be heard in
prayer.
shall obtain mercy: for it is the privilege of a child to be heard, in
whatsoever his father sees good for him. What says Christ? If you, being
evil, can give good things to your children, how much more will your heavenly
Father?

Secondly, become Gods servant: for it was the usual ground of David's prayer,
to say, Lord, I am thy servant, hear and deliver thy servant.

Thirdly, get humility unto thee; for the sacrifice of God is a contrite
spirit, Psalm. 51. 17. such sacrifices he is well pleased with.

Fourthly, the poor blind man shows; the quality of that man whom God
hears. Ioh. 9. 31. God hears not sinners, but if any be a worshipper of him
and does his will, him he hears. The same condition is required of him, that
would speed in his suites. 1. Ioh. 3. 22. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his Commandments, and do things pleasing in his sight.
Ye ask, and have not, says JAMES, because ye ask amiss: and when do we
ask amiss? when we do not keep Gods Commandments: but how shall we know
that we keep them? Verse. 23. if we love one another: for charity is an
undivided companion of true piety.

To conclude this point; let us take Jobs friends counsel unto him, Acquaint
thy self with God, and he shall prosper thy way before thee, thou shall cry
unto him, and he shall hear thee, Job. 22. 21.

Now in the second place, in that the word translated (Godly) signifies a
merciful man, note that Doct. 2.


No service of God, or exercise of Religion, can be acceptable All acceptable
service must be from merciful men.
to God, which is not performed by merciful men. All Gods worship must be
joined with mercy: for here it is said, The merciful man shall pray, Isa. 1.
11. to 16. God rejected all the Jews services, because they did not fast from
strife as well as from meat, and because their hands were full of blood. Zeph.
2. 3. Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth; whence is noted, both
that this is a denomination of a righteous man, to be meek, and that none but
such meek persons can seek God to find him. Mat. 15. 5. The doctrine of the
Pharisees was, that if men brought oblations to the Temple, though they relieved
not their poor Parents, yet God was well pleased with them: but the words
following show, that this was but an hypocritical tradition, reuersing the
Commandment of God.

Matthew. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: what is
it that we ask for, when we come to do God his due homage, but to obtain
blessedness and happiness? but this we cannot do, to be accepted, without
mercifulness. So, Verse. 24. If thy brother have any thing against thee, go
first and be reconciled, and then come and offer thy gift.

Reasons of this point are these: First, those things Reas. 1.
which God has joined together, no man must separate; but God has joined
together the works of the first and second table, the love of himself and of
our brethren; of himself and of his image; of our forgiving our neighbors,
and his forgiving of us; these are inseparably joined, and therefore we must
not dissolve them. Hence, Isa. 58. 10. hypocrites pretending Religion, are
called to break their bread to the hungry, that is the true fasting.

Secondly, unmercifulness hinders both the preferring of our prayers, and
likewise the prevailing of them. 2.
First, it cuts off prayer, 1. Pet. 3. 7. Husbands must dwell with their wives
like men of knowledge, and take heed of strife, lest their prayers be
interrupted. The very husband and wife, the nearest couple, cannot pray
privately, if they do not put away strife; and how can the same but hinder
public prayer also? The Spirit of God cannot light on a Christian, but in the
shape of a Dove, as it did on Christ; the Temple that is fit for the holy Ghost
to dwell in, must be merciful: see Isa. 11. 6, 7. Secondly, it hinders our
prayer from prevailing, because of the promise and the threatening: the promise
of being heard is made only to the merciful, that the meek shall inherit the
earth, Psalm. 37. 11. and that the Lord will hide them in the day of wrath,
Zeph. 2. 3. So threatening is gone out against the merciless, even judgment
merciless belongs to him that shows no mercy; and as a man judges, so he
shall be judged, and his own measure shall be met to him again, Mat. 7. 1, 2.
so that if a man be an Ismael, rough against every man, God will be rough
against him; and, if we be vnpittifull, we shall be vnpittied of God and Men.

Thirdly, no sound worship can proceed but from a 3.
sound Religion, and that is the Religion and wisdom which is from above, and
the quality of it is that it is peaceable, Iam. 3. 17. gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits. The Gospel which we profess, is a
Gospel of peace, fostereth peace, and seeks it by all means.

Fourthly, so long as any a^e slaves to the deeds of the 4.
flesh, it is impossible they can be acceptable to God: but debate, hatred,
anger, rage, murders, are condemned for the works of the flesh, which shut a
man out of heaven, Gal. 5. 21.

But wherein stands this mercy, whereunto prayer Quest.
must be coupled?

It stands in these things. First, in pitying the bodies Answ.
of men in their wants. Secondly, their souls much more. Thirdly, in supplying
their wants, as relief, succor, comfort, counsel, etc. to be rich in good
works, and restore them that are fallen, by the Spirit of meekness.

This teaches all of us that profess the doctrine of the Gospel and true
Religion, and the pure worship of Use 1.
God, how we ought to be disposed, when we come to perform unto God
religious duties, as prayer, etc. Those that come nearest to God to present
service acceptable to him, must more especially look to this point, namely, to
take heed of the spirit that lusts after envy, and sets men in a rage
against Gods image and those of the same profession with them; and they must
take the counsel of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13. 11. Be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of peace shall be with you. And let us consider

First, we are all members of one body, whereof Christ Motives to mercy.
is the head; nature teaches one member to pity and help another; if one be
ill affected, to get remedy for it; and so must Christians.

Secondly, a meek and merciful spirit is much set by of God, and called for
at our hands by Christ, of whom we must learn to be humble and meek: a sure
note of one that is brought into Christ's Kingdom and sheepefold.

Thirdly, God has taken all execution of vengeance out of our hands; Vengeance
is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. and if we will take the
sword of revenge into our hands, it will prove but a sword to our own
destruction.

Fourthly, if we look at the recompense of reward, we are to be provoked to
the works of mercy. As a man sowes, so shall he reap, sow mercy and reap
mercy, sow liberally, and reap liberally; God gives seed to the sower, 1.
Cor. 9. 10. and makes men rich unto the works of mercy, ver. 11. How was the
poor widows oil increased, when she sowed mercy to Elias in his want? She
had sufficient, till the hard year was blown over. Thy expenses shall have a
rich return, it shall be but a lending to God with abundant usury; for
earthly and base things, we shall obtain heavenly and glorious; it is a sowing
on earth, to reap in heaven.

Fifthly, if we desire patterns and presidents in mercifulness, we have
enough: First, we have God himself, whose mercies are above all his works:
how mercifully did he forbear the world an hundred years? and what experience
have our own souls, how he daily forgets and forgiues innumerable sins?
Therefore be we merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful. Secondly,
Christ the Son of God is a president herein, whose mercy and compassion was
such as he laid down his life for us, that we should also lay down our
lives for the brethren: 1. John 3. 16. Thirdly, the Saints of God have gone
before us in examples of mercy. Moses was a man mighty in word and deed, yet
the meekest man on earth, Numb. 12. 3. Abraham yielded to Lot his inferior;
Isaac swallowed many indignities at Abimelechs hands, and Iaacob as many at
Labans. David spared Saul his enemy, when he had him at an advantage, and
pardoned Shimei a Traitor, when he had cursed him and threw stones at him. Yea
all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, as much as lay in them, had peace with
all men. If we profess our selves the Sons of God, how are Romans 12. 18.
we so rough against our brethren, so without pity and charitable
disposition? as Lamech, Ismael, or Cain, who learned of the Devil, who was a
murderer from the beginning, to hate and kill his brother. Let professors
leave these works of the flesh to such as are in the flesh: let us be led by
another rule, as Christians mercifully considering one another, and not as
bruit beasts led by sensuality. We must not follow noisome lusts and
humors, but the rule of Gods Word, to bless though we are cursed, and take
things at the best, and seek peace, and follow after it. Let professors
consider the sweet fruit of Christian communion, which by a merciful and meek
spirit is enjoyed, but by wrath and rash anger violenced; how that the peace of
the Church and public quietness, the honor of their profession, the comfort
of their conscience, and acceptance of their prayers or any service cannot
stand by them, if they subdue not their spirits in this behalf.

Secondly, this shows us what to think of that religion, which vpsetteth and
vpholdeth it self by cruelty Use 2.
and malicious rage and fury; it is a religion which God has no delight in,
he never did set it up, nor accepted it. It cannot be the right religion,
which by cruelty, sword, and fire, either planteth it self, or seeks to
supplant others. Therefore we may note in the Scripture, that those religions,
that were hated of God, were cruel and unmerciful. One might have read in
Cains forehead what religion he was of: no marvel if God rejected his
sacrifice, seeing he bore such deadly malice against his brother. Of what
religion were the Egyptians that kept under the Israelites so tyrannically, but
barbarous, wicked, and idolatrous? Iaacob must have a place by himself to
dwell in, because his religion was an abomination to them, they must not see
him perform the services of it. Manasseh set up Idols, sought to witches, yea
himself was a Magician or Coniurer, and what was his practice? Look and we
shall see, that no man ever shed more innocent blood then he did. Here was a
note of a false religion, even cruelty, such as we read not of in any of his
predecessors. Antiochus Epiphanes a monster among Idolaters, did so
prodigiously waste the blood of the holy people, as never was since there began
to be a Nation, till that time. Dan. 12. 1. The heathen Emperors made such
butcheries upon the bodies of the Saints, as every street seemed a shambles of
Christians, and every line of the story written in blood; and their religion
was suitable, barbarous, and butcherly. Saul was zealous in his religion, and
breathed out nothing but slaughter and threatening, but all that while his
religion was proportional, he knew not Christ nor what he did. But the
Romish religion goes beyond all other in cruelty and unmercifulness, and
therefore of all other must be most hateful to GOD. It was said long since,
that Antichrist the head of that Church must be an Appollyon, a Destroyer, and
2. These. 2. 3. the son of Perdition, both actiuely, and passiuely, in
himself and unto many others. He must be clothed in scarlet, a color dyed in
the blood of the Saints; and a beast that must make war against the witnesses
of God.

The Church of God in the Old Testament endured most grievous oppression, and
was unmercifully handled in Egypt by Pharaoh, in Canaan by the King of Syria,
Judge. 3. 8. by Eglon, King of the Moabites; by Iabin, King of the Canaanites;
by the Midianites, Ammonites, and Philistims, and by Nebuchadnezzar in the
Babylonish captivity: But all this was nothing to that it suffered by
Antiochus Epiphanes. And yet this of Antiochus, was but a type of Antichrists
persecution; his wicked rage was but a shadow to this: Here is an unmerciful
Destroyer, that kills, first, the souls of men by poisoning their minds
with false and damnable doctrines: Secondly, the bodies of men with horrible
and unheard of cruelty and tyranny.

Here is a woman drunk with the blood of the Saints Romish religion accursed,
because so cruel.
and of the Martyrs of Jesus; Reu. 17. 6. What shall we think of that
religion, by whose edicts, persuasions, and approbations all the Christian
blood almost has bin shed upon earth since the ten first Persecutions? Who
has done this but the firebrands of Babylon? What of that religion, which
commits Kings and Emperors together, making them Wolves and Tigers one to
another? and who does this but Nebuchadnezzar the head of this Babylon? What of
that religion, that blows up Massacres, Rebellions, Seditions, Treasons in all
Countries? This also does the scarlet-whore of Babylon. What of that Religion,
that sends out cutthroat villains with Pardons to stab and poison Kings and
Potentates of the earth, yea to blow up with one terrible blow three whole
states and Kingdoms? This also does the merciful holy Father at Romish
Babylon.

Who has kindled so many furnaces to burn the bodies of Gods Saints in all
Christendom, but that meek son of perdition, whose mercies are cruel? What
may we think of the merciless inquisition in Spain? Or that horrible
massacre of the Christians in France, the like whereof was never seen in any
Nation? Here in our own land, what damnable plots, and deuillish designements
have there been against the persons of our Kings and Princes? What shall I
speak of the unnaturalness of their cruelty amongst us, while they have
chased away all pity and respect of silly persons, who in regard of the
impotencie of their minds or their tender age, might by all laws of nature
and Nations have laid claim to mercy, if the Ocean of heathenish, I mean
Popish cruelty, had not broken all bounds and banks?

What hurt could a Boy of eight years old do to their religion, who yet for
that was scourged to death in Bonners house? What hurt could that babe do them,
that sprang out of the mothers womb, and was cast in again, because it was a
young Heretic, and so baptized in the mothers flames and the own blood? What
madness was it to apprehend a mad man, one Collins, who held his dog over
his head as the Priest did the host, for which he and his dog were burnt
for Heretics? a woeful means to bring a mad man into his wits.

With how little reason could they demand a reason of the faith of a mad man
(one Cowbridge) and make a mad man's words without understanding, a sentence
of his own death, for which he was burnt at Oxford? but where fury has
madded men, no argument can move them to pity. What religion is that, the
wrath of which sticks not either to bury the quick as Marion at Burges, or
to vnbury the dead, as Wickliffs bones burnt one and forty years after his
death? Peter Martyrs wife at Oxford, two years after his death burnt for an
Heretic; at Cambridge Mr. Bucer and Phagius, cited out of their graves to
appear four years after their burial, which when the silly ashes could not
do, they were dug out, and burnt on the market-hill, because they did not
answer and satisfy such articles as were laid against them? Richard Hun,
apparently hanged by them in the prison, was also burnt after his death. John
Tooly being dead and buried, was cited to appear before Bonner by a day
appointed, at which time limited and expired, he was excommunicate, and strait
charge given, that no man should eat or drink with him, or if any met him,
they should not bid him God speed, or if he came to Church in time of divine
service, he must be thrust out: after that this excommunication wrought nothing
upon the dead man, he was condemned and committed to the secular power, and so
the poor dead man was the second time by the Sheriffs executed. Is this cruel
religion of God? Did Christ or any of his Apostles bring in the truth by fire
or sword? No, it is falsehood that must stand by power and humane policy.

When the two Disciples asked Christ, if they should call for fire from heaven
against the Cities that received the^ not? No, says Christ, Ye know not what
spirit ye are of: But let Antichrists Disciples ask him, as Faux and Winter
did Garnet: Shall we call for fire from hell against those Kingdoms which will
not receive us? He says, Yea, because he knows what spirit they be of,
resolute, but unfortunate Gentlemen: begin to dig under the Parliament House,
and when all the house is set to make laws against the Catholics, give them a
terrible blow, and they shall never know who hurt them.

O, but what speak you this against the Religion of the Church of Rome? this
is the fault of men, not of their Object.
doctrine.

Nay, but it arises out of the grounds of their doctrine, Answ.
which is full of cruelty and bloudinesse. Iesuitisme Iesuitisme the rebels
Catechism.
is the Rebels Catechism. I will set down their doctrine in certain
positions, which are eminent in their Authors at this day.

First, the Pope ought to drive Woolues, and bad leaders, heretic Kings (that
is, Protestants:) agrege and dominio, not only excommunicate, but also drive
them from their Kingdoms. This is Bellarmines position defended by the Pope
himself.

Secondly, not only manifest, but also secret and suspected heretics; so
Symancha.

Thirdly, not only themselves, but all their favorers also and children: So
Creswell.

Fourthly, quibuscunque modis, by any means, says Sanders: vi, or dolo, as
Judith put down Holofernes, and Iehu Athaliah; Reinolds and Boucherius: or by
a knife or dagger, as Henry the third and fourth, Kings of France, were
murdered: or by Dag, Dagger, or poison, as against Elizabeth our Queen often,
at the persuasion of Walpoole, a Priest and Cardinal of Coome: or by Gunpowder
against three Countries, at the persuasion of Garnet, Provincial of Jesuits
in England.

Fifthly, not only the Pope, but also all Christian people are bound arctissimo
conscientiae vinculo and extremo animarum periculo, to resist any heretical
King, sirem praestare posuit, if he can bring the matter about: So Creswell.

Sixthly, Kings as soon as they begin to be heretics, are presently ipso
facto and deiure excommunicate, and deprived of their Kingdoms, and their
subjects freed from the oath of allegiance; so says Allen, who for the same
obtained a Cardinall-ship. This, says he, is a just, holy, and honorable
war; and hence he speaks to the English Nobles to rise up in arms against
Queen ELIZABETH.

Seventhly, Henry the third, a French King was justly slain before
excommunication published, because public sorrows wait no forms, and in
such public things evident knowledge sententiae locum habet, is in place of
sentence: So said William Reinolds.

Eighthly, a secret heretic is not only ipso iure excommunicate, but his
children also deposed from the Kingdom, because leprous parents beget leprous
children. Thus Symancha a wicked Knave cuts off branch and root.

Ninthly, Yea, but the Pope-holy-Father, he approues of no such things, no, not
he, because he cannot err. Yes, then Gregory the seventh, and Gregory the
ninth, erred not in teaching, that so soon as a King is an heretic, his
subjects are freed from all loyalty.

Nor Sixtus the fifth, in making a laudatorie oration upon the murder of Henry
the third, King of France.

Nor Pope Pius Quintus in his Bull, saying, Volumus and inbemus, We will and
command, that all subjects take up Arms against Queen Elizabeth.

Tenthly, no murder without a Jesuit, no Treason without a Priest. Mariana
found an apt scholar of Rauilliac, and gave him a poisoned Dagger to kill the
French King. Catesby, Percy, Faux, were apt scholars of Garnet: so Gerard,
Parsons, Greenewell. Nay, these peaceable men themselves, one struck out the
tooth, another the heart of Henry the fourth. Who after all this can doubt of
the wickedness of the Romish Religion? or who can think it acceptable unto
God, seeing the godly, the merciful man only can perform acceptable service?

What? is not God pleased with that religion, which Object.
he has prospered so long? never any Religion so rich, so strong, so embraced,
so defended by the Kings and Princes of the World.

First, the Kingdom of Antichrist has taken deep roots for many ages;
because, Answ. 1.


First, the shadow never leaves the body, Antichristianisme a shadow of
Christianity: so Antichrist began to work in the Apostles days, and shall
continue to the end of the world.

Secondly, the Lord will have his Church still combat in this world, to shake
it out of security, and to get Gods Armor, which is only able to preserve it
from the deadly poison that is in that enchaunted cup.

Thirdly, by prolonging this war, he has occasion to show his wisdom,
mercy, and justice, in preserving his Church through such danger, and to try
the faithfulness and constancy of his Saints: Here is the patience of the
Saints.

Fourthly, sin and want of zeal in the Church, is a cause why he still
stands a far off; the time of deliverance is not yet, Dan. 12. 1. But yet the
sentence is passed against that Church, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the
great City, Revel. 18. 2, 6. and give her double to that she has done.

Secondly, that Church is already blasted by the 2.
breath of Gods mouth: Gods Word has detected the Man of sinne's fraud,
wherewith he has blinded the world: his Bulls, that were once as terrible as
thunder, and affrighted all Christendom, are now accounted but paper-shot or a
flea-bite, and as wind in great part; his Pardons and Indulgences, which were
once bought at so dear a rate, are now contemned even of little children, as
things of no value: his claims are disclaimed by Princes; and notwithstanding
all his Phisicians about him, he is consumed, and much withered.

Thirdly, he shall be quite abolished in himself and his members at the
coming of Christ, when himself 3.
and his whole sent shall be cast into the burning Lake, as a Millstone into
the bottom of the Sea, never to be raised up again.

Unto thee.]
HEre is the third point, namely, the person to whom the godly man must pray,
and that is God himself. Whence note, that

Every godly man in his affliction prays unto the Doctr.
true God, and to him alone. Psalm. 116. 2, 3, 4. In my The true God must only
be inuocated in trouble.
day I called upon the Lord, and the Lord heard me. Hezekiah in his day, when
his days seemed to be cut off, turned his face to the wall and wept, and
prayed to the Lord, who heard his prayers, saw his tears, and gave him his
desires, Isai. 38. 3, 4, 5. Paul also in his day, being buffeted with the
messenger of Satan, prayed thrice, that is, often to the Lord, and the Lord
answered, That his grace was sufficient for him: 2. Cor. 12. 8.

The reasons of this point are these:

First, he cannot be a godly man, that in the time of his peace and
prosperity, approues not his godliness, by being Reas. 1.
much and often in this duty of prayer, and much more in his affliction and
distress; because, first, a godly man cannot be without the Spirit of
adoption, which makes the heart thirst after the living God, and forms sighs
and groans and desires in the soul after him; the Spouse calls Christ, him
whom her soul desires: whereas it is a sign of a dead soul, and of a bad
constitution, to be without these desires and requests, as DAVID makes it a
note of an Atheist, not to pray: Psalm. 14. 4.

Secondly, a godly man cannot deny unto God the principal part of his worship,
which himself has prescribed for his own so great glory, and our own so
great good and utility. A godly man cannot but give him the honor of
Majesty, in seeing our hearts and wants, and ability to relieve them, and the
honor of mercy, both in confessions, petitions and praises.

Thirdly, a godly man cannot but depend upon God, as the Fountain of grace, as
the Father of lights, the Staff of his life, the Length of his days, the
Strength of his heart, his Portion for ever: neither can a godly man testify
this confidence in God otherwise, then by resorting to him as a God hearing
prayer.

Fourthly, a godly man cannot but sanctify all his actions and gifts, and all
Gods creatures by this means, which else are not pure unto him. Nay, a godly
man cannot but increase and strengthen his graces by the means of prayer, and
by the same means preserve his holiness and grace, and exercise them, which
stand or fall, are weak or strong, as this grace of prayer is.

Secondly, a godly man cannot, but much more in affliction and trouble, seek
God by prayer. If adversities 2.
press him, disease pain him, dangers threaten him, sense of sin prick
him, conscience of guilt wound him, and corruption work upon him: now is a
time of seeking God in his promises; now is a time ofneede, when a man sees his
own weakness; now is the time of obedience to that commandment, Is any
afflicted? let him pray. And Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of thy trouble,
and, the prayer of faith shall save the sick: Now is a time when men lay fast
hold upon God, and will not let him go, whereas in the time of peace, we hold
God but carelessely. When Iaacob wrestled with the Angel, he would not let him
go till he had blessed him. Affliction is as bellows to our prayer, to kindle
and blow up this grace to a great flame and brightness.

Thirdly, no godly man will pray to any, but the true God in trouble: First,
because every godly man knows, 3.
that whom he prays unto, he makes him omniscient, that must see the wants
of all men, and all the desires of all men's hearts: he makes him omnipresent,
that must receive all the prayers, preferred in all the corners of the world:
and he makes him omnipotent, able to supply all the wants which are made known
unto him.

Secondly, the ground of all prayer is the Covenant, as Isa. 64. 9. Now, O
Lord, thou art our Father: lo, we beseech thee, behold, we are all thy people:
and Psalm. 77. 4. Every godly man knows, that the Covenant is made between God
and his people, and that all the promises of help in the Scripture are his,
and none else can lay claim to us but God, as David said, Psalm. 119. Therefore
godly men, being in covenant with none but God, they will pray to none but God.

Thirdly, every godly man knows the commandment, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve: he knows, that God is a jealous God,
and admits no corriualls; for his glory he will give to no other: see Psalm. 27.
8.

Fourthly, every godly man knows, that he must believe in him, on whom he
calls, Romans 10. 14. And hence it is called the prayer of faith; therefore as
he must believe only in the Father, Son and holy Ghost, so he only calls
upon them.

Fifthly, every godly man knows, that if the Spirit direct his prayer, it
teaches him to call Abba Father, and, if his prayer be squared to the rule of
prayer, he must go to our Father which is in heaven. He that is a Jew within,
hates Samaritane-worship, who worshipped they knew not what, but he knows
what he worshippeth, John 4. 22.

Well, if this be so, then no godly man ever did, or will pray to the Angels or
Saints, or to the Court of heaven; Use 1.
for this is an high ungodliness and idolatry: for,

First, the Angels know not our hearts directly: 1. Kin. 8. 39. Hear thou in
heaven in thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and do and give every man
according to all his ways, as thou know his heart; for thou only know
the hearts of all the children of men: here we see, that it is Gods privilege
to be (...). And if he only, then not the Angels, who therefore are not able
to know our wants.

Secondly, the Angels are but fellow-seruants, and not gods to be worshipped.

Thirdly, they refuse all religious worship and service and honor (saving
honor charitatis) that is to be loved. Revel. 22. 9. See thou do it not; for I
am thy fellow-seruant: as if he had said, If I were God, thou might worship
me.

Yea, but Joshua fell down before the Angel, and worshipped him, chap. 5. 14.
Object.


It was the Lord himself, the Captain of the Lords host, that is, Lord of
the Angels: and he is bid to put off Answ.
his shoes, as Moses was, when God was present.

Also, IOSHVA called him IEHOVA, which can agree to none but God: IOSHVA non
adorasset, sinon agnouisset Deum, says ORIGIN. Or lastly, IOSHVA was but a
man, and subject to infirmities as we are, and therefore his action, if it had
been sinful, may not be our rule.

Revel. 8. 3. Another Angel came, and stood before the Object.
Altar, having a golden censer, and much odours was given unto him, that he
should offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar, which is
before the throne. Therefore we must both invoke them, and they offer our
prayers to God.

First, by prayers are meant the prayers of the Saints in Answ.
earth.

Secondly, by the Angel, is meant Christ himself, who elsewhere is called the
Angel of the covenant; he offers our prayers; and the thuribulum aureum, the
golden censer, is corpus eius sanctum, and the Altar is himself, who
sanctifies our prayers, as the Altar does the gift: Augustine.

Thirdly, here is but one Angel to offer our prayers; and if it were a
created Angel, it yields no ground to invoke all, as the Papists do,
naming them severally, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, etc.

Secondly, as not to the Angels, so neither will a godly man pray to the Saints
departed: for Use 2.


First, Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25. Whom? the Papists will
say, Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, and the rest. Well, but David had none of them;
Adam, Abraham, and other godly men were then in heaven, yet he knew not their
help.

Secondly, the Saints in heaven know not our wants. Isa. 63. 16. Doubtless
thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not.
If so great Patriarchs (says Augustine) knew not what became of the people,
surely neither did other dead persons know. If ABRAHAM and IAACOB know us not,
no more does PETER, PAVL, the blessed Virgin, nor any other of the Saints.

Thirdly, every godly man will go to the Father by the Son: for none comes
to the Father but by the Son, and, There is no Mediator but one, even the man
Christ Jesus: 1. Tim. 2. 5.

Indeed there is but one Mediator of redemption, Object.
but more of intercession: and it is great boldness to rush into the Kings
presence, if way be not made by some of his Council or Guard. Absalom could
not come into his Fathers sight, but by Ioabs intercession, nor Adoniah to
Solomon, but by his mother.

First, Christ has performed the whole office of mediation every way, and is
our whole salvation: and the Answ.
Scripture was much ouer-seene to omit that distinction, if any such were,
where it had so fit place, and necessity did so vrgently require it.

Secondly, the King has commanded, that we should mediate only by the Prince,
and not by any other of the Court or counsel of heaven.

Thirdly, it is a carnal argument from things earthly and civil, to heavenly
and spiritual, as in the instance of Ioab and Salomons Mother.

Fourthly, it is but a gloss to use their distinction, seeing every where they
pray the Saints to intercede for them, not only by their prayers, but also by
their merits; and not only set the Virgin at the right hand of God, as Solomon
did his Mother, but also set her above Christ, dividing his Kingdom into two,
one half of which standing in administering justice they leave to him, but all
the office of mercy is hers; and so they appeal from the Throne of the Fathers
justice, to the seat of the Mothers Biel in Can. Miss. Lect. 8.
mercy; and so between them the Son has nothing to do: nay, she must
command her Son, in the right of a Mother, to be propitious unto us.

But the Saints departed, though they see not directly Object.
what is done on earth, yet they see in God, or the glass of the Trinity, all
our doings, or else the Angels may reveal them unto them: therefore still we
may pray unto them.

This argument is more brittle then their imaginary Answ.
glass, which we must handle tenderly for fear of breaking. For what is this
glass? Is it the essence of God? No, this never was, nor ever can be seen; if
it could, as it is most simple, so never was there any change in it, nor any
new or diverse image: and if they see in Gods essence our doings, they see all
things, even the day of Judgment, which the Papists themselves deny. Or is
this glass a bright and glorious light, as some say? But thus it is impossible
for the Saints to see any thing, because God sees it: for by common reason,
does he that sees the glorious light of the Sun, see al which the Sun does
enlighten? or can he be present where ever the beams of the Sun are?

Oh, but they call not on the Saints as Gods, but as Object.
Gods friends.

First, this is false: for by this invocation they ascribe Answ.
unto them omnipresence, and omnipotency, and therefore they invoke them as
Gods. Secondly, Idolatry is a spiritual whoredom: now it will be no good
excuse for a woman, to say, She is not so bad, she yields not her body to her
husbands enemies, but to his special friends.

Aquinas stands much on one place to prove invocation of Saints, and that is,
Job 5. 1. Call now if any will Object.
answer, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? therefore, says he, we
may call upon the Saints, and they will hear us.

A most silly argument: for, first, by Saints, Eliphas Answ.
means not Saints in heaven, but in earth. Secondly, by turning to them, he
means not, that he should do it by invocation, but by considering of former
examples: and it is, as if he had said, Give me example of any Saint so
punished, as thou art, and not for sin: for that was the argument. Thirdly,
suppose he had wished him to call upon the Saints, yet it was the speech of a
man, subject to error, and not of God; and if he exhorted Job to Saint-worship,
he was not to be obeyed. Fourthly, Eliphas in the eighth Verse shows, whom he
should go to for help, saying, I would enquire of God, and turn my talk to
God, namely, to pray unto him, and repent before him, if I were as thou, in thy
misery.

The last objection has more wit then good matter. Object.
As, say they, We believe the communion of Saints, so we must believe the
communion of prayers: for this is the chiefest benefit and special part of
community.

In the natural body, common sense is distinguished Answ.
from every proper sense: so is it in the mystical body; the Saints that are
absent, help us in common consent of nature, but the present Saints, which are
on earth, only they help us with the proper sense of our misery, which they
know, and therefore lend us help: in general, they desire our good, crying
with a loud voice, and saying, How long, Lord, holy and true, etc. but in
special they know not our estate. Again, there is a twofold communication;
one of person, in the same mystical body; and so we acknowledge we are one*
with the Saints in heaven; the other of office and special administration; and
thus only the Saints on earth are in communion with us; they in heaven cannot
do the same office for us, as we can do one for another.

Thirdly, much less can any godly man pray to dead Use 3.
things, to Images, stocks, and stones, to a piece of bread in the Mass, to
Relikes as bones and rags, and much less to the wooden Cross: all which
directly overthrows the horrible Idolatry of the Church of Rome, whose Idols
are above the Idols of the Gentiles, both in baseness and in multitude.

For the first: if the Heathens had worshipped Mice, or Rats, or Frogs, yet
they would have scorned to worship rags and bones, and moldy bread, and a
rotten stick, or block, for the Crosses Relike, and yet these the Papists do
invoke. As for the number, Augustine notes, that the Heathen had three
thousand known gods, and in diverse places three hundred Jupiters, or chief
gods: but the Papists have multiplied three thousand by thirty thousand: every
City, nay not only every City (for not according to the number of their
Cities, but of their families, is the number of their gods:) every house, nay,
every person has his special Angel to be prayed unto daily; every state,
order, art, disease has a special Patron and Physician to be inuocated.
Every Altar, every consecrated Host received or boxed up, is a God, new made by
the Priest and Baker, and this must be inuocated. Yea the holy beasts in
Popery have their several gods; the horse has S. Loy to pray unto if he can,
and the Pigs have S. Anthony: the Sea has her Neptune among the Heathens, the
Woods their Satyrs, the Waters their Nymphs, the Corn Ceres, the Wine
Bacchus, and the very like heathenish superstition and idolatry is in Popery.
I will not speak of the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins,
Bishops, and Fathers, and a Legion of Legend-Saints canonized, and special
prayer directed unto them. Whence I conclude, that Religion to be an heap of
Idolatry, and a sink of damnable heresy.

Fourthly, we see by this doctrine, where to speed our Use 4.
selves in affliction, and whither to go, namely, to God: for so did the
Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and Christ on the Cross, and we have no example to
the contrary.

Yea, but the worst will run to God in trouble and Object.
danger, and seek him diligently, Hos. 5. 15.

First, the wicked first try all means abroad, if they Answ.
can have any help and refuge. Psalm. 4. 6. Many say, Who will show us any
good? if they can find help there, that is their god for the present.

Secondly, if an ungodly man see no help there, his heart is down, he must
then to God, but he prays not; he only howles upon the bed of his sorrow like
a beast, through sense of pain.

Thirdly, in his shows of prayer, he seeks not God, but himself, not Gods
favor, but present ease.

Fourthly, the manner of his prayer is tumultuous, his desires are not
distinct, his prayer not settled in his soul upon true sense of his want, his
voice not tuned by the Spirit; his lips walk, but his heart mooues not; so he
babbleth words, he is soon weary, he is in a business that he is not used
to, and at least he holds not on till God answer him.

Fifthly, if he obtain relief or release, he can impute it to second causes,
and then he has done with God till he need him again. Thus he has neither
experience of Gods love, nor increase of love to God. Thus it is hard for him
to pray in affliction, and he can never do it well that is not a godly man,
accustomed to prayer in his peace.

In a time when thou may be found.]
HEre is the fourth or last point in the godly man's practice, namely, the time
when he shall pray. The phrase implies three things: first, that prayer is a
seeking of God: for finding supposes seeking. Secondly, that there is a time
when God, though sought, will not be found. Thirdly, that there is a time,
when the godly shall find him.

For the first. Prayer is a seeking of God. Isa. 55. 6. Doct.
Seek the Lord while he may be found. Call ye upon him Prayer is a seeking of
God.
while he is near: The latter words expound the former. Psalm. 34. 4. I sought
the Lord, and he heard me: he says not, I prayed and was heard, but, I sought
and was heard, because his prayer was a seeking. 2. Chron. 20. 3. When the good
King Iehoshaphat proclaimed fasting and prayer, he is said to set himself to
seek the Lord.

But God is euery-where present, and what need we Quest.
seek him? or, seeing he is never absent, how can he be found?

In God are two things to be considered: first, his Essence. Answ. God is
sought in his presence not in his essence.
Secondly, his Presence. His Essence or Godhead, which is not far from any of
us, Act. 17. 27. we neither seek nor find. But his Presence, or, some
comfortable sign of his presence and grace, we are commanded to seek, and to
our comfort do often find: this is called in the Scripture the seeking of the
face of God; the face is that, whereby a man's presence is known; and
whatsoever it is, wherein the Lord does manifest his presence, is called the
face of God, see Genesis 32. 30.

Yea, but the Lord said to MOSES, No man can see Object.
my face and live, Exodus 33. 20.

The face of God is either prima or secunda, praesentia Answ.
Deitatis or habitationis. First, the first face of God is his divine Essence,
which is invisible, which no man ever saw or can see, both because he is a
Spirit and cannot be seen of any mortal Creature; as also because our
weakness is such, as the brightness of such Majesty would bring us to
nothing: for, if our eyes cannot, without the destruction of themselves, behold
the brightness of the Sunne-beames, being a creature, how are we able to
behold the infinite and surpassing brightness of the Creator? Secondly, the
second face of God is his grace and favor, called in Exodus the backe-parts of
God, when God does manifest his gracious Presence, or some part of his glory,
in some ordinary or extraordinary revelation of it. Of the former God
speaks to Moses, of the latter speaks Iaacob; he had seen God face to
face, that is, more clearly and manifestly then ever before, and therefore he
called the place Penuel.

In the old Testament, the Arc of the covenant was called the face of God, and
the seeking of special testimony of his presence there, is called the seeking
of his face, because the Lord many ways there gave special testimonies of his
presence, as

First, by giving Answers and Oracles from the Mercy-seat.

Secondly, by preserving it from the contempt of his Enemies, so as fifty
thousand Bethshemites were slain for looking into it; nay, the Priests, the
Sons of Aaron, might not see it, but only the high Priest once a year.

Thirdly, by winning honor to it by diverse miracles, as, that before it the
waters of Jordan were divided, the walls of Jericho fell down, and Dagon
before it lost his head and hands. And because God was so specially present
there, the Jews must in their prayers turn their faces toward the Arc, and
toward Jerusalem, as Daniel did being in Chaldaea. And that the Jews might
know where to find God at all times, he told them that he would dwell in the
Sanctuary, and sit between the Cherubins, Exodus 35. 8.

Indeed the Jews were encouraged hereby to seek God, but what is that to us?
If we had such a set place, Quest.
where GOD had tied his presence and residence, we should have more comfort to
seek him, then now we have.

We want not encouragement of seeking God, nor Answ.
need doubt of finding him, if we take these grounds with us:

First, if we seek him in his own house: for where should a man be found but
in his own house? God had 1. Conditions in seeking God.
one standing house in the Old Testament, not where his infinite essence, which
the heaven of heavens was not able to contain, but where his Name and
memorial dwelt: but in the new he has a number of houses, and being
omni-present, he will be found in them all: First, the Church Assemblies, thief
be so many Bethels or houses of God; there the Church sought him, and found
him, Cant. 6. 1. among the tents of Shepherds; and Christ was down in the
Garden, and among the beds of Spices, that is, the assemblies of the Saints,
where graces grow up as sweet spices in a bed. Christ delights to walk in the
midst of the golden Candle-stickes; therefore in these houses of Prayer seek
him by faithful prayer, and thou shall not miss him.

Secondly, every Christian Family is a house of God: where two or three consent
in any one thing in his name, Christ is in the midst them. Adams Family, where
God was worshipped and sacrifices offered, was Gods face; whence Cain
complains he was cast out. And the Apostle saluteth private Christians with
the Church in their houses. Therefore make thy house Gods house, by setting up
his worship therein, and thou shall have him near thee with all sweet
fellowship and fullness of blessedness.

Thirdly, every Christian soul is a temple of GOD. 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the
Temples of the living God: as God has said, I will dwell among them, and walk
there. Then make thy heart his Temple, and, if thou would find him, seek
him there, thou shall find him no where else, or sooner then there. Adore him
in thy soul, and worship him in his holy Temple, offer upon the Altar a pure
heart thy sacrifice, even the sweet incense of prayer. Let the candle of thy
faith ever burn before God, let the Arc of thy soul keep the tables of Gods
commandments, and keep within thy heart that pot of Manna, even Christ, the
bread of life. By this means thy soul is Gods Temple, where he will be found
as a man is in his own house.

Secondly, as we must seek him in his own house, so by his own light and
means, and this is twofold: 2.
First, the Word of God in Precepts and Promises; this is a lantern to our
feet, and a light to our paths, by which God may be discerned, whom the
darkness of the world cannot comprehend. Secondly, such signs of his presence
as he has made choice of to reveal his grace in. In the Old Testament
believers must seek him in sacrifices and ceremonies, and therein he gave
them gracious answers: the sacrifices were partly hilasticall or expiatorie,
and partly Eucharisticall or gratulatory; the ceremonies were all typical, and
pointed at Christ and the good things to come in him. So in the New Testament
God has appointed visible signs annexed to his Word, as the public service
of him in Spirit and truth, the offering up of our sacrifices of prayer and
praise, and frequenting of the holy sacraments or ceremonies; in all which he
will be sought, and out of these will not be found. God cannot be seen or
found but by his own light, and therefore he that must seek him, must have
the light of understanding: Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord looked down, to see if any
would understand and seek after God.

Thirdly, we shall find God, if we seek him, not by the eyes of sense and
nature, but of faith and obedience. 3.
God being of a spiritual nature, cannot be seen with the eye of flesh,
which sees nothing but that which is material, visible, finite, and
circumscriptible as GOD is not. Nay, if the soul of man a finite spirit cannot
be seen with the bodily eye, much less the God of spirits, who is infinite
and of such purity, as the Angels are not able to behold.

Neither are we able to see God, or find him by the eye of our mind, as
being corrupted with sin: nay, neither can seek him more then the Gentiles,
of whom it is said, that the Lord was found of them that sought him not, Isai.
65. 1. For till the sound of the Gospel was carried among the Gentiles, and
Christ was proclaimed the Savior and Messiah, inuiting them to salvation, they
never asked after Christ, but had their minds darkened, alienated from the life
of God, by the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 2. 3. A dead man cannot seek
the things of this world; the lost groat could not think of her that lost it;
no more can a man seek God before his conversion; it must be an eye of grace
enlightened and cleared by God, that can seek him.

Seek and ye shall find, Mat. 7. 7. and, Whosoever seek, Object.
find.

Christ speaks thus to his Disciples, and the promise is Answ.
not made to the seeking, but to the seeker, being a believer and in Christ: So
as the meaning is this: Whosoever have been first sought of God and found of
him, shall seek and find him: else Ioh. 6. 44. No man comes unto me, unless
the Father draw him.

Fourthly, we shall seek aright, if we seek God in 4.
Gods manner, and that is in four things. First, if we seek him in sincerity
of Spirit, as Ephesians. 6. 18. praying in the Spirit, as knowing that we are to
deal with God who is a Spirit: and in sincerity, because he is a God that
loves truth in the inward parts: This condemns hypocritical seeking, which
is but deceitful. Ier. 29. 13. Ye shall seek me, and find me, because ye
shall seek me with all your heart. Secondly, in feruency: men are commanded to
seek for wisdom as for gold and treasures; how eagerly and instantly do men
seek after gold and earthly things? why, no labor can beat them from their
desires: How much more carefully ought they to seek after spiritual graces,
and most of all after God himself? Thirdly, in season, timely, as Psalm. 63. 2.
Early in the morning will I seek thee; that is, every morning the beginning of
my work shall be to look toward thee, I will begin my duties in faithful
inuocating thy help and aid. Fourthly, in his Son: seek him in Christ the
only Mediator; For none can come to the Father but by the Son.

Fifthly, we shall seek aright and with comfort, if we seek him in the right
ends, namely, for himself; not as 5.
the Jews who followed Christ for bread and the belly; not to gain the world
by him, but to gain himself and his favor, which is better then life; Yea to
obtain this, be content to seek him with the loss of all, as the Disciples
and Martyrs did. And then we seek himself for himself, when we seek his
glory in every thing, although to our own shame and confusion.

Is this so? Do the godly seek God in prayer? Then Use 1.
it follows that a godly heart finds a want of God: For seeking is of a thing
that we want and fain would have, Ps. 143. 6. My soul desires after thee, as
the thirsty lands: and the reason is, because he knows he has lost God;
For, what need he seek that he has not lost? First, in the corruption of his
nature he has lost the comfortable presence of God, which in our innocence
we enjoyed, by losing our selves, we lost God. Secondly, in the daily
admissions and commissions of sin after grace received, we lose his sight and
presence: For our sins separate between God and us, as a cloud between the
brightness of the Sun and us. Thirdly, a godly man sees the want of God,
because he knows in some sort the worth of GOD, without whom the soul is
dead, grace lost, the conscience in torment, and heaven turned into hell, both
here, and hereafter. The world were not so miserable without a sun, nor the
body without breath, as the soul without God, the Sun of his Church, and the
soul of the soul of every believer.

Fourthly, the godly having received a taste of Gods sweetness in Christ, and
his graces, still seek him for more; the more they drink, the more they
thirst; as Moses, the more familiar he was with God, the more he desires to
see of Gods glory: and here is no sacietie in this life, but the more a man
has, the more he wants and sees his wants. But

Fifthly, if God depart in displeasure, and leave a sense of wrath in the soul
for sin, then the soul finds such want, as it cannot sustain it self
without him, even Pharaoh will seek God in trouble, and hypocrites in
affliction will seek him diligently, in hypocrisy. How much more will the
godly heart above all desires, seek his favor, and one cheerful countenance
from him? Of this want and this seeking our Text speaks.

Numbers of men never find any want of God, they find the want of health and
wealth, of friends and means: many say, Who will show us any good? and a great
sort seek corn, and wine, and oil; but a few say, Lord lift up thy
countenance upon us.

God forbid we should feel no want of God. Object.


The carnal man cannot feel the want of Gods familiar Answ.
presence, because he contents himself with the comfort of his creatures, and
therefore he cannot seek God to find him. A man that seeks a lost jewel,
looks still to see that, for other things coming in his way he sees not
them, but passes slightly over them, he seeks not them; so he that seeks
GOD, makes inquisition only for himself, no other thing contents him but
himself, no other thing takes up his mind, and therefore the worldling
indeed wants not God nor seeks him.

Secondly, if the godly man seek God in prayer, then he frequents the places
where God has promised to Use 2.
be found: He has pleased to tie himself to the assemblies of the Saints,
that there those, that would meet with him, might be sure to find him.
Graceless men therefore are they, that turn their backs upon God, that leave
the Church and assemblies, that take their horse and travel about worldly
businesses on the Sabbath day, with pretense that they can pray as well in the
way, and serve God on horseback as well as the best: But they are deluded by
the Devil whom they serve, they have no God but their belly and their wealth.
And is it not a strange enchantment, that while a man runs from God, from his
presence and assemblies, yet he should think to meet with him and find him?
And so he shall, he will at last meet with thee, and find thee out in thy
hypocrisy; and if his patience let thee go on, waiting for amendment,
remember that he is fetching a stroke, which, the higher it is lifted, the
heavier it will fall. Be warned by others example.

A certain Noble man for hunting usually on the Lords day, had a child borne
with the head of a dog, that seeing he preferred his dogs before the
service of God, he might have one of his own getting to make much of, Theatr.
Histor.

Also a Flaxe-woman at Kimstat in France, dressing her Flax commonly on the
Sabbath, for mere covetousness and eager greediness upon the world, after
two fair admonitions on two Sabboths together by fire, was the third day burnt
with her Flax and two children. A warning for women, who on the Lords day
mind their Brewing, Baking, Buckes-driuing, etc. and will not be reclaimed.

A certain man working hard at harvest on the Sabbath, in the mean time a
fire kindled in his barn, and consumed all: according to the word of the Lord:
Ier. 17. 27.

At Paris garden, at a Beare-bayting, anno 1583. eight persons were slain,
many hurt, and all affrighted by the sudden breaking of the scaffold. Thus God
has ways enough to find out profane persons: thou can not run from God,
but thou shall know how far thou art gone from him, and thou that carest not
to find him, shall be sure he will find thee in judgment; and if thou growest
rich by breaking Gods holy Sabbath, the Lord sends leanness into thy soul,
and the rust of thy money shall cry out against thee one day, Oh this is the
money, which I have got by breaking the Sabbath. The like may be said of them,
that banish Gods worship and godly speech from their houses and tables, Oh,
they will have no such salt at their bankets, such words are never seasonable,
whereas they ought rather to bring in goodness into their families, then nip
it in the head, and cast the Arc out of their houses.

So much of the first doctrine: the second follows, and is this.

There is a time, when God will not be found, though Doct. 2.
he be sought. And this is true both in the wicked and There is a time wen God
will not be found, although he be sought.
the godly: first, the wicked still pray in a time of not finding God; if they
seek, they never find, as Luke 13. 24. Many shall seek to enter, but shall
not be able. James 4. 5. Yea ask and have not, because ye ask amiss; now the
wicked always ask amiss. John 9. The poor blind man concluded against all the Scribes and Pharisees, that Christ was a good man and righteous, because God
heard him.

First, because the promise of hearing prayer is not made to the prayer it
self, but to the person praying, Reasons.
and not unto him farther, then he is invested with Christ's righteousness, in
whom he and his prayer is accepted.

Secondly, God will not be found, when he is not sought in truth of heart, which
can be found no where, but in a converted person; for then he is truly sought,
when the heart brings these things: first, an earnest desire of
reco^ciliation: for no sacrifice is acceptable, but from a contrite heart.
Secondly, a special word and promise. Ask what is agreeable to his will, and
you shall obtain it, 1. John 5. 14. Thirdly, a special faith in the promise,
which is necessary to a true seeker, James 1. 6. Let him ask in faith. And
Mark. 11. 24. If ye believe, ye shall have what ye ask. Fourthly, it brings
the exercises of piety and mercy, a putting off of the old man, and a putting
on of the new: Isai. 1. Wash and cleanse you, and then come and seek me. These
conditions a wicked man cannot perform in seeking, and therefore he finds not.

Thirdly, the wicked seek not commonly, till the time of finding be past, they
seek too late; so did the foolish Virgins, it was too late when the gate was
shut, it was too late, for Pharaoh in the sea, it was too late for Esau to
seek repentance, and the blessing with tears, he profanely rejected it,
while it was in his power. While they have light, commonly they spurn at it,
and while the day lasts, are idle; they never seek God, till they must
needs; and therefore when the night comes, they cannot work or help
themselves.

Fourthly, if we consider what the finding of God is, we When God is found.
shall see they cannot find him. Then God is found, first, when according to
the prayer of faith, he visits us in mercy. Secondly, when by some sign of
his mercy, he testifies a fatherly care and love over us. Thirdly, when he
vouchsafes not a general, but a special and gracious presence with us: Thus
Hos. 10. 12. the Church seeks God till she find him: But how is this finding
expressed? thus: till he comes, and raines down righteousness upon us: that is,
when by the power and dew of his Spirit our hearts, otherwise like a dry and
barren ground, are watered, so as his Word may bring up in us blessed fruits
of righteousness, acceptable to God. But no wicked man has any testimony of
Gods care over him as his Father, but only as a Lord, neither enjoys he more
then a general presence, not the presence of any special love.

Ahab praying in hypocrisy, was heard in mercy, and Object.
his prayer obtained a remoouall of the evil threatened: 1. King. 21. 29.

Gods mercy is twofold: first, temporal; secondly, Answ.
spiritual. God often gives to hypocrites to be heard in temporal mercies, as
here an external humility is recompensed with an external benefit, a
temporal repentance, with a temporal deliverance: but for any spiritual
deliverance from the guilt and bonds of his sin, or any spiritual blessing
concerning salvation in Christ, to come from God as a father, this Ahab did
neither seek, nor could find.

Secondly, in temporal things, the wicked are not heard in mercy so much as in
justice; not in love, but in anger and wrath. Thus the Israelites asked
Quails, and had them: but, While the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of
God was upon them, Psalm. 78. 30. The same people asked a King, and, he gave
them one in wrath, as himself said afterward. It is not always a mercy,
that God grants a request: for then the Lord had showed mercy to the devil, to
whom none belongs, when he granted him his request against Job and the Swine,
whereas he did it for to be a means of his own shame and judgment.

Secondly, the godly also seek sometimes, when God will not be found: but this
must be understood with two cautions: First, for the present he will not be
found, as Cant. 3. 2, 4. the Church sought Christ, whom her soul loved, but
found him not; she went a little farther, and found him. How strange did
Christ show himself to the woman of Canaan? what grim countenance and contempt
showed he by his silence, not vouchsafing to speak to her? and when he spoke,
what rough and churlish words gave he to a woman in that distress, calling her
a Dog? and yet in two or three words more she heard from him, Be it unto
thee even as thou will.

Secondly, in their sense God will not be found, though indeed he never sends
away empty the prayer of faith: for though he obscures his face, as the
Church complains, and couers himself with a cloud, that our prayers cannot
come unto him, yet the very sustaining of us in seeking to him argues his
presence. When the prodigal son was but resolving to go to his father, the
father went out to meet him with compassion and love, while he was yet a far
off, and had no sense of it. Thus David often complains, Will the Lord absent
himself for ever? has he forgotten to be merciful? and will he be never more
entreated? Why art thou so far from the words of my complaint? thou make as
if thou heardest not.

And what be the reasons that the godly find not the Why the godly themselves
always find not God.
Lord always? first, the Lord will not be found of the godly, to chasten and
correct them for their sins. Why cannot the Church find Christ, seeking him
so earnestly, Cant. 3. 1? because she will seek him in her bed, and provide
for her own ease, and is loath to rise out of her bed; sometimes in the
Streets, where she list, and not where she should; sometimes she is heavy to
go to the tents of shepherds, or the Temple; sometime she has rejected him,
when he offered himself kindly, Cant. 5. 3, 6. she will not receive him at the
threshold; and therefore she must trudge up and down after him, and he will be
far from her finding.

Secondly, the Lord will not be found of a long time, that the continuance of
their trouble, might let even his own children see the greatness of their
sins, which have plunged them so far into Gods displeasure, as now he will
not be entreated. For if our corrections were always light and short, we would
not conceive sufficiently the weight of our sins. And this dealing of God,
though it may a while dismay his children, yet is good for them, that they may
thoroughly feel their sin, and, being bitten with it, might both seriously
humble themselves for the present, and beware of it for time to come.

Thirdly, God will not always be found, oftentimes to try their faith hope,
patience, and obedience. Abraham must not find God retrayting his heavy
commandment till the third day, till he was on the Mount, and had bound Isaac
to the wood. Job was tried to the uttermost, before he could find God taking
his part, and so became a mirror of patience. The Canaanitish woman was held
off so long, that her faith might be a shame to all the Jews, she being a
Gentile: and therefore Christ said, O woman, great is thy faith.

Fourthly, even the repentance of the godly, in respect of outward afflictions
may come too late, and God will not be found. For though he will not take his
loving kindness from them, yet, if they be stubberne in sin, he will visit
them with the rods of men. If the decree be once gone forth, they shall
frustrate many means, and he will not repent nor spare, nor be entreated:
Ezech. 24. 13, 14. Thou remainest in thy filthiness and wickedness; because I
would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from
thy filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to light upon thee, etc. Moses (no
question) repented of the sin, in that he glorified not God at the waters of
strife, yet in regard of the temporal correction, it came too late, he must
not go into Canaan. Notwithstanding all David's repentance and praying, the
child of adultery must die, because, if once God pass sentence, it may not
be called back. Therefore, Search, O search your selves, O people, not worthy
to be loved, before the decree come forth: Zeph. 2. 1, 2.

Fifthly, the Lord will not be found often for a time to the sense of his
children, to whet up their desires after him; both to make them long after him
in his longer absence, and also to make more account of his presence; as the
Mother stands behind a door, and lets the Child cry after her, it sees it
own weakness and gets a knock and thereby perceiues the need of her.
Further, we enjoy no good thing, as health, wealth, or liberty, but the harder
it is come by, the more it is set by, and whatsoever lightly comes, lightly
goes; a disease easily cured is easily incurred, and not so carefully
prevented. Cant. 3. 3. When the Spouse had sought Christ here and there, and
could no where find him, at length finding him, she took fast hold on him,
and would not let him go.

Sixthly, God will not always be found, that we might herein see a resemblance
of that eternal displeasure of God, against impenitent sinners, when as those
that seek after the Lord with true repentance, stick in their trouble and
cannot easily get discharge. This use Peter makes, 1. Epist. 4. 17. If
judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of those that obey
not the Gospel? and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the sinner appear?

But to whom then is that promise made, Matthew. 7. 7. Quest.
Seek and ye shall find; if the godly seek and find not?

To the godly: but first, all such promises go with Answ.
exception of the Cross, for trial and correction.

Secondly, we must distinguish between Gods delays Gods delays to be
distinguished from denyalls.
and denyalls; he gives not that we ask for the present, but gives it after
when we are fitter to receive it, and the giving will make more to his glory
and our comfort. Abraham, Zachary, Annah, prayed, no doubt, for children in
their young days, but were not heard till they were stricken in years, whereby
God had more glory, and themselves more exercise, experience, and comfort.

Thirdly, God is found often in another kind, better for us, when we think he
will not be found, as in Paul, He prayed God to remove the prick of the
flesh, but God would not be found in that, yet he was in supplying sufficient
grace. Christ himself prayed that the cup might pass from him; his Father was
not found in that particular, but he was found in passing him well through it,
which was far better. So if God give not the particular we ask, but some thing
better then it for it, as patience, exercise, and increase of grace, and
strength that holds the heart in faithful expectance, who can deny but that
he is found? and sometimes God gives more then our request, and is this a
denial? A poor man asks a penny, we give him a shilling; is this to deny
his request?

Fourthly, the godly in seeking are tied to some conditions, of which if they
fail, let them blame their own unfaithfulness, and not the faithfulness of
God who cannot deny them, as

First, if they seek not according to his Will, or as his Word allows, but
as Zebede's Sons, they know not what they ask; they must have, not what is
good for them, but what seems good to them: this was Moses his fault, see
Deuteronomy. 3. 25, 26.

Secondly, if they ask without faith, in wavering and doubting of Gods hearing
or answer.

Thirdly, if they ask without patient waiting the Lords leisure, making more
haste then good speed, prescribing the manner and time of hearing, which sin
was noted in the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 41. they limited or stinted the holy one
of Israel: here it is just that the Lord is not found of his own servants: But
keep the conditions of seeking, and in some of these ways the promise is
true, Seek and ye shall find.

Well, if there be a time, when God will not be found, Use 1.
then must the godly hence learn rightly to conceive of Gods not hearing their
prayer: for it proves not, that either they are out of Gods favor and love,
as hasty persons are ready to gather and conclude against themselves. The Lord
regards them not, oh he has broken the bottle of their tears, and they are
none of his children; or that the Lord grudgeth their good or is loath to afford
it them; or to discourage them, to the breaking off of their prayers; or God
has forgotten his promise: But it serves to teach them to turn against their
sins, Peccato grauescit oration.
which hide good things from them, and to join watching against evil, with
wishing and prayer for good. Secondly, the longer our prayers are put off,
enter we into a more serious examination, and severe proceeding against our
sins. Thirdly, say thus with thy self, The Lord now tries my faith,
patience, love, hope, and perseverance: I must not limit him as the Bethulians
did, or send for him in post-hast, but wait his leisure; though the vision
stay, and be yet appointed for a time, yet at length it shall speak and not
lie, Hab. 2. 3. And, were it fit for a subject by post to send for the King?
Fourthly, it may be, I know not well what I ask, and the Lord knows to give
me better or above that I ask: If it be a good thing, perhaps it is not good
for me, or not yet. I must be kept humble still with a prick in the flesh, to
let out my wind of vainglory. What? have I a promise for that I pray for?
else I offer strange fire. And is not this promise conditional? let me pervse
it and so pray. Fifthly, doubtless the thing I ask is worth more prayer and
more labor, and I undervalue it: God by this delay would make me know the
worth of it by hard obtaining, and learn to use it well when I have it, that I
may not forfeit it: great things must be sought with great affection. Sixthly I
must know, my prayer is a seed-time, it is sown in heaven, and cast into the
bosom of God, and, as we cannot sow and reap presently, but the husbandman
waits patiently a whole winter, so must I wait the coming up of my prayers:
for certainly, if the prayer of faith presently return us not some good, it
lays up good in store for us, to enjoy afterward. And if God intend my
bettring by present denial of my prayer, so must I.

Secondly, the godly must learn hence to pray for their prayers, seeing it is
so hard for them to pray well, to the Use 2.
end that they may find entrance to God, and acceptance before him. Thou that
have not found God upon thy prayer, tell me, Have thou prayed, that God would
hear thee therein, and direct thee to pray aright? Know this for certain,
Thou must sanctify all things, even the word and prayer, by the word and
prayer. Take up David's practice. Psalm. 119. 169, 170. Let my complaint come
before thee, O Lord, and give me understanding according to thy Word. Let my
supplication come before thee, and deliver me according to thy promise. Or else
thou may pray in a time of not finding.

Thirdly, the wicked may here see, what a great plague is upon them, seeing God
rejects their prayers, and Use 3.
turns them to sin.

First, the soul of a natural man is dead to God, and a dead man, we know,
vtters no voice.

Secondly, seeing we live at Gods allowance and liberality, and he gives not
till we seek, how poor and miserable must they be, that can not seek him
to obtain?

Thirdly, the strength of a Christian is in his prayer, as Sampsons strength
was in his hair; if this be taken away, he is a prey for all the spiritual
Philistims.

Fourthly, it was the curse of Moab to pray and not prevail, and it was the
comfortless case of Saul in his need, not to be answered.

But God will not deal so roughly with his Creatures Object.
as you talk of; why, he is gracious and ready to hear.

We acknowledge these attributes of God; but what Answ.
is that to thee that art a Moabite, and out of the covenant; what will Gods
mercy profit thee, that lie in sin unrepented? Mercy belongs only to the
vessels of mercy. What good can a conditional promise do him, that no way
performs the condition? promises of mercy belong only to those that keep the
condition of believing.

There is yet a third doctrine to be considered, and that is this:

There is a time wherein God will be graciously found of every Doct. 3.
godly man, if he seek him. Matthew. 7. 7. Seek and ye There is a time wherein
God will be found of every godly man, seeking him.
shall find: this is a general promise, made to all the followers of Christ:
and, Whosoever seeks, finds. Ier. 29. 11, 12. There is a promise, that Gods
people shall cry unto him, and he will hear them; they shall seek him, and
find him, because they shall seek him with their whole heart. Isa. 65. 24.
Before they call I will answer, and while they speak I will hear. Psalm 9.
18. The poor shall not always be forgotten, the hope of the afflicted shall
not perish for ever.

First, Gods nature is to tender the misery of the afflicted Reason 1.
and distressed, wherein he cannot deny himself. Psalm. 12. 5. Now for the
oppression of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will up, says the
Lord, and set him at liberty. Exodus 3. 7. I have surely seen the affliction
of my people, and heard their cry, because of their taske-masters: for I know
their sorrows, and now am come down to deliver them: this is Gods
philanthropie and loving affection to mankind, to put forth thoughts of peace
toward them.

Secondly, if God should not take one time or other 2.
to answer his children, he should not be as good as his promise, Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee. He should reject prayer
preferred according to his will, and in the name of Christ, and the voice of
his own Spirit, yea, the prayer of faith, tending to his glory and the
salvation of his people, which he cannot do and continue faithful.

Thirdly, he sets out a time of finding in respect of his 3.
own glory, sundry ways: first, by being found of his people, he procures
praise and abundant thanksgiving, as Psalm. 22. 24, 26. He has not despised
the poor, nor hid his face from him: my praise shall be of thee in the great
Congregation. The poor shall eat and be satisfied, they that seek after the
Lord, shall praise him: see Psalm. 79. 13. and Isa. 38. 19. The Fathers to the
Children shall declare thy praise. Yea, the Lord challenges this as a chief
part of his glory, Isa. 42. 7, 8. Secondly, by being found of his people, he
magnifies his own name in the midst of his enemies; for they brag and exalt
themselves, when they can tread upon the necks of the godly. Now, lest they
should say, We have prevailed, and, Where is now their God? He steps in and
finds a time to hear their weak prayers. Psalm. 106. 8. He saved them (the
Israelites pursued by Pharaoh in the red Sea) for his names sake; according to
the prayer of the Church, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be
the praise, 'Psal. 115. 1.

Fourthly, God will in time be found of every godly 4.
man, often because of the malice of the wicked, when it is come to the height.
The Israelites had often prayed, and groned under their afflictions in Egypt in
the four hundred years, but, because the sins of the Amorites and
Canaanites were not full and ripe, they found not God in all that time; but
when they were full, they were delivered.

Fifthly, God sets out a time of finding in respect of 5.
the godly themselves: first, to provoke them to love the Lord, who gives and
forgiueth much: as Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my
prayer. Secondly, to encourage them in prayer and in the course of inuocating
him, wherein they find God so good; yea, to be instant, and press in upon
him: Psalm. 116. 2. Because he has heard me in my days, I will call upon him.
This the Prophet expresses, Psalm. 65. 2. All flesh shall resort to thee a God
hearing prayer, or, Because thou hear prayer, all flesh shall resort unto
thee.

Yea, but God has denied to hear the prayers of his Object.
children, they have sought and never found, as Moses and Paul.

First, we may pray for temporal things, we must know that all the promises for
them are made with a condition, Answ. 1.
If God see it good for us: in such things a godly man may pray all his life
time, and not find, because GOD sees it better for him to be without them, and
to lie under the cross.

Secondly, we must distinguish between delays and denials, as we have seen.
2.


Thirdly, the godly have many special graces, but it is Gods wisdom to leave
them in some want, to know 3.
some prick of the flesh, as Paul did, lest they should be puffed up, being
taken up into such an heavenly condition.

Fourthly, God hears his children in a better kind, as we have showed. 4.


Fifthly, the godly are tied to conditions, which are often broken. 5.


Sixthly, it may be thy prayer is heard, but the answer 6.
is not yet come to thy heart, the sense of grant is not yet brought to thee,
and there must go some time between seeking and finding: so the Angel said
to Daniel, chap. 9. 22. 23. From the first day that thou did set thy heart to
seek the Lord and humble thy self, thy words are heard, and now I am come to
tell thee.

If the godly seek sometimes in a time of finding, then we must learn to
judge wisely of the poor and afflicted Use 3.
in spirit, not to triumph over them as David's enemies did over him: Oh, God
has forsaken him; or as Jobs friends did, All that he was, at best he was but
an hypocrite. Oh, says the world, this is not the child of God: Why? because
the Devil has a little power over him, and God is gone. A false conceit: For,
first, though he be not heard presently, yet he shall be heard hereafter;
there is a time when he shall find God. Secondly, God is delighted in an
humble spirit, and a broken heart. Thirdly, he is the God of the abject; his
promise is, that such as mourn in Sion, shall be delivered and have beauty for
ashes. Fourthly, after this rate we shall condemn the greatest lights of Gods
Church; Paul and the other Apostles were in a thousand dangers, within and
without, assaulted on every side, yet as dear to God as ever they were: and it
was a Jewish scoff against Christ, Let God deliver him now if he will have him.

Let us rather consider our own case what it may be, and be charitably
affected to them in distress, as we would have others affected toward us in
the same case, knowing, that that which befalls one man, may befall any man.

Secondly, if there be a time of finding, let us take heed Use 2.
of being Lions in our own houses, tearing our souls with diffidence and
despair, as if the Lord were clean gone for ever, and would never return,
and as though there were no time of finding.

Alas! I am then no godly man: for I have prayed Object.
long, and God will not be found; must I not fear my estate?

Yes, fear and doubt in the godly, make their salvation Answ.
more sure in the end, because it sends them to the means of comfort: and by
this thou may try thy fear, and distinguish it from al ungodly fears and
doubts, which vanish away without any such use.

But I am unworthy to find God, who have incensed Object.
his wrath, like an unkind and unthankful wretch, and that every day.

A false ground of a false enemy: all thy worthiness Answ.
is the sense of unworthiness, and an apprehension of Christ's worthiness:
What worthiness was in Israel, when the Lord covered her with his skirt, and
she became his? Did she not wallow in her blood and filthiness? And is not
God the same, promising and performing mercy to them that confess their
sins and forsake them?

Oh, but my sins have abounded, and have so separated between God and me,
that I doubt I shall never Object.
find him.

Not so: For where sin has abounded, grace has Answ.
abounded much more; and in the forgiveness of many sins, God shall have
honor of much mercy and love from the sinner in greater measure. And if he
delighted in the death of a sinner, or took pleasure in the death of him that
dies, any one sin would furnish him with matter of revenge enough; but he is
much in pardoning and delights therein. The Apostle Paul says, I was a
persecutor, an oppressor, a blasphemer, etc. yet God had mercy on me, to be an
ensample in time to come to all that should believe in Christ Jesus.

Alas! he sinned of ignorance, but I of knowledge against Object.
the light of my mind, the voice of God, the motions of his Spirit, the cries
of my own conscience, and have so quenched and grieved the Spirit, that he
will come no more; I may not look to find God as Paul did.

Tell me when John said, The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all sin, 1. Epist. 1. 7. does he mean Answ.
only sins of ignorance? No verily: and if GOD have made no distinction of
small and great sins, sins of knowledge and of ignorance, of weakness and
of presumption, you may justly and must defy a distinguishing devil.

Thirdly, the godly must be encouraged by this doctrine, Use 3.
to seek the Lord in a time when he may be found.

Oh that I knew that time! when is it?

First, one time of finding is, when a man has been Quest.
truly humbled and-toucht for his sin: Of this time Answ.
our Prophet speaks in the Text: after humiliation David Certain times when
God will be found.
found God, and teaches that every godly man shall then find him. It is the
troubled spirit that God respects, and at whom else does the Lord look? Isai.
66. 2. CHRIST came not to the righteous (in their own conceit:) but to call
laden and humble sinners.

Secondly, another time of finding God is, when all good means and care have
been used to find him. God will not be found at first, because he will try the
diligence of his servants, in which he sees the price they set upon him, and
the thing asked. The Spouse in her bed cannot find Christ; but, if she get
out, and use all good means, enquiring and seeking after him, at last he is
found: and a godly heart cannot but think that the comforts Christ brings with
him, are worth all his pains and labor. And it will manifest our care, if we
seek him: First, early, as Prou. 8. 17. I love them that love me, and those
that seek me early, shall find me. Secondly, if we seek him with all our
heart, as Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy
heart, and all thy soul. Thirdly, in perseverance, not by starts and fits, as
the careless and temporizers, but as the Church that never rests till she
find him.

Thirdly, another time of finding God, is the godly man's extremity, and urgent
necessity; for that is Gods opportunity. The Lord will be a refuge for the
poor, a refuge in due time, even in affliction, (when he has no refuge
elsewhere;) Psalm. 9. 9. and Psa. 10. 1. Why hidest thou thy self, O Lord, in
due time, even in affliction? Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30. When thou art in tribulation,
and all these things are come upon thee, at the length, if thou return to the
Lord, he will not forsake thee. When Jonas was wrapped with waves and weeds in
the bottom of the Sea, he cried, and God spoke to the fish to set him on
land. David called out of the deep, and God heard him. Moses cried at the Red
Sea, and then God was found. Christ in his agony in the garden prayed, and GOD
sent the Angels to comfort him. Abraham found God three days after the
commandment, on the mount. And after three days, when the case was hopeless,
and the Disciples faith was a little prejudiced, Christ rose again. Therefore
wait, thou art not yet in the deepes, nor yet at the mount, the third day is
not yet come.

Fourthly, another time of finding God is, when God offers himself to be found
in the preaching of the Gospel; for by it God comes and knockes at our door
and seeks entrance, Reu. 3. 20. and the opportunity of the Gospel is called
the day of salvation, and the day of visitation. Let us walk, while we have
the light; this is the acceptable time. The Jews knew it not till it was past,
and they were left in their sins; let us take heed it be not so with us.

How can we want motives to seek the Lord with comfort and assurance of
finding him? for

First, God has a fatherly care over us, and as a faithful Shepherd seeks
thee, leaving ninety nine to save Motives to seek the Lord.
one; and is not he willing to be found if thou seek him? oh goc and meet him?

Secondly, Christ seeks and sues to thee, Open unto me, my beloved: and why
should not we set open the gates of our hearts, that the King of glory may
enter in? Even when we run away from him, he seeks us and offers us
conditions of love; he runs after fugitive ADAM, that if he will believe in
the promised Messiah, he shall be saved: And have not we encouragement
enough to knock at the door of his mercy?

Thirdly, consider what a woeful threatening is sent out against such as will
not seek the Lord? as Zeph. 1. 6. He will stretch out his hand against all
them that turn from him, that sought not the Lord nor inquired after him. and
Zech. 7. 13. It is come to pass, that as I cried, and they would not hear, so
they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts.

Fourthly, the Gospel is the hammer, by which God still knockes: now if thou will lay hold on mercy offered, thou shall have a blessed answer: but if thou will bolt up thy heart with security and ignorance, how can he come unto thee?
Christ, when he was borne, found no room in the Inn, but was content to lie
in the Stable: and surely the world is no changeling, it is as unthankful
still, men are loath to make Christ a room in the Inn of their hearts: If now
in his glory he would be content with Stables, that is, hearts filled with
noisome lusts, as so many filthy beasts, this room they could afford him. But
know, that he is past infancy and abasement, and has showed himself a Lord
of glory, and will have a room and entertainment like himself: and, if thou
make him no room by embracing the Gospel in the Kingdom of grace, he will
never make room for thee in the Kingdom of glory. Now is the light shining,
now lay hold on the light.

Oh, but it may continue long, and what needs such Object.
haste?

First, that is uncertain, we have seen as fair Suns Answ.
as ours fall from the midst of heaven, as the Churches of Ephesus, Corinth,
and the seven in lesser Asia. Secondly, thou can not deny, but that we have
forfeited all our liberties by horrible sins against it. Thirdly, suppose the
Gospel do continue with us, yet thou know not whether thou shall stay with
it one night. Therefore work while the day is, before the night come, and thou
can not work.

Surely in the flood of great waters, they shall not come near him.]
NOw we come to the second part of this verse, and in it to that excellent
promise made to the godly man praying, namely, of special safety from most
present and perilous dangers.

By floods of waters, the Scriptures Metaphorically express extreme dangers
and violent troubles, whether sent: First, by God himself, as Psalm. 42. 7. All
thy floods and waves are gone over me. Secondly, by Satan, as Revel. 12. 5. The
Serpent cast out waters like a flood. Thirdly, by wicked men, Isa. 59. 19. The
enemy shall come as a flood: because, first, as inundations and swellings of
waters come fiercely and terribly, or as the flood of Noah, (to which the
Prophet may allude) bare down all before it; so afflictions come, as though
they would swallow the godly, as Psalm. 18. 4. The floods of wickedness made
me afraid.

Secondly, because as a man, ready to be drowned, is drawn out of the waters,
and so saved: so Gods present deliverance is compared to the drawing out of the
waters, Psalm. 18. 16. He has drawn me out of many waters. Thus Moses was
drawn out of the waters, and Gods protection is the only Arc to save his
children.

Shall not come near him.]
WHat? did ever godly man avoid them? was Object.
not Noah near them, and they near him? was not David over head and ears in
them? Psalm. 69. 1, 2. was not Jonas in the midst of them? Chap. 3. 5. All thy
waves and surges passed over me.

The meaning of the phrase is, that these floods shall Answ.
not come near the godly man to hurt him, or as evils, or till they be
altered. It were not fit, that the godly should be privileged, and quite
exempted from afflictions, but that the hurt and evil of them shall not come
near them; for they shall all turn to their good, yea to their best. Psalm.
105. 15. Touch not my Prophets: The phrase is presently expounded, Do them no
harm, no, not the least harm. And Saint John says, He that is borne of God,
the wicked one shall not touch him.

No? what say you to Job and his children? of Marie Object.
Magdalen possessed with seven devils? of many of Gods children bewitched and
vexed with the devil? why, Satan is most busy with the sons of God, neither
spared Christ himself.

True, but he touches them, not to do them harm, he Answ.
cannot have his will on them.

Surely.] Or certainly: an asseueration, added, first, to confirm their
hearts that shall seek God in prayer. Secondly, to show that as the promise of
God is large and excellent, so it is most sure and true. Thirdly, to reprove
the distrust of men, and want of application. David himself is not always in
case to apply the promises, Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my haste, All men are
liars, that is, all the promises are untrue.

This promise yields us this point of instruction, that

No judgment in the world can hurt, or touch a godly man Doct.
to do him the least harm. Psalm. 91. 6, 7. No plague shall The greatest
judgment cannot do the godly the least harm.
come near his tabernacle: A thousand shall fall at thy side, and 1000. at thy
right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. When the revenging Angel was to
pass through all Egypt, and smite the first borne, his commission is limited,
he must pass over the Israelites, where the blood was sprinkled on the
doore-postes and lintels. Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6. The man in white raiment, who was
Gods executioner of a common judgment, must first Mark those in the forehead,
who mourn for their sins, and spare them. Revel. 7. 3. The Angel must not
hurt the earth, till all Gods Saints be marked.

First, the godly man stands on a rock, the Lord is his Reas. 1.
rock, that look as in the ouerflowing of many waters, houses are driven
down, men are drowned, and cattle perish, but he that is upon a high rock, is
safe: so he that has made the Lord his Rock and defense, heaven and earth
cannot stir him. In the great deluge, the waters rose not up to heaven, but
only fifteen cubits above the highest Mountains of the earth; and, if thy
Rock be in heaven, the floods of great waters shall not touch thee.

Secondly, Gods protection compasses his people, as the hills compassed
Jerusalem. Moses being cast upon 2.
the waters, but first put into a basket, was safe enough till he was drawn
out. When the great deluge covered the face of the whole earth, the Lord
prepared an Arc for Noah and his family; therein they were safe, because God
shut them in: Gods protection is this basket, this Arc to his children.

Thirdly, as, if a man be cast into the sea, and can keep his head aloft, he
cannot be drowned; so, as long as 3.
Christ the head is above, he will not lose the least and basest of his
members; If Christ be in the ship, all is safe.

Fourthly, Gods word and promise is to be with them; 4.
at Christ's word, Peter walks safely on the water.

But sense and reason is against all these your sayings: Object.
What? have not the enemies with their violent inundations come near, yea, and
almost ouerturned the whole Church? What stirs, tumults, martyrdoms and
butcheries have been outragiously committed on the poor Saints? What horrible
slaughters have been done on Protestants, in France, Flanders, Spain? in our
own Country, the fires have been kindled as hot as Nebuchadnezars furnace, to
burn the bodies of Gods Saints, and some yet alive have seen those Marian
days, wherein the streets ran with the blood of the Saints, as Ierusalems did
in the time of Manasseh.

The Church is like the Arc of Noah, which, the more the waters rose, the more
and higher it rose; or like the Answ.
ship, wherein Christ lay asleep, which may be tossed with winds and waves,
but not ouerturned: even so, the more the waters of affliction be increased,
the more is the Arc of the Church exalted. The Church may be beaten with
waves, but it shall be still lifted up above them. The Disciples may faint,
and see the streams ready to swallow the^, yea, in their sense may say,
Master, we perish: but Christ is in the ship, he will awake in due season, and
rebuke both the storm, and their little faith. Thus the Apostle says, We are
in all things more then conquerours.

Secondly, the Prophet yields, Psalm. 34. 19. that, great are the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all: but mark how:

First, sometimes they are exempted from the common Sundry ways of Gods
delivering of his servants.
inundation, that it does not come near them, as those 7000. marked, who bowed
not their knees to Baal, were saved from Iezabel, and the tenth and remnant
reserved from common plagues, to propagate Gods grace and glory with the manner
of his dealing, and their deliverance.

Secondly, sometime they are wrapped in the common misery, as suppose the
plague, or fire, or sword, but herein find the Lords compassion and mercy in
special deliverances. Jeremy was taken into Babylon with the captives, but it
was better with him there, then among his own people. So David says, Thou
have afflicted me sore, but have not delivered me unto death.

Thirdly, sometimes the godly are left unto death, and led, as sheep unto the
slaughter, and sustain all the cruelty and ignominy their enemies can devise.
And this the Lord does permit: first, in respect of their enemies, that they
may by their blasphemies and cruelty prepare and hasten their own destruction.
Secondly, of the truth, which is sealed and ratified with the blood of the
Martyrs. Thirdly, of the growth of the Church, which is sown and watered with
the blood of the Saints, as being the seed of the Church. Fourthly, in respect
of the godly themselves, to sweeten them; for the fire is the fittest place for
perfumes: But yet

First, the Lord is not careless, much less prodigal of the lives of his
servants, but by special counsel, thus orders and disposes of them: for
he numbers their flittings, puts their tears into his bottle, and suffers not
a hair, much less the head it self, to fall without his providence. Precious
to the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15.

Secondly, being thus left in the enemies hand, the promise of deliverance is
most true, seeing, first, the rod of Psalm. 125. 3.
the ungodly does not rest upon them, but by being delivered to them are
delivered from them. Secondly, in the midst of death they live, conquer, and
reign: so says the Apostle, We are slain, but not overcome: the reason is,
because Tyrants and Persecutors cannot overcome their Faith, Hope, and
Profession. Thirdly, they are delivered from all the bands of sin and death,
and the imperfect man is wholly renewed. Fourthly, they rest in their beds,
even every one that walks before the Lord, and are delivered from seeing the
evil to come.

But seeing the wicked are delivered from troubles as Object.
well as the godly, out of many judgments, what privilege is this?

First, the wicked are often temporally delivered as Answ. 1.
well as the godly, but a sting is left behind, so as deliverance Difference
between the deliverances of the godly, and the wicked, in three things.
is a blessing in it self, but not to them, whereas the godlies deliverance is
a true blessing both in it self, and unto them.

Secondly, God delivers either as a Creator, or as a Father. As a Creator and
preserver of things created, he 2
preserues the wicked from some present evil, to reserve them to a greater
mischief. Thus are the Devils preserved by God, and reserved to final
judgment; only the wicked have offer of grace, which the Devils have not. But
as a Father, he delivers his children, who often delivers his own by
correction, taking them away from evil which might corrupt them, so as if they
be not temporally delivered, they are delivered eternally. The godly by being
taken away by judgment, are freed from judgment, the wicked every way
preserved, or rather reserved unto judgment.

Thirdly, God delivers either by virtue of a promise, 3.
made and applied to the faithful, claymed and obtained by fasting, prayer,
and obedience, as Mordecai, Ester 4. 16. and Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 20. 3. or
else not by virtue of any promise, as the wicked, who have no promise, no
faith, and therefore no sound blessing. Thus we see the great difference
between the deliverance of the godly, and of the wicked, and as great comfort
in the one, which the other wants.

This serves to comfort the godly; in that the Lord sits Use 1.
upon the floods, and that to this purpose, to perform this gracious promise.
Isa. 42. 3. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the floods, that they shall not ouerflow thee. So Eliphas tells Job,
chap. 5. 19 In six troubles he will deliver thee, and in the seventh, evil
shall not come near thee; as if he had said, Though six and seven troubles
beset thee, yet the evil of them shall not come near thee. This presence of
God with his children, makes them glory in their troubles, as in a crown upon
their heads: and the Apostle Paul gloried, that he was more in affliction then
all the false teachers, 2. Cor. 11 and Heb. 11. 35. the Saints were in most
deadly trials, and would not be delivered (namely, upon unlawful conditions)
because they found God as good as his word.

Secondly, miserable men are they that withdraw their Use 2.
hearts from the Lord, and seek him not in his promises, nor in their prayers,
but trust to wind out themselves by other means: some make falsehood their
refuge, and some embrace the world and carnal means, and lean upon the arm
of flesh. These fly from their defense, wait upon lying vanities, and forsake
their own mercy, Ion. 2. 8. it is as if Noah for fear of the inundation should
have left the Arc, and flyed to the Mountains, which had been to have
thrown himself into the midst of the waters; and thus do they, that to avoid
troubles, fear, and fly their profession, and so Apostasy, and Idolatry, and
corruption drownes them. We must rather with the Church fly to the Rock, Psalm.
69. 2. Save me, O God, the waters are upon me, yea, I am come to the deep
waters: and then, being delivered, we must go back unto him, saying,
Salvation is the Lords, and Psalm. 124. 1. If the Lord had not been with us,
the waters must needs have drowned us when they rored upon us.

Thirdly, this serves to persuade every man to become godly, seeing this
privilege belongs only to such: there Use 3.
is no man but desires safety in danger, and yet no man but the godly man can
assure himself of safety therein. If then thou would have assurance of
this promise, thou must practice piety, in these seueralls:

First, become an humble person, repent and turn to How to be safe in dangers.
God, cry out of sin, sue daily for pardon, as for life and death, and then
let all the miseries in the world come haile-shot upon thee, thou shall be
safe. Only sin is as poison, cast into the Lords cup: God gives thee no
poison to drink, but that is of thy own tempering: pull the sting out of
these Scorpions, and the sight only will be dreadful, but the danger is past.

Secondly, as thou mournest for thy own, so for other men's sins. 2. Pet. 2.
7. God delivered just Lot, vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked.

Thirdly, get thy heart washed with the blood of Christ, be a true Israelite,
a true believer: for God is good to Israel, even to the pure of heart, Psalm.
73. 1. and Deliver Israel, O Lord.

Fourthly, get innocence and uprightness into thy life, to be able to say with
DAVID, Deliver me according to Psalm. 18. 24.
mine uprightness.

Fifthly, draw daily nearer unto God, and if God be with thee, or thou with
him, thou need not fear, though thou walk in the shadow of death, Psalm.
2^. 4. and do this three ways: first, get near him in thy affection, love
him in his Word and Image. Psalm. 91. 14. Because he has loved me, I will
deliver him and exalt him, that is, set him out of the reach of trouble.
Secondly, in obedience: I am thine, says DAVID, O save thy servant. Thirdly,
in thy confident prayer: so Psalm. 91. 9. For he said to the Lord, Thou art my
refuge.

VERSE. 7.
Thou art my secret place, thou preseruest me from trouble, thou compassest me
about with joyful deliverance. SELAH.
NOw follows a second use of this worthy doctrine of David, which concerns
affiance in God, when the heart can lay hold upon God, as David does here.
First, for the present time, Thou art my secret place. Secondly, for time to
come, Thou shall preserve me from trouble, and compass me about with joyful
deliverance.

Whether these be the words of David holding in his soul the sweet sense of
remission of sin, or whether it be a form of prayer, which the godly man,
coming unto God, does prefer in his presence, it is not material, but
howsoever, it is the speech of one assured of the pardon of his sins, and
from that assurance this confidence arises, to say, Thou art my secret place:
whence note, that

The Fountain of Gods protection, and our assurance of deliverance Doctr.
in trouble, is from the remission of sins. A man Assurance of deliverance in
trouble from remission of sins.
cannot say, Thou art my secret place, till he can say, Thou forgauest my
sin. Job 22. 21, to 25. Acquaint thy self, I pray thee, with God, and make
peace, and so shall thou have prosperity. If thou put away iniquity, the
Almighty shall be thy defense; when others are cast down, thou shall say, I
am lifted up, Psalm. 103. 3. The Prophet provoking his soul to praise the Lord
for all his benefits, reckons up the healing of all his infirmities, and the
redeeming of his life from the grave; but before all these he sets
forgiveness of sins, as the Leader and the cause of all the rest, thereby
showing, that all other of Gods mercies have their rise from hence, as from
their head and original.

First, sin lays open the sinner to all Gods wrath, and the curses of the
Law in this life, and the life to come: Reason 1.
it sets a man as a butt, against whom the Lord shoots all the arrows of his
displeasure: sin not remitted makes us enemies to God, and God to us, so as
we cannot expect any other but fruits of hatred. Exodus 32. 25. Israel having
worshipped the Calfe, was naked to Gods judgments, and having sinned a sin,
could not stand before the men of Ai, Josh. 7. 11, 12. Sin is transgression,
that is, a thrusting of us out of our way, and so from under Gods protection,
who has given his Angels charge over us, to keep us no longer then we are in
our way, Psalm. 91. 11.

Secondly, this is Gods covenant, who promising to put his Law into their
inward parts, and to write it in 2.
their hearts, and to become their God, and accept them for his people, he
gives the reason of all the former articles, because he would forgive their
iniquity, and remember their sins no more, Ier. 31. 33, 34. And indeed
euery-where we may observe how God begins all our good here. Ier. 32. 41.
First, he takes away the sins of his people, and then delights to do them
good, to watch over them, to build and to plant them. And Hos. 2. 17, 18 First,
the Lord takes their Baalim from his people, and then makes a covenant and
marries his Church unto himself; and then, to safeguard his Spouse, he makes
a league with the Beasts of the field, with the Fowls of heaven, and creeping
things; then will he break the Bow, and Sword, and battle out of the earth,
that they may sleep safely. While man kept covenant with God, he had dominion
over the Creatures; but rebelling against God by sin, the Creatures rebel
against him: and now God, making and renewing his covenant again with man
himself, renews also this clause of it concerning the Creatures, that they
shall be at peace, which is no other then a promise of protection.

Thirdly, confidence is a fruit of faith: for we must 3.
first believe God, to be our God, before we can be persuaded, that his mercy
and truth belongs to us: our ground for our confidence in outward mercies, and
deliverances, must be an assurance of his inward love, in which we may
glory, as Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? trust in God, he
is my God and my present help. And, Romans 8. 33. the Apostle laying this
ground, It is God that justifies, challenges with great confidence
principalities and powers, things present and things to come, and all creatures
as too weak and impotent to separate us from Christ.

Fourthly, what do the Scriptures else teach us, while 4.
euery-where they make the particulars of our comfort, fruits of this root? as
Luke 1. 74. Deliverance from all enemies proceeds from the release of the
punishment of sin. Our peace with God, boldness with him, access to the
Throne of grace, come from our justification by faith, Romans 5. 1. Peace at home
in our own souls, is a fruit of remission of sin, Luke 7. 7. Thy sins are
forgiven thee: Go in peace: Yea, our whole redemption from first to last, from
all enemies, spiritual and temporal, and all the fruits of sin, is called
by the name of remission of sin, Ephesians. 1. 7. and Col. 1. 14. and in the
entry of our Psalm we have showed, that all our blessedness is placed in
remission of sin.

But then it seems, that where men are not protected Object.
and delivered from danger, that their sins are not remitted.

This was the error of the Jews, that they thought those, on whom the Tower of
Siloam fell, greater sinners Answ.
then the rest, and those whose blood Herod mingled with the sacrifices. But
we must know, that the Lord does perform his promises of temporal
deliverances and benefits, not absolutely, but conditionally, so far as will
stand with his wisdom and glory, and the good and salvation of his own
children. Sometimes the Viper cannot hurt Paul, nor the Lions Daniel: but
again, sometimes they may be ouer-taken with dangers, and seem to be left in
them, but so, as first, they are sanctified to the former main ends; and
secondly, as they are good for them, all things falling out to the best to them
that love God. Neither may it be strange, that although remission of sin be
the ground of all deliverances, yet all that have remission of sin, have not
deliverance from temporal dangers, but some of the Saints are hewne asunder,
tempted, slain, burnt, hanged, and ignominiously put to death: For, as the
subjection of the creatures to us, depends upon our subjection to God, and
our peace with men, upon our keeping peace with God: so our subjection and
peace with God here, being only begun and imperfect, we must recover our
safety from the creatures, and peace with men, but in part and imperfectly.
But yet that which is wanting here, is recompensed with spiritual peace, even
here, as Ioh. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have affliction, but in me ye
shall have peace: and afterward with that peace that is everlasting.

First then, where God begins our safety, let us begin Use 1.
it, in laboring to feel our inward peace with God, which will quiet our
hearts in the assurance of Gods providence, and protection in outward things;
it will be an easy descent from the greater to the less. In the want of
outward things, say to thy self; God out of his love has given me his own
Son, and will he not give me all things with him? Shall he give me heaven,
and not earth? In the want of inward comforts say to thy soul, Why art thou
cast down, my soul? while I was yet an enemy and a sinner, God has
reconciled me by the death of his Son; how should he now cast me off being
reconciled? In bodily dangers, what a prop does this doctrine give us? Has my
Lord provided with so much cost, so great salvation for my soul? and will he
neglect to save and preserve my body? he that does the greater, will not he
do the less? In molestation by external adversaries; What? has my Lord and
head foiled the Devil for me, trodden Satan under my feet, and trampled upon
all spiritual enmities for me? and will he not beat back the endeavors and
unjust practices of my enemies? Shall I believe the greater, and not believe
the less?

Secondly, in receiving and enjoying outward benefits, Use 2.
labor to see them all to be the rivers and streams of this fountain; for
then they be sweet indeed: as the stream is then sweet, when the head and
fountain is so; but, if the Fountain be bitter or poisoned, so are the
streams. For first, they are no further mercies then they proceed from mercy,
and then they be mercies indeed as they are Nothing is a mercy, but what
proceeds from mercy.
called. Secondly, else we enjoy them by a broken title, if not by virtue of
the Covenant, and even those creatures are in a kind of bondage, from which
God frees them often by plucking them from unjust owners, as Hos. 2. 9.
Thirdly, else we distinguish not our selves from the wicked, scarce from the
beasts, who find and taste the sweetness of the creatures as we do, but not of
GOD in them. Natural men stay in the fruition and delight of the things
themselves, and can go no further, whereas, as the rivers lead us to the sea,
so ought we to be led by them to the mind of the Lord toward us in them.
Fourthly, those that delight themselves in the pleasures and delights of things
below, and want the pardon of sin, are as if a man should drink off a cup of
sweet poison with much delight, but presently or not long after, it works
deadly. Thy sin is poison, which thou castest into the cup that the Lord has
made to run over. Fifthly, a little gift with love and good will, is more
acceptable then a great deal with strife and grudging. If a man can see Gods
love and good will toward him in Christ, he will be content with a little,
thankful for a little, cheerful with a little; and his portion, though very
small, will be very precious. Sixthly, if assurance of remission of sins
gives us such joy in trouble and affliction, that the Saints can rejoice in
tribulation, Romans 5. 3. how will it rejoice the heart in the fruition of Gods
mercies? Oh then, how ought we to labor earnestly by the eye of faith to
discern the beams of Gods love and favor, chasing away the cloud of our
sins, without which all our comforts are but bitter and unsavory?

Thirdly, hence gather the privilege of Gods children, to whom remission of
sins is sealed up, which is, to be Use 3.
secure either from perils or in perils: For first, once in Gods Covenant, and
ever safe: for the covenant is unchangeable as God himself is, an everlasting
covenant, Isai. 55. 3. Secondly, their afflictions are not punishments of
sin, but either trials or loving corrections, the sting of them is gone.
Thirdly, whereas the wicked, whose sin is not pardoned, are haunted and vexed
with terrors, and fear where no fear is: a godly man is as bold as a Lion,
yea in the presence and sense of danger. Job 5. 22. Thou shall not be afraid
of destruction when it comes, but shall laugh at destruction and death: For
the stones shall be at league with thee, and the beasts, etc. Who would not be
exempted from danger, or fearelesse in danger, as seeing his own safety?
Surely the way is to get the Lords loving countenance up upon us, and then we
shall be safe, Psalm. 80. 3. 7, 19.

Thou art my secret place.]
THe Prophet borrows a comparison from living creatures, who, being in danger
or in chase or pursuit, have their hiding places to defend themselves in: the
Lion has his den, the Fox his hole, the Conie his burrow, and the Godly man
has his asyle or refuge; Difference between the hiding place of the godly
man, and of other creatures.
but with this difference: First, the beasts have their dens and caves in the
earth, wherein they hide themselves, but the godly has his hiding or secret
place in heaven. Secondly, they may be fetched and hunted out of their hiding
places, and be destroyed for all them: but so cannot the godly who make God
their secret place, seeing none is able to, pluck them out of his hands who is
stronger then all. Hence we may note, that

The Lord is the hiding place of the godly in trouble Doctr. God himself is
the godly man's hiding place.
and danger. As a man in a storm or shower seeks shelter, so in the storms
of the Church and Commonwealth, in which the enemies thunder and roar, and
seem to mingle all into one confusion, then the Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, and the righteous fly unto it. Psalm. 27. 5. In the time of trouble he
has hid me. Psalm. 91. 1. The godly is said to dwell in the secret of the most
High.

How is the Lord the hiding place of the godly? Quest.


First, by his promise: Secondly, by his protection. Answ.


First, his promise covers and compasses his Elect, under which they are as
safe as in a town of war. Psalm. 119. 114. Thou art my shield, I trust in thy
Word. Many How God is so.
were the plots, which David's enemies impugned him withal, but his only
armor, by which he defended himself, was the Word of God, and he makes the
Lord his shield, by trusting in his Word. Exodus 14. 13. When Moses and the
Israclites were compassed with Sea, Mountains, and Enemies, how were they hid
and covered with the promise only? Stand still, fear not, and behold the
salvation of the Lord. Judge. 7. 2. Gedeon appointed with three hundred men to
go against the Midianites and Amalekites, who lay in the valley like
Grasshoppers for multitude, and their Camels without number, as the sands of the
Sea, says the Text: What could he expect but to be eaten up presently? but
having a word that God would deliver him, he was as safe as any of those whom
he had sent from the war; God being his shield, he was secure. When Athaliah
had put to death all the seed of Ahaziah, only Ioash his son escaped, and
was hid in the house of the Lord six years; GOD had a chamber of providence to
keep him safe, when there wanted no means, nor diligence in Athaliah to find
him. But whence was this safety? even from the Word and promise of the Lord:
2. Chron. 23. 3. Behold, the Kings Son must reign, as the Lord has said of
the sons of DAVID, that he should never want a man to sit upon his Throne
after him: According to that; Psalm. 91. 4. His faithfulness and truth shall
be thy shield and buckler.

Secondly, God hides his children by his protection, which is the
accomplishment of his Word: this protection of God is called his wings, which
is a borrowed speech from Birds, which by their wings keep their young ones
both from injury of weather, and from the ravenous Hawks and birds of prey;
that look as the Hen gathers her chicken under her wings, so the Lord will
cover his own under his wing, that is, under his protection, as Psalm. 91. 4.
He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust.
And this wing of God is represented by the wings of the Cherubins, extended
over the Arc: these are the wings of grace and mercy, under which David
desires to be hid, Psalm. 17 8. It is also called Gods shield and buckler,
because, as under a shield or buckler the body is hid and covered from the
blows and deadly thrusts of the enemy, so the godly are hereby wholly
protected from dangers.

This is a great comfort for Gods children, who have Use 1.
such a hiding place as that God himself vouchsafes to provide for their
safety, who is stronger then all, and most faithful; The Lord needs fear no
tyrant, to expose his children to their rage, as Moses his parents, who durst
not hide him above three months: And for his faithfulness, he never failed
them that run under his wing. David calls him the salvation of all them that
trust in him, from such as resist his right hand. A man without God, is a bird
without a nest, and a beast hunted without a den, liable to any danger that
comes: but great is the comfort of the godly, who know whither to go to be hid,
both from the strife of tongues, Job 5. 21. and from the violence of tyrants.

Secondly, we learn hence how to behave our selves Use 2.
in troubles; namely, to hide our selves in heaven, as the poor beasts do
hide themselves in earth.

May we not hide our selves in earth, by using the Quest.
means of safety? Did not David hide himself in Woods, in Caves, Holes and
Rocks? 1. Sam. 22. 1, 5. and 23. 5, 6. 14.

Yes, neither must we neglect any good means of our Answ.
own safety, yet we must trust in none of them, but in Gods blessing, who must
watch us, and hide us, or else all comes to nothing. Well knew David how little
help there was in any thing to hide him, unless he had with the same, Gods wing
to cover him. The strong City of Keilah 1. Sam. 23. 11, 12.
could not hide or defend him, and therefore the Lord warned him to come out of
it, and himself became a shield and brazen wall unto him. The vaste and
solitary wilderness of Maon could not hide and secure him, there Saul and his
Soldiers had compassed him, only the Lord hid him, and turned his pursuers
another way. For this purpose the Lord often brings his children into the
streits, that they may run under his wing: for those, who at no time else
will seek him, will then seek to him as Pharaoh himself. He knows it is
with the godly, as with a Note.
beast in the field, which is safer in a storm, then in the fairest seasons;
the storm drives him to his den, and the hunter to the clefts of the Rock,
but, that being blown over, he comes forth and is in danger of taking: So the
godly in trouble draws into his secret place, and so long as danger continues,
so long he cleaues to God; but after danger he lies open to Satan, his own
corrupt lusts, and other snares, as we may see in David himself, who in the
wilderness and his flight before Saul and Absalom, lay not so open to temptation
as in his Palace. God often imprisons and streytens his, that they may be more
wary in their enlargement.

But how may we make God our hiding place? Quest.


First, by faith, leaning upon the promises: For what Answ. 1.
good can all the promises of God do, being not mingled How to make God our
hiding place.
and tempred with faith? Ps. 119. 49. Remember thy promise made unto thy
servant, wherein thou have caused me to trust. Habac. 2. 4. The vision shall
come, in the mean time the just shall live by faith, which in times of danger
fenceth, and compasses them with all the promises of God; whereas unbelief
lays a man open to judgments, debarred Moses of Canaan, and struck Zachary
dumb: the greatest dishonor to God, is, not to rely on his Word: and the
Prince that believed not in the Word of the Lord, was trodden to death, 2. King.
7. 19, 20.

Secondly, cover thy self under the wing of God by 2.
the practice of repentance: for the way to escape judgment, is to judge our
selves. Ezekiel. 9. 4. When Jerusalem was to be destroyed, they that mourn and
sigh for all the abominations thereof, must be first marked for deliverance.
And, can an enemy of God, an impenitent sinner have the face, or any hope to
go to God for safety and hiding?

Thirdly, hide thy self with GOD by prayer, and in 3.
extraordinary danger by fasting, which exercises both faith and repentance:
thus our Prophet often prays the Lord to keep him as the apple of his eye,
and to save him under his wing. 2. Chron. 20. 12. Iehoshaphat thus hid
himself, There is no strength in us (says he) to stand before this great
multitude, neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are toward thee; and
being in this hold, he had strength enough from enemies, who slew one another,
and had no use of his own. Hezekiah likewise against Sennacherib had recourse
to this hiding place, he put on sackcloth, went into the house of the Lord,
and spread open the letter before him; and the Angel of the Lord in one night
slew an hundred, fourscore, and five thousand. The Ninevites seeing the storm
approaching in the threat, Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed, did
fly to this shelter: for high and low, man and beast did humble themselves in
sackcloth and fasting, and they cried mightily to the Lord, and he was
entreated.

But how shall I know, that God will be my hiding Quest.
place?

By these notes: Answ.


First, that in the Text, if thou have got assurance of the 1. How to know that
God is our hiding place.
pardon of sin. David, by long travel having got this assurance, breaks out
into these words, Thou art my secret place. This assurance must be gotten by
confessing and forsaking sin, and such a man is a blessed man: Prou. 28. 13.
Adam, so long as he would hide his sin, could get no thicket thick enough to
hide him; the way to remove judgments, is to remove our sins. Hear thou
of a judgment, or see thou an approaching danger? meet the Lord with sorrow
of heart, and with humility of soul, and his wrath shall be appeased, and his
fury turned away. David's wrath, when he was strongly resolved to kill and
slay, was by Abigails humble and dutiful submission appeased. Esaus fury,
being resolved to slay his brother, was turned away by Iaacobs seven times
humbling himself before him; much more will the Father of mercies, in whom is
no passion.

Secondly, if thou trust in the Word of God: for man lives by every word of
God, and then thou can not 2.
seek to any other shelter, thou can use no unlawful shifts, and wicked
means to accomplish thy desires. Every man says, He trusts in God: but that
is only a vain blast: for, whereas the first thing our Prophet does, is to
go to God, many men look to be hid every where else first of all: and at
last, when all means forsake and fail them, they would come to God. First,
they fly to the wedge of gold, and say; Thou art my hope. Secondly, or else
lie hid in humane strength, and the arm of flesh, as the Prophet says, Some
put their trust in Charets, and some in Horses. David had gold, men, strength,
and Towns of war, but yet the Lord was his hiding place; he knew how vain
it was to hide himself under the wings of wealth, that with those wings would
fly away, and leave him in the suds. Thirdly, some run to Idols, Images,
Saints, the Cross or Holy Water, all which drive them from their hiding place.
Fourthly, others in strange visitations and dangers run to hell, and to the
devil to hide themselves: this is a common sin, to consult more with one
Witch, then all the Ministers in a Country. And now, when none of these can
do a man good, he must come to God, as Pharaoh, when none of his Princes or
Sorcerers could help him, then came to Moses and Aaron: but he that did thus
deceitfully hide him, the Lord hid and covered him and his Army under water.

Thirdly, thou must be a member of the Church, Psalm. 27. 4. David desired one
thing, even to dwell in the 3.
House of God, and then he is sure God will hide him in the secret place of his
pauillion. Assemble thy self with the Saints, frequent the public places of
Gods worship; every Master will protect a good servant in his service, and
especially while he is under his eye, and much more will the Lord: but when a
man will get him out of Gods sight, then is he numbered to the sword, to the
beasts, and to destruction: Ier. 15. 2, 3.

Fourthly, thou must cleave unto God in the love and 4.
obedience of his truth. The promise is, he will keep thee in thy ways.
Israel being out of his way, and having made a Calfe, was naked; but before
that, the Lord as a cover hid them. How can they make account of safety in
danger, who to hide themselves from persecution of the Gospel, leave it upon
the plain field? Oh, say they, I love the Gospel, and desire to give
obedience to it: but I was afraid of my name, of my liberty, of dishonor.

What? were dangers toward? and must thou therefore Folly of many in danger,
who run from their hiding places.
depart from thy secret place? one would think thou should rather have run
unto it. Must thou needs run out of doors, because a storm or tempest is
coming? the filly unreasonable creatures can teach thee more wit then so: why,
thou runnest from under his wing, who would have kept thee safe. Will thou save
thy life, by flying from Christ, who is the way and the life? will thou avoid
the sword of man by an evil conscience, which is a sharper sword within thy
bowels, striking through, and pearsing thine own soul? Will thou avoid the
flames of natural fire, by kindling the fire of Gods wrath against thee, yea,
the flames of hell within thee?

How do the deceitful bewitchings of this world at this day, wind into men
professing the Gospel? who to sit in the warm Sun, dare not to be seen
with Christ by day, but like Owls and Bats and hateful birds, cast themselves
into the night, and wilhold such a course of Religion, as that they seem none
of the forwardest; would feign speak for good men, so as none might hear
them; would willingly supply their wants, and help their wrongs, were it not
for fear of hearing that voice, which would strike them to the heart, Surely
thou art one of them.

Fifthly, thou must be a sincere-hearted Christian, and carry thy self
uprightly: He that walks uprightly, 5.
walks safely: uprightness is a breast plate, which hides the chief parts
from danger. Noah was an upright man in his generations, and the Lord shut him
in the Arc. Lot was a just man, vexed with the unclean conversation of the
wicked, and the Lord pulled him out of Sodom, and hid him in Zoar, the Angel
could do nothing till he was gone. Uprightness hides a man's self and others
for his sake, he may glory in the power and truth of God in extremest perils.

Thou shall preserve me from trouble.]
DAVID'S confidence confines not it self within the time present, but is such,
as that he can lean upon God for afterward.

How came David to be so confident for future time? Quest. Answ.


He had experience of Gods mercy in the pardon of sin, and drawing him out of
former deepes (as the Psalm shows) and therefore he resolves thus for time
to come: whence note, that

Experience is a notable Mistres, and the surest teacher Doct.
of affiance for time to come: experience of God will Experience the best
teacher.
carry the heart through such trials, as flesh can never buckle withal. 1.
Sam. 17. 36. When David was to encounter with Goliath, and Saul told him he was
but a boy, he reasoned and builded his victory upon the former experience of
God, saying, Thy servant in his keeping of sheep, slew a Lion and a Bear, and
so shall it be with this Philistim: Psalm. 23. 10. Doubtless I shall dwell a
long time in the house of God. How comes David to this conclusion? In the
former verses he had said, The Lord had bin his Shepherd, had fed him, spread
his cloth, filled his cup, comforted him, and so lays one experience to
another, till he come to this godly persuasion.

The same does the Apostle Paul, 2. Tim. 4. 17, 18. He has delivered me out of
the mouth of the Lion, and he will deliver me from every evil way: Romans 5. 3.
Experience brings hope, and hope makes not ashamed. For as a poor man, having
often borrowed money of a rich man, and having found him free and cheerful
formerly, has good hope and much boldness, that he will still afford the
same favor in the like case: even so the poor Christian, having found much
supply many times, of wisdom, strength, deliverance, persuades himself of
the same for time to come.

First, God is honored when his Word is acknowledged Reas. 1.
true in it self; but this the devils themselves believe: but by experience
we find it true to us, and can set our seal to God and his Word, which is
not only a great honor to God, but also to our selves.

Secondly, Faith in a bare word without experience, 2.
does much strengthen and comfort the heart possessing it, as when Abraham did
receive the first promise of a son by Sarah, he relied upon it, and doubted
not of the accomplishment: but when in temptation and particular troubles, we
have particular proofs of Gods truth in accomplishments, it will be a strong
anchor to hold us fast, that we be not carried away with violent winds and
waves of temptation: as Abraham, after experience of Gods power, in quickening
Sarahs dead womb, and remembering his promise 30. years after he had uttered
it, when no man almost could have expected it, seeing the whole course of
nature was set against him, he could easily and readily overcome himself in
that difficult trial of offering his son at Gods commandment; and the
reason was, because former experiences persuaded him, that he should rather
receive him from the dead, then Gods word should not be fulfilled.

Thirdly, no marvel if experience be such a teacher of affiance in God, seeing
it finds more sweetness by much 3.
in the performance of promises, then can be conceived in holding the promises
themselves, as a man that has possession of an inheritance, which he held
long only in reuersion, by experience of those supplies and comforts he now
has, tastes much more sweetness, then he could possibly conceive while it
was his only by entaile and expectation.

Fourthly, the work of experience even in civil things, is of great use, and
no less in divine: First, to make us 4.
bold with God, as men are with an experienced friend. Secondly, to quell those
distrustful fears, which distract us: a fresh water soldier is afraid of
every crack of a Gun, and thinks sure it will cost him his life: but a
soldier experienced, is fearelesse and more valorous. Thirdly, to quiet the
heart in Gods absence and desertion, waiting his approach again. Suppose a man
put into the world, as Adam was, if he should see the Sun set, he would
think it quite lost, but experience teaches, that it will rise the day
following; and therefore we are content, when it is set, and wait the rising
of it: so is it here between God and a Christian soul.

What makes us content our selves in winter, when we see all things dead and
withered? if such an uncomfortable time should continue ever, it would break
the hearts of men: but we know that Summer will return, and then all things
will spring again, and this cheeres us up: so in the winter of temptation, we
may think we shall never see God again, but for all that, his grace and
spirit shall come and shine again to us, it shall never absent it self for
ever.

Alas! I have had many experiences of God, and yet I Object.
feel many grudgings of despair, I cannot wait, I am too short-spirited, I
cannot come to this affiance by them.

Never had any man experience of Gods former love, but he also sometimes had
assured hope and confidence Answ.
in God, but

First, never had any man faith at all times alike, which shows, that it is
no natural faculty, which is ordinarily uniform, but supernatural, given in
such degrees as it pleases God, and so as place may be left for correction and
trial of his children.

Secondly, sense of weakness in a sound Christian is a means of strength,
provoking a man both to humble himself before God in prayer, as also to depend
upon Gods strength.

Thirdly, Gods favor in this life is annexed with trouble, as the Sun is
ouer-cast with clouds, and the Moon with specks, yet, as the Sun shall at
length disperse those clouds, and show his light and strength, so shall the
light of Gods countenance shine upon his people in such brightness, at length,
as they shall out-grow all these clouds and ouer-casts, which hindered their
comfort.

The way then to attain affiance and sure confidence Use.
in God, being to get experience of his goodness unto us, we must take pains
in this duty, so fruitful and comfortable.

But how shall I come to have experience of God? Quest.


Know, that to experience there go three things; first, Answ.
Knowledge. Secondly, Observation. Thirdly, Memory. Three things concurring to
make up experience: 1. Knowledge.


First, Knowledge; you must know God as he has revealed himself in his Word
and Works; this is the ground of experience, and, the more a man knows God,
the more he will trust in him, as Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name, will
trust in thee. The better knowledge, the better affiance. Special grounds to
be known for Christian experience.


Now the special grounds of this experience, to be known, are these: first,
that God is the same, without change or shadow of change; what he ever was, he
is still; true, just, merciful. Secondly, that his covenant is the same, being
an everlasting covenant, and the records of that covenant are for ever the same
and truth it self: Heaven and earth may pass away, but one jot of the Word
cannot. Thirdly, that his children being ever as dear unto him as ever they
were, he does always maintain their cause: for he were not righteous, if
he did not ever love and maintain righteous persons, and dealing. Fourthly,
that sin being ever hateful unto him, he destroys it at length, and,
because he never favors wicked men, he confounds all their plots and
attempts undertaken against him, or his.

Secondly, another means of experience of God, is Observation of the ways of
God: as first, the works of 2. Observation.
his power, and these we shall see as far above Satan's power, as infinite is
above finite; and again, so far from being hindered by our weakness, as it
is perfected thereby, 2. Cor. 12. 9. Secondly, the works of his wisdom, who
knows how to deliver the just out of temptation, 2. Pet. 2. 9. Thirdly, of his
love and mercy, being as willing as able to help his children, whose grace is
sufficient not only it self, but also for them, 2. Cor. 12. 9. He is most
present in their greatest need, a very present help in trouble. Fourthly, of
the gracious ends and issues, he has ever given to the trials of his
servants, not only for his own promise sake, but also for thy experience.
Consider, says Eliphaz, who ever perished being innocent.

This observation or consideration, whereby things are pondered in the heart,
being neglected or slightly used, experience of God must needs be wanting; as
there can be no harvest, where the seed sown rots in the earth, and comes to
nothing: therefore, the Apostle exhorts, That we be not leaking vessels, to
let things run out as fast as they come in.

Thirdly, another means of experience, is the Remembrance 3. Memory.
of such works of God, as we have known and observed: the Philosopher says,
that experience is multiplex memoria, a multiplied memory, because, of the
memory of the same thing often done, arises experience, and many memories of
the same thing, is but one experience. Now, this remembrance includes these
things: first, a committing to memory such things as wherein God most
expresses himself. Secondly, a retayning of them in memory as in a
storehouse. Thirdly, a recalling of them to mind upon occasion offered.
Fourthly, an applying to our own special uses and occasions.

This is the way therefore, which he must take, that would become fearelesse
in future troubles, and to have his heart established against all evil tidings.

First, to get the knowledge of God in the covenant, to be assured of his
favor and love in the pardon of sin, which may be known by the fruits of
repentance, in confessing and forsaking sin, and by love of God in his Word,
in his Image, in his Saints and graces.

Secondly, to grow up in the observation of Gods working with himself, and his
people, to observe his own increase of grace, the supply of comfort, the
return of his prayers, the issues and deliverances he has had out of
troubles and dangers. Alas! what a staff and strength cast they out of their
hands, who heedlesly pass by Gods gracious dealing with them? whereby, not
only God is deprived of his glory, and of the praise due to his mercy for the
present, but themselves also for time to come of much comfort and confidence,
which is as small as their observation is.

Thirdly, to lay up in our memory the things which may bestead us, that we may
have them at hand, and for our best use: And this we shall do.

First, if we have a care of good things, and a right estimation Helps of
memory.
of them. Men remember the things they care for, no man forgets where he hides
his money. Psalm. 119. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my
soul keep them.

Secondly, if we affect them as things of reckoning, as Psalm. 119. 16. I
delighted in thy statutes, therefore I did not forget them. But if men judge
not aright of the things of God, or prefer in their judgments and affections
baser things, this breeds sensuality, which made a whole world of people forget
in Noah's time, that which so nearly concerned them.

Thirdly, if we use continual helps, as hearing of the Word, which is a
continual monitor unto us; godly conference, which is as a whet-stone of
grace; meditation, whereby we hold things as our own, and not by force and
compulsion. These be as the Law written, ever before the eyes of the Jews, or
as the frindges of their garments, to put them in mind of his statutes.

Lastly, use prayer, by which we keep in that, which we would else cast up
again: this is as vinegar, the smell of which keeps down that which would
rise in the stomach: And again, prayer obtaynes the Spirit, whose sole office
it is to bring things into our remembrance, Ioh. 14. 26.

By these means we may store up plenty of experiences, and by every
experience we ought to draw nearer unto God, and grow more familiar with him,
more bold and confident.

We want no motives hereunto: For first, experience Motives to get experience
of God.
of Gods favor is the greatest gain of a Christian, and ought to be most
desired, Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 4. 7. as the loss
of the sense of Gods good will, is his greatest loss. Nothing troubled the
prodigal Son so much as the offense of his Father, he would have been glad
to have eaten with Pigs, he weighed his misery with his prosperity; his
sorrows were great, but all the pains he sustained, was nothing to the
vnreuerent using of his Father, who was not only kind to his children, but to
his hyrelings that lacked nothing. Cant. 5. 7. The Spouse having lost the sense
of Christ, cried and traveled to seek him, was robbed, beaten, and misvsed by
the way, and her life was in great danger by confessing him among his enemies;
yet all this is nothing, she must have Christ, she cared not for the loss of
her goods and apparel, nor her danger, she will not give over till she have
himself.

Secondly, experience of Gods love will make a man bold in good causes, even to
the death, whereas the wicked fear, where no fear is; for they can have no
affiance in God. Whence it is, that one good man in a good cause, wherein he is
assured God stands by him, is able to withstand and confound a number, who
are not able to withstand the terror of their own conscience, which witnesses
them to be enemies of God, as our Savior himself, Ioh. 18. 6. struck not a
blow, but only modestly answered his enemies, and asked them whom they sought:
and they all fell prostrate to the ground. So in Gods children: Genesis 43. When
Joseph spoke most kindly to his brethren, and told them he was their brother,
there was such a terror and fear in their consciences for wronging him, that
they were not able to answer him a word. The godly are bold as Lions, but the
wicked as fearful as Hares; they can laugh and sing in the extreme suffering
of that, which the other are aghast, and shrink to think of.

Thirdly, he that gets not a sense and experience of Gods favor here, shall
have experience of his wrath and justice hereafter.

Thou shall preserve me from trouble.]
TRoubles are either of soul or body, outward or inward, spiritual or
temporal: this word includes all, according to that, Psalm. 34. 19. Great are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers, or preserues them from
all.

Gods preservation is to be considered in respect of the First, means: so it is
either Secondly, manner. Mediate, or, Immediate.


Immediate preservation is by himself alone, when no hand of man or Angel can
reach to help, and so he preserved the Israelites in the Sea. Mediate is, when
mediately by his Angels, or by men, or other means he preserves his people,
as Moses was by Pharaohs daughter, and those in the ship by plankes and boords,
Act. 27. 44.

In respect of the manner, preservation is either secret or manifest. Manifest,
when he mightily preserues men in the sight of others, for the confirmation of
the faithful and confusion of their enemies, as the three fellows of Daniel
in the furnace, and Daniel himself in the den of Lions. Secret and spiritual,
by which he eternally delivers from all trouble those, who manifestly seem
to perish, as the Martyrs, who seemed left in their enemies hand, the body is
slain, but the soul is preserved, and sent to a better life: here is a
secret, spiritual, and eternal preservation: these are in occulto coronati:
Augustine. According to which grounds, our Prophet is bold to declare his
confidence in God, being fully assured, that the Lord, of whom he had so good
experience, would in all troubles make some way for him, and either by himself
or some other means, vouchsafe either a secret, or a manifest deliverance.

But seeing none are more troubled then the faithful, Quest.
and none indeed less preserved from troubles, how can David, or any other
believer so confidently utter this?

It is true, none are more troubled then Gods children: Answ.
for first, there is a perpetual enmity between the serpent and his seed,
against the woman, that is, the Why none are more troubled then the godly.
Church and her seed: and if there be hope, that the devil, and the wicked
may grow kind to the godly, there may be more hope of less trouble.

Secondly, the word of truth has said, In the world ye shall have
tribulation: and, The world shall laugh, but you shall weep.

Thirdly, the way to heaven is strait and narrow and troublesome, because of
the crosses it is strewed withal.

Fourthly, experience has concluded, that all that will live godly in Christ,
must suffer persecution; wherein they are conformable to Christ their head, who
by the cross went to the crown.

Fifthly, the blessing of sound peace and joy is promised and bestowed only
upon them that mourn.

But this is not the meaning of the text, that they should be so preserved from
trouble (which David was never without) as trouble should never come near
them, or afflict them, but, as the word in the original signifies, Thou shall
save me from the straitness, or in the distresses of trouble. Note, that

The godly shall not be exempted from trouble, but Doctr.
preserved from it, that is, kept in it, and happily led Godly not exempted
from trouble, but preserved in it.
out of it. For David himself, notwithstanding his confidence here, said,
Certainly, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul, 1. Sam. 27. 1. And when
he asked God, if he had forgot to be merciful, did he see any way to escape
death and danger? So as his resolution here is this, that though the godly be
in never so deep distress, they perish not, but are preserved in the strait,
they are raised out of this depth of misery: and this stablisheth the heart
with confidence, as the words following intimate, Thou shall compass me with
songs of deliverance.

This doctrine and phrase is expressed and confirmed by other places of
Scripture: Psalm. 4. 1. Thou have set me at liberty, when I was in distress:
implying, that he was in a strait, and as it were strongly besieged with
enemies or dangers, but the Lord enlarged him, and so preserved him: Psalm. 25.
15. He will bring my feet out of the net: the godly may be in as great danger,
as a silly bird in a net: but the Lord will break the net, that the bird may
escape, Psalm. 1 24. 7. 2. Cor. 1. 10. who delivered us from so great a death,
and does deliver us, in whom we trust, that he will hereafter deliver us.

First, Gods care of his children, though it free them not Reas. 1.
from the exercise of troubles, yet leaves them not till he have delivered
them. Can a mother forget her child? she may let it get a knock, and fear it
with the sense of some danger, but leave it in danger, she cannot. And who be
they toward, whom the Lord thinks thoughts of peace, or, to whom he will
remember mercy, but vessels of mercy? Once have I heard (says David) yea
twice, that mercy belongs to God, Psalm. 72. 11. And therefore it is so true, as
it can never be false; once, yea, twice, that is, once by the Scriptures, and
another time by the holy Ghost.

Secondly, Gods promise is, that he will not suffer his 2.
to be tempted above that they are able to bear, and therefore at length they
find him, as David says, Psalm. 73. 2. My feet were almost gone: but not
altogether: the man of God may slip and slide, and much ado to keep his
feet, but at worst, his feet are but almost gone, and this comes from Gods
promise.

Thirdly, Gods providence limiteth the times, in which his Church shall suffer,
and no longer; sometimes 3.
a longer time, as Israel in Egypt four hundred years; sometimes shorter,
seventy years in the Babylonish captivity; sometimes shorter then so, Ye
shall suffer tribulation for ten days, Revel. 2. 10. Sometimes three days, as
Jonas in the Whales belly, and Christ in the grave; sometimes but one night,
Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning; and sometimes
there is but an hour for the power of darkness; then Gods time is come, and
the godly see the salvation of the Lord.

Fourthly, he preserues them in their troubles by his 4
presence, first, of power, and so a fourth like the Son of God, was in the
furnace with the three children: and it is said, I will be with thee in six
troubles, and in seven, in fire and water. Secondly, of grace, his right hand
is under their heads, gives them grace sufficient, proportions their strength
to the burden, mitigates their sorrow, makes them possess their souls in
patience, yea, rejoice in sorrow, which else would sink them, and at length
recompenseth their light affliction with an eternal weight of glory.

But sometimes the godly are not preserved, but made Object.
meat for the sword, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter, they die of
the plague, and are slain in battle as well as others.

Consider the Church either in the whole, or in the Answ.
parts: First, the Church for the body of it is ever preserved, How the Church
is ever preserved in trouble, yea from trouble.
as in all ages may appear, the case being with it, as in a military
condition, wherein, although some soldiers be wounded and slain, as the
Martyrs, and other godly persons, yet the Church carries the victory out of
the field, and is preserved: the Church for the body of it, is ever the
conquering part; for Michael and his Angels must overthrow the Dragon and his
angels.

Secondly, the particular members are often slain, and seem not preserved, as
Steven, and James, whom Herod slew, Peter, Paul, etc. yet they are, first,
preserved by that secret and spiritual preservation. Secondly, sin and
corruption, which is always present with us, makes our preservation to be but
imperfect. Thirdly, God turns the corporal destruction of his Saints to the
best, so as Heb. 11. 35. They would not be delivered, because they looked for a
better resurrection.

This serves to comfort the godly in their troubles, that they shall be
preserved in them and from them, the gates of hell shall not prevail against
them. First, Satan the Red Dragon may create them trouble, so that they shall
want no molestation that he can procure them; but he cannot hinder their
deliverance, nor without leave hinder their peace, no nor touch an hair of
their head. Secondly, the wicked of the world will see they want no trials or
vexation, but on the contrary GOD will see they shall not want seasonable
deliverance: for Psalm. 37. 8. he will not leave him in his hand: and although
such is their imbred malice, that they would never take off their rods from the
backs of godly men, yet God will not suffer the rod of the ungodly always to
lie on the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125. 3. Thirdly, their own sins beset
them hard, and so dismay them, as though they should never get freedom: and
this is the strongest band of all, which tyeth them to trouble, and all other
troubles were but a play, so that the heart were persuaded of the pardon of
sin (as the Saints in sickness of conscience can confess:) but sin shall
slay the ungodly; as for the righteous, the promise is, Psalm. 34. 24. Though
they fall, they are not cast off; not that their sin does not deserve they
should, but because the Lord puts under his hand, and renews his grace to
raise them to repentance.

Secondly, this may teach us not to condemn the state Use 2.
of Gods children when they are in trouble: For, either in darkness they see
light, when God stablisheth their hearts with inward peace or patience, or
supplyeth strength, or lightneth their burden so as they can cheerfully carry
it: or at least with Job, after darkness they see light. If in Winter, when we
see the heavens black, the clouds bent to storms and tempests, winds
roaring, waters raging, the earth covered with frosts, and cold and snow, and
barrenness or deadness, were it not madness to say that there would never be
any summer again? that the young springing corn, covered with such stormy and
winterly weather, and lying buried under the cloddes, should never revive
again, and grow up to the harvest? or that the frost-bitten roots, and
blasted blades should never spring forth to flower or seed? No man is so mad,
Summers fruits not condemned for Winters storms.
as to condemn summers fruits, because of the winters storms and barrenness.
This present life is the winter of Gods children, wherein the seeds of grace
lie hid and covered under the clods of heavy afflictions, disgraces, and a
number of trials: shall we now condemn and curse the life of Gods people
here, and their summer fruits to come in the harvest, because the fruits of
grace, and the glory of their resurrection are covered and hid under
persecution affliction, and trials?

Wherein we meet not only with the general misconceit of ungodly men, but even
of the godly themselves, who sometime with David think their own estate most
unfortunate, and are ready to slip, to see and compare the wickeds outward
prosperity and happiness with their own unhappiness and apparent misery,
whereas the Sanctuary tells them of the end of both, and so quieteth their
hearts.

Thirdly, this serves to teach the godly their duty: Use 3.


First, to set before them in their trials these three things: First, the
commandment of God: Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble.
Secondly, the promise, And I will deliver thee. Thirdly, the accomplishment of
it, or the experience of others, who have found Gods assistance in trouble: as,
Psalm. 22. 4. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver
them.

Secondly, in the deepest of troubles wait for Gods preservation, and know that
though he come not of a long time, yet at length he that shall come, will
come, and willnot tarry. In this expectation beware of haste, and of evil
means, and trust when thou see no means, yea, and against means, as Job
did, saying, If the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him. The style of the
godly, is, to be brands plucked out of the fire, Zech. 3. 2. Is not this a
brand taken out of the fire? which shows, that the godly may be cast upon the
coals, yea into the fire an unmerciful creature, and may be smeared and
scorched, yea, in part burnt and consumed; but at length the Lord in extremity
wi^ snatch them out of the fire and preserve them, as a man will catch speedily
at that which he would have burnt.

Thou shall compass me about with Songs of Deliverance.]
IN these words the Prophet David rises up by a gradation, and goes beyond
that that he had formerly said concerning his confidence in God. First, he had
said that God was his hiding place. Secondly, that he would preserve him in
trouble: and now thirdly, that the Lord would make him joyful, and to triumph
over his troubles and enemies, by compassing him in stead of troubles with
mercies.

In the words are two things to be considered: First, the matter of David's
assurance, namely, Songs of Deliverance: Secondly, the measure, Thou shall
compass me about.

First, Songs of Deliverance.] This implies the matter of these songs, and that
is Gods help and deliverance, which when the Lord affords, then there is
matter of singing and setting forth that mercy: for a song beseemes him that
rejoices with great joy, the which ought always to attend our praises.

Secondly, to be compassed with Songs of Deliuerance] is, not to have one or
two, or a few occasions or deliverances to sing praises to God for, but
abundant, yea innumerable causes to praise and magnify God, so as a man can
look no way round about him, but he shall see many and infinite mercies, and
so many songs and praises, every new mercy, being a new matter of a new song
of Deliverance. For look as when a man has endured an heavy, dark, and
uncomfortable night, the morning approaches, and light begins to appear, not
in any one side of the heavens, but on every side, that let a man look where
he will, the light compasses him, and it grows lighter and lighter until
perfect day: So, although Gods children seem to be in darkness and in the
night of affliction, yet GOD affords some deliverance, and brings the joyful
morning, and then they see the light of comfort on all sides, and can say, Now
they are compassed with light and salvation. So as the thing, which our Prophet
here professes, is: First, that the Lord would afford him matter enough to
frame and compile holy songs of joyful praise and thanks. Secondly, that this
matter should be so plentiful and abundant, that nothing should on any side be
about him, but that whence he ought to provoke himself to return joyful
thanks, he should be begirt with blessings and mercy.

Hence in the first place we may learn, that

As God has appointed times of sorrow and straitness for Doct. 10
his children, so also of rejoicing and comfort. This whole Times of joy
succeed times of sorrow to godly men.
Psalm teaches it, in the beginning of which how was David dejected? What an
intolerable burden of sin complains he of? how were his bones dried and
broken? how did his moisture dry up as in the drought of Summer? how did he
roar night and day under the heavy hand of God? and all this misery pressed
him a long time together: But now toward the end of the Psalm his confidence
supporteth him, his joy comes again, his comfort not only returns, but also
in such abundance, as he sees himself compassed with Songs of Deliverance.

Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, (spoken of the
Church returning out of captivity;) they went weeping and carried precious
seed, but they shall return with joy, and bring their sheaues. Psalm. 30. 5.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. As certain
as is the vicissitude and change of darkness and light, evening and morning,
so certain shall the changes of the godly be, their darkness shall be turned
into light. Eccl. 3. 1, 4. To all things there is an appointed time: a time to
weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance. All times
are limited by God to the faithful; but first for sorrow, and then for joy.
Exodus 15. 27. As it was with Israel in their journey through the wilderness,
so is it with Gods people in this world. After they had gone through many
barren and dry places, then they came to Elim, where were twelve fountains of
water, and seventy Palme-trees, the Lord at length brings them to a pleasant
station: So the Lord has appointed after labor, a time of rest; after
heaviness, a time of joy; he brings his children from Marah to Elim, Numb.
33. 9. from a place of bitterness, to springs of water.

First, because God is not always angry with his children, Reason. 1.
neither does he delight in punishing, his anger is but for a moment, and for
a little while he forsakes, but the end is with everlasting mercy to have
compassion on them, Isai. 54. 8. True it is that he punishes and corrects
sin in his deadliest enemies, and in his dearest children, but all this as a
just and righteous Judge, and as forced to it, not as a tyrant that punishes,
with affection, desire, and delight.

Secondly, the troubles of Gods children are overcome 2.
already by Christ, who has carried the heavy burden of them, and has left
only the cross for them to bear, so as they cannot still lie upon them. For
if even the troubles, which Gods chosen are exercised withal here, were
everlasting, and there were no time of release appointed by God, they would be
out of measure ponderous and weighty: but this makes them easy among other
considerations, that, if they be heavy, they are but short, and (as the
Apostle says) but momentanie.

Thirdly, the use of afflictions and sorrows of the godly is, but for a time
to exercise their faith, and patience, and therefore cannot be perpetual;
for, when the try all is over, the burden must be removed. The time of
Winter is bitter and barren, and cold, through frosts and storms; but, besides
that it is profitable for the earth and plants, to kill weeds and worms, and
to mellow and rot the ground, it is a forerunner of a pleasant Spring, and a
fruitful harvest: Such is the state of the godly often here, Christ the Sun
of righteousness sometimes departs further off, and leaves the believer in a
wintrous estate, laid open to many storms and sad showers; but, besides that
all this winter prepares the soil, and kills the weeds and vermin of the
soul, it goes before an happy spring and harvest, which will bring in fruits
of righteousness to those that are exercised. Ioh. 16. 22. I go away for a
while and ye shall be sorrowful: but I will come again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy shall none take away.

Fourthly, the promise of God must stand firm, who 4.
has promised blessedness to them that now mourn for sin: Math. 5. 4. for
they must be comforted: therefore there is a time appointed wherein mourners
shall be comforted. Prou. 24. 16. The just man falls seven times a day, that
is, into distress and trouble; but rises again. The state of the godly in
the sea of this world, is like the Sea Euripus, that ebbes and flows seven
times a day; it ebbes no oftener then it flows again: so the godly have as
many comforts as sorrows.

And most full of truth and assured comfort is the promise made by Christ to
his Disciples, Ioh. 16. 20. Ye shall indeed sorrow, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy: It had been a great comfort, if Christ had only promised,
that their sorrow should be mitigated, and more, to have said it should be
shortly ended: but to say it shall be turned into joy, ministers abundant
consolation and strength in the patient expecting of so happy a change.

Hence is it, that the sorrows of the godly are often compared to the sorrows
of a woman in travel, as Isa. 26. 17. Like as a woman with child being near
her time, is in Sorrows of the godly like the sorrow of a woman in travel why?
sorrow, and cries in her pains; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. Ier.
6. 24. Sorrow is come upon us, as upon a woman in travel. And the sorrows of
the godly are like these sorrows.

First, in bitterness and sharpness. Secondly, in the utility and profit of
them, both tending to a birth. Thirdly, it is not without hope of deliverance,
and in every hope there is some joy and comfort in the midst of sorrows, mixed
with them. Fourthly, in the travel of a woman there is not only an expectation
of an end of that sorrow, but also of the fruit of it, which is the joyful
fruit of the womb. Fifthly, there is a certain time set both for the one and
the other: All which our Savior clearly confirms, Ioh. 16. 21. A woman,
when she brings forth, has sorrow because her hour is come; but when she is
delivered, she remembers not the sorrow, for joy that a man-child is borne: So
you are now in sorrow, but your hearts shall rejoice: so as there is a time set
by God not only to finish the sorrows of the godly, but also to turn them
unto joy, as the winter not only ends, but is turned to Summer.

Fifthly, there must be some difference of the sorrows 5.
of the godly from the wickeds, as there is in their persons and estates; and
this is the difference, that they sorrow without mixture of joy, or hope or
expectation of deliverance by any promise, no time is set for their
deliverance: nay, all their light must be darkened, their sun must set and
never rise more, and they left in an everlasting night: but the godly sorrow
quite contrariwise.

Isa. 27. 7, 8, 9. Has he smitten him as he smote those that smote him? Or
is he slain according to the slaughter of them that were slain by him, etc?
Here the Prophet shows great differences between Gods afflicting hand
Difference between Gods smiting of his children, and his enemies.
upon his people, and upon his enemies and theirs: and the difference is,

First, in the measure: on the one but drops, on the other a sea of wrath: One
drink a cup, the other draw a vial of his displeasure: has he smitten him
as he smote those that smote him?

Secondly, in Gods intention: his intendement in afflicting the godly, is to
lop off their superfluous boughs: In the branches thereof will thou contend
with it? He says not, with the root of it: But he quite stocks up the root
of the ungodly. In the one he intends purgation, by taking off fruitless
boughs and branches, Ioh. 15. 2. in the other he intends punishment, and to
overthrow them with his rough wind in the day of his East wind.

Thirdly, in the issue and fruit of them. By this shall all the iniquity of
IAACOB be purged, and this is all the fruit, the taking away of his sin. In
the one the sin only, in the other the person is destroyed. The Lord
therefore does not so punish the members of his Church, either as the enemies
of the Church would punish it, or as himself punishes them: As for example.
The Devils, the greatest enemies of the Church, are punished without hope of
all mercy, no time of deliverance is set for them; but the Church is assured
of a good and joyful end. The Egyptians were terrible enemies to the Church;
did God ever smite his Church as he smote them? though it was long under their
oppression, yet it had a promise of deliverance, a time set for it, and a
joyful departure, when all Egypt was lasht with that terrible whip of ten
cords, and drowned and destroyed in the Sea by Gods immediate hand.

Here is then first of all a notable ground of patience in Use I.
sorrows, God has set the time how long they shall last, and shall not
exceed the appointed time: yea, he has not only set a time of duration, but
also of exchanging thy sorrows into joy. Art thou in any trouble, or under any
molestation of Satan or wicked men, under reproach, scandal, hatred,
persecution, etc? nubecula est, transibit; it is a storm too violent to last
long; nay, it shall be changed into a calm, into a fair and comfortable
season. Suppose thou be in the night of disgrace, blacked and darkened by wicked
ones, as David was; suppose thou have things laid to thy charge, that thou
never knew, and art forced to repay that which thou never tookest: yet wait
still the good time; after thou have endured a little scouring, all the soil
will tend to thy brightness, and the time comes, that God will make thy
innocence to break out as the light.

Art thou sick in thy soul, or pained in thy body, and see no way but
present death? wait the time, and thou shall meet not only with perfect
cure, but perfect health also: only see thou make Christ thy Physician. God
had appointed a time of Abraham's trial for three days: but the third day
turned his sorrow into joy, in which he had the comfort, both of his son, and
his own obedience. Jonas had his appointed time of sorrow in the belly of
hell, in the bottom of the Sea, when he was cast out of sight: but at the end
of three days he was cast on the dry ground, and his sorrows and fears were
turned into joy and praises. The thief on the Cross was even in the hands of
death, his pains and sorrows increasing, as he felt his life decreasing: how
did our blessed Savior comfort him, and support him with patience, but with
this assurance, that the end was coming, and a time appointed, which should
instantly turn that shame and sorrow into glory and joy? This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Lazarus was not only in the hands, but in the house of
death four days, yet a time was appointed, even the fourth day, wherein the
bands of death were to be loosed, and he restored to his former life. And thus
shall it be with all the Disciples of Christ, whose troubles shall not last
always: the longest they can last, is but for this life, and while they do
last, they have the comfort of both those petitions of Christ: first, that the
Father would keep them in the world, and secondly, that after they be safely
passed through the world, and the troubles and disgrace of it, they may be
where himself is, to behold his glory, John 17. 15, 24.

Secondly, in all troubles, learn to judge and measure Use 2.
thy self by this doctrine, not according to thy present feeling and comfort,
which faith does not always minister: for that may be where there is no feeling.
Look out at the end, and at that time which shall change thy state, and give
thee the fruit of this sorrowful seedetime. Should an Husbandman measure
himself by his seede-time, what is there but labor and loss? but, when he
considers, that without a seede-time, he shall never see harvest, and the
more liberally he sowes, the more abundantly he shall reapc, he is well
contented to so we in all weathers: So if the godly could consider, that their
sorrow shall not only end in joy, but that their joy must rise out of sorrow,
they would cheerfully sow even in tears, for the hope of a joyful harvest.
How do men out of their sorrows disquiet and vex themselves, and think
themselves cast off, whereas out of the quantity and quality, the measure and
manner of their sorrow, springs their truest joy?

Again, in the manner of David's speech, saying, that the Lord would compass
him, not with mercies, but songs:

Note what the godly man must do in the times and Doct. 2.
occasions of joy, and in receiving deliverances and comforts Songs of praise
beseem seasons of joy.
from God, namely break out into songs or speeches of thankful praises. Thus
David professes elsewhere, being delivered from danger, Psalm. 40. 3. He has
put into my mouth a new song of praise: he never received a new mercy into his
hand, but withal a new Song into his mouth: Psalm. 66. 20. Praised be the Lord,
which has not put back my prayer nor hid his mercy from me: I called upon him
with my mouth, and he was exalted with my tongue. It was the practice of the
Church, after her deliverance from Pharaoh, to compile a Song of praise: Exodus
15. and of Deborah, Judge. 5. 1, 2. and of Jonah, chap. 2. 9. I will sacrifice
unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving.

First, this is the return that God looks for of all his Reas. 1.
benefits, and is all that we can give him for all, and, as it is as much as we
can do, so it is as little as we can do: yea, it is the condition, upon which
he promises mercies, Ps. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I
will hear thee, and thou shall praise me. Which the godly know so well, as in
craving mercies, they express this condition, and bind themselves the surer
unto it, as Psalm. 51. 14. Deliver me from blood, O Lord, and my tongue shall
sing joyfully to thy righteousness. Hence sprung all those holy vows of the
Saints, as of Iaakob, Genesis 28. 20, 21. and that of David, which he would
perform in the midst of the people: Psalm. 116. 14. This is the end why God
delivers us, the end of his mercies, and therefore is better then the
deliverance.

Secondly, it is a good thing to praise the Lord, Psalm. 92. 1. and it well
becomes the just to be thankful, 2.
Psalm. 33. 1. for first, hereby the Lord shall have his due, which is a part of
justice. He is content that we have the good of his creatures, but he reserues
the praise of them to himself still. He is content we should have the comfort
of them, only with this reservation, that the glory of them be his still.
Secondly, it is good for us: for all the benefit of our thanks comes to our
selves, seeing by it we both retain the old, and inuit new mercies.

Thirdly, it is impossible for such, as have truly tasted Gods mercies, but to
speak of it; sense of mercy in the 3.
heart will untie the tongue, fire will not be kept close, but will break
forth. And here is a plain difference between the godly and the wicked. They
rejoice in the Lord for his mercy, whereas the most that these can do, is to
rejoice in the mercy, not in the Lord, as a false friend that delights more in
the gift of his friend, then in the giver.

Fourthly, the godly know, that God does require, not only the heart to
acknowledge him, but the tongue as 4.
well as that, whereby we do not only praise God our selves, but also excite
and stir up others to the same. And then a man's tongue is his glory, when it
can readily glorify God, and this sometimes by bare voice and speech, and
sometimes by singing out his praises, as in this place. Nay, the whole man
which is so continual a receiver, is little enough to manifest the praise of
the giver: and because the mercies of God follow all the life of man, the whole
life and conversation ought to be framed to the glorifying of God, and to
express our thankfulness.

Fifthly, unthankfulness for mercies received, vnbeseemes a reasonable man,
much more a Christian man. 5.
The unreasonable creatures acknowledge their Masters, Feeders and Benefactors,
as the Ox and the Ass: nay, the senseless earth yields all her burden to the
tillers of it, Heb. 6. 7. and the trees and plants all their fruit to the
Gardner that trims them. Yea, this sin of unthankfulness leads a man to
idolatry, makes him sacrifice to his own net, and ascribe things to his own
power, wisdom and industry, thrusting God out of sight, and out of mind. It
provoke God to take away even his temporal favors, as Hos. 2. 9, 10. When
Israel said, verse. 12. of his Corn, Wool, and Oil, These are my rewards that
my Lovers have given me: the Lord answered in displeasure, I will take away my
Corn and Wool, etc. And at length the wicked servant that does not traffic
with his Lords talent, for his Masters advantage, has not only his talent
taken away, but himself cast into utter darkness.

Let us therefore take heed we deprive not the Lord Use 1.
of this part of his honor, but provoke our selves to thankfulness for so
great mercies: Let no mercy slip us without thankful acknowledgement. And to
this purpose use these means:

First, learn to acknowledge Gods goodness to thy self with particular
application, as David says here, 1. Means and helps to thankfulness.
Thou shall compass me with songs of deliverance. Not only confess his
goodness to others, as to Abraham, Isaac, Iaakob, nor only his deliverances of
Noah, Daniel, Lot, but also his mercies to and deliverances of thy self, as
Paul did, Christ gave himself for me, and dyed for me. This will exceedingly
whet up thankfulness, whereas only to acknowledge God good in himself or to
others, and not to thy self, will make thee murmr and repine.

Secondly, set before thee the number of Gods mercies, 2.
and muster them sometimes, and take a view of them, or, because they are
numberless, and so large as they reach up to heaven, survey them in their
heads, temporal and spiritual, positive and privative, public, private, and
personal, either continued or renewed according to thy several necessities;
and so, seeing thy self compassed with mercies, thy songs and praises may be
in the same measure, as David takes it up for his practice. As he is compassed
with mercies, so with songs of deliverance: and thou likewise, as the mercies
thou receiuest are innumerable, ought to renew thy songs and praises.

Thirdly, highly prize them according to their goodness, 3.
Psalm. 116. 12. 13. David valuing and weighing Gods mercies toward him, enters
first into a deliberation what he might render to the Lord, and finding that
the Lord was beyond all that he could recompense, in the second place he
sets upon this determination, that when he could find nothing else, he
would take the cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

And we shall much the better prize them, if, first, we How to prize Gods
mercies.
consider our misery without these mercies, even the least we enjoy. Common
mercies are commonly neglected or vnprized, because they be so ordinary: the
Sun, the Air, Meat and Drink, are common and continual mercies; how
miserable were our life without any of them?

Secondly, our unworthiness of the least, Genesis 32. 9. I am less then the
least of thy mercies, says Iaakob. Nay, seeing we have forfeited all and
deserved all the curses of the Law, it is Gods mercy that we are not consumed,
and a further and more liberal mercy to renew mercy: but

Thirdly, especially if we can receive them as louetokens and pledges of
further grace, sealing up unto us the Covenant, and that spiritual Marriage
between Christ and us. A small token from a dear friend, but especially of a
Lover to his Spouse, is therefore most welcome, because it assures of the
marriage and further fellowship.

Fourthly, if we consider the greatness, the excellency, the justice, the
wisdom, the power, and the mercy of all Gods works, especially of his
mercies: that a piece of bread should feed, not choke us, is from this
greatness of power, wisdom, and mercy.

Fifthly, another means to become thankful, is, to remember his mercies, and
not let them slip from us, Psalm. 103. 2. My soul, praise the Lord, and forget
not all his benefits: and our Savior Christ, Ioh. 5. 14. says, Thou art made
whole, go sin no more: as if he had said, Keep this blessing in memory,
and let it ever provoke thee to thankfulness.

Now the way to recall into our memory Gods mercies, Means to recall Gods
mercies into memory.
is, first, by occasion of every renewed mercy, to look back to the former,
and account it as an addition to the other. Tradesmen make a day-booke for
daily receipts, and by occasion of one, often look back upon others: it were
neither unnecessary nor unprofitable, to have such a day-booke to write up our
receipts from God; assuredly it would much help our slipperie memories, which
we are loath to trust in civil matters, and help the Lord sometime to his due.
Therefore write and register the noble acts of the Lord, Psalm. 102. 18.

Secondly, if we set special marks upon them, and raise some monument or
other of them in the heart. Many ways in the old Testament did the godly help
their memory, and keep in mind the special favors received of God:
sometimes by compiling holy Psalms, which are preserved in the Church, for the
preserving of Gods mercies in memory, as David wrote many, and the faithful
sang praises for their deliverance out of the Red Sea, Exodus 15. 1. 2.
sometimes by setting up stones, as in Gilgal where the waters of Jordan were
divided for the passage of the Israelites: sometimes by erecting Altars, as the
Patriarchs did in those places where God specially appeared unto them, and
vouchsafed them a gracious presence: sometimes by imposing new names or
changing the old, as Abram into Abraham, and Iaakob into Israel: so Genesis 22.
14. Abraham called the place where he received a Ram, to sacrifice in stead of
Isaac, Iehouah-ijreh, the Lord will see or provide. All these things were done
either by commandment or inspiration from God, that the mercies of God might
not be forgot, but might be declared from Parents to Children, and so might be
continued in mind with all the Ages of the World.

Secondly, this serves to reprove the carelessness of Use 2.
men in this duty, few return with the Leper to praise God: and Christ is
feign to ask, Where are the other nine? Naaman would give Elisha a reward when
he was cured, but the reward which men return to the Lord, shows they be not
yet cured from their sinful leprosy. How do men swallow the mercies of
God, as the Swine do mast, not looking up to the tree, scarce blessing their
meat? How do we vnder-prize them, and the commonnesse of mercies lets us not
see the worth of them? as the precious Word of life, to say of it as they did,
Oh this Mannah, we see nothing but this Mannah: and so concerning our days of
peace, Oh it was better (say some) when we had Wars: the more Fools we, that
know not how to use our peace, and testify so great unthankfulness for so
great a mercy. The Saints of the primitive Church knew better how to use their
peace, Act. 9. 31. that Church had rest, and they were edified and walked in
the fear of the Lord, and multiplied in the comfort of the holy Ghost.

How lamentably do men abuse their wits, their strength and health to
drunkenness, surfeiting, and uncleanness? their wealth and calling to
injustice, coozenage, covetousness? their meat and drink to riot and excess,
as though the Lord required no other return, or would require no other
reckoning?

How do men forget the great mercies of God, both common and private? We have
forgot the wonderful deliverance from those bitter and bloody times of Queen
Mary: we have forgot the happy government of Queen Elizabeth, and the blessed
proceedings of the Gospel therein: we have forgot the miraculous ouer-throw of
the invincible Navy in the year 88. we have forgot the peaceable entrance of
His Majesty, when we had cause to fear the days which many hoped for: we
have forgot the fifth of November, the strangest deliverance that ever God
bestowed on any Nation, from the bloody, fiery, and hellish plot of the
Papists, by gunpowder: we have forgot our freedom from the plague, which
wasted thousands and ten thousands in our streets. And no marvel, if we forget
mercies past, when blessings present are not remembered: We forget that God has
created us reasonable creatures, that he has given us wisdom in our souls,
proportion and strength in our bodies: We forget that wonderful redemption
wrought by Christ, which no creature was able to devise, and the Angels desire
to pry into; a redemption far more glorious and victorious then that over
Pharaoh, out of Egypt: We forget our day of visitation, our time and talents
that our Master has given us to traffic withal.

Oh, but we cannot forget these things. Object.


Yes, we can and do, as the Israelites were no sooner Answ.
gotten out of the Wilderness but incontinently they for gate Gods wondrous
works, Psalm. 106. 13. what works were those? First, their preservation in
Egypt, and increasing against Pharaohs power or policy. Secondly, their
deliverance at the Red Sea. Thirdly, the mighty miracles, by which he
preserved them, in their Clothes, Shoes, and Mannah.

Why? how could they forget these, at least so soon? Object.
they could discourse of them long after.

We are said to forget Gods works: first, when we Answ.
set not our minds on them, as Isa. 57. 11. Thou have not remembered me, nor
set thy mind thereon: and Deuter 32. 2. Remember the days of thy youth and
consider: they knew and sometimes did remember, that such things had been
done, but they did not set their minds on them, nor consider, for what purpose
God had done all this. Secondly, we are said to forget Gods works, when,
though we hold them in our understanding and memory, yet our practice shows
we remember them not, when our lives and courses are not answerable to his
mercies, as, when Israel left the true worship of God and sought to Idols, it
is said that they forgate God. Do we walk as redeemed from vain
conversation? Do we improve our day of visitation according to the light and
means that we have? Do we traffic with our talent to our Masters advantage
and not our own? These things while we may be convinced of, we are also
convinced of forgetting God, not only in things past, but in present also.

Oh let us take heed, and break off this sin by repentance, Motives to
thankfulness.
and express more dutiful thankfulness toward God, and consider: first,
how the Lord prizeth thanks and praise above all sacrifice, as Psalm. 50. 13.
Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? offer unto God
praise and pay thy vows: and Psalm. 69. 30. 31 I will praise the name of the
Lord with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving: This shall please
the Lord better then an Ox or a Bullock.

Secondly, consider what an intolerable hypocrisy it is, to be more earnest
Suitors for mercies, than thankefully Acknowledgers of mercies received.

Thirdly, consider we how God preuents us with mercy, and is first in
goodness, and free in bounty, which would make us think upon some return,
as the Saints have done before us.

Fourthly, acquaint we our selves with the life of Heaven, and hereby begin
life eternal, which when the Saints were deprived of, how did they lament
their estates? Psalm. 84.

Fifthly, must we praise God for evil, and for affliction, and for taking
away? and not for good, and for giving? Job 1.

Now further, this duty of thanksgiving being so great a service, as that it
is sometimes put for all the worship of God, it shall not be amiss to enter
into our selves in particular, by a more narrow view of our selves, to take
better notice of our estate, both by judging our selves in the things we fail
in, and by provoking our selves with more cheerfulness to so holy a duty.

Many ways have we erred: first, in not doing the duty at all. Many fail in
not doing this duty.


Secondly, in doing it. First, in not doing the duty many stray many ways, as

First, how few of us take notice of Gods mercies, Enemies to thankfulness.
with which he compasses us, when (as we say) we cannot see Wood for Trees,
being beset with numberless 1. Carelesnes.
mercies, and yet see none or as good as not, and therefore cannot to any
purpose open our mouths in thanksgiving further then in general terms,
slubbering over the duty, as having the heart upon every thing else? How few
consider, how being dead in sin they are begotten to the life of God, how of
Enemies they be become Friends, how they have part in the first resurrection in
grace, and assured hope of the second to glory? How many sins are there,
which God has not let them know? How many, of which he has let us know the
pardon? How has he kept us from diseases? How restored us out of sickness?
How vvardeth he us all the day long, feeds us, and leads us in our going in
and out? How carries he us in his arms, saues us from danger, and maintaynes
our peace of soul and body, our health and reputation? How keeps he us and
ours every night, and refreshes us with sleep? For he gives sleep to his
beloved, draws our curten, watches over our houses from fire, from robbers,
and from ruin, and every morning, yea every moment, renews mercy upon us.

These things while we take no notice of, we must needs fail in this duty:
for were there thankfulness, it would smother no mercies, but now (...) is
with us as with children, whose eaten bread is quickly forgotten.

Secondly, Numbers of men count basely of, and eleuate Gods mercies, and then
there can be no thanksgiving: 2. Slight regard.
So much as a man esteems a gift, so much he is thankful for it; neither is
it having of things, but having them in estimation, which breeds
thankfulness, Numbers 11. 6. The Israelites having Mannah, thought basely of
it, and were so far from giving thanks for it, as they murmured and said,
We see nothing but this Man: and so men speak at this day of the spiritual
Mannah, the Word of God.

We think it an ordinary thing to dispatch our ordinary business, as a
journey or the like, and esteem not of Gods success and blessing upon it, as
Abraham's servant did, Genesis 24. 27. saying, Blessed be the Lord God of my
Master; I being in the way, the Lord led me to the house of my Masters
Brethren.

We think it a slight thing to be carried day by day through our way, and
not to be surprised by Satan or temptation; but David otherwise esteemed of
it, as 1. Sam. 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thy counsel, and
blessed be thou that have kept me from doing this thing.

We count it no great matter to be drawn out of weakness or sickness of
body: Oh it is but an ordinary thing; whereas, if we did esteem rightly of
it, with the Leper we would glorify God with a loud voice. We think it a
common thing, and never prize the benefit to be fed and clothed every day, to
be able to enjoy these creatures to our life, health, and strength: whereas, if
a man bid us to supper or meat once in a year, or quarter, we will then
thank him, and after meeting him again, thank him for our kind welcome, or
check our selves if we forget it, and will be ashamed to make no neighbourly
requital: but God gets not so much thanks for his continual spreading of our
Table, and furnishing it, and filling of our Cups daily, as a man does for one
meals meat, as though GOD were more bound to us then a man, or we less
bound to him then a man to his Neighbor.

And when men have thus undervalued Gods blessings while they have them from
him, how justly does he deprive them of them, till they know the price and
worth of them, and in their restraint make them enjoy a small thing more
thankefully and comfortably, then when their plenty hindered them from being
dainty? Hunger were good sauce, and would give relish and taste to courser
things then men now contemn.

Thirdly, others are discontented with their estate, 3. Coffeehouse.
and then can never be thankful; Oh, God gives them not what, and when, or
how much they would have, or, others have more then they, or, they deserve more
then they have or, their troubles are above the favors they have; and thus
they enjoy nothing either thankefully, or comfortably. But alas! First, how
little do we see what unprofitable servants we are, when we have done all
we can? Luc. 17. 10. and how we deserve nothing but stripes, like Whelps under
the Table of our Lord, not deserving the crummes? Secondly, how do we harp
upon our wants more then our receipts, so to deprive God of his glory, and our
selves of comfort? as Ahab was unthankful for a whole Kingdom, and sick
because he wanted Naboths Vineyard. Thirdly, how do we rather repine at that
which others have, then consider what is our own need? as if a bitter medecin
were not as good in season as the sweetest dainties. Fourthly, how do we cast
our eyes only on that, which God can give, and not upon that he has given,
or we can receive? Fifthly, how do we gnabble upon the shell, which is the
gift, and neglect the meat, which is the goodness of the Giver, which were it
once tasted in the soul, would be thought sweeter then life, and would make
it break forth into praises?

Fourthly, others pervert and blaspheme Gods mercies, and in stead of
thankfulness load him with wicked 4. Abuse of mercies.
and ungracious behavior. Some have received gifts and talents of learning and
knowledge; but in stead of employing them to his praise, they either hide them
in a Napkin, and do no good as the unprofitable servant, Matthew. 25. 25. living
as drones and unprofitable burdens in the Church and Commonwealth, and as
corrupt trees, fruitless themselves, and keeping the ground barren: or else
they do much hurt with their learning, opposing the truth and goodness and
good men, defending corruptions, maintaining corrupt opinions, and making
bridges to Popery or profaneness: or else they corrupt others by making filthy
Poems, and such like. Some have received wealth and a large estate of earthly
things; some honors, favor, and authority; of whom GOD may look for more
because they have received more: But how for mercies return they rebellion in
all their lives, and dissoluteness in their whole course? How pervert they
authority to injustice, wrong, oppression? How do they by means of their
wealth swell in pride, and arm themselves to contentions, to contempt of
inferiors, equals, and betters, and to tumble in all voluptuousness and
lusts, so strengthening themselves against God? Some blaspheme GOD in his
goodness, in stead of thanks, as the Israelites did, Deuteronomy. 1. 27. saying,
Because the Lord hated us, he brought us out of Egypt, to destroy us: What
could be greater blasphemy then this? yet this is our horrible sin also, to
receive good things of God and repay evil.

Secondly, as many of us fail in doing the duty: Others fail in doing it.


First, when we can use some common terms of thankfulness, as many can
thank God for all, but first, without all affection beseeming the duty, there
is no hearty acknowledgement nor glad entertainment of the mercy, we are
far from these Songs of deliverance, we tell not of Gods goodness as David
did, Psalm. 66. 14. Come and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my
soul; and as Moses told Iethro what God had done for them, Exodus 18. 8. If a
friend should do us a kindness, we would rejoice in it, and tell others what
such a one has done for us, and according to our joy in it, would our care be
to testify thankfulness, and our sorrow and accusing of our selves to be
backward herein.

Secondly, without all action, as though we would pay all our debt to God with
good words, whereas soundness of thankfulness is seen in actions, and the
life of the duty is not in a sound of words, but in the carriage of the life
and course: David did love the Lord, because he had heard him, Ps. 116. 1.
Every new mercy is a new testimony of Gods love, and a new spur of our
love to God, as David (in the same place) would pay his vows to God, which he
made in affliction: to set forth Gods praise, he would keep his judgments and
do righteously always, Psalm. 106. 3. see Psalm 111. 1. 2. to the 10.

This is that, which GOD requires of his people, when he has given them the
good land and accomplished all his promises, that they should not forget him,
but fear him and walk in his ways, Deuteronomy. 6. 10. 11. If a Landlord should
come to demand his Rent, and the Tenant think to please him with good words,
but neither pay him his due nor regard any of the conditions of his Lease,
agreed upon, should not he both deceive himself and cause the Lord to
re-enter for not paying? Would God we were so wise to acknowledge, that the
Lord looks for another manner of Rent then words, and that, as we will not
let Leases go for not paying of Rent to man, so we would give the Lord no
just cause to strain upon us and all that we have, for breaking our
conditions with him! To him that does us a great pleasure, we profess our
selves in his debt, and acknowledge our selves at his command to the uttermost
of our power: Oh let us blush and be ashamed to be so superficial in actual
and substantial thankfulness toward our God!

Secondly, a number make show of many thanks, but all is in pride and
hypocrisy, and can thank God for that they never had, and much less the
sense of it. The Pharise praised God for that he never had, Luc. 18. 11. Oh he
was never so bad as the Publica^, no Extortioner, nor an unjust person like
others. Civil men will thank God they do no man harm, come to Church, live
in compass and good fashion: they thank God they believe as well as the best,
without all doubting, they be good subjects, and they love God with all their
hearts: Here is a Pharise justifying himself, but he goes not away so, he
departs not justified. But the poor Leper fell down humbly on his face at
Christ's feet, praising God, and the Publican at the Church-doore: Iaakob is
less then the least of Gods mercies, and Abraham before God is but dust and
ashes.

The Papists make show of thanks to God for their salvation, which yet they
can merit for themselves: all one as to thank God for nothing; for they must
come to Heaven by their own good deeds, and what needs then the mercy of
God? Some of our ignorant people thank God they can serve God and say their
Prayers as well as any: but what Prayers? the ten Commandments, and Creed,
the Aue-Mary: A Popish thanksgiving, when there is not a word of prayer in
them all.

Thirdly, even the best of us are infinitely wanting in this duty, when we
set our selves to the best performance of it, as appears by these things.

First, in our praises we cast our eye chiefly on temporal Failings in our
best performance of this duty.
things, and are more feeling and fervent in our praises for them, then for
spiritual mercies: we dote too much upon them as the Israelites did, Numb.
11. 5. saying, We remember the Fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the
Cucumbers, Leekes, Onyons, and Garlic that we had there: but now our souls
are dried away, and there is nothing but this Mannah: Whereas the Apostle
counted all things but doung for Christ and in comparison of spiritual
blessings, wherewith he begins his praises, Phil. 3. 5. and Ephesians. 1. 3.
Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things: and so he goes on in this Argument as one that cannot get out of it.
We had cause of comfort in our affections, if we could forget the things that
are below, in comparison of heavenly blessings.

Secondly, how partial are we in our thanksgiving? for a great blessing we
can give some thanks, but those that we count smaller, we pass slightly,
whereas, were our eyes so clear as they ought, we could not but see God in
the least of them. Besides, we can sometime give thanks for a present mercy
with some affection, but we forget eaten bread; whereas Solomon gave thanks
as well for the promise made to David, as the accomplishment of it to himself,
2. Chron. 6. 10. but the great works of GODS mercy are to us but nine days
wonder.

Further, whereas we are bound to thankfulness even for those mercies, which
GOD having promised has in store for us, how do we confine our thoughts to
the present, not looking beyond the day to provoke our selves to this duty?
David goes further, and says, Oh how great good things have thou laid up in
store for them that fear thee! especially, seeing they are such as eye has
not seen, nor ear has heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to
conceive.

3. When we set our selves to be thankful, how slight, how short are we in
this duty and part of Gods worship? we can in the gross and lump turn over
a great heap of mercies, not willing to trouble our selves with the particular
recounting of favors, which would be a special help to the duty. Iaakob
far otherwise, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy, says he, of the least of all
the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou have showed unto thy servant: for
with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands.

And to conclude, how little are our hearts stirred to thanksgiving under
crosses and afflictions? whereas our Commandment is, In all things give
thanks, even 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
in crosses and losses. We can receive good from God, but no evil; whereas our
duty is with Job to bless God as well in taking away as in giving.

Thus seeing how far we are from our duty, let us judge our selves, and
take our selves tardie in the slips, and amend what we have failed in, and for
time to come so frame this duty to this Doctrine, as God may have his praise,
and we his mercies continued to us and ours.

There is yet remaining a third point of Doctrine, namely, that the matter of
the godly man's songs, and joy Doct. 3.
must be spiritual and heavenly: as here, the ditty of David's The matter of the
godly man's songs must be spiritual.
songs are Gods deliverances and praises of God for deliverances: And this his
practice elsewhere. Psalm. 22. 25. My praise shall be of thee in the great
Congregation. Psalm. 59. 16. 17. I will sing of thy power and praise thy mercy:
see the place. Psalm. 57. 8. I will sing unto thee among the Nations. And in
respect of this argument of all his Psalms, David is called the sweet Singer
of Israel, 2. Sam. 23. 1.

First, the Commandment enioyneth us this, Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking unto your
selves in Psalms and Hymns Reasons. 1.
and spiritual songs: therefore our songs must be spiritual: first, for
matter not profane. Secondly, they must proceed from Gods spirit as the
Author of them. Thirdly, they must be framed with honest and gracious words,
beseeming the Spirit.

Fourthly, to a spiritual end, which is, first, Gods glory: and secondly, our
own and others edification. And in the same place it follows: Singing and
making melody in your heart to the Lord, ever looking and referring your
Psalms to God, as the right object of them and our joy. Col. 3. 16. 17. there
is required, first, that our songs come from the Word dwelling plentifully in
our hearts. Secondly, that they be spiritual, for the former causes. Thirdly,
that they be to the Lord, that is, first, before the Lord. Secondly, to his
praise, as Ver. 17. Whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the
name of the LORD JESUS, giving thanks to God and the Father, by him: and Psalm.
37. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord.

Secondly, the godly ought ever to give testimony 2.
of that heavenly joy, which delights their souls, and which is a fruit of
the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. seeing they profess to be led by the spirit; and by
this they notably incite themselves, and inuit others to piety.

Thirdly, it is fit there be a difference between wicked 3.
and godly men's songs. They sing like themselves, either wickedly, vvantonly,
and filthily, or the best of their songs, which they sing with any feeling,
are but vvorldly, when their Wine and Oil are increased, and they enjoy
temporal prosperity: But the godly must be in another tune; they must sing,
because God has lifted up the light of his countenance upon them: they have a
peculiar joy, the joy of Gods people, which David desires the Lord to visit
him vvithall, Psalm. 106. 5. The Stranger enters not into this joy, Prou. 14. 10.

Fourthly, if the godly should not make their songs of 4.
God, he should have little or no praise on earth for all his mercies, seeing
the wicked cannot praise him, the dead (in sin) cannot praise him, they can
rejoice naturally in eating, drinking, sporting, building, and such props of
the flesh, yea and are never so glad as when God is farthest off, out of sight
and out of mind: Now if the Christian man, who has a true sense of God,
should not sing unto God, he should have no praise at all of all his goodness.

Fifthly, the songs of godly men on earth are best, when 5.
they be the same for kind and matter with their songs in heaven, seeing the
same heavenly life and joy is begun on earth, which we must have in
perfection in heaven, and there is no difference but in the degree. And this
we see plainly in the Scripture, both what is the matter of that new song of
the Saints in heaven, who had gotten victory over the Beast, Revel. 15. ^.
the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, King of Saints:
And, that the songs of the godly have commonly been of the same argument and
matter, is clear by the Church in general, and in the special members of it.
The Church, Exodus 15. 1. 2. sang this song unto the Lord, and said in this
manner, I will sing unto the Lord, the Lord is my strength and my song, he is
become my salvation, etc. My song:] that is, first, the matter of the song, the
Lord, to whom all praise belongs: and secondly, he in whom the Church
rejoices and glories all the day long. Isa. 5. 1. I will sing to my beloved:
Christ is the song of the Church; the whole book of Canticles is a song of
Christ, and the Church, which sings out his beauties, perfections, and
affections, and describes him in excellent manner from top to toe. So for the
particular members of it: David professes it, saying. My song shall be of thee
all the day long: the like we may see of Hanna, Zachary, Simeon, Mary, Deborah,
and Barak, Judge. 5. All whose songs record how they made God their glory, and
the matter of their Psalms and praises; in a word, they were no other then
songs of deliverance.

Sixthly, let a man turn his face any way else from 6.
God, let him sing of his wealth, of his pleasure, or any of the delights of
the sons of men, his song shall be but a short one, and as unsound as short.
Solomon tried his heart, and tired himself in worldly pleasures, treasures,
honors, and all kind of earthly happiness, but he comes at length to a
recantation, and sings a new song, and tells us, that all that is under the
Sun, is but vanity and vexation of spirit. And try it after him who will,
he shall surely change his note as he did, when his laughter shall be no
better in his own eyes then madness; and the reason is, because nothing out
of God can afford matter of sound joy.

We see hence what to think of music in Gods service, of which kind songs
are. In the old Testament it Use 1.
was of divine institution, and a part of the ceremonial Law. In the new
Testament God requires a more spiritual worship, and yet we are allowed us
that music, whether natural or artificial, whereby the heart is raised up
and provoked to glorify God. Is any man merry, says James, let him sing
Psalms, Chap. 5. 13.

The conditions of this music must be these: first, it must tend to
edification, and therefore it must be understood. Secondly, it must not carry
away the heart or ear, either of the Singer or of the Hearer, but stir it
up. Thirdly, it must not consist more in fragore quam feruore, more in
contention of voice, then intention of heart. Fourthly, it must be orderly, not
wasting the time of preaching: for the better must take place and take up more
time. Here therefore is not approved that practice of the Papists, in turning
out of the preaching of the Word, for their chanting of Masses and music,
which is, first, in Latin, and therefore cannot be understood nor edify.
Secondly, superstitious: for all of them hold, Mass sung to be more holy and
meritorious then Mass said. Thirdly, they sing to Idols, and God is not the
matter of their songs. The best Organe in Gods service is a Christian and
faithful man's heart: set that in tune, and there will be sweet music. But as
for our singing of Psalms in public and private, the use of them is
excellent, if used aright: first, to celebrate the Name of God in the
acknowledgement of his mercies. Secondly, by singing to awaken our dull hearts,
and raise them toward God. Thirdly, as to testify our own thankfulness,
and show our affection, and rejoice our selves in him, so also to stir up
others to zeal and feruencie, as Psalm. 34. 3. O magnify the Lord with me, and
let us exalt his name together. Fourthly, to comfort and refresh our sorrowful
spirits, as Paul and Silas being in prison sung to God even at midnight, Act.
16. 25. Fifthly, to learn by the examples of the Saints to fear God, to trust
in him in adversity, and so to confirm our selves in piety. Sixthly, to be
acquainted with the Psalms, and learn them by heart, in which is a most
artificial anatomy of the soul of a Christian, showing most lively his whole
state and constitution.

Secondly, if the matter of our songs be best when Use 2.
divine, it condemns all those wanton songs and tunes, which misse-tune the
heart and affections, and tend to nothing but corruption: David's songs were of
God; but, how vain and vile are the songs of our common people? How happily
might they make exchange of their wanton Sonnets and filthy Ballads with these
holy Psalms? first, does not the Apostle include such amorous and lewd songs
under jesting or foolish talking, which he advises Christians to exchange with
thanksgiving? Ephesians. 5. 4. Secondly, must we give an account of every idle
word? and not of every idle song, which is hurtful to our selves and others,
and keeps out better? Thirdly, it is a manifest note of a carnal man, to be
delighted with wicked or foolish songs: Does not want of spiritual affection
argue the want of the Spirit? And does not want of spiritual songs argue want
of spiritual affection? And if it be so, our eyes see a general decay of
godliness, and increase of Atheism and profaneness among our people, who
are generally decayed in singing Psalms, and delight to sing nothing but
profane Ditties, barring grace out of the heart.

But I cannot pass over the practice of wicked Fiddlers, who make it their
profession, and get their living by the daily poisoning of many with
themselves, by most filthy and ribaldrie songs, shameless and unchaste
Ditties; setting themselves to please the foul and wicked hearts and ears of
men, to the displeasure of God, and their own damnation without timely
repentance. I may not name David's songs almost the same day with these
detestable Ditties. But, if filthiness and fornication ought not to be named
among Saints; then should there be no place for such Teachers of filthiness,
whose mouths were better be without tongues, then filled with songs of any
such kind: for as these do much infect and poison others, so any better
vnbeseeme themselves.

Cannot we by all our labor and best endeavors prevail with men, while we
provoke them to purity of heart and life, such is the gulf of natural
uncleanness and filthiness? And is there any need of such firebrands and
incentiues of lust? Do men need spurs and prouocations to unchastity and
filthiness? If it be not in the power of Christians, to stop the mouths of
such Satanicall Factors, yet let them be wise to stop their own ears, lest
hereby the Devil cast a sparkle into their Gunne-powder.

Thirdly, let us learn to check our selves, when we Use 3.
find our selves heavy and weary in talking of good things, and of our
gracious God, seeing the godly account this a refreshing and matter of godly
songs, and when we find want of Spirit, and coldness of heart in singing
Psalms, public or private: for this argues decay in godliness, and coldness
in Religion, seeing the heart must lead the tongue, and a joyful tongue
accompanies a gracious heart.

Means to help forward our songs in God, are these: First, make up thy peace
with God: Acquaint thy self with him, then shall the Almighty be thy delight,
Job 22. 21, 26. Grow up in the knowledge of God; the more thou know him, the
more full will thy joy be: especially get assurance of the pardon of thy sins.

Secondly, delight in his Word and Ordinances, as in the deeds of thy
salvation, Psalm. 119. 54. Thy Statutes have been my songs in the house of my
pilgrimage.

Thirdly, get sincerity of heart: for, Can an hypocrite delight himself in
the Almighty? Job 27. 10. No, he cannot.

Fourthly, beware of intangling thy heart with wicked or worldly pleasures: for
these are as water cast into heavenly heates; keep out carnal joys, and
labor to make thy joy more heavenly.

VERSE 8, 9, 10.
8. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way that thou shall go, and I
will guide thee with mine eye.
9. Be not like an Horse, or like a Mule, which understand not; whose mouths
thou do bind with bit and bridle, lest they come near thee.
10. Many sorrows shall come to the wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord,
mercy shall compass him.
NOw we come to the third use of the former doctrine, laid down in the former
part of the Psalm, which concerns our obedience unto God: the sum of it is
this, that when a Christian has gotten remission of sins, he must take
heed of offending God any more, and endeavor to walk worthy of so great a
mercy.

These three Verses contain, first, a Preface to the exhortation, in the
eighth Verse. Secondly, the exhortation it self, standing of a grave and
sharp counsel or advice: Be not like the Horse or Mule; that is, be not so
indocible as thou wast, neither stand out stubbornely with God as thou did
before thy justification. Thirdly, the Reasons or inforcements of the counsel,
drawn, first, from the plagues of God upon indocible and incorrigible persons:
Many are the sorrows of the wicked. Secondly, from Gods great good will toward
his own, who have got assurance of remission of sin: Mercy, or goodness,
shall compass him on every side.

The words of the Preface contain, first, the person that speaks: 1.
Secondly, the person, to whom he speaks: thee. Thirdly, the matter of the
speech, in three particulars. First, I will instruct thee: that is, make thee
to understand. Secondly, I will teach thee the way: that is, not only by
precept, but also by example I will lead thee into the practice. Thirdly, I
will guide thee with mine eye: that is, I will watch over thee, lest thou stray
out of that good way, to set thee in again.

1:] the person uttering these words is not God, as some think, but David, as
the title of the Psalm proves, A Psalm of David to give instruction: so here
he fitly professes himself an Instructor.

David was a King, how then comes he to profess Quest.
himself a Prophet or Teacher in the Church? Can one man carry both
Magistracy and Ministry? Yes:

In the old Testament, the Sword and the Word did Answ.
sometime concur in one person for these causes.

First, because the Church was a long time shut up in one Family, and then the
same man might sufficiently perform both. Thus Adam was a Governor and a
Priest in his house. Thus the Patriarch Abraham was a great Prince and
Magistrate, as appeared by his rescue of Lot, by a band of men, gathered out of
his own house, and yet a Prophet too, as the Lord told Abimelech, and appears
by sacrificing his Isaak. Job was a great man, and a Magistrate, and yet
offered sacrifices as a Priest, for his sons. And thus it was all the while
the Church was in Families.

Secondly, after the people of the Jews were settled into a Kingdom, the
Scriptures were the positive laws of the Jews, so as the Levites were both of
the Priesthood, and their Lawyers, and then one man might more easily perform
both: but this was a propriety of that Commonwealth of the Jews; for never
any other but that had the Scriptures for their positive written Law.

Thirdly, sometimes for necessity they did concur in one man, as when there
was an universal corruption or ruin of the State, God stirred up some
extraordinary man to take up both, for the repair of the Church and
Commonwealth. Thus Eli the chief Priest, also judged Israel forty years, 1.
Sam. 4. 18. and the corruptions of those times, and the general discontent of
men both in matters of Government, and of Gods worship, appear manifestly in
the History. After Eli, when Gods worship was broken up at Shilo, the Arc in
the Enemies hand, and a woeful confusion was in the state of the Jews, the
Lord stirred up faithful Samuel, who was a faithful Prophet of the Lord, 1.
Sam. 3. 20. and also judged Israel all the days of his life, Chap. 7. 15.

Fourthly, some by way of type were both Kings and Priests: before the giving
of the Law, Melchisedec was the King of Salem, and a Priest of the most high
God, Genesis 14. 18. so David here, and his son Solomon after him, were notable
types of Christ, who would in those dark shadows be in some particular men
declared to be both the King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church. And this is
the reason here, why David being a King, does take upon him to teach others:
and for this, Christ is often called the Son of David.

To come nearer to our Text: David, having after a long conflict obtained mercy
at Gods hand, earnestly desires and endeavors, that others may be partakers
of the same grace also, and he, having found the way to comfort, will set others
in the way also: Hence note, that A man that has true grace, earnestly wishes
that all Doct.
others did partake in the same grace with him. Ps. 34. 8. 11. True grace is
co^municatiue
Come children, harken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord: and,
Oh, taste and see how good the Lord is! a man cannot taste of Gods mercy, but
he wishes all did taste with him. Hos. 6. 1. the first note of the sound
conversion of the people, was, that they call one another, saying, Come, let us
turn to the Lord: and it is indeed a mark of true repentance, to take one
another by the hand, and lead one another toward heaven. As in a natural
body, one member seeks the safety and welfare of all; so is it in the
mystical body of Christ.

First, this is one condition of our own conversion, Reasons. I.
even to convert others. Luc. 22. 32. Thou being converted, strengthen thy
brethren. Neither is there any man that receives any grace for himself alone,
but that others may share with him: never had any man any talent, but a charge
also with it, Occupy till I come. And hence are those Commandments in
general, As every man has received a gift, so let him minister; and, Return
and cause others to return: and those special charges, to exhort one another,
admonish one another, to convert one another, to comfort one another with the
comforts received from God, to provoke one another to the love of God and good
works: all which show, that every one, as he is borne in the Church, so he is
borne also for the Church.

Secondly, it is a property and an assured sign of 2.
sound says to work by love. And this love is first set upon God and his
glory, it earnestly desires that his Kingdom may come, and that his will may
be done in earth, of men as of the Saints and Angels in Heaven: and this it
endeavors in a man's self and in others. Secondly, this love looks out unto
others, and commiserateth the estate of unconverted persons, and seeks to
relieve them: true sense of their own change and former estate, mooues them to
compassion for such as are still in their sins, and surely none are so
merciful as those that have obtained mercy. One that loves another, will pull
him out of danger if he can: So will a believer bemoane another, and pluck him
out of the fire, as Jude speaks. Thirdly, it looks to such as are conusrted,
and for Gods sake loves his Image, especially renewed: it loves him that is
begotten for his sake that begat, 1. Ioh. 5. 1. and, as David did good to
Mephibosheth for Jonathan his fathers sake, so do good men to Gods children
for Gods sake their heavenly father. Fourthly, this love, which is the life of
faith, at least the pulse of it, is clean opposite to self-love, which is of
an hard and niggardly nature, and envious of any good to any about him; but it
is like Gods love, which communicates it self and is liberal for the good of
all.

Thirdly, where there is any sound grace of conversion, there is zeal for God,
which works the heart 3.
to the cherishing and setting up of grace and virtue, and to the hatred and
resistance of sin and vice in a man's self and others, it will show it self
for God: as Act. 26. 29. Paul said to King Agrippa, I would that not only
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were as I am, saving my bonds. His
sound zeal wished that all were sound Christians. And hence are all those
Similitudes, wherein grace is compared to such things as are hardliest kept in
any compass, as

First, to fire: Quench not the spirit: if there be but sparkles of fire under
the ashes, lay on wood, and it will kindle and turn it into it self: let grace
meet but with fuel and matter, it will work upon it, to the warming of all
the house.

Secondly, to water, which is of a flowing nature and is hardly contained
within banks or bounds; so Christ says, He that drinks of this water, out
of his belly shall flow Rivers of water of life, Ioh. 7. 38.

Thirdly, to a sweet smell, or precious ointment, which spreds into the air
and cannot be smelt of any one, but also of every one in the same place.

Fourthly, to a leaven: The kingdom of heaven (says Christ) is like a little
piece of leaven, it will quickly work through a whole lump.

Fifthly, to a light in a Candlestick, which lightneth the whole house, yea,
which cares not to consume it self, so it may comfort and inlighten others.

First then, examine hereby the truth of grace and thy Use 1.
conversion, even by thy desire and endeavor in the conversion of others. Pro.
27. 17. Iron sharpens Iron: so does one friend sharpen another, that is,
quicken up another; a spark of zeal in one Christian will kindle a flame in
another, yea, it will stir up some good inclinations and motions even in lewd
persons. If Andrew find Simon, he will bring him to Christ; and if Christ find
Philip, Philip will find Nathaniel: the woman of Samaria was no sooner touched a
little, but she called the whole City to see Christ. Do we lack motives?

First, if we look at the wicked, we shall see them Motives to forward one
another in grace.
call one another, to go together, and have all one purse, Prou. 1. 14. they
can spread and infuse their wickedness one into another suddenly, as mischief
is very nimble. See we not Jesuits and Papists compassing with great danger
of their lives all the parts of the World, to corrupt and infect with the
deadly poisoned Cup of the Whore of Babel, all the Countries of the Earth? and
shall not we labor to make men love and like the truth? Shall their blind
zeal carry them so far beyond us, who, while we profess we hold the
truth against them, our care is not to plant or spread this Religion as they
do theirs? Oh then our love is but small, if it be any at all.

Secondly, he is no Saint that lives out of the Communion of Saints: a
righteous man is described to be one, whose lips feed many: nay, a gracious
woman opens Prou. 10. 21. Prou. 31. 26.
her lips with wisdom. And why does not the Lord give one man all graces, or
to all a like measure, but diversely, but that he intends the mutual good of
each person? It was anciently prophesied of believers, (Isay 2. 3.) in the new
Testament, thus, Many shall go up to the mountain of the Lord, and say, Come,
let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways: and how
glad was David, when he could get men together to go up to the Temple of God?
Psalm. 122. 1. 2. The grace of gracious persons must be discovered by the grace
of their lips.

Thirdly, if we consider the blessed fruit of this care for others conversion,
it will be a strong motive to take it unto us:

First, we shall notably glorify God in furthering his Kingdom in our selves
and others: this was the care of them, who were taught in the Apostles
Doctrine, that in two years it was carried from Ephesus over all Asia, and
many were partakers of it, Act. 19. 10. hereby Gods glory was exceedingly
enlarged.

Secondly, we shall hereby edify our brethren, and bring Gods glory into
request with them. Cant. 5. 17. when the Church had lively set forth the
beauties and perfections of her love and Lord, Jesus Christ, others which
before had no sense and feeling of it, by her commendations are now ravished
with desire after him, saying, Whither is thy beloved gone? turn aside, that
we may seek him with thee. Yea, being as weak as we are, may be a means of
converting and saving our brethren, and so bind their hearts for ever unto us.

Thirdly, we shall not only set a-worke our own graces, but increase them,
and be gainers by our return of our talents: we read not of any servant,
that used his talent, but to increase: and this is by a secret blessing of God,
who gives bread to the Sower, as the two Disciples, going to Emaus, talking of
good things, Christ himself joined to them and went with them; yea, and
although for a time at our first conference often we see but little fruit, yet
after a while it is with us as it was with those Disciples, Their eyes were
holden for a time, that they could not know Christ, but, holding on in their
communication, Christ lodges with them, sits down at table, opens their eyes,
and reueales himself unto them: even so it is here.

Fourthly, we shall not only further our reckoning, to give it up with joy,
but even increase our glory and reward in Heaven, as he that had gained five
talents, was made Ruler of five Cities, and the other of ten. What can move
to this duty, if this do not move us?

Secondly, this serves to reprove many sorts of men, as Use. 2.
First, such as content themselves with a conceit of their own conversion and
good estate, but they are wise and politic, they will look every one to one,
but as for others, who made them their brothers Keepers? What have they to do
whether they sink or swim? every vessel must stand on his own bottom,
they must shift for themselves. Yes, yes, GOD has made thee every man's Keeper,
and given thee the charge of every man within thy power to do him good, to
further his salvation. Neither can thou have any comfortable assurance of thy
own charge, if thou desire and endeuourest not the conversion of others:
Slender is the sense of mercy, and little love of righteousness in thy own
soul, if there be in thee no desire of drawing others to the same: Therefore
lay aside this conceit, that thou art to care only for thy self.

Secondly, such are hereby reproved, as can frame themselves to please all
companies they fall into, are ashamed or afraid to minister or entertain such
speech as sauoureth of this desire, and thus pass the time in idle speeches,
or unsavory communication, not only to the hindering of that comfort, which
would rise out of sauourie and fruitful conference, but to carry with them a
check and accusation of conscience for neglecting so comfortable a duty. Oh,
therefore, finding our selves tardie in these things, let us check our selves,
and know, that though we cannot gain others to goodness by our speech, yet
we shall lose nothing by it, but be gainers our selves.

Thirdly, such are reproved, as either neglect or envy to communicate their
graces in furthering the growth of grace in such as they ought. A Magistrate
should see all within his power, keep the two Tables as well as himself: good
Nehemiah would see all the City keep the Sabbath, and set forward all the
good he could for the Temple, by his authority and example. Masters of
Families also and Governors should be as great wheels in a Clock, whereof if
one be set a going, he will move his fellow, and that the next unto him; not
one must be idle: Abraham will teach his Family, and Joshua his house; and
Cornelius calls his kinsfolk to hear the Doctrine of life.

Others envy the graces of God, where they should rejoice most, as Cain did
the grace and goodness of Abel, and this was young Joshua's fault, to envy
Eldad and Medad for Moses his sake. Master, forbid them to prophecy: but what
said Moses? he was of another temper, and said, Do thou envy for me? would
God all the Lords people were Prophets, Numb. 11. 29. It is woeful to speak,
but more woeful to practice, that men should be weary of their servants,
because they are good, and say of their good and towardly children, Young Saints
old Devils; also of the wife, that she is attempting of some strange matters,
when she will do that good in her house, which her husband will not: Satan
that can get this advantage of men, will get a greater before he has left
them. True grace would delight in building up others, and is glad when any
comes on well or out-strips it in goodness.

Fourthly, those are reproved, which not only not instruct or help forward,
but also hinder others and withdraw them from their godly courses, which
reproach or persecute good ways, men whom the Devil has taught to be cunning
in besmearing all the ways of Gods children. Oh (say some) they are all
Hypocrites, all Dissemblers, as bad as who is worst, yea (if we will believe
such) as black Devils. Much more are those in a woeful case, which corrupt and
pervert others, saying, What? will you be so precise and foolish? will you in
a kind of singularity lose both your pleasure and reputation? But mark the
severe reproof of such in Elymas the Sorcerer, who labored to turn away the
Deputy, Paulus Sergius, from the faith, Act. 13. 8. 9. 10. O thou enemy of
righteousness (says Paul) full of subtletie, the child of the Devil, full
of all mischief, etc. like indeed to the Devil, who is the greatest disswader
of goodness, and would drive all holiness out of the earth if he could:
Elymas is the Devils child, because his works he did. Oh, let us take heed of
these errors, and be more diligent in this fruit of conversion: If in the
Springtime a Plant be without leaves or buds, when others sprout and
blossom, we say, Surely it is dead: so if the Spring of grace be returned
upon thee, let all the World see it in this sprout; if thou be a Plant of
righteousness, thou will show thy life and fruit, that every one may pluck
somewhat and be the better by thee.

The second point in this Preface is the Scholar or person to be taught:

Thee] that is, every man particularly, to whom this Psalm shall come to be
heard, sung, read, or any way used: Whence we may learn two things:

First, That no man naturally understands the things of God without a
Teacher. Doct. 1.

No man naturally understands the things of God without a Teacher.

See Psalm. 14. 3.


Secondly, that Doctrine is not sufficient to be delivered in general, but
must be particularly applied to all. The first is manifest by Scripture and
reasons. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The nature all man understands not the things of God.
Act. 8. 31. When the Eunuch read the Prophecy of Esaias, and Philip asked him if
he understood the place, How can I (said he) without a guide? The case is with
every natural man as it was with Samuel; God calls once, and again, Samuel
still runs another way, 1. Sam. 3. 7. Thus did Samuel (says the Text) before
he knew the Lord, and before the Word of the Lord was revealed unto him: Which
is true as well in respect of that ordinary divine knowledge, which is common
to all the servants of God, as the extraordinary, which was peculiar to the
Prophets.

The reason hereof is not, as Papists say, the obscurity of the Scripture,
which is a light to our feet and a Lantern, but

First, nothing can go beyond its own nature and Reasons. 1.
kind, nature cannot reach to divine things, flesh cannot reach above flesh,
and before Regeneration the whole man is flesh, his body is flesh, his soul
is flesh, his affections flesh, his actions and all is flesh; And as for
spiritual things, he can no more reach them then a beast can reach to
reasonable actions. No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son reuealeth him. No man knows the heart of a man, till himself make it
known: much less can any man know the mind of God, but God himself and he
to whom the Spirit reueales it, 1. Cor. 2. 11.

Secondly, whereas by our innocence we were of large hearts and Eagles eyes
for clcerenesse of understanding 2.
and judgment in the things of God, by the fall a veil is come over our
hearts, and the scales of ignorance are come upon our eyes, and the clouds of
darkness are between us and our Sun; nay, an unregenerate man is not only
in darkness, but even darkness it self, Ephesians. 5. 8. and the child of night
and darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7. that as Paul being blind must have the scales
taken off his eyes before he can see; so no man can have any saving knowledge,
till his natural ignorance be removed: And as this was the first thing in
Paul's Conversion, and the first work of God in the Creation, to sever light
and darkness; so the first work of this second Creation is the illumination
of the Spirit.

Thirdly, if every regenerate man need a Teacher, much less does any natural
man understand without one: but even the best have ignorance in them, though
not reigning, it being with the godly in this life as in the twilight, much
darkness is mingled with their light: and therefore even the Apostles
themselves prayed for increase of spiritual understanding. And the knowledge
we have here of God, is but as in a mystery, or in a mirror: In a mystery]
wherein something is seen, something hid, as in the Sacraments for that cause
so called, because we see the Elements, but not the things signified by them:
In a mirrour] as in a glass, and not face to face, we know but in part, 1.
Cor. 13.

First, Let us hence acknowledge our natural blindness, Use 1.
it being with us as with the blind man, Ioh. 9. who was borne blind, and
never saw any thing, till Christ had opened his eyes; we being naturally
blind, cannot see though the Sun of righteousness shine upon us. And, if we
cannot see our spiritual good, even by our best natural graces, much less
can we embrace it, or by the power and strength of nature or will, follow it,
against the Papists who teach that we can.

Secondly, learn to pity natural men as David here Use 2.
does, who as blind men, first, see not the way to Heaven, secondly, and are in
danger of harms, though they think themselves safe enough, thirdly, and are
soon misled, (for who but ignorant persons are a prey to Jesuits and such
like?) fourthly and lastly, they have no comfort of the Sun, no light of
grace or of glory. And a woeful condition are such in, as live without the
means of knowledge and grace: who would live in a soil, where the Sun never
shines, or if he were sure to be made blind in it? yet many men leave good
means for a little pelf: who, according to the Proverb, run out of the
blessing of GOD into the warm Sun.

Thirdly, we see hereby how little need there is either Use 3.
to remove the Word and Sacraments from the people, as the Papists do: the
light of the Sun being not so necessary to the World, as the use of these.

Fourthly, let us do as the blind man in the Gospel Use 4.
did, Luc. 18. 35. etc. First, let us acknowledge that Christ must open our
eyes, that he must give us eye-salue, nay both eyes to see, and light to
enlighten us. Secondly, let us pray as he did, saying, Lord, our desire is that
our eyes may be opened, that we may have insight into heavenly things.
Thirdly, let us with him stand in the way where Christ comes by; in the Temple
and the Assemblies of the Saints, in the Tents of Shepherds, or among the
seven Golden Candlestickes. Fourthly, being healed, he praised Christ and leapt
for joy; so if we see the things of God better then we did before, we should
rejoice exceedingly with hearty thanksgiving. Fifthly, having his eyes opened,
he followed Christ, and would not be beaten from him: so if we can get the
eyes of our mind opened, we must praise our good God in word and in deed,
walk answerable to this mercy, become his Disciples, sin no more, lest a
worse thing befall us, and walk worthy of the light.

So much of the first point: the second follows, Doct. 2.
namely, that The word must not only be taught, but Gods Word must be
applied in special.
also specially applied to every particular person. David says not, I will
teach the Church, or, all men, in general, but every one in particular, thee.
After Adam had sinned, how plainly and personally does the Lord deal with
him, both in amplifying his sin, that he might be struck down with it, and
in publishing the promise of salvation, to raise him again? herein teaching
every Minister and Preacher how to carry the Word home to every son of Adam,
seeing they are to speak the same words, which, he whose Messengers they
are, would speak. 2. Sam. 12. Nathan the Prophet of the Lord, sent to David
while yet he lay in his sin, was directed by God what to say, and he must
not only in a Parable make David condemn the sin to the death, He shall dye
that has done this thing, but by plain dealing with him, saying, Thou art the
man, condemn himself, and confess, I have sinned. Our Savior Christ thus
carried his Doctrine, applying it home to the several persons it concerned: to
the Jews, Mat. 3. 7. O geration of vipers, who has forewarned you to fly
from the wrath to come? to the Pharisees; Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites. And his Apostles, being to deal with wicked people, used the same
course; Act. 2. 23. Whom ye slew with wicked hands, and hanged on a Tree: and
Chap. 8. 22. Thy money perish with thee, repent of this thy malice, thou art in
the gall of bitterness: It may be, thy sin may be done away. Hence their
Sermons were called exhortation, which is application of Doctrine and enforcing
of it, Act. 13. 15. And their Writings are of the same manner; ever after
Doctrine they used exhortations, as Romans 12. having delivered the Doctrine of
Faith, Justification, Sanctification, and Predestination in the former
Chapters, begins there his exhortations, and so continues in them to the end:
The like may be seen in other Epistles.

First, the use of the Scripture is to exhort, reprove, Reasons. 1. 2. Tim. 3.
16.
correct, and instruct to make the man of God absolute: the use of it is not
only to teach and enlighten the understanding, but also to work upon,
convince, quiet, and direct the conscience and whole course. Doctrine is but
the laying of a ground, application is the building up of a Christian.

Secondly, the life of Ministry is in application, 2.
without which the Word is a Sword, but without an edge, not in it self, but
to us; but, being specially applied, it is a two-edged Sword, cutting deep,
dividing between the marrow and bone, and piercing between the soul and
spirit, Heb. 4. 12. Application of the Word is that, which leads it to the
thoughts and intents of the heart, to discern them, to high thoughts, to
deiect them, to the affections, if sinful, to captiuate them, if set right, to
inflame them, to several temptations and lusts, to sub due them, and to the
whole life and ways to reform them.

Thirdly, our own constitution and weakness stands in need of special
application: 3.


First, because our hearts are naturally asleep, and we are covered over with
the spirit of slumber, spoken of, Isa. 29. 10. and need to be wakened by a
voice lift up like a Trumpet from some son of Thunder. David by his gross
sin had cast himself into a fast and dead sleep, therefore Nathan must go
to waken him, and say aloud in his ears, Thou art the man.

Secondly, our hearts by the neglect of good means or security are easily
hardened, and lose their softness or tenderness: now, the word in special
application must be as an hard wedge, to our hard knots; this makes the Word
an Hammer to knock and break our flintie hearts, Ier. 23. 29.

Thirdly, as we cannot apply the Word our selves, so we will not apply it:
commonly men skip over the Law, and catch at the Gospel, and so, being never
soundly humbled, their whole life is led carelessly.

Fourthly, this bad disposition of ours can never be reformed without this
special application: for the 4.
Word never becomes ours, neither can we taste any sweetness of it, without
this; no fruit of the Law in our humiliation, no comfort of the promises in our
restitution, no understanding of the true meaning of either without our own
faith mingling and truly applying both; no work of the Spirits sanctification
in our hearts, but in applying the Law and Gospel; no action of our lives
warrantable but by faith, which is a special application of the Word unto them.

First then, we that are Ministers must labor herein: Use 1.
A good Steward gives every one his part, and then it is the wholesome Word of
life, when every one has that portion which is fit for him; this makes the
Word dwell plentifully in Christians; by this, holy doctrine is fastened as by
nails by the Masters of Assemblies. If a man should set a great brown Loaf
before Children, what good would it do them? they may starve well enough,
unless it be divided: Gods Word is in it self nourishable, but, being not
divided, it will not be nourishing to us. Away then with Sermons, if they be
afraid to come near by application; away with idle and intricate discourses,
further then to lay them as grounds for exhortation, herein is learning and the
life of the Word.

Secondly, people must learn to cleave constantly to Use 2.
an effectual ministry, which has life and stirring in it, and praise God
for it, seeing their necessity requires it: In hearing the Word apply it to
thy self, not to others, mingle it with thy faith, help the Minister in his
labor and paines-taking. Oh, what a deal of labor would it save us, if men
were able and vvilling to apply doctrine to themselves?

Thirdly, we must all learn to suffer the Word to be applied in particular
unto us. A man that has a sore or Use 3.
fester, would be loath to be put to pain by a sharp plaster; but without
it there is no cure: what will it help him to have it lie on the cupboord,
or on the table? Before thou can be a living stone in Gods temple, thou must
suffer hewing and squaring; nay, so long as thou art here in the Mountain,
thou must be hewne as the stones were for the Temple. Object. What? must Gods
children hear the Law applied? Answ. Yes, to condemn their sins, not their
persons; and we know, that rods, which are provided for servants, are laid in
the sight of children to fear them.

But here is all the quarrel, that we reprove special sins. Oh (says one) he
hates me, it is I that he reproues; What needs all this ado? What has he to
do with my pleasures and dealings? What need these fellows make
Pulpit-matters of every thing? And were it not for special application, we
should please men well enough: but, first, are we enemies for speaking the
truth? Secondly, is not the Word a Sword? And can a man be struck or thrust
through with a Sword, and not feel it? Is it not Gods sacrificing knife? Act.
10. 13. Kill and eat: Peter was commanded with the sword of the Spirit, to
prepare the Gentiles an acceptable sacrifice, and join with them in the
communion of Christ's body: And can a man be sacrificed without pain? Thirdly,
does not every man desire, that the strong man were cast out of his heart? yet
we must not shake his Towers, he will not let any of his holds, which are his
own sins, to be touched. Fourthly, we may not preach mercy to him, that
stands in no need of it; for then we shall preach false doctrine, by
misse-applying that which in general is true. Fifthly, the Saints of God have
been contented to bear particular reproof: David upon admonition confessed
his sin even before Nathan; why, he might have said, Get thee going, silly
fellow, tell me of no such matters, go deal with your equals. Our great men
under Kings would have said so, but David put it up; and indeed, where had he
been but for Nathans plain dealing? If we had David's heart, we would be
contented to say with him elsewhere, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me;
for that is a benefit; and let him reprove me, and it shall be a precious Oil
that shall not break mine head. Beloved, if it were profitable for you, it
were peaceable for us, to speak at random; but both our duty, and your
edification calls for particular application.

In the way that thou shall go:]
THis is the third point in the Preface, the matter wherein the Prophet
promises to instruct the Christian man, namely, in the way wherein he is to
go: the most necessary, difficult, and profitable discipline that a man can
teach or learn. By way here is meant the Why the godly course is called a way.
course and conversation of a godly man; called a way. First, because God has
laid it open and allowed it unto us as an highway between us here, being in a
strange Country, and our home whither we travel. Secondly, God directs and
approves it, Psalm. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the righteous. Thirdly,
as in an highway there is a continual motion of Travelers, who in the way are
at no rest, till they come to their ways end: so a Christian man is still
moving and proceeding in godliness, forgetting that which is behind, and
pressing hard to the mark that is before him, and does not find this World
his resting place. Fourthly, as a way leads to some desired place, and if a
man keep in it, it will bring him home, or to some great City where his
business lies: so godly life leads a man home to heaven, the great City of
the great King, the end of which is rest and glory. Thus it is called Gods
way: first, being taught us by God. Secondly, tending to God. Thirdly, approved
of God: and fourthly, ending in God.

The going in this way, is, the ordering of our whole course, and every action
of it, so as we be daily nearer our aim and perfection. As in a way a
Traveler observes and orders every step, that he may come to his iourneyes
end; so the heavenly Pilgrim makes right steps to his feet, and sees that
every several duty, which is as a step in our way to heaven, be an obedience
of faith, performed in the way either of his general or special calling.

Hence we may learn this lesson, that, Every godly Doctr.
man must be careful, that his course be a going and Godliness is a going in
Gods way.
proceeding in the ways of God. Prou. 4. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and
let all thy ways be ordered aright. Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be
upright: the sons of faithful Abraham must keep a course of walking in Gods
ways, as he did. Psalm. 119. 32. I have considered my ways, and turned my
feet to keep thy Commandments.

First, this is the only true wisdom, to make God Reasons. 1.
our guide in our way. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep his Ordinances; for this is your
wisdom, and men shall say, Only this is a wise people. Psalm. 101. 2. I will
do wisely in the perfect way: where mark how David tyeth wisdom to the perfect
way, and gives us to understand, that whosoever refuse to walk in it, let them
seem never so wise Politicians, yet we may say of them as the Apostle did of
the Gentiles, Romans 1. 22. Professing themselves wise, they became stark
fools: without this way, all is but folly and mere craft, and shall be turned
to a man's hurt. If a man or people will reject the Word of God, what wisdom
can be in them? Ier. 8. 9. When David had but stepped out of the way, in numbering
the people, out of the pride of his heart, (for otherwise Moses might number
them, Number. 1. 2.) being convicted, he said, I have done very foolishly, 2. Sam.
24. 17.

Secondly, it is a description of a man in the state of 2.
corrupt nature, unconverted, to be out of this way. Psalm. 14. 3. They are all
gone out of the way. And it is a dangerous estate, when a man is given up to
his own ways, or to walk in a broad way, that leads to destruction; wherein
because so many wander, a Christian must be so much the more careful to avoid
it. And it is a way most uncomfortable: for, can a man meet with the comforts
of God, while his way is contrary to Gods? Can he ever look to come where God
is, and not walk in Gods way?

Thirdly, if we compare this way with all other ways, it will whet our care
to enter into and continue 3. Gods way compared with all other ways.
in it: for, First, this is the Kings highway, in which we have promise of
protection, Ps. 91. 11. The Angels shall keep thee in all thy ways: In all
other ways we be as vagrants without a pass, subject to the whip euery-where;
Israel was stripped starke-naked to Gods severe strokes, when they left this way,
Exodus 32. 25. Moses had much ado to save them from final destruction.

Secondly, Gods ways are the cleanest of all. 2. Sam. 22. 31. The vvayes of
God are vncorrupt and pure: and Isa. 35. 8. There shall be a path and a way,
the way shall be called holy, and the polluted shall not pass by it. Now who
would go plodding in deep and durtie vvayes, in danger every step to be
plunged and laid fast in the mire and clay, when there is a clean path before
him?

Thirdly, Gods ways are the rightest ways. Hos. 14. 9. The ways of the Lord
are right, and the just shall walk in them. Act. 13. 10. Thou ceasest not to
pervert the straight ways of God. Now every man desires to go in the right
way that will lead him directly to the place, which he would be at. All other
ways are crooked ones, Isa. 59. 8. They have made them crooked paths;
whosoever goes therein, shall not know peace. And being rightest, they be also
the shortest ways: (for a right line is the shortest between the terms,
says the Geometer:) whereas the wicked toil and weary themselves in the
ways of wickedness, and lose themselves in every by-lane of lusts and
fleshly devices; they are distracted in inextricable mazes and labyrinths; in a
word, they take more pains to go to Hell, then the godly to get to heaven.

Fourthly, Gods ways are most lightsome and cheerful. Prou. 3. 17. Her ways
are the ways of pleasure, and all her paths prosperity: those that walk in
these ways, are sons of the Day, to whom the Sun of righteousness is
risen and shines on them, and they walk in the light: Whereas, whosoever are
out of this way, there is no light to them, but they walk in the night, their
feet are in continual danger of stumbling. Pro. 4. 19. The way of the wicked
is as darkness, they know not where they shall fall: If a man be in the
dark and in the dirt, he knows not where he shall lodge: so the wicked
know not what shall become of them: see Isa. 8. 21, 22. Mark the confession
of sins, made Isa. 59. 9. We grope for the wall like the blind, and stumble
as without eyes: we wait for light, but behold obscurity, for brightness,
but we walk in darkness.

Therefore, Gods vvayes being the safest, cleanest, rightest, shortest, and
lightsomest vvayes, we must be careful to walk in them.

Fourthly, only the end of this course and way will 4.
make us happy: the Devil himself confessed, that these are the vvayes of
salvation, Act. 16. 17. Psalm. 37. 37. mark and consider the just man; for the
end of that man is peace. Ps. 1. 1. Blessed is he that walks not in the
counsel of the ungodly; whereas the way of the wicked shall perish, that is,
leads to perdition; destruction and calamity are in their ways, Romans 3. 16.
and the Apostle calls them in plain terms damnable ways, 2. Pet. 2. 2.
Both these are concluded, Psalm. 125. 5. As for such as turn aside unto their
crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity;
but peace shall be upon Israel.

This doctrine serves to let many men see their folly; Use 1.
they hope to be saved, and make full account when they die to go to God, but
yet shall never come there, because they are not in the ways of God. If a man
should say he would go from York to London, and yet shall hold the direct way
to Barwicke, would not every man laugh at him? So is it with him that walks in
the path of perdition, and yet says he will come to heaven. Ask them what way
they walk in, and they must needs give themselves the lie if they say it is
Gods way: and in this conceit thousands are deceived, and slip into their place
before they would; or be aware: for,

First, some walk in the blind way of ignorance, a Many bywaies beaten by
many.
dark and uncomfortable way, as men walking in the night, in which is no
safety nor direction: Numbers care not for the lantern of the word, and
walking in the night, know not whither they go, nor where they shall lodge.
Ask Papists what way they are in; Oh they are in the way of Catholics, in
the way wherein the Martyrs and Confessors died, in the way of their
forefathers, what way soever it be: and I would this ignorance were among them
only! but alas! it is the way of too many, who profess the light.

Secondly, some walk in the cross ways of superstition and men's devices, as
many of our people, who think common prayers better in Lent then all the year
after: and some can be devout on high days, and come to Church, but other
days Gods service is not so affected: and some receive the Sacrament at
Easter, and they were damned if they did not, but all the year besides, the
Sacrament has no sweetness. These are superstitious ways, whereas Gods ways
are always the same and to be walked in with the same affection.

Thirdly, some go in the crooked ways of humane reason, will, policy, and
affections, and cannot yield to the wisdom of God; their own lusts are their
laws; who should control them? Here is an infinite number of rodes, all of
them full of wanderers from God; whereas Gods way is but one, and of Gods
describing, clean contrary to man's corrupt reason, will, affections, and
conversation.

Fourthly, some go in the detestable and damnable ways of wilful spurning
against the truth. 2. Pet. 2. 2. Many shall follow their damnable ways, by
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. Is it not damnable enough for
men to walk on in the vvayes of damnation themselves, unless they rail at
the way of truth and life?

Fifthly, some walk in the filthy, myrie ways of voluptuousness and
profaneness, as foul fornicators, drunkards, gamesters, gluttons, Epicures,
dainty and delicate persons, who seem to be made for nothing but idleness, and
effeminate care of their skin, and fruition of their own sensuality and
appetite. To such, Solomon speaks in the person of the young man, Walk in the
sight of thine eyes, and in the lusts of thine heart, but know that for all
this thou must come to judgment.

Sixthly, numbers walk in the rugged, stony, thornie, and clayie ways of
earthlinesse, covetousness, usury, and oppression, setting themselves fast in
the gall and guile of earthly-mindednesse, not having power over themselves to
stir hand or foot to heauen-ward: where their treasure is, there have they
locked up their hearts too, or rather burying them (for so they may being
dead:) in the earth and earthly desires; the heaven that they wish for, they
have; what then care they for any way that leads to another?

Secondly, it teaches us to learn the way that we are to go in: We can
walk in the ways of sin without Use 2.
a teacher, and can of our selves invent all such ways, but in Gods ways we
cannot move, unless God set them open unto us, and set us in them. This way
lies open to none but him that is taught of God: humane wisdom teaches it
not, nor reaches it, neither will believe it is the way.

How may I know which is the right way to go in?

If thou will know it, then, first, use the means to Quest.
come to know it. Secondly, take good notice of the Answ.
eye-markes, by which it may be discerned.

First, The means to know the way, are, first, diligent Means to know the
marks of Gods way.
converse in the Scripture. Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for they witness
of me, that is, of the way. So our Savior tells the Jews, Ioh. 8. 37. that
they sought to kill him, and were in the way of Cain, because his word had no
place in them: Whatsoever thou have a word for, that is the way, or else thou
art out of it.

Secondly, Prayer that God would teach us his way, Psalm. 119. 33.
as David does often pray, and give us the spirit to lead us into all
necessary truth. ler. 10. 23. I know, O Lord, that it is not in man to dispose
his way, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps.

Thirdly, Experience of change in our selves; if it lead us out of ourselves,
out of our natural lusts and the practice of sin, and bring in understanding
of Gods will, new desires, motions, affections, etc. then it is Gods way.

Fourthly, observation and experience of Gods blessing or cursing, of inward
peace, or accusation of joy and confidence, hope and patience, which in the way
of God is assured; whereas in any other way the greatest joy is but in the
face, and peace is but a truce with God, and an vnfeelingnesse of men's estate.

Secondly, The marks of this way, are, first, an outward The marks themselves.
profession of religion, which is called the way of God, Act. 19. 9. Speaking
evil of the way of God. Those that cannot away with the profession of piety,
have not stepped one step in the way to heaven.

Secondly, the life of profession, which is a faithful apprehension of Christ,
who is called the way: I am the way, no man comes to the Father, but by me,
Ioh. 14. 6. Every sound mark of a sound Christian is a mark of this way:
every man in every religion goes not in the way to heaven, but he only that
goes by Christ, the right and only way, and this, not only by outward
profession, but inward apprehension of Christ with all his merits.

Thirdly, the straitenesse of this way: strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leads unto life: the straitness of it is, in that it is a way all
strawed with crosses; the beginning of it, is repentance and selfe-denyall; the
continuance of it, is mortification, temptation, persecution.

The way of the world is a fair, broad, and easy way to the flesh: If we
find our selves prosecuting things pleasant to the flesh and nature, we may
justly suspect that we are out of the way.

Fourthly, the fewness or smalnesse of company in the way; few find it: Not
many mighty, noble, worldly wise, but a few poor ones receive the Gospel; the
greatest part of the world are in the broad way that leads unto death.

Foolishly therefore do the Papists make universality a note of the Church:
We must not follow multitudes, to do evil, nor do as the most do; for then
certainly we are out of the way.

Fifthly, the employment of all such as are in the way, who are never but doing
some of Gods Commandments, therefore called, The way of Gods precepts. Christ,
whom we have before us in this way, was obedient even to the death. Go without
or against a commandment, thou art out of the way: as, Romans 3. 12. they are
all gone out of the way: every sin is a stepping out of the right way.

Thirdly, when we have learned this way, then go in it: for here it is called
the way, wherein we must go; so as Use 3.
we must in our whole course carry our selves as those that are in the way to
heaven. To this purpose observe these rules:

First, consider what way we have entered into, whether Directions how to go in
the way of God.
we have chosen our own way, or walk in the way which God has prescribed:
the best must often consider of his way and course; David never considered of
his way, but he found something or other that needed redress. This do not they
that go at all adventures, not examining their way, nor the end of it, as if
they did not know, that there is a way which seems good in a man's own eyes;
but the issues thereof are the issues of death.

Secondly, forecast what may befall us in our way, and prepare for it. Elias,
when he had a great way to go, provided himself accordingly. If a man be
going to war, had he not need cast his accounts, and prepare all necessaries,
and fit himself against all difficulties? we must forecast what temptations,
trials, and dangers may meet us in our way, what may be our expense or loss:
many are the slips, scandals, offenses, and trials, which will encumber us in
this way, if we be not careful to forecast them, either to prevent them, or
prepare patience and strength to bear them.

Thirdly, walk on in this way; for it is not a way that can bring a man to any
desired place, but his walking in it: And then a man walks on in this way,
when, first, he neither goes back, nor stands still, as upon Iaakobs Ladder
the Angels were ascending or descending, none stood still: he that goes not
forward here, is going backward. Remember Lots wife. Secondly, when a man is
sure every action of his life is performed at the call, and within the compass
of his calling, general, or special. Thirdly, when he does all that he does
in the Name of the Lord, looking at Gods commandment, beginning the same with
invocation, and ending it with praise and thanksgiving, Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God. Fourthly, when all is done to the glory of God, to the honor of our
profession, and to the provoking of others, seeing our good works, to glorify
our heavenly father, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God. And thus shall every good duty in our
hands be a step in our way to heaven.

Fourthly, beware of turning to the right or left hand, Prou. 4. 27. Turn not
to the right hand: seeking or stablishing our righteousness in our selves, or
in merits, with the Papists: for the way of inherent righteousness leads from
Christ, who is the Way: nor to any way of perfection of orders devised by men,
as of Francis or Dominicke, of Poverty, Chastity, and Counsel-keeping or of
Iesuitisme, which is the perfection of Rebellion and Treason. David in the 101.
Psalm professes, that he will walk in the perfect way, diverse thousands of
years before the Devil had hatched any of these unclean birds in the world.
Neither turn to the left hand, turning grace into wantonness, and imboldning
our selves to sin, because grace has abounded, as profane Libertines do.
Turn not to the world or earthlinesse; these two ways can none walk in
together, unless one man could serve two Masters, or serve God and Mammon. Our
profession to God must be the same, that the Israelites, going toward Canaan,
made to Sihon King of the Amorites, Number. 21. 21. Let me go through thy Land,
we will not turn aside into the fields, nor into the vineyards, neither
drink of the waters of the wells, we will go by the Kings high way, until we
be past thy Country.

Fifthly, let us be circumspect both to prevent, and to recover our selves out
of our falls in this way. By reason What to be done in our falls.
of Satan's fierce temptations, the weakness of grace, and the frailty of the
flesh, many are the false and knocks of the best: In many things we sin all,
says S. James: and, Who knows his errors? Psalm. 19. 12. Now if we will
prevent these, we must beware of occasions of sin, as a traveler steps over
stones and rubs in his way: Eve prevented not the occasion of her fall, when
she entered talk with the serpent. We must make a covenant with our eyes, not
to look upon a woman, nor on the wine in a cup: we must watch over our selves,
both alone, and in company, and not run into bad company, lest we come home
by weeping cross, as Peter did. Secondly, we must not lie in our falls: a man
in his journey, if he fall, and lie still, shall never come to his ways end;
and if he rise quickly, though it hinder him a little, it shall not much. The
Saints all of them recovered themselves out of their falls, as David in this
Psalm, by confession, conversion, suing for pardon, and renewing their faith
and repentance. A man out of his way must come back again, the sooner he
returns, the less is his labor: Peter presently went out and wept bitterly,
and so was restored to Christ's favor. Thirdly, suppose thy falls be grievous,
and often into the same sins, yet let them not hinder thee still out of the
way. For as the child of God must neither presume nor purpose sin, so must
he not despair of rising, having fallen into sin, seeing the promise is,
that if a man's sins for heinousness be as red as Scarlet, upon his true
repentance they shall be made white as Snow: and the parable teaches, that if
a sinner offends seventy times seven times in a day, and as often truly
repent, he shall be as often forgiven. Fourthly, after such falls we must be more
wary and careful, lest we fall in the same manner. A man, yea, a beast will be
more careful when it comes by the same place where it caught a fall, ye
cannot get it into the same hole again. David no doubt would not count the
Tribes again, after that fall in numbering them.

Sixthly, hold on in this way constantly with perseverance; for the end of a
work crowns it, and the end of a way gladdeth and rests the weary
traveler, and this rest is without end. Many set forth on this way, but are
discouraged by the hardness of the entrance, whereas, if they were a little
entered, the way would be pleasant, and the yoke of Christ easy and sweet.
Others have gone yet further, but at length look back, yea, go back, when a
man would have thought they had escaped the filthiness of the world: and these
have lost a great deal of labor and comfort. Others yet farther then then
they, as the bad earth, even so far as a man could perceive no difference
between them and sound Christians; and apparent difference was there none but
in perseverance, and yet, wanting soundness, have suffered shipwreck even at
the haven, and so their former righteousness is all forgotten: a great deal of
way they had gone, and much work had they rid, whereof they shall never see
crown nor comfort: Oh beware of weariness and relapse: as toward the end of
his way the traveler is most cheareful, so should we, and the rather;
because, first every one affects a good end, even Balaam; and will we not
endure a little difficulty for it?

Secondly, Satan is most fierce in our end to hinder us of the crown, and
therefore we should be more watchful and diligent to go through.

Thirdly, if we can labor a while, we shall be ever safe, never fear him
any more, never lose that crown, which the righteous Judge shall give unto us,
who love his appearing.

I will instruct thee, I will teach thee, I will guide thee with mine eye:]
These three particulars teach us three properties of a good Teacher: First, to
make a people to understand their way. Secondly, to go before them in good
example in this way. Thirdly, to have a watchful eye over them, to guide and
govern them in that good way, which they teach and walk in. David, a good
Instructor, professing all these, propounds himself a pattern for all good
Pastors and Teachers.

First, Teachers must make the people understand the Doctr. 1.
word of God, and from thence their own estate, Nehem. Teachers must make the
people to understand the Word and their own way.
8. 8. Ezra read the book of the Law distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand. The sum of a good Teachers office is in teaching
pure doctrine purely: first, he must chiefly tie himself to the word of God;
his principal scope must be, not to make men understand Latin or Greek, or
the sayings of men, but the word of God. Ierem. 23. 28. The Prophet that has a
dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word
faithfully: what is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord? 2. Tim. 2. 2. The
Word that thou have heard of me, deliver to faithful men. Secondly, these
words must he propound to a plain and simple Audience, in no other then a
plain and simple manner, avoiding as much as he may unknown sentences, and
dark speeches, which fly above low conceits, that by this familiar handling
of the Word, it may become as a light in the dark corners of ignorant men's
hearts.

First then, It were to be wished, that a Minister were Use 1.
more then a bare reader, he must be (...), apt to teach, able to divide the
Word of truth aright, and must labor for the truely-learned tongue, to be a
prompt Scribe, an Ezra, causing men to understand the reading. For if the
blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch.

Secondly, people must diligently attend to the Use 2.
things that are taught, Heb. 2. 1. and not give over till they understand the
grounds of Religion. For, first, Faith comes by hearing and understanding of
the Word: the Word truly understood is the seed and parent of faith.
Secondly, without this knowledge of God and Christ there is no salvation: Ioh.
17. 3. This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. Thirdly, great is the excellency of knowledge:
Eccles. 2. 13. As the day is above the night, so knowledge excels ignorance,
and wisdom folly: without it there is no walking in the day or in the light;
knowledge is more necessary then the day or the Sun, therefore resist not the
means whereby it may be gotten.

Thirdly, we must not think that we then understand, when we know, or teach
men to know that which they Use 3.
did not before: for true understanding stands not only in speculation, but,
first, in the change of the heart. 2. Cor. 3. 17. then we behold the glory of
God in the Word, when we are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory, by the Spirit of God. Secondly, in the change of the life to new
obedience. Psalm. 111 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a
good understanding have all they that do thereafter: whereas without obedience
understanding does but convince and lay open to many stripes. Thirdly, when it
mingles the word with faith. Psa. 119. 66. Teach me good understanding and
judgment, for I have believed thy Commandments. Fourthly, when knowledge sets
us forward in glorifying God: for else it is no better then the knowledge of
the heathens, which made them excuselesse, because knowing God, they glorified
him not as God, Romans 1. 21. and if the heathens were justly condemned for not
glorifying God according to that dark knowledge they had, how much more should
our knowledge move us to glorify God, which else makes us more inexcusable,
if we glorify him not, by giving him his worship, praise, and honor, and by
making use of all his attributes and mercies, but especially those in his
Christ?

Secondly, A minister must not only be an instructor by his doctrine, but a
leader also by his practice: for Doctr. 2.
else, first, he is no guide: for he is a guide, whom we A Minister must be a
leader by his life, and example.
take with us to direct us in a dangerous way: what? a guide and not able to
guide himself? Secondly, else Gods work shall never go happily forward: for he
shall not build so fast with one hand, but he shall destroy with another.
Thirdly, their doctrine, which may save others, shall be a bill of indictment
against themselves; the curse is already upon them; that seeing, they perceive
not; and speaking the word to others, they hear it not themselves; and their
doom shall be, Wicked servant, out of thine own mouth thou shall be judged.
Thou that teach another, do not thou teach thy self? thou that preachest
against covetousness, art thou a griper never satisfied? or is there a grave
in thy heart, never full? do thou preach against drunkenness, and art an
intemperate person, a companion of drunkards? against liars, and yet there is
no truth in thine own words? Fourthly, it is a notable mark of an
Hypocrite, to do the same things which commonly he reprooueth in another; and
of a bold wicked man, that dares take the word of God into his mouth, and yet
hates to be reformed, and if it be in a teacher, he becomes not only a wicked
agent, but also a teacher of iniquity.

All which shows, that a good Minister must be more then a Preacher, he must
be a doer also, a guide, a good Use.
man, not a directer only, but a guide too. Singular holiness must be written
in Ministers foreheads, and special graces in their hearts; they must have
about them not only the sound of Bells, but the sweet smell of Pomegranates
also; they must be neither bleare-eyed, nor blemished, nor any way defective.

Thirdly, A faithful Minister must ever have his eye on Doctr. 3.
his flock, to guide them, and watch over them, for their good; A Pastor must
have his eye upon his flock to guide them.
as a tender mother will not let her weak and tender child be near a place
of probable danger, but her eye shall be over it to save it from peril. From
this care Ministers are called watchmen, and are set in their places as
watch-towers to epsy and prevent danger and enemies: and,

First, the estate of men requires this duty from Pastors, who are weak when
they are at the best, apt to Reasons. 1.
turn aside out of the way, ready to be seduced and misled by others, and
prone to be carried away headlong by their own lusts, if there were no enemy
else without them.

Secondly, their own calling enforces it, being set 2.
as Overseers of their Congregations, Act. 20. 28. to ouersee the ways of
their people. Their charge is, to warn the wicked, and to admonish the
righteous, if he turn from his righteousness; which they cannot do without
the observing of both.

Thirdly, they must imitate the chief Pastor and shepherd 3.
of souls: the good shepherd calls his sheep by name, and finds it out if
but one of a hundred be wandering, he seeks out the lost sheep, binds up the
broken, and strengthens the feeble knees; he loved his sheep to the death, and
so true love is desirous not to leave a man till it have set him safe.

Fourthly, the danger of not admonishing the people 4.
is exceeding great, for they communicate in their sins and the curses due
unto them; God will require the blood of a sinner that is not admonished, at the
watch-mans hand, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 20. And hereunto add the blessing and reward of
him, that turns a man from iniquity: he saues the soul of his brother, Iam.
5. 20. and shall shine as the stars in the firmament for ever, Dan. 12. 3.

This doctrine serves to reprove sundry both Ministers Use.
and people.

First, the sin of non-residency is a great sin where there is no just cause of
absence. A minister is tied to live among his people, because he must ever have
his eye over his flock: but how can he guide them with his eye, who is
continually absent? The Apostle Paul, whose calling made him necessarily absent
from some Churches, professes that he had no rest in himself, when he was
thus forced to be absent.

Secondly, the peevishness of men is hence discovered, that will not have
their lives marked, nor their actions scanned, the Minister must set no eyes
upon them, they will endure no observing, no reproof. Oh, what has he to do
with me? I will do what I list for all him. Nay, but he must observe thy
ways, he must guide thee with his eye, he must ouer-see thy course, and warn
thee out of thy special sins, and if he cannot hinder or prevent thy
damnation, he must prevent his own by warning and admonishing thee. Nay, if
God have made every Christian another watchman, and all the godly mutual
Keepers of each other, which is a special fruit of the communion of Saints, as
appears in those exhortations, to observe one another, to provoke to love and
good works, and, Let every man look on the things of another, etc. much more
must the Minister observe the ways of his people.

Thirdly, see hence both the necessity of the Ministry, which God has
erected in the Church, as a guide to heaven, and how we should entertayne it:
How kindly do Travelers recompense faithful guides? How barbarous were it for
a man to abuse him that gently guides him through a dangerous and unknown
way? and yet, what good guide in the Ministry meets not with such unnatural
dealing from natural and ungodly men? so much of the Preface; Now follows the
Exhortation.

VERSE. 9. Be not like the Horse or Mule, etc.]
IN these words is contained the third general use of the former doctrine, of
Gods free mercy, in justifying and saving the humble and penitent sinner,
hereupon inferring the duty of humble subjection and obedience unto God. This
is propounded in a precept dehortatorie, dissuading from brutish senselessness
and perverse obstinacy, which are two main lets to repentance and godly
sorrow: and the Prophet lays it down by way of dissimilitude between man,
to whom God has given a reasonable soul; and Beasts deuoide of reason and
understanding, especially such as are in a further degree of stupiditie and
dullness, then sundry other of the Creatures be, of which sort he names two,
the Horse and the Mule, from whose nature, Nature it self has taught us, not
to depart only, but also to abhor, because we are made after the Image of
God in knowledge and understanding.

The things wherein we must be unlike these creatures, are two: First, they
are unteachable; which understand not, says the Text; Creatures they are
incapable of instruction, you can persuade them with no Reason or Eloquence.
Secondly, they are intractable, and therefore it is said, Thou bindest them
with bit and bridle, lest they come near thee: they are wild by nature, and
if they be not well watched and hampered, they will bite and strike their
owners. Herein must every man, professing the fear of God, be utterly unlike
them.

For the further opening of the words, sundry questions are to be answered,
as,

First, Why is the Prophet so harsh and sharp with Quest. 1.
his Scholars? Are we not commanded to be soft and gentle unto all men, and to
instruct them with all meekness, considering our selves were once deceived?

David was directed by a good Spirit, and went upon Answ.
a good ground: First, he speaks out of his own experience, he knew what
himself was a little before, while he hardened himself in his willingness to
keep his sin. Psalm. 73. 22. I was foolish and ignorant, even as a beast
before thee. He knew the strength of other men's corruptions, the hardness of
their knots by his own, and sees they have need of as hard vvedges as he,
and yet after a sort makes himself a copy and instance in this sharp
reproof: Be not as I was, even like the Horse or Mule. Secondly, he
manifests a notable fruit of his own true repentance, that having left his
sin, he cannot speak of it but with disgrace, and testification of the
lothsomnesse of it; as it is a bad sign of impenitency, when a man can speak
any thing friendly of his sins past. Whatsoever has much lothed us in time
past, we cannot name it or think of it without dislike. And as he be wrayes
his own zeal against his own sin, so does he assure himself, that all
that are truly touched, care not how disgracefully their sins be dealt
withal. Thirdly, he would check the pride of sinners who think so well of
themselves, but in the state of nature are not only like, but far worse then
any of the brute beasts. True humility will make a man think of himself as
of the basest creature: Christ gave the Woman of Canaan diverse checks, and at
length he called her a Dog: Truth, Lord, said she: she thought no better of
herself then so. Fourthly, though our softness and meekness must moderate
our heat toward the sinner, yet must it not abate our heat and zeal against
the sin it self: again, we must so have compassion on some persons
offending, considering the circumstances of sins, as others we must save
with fear. Further, we must so consider our selves in times past, as we
forget not our selves for the present: Are we now healed? then our zeal is
more against sin then ever before, and as zeal increases, so does our
hatred of sin daily. Lastly, whom deals David withal, but obstinate and
wilful sinners, who are no better then corrupt and brutish nature made them?

Secondly, Why does he name these creatures, the Quest. 2.
Horse and the Mule, and not the Lion or any other?

First, because these are best known unto us, that his Answ.
true meaning might appear to the meanest, and break out sensibly in his
comparison to the simplest Hearer.

Secondly, that in their properties natural men might see their own, as,
first, these creatures are led by sensuality, not by reason; no more are
natural men, but led by the same guide. Secondly, every man sees these
creatures lower then that they can rise up to the understanding and judgment
of humane actions; and so are they in the things of God, 2. Pet. 2. 12.
Thirdly, how often do these creatures, especially if better fed, lift up the
heel against their Feeder, and never or seldom acknowledge the Owner of their
fat pasture? they cast off their Rider and grow insolent; so do they, Deuter.
32. 15. Fourthly, the Horse, longer then the spur or bit is upon him, is in
no awe: so wicked men, neither spur nor bridle auailes them to amendment.
Fifthly, the Horse, wanting reason to his strength and courage, rusheth fiercely
and fearelesly into any danger; so every wicked man turns to his race, as the
Horse into the battle, Ier. 8. 4, 6. Sixthly, the Mule is a creature, not of
the creation of God, but against his institution, Genesis 36. 24. and a wicked man
is a degenerate creature, not of Gods making, but against his Law, a Mule
arising by strange copulation with Sin and Satan: there was never a wicked
man, when God said of all the works of his hands, that they were exceeding
good. But we will co^fine our speech to those two properties in the Text, of
which an on.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, Be not like the Horse or Mule. Whether has a man
free will and power to Quest. 3.
change and convert himself? or else it seems the exhortation is idle.

Such exhortations argue neither universal grace nor free will, as the
Lutheran Divines and the Papists hold; Answ.
but have manifold uses besides, first, in regard of the wicked; to restrain
their wickedness, or to harden them as Moses his ministry did Pharaoh, Exo. 7.
2, 3. or to convince, and make them inexcusable, in that they cannot plead
ignorance. Secondly, in regard of the godly, and these either unconverted: for
with the exhortation, the Lord puts forth a power to enable them to do the
Commandment in some measure, as when Peter spoke to the Creeple, and bade him
stand up, at the same instant, a new and fresh power and life came into his
ioints and ankles, by which he was able to rise and walk. or converted: and
then they serve, First, to show them what they could do in ADAM, but now are
disabled by their own fault and folly. Secondly, what they can do in the
second ADAM in some measure. Thirdly, what to strive unto, because God
commands. Fourthly, to blow up grace received, which is often weak as a
smoking flax, or as a sparkle under green wood. Whereunto one observation
serves, clean contrary to the Papists opinion, namely, We never read of any
exhortation, but somewhere it has a promise or prayer for it, both which send
us out of our selves: As for example; Ezech. 18. 31. Make you a new heart, and
a new spirit: but it is the Lord, that promises to give an heart of flesh,
Chap. 11. 19. and DAVID prays, Create in me a new heart, Psalm. 51. 10. So,
Fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12. 13. but it is the Lord that
promises to put his fear into our hearts, Ier. 31. 33. and 32. 40.

Now from the former property of these creatures, which is vnteachablenesse,
being without understanding, we learn, that

It is a brutish quality not to learn our duty by the Word Doctr.
of God: for David here speaks out of his own experience, A brutish property
not to learn by Gods Word.
who while he cherished his sin, provoked God to deal with him, as we do
with Horses and Mules, which being incapable of persuasion, we deal not with
them with words or arguments, but with bridles, spurs, and rods; we can
make them feel us, but not understand us: and this is the brutish property of
wicked men, and of the godly sometimes in desertion, not to be ruled by the
voice of GOD, till his hand set it home. Prou. 7. 22. the young man being taken
with the Harlot, and not understanding his way, follows her as an Ox to the
slaughter, and as a Fool to the Stocks for correction; till a Dart strike
through his Liver, he sees and knows nothing. David himself, Psalm. 73. 22.
not having learned in the Sanctuary by the word that point of heavenly
wisdom, which might have sustained him in a sore temptation, confesses of
himself, that he was in this point ignorant, as the beast without
understanding.

Nebuchadnezzar would not hear the Word of God, while Daniel admonished him to
break off his sins by repentance: and to show what a brutish practice this
was, God changed him into a brute beast, not in form or shape of body, but in
his understanding and behavior; he ate grass with the beasts, and sorted
himself with them seven years, till his understanding came again, and then
he knew it was the most High that bears rule.

Balaam would not be taught to sit down by Gods Word, but still he would
assay if in this place, or that, he could curse the people of God: To show what
a brutish property this was, the Lord by the brute beast, which was under him,
reproved him, which saw more then his Master: 2. Pet. 2. 16. He was rebuked
for his iniquity; for the dumb Ass, speaking with man's voice, checked the
foolishness of the Prophet. Ier. 10. 21. The Pastors are become beasts, having
no understanding.

First, the chief part of that glory, which God decked Reasons. 1.
man withal at the beginning, and wherein his excellency was above the beast,
was in the light and holiness of his mind: for, being created in the Image of
God, which (as the Apostle says) stood in knowledge; he did acknowledge God in
himself, in his word, and works; he had communion with God, and delight in
his will: But now by his fall spoiling himself of his understanding, and
falling out of his right mind, he degenerates into the nature of the brute
beasts, which neither do, nor will understand the will of their Master. The
same speaks the Psalm, 49. 21. Man being in honor, became like a beast
without understanding; plainly showing, that his honor above the beast was
his right understanding, which departing from him, he was dejected and
degenerate into the dishonorable rank of brute beasts.

Secondly, since the fall, even the worst men retain the specificall and
common difference between man 2.
and beast, which is reason it self, suppose never so corrupted, which when a
man forsakes, he becomes brutish, like the brute beast, following lust and
appetite, and no other persuasion: and even so do they, that although they
hear the reasons and exhortations of the Word (all which reasons are divine
and of Gods framing,) yet as if they were beasts in the shape of men, their
actions proceed from sense and appetite, and have a brutish beginning; they
will not live by rules of reason, especially renewed; enemies they are to
persuasion; words no more prevail with them, then with the Horse or Mule which
understand them not.

Thirdly, who can deny, (that does but look on the external shape of man and
beast) but that GOD 3.
has put a plain distinction between them? One he has made with his face
upright, to look upward, as he that should have his continual dependence
upon God, and as he that should communicate with God in his counsels, and
attend the words of his mouth, and, being of an intelligible nature to receive
and know his will, should yield him frank obedience: The other, the beast, the
Horse and Mule are made with their eyes and countenance fixed upon the earth,
above which they cannot rise or consider any thing: A beast cannot look beyond
things present, or any thing but those that are ante pedes, before the feet; it
understands not any promises or threats further then it feels: and is not this
the property of many men, who are no better then beasts in their
understanding? tell them of GOD, of their Creation, their Fall, the Curse of
Sin, the means of their Restitution, the promises of Life, and the torments
of Sinners, their eyes are fixed wholly upon earth, and cannot see or discern
any such thing.

The beast may hear the sound, when we speak of such things, and these men
hear no more, or to no more purpose but to make their damnation just; they
live for the present; if they feel nothing, they are well enough; nothing that
they hear troubles them: And if this be not a brutish property, ask the
brutes themselves, and they will tell thee.

This teaches us to take shame to our selves, and be Use 1.
humbled when we see this to be our disposition, that we have not
understood, nor been warned by the Word of GOD, nor considered of his ways,
but as brute beasts have been led by lusts and sensuality while the Lord has
spoken unto us; whereby in Gods reputation we are worthily cut from the
account of men, nay thrust far lower then they; as the Lord often shameth his
own people by the brute beasts themselves, as Isa. 1. 3. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; that is, by much sense and daily
good-turnes may be brought to know their Benefactors; wherein he prefers
them before his people, that by no benefits, never so great or constant, would
be brought to know him. Yea, and whereas nature has taught the silly birds,
the Crane, Storke, and Swallow, to know their seasons, Ier. 8. 7. neither
nature nor grace has taught such as profess themselves GODS people, to know
God a. right.

Secondly, this shows what men may think of such as are unteachable, and
unwilling to learn the will Use 2.
of God: If we frame our judgment to Gods, we are to think no better of them
then of the Horse or Mule. Numbers will not be taught, and as many, who are
capable enough in earthly things to reach them, and ouer-reach others, yet are
altogether incapable of heavenly: both of these, as they have lived without GOD
and his Word all their lives, so they live still: Well were it for them they
were no worse then Horses and Mules; when they dye, their misery ends; when
these dye, their unhappiness begins, when Christ shall appear in flaming fire
to render vengeance to all them that know not God, nor obey his Sons Gospel.

Thirdly, if we would retain not the place of Christians only, but even of
men, we must be persuaded Use 3.
to be unlike the Horse and Mule, who are without understanding: We must labor
to understand what is the good and acceptable will of God: for which purpose we
must use the means to get out of our natural ignorance, and they be these:

First, because God teaches by his Word, we must co^scionably Means to get
understanding.
frequent the Ministry; I say not customably, but co^scionably: if you should
bring your Horse and Mule as your little Dogs to the place of knowledge, you
may make them stand or lie quietly, you can make them learn nothing: and do
you your selves no more? the more you hear and frequent means without profit,
the liker you make your selves to the Horse and Mule.

Secondly, God speaks by his Spirit which makes the Word effectual, we must
therefore hear the voice of the Spirit; not the sound of the words so much,
but the meaning of the Spirit. An Horse or Mule can hear a sound of words,
but have no distinct sense: and if a man come and hear words, and endeavor
not to be led into the meaning of GODS Spirit, he goes not beyond his Horse
in hearing. A beast by much pains may be taught something of man, which
runs into the senses; and if thou be only taught by man, and not by God,
that thine ears hear, but the heart which God must teach, be vnperswaded,
thou art not beyond thy beast in knowledge.

Therefore pray for Gods Spirit to teach thee, he is the Spirit of
illumination, the Spirit whose office is to lead into all Truth.

Thirdly, thou must lay up instruction, hide the word in thy heart, lay up and
bind up the Lessons in thy soul, not to lose or depart from them: The Horse
or Mule by sense will conform for the present, and do that they see they must
do, but want understanding to make use of that knowledge for time to come:
Like to the Horse or Mule are they, that for the present hear, and be
affected, and seem desirous to conform to the Doctrine delivered; but no
sooner out of the place but all is forgotten; and all good motions quenched;
all the use of their instruction is confined to the present time, and for time
to come is as merely lost, as words and persuasions upon an Horse or Mule.

Fourthly, thou must grow up in the similitude of the Word thou hear: the
Word must make thee of a man a new man, of a good man a better man; thou must
be changed into the Word: It is a Word of Faith, and must make thee a Believer,
yea, and the more thou frequentest it, thou must rise in the degrees of Faith.
It is a Word of light, and must inlighten the dark corners of thy heart, and
give direction to every one of thy steps. It is a Word of life, and must
quicken thee in the ways of God, and make thee move and active in piety. It
is a word pure and holy as God is, and must make thee grow up in holiness of
heart and life, without which thou shall never see God.

Thus if thou growest not like the Word, thou art not yet better then an Horse
or Mule, who, let them hear never such good reasons and persuasions, and by
maine strength be brought to conformity, yet abide the same they were, without
any change of themselves: Horses and Mules they were, and so they abide: be not
thou like unto them, let the Word make thee another man, or else thou art; to
these ends take with thee a few motives.

First, consider God has made thee a man, and wilt Motives to get
understanding.
thou by this property debase thy self, and equal thy self with beasts?
Will thou being a man put off manhood, and lay aside thy mind and the powers,
which God has given thee to distinguish thee from a beast? Secondly, he has
called thee into his Church, he has set open his School, he has sent out his
own Spirit to teach the Elect, so that now thou art willingly ignorant as
they, 2. Pet. 3. 5. worse then an Horse or Mule, who would know their duty,
but cannot, thou can, but wilt not. Thirdly, he has afforded thee his
blessed Word, a Word full of wisdom, resembling himself, furnished with such
variety of persuasion, as Men and Angels cannot devise the like; that if this
will not persuade thee, thou must be no better then an Horse or Mule without
understanding, nay worse: for reason cannot persuade them being unreasonable
creatures, but thou being reasonable, the reason of reason cannot persuade
thee. Fourthly, if thou would have a note of thy own conversion, thou must
put off thy brutish nature, and grow up in the knowledge of God: Hos. 6. 1, 2.
so soon as ever Gods people were converted and returned to God, they profess
this as a necessary consequent. Then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor, or
proceed to know the Lord. And indeed an unconverted man is an Horse or Mule,
incapable of this knowledge, it is too high for him, nay, he hates it and
spurns against it.

The second property, from which we are dissuaded in these creatures, is,
vntractablenesse: for before these creatures be broken and tamed, they are in
their nature wild and fierce, and can never be so tamed that they will obey
without bit or bridle: which teaches us, that

The property and nature of a wicked and unregenerate Doct.
man, is, to be obstinate and stiff against God and his Word, Every man
naturally is obstinate against God and his Word.
whom nothing but bit and bridle can tame and hold in order. This rebellion and
obstinacy is noted in Cain, who notwithstanding the Lord spoke unto him, and
reproved him for casting down his countenance upon Abel, yet went on
stubbornely in his sin, and could not be reclaymed till he slew his brother.
The like rebellion is noted in Pharaoh, whose invincible stiffenesse was such
as no word of God, no plague of God could move longer then they were as a bit
or bridle upon him: God raised him up as an extraordinary example of an
hard-hearted wretch, on whom he would declare his power, to whose degree of
rebellion every wicked man rises not, but it teaches expressly what is in
every man's nature, which would discover it self, were it not for Gods grace,
either renewing or at least restrayning. The same brutish property the Lord
taxes in his own people of Israel, Hos. 4. 16. who for rebellion is called an
unruly Heyfer, which, as it is untamed, rebelleth and suffers not it self to
be brought into order by the herd-man, nor abides among the other Cattle, but
breaks out: so Israel would not suffer her self to be ranged in the same
Orders and Ordinances of God, which he had set up at Jerusalem, but rebelled,
separated her self, and devised a new kind of worship, behauing herself more
like an unreasonable Heyfer, destitute of mind and judgment, then a people
whom God had ever chosen to himself.

Hereunto serves the common phrase of Scripture, whereby the cruel and savage
Oppressors of the Church are resembled by beasts, as the four great
Monarchies, of the Assyrians, Medes, Grecians, and Romans, with beastly
cruelty oppressing and eating up one another, are figured under four great
beasts, Dan. 7. 3. etc. a Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, and a strange beast with
ten horns: and the vision is expounded, verse. 17. These great beasts, which
are four, are four Kings which shall arise out of the earth. So Rome, being
restored by the Pope unto the tyranny of the persecuting Emperors, obstinately
resisting Christ and his Church, is set out by a great and strange devouring
beast, Revel. 13. 1.

First, the natural corruption and power of original Reasons. 1.
sin, most manifestly discovers it self in a stony and hard heart, which
every man brings with him from the womb, and by which a man naturally not
only declineth from Gods Image and Will, but stubbornely resists it. This
obstinacy is notably described, Isa. 48. 4. Thou art obstinate, and thy neck is
as an iron sinew, and thy brow as brass: Sinews are instruments of motion,
hard indeed, but flexible; but so refractarie is the natural man, and auerse
from God, that he is no more moved and bended toward him, nor can no more be
bended, then if for every sinew in his body having a plate of iron, he could
move or bow the parts: And to this natural evil of iron sinews, come the
brows of brass, which hardneth the wicked, and makes them impudent in evil,
as the former makes them impotent and auerse from God: From both which the
Scripture denominateth natural men to be sons of disobedience. Ephesians. 2.


Secondly, besides natural corruption there is an habitual hardness, and
obstinacy, contracted and arising from sundry causes, as, first, from the
custom of sin; and as hardly can an habitual and customable sinner change
his course as a Black-Moore his spots. Secondly, custom of sin takes away
both fear and feeling of sin. Thirdly, want of sense and feeling of sin,
brings a delight and pleasure in the fruition of it. Fourthly, this delight
holds out of the heart all desire to get out, nay it holds it in a purpose of
retaining the sin still. Fifthly, this purpose of retaining sin, does
purposely resist the means, which God has appointed to encounter and subdue
sin: as, first, the word of God: They have hated knowledge, and chused not
the fear of God; and Zach. 7. 11. they have refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder. Secondly, the Spirit of God: so Act. 7. 51. Steven tells the
Jews, that they had ever resisted the holy Ghost, striving with them in
public instructions, and private motions. Thirdly, the corrections of God,
notwithstanding all which the wicked man falls back more and more: And
commonly these go together, the hating of counsel, and not profiting by
correction, as appears, Prou. 1. 25.

By these means the wicked man hardneth himself in evil, and, whereas
naturally his heart is of the nature of a stone, himself hardens it by these
means to the hardness of the hardest stone: for so it is, Zach. 7. 12. Yea
they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, etc.

Oh then take notice of this hardness of heart and obstinacy Use 1.
against God and his word, which resists and rebelleth against the light of
grace.

God forbid we should be rebels against God. Object.


This obstinacy is in every man by nature; in the reprobate Answ.
it continues total and final, in the elect temporary and partial, even
after their calling and conversion, and it cannot be otherwise: for so long as
we carry any carnal wisdom about us, there will be enmity against Gods
wisdom; and so long as pride reigns, as in the wicked, or moves and
breaths, as in the godly, it will be lifting it self up in high thoughts
against God; and so long as the conscience is evil, as in the wicked, or but
in part good as in the godly, it will be desirous to maintain peace with
evil, and war with the word of grace, when it would disturb it. In a word,
so long as any sin has any command or power, and so long as the flesh is not
wholly mortified (as it cannot be in this life:) the Spirit shall be resisted
by the lustings of the flesh, because (as the Apostle says) these two are
contrary. Great cause we have therefore to mourn under this our misery, by
which we cast off the yoke of God and his gracious regiment, even as the horse
casts his rider and rises up against him. And it will be a good meditation,
when we see an horse or other brute creature resist and rebel against us, to
think, Oh thus does my cursed nature rise up against Gods teaching and handling
of me; nay he has far more strength then he puts forth against me: but
I have no strength, which I have not used against God.

Secondly, let us labor to get out of this obstinacy and stiffenesse betimes,
lest the Lord give us up to fall away Use 2.
by perpetual rebellion. This we shall do by yielding our selves tractable,
and laying aside obstinacy in sin, and by giving up our selves to be ruled
by Gods word and spirit. This point is so much the more necessary, because the
great sin of these days is obstinacy of heart: men cannot plead ignorance,
nor want of good means to help them out of their sins; and yet few or none
leave their sins, but wilfully persevere in them against the word and their
own consciences. Besides this, God has given us many warnings of our estate,
by many plagues of the highest kind threatened, and not a few, and those not
insensible, executed with severity, but for all this, we are in general
senseless, and are resolved to hold our sins without humble sorrow and suing
to God for reconciliation. And this is rebellion against God, of knowledge to
depart from the known truth in whole or in part.

Now to help us out of this sin of obstinacy, consider Motives to lay aside
obstinacy in sin.
these motives: first, neither Gods covenant of mercy nor the least part of it
belongs to that man, that obstinately goes on in sin: for the first condition
in the tenor of the new covenant, is, to take away the stony heart, Ezekiel. 11.
19. It is a brand of a man in the state of death, to be hard and
brawnie-hearted.

Secondly, all the hope and expectation of such a man is, evil and mischief
to meet him at every corner. Prou. 28. 14. He that hardneth his heart, shall
fall into evil: he may with Balaam shuffle from one way into another, but
cannot avoid the Angel with a drawn sword ready to kill him. Now what a
fearful and desperate estate is it for a man to go under Gods curse
continually, as a man upon whom sentence of death is passed, and knows not,
but expects every moment execution? yet so hardened are some, who harden
themselves, that when the parts of this curse are in executing upon themselves
and theirs, they are further hardened still.

Thirdly, every sin is damnable, but yet, not so much sin, as obstinacy
and impenitencie in sin condemns, especially where all good means of
softning have been used: nothing but repentance cuts off sin, and that is the
only remedy, which by the hardness of heart being rejected, the wounded soul
dies irrecouerably.

Fourthly, while hardness and obstinacy continue, no means can help or avail
a man to salvation: He cannot pray, because he turns away his ear from
hearing the law: He cannot hear the word to do him any good; for, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: The Sacraments are bane and
poison to him, because he comes with a wicked heart: In a word, no Service or
sacrifice is acceptable but from a broken heart, which he has not: therefore
he is like a sick man given over by the Phisician.

Fifthly, the longer a man continues in obstinacy, the more he increases the
wrath of God upon him. To. 2. 5. Thou through the hardness of thy heart, which
cannot repent, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath. As if
a great malefactor should for twenty or forty years every day be carrying a
faggot, to make a fire to burn himself withal: so the sinner, the longer he
continues in his sin, the greater wrath is laid up for him, as the more
faggots, the greater fire: What a woeful condition were this? but nothing to
the fire of hell, the burning of which is fire and much wood, and the wrath of
the Lord as a river of brimstone kindles it, Isa. 30. 33. Is it not a
lamentable thing for a man to abide in that estate, in which he is continually
carrying, as it were, a faggot to hellfire to burn himself withal?

Oh but I will repent in the end of my days. Object.


Do not trust upon that: for, first, late repentance is Answ.
seldom true repentance; he that repents not till he be dying, it is to be
feared lest his repentance dye with him. Secondly, the longer a man perseuers
in sin, the longer and more he increases the hardness of his heart, and it
proves daily the harder to repent: every day adds something to hardness of
heart; as in the body, a sore, the longer it is delayed, the more incurable it
is, so is it in the soul. And thirdly, this thy speech makes as if a man would
be sure to pay his debts by running further in: Know this for a certainty,
that the souls sweruing from God, is like bones out of joint, which, the
longer they are let alone, are the hardlier set.

Notes of a man gotten out of his obstinacy, are Notes of a man gotten out of
obstinacy,
these: first, poverty of spirit all our lives for sin, which is an humble
sight and sense of sin and misery, when a man finds a want of all goodness
in himself, and in an holy despair of himself he flies wholly to the mercy
of God in Christ, longing after it above life, and hungring after it above all
things in the world.

Secondly, a trembling at Gods word; for these two are joined, Isa. 66. 2. I
will look to him, that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at my Word; and
yet loves the sharpest reproves of it; which is joined with the former, Psalm.
119. 119. 120. I love thy testimonies; My flesh trembles for fear of thee,
and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Thirdly, silent submission to Gods corrections, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it: Micah. 7. 9. I will bear the
wrath of God, because I have sinned: we must get into our hearts a patient
waiting in all injuries and wrongs, till God plead our cause.

Fourthly, a mourning under the grudgings of our own hardness of heart, and
that we cannot mourn and get them to through subjection: so did the Church
returning to God, Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from
thy ways? return for thy servants sake, and for the tribes of thine
inheritance.

Fifthly, a fear of the occasions of sin, and hatred of appearance of evil,
and of the garment spotted by the flesh.

Whose mouths thou do bind with bitte and bridle:]
OVt of these words we may note; that, If a man will Doctr.
continue indocible and intractable, God has his God has a bridle for
intractable sinners.
bitte and bridle for him, to curb and hamper him: If men will be as Horses
and Mules, God will deal with them as men do with Horses and Mules. Prou. 26.
3. Unto the Horse belongs a whip, to the Ass a bridle, and a rod to the fools
back: God has rods enough in store, to whip the folly of sinners, otherwise
incorrigible: Leuit. 26. 27. If ye will yet walk stubbornly against me, I
will walk stubbornely against you in mine anger, and will chastize you yet
seven times more according to your sins.

Now then, a man walks stubbornely, when he regards no admonitions, nor
precepts, nor corrections and judgments to bring him to amendment, as a child
or servant is then stubborn, when he will have his own ways,
notwithstanding all means the Father or Master can use to the contrary; he
intreates fair, threatens, and lays on a load of stripes, but the other
stands close to his own disordered will; and to disobedience adds a wilful
and perverse frowardness. But what gets a man by his obstinacy and
frowardness against God? why, God walks frowardly in anger against him; his
hardness of heart hardens God against him, his stony heart brings upon him
Gods brazen hands. And then God is said to walk stubbornly, when he does as a
stubborn and perverse man, being moved against another, uses to do: as,
first, a stubborn man seeks all the hurt he can to him, whom he spites: so
God finds out plagues against sinners, but all in the way of justice, as the
froward man does not. Secondly, he shuts his ear to all prayer and entreaties,
and will not hear of any reconciliation: so does the Lord in sins of this
nature. Thirdly, he rejoices to see his harm, and the Lord laughs at a
wicked man's destruction, Prou. 1. 26.

What be the bridles, wherewith God curbeth obstinate Quest.
sinners?

Diverse: first, his own will and good pleasure, by Answ.
which he lets them sometimes go with the reine in their Gods bridles what.
necks; and sometimes again reins them up at his pleasure: for as men by an
halter or bridle lead an Horse and other unruly creatures whither they would
not: so the Lords will ouer-rules the sinner, and orders him this way or that.
Judas was often warned of his sin of covetousness, yet he went on obstinately
in it; the Lord suffered him to perfect it, but instantly the Lord ouermastered
him, put his halter about his neck, and made an end of himself and his sin.

Secondly, the law, a part of Gods will revealed, is another bridle: the law is
added because of transgressio^, says the Apostle, and is given, not to the
righteous, but to the lawless and disobedient, namely, by fears, threats, and
the cursings of it to repress and restrain them; that look as harmefull and
unruly beasts, as Lions, Dogs, Horses, are tied up and chayned that they do no
hurt, so unruly sinners are hampred by the Law, the doctrine of which is as a
Tedder, and the threats as a Curb to contain them within some bounds.

Thirdly, Gods hand and power in judging and revenging, is another bridle to
tame wicked persons, and keep them from rising up against him or contemning
him. Pharaoh, who would not know who the Lord was, was only by this bridle
ouer-mastered and subdued. This bridle sometime the Lord hampreth the inner man
and conscience withal, vexing the wicked man with horror, accusation, and
despair, as Cain; sometimes the outward man with visible judgments; often by
others, he lets them fall into the hand of the Magistrate, and so he cuts them
off; not seldom by themselves, by quarrelling, drinking, or intemperance
insensibly to slay themselves; and often in desperate impatience and
wickedness, he makes their own hands their Executioners, to cut off the thread
of their lives, as Judas and Achitophel. Nay, this bridle does not only in this
present life curb and hamper the wicked, but eternally in the life to come,
and shall never be drawn out of their mouths, to give them the least ease or
hope of an end, when it shall be made as sharp and cutting as GOD himself can
devise.

The reasons, why God has these bridles for indocible Reason. 1.
and incorrigible sinners, are these.

First, because he is a just Judge, and renders to every man according to his
works. Psalm. 18. 26. With the froward thou will show thy self froward: that
is, thou vvilt by the effects declare another carriage to the wicked then to
the godly. Wilful sinners must reap as they have sown, and drink as they
have brewed, and have returned to them according to their own measure.

Secondly, for the declaration of his mighty power upon the wicked. Isa. 37.
29. Senacherib, Because thou have raged against me, and thy tumult is come up
before me, I will put my hook in thy nostrils, and my bridle in thy lips: that
is, because as a wild Horse thou have tumultuously rebelled against me, I will
bridle thee, and with shame enough lead thee against thy heart from thy
enterprises.

Thirdly, necessity calls for it: for if God should not bridle and restrain
the malice of the Devil and his Agents, there would be no living in the world:
for sin is of that spreading nature, that it would never know bound or bank.
Neither has any sinner any bridle or stay in himself; therefore God uses
this bridle for the preservation of the world, and humane society in it: he
has set up his solemn Ordinances, of Magistracy in the Commonwealth, and
Ministry in the Church, to repress and bridle sin and sinners: but when
these either fail, or are contemned, his own hand holding the reins, checks
and controls those who will know nothing else.

This should move us further to beware of standing out with God, while he
gently calls us by his Word: Use 1.
If we will not hear his fatherly voice, we must feel the hand of his
severity: If we will not be bended with the rod of his mouth, we must be
broken with the rod of iron that he holds in his hand. Here consider, first,
how brutish it is not to hear reason, not to be capable of persuasion, but all
that is done must be with bit and bridle.

Secondly, that there is no resisting of God by force and arms, by war and
weapons, but by humility, faith, and repentance. Were it not better then, to
take the rod of mortification betime into our own hands, and beat our selves
gently, then force the Lord to take the rod of his indignation against us?

Thirdly, consider God is the same in his dealing with his Church, and his
manner has always been first to warn and admonish the sinner, and wait with
patience his amendment, but, not attayning his purpose, he has always turned to
severity; when his vocal Word could not be heard, his real Word must. Hos.
5. 4. 12. how many means used the Lord to reclaim Ephraim, that is, the
people of Judah, from her Idols and transgressions? but verse. 4. they will not
give their minds to turn unto their God; hereupon the Lord turns him to his
real Word, that is, his judgments, but as one slow to wrath, verse. 1.
therefore I will be to Ephraim, as a moth, and to the house of Judah as a
rottennes; that is, by leisure and smaller judgments begin to consume them:
and if Ephraim, now seeing his sickness, will go away still and seek to
others beside me, then I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a Lions whelp
to the house of Judah, (not as a moth:) but in rage tear and spoil, and none
shall rescue.

Ezekiel. 24. 12, 13. the skumme of Jerusalem went not from her, therefore her
skum shall be consumed with fire: But why did it not go from her? Did she
want means? No, I would have purged thee, says the Lord, and thou wast not
purged: therefore now thou shall not be purged till I have caused my wrath to
light upon thee.

The same is Gods dealing, whether with people or persons: if his Word cannot
separate the skum from thee, his fire shall, and if the means of purging
cannot prevail, thou shall have thy will a while, thou shall not be purged,
but then God will have his will, his wrath shall light upon thee. Thou that by
Gods Word wilt not be persuaded to leave thy vain swearing, the bridle of the
Law and the menaces of it, restrain thee never a whit, God has another bridle
of his revenging hand and power, which will make thee know, that though his
patience for the present be great, ye he will not ever hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in vain. Thou that art in league with thy drunkenness and
drunken company, hear the Word say, that Drunkards shall not come into the
Kingdom of Heaven: this is no bridle for thee, thou runst upon head without
rule or reins of moderation and sobriety; Gods hand and power will bridle
thee well enough, when thou shall drink the cup of his wrath, mixed for his
enemies, and thou being one shall not avoid. Thou that art an enemy to the
Word, because it is an enemy to thy sin, and scoffest the profession and
professors of Religion, under the titles of Heretics, hear the Word
cursing those that curse GODS people, Genes. 12. 3. yet this is no bridle nor
stay to thee, but thou please thy self still in disgracing them: know that
God has his bridle to hamper thee with, and he will bind thee if thou were
as fierce as a Bear, and thou shall know it, when Christ shall be ashamed of
thee, and say to thee standing without: In that thou have scoffed one of these
that believed in me, thou did it to me. Remember Julian; when the Lords
bridle was in the mouth of that Monster, he cried, Vicisti, Galilaee, vicisti:
the like shall be unto thee, and unto Sabbath Breakers, Usurers, Liars, etc.

Fourthly, consider the uncertainty of our lives, no man has a lease of his
life, and if death take us away in our obstinacy, we perish for ever, as the
tree falls so it lies, as death leaves us, so the judgment finds us.

Secondly, let this consideration persuade us to willing and free subjection to
God and his Word, lest God Use 2.
be enforced with the bridle of his might to tame our fierceness and
senselessenesse: for this is the threatening, that the Lord will walk
stubbornely with his own people, till their uncircumcised hearts be humbled,
Leuit. 26. 41.

And to the effecting hereof, consider: First, God requires a reasonable
service of thee, Romans 12. 1. not unreasonable, like that of unreasonable
creatures that do all by constraint, by the rod and the spur, but voluntary
and cheerful: All sound obedience to God must proceed from sense of his love,
and this puts life into it; for that which is forced and constrained for fear,
is hypocritical.

Secondly, the subjects of Christ are called a willing people, Psalm. 110. 3.
and those that are inwardly taught of God, work and obey not by the compulsion
of the Law (although the best need sometimes not only threats, but rods aso,
and bitts, and bridles to keep under their lusts:) but the Spirit has in
their general purpose and course freed them to a voluntary subjection and
obedience.

Thirdly, Gods acceptance of our duty, and consequently our comfort is in the
willing and cheerful manner of performance: A wicked man may do the same
things with the godly, and go beyond him in matter, the difference is in the
manner and end. God loves and accepts free will Offerings; If a man give, God
loves a cheerful giver: If a man do any duty of his calling, let him say as
Paul said of himself, If I do it willingly, I have a reward, 1. Cor. 9. 17.
It is not thanke-worthy, but the work is lost, when a man is drawn to the
duties of piety or charity, as a Bear by the ring in his nose, or an Horse
by the rod and spur to his ways end: GODS love must be our spur, and then
we may look at the recompense of reward.

VERSE. 10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he that trusts in the
Lord, mercy shall compass him.
NOw follow the reasons or enforcements of the former precepts, to lay aside
brutish senselessenesse and perverse obstinacy, and they are drawn,

First, from the great and manifold plagues, which are reserved for indocible
and incorrigible persons, Many sorrows shall be to the wicked.

Secondly, from the infinite love and good will of God toward penitent
sinners, But he that trusts etc. And these two reasons are the two parts of
this verse, which contains in it the sum both of all the curses of the Law;
and of the sweet promises of the Gospel: And David as a good Teacher takes the
right order, first, he preaches the Law, to terrify the dull and secure, and
then offers the sweet and gracious promises of the Gospel to believers:
thus John Baptist makes way unto Christ, and thus the Lord by Earthquakes and
Thunders prepares men to his still voice: he that has felt the breakings of
the Law, feels the sweetness of the bindings of the Gospel: If therefore we
preach the Law, it is to prepare men for the Gospel, and little know men that
shunning the Law they fly from the Gospel.

First, of the commination or threatening; Many sorrows shall be to the wicked.

And first we must know what is meant by this wicked man: he is not every
sinner, but as the Text it self notes him out,

First, an ignorant and indocible person, who is as the Horse or Mule without
understanding.

Secondly, an obstinate person in his sin, an incorrigible person, one whom
Gods Word nothing preuailes withal, nor can be ruled without bitt or bridle.
Thirdly, a man that trusts not in the Lord, as the words following show. The
handling of this text is fit in our congregation, wherein not a few of all
these sorts be.

Secondly, this man shall have sorrow; the wicked man is ever miserable, though
seldom or not ever sorrowful, that is, sensible of his misery. Now the wicked
triumph, and seem the happyest men under the Sun, and it has troubled the
godly, that they have all to their hearts desire, Job. 21. 7. Psalm. 73. 3. Ier.
12. 1. the rich glutton goes in skarlet, and fares deliciously every day: But
their sorrows shall be as the sorrows of a woman, their delights shall be
turned into torments, their laughter into tears. Now all our working on them,
cannot bring them to take knowledge of their misery, but they shall one day be
afflicted with sorrows, and shall not so easily turn them off.

Many sorrows,] because of many plagues, and many plagues, because of many
sins: Many sorrows in number, many in kind, many in this life, many more in
the life to come, many within him, many without him, and many on every side, as
the next branch in the opposition shows, that God on every side compasses his
children with goodness and mercy. Whence,

Note the unhappy and cursed estate, of every wicked and Doctr.
obstinate sinner in the world, his sorrows shall be many The state of an
obstinate sinner is accursed.
and great. Isa. 65. 13, 14. Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be
hungry; my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and and ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of mind, and ye shall leave
your names for a curse unto my chosen. Reu. 9. 12. One woe is past, and two are
to come: and Chap. 8. 13. The Angel flying through the midst of heaven, cried,
Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth: All these many woes are proclaimed
against the wicked of the world, cleaving either to the Kingdom of Antichrist
in the West: or of Mahomet in the East, Turks, Saracens, Arabians, Tartarians;
and after them to all the wicked that cleave not to God in the purity of his
worship, and in obedience of his word.

And, that they are only denounced against them, appears, Chap. 9. verse. 4.
because the children of God are sealed and exempted from them. Deutron. 28. 58.
59. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law, then the Lord
will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great
plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses and of long continuance.

But many are the woes and miseries of the godly, Object.
and therefore what is it better to be a godly man then a wicked?

There is great difference between them: for, first, Answ.
these are all mingled with mercy. Indeed a child that is 1. Difference between
the godly, and wickeds misery.
dear to his father, if he run another way with Jonah, must be whipped and
fetched back again; yet the Lord puts not off fatherly affection but
remembers mercy in judgment, and smites with the rods of men, but his mercy
he takes not away: Whereas the sorrows of the wicked are destitute of all
mercy; and no marvel, seeing all their blessings are leuened and sowred, and
tend to their bane; through a secret curse of God blowing on them, and blasting
them.

Secondly, the godly call not their miseries on them by 2.
a trade and course in sin, as the wicked do; but, when for trial or
correction of some slip, God leads them where they would not, they follow him,
taking up the cross, thereby learning the will of God, proving what is in
themselves, amending that which is amiss, and confirming themselves to every
good work: this cannot the wicked do, who, whatsoever they suffer, fall from
evil to worse.

Thirdly, the Lord delivers the godly out of all, puts under his hand, and
reares them up, and leaves them not 3.
in the sorrow, till he have enlarged their feet, and brought them where all
tears shall be wiped away: Whereas he leaves the wicked in sorrow, laughes at
it, and suffers the fire of his jealousy to seize on them to the bottom of
hell.

Fourthly, the Lord recompenseth the light afflictions of his servants with an
exceeding weight of mercy, first, in this life, justifying, sanctifying,
beautifying, teaching, feeding, protecting them and theirs. Secondly, in death,
bringing their souls to heaven, and laying up their bodies safe till the
resurrection. Thirdly, at the day of judgment, bringing both body and soul
into the glory of the just: But these sorrows of wicked men are far other,
both for number and measure, in this life and afterward much more, all of them
void of all mercy.

And to conceive aright of them, consider, first, the kinds of them. Secondly,
the causes or reasons of them. Thirdly, the use.

For the first: these sorrows are partly in this life, and The kinds of the
wickeds sorrows.
partly after it.

First, In this life these sorrows are partly in the present practice of
sin, and partly in the consequent 1. In this life.
fruits of it.

Secondly, the very course of a sinner, although Satan present it to him
through a false glass, and it seem pleasant, and care to be quite away, yet
indeed it is a sorrowful and heavy course: for the laughter of a wicked man
is but in the face, not in the heart, and even in laughter the heart is heavy,
or has cause so to be.

That which Solomon speaks of a voluptuous course (which most agrees with the
flesh:) is true even in the passing of it, It strikes as a Dart through the
liver, Prou. 7. 23. The same is true in the purchase of other sins, as, 1.
Tim. 6. 10. the Apostle notes of the course taken up in earthlinesse and
carking care after the things of this life, that this man, though he seem to
live merrily, yet he pierces himself through with many sorrowe^. The
intemperate person meets with many diseased days and hours of pain and
sorrows, as the Gowt, Dropsy, Palsies, Surfets, which make his life a burden
unto him, so as though the sinner see it not, yet in the practice of sin
there is more gall then honey, and at the best it is but a bitter-sweete: But,

Secondly, after the sin is committed, comes a fearful and more sorrowful
sense of it: for, if the best fruits of sin even in the godly that are renewed
by repentance, be shame and sorrow; no marvel if the wicked be hanted and
hunted with horrors of conscience, desperate fears, restless torments, and be
as the raging Sea, which cannot rest: for there can be no peace to the wicked
man, so long as his conscience has any sense: but, let him go and ride where
he will, he pursues himself with hue and cry; and so long as he cannot run
from himself, he carries his accuser and tormenter with him; as Cain did; and
Baltasar even at his Feast was pierced with fears and sorrows, that made his
joints loose, and his knes knock together: so shall Gods handwriting be on the
walls of profane consciences. How many sorrows after his sin, ouertooke
Judas, and so oppressed him, that his heart being not able longer to sustain
him, his best ease was to hang himself? a woeful remedy, not much better then
his disease; but such shifts are the wicked sometimes put to, when their sweet
meats are recompensed with sour sauce.

Secondly, after this life is the consummation of his 2. After this life.
sorrows, even in Christ's appearance: for, all that this life can load him
with, is but the beginning of sorrow. The parcels of this sorrow shall
especially be in these particulars:

First, they shall wail and sorrow to see him come in the clouds, whom they
have pierced; he shall be their Judge, whose laws and person all their
villainies have been committed against.

Secondly, in that woeful separation, first, from God in the loss of glory and
happiness; and then, from Gods people; when they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Iaakob, and all the Saints in the kingdom of heaven, and themselves shut out;
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Luc. 13. 28.

Thirdly, in the punishment of sense, when they shall be wrapped in that cursed
sentence, Depart from me, I know you not, when they shall be bound hand and
foot, and cast into torments, prepared for the devil and his Angels: which
torment is amplified, first, by the place, a prison, a lake of fire and
brimstone, a dungeon for the darkness, blacker then that of Egypt, where
shall be a perpetual night; in a word, an hell. Secondly, by the company, the
devil and his Angels, with all the rout of reprobates, Gods deadly enemies,
and whom God is a deadly enemy unto; such as they chose for their companions
in this world, and would not be separated from, now they shall not. Thirdly,
by the exquisiteness of torment, set out by fire and brimstone, and that which
is most terrible to sense; yea, not only outward, but inward also, described
by the worm of conscience, which as a gnawing grief, shall eat and fret the
heart of the sinner in memory of ancient and hateful sins.

Fourthly, in sinful concurrences, as hatred of God, blasphemy, despair,
cursings; for all the parts of soul and body shall curse the day of their
wretchedness and confusion, when the fire of Gods jealousy, and his hot wrath
shall seize upon them.

Fifthly, in seeing all mercy and pity excluded, nay, God, and his Saints
(whose affection shall be conformable to his:) shall rejoice and laugh at their
destruction, this shall break the caul of their hearts with sorrow.

Sixthly, in the eternity of their sorrows, the worm within dies not, their
fire never goes out, but the wrath of God abides upon the sinner without all
remission or abatement, without any intermission or release, without end or
mitigation, not one drop of water shall cool their tongue, and so long as God
is God, the smoke of their torment shall ascend up night and day continually.
This is Tophet, prepared for the wicked, in which one word how many sorrows be
there?

Now the reasons to clear Gods justice in all these Reasons of all these
sorrows of wicked men
sorrows of the wicked, are these:

First, where many sins are unrepented of, there must needs be many
sorrows, every sin having sorrow 1.
enough belonging to it.

Secondly, where an infinite God is offended, an infinite law transgressed, and
an infinite justice provoked, 2.
there must needs an infinite revenge be returned upon the sinners head, and
sorrows in infinite measure be conceived.

Thirdly, Infinite mercy has been rejected, the blessed means of salvation
neglected and despised, good 3.
means without in the ministry, counsel and example of the godly, inward
motions of the spirit quenched, yea, some checks of conscience contemned, and
some resolutions deaded and vnfollowed: All these yet bring on more stripes and
sorrows, especially in remembrance of hateful sins against knowledge,
means, and conscience.

Fourthly, it is now too late to repent, when these sorrows have beset the
sinner on every side; hope of 4.
mercy is cut off, the Sun is set upon him, the door of grace is shut
against him: now he can hear no other voice then that Reu. 18. 6, 7. Give him
torments according to his sins. Here is an Ilias, an vpheaped measure of
infinite sorrow, a merciless sorrow without spark of hope or joy.

Fifthly, now he sees with horror and despair that 5.
which he would not hear of, first, that he has in his whole course piled up
wrath against himself.

Secondly, that God, whom he thought to be made all of mercy, is a God of
infinite justice, and a consuming fire, and how dreadful it is to fall into
his hands.

Thirdly, that the sentence of death is passed irrecouerably, and the heavy
doom of damnation for such sins as he thought to be lighter then a feather.

Fourthly, that himself is a vessel of wrath, filled with Gods indignation,
that shall seize on him so long as God is God, seeing Christ's blood can be shed
no more, and tears of repentance come now too late, a Sea of them is not able
to quench one spark of this fire.

First then, let this be a motive to restrain all men Use 1.
from sin, seeing it brings such after-claps. If there be any that like the
Horse or Mule, will not understand, nor be persuaded to seek the Lord, but will
obstinately persist, hardening his heart against the Word, for such a man are
all these sorrows prepared. Thou that delightest in any sin, open or secret,
that wilt drink with the Drunkard, swear with the Swearer, and break the
Sabbath after so many admonitions; thou that live in pride, wantonness,
idleness, uncleanness, contempt of God and his Word and Servants; thou that
every way multipliest thy sins, remember what David says, Psalm. 16. 4. Thou
multiplyest and heapest up thy sorrows, even wrath and fuel for thy self
against the day of wrath. Thou that can with a bold face brave out thy
sins, and glory in that thy hand is strong to practice ungodliness; and
can triumph when thou can bring others to thy bent; thou shall one day cry
for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit, Isa. 65. 14. and curse
the day that ever thou knew thy Companions, and with bitter lamentation
shall wail and gnash thy teeth at thy unhappy condition, and all this in all
eternity. Oh, consider these terrors of the Lord, and be persuaded to turn to
the Lord, seek in time thy blessedness in the pardon of sin, that thou
may escape all these things. Consider the end of all sin in that one, Pro.
5. 3, 4. Though it be as an hony-combe in thy mouth, the end will be bitter as
wormwood. And if now thou see thy danger, but wilt run on headlong upon
all these sorrows, excluded from all pity and mercy: say thou wast warned; the
time comes, wherein thou may be pitied but not helped, or rather, neither
pitied nor helped, the Judge has said it, Behold, I come shortly, and my
reward is with me, to render to every man according to his works.

Secondly, if so many sorrows, and they of this nature, belong to every wicked
man, then it follows, that Use 2.
no sin is small in it self, to every of which all these sorrows belong.
Our Text plainly teaches, that they belong not only to Murderers, Thieves,
Adulterers, Liars, Swearers, but also to civil honest men in the worlds
account, if they be ignorant of the Word or ways of God. To him that lives
obstinately in any known sin, that holds on for his profit or pleasure any
practice condemned in the Word, and in his own conscience, let him be never so
civil, sober, sociable, peaceable, and harmless, all his civility cannot
keep off these sorrows, if there be not knowledge of God, softness of heart,
a teachable disposition, and an hungring after Gods mercy in Christ alone above
all things in the world.

Where be the Papists, that teach some sins to be venial in their own
nature, when as all these sorrows Quoad reatum omnia peccata sunt paria, nisi
fiat reconciliatio, Luther.
are the wages of the least? Romans 6. vlt. What mean others by their ridiculous
distinction of Gnats and Camells in the matter of sin, as though any were in
it self a Gnat? some indeed in comparison of others are lesser in degree; and
lesser in respect of disturbing humane society then others; but in respect of
God offended, the Law, and the Curse, which are all infinite, the sorrows due
to the least are infinite; which Christ must sustain before he could remove
the least sin. If a Gnat can be infinite, then some sins may be esteemed so
many Gnats. How profanely and ignorantly doc they speak, who cannot abide
these scrupulous fellows that strain at Gnats and stand upon such nice
points, as if they were the greatest matters, etc? But where Gods Word binds
the conscience, he shall have least sorrow that stands most strictly in the
least things: He that is unfaithful in small things, will never be faithful
in great; and observe these fond Haters of strictness in small things, ye
shall see them stand neither upon small, nor great things to make any
conscience of any, for the most part. Let no man adventure on any sin,
because it is little: say not as Lot did of Zoar, Is it not a little one, and
my soul may live in it? for, let it be never so small a mote in thine eye,
Gods law makes it a Mountain: and thy presumption makes it swell, and thy
continuance in it upon that ground, makes increase both of sin and of sorrow;
no hole is so little, but unlooked too will sink a ship.

We weigh our sins often in a false balance, and foolishly esteem them by
the matter wherein the offense is done: to eat an apple, oh, that is but a
small thing, to swear little oaths, to lie in small things, a little work on
the Sabbath, or a little play and recreation on the Lords day, or to gather a
few sticks, oh, this is but a trifle. No, take heed of such resolutions, look
into the true glass, and there see, first, that the person against whom the
sin is committed, is infinite in mercy A true glass to see thy sin in.
and power: now a small thing against a Prince is high Treason.

Secondly, that thy own malice and presumption makes a small thing great, as
appears in him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath. Will thou in so small a
thing incur the Lords so high displeasure? in other disputes we hear often,
The less the thing commanded is, the greater is the contempt: besides,
Thirdly, consider that the price paid for the least sin, is the precious
blood of Jesus Christ. Fourthly and lastly, consider the weight of vengeance,
and the gulf of sorrow, into which the least sin casts the sinner, being
unsupportable and unutterable. Any one of these, well considered, argues no
sin to be small, and much less to be ventured on upon that conceit.

Thirdly, if this be the miserable estate of a wicked Use 3.
man then we see plainly that the wicked are not so happy as they think
themselves. They think themselves the happyest men under the Sun, because of
their outward prosperity, and others flatter them, and Mal. 3. 15 We count the
proud blessed, and they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt
God are delivered: thus the prosperity of wicked men often vnsettles and
offends the godly themselves; but little reason they should stagger at it: If
we can hold the truth of this doctrine, we shall have little cause to envy his
happiness that is a wicked man, unless we can account him happy, for whom the
Lord has prepared such changes and armies of sorrows. And to see this truth
more clearly, we must know that nothing in the world can make a wicked man
happy: for,

First, it is an error to say or think, that iniquity and Why no wicked man
can be happy.
peace, sin and prosperity, can dwell together, seeing the Lord has said,
There is no peace to the wicked man, Isa. 57. 21. and the tenor of the promise,
is, Acquaint thy self with God, and so shall thou have prosperity, Job 22. 21.

Secondly, all their happiness is in outward things. Now all the parts of
temporal felicity are only good in them, which can use them, as helps and
instruments to eternal happiness, and that good which is independing. Neither
does the matter, but that which gives a form to happiness, make a man happy.
Neither is it the having of things, but the happy enjoying of them, that can
make a man truly happy; which no wicked man can have.

Why then does God give these things to wicked men? Quest.


First, to show his bountifulness, Romans 9. 22. Secondly, Answ.
to show that these be not things to be esteemed much. Why God gives outward
things to wicked men.
Thirdly, to be as snares to themselves, and scourges for some others.
Fourthly, to reward that little good that is in many of them.

Thirdly notwithstanding this temporal happiness, a wicked man is for the
present the Devils prisoner: his fetters are indeed of gold, but he is
chained to the day of judgment, which comes apace.

Fourthly, all his flourishes are unhappy, in that they end in tears and
sorrows: God shall turn his meat in his belly, and make his Sun to fall at
Noonday: for every grain of external joy, he shall be sure of a talent of
eternal sorrow, when the sword of the Almighty shall pierce him. Tell me now,
whether if thou saw this his estate with the eyes of thy body, as thou
ought now with the eyes of thy faith, thou would admire or pity such a
one. Well were it, if wicked men would weight their present estate with the
future: surely, it would be a means to afray them from many sins, and prevent
many sorrows.

Fourthly, if such be the unhappy state of the wicked, Use 4.
what great cause have the godly ^o be thankful for their deliverance from so
manifold sorrows? both unto God, who devised a way to temper mercy with
justice; and to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who was a man of sorrows, and bore upon
himself, and brake all these sorrows for us. How glad will a man be, when he
has escaped a great danger that would have made him heavy to death? How
thankful would we be to that man, that would put himself between us and
some deadly danger? but never was there such misery as this escaped Psalm. 126.
1. The Jews were so glad of their deliverance out of the Babylonish
captivity, and their return thence, that they scarce could believe whether it
was not a Dream: Our captivity was far greater, being under the Curse of
the Law, sold under sin, Bond-slaues unto Satan, and Sons of Wrath: which
bondage could we rightly acknowledge, our deliverance would be far more
grateful then it is. Our Deliverer was not Moses, not Joshua, not Zerubbabel,
but the Son of God, of whom they were Types, both in the first induction of
that people out of Egypt into that Land, and in their second reduction back
again. He by putting himself into the Prison of our flesh, and in that flesh
by suffering that execrable death, and all the sorrows of it, freed us from
the guilt of sin, appeased the wrath of God, abolished eternal death, and
destroyed the Devils Kingdom: Now, the Son thus freeing us, we are free
indeed. Oh! the greatness of this deliverance should astonish us, whereby we
avoid those great and insuperable evils, which otherwise had for ever oppressed
us.

Now in way of thankfulness, First, beware of turning back to the service of
sin, and obey the precept given to the blind man, Thou art made whole, sin
no more.

Secondly, love him much, who has forgiven so much, Luc. 7. 47.

Thirdly, Study to please him in all things, Psalm. 116 8. Because thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling;
I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living.

Fourthly, magnify and speak of this great deliverance and salvation, as the
Church did, Psalm 126. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we
reio ye: and say with Mary, Luc. 1. 49. He that is mighty has done great
things for me, and holy is his Name.

But he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him.]
THis is the second motive or enforcement of Christian obedience, wherein first
consider the meaning of the words, He that trusts in the Lord:] here is a
description of a godly man by a Periphrasis: A godly man is not he that wants
all sin, but he, that being a Believer, manifests the fruit of faith in
reposing himself upon Gods mercy as the rock of his safety.

Thus the Church is described, coming out of the Wilderness, and leaning on
her well-beloued, Cant. 8. 5. And the people of Gods delight are such as fear
God, and attend upon his mercy. Mercie] he says not, joy, as in true
opposition he should have said: for joy is properly opposed to sorrow, not
mercy: but in this Word, First, he both includes that; and Secondly, he
notes also the ground of the godlies rejoicing, which is mercy, not merit.
Thirdly, mercy also vpholds and preserues this joy.

Shall compass him] opposed to the many sorrows of wicked ones: and it
notes, First, a full and complete felicity of the godly.

Secondly, the large goodness of God toward them, not giving them only one
blessing or mercy, or of one kind, but besetting them and meeting them at
every corner with mercies.

Thirdly, that David had here tasted abundantly of mercy, and having assurance
of the pardon of sin, had experience in his own person, and here speaks of
it according to his abundant sense of it.

Fourthly, that being now compassed with mercy, he would allure and persuade
every godly man to get the pardon of his sin also, and that is mercy enough.

Out of this exposition arises this instruction, namely, that He that
trusts in God, shall have a plentiful part in the Doctr.
He that trusts in God, shall have abundant mercy.
mercies of God: mercy shall compass him. Psalm. 103. 11. As high as the
Heavens are above the Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear
him. Psalm. 125. 2. As the Mountains compass Jerusalem, so the Lord is round
about his people. Zach 2. 5. The LORD promises to the Church, to be a wall of
fire round about her, and her glory in the midst of her: Here are every where
mercies, within and without. And the reasons of this point are these:

First, the godly are vessels prepared for mercy, Romans Reasons. 1.
9. 23. Whom God has chosen to declare the riches of his glory upon.

Secondly, where Gods comfortable presence is there are great mercies, because
he is great in mercy, Isa. 55. 7. 2.
and rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. Where the Sun is, there is abundant light,
and where the Sea is, there must be abundant water. Now Gods promise on his
part, and the faith and trust of the godly on their part, holds God present
with his people at all times.

Thirdly, the mercy that God shows to the godly, 3.
is great in kind, because it is a special mercy, which is peculiar to them,
flowing from special love. True it is, that the Lord is good to all, and his
mercy is over all his work, Psalm. 145. 9. that is, there is no work of his
hands, which receives not from him some mercy: But that is but a general
mercy, as when the Sun shines on the good and bad, and the rain falls on
every man's ground: by this he sends away the worst men with good gifts. But
there is a special mercy reserved for the Elect, and reserving the
Inheritance for them: to these he is not only a merciful Lord, but a
merciful Father, a Father of mercies, rich in mercy: Psalm. 103. 3. As a
Father pities his Children, so the Lord pities them that fear him. A merciful
man pities his beast, much more his brother; but if his child be in
distress, his pity is more inward and working as his affection is: such is
the compassion of God toward his Children, who is therefore said to have
bowels of compassion.

Fourthly, GODS mercy is great in quantity and measure, it fills all the
space between the Earth and 4.
Heaven, and all the distance between East and West; Psalm. 103. 11. 12. so as
if a man be between Earth and Heaven, or within the quarters of either, this
mercy must compass him. David shows the unmeasurable measure of it, Psalm.
40. 5. O Lord, thou have made thy wonderful works so many, that none can
count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us: I would declare and speak of
them, but they are more then I am able to express.

For the better clearing of the point, although we can never set out the
infinite mercies, with which God compasses his Elect, yet we may point at
some of them, especially those special ones, which are peculiar to the godly,
and which like the childrens bread, are not cast unto Dogs: it faring with
the godly, as with a mighty rich man, that knows no end of his wealth; Though
he cannot have his eye over it all, yet his thoughts sometimes are upon his
goodliest Manors, his Treasury, his most precious Pearls and Jewels.

The kinds of this mercy toward the godly concern either this life, or the
life to come.

The first and chief mercy, the fountain of all, is, that even in this life
God has pleased to afford us himself Mercies intayled to the godly.
the chief good; that himself is become our portion, Psalm. 16. 5. and that
the souls of his people can rest and stay themselves in him alone, and joy in
the light of his countenance, when the World does what it can to make them
miserable. Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and whom have I in
comparison of thee? My flesh fails, and my heart also, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Now can an Hypocrite ever
rejoice in God? or, what comfort can he have in God, who is not in covenant
with him? here then is a special mercy, without bound or bank, even infinite
as God himself is.

Secondly, from hence flow all other mercies that we enjoy as streams of it:
first, temporal, concerning this 1. Temporal.
present life, as health, life, liberty, wealth, peace, prosperity, good name,
etc.

Oh but the wicked have all these.

True, but, first, not in a right tenure, they are usurpers, Object. Answ.
they have no right in themselves, no part in Christ to recover it. Secondly,
not by virtue of any promise or covenant. Thirdly, not in any holy or
sanctified use: for, To the impure all things are impure. Fourthly, none of
their prosperity is joined with Gods love, but his hatred, which is a secret
poison in them: whereas, Psalm. 35. 27. the Lord loves the prosperity of his
servant; he ioynes them both together.

Secondly, spiritual things; even in these also how has 2. Spiritual.
God compassed us with mercies even for the present?

First, What a world of mercy was, and is in that one gift of his Son, to be
our reconciliation, when we were firebrands of hell, that the blessed Son of
God would descend from the glory of heaven, and give himself to the death of
the Cross, and the pains of hell, to redeem us from all iniquity? The
Apostle conceiues of this as of a rich mercy, Ephesians. 1. 7. by whom (says he)
we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins according
to his rich grace. This is the com passing mercy meant in our text, even
redemption from sin by Christ, both from the guilt and punishment of it; a
free mercy, a full mercy, an Ocean of mercy, drawing us out of a gulf and
bottomless sea of sorrows everlasting. David amplifyeth this mercy, Psa. 86.
13. Great is thy mercy toward me: for thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.

Secondly, What an infinite mercy, peculiar to the godly, is that of his spirit
to take up our hearts for his temples, when we were spiritually possessed of
the devil? by the same spirit he does daily cleanse us, and wash us, and
beautifyeth our souls with heavenly graces; teaches us, leads us into all
truth, comfort us with heavenly consolations in all distresses. What a
great mercy was it, when Christ opened the eyes of the blind, or healed the
deaf and lame, yea or when he raised Lazarus being dead? but God,
regenerating us by his Spirit, does all these for us: he gives sight to us
being blind, says to our deaf ears, Be open, yea restores us to life being
dead in trespasses and sins, and makes us able to move and stir in good
ways. Those great works of the Son of God were all miraculous; but here is
a miracle above them all, yea one mercy consisting of many miracles.

Thirdly, What a mercy is it, not only to give them his word (as he does also
to the wicked) but also to make it the immortal seed of their new birth, and
the sincere milk to feed them? to make it a preservative from many great
sins, which the wicked daily commit, open and secret? to put it into their
hands as a sword to cut off Satan's temptations? to make it unto them a rule of
faith, and a rule of life, able to make the man of God perfect to every good
work? to make it a sound stay and comfort, to support them in all their
troubles; wherein else they must needs sink? In this respect the child of God
is compassed with a multitude of mercies, all which the wicked are strangers
unto.

Fourthly, What an inexhaust treasure of mercy is it, that the godly enjoy?
that whereas God hears not sinners, that is, wicked ones, he not only gives
them leave to come freely to the throne of Grace, to ask any good thing for
them, but also much assurance in their souls of obtaining any thing they ask,
because of his promise, Ask, and ye shall have. If earthly fathers can give
good things to their children, much more will our heavenly Father give, not
only what we ask, but even abundantly above that we are able to ask or to
think, Ephesians. 3. 20. Can that man be other then beset with mercy, who has a
means to get within Gods storehouse and treasury when he will? Can he, that
is able by the prayer of faith with Israel to prevail with God, want abundance
of blessings? Great is the power of fervent prayer for mercy: It can obtain
and force the sun to stand still; It can command the clouds to rain, or
not to rain; It can get children for the barren, and life to the dead; and if
our prayer be weak, Christ's intercession has power enough for us, John 11.
22, 42. Oh that wicked men knew the power of prayer! how quickly then would
they come to Gods mercy-gate?

Fifthly, What a mercy is it, peculiar to the Saints, to have peace of
conscience, and joy of their estate? that whereas wicked men are often vexed;
ever liable to infinite horrors, fears, and inward torments, which are the
beginnings of hell, they being justified by faith, have peace with God, the
spirit of bondage and fear and tumult is gone, and the spirit of adoption
dwells in their hearts, which makes them cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8. 15. And
whereas the wicked have no peace, but a senseless vnfeelingnesse of their
estate, the godly have peace in them, which (as the Apostle says) passes
understanding; because, first, neither can the understanding of man
sufficiently conceive it. Secondly, neither can the understanding of man
sufficiently esteem or prize it according to the worth and value of it:
plainly implying it to be such a mercy, as for the greatness ouerwhelmes him
that has it, an infinite and unbounded mercy, called the peace of God, which
he begins and maintains here, and perfecteth and preserves for all
eternity.

But how stands this with all those evils and miseries, with which the godly
are beset in this life? Can they Object.
be beset both with misery and mercy too?

This is a sixth and last mercy therefore special to them, Answ.
that they are never more compassed with mercy, then Godly never more
compassed with mercy, then when compassed with misery.
when they seem most miserable. Habak. 3. 2. The Lord in judgment remembers
mercy.

For, first, nothing is properly evil but that which comes from divine
revenge: but nothing comes so upon the godly: Christ has carried away all the
revenge of their sins; so that their crosses come from mercy. Secondly, they
are attended with mercy; for God has first fitted his servants for
afflictions, before he brings them: Religion has patience, which, if the house
be not filled with plenty, makes a sallet of green herbs more dainty, the^ the
sweetest dishes of wicked men; it has strength, above which the trial shall
not be; it has subjection and silence to God, and can bless him both in
giving, and in taking away. Thirdly, Gods mercy rejoices in judgment against
judgment, three ways; first, magnifying himself: secondly, training his
chosen: thirdly, teaching others: and all by the troubles of his children.

The first in two respects: first, when judgment begins at Gods house, he
declares his hatred against sin, and mercifully by them forewarnes the wicked
of their danger: For, if judgment begin there, where shall the wicked appear?
Secondly, he most manifests his power in his childrens weakness, in
supporting their souls and bodies: Now if his power and mercy were not above
the judgment, they should perish in it.

Secondly, he trains and betters his children, which is great mercy by the
judgment: first, he scowres and purges their sin; afflictions are as Gods
laundrie, wherein his children by beating, scowring, and rubbing are made whiter
and whiter. Venomous creatures breed not in winter, nay, a sharp winter kills
the Vermin; so afflictions nip and stay our corruptions: This is another
mercy above the judgment. Secondly, by them he exercises and stirs up
the grace that is in them, as the wind blows up the sparks of fire, yea,
manifests the synceritie of their hearts to themselves and others; for a man is
that indeed which he is in trial. Thirdly, he fits them by afflictions, to
comfort others in trial with the same comforts wherewith he has comforted
them. A great mercy to fit them to mercifulness, and to set out Gods mercy
to others: See Exodus 23. 9. Fourthly, he teaches them to esteem more of his
blessings in the want of them.

Is there not an ouer-ruling mercy in all this, that whereas afflictions are
in themselves evil, and reuenges of sin, yet they make the godly better?
now, whatsoever makes us better, is from a hand of mercy.

Thirdly, the Lord by his servants trouble would God offreth to teach us many
things by the troubles of his servants.
teach all: first, that the evils, chiefly esteemed so in the world, are not so
indeed; for the godly are exempted from the greatest evils; if only wicked men
were blind, blindness would be thought a fearful judgment, therefore (to
confute that) Isaac must be blind. Secondly, how such evils should be borne.
It is a mercy, that by the godly the world may be taught how to bear the
hand of God. Thirdly, an infallible mark of the resurrection, Luc. 16. 25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things, therefore now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
Fourthly, that all their miseries end in mercy, and are turned to their best:
Mark and consider the godly man, for his end is peace; his light afflictions
are recompensed with an eternal weight of glory. From all which we may
conclude, that if godly men in the midst of their miseries, be so compassed
with mercy, in the beginning, carriage, and conclusion of them, that the
doctrine propounded is most true.

But if we turn our selves to the second branch, and Mercies meeting us in the
life to come.
consider those kinds of mercies which shall meet us in the life to come, we
can look no way but we are entrenched with such mercies, as eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to conceive,
much less can we speak of them as they are, but must break out into David's
admiration, Psalm. 31. 9. O how great is that goodness which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee!

But yet as Moses we may see the good land a far off, and with the searchers
let you see by a cluster or two, and give a taste of the good things therein: If
God love us (said they) he will bring us unto it; so many as God loves, shall
be brought to it, and, not only taste (as here) how good and gracious God is,
but shall drink plentifully of the rivers of his house: for with him is the
Well of life, and in his light we shall see light.

First, how can the Elect but be compassed with mercy, 1. Privative.
when all the misery and sorrow, with all the causes and effects, wherewith
they are now compassed, shall be abolished, and utterly chafed away? Now we are
vexed with the remembrance of evils past, with the sense of evils present, and
with the fear of evils to come: but all these first things must pass away,
and all tears must be wiped from our eyes. In our bodies, all weakness,
natural infirmity, sickness, labor, mortality, and corruption shall be
removed: they shall need neither meat nor cloth, for which here we toil so
much, nor Marriage, nor Physic, nor sleep: there shall be no care for the
family, no toil in the calling, (for they rest from their labors:) no labor
spent in teaching or learning, in preaching or hearing: mortality has put on
immortality, and death being destroyed, it can dye no more. The soul shall be
from all sin and sinful passions, from ignorance, unbelief, pride, envy,
and all the works of the flesh; yea, not only from sin, but from the power of
sinning; the will has no freedom to evil, being perfectly freed to good,
neither can the affections set themselves upon any other object. In our names
we are now liable to many contumelies, and reproaches, and slanders, as our Lord
himself was numbered among the wicked. He was not known, no more are we: but
then shall our innocence break out as the light, and it shall be manifest
what we are. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. When Christ our Head shall appear, we also shall
appear with him in glory. Now we are in spiritual combat, but then we shall
be perfectly freed from the devil, from his Angels, from sin and sinners,
from the world and the lusts that are in it, and God shall fully and finally
tread Satan under our feet.

Secondly, If we be so happy in Privative mercies, 2. Positive.
what shall we be in Positive? how shall we be compassed with them?

First, how shall we be beset with mercy, yea, and glory, in enjoying the
immediate fellowship and vision of God, in whose face is fullness of joy, and
at his right hand pleasures for evermore? If a man had all the pains of hell
upon him, this blessed vision of God would make him an happy man. We see God
now, but as in a glass, and yet that sight of him vpholds us in all our
troubles: how much more shall we be fully happy, when we shall see him as he
is, face to face? even so fully, as, being glorified, we shall be capable of:
So many mercies compass the Elect in this one, as, if I had a thousand
tongues, and should do nothing but speak them till the day of Judgment, I
could not recount them.

Secondly, what a wonderful mercy shall compass us in our immediate union
and conjunction with Christ our Head, by which we shall be like him? not like
him as he was a man of sorrows, and in the shape of a servant; (for thus he
was like us:) but like him as he is now, the glorified Head of his Church; not
equal to him, but like him, both in soul and body. Our souls Similes non
pares.
perfect in knowledge, holiness and righteousness, and standing in a perfect
image of God, like to the perfect holiness of Christ himself. Our bodies
clothed with beauty, strength, shining, agilitie, and glory as his is; He
walks in white, so shall we; His face is shining and glorious, so shall
ours; As he sits on his Fathers Throne, so shall we sit with him in his
Throne, Reu. 3. 21 If the hungring after this union make us blessed, what shall
the enjoying of it do?

Thirdly, Who can tell or reck on the sum of those mercies that we shall
enjoy in respect of that glorious inheritance of the Saints in light? when we
shall be heirs annexed with Jesus Christ, not of a House, or Manor, or
Lordship, but of a Kingdom; and that not an earthly Canaan, flowing with milk
and honey, but of a Kingdom passing all earthly Kingdoms and inheritances, in
those four properties which the Apostle expresses, 1. Pet. 1. 4. first,
Immortal; secondly, Undefiled; thirdly, Not withering; fourthly, Reserved for
us in heaven.

Here is the crown of all mercies, amplified in these respects: first, in that
it is prepared by God from the beginning of the world. Secondly, from the
place, which is the pleasant Paradise of God, the new Jerusalem, the City of
God, full of peace, sweetness, and safety. Thirdly, from the company, God
and Christ, the holy Angels, the Spirits of just and perfect men that ever have
lived or shall live. If it be an honor to live in the presence and fellowship
of honorable persons upon earth; how much more, to enjoy the glorious presence
of God, and the glorified Saints of God in heaven? and yet this honor have all
his Saints. Fourthly, in respect of the conueniencie and sufficiency of all
things to be be desired; there can be no want; for The absolute sufficiency of
future happiness.
God shall be all in all: as,

First, Stately habitation, Ioh. 14. 2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions,
and I go to prepare you a place: it is a lightsome City; for the Lamb is the
light thereof, Reu. 21. 23.

Secondly, Food fit for great personages; the Tree of life which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God; they shall eat of that hidden Manna, Reu. 2.
17. and their drink shall be of the water of the Well of life; so as, Reu. 21.
6.
being without all bodily meat and drink, they shall never hunger not thirst
any more.

Thirdly, Apparel; long white Robes, washed in the blood of the Lamb, such
garments, as great Princes use. Their Pysicke is the leaves of the Tree, which
cure the Nations.

Fourthly, Pleasure, and sweet repose in the bosom of our Father, where
children take greatest delight, and joy in the presence of the Lamb. If the
wise men, seeing but the Star of Christ, rejoiced with great joy, how much
more shall we, seeing himself, and that in his glory and advancement? oh,
what joy and delight shall there be in the Kings marriage, and in the meeting
of so many good friends together? Add hereto the testification of joy, when,
as at such meetings there are the voices of singing men and singing women; the
Saints shall sing a new song, even the song of Moses and of the Lamb, Reu. 5.
9. and there shall be the music of Harpes, and Viols; that is: all kind of
heavenly melody and harmony, such as the sweetest music may not be compared
unto: through our peace with God, and his Angels and Saints, and perpetual
peace from Satan and wicked ones. Our joy shall not be interrupted by loss of
any friend, nor fear of any enemy.

Fifthly, Wealth. In Salomons days gold and silver were as the stones in the
streets of Jerusalem, but here the walls and pauement of this new Jerusalem,
and all is beaten gold: no Saint shall know the end of his wealth, every one
shall confess his lines to be fallen in a goodly ground, and that he has a
goodly heritage, every child of God is now in Gods treasure-house, and what can
he want? Oh that our eyes were open to see the riches of this glorious
Inheritance of the Saints! as the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1. 18.

Sixthly, Authority and glory, noted by sitting on Christ's Throne, by the Crown
of righteousness, a Crown of life, the Kingdom of our Father, the Kingdom
unshaken, wherein all shall be Kings and Priests to God.

Seventhly, Continuance of all: it is an eternally weight of glory; for
quantity a weight, for quality eternal, 2. Cor. 4. 17. I will make him a
pillar in the house of my God, Reu. 3. 12. I will not blot out his name out of
the Book of life, verse. 5. Here is eternal soundness, and sound eternity.

Does the Lord thus compass the godly with such Use 1.
mercies? Oh then labor to be godly men, and such as trust in God, to whom all
these precious promises are made. Psalm. 36. 6, 7. Oh how excellent is thy
mercy? therefore the children of men shall trust under the shadow of thy wings.

Oh but then all shall be well, if all these mercies Object.
shall compass him that trusts in God; for, who trusts not in God?

Take heed thy trust prove not presumption, try thy trust before thou trustest
unto it, try it by these properties: Answ.


First, It has a constant course and proceeding in godliness, which no
trouble can dismay or break off. Psa. 44. 17. 18. All this is come upon us,
yet do we not forget thee, our heart is not turned back, nor our stepps gone
out of thy paths. 1. Tim. 4. 10. Therefore we labor and suffer, because we trust
in the living God.

Secondly, a faithful endeavor in the means that serve Gods providence, there
are none so diligent therein as they that trust in God.

If thou trustest in God as thou say, then thou hear, beleeuest, and
practisest the word; thou show thy self a child of God and of the Church:
else, say what thou can for thy self, and compare thy self with the best,
thou trustest not in God.

Thirdly, if thou trustest in God, thou withdrawest thine eyes from thine own,
and all other inferior means, and can as quietly wait upon God in want of
means, as in having them, and having them, art as if thou had them not: Thou
art far from leaning upon thine own wisdom, if thou trust in the Lord.
Prou. 3. 5. Be not Wise in thine own eyes, but trust in the Lord: thou art
resolved, that if the Lord help thee not to thy hearts desire, all the helps
in the world cannot do it.

Again, if thou have not the means, thou think the Lords merciful promise
is means enough, thou discomfitest not thy self; nor in defect of means
fretst thy self how to compass them: as the eye of the maid is upon the hand
of her Mistress, so thy soul attends, and waits upon the hand of God. If
thou trustest, thou first beleeuest, and if thou beleeuest, thou make not
haste.

Fourthly, look what it is, in which thou trustest, that has thy heart, thy
affections of love, joy, and desire above all things; if it be God, then thou
have made God thy God, and only portion: the voice of the Church is, This is
our God, and we will wait on him. Abraham trusted in God, when he preferred
the commandment of God before Isaaks life: so if thou preferrest the pleasing
of God before thy chief joy, and grieuest most when thy heart is ready to make
any thing thy portion but God; and when by sin thou have provoked him to hide
his face or stand aloof from thee, then say thou trustest in God, and not
before. True it is, that the godly have some failings, and slidings from these
rules, but yet hereunto they strive, and in some comfortable measure attain.

Now if these be the practices and qualities of such as mercy belongs unto:
we see easily by the contrary, that there be sundry kinds of men, to whom
the Lord does covenant wrath, as,

First, many civil men who content themselves without the knowledge of God:
they say they mean well, and do no man harm, live in peace with their
neighbors, and follow their Church as others do; yet have no care of religion
but for fashion; they say they trust in God, but do not, because they use not
the means, nor walk in the way of faith and repentance, nor in the
conscionable hearing and obeying of the word.

Secondly, such as walk stubbornely against God, and the means of Salvation,
mercy belongs not to these.

How know you that?

Well enough: first, out of the text, which says, Mercy belongs to him that
trusts in God: Now he that trusts in God, walks on in a course of
godliness, and cannot stand out against God. Secondly, by an express text,
Deuteronomy. 29. 20. He that hears the curses of this law, and yet blesses
himself, saying, Though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, the sword
shall not come near me, I will not be merciful to that man, says the Lord.

Secondly, here is a great comfort for the godly, Use 2.
who have no small security hence, that whatsoever their outward estate is or
may be, Gods mercy compasses them as the hills compass Jerusalem: see it in
some instances:

First, If Satan assault us on every side with temptation, to vex and disquiet
us with inward fears, he shall not have so nimble eyes to spy our weakness,
as the eye of the Lord to spy means to strengthen us. Let him object the
greatness and infinite number of our sins; yet he shall but amplify the
great mercy of GOD which is greater and more large then all the sin and
miseries in the world. Thus Moses comfort GODS people, Deuteronomy. 4. 31. The Lord
thy God is a merciful God, he will not forsake nor destroy thee, nor forget
the Covenant of thy Fathers, which he swear unto them.

Secondly, If unmerciful men compass them and come about them like Bees, Psalm.
118. 12. and sharpen their stings, yet the mercies of the Lord are nearer them,
then that they can hurt them. Thus David comforted himself, Psalm. 86. 14. 15.
O, Lord, the proud are risen against me, but thou Lord art strong, and
merciful, gracious and long-suffering, and a pitiful God.

Thirdly, If a man should conflict with Gods own hand, by inward temptations
or outward trials, of sickness, poverty, persecution, if he were so beset as
he could see nothing but troubles without, and fears within, now is the time
to mound and fence himself with this comfortable Doctrine, that even now GODS
mercies do guard and compass him; seeing he cannot deny himself, nor fail
of any of his promises. David when he was to choose one of the three Rods of
GOD, the Sword, Famine, or Plague, he chose to fall into the hands of God,
because he is merciful, 2. Sam. 24. 14.

He may afflict and chasten us a while, and for a moment seem to forsake us,
but with great compassions he will gather us, Isa. 45. 7. 10. For, He chides
not always, neither retayneth he his wrath for ever, Psalm. 103. 8.

Fourthly, If a man were in the hands of Death, and the Messengers thereof had
already taken hold on him, as on Hezekiah, yet, even then he need fear none
ill, seeing Gods mercies compass him: this is ever our cover, though we
cannot always see it, as Elisha his servant saw not the great mercies of God
compassing him and his Master; even then when we know not, GODS mercy is all
about us, there are still more with us then against us, our Mountain is always
beset with Heavenly Warriors.

Was Jonas ever more compassed with mercies then when he was in his own sense
cast off, and compassed with Waves and Weeds? Was Israel ever more compassed
with mercy, then when they were compassed with Mountains, Sea, Enemies,
Death, and deadly things? these our extremities are Gods opportunity.

Nay, fifthly, suppose a man were in the house of death, in the grave, yet, even
this separates not from GODS mercies, which being eternal leave us not in
death, but, when we are most compassed with dust and corruption, shall then be
most abundant and mighty for us.

Oh, therefore let so many as trust in God fly in all their straits to this
Sanctuary, which can make not only Deaths forerunners, but even Death it
self welcome, which depriues us of all things else but this mercy, into the
full estate of which it sets us.

Thirdly, labor above all things in the World to get Use 3.
part in this mercy, by getting assurance of the pardon of sin; get this,
and thou gettest a mercy reaching up to Heaven, a Crown of Blessings, a
plentiful Redemption: Our Prophet here calls it a compassing mercy: for a
godly man thinks not himself compassed whith mercy, when he is compassed
only with outward blessings, when GOD has hedged about his house, and he
has wealth to tumble in (though the World breathe after nothing else:) but
when he has a voice telling him, that God in Christ is merciful to his sin,
and has covered his iniquity: oh, now thinks David himself compassed with
mercy, and not before, although he was a King, and had all outward things to
his hearts wish. Zacheus had mercy enough when salvation was come to his
house, he never got so fast before, as now he forgoes and restores, he was
never compassed with mercy till now, though he was a great rich man, never so
rich as now when he was impouerishing himself to entertain Christ in his
house and heart.

Iaakob when he saw Joseph's face, his best beloved son, Now (says he) I
have enough, let me now dye, seeing I have seen my son Joseph's face: How
much more shall we have enough to see the face of the well-beloued Son of
God, yea and of God himself, in that wel-beloued one, appeased and fully
pacified! Simeon having seen Christ with his eyes, and held him in his arms,
Now, Lord, (said he) let thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation: But to see Christ by the eye of faith, and hold him in our
hearts, will make death much more welcome to us; we shall think we have
enough: the sweet sense of it within will frame the mouth to speak plentifully
of it, as our Prophet does in this place. Neither can any good heart either
lightly account or speak slenderly of such a mercy, neither content it self
with slight means to get it, or with superficial phrases in holding it. In a
word, if once we can claspe hold on this mercy of God in pardoning our sins,
we could desire even to live no longer in this World, were it not to come to a
more full sense and fruition of it.

VERSE. 11. Be glad, ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful
all ye that are upright in heart.
THese words contain the fourth and last use of the general Doctrine, and a
conclusion worthy the Psalm, to which it is notably fitted: for seeing the
whole Psalm has taught us, that he is a blessed man, whose sins are
remitted and covered, then may and must that man, who has this Doctrine sealed
up in his own heart, rejoice with great and unspeakable joy. And as it
notably concludes the whole Psalm, so is it most aptly knit to the former
words, which have laid down the diverse estate, both of the godly and wicked
man, and how, when as sorrows eat up and consume the ungodly man
remedilessely, the portion of GODS people shall be his own compassing and
infinite mercy; and therefore upon those premises he infers this sweet
conclusion, that the godly having so sound cause of Christian joy, must mind,
yea and overcome all their sorrows with an holy and Christian rejoicing in the
LORD.

In the Verse are three things to be considered: first, the persons to whom
this precept is directed, described by two titles, first, righteous: secondly,
upright in heart. Secondly, the Commandment, to be glad, to rejoice, and be
joyful. Thirdly, the object of their joy, and limitation, In the Lord.

First, of the meaning. He that is called in the sixth Verse a godly man, and
in the former Verse one that trusts in God, is here also set forth by two
inseparable properties; first, he is a righteous man. And secondly, upright in
heart.

Who is this righteous man?

A man is righteous by righteousness, either Legal Quest. Answ.
or Evangelical.

First, Legal righteousness is that perfect righteousness in nature and
actions, which the Law of GOD requires, even perfect and full conformity with
the whole rule of righteousness, as it was first written in man's heart by the
law of nature. By this was never man righteous but the first Adam, in the time
of his innocence, and the second Adam the innocent Son of God, in whom,
besides the righteousness of his humane nature and life, we read of the
righteousness of God, that is: the same righteousness, being in a person that
was God, was so far advanced, that it was able not only to fulfill, but to
satisfy the rigor of GODS most righteous Law.

Secondly, Evangelical righteousness is that, which the Gospel reueales, and
that is, when a man being reconciled to God, justified by faith, delivered from
all the guilt and punishment of sin, and inwardly sanctified by Gods Spirit,
is accounted of God righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto him,
as Saint Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made unto us of God
righteousness. And although this be in part and imperfect in this life,
attended with much frailty and infirmity of flesh, yet because,

First, they are perfectly justified even in this life,

Secondly, have begun in a righteousness, which shall be perfected,

Thirdly, have a will and endeavor, striving to perfection,

Fourthly, are accepted of God as perfect for Christ's sake, in whom all their
unrighteousness and defects are covered: therefore they are called every where
righteous.

So our Prophet here calls such, as according to his former Doctrine have
made sure their discharge with God, and gotten evidence of remission of sin,
and reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ.

Secondly, This person is upright in heart, that is, sound and sincere, without
guile, verse 2. and this is, when the heart is set right toward God in doing
all duties of piety and charity toward GOD or men; truly aiming at the
pleasing of GOD, and not at byrespects: this is straightness of heart, called
truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. Thou love truth in the inward parts.
And although no man is indeed upright without some crookedness, and declining
from the straight rule, yet because here is, first, a drawing near and
endeavor to full perfection: Secondly, a comparatiue rightnesse, in respect of
the unregenerate, whose course is wholly crooked:

Thirdly, the acceptance of a merciful Father: therefore they are called
upright:

And upright in heart, first, because there is the beginning of soundness: for
the first work, by which God distinguishes between man, and man, is the
purifying of the heart by Faith, Act. 15. 9. and the work of conversion is
called the circumcision of the heart, which the Lord promises, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

Secondly, because all outward shows without this ground are unsound and
deceitful, and whatsoever we do, must have this ground to make it acceptable,
even a sincere and honest heart. 1. Pet. 1. 22. all obedience to the truth,
all love to our brethren, must come from a pure heart.

Thirdly, because if the heart be upright, it will from thence shine into all
the actions: for a righteous man must be upright also in his way, Psalm. 119. 1.
Now uprightness of heart is like a great wheel in a clock, that sets all the
other a moving, or like a light in a lantern that shines through every side
of it. A wicked man may be upright in some one action, as Abimelech pleaded
for himself, Genesis 20. 5. With an imperfect heart have I done this: but the
general uprightness of the whole life is peculiar to Gods people, it must
issue from the heart, where if there be a living fountain, the streams will
ever run.

Secondly, the Commandment, enioyning spiritual rejoicing, has diverse
branches, as there are diverse words in the original, which are to be
distinguished.

First, Be glad: the word Shimen comes of Shama^, which properly signifies
inward and hearty joy, conceived by the presence, or hope, at least opinion of
some good or desirable thing, as Psalm. 35. 26. Let them be confounded that
rejoice at my hurt: now none of David's subjects durst make show of this joy in
his hurt, only it was conceived in their hearts.

Secondly, Rejoice: Gila rises of Gil, which signifies to express our joy by
some outward gesture, sometimes used for dancing, as Psalm. 65. 12. The hills
skippe for gladness.

Thirdly, Be joyful: Harninu of Ranan, vociferatus est prae laetitia. Isa. 35.
6. The dumb man's tongue shall sing: Vetaron. So as upright men are commanded
not only to conceive and conceal their inward joy, but to express it in
their actions, in their speeches, and every way they can.

And this Commandment runs up these three stairs for sundry causes:
First, to show that there is great cause why the righteous should rejoice.
Secondly, that where sound joy is within, it will not be hid, but made
manifest. Thirdly, to show that Christian joy is not perfect at first, but
rises by degrees, first within conceived, and then by little and little
expressed, as the degrees in our text teach us.

So much of the Commandment. The thing commanded is joy and gladness: Joy is
the souls delight, or solace in the presence of some good thing, in deed or in
hope. It is twofold: either natural and worldly, when the good, of which it
rises, is so: or supernatural and heavenly, about some spiritual good which
is apprehended: This supernatural joy is twofold: First, the joy of grace.
Secondly, the joy of glory: the former is here meant, which is the inheritance
of the Saints here, and a forerunner of that of glory hereafter.

Thirdly, the object or limitation of this joy, In the Lord: the matter of our
joy must be the Lords goodness unto us, especially in keeping his promise
faithfully, in pardoning our sins, and gracious receiving of us. For so not
only the context, but the word Iehoua puts us in mind, properly signifying
God having being of himself, and giving being not only to all his creatures,
but to all his promises also. And then we rejoice in the Lord,

First, when our joy is a fruit of the Spirit of the How we rejoice in the Lord.
Lord, Galat. 5. 22. therefore called the joy of the Holy, Ghost.

Secondly, when it looks to God and acknowledges him the true God, and in
his Son whom he has sent, his God, reconciled, appeased, and well pleased,
as Romans 5. 1. being justified by faith, we have peace with God, and rejoice,
etc. Our Prophet here calls the righteous to rejoice, upon this ground. When a
man rejoices in Gods favor, forgiving sin, and in fellowship with God and
Jesus Christ, then he rejoices in the Lord. This David calls the joy of
Salvation, Psa. 51. 12.

Thirdly, when it respects the special pledges of Gods favor, as the work
of regeneration, the happy change we find in our selves, the shining and
beautiful graces of Gods holy Spirit, with the daily increase of them: thus to
rejoice in the Lords image renewed, is to rejoice in the Lord himself.

Fourthly, when our joy is set upon Gods ordinances and word, in which the Lord
reuealeth himself, and communicates himself more freely unto us, when in
them we get a faster hold of God, and grow up into further fellowship with him,
especially when his gracious promises feed our hearts, and we rejoice in his
truth and faithfulness, making them good not only to others, but also to our
own selves.

Fifthly, when we rejoice in the hope of eternal glory, both in soul and body,
Romans 5. 3. Hoping, and expecting, and rejoicing, that we shall fully enjoy him
as he is, and drink freely of that water of life, which we have already
tasted.

And thus to rejoice is no easy thing, and therefore he calls on us, again
and again, and the third time, to rejoice in the Lord, as Philip. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say, rejoice: for though it be easy to
rejoice in a carnal manner, and most men lose themselves in such merriments,
yet to reioce in the Lord is not so easy; the object, the matter, and manner,
and end are hard to force on our selves, which is the reason of such earnest
enforcing of the precept. So much of the meaning.

The words being thus expounded, we come to the doctrine of them, and first
from the persons, righteous men and upright in heart: These are the same
persons that are spoken of in the fixed verse, The godly man shall pray unto
thee; whence we may note, that,

A godly man is an upright man; that is, of a simple and Doctr.
true-dealing and true meaning heart, with God and Every godly man is an
upright man.
man; having a mind ready to learn of the Lord both what to do and for what,
and so, doing what he does for no other cause in the world, 2. King. 20 3.
Remember, O Lord, that I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart. Ier. 12. 3. Lord, thou know me, thou have seen me, and tried my
heart toward thee. Nathaniel, a godly man, was a true Israelite in whom was
no guile: so, all other good men are called upright men in their generation.

First, because Gods image is renewed on them in Reasons. 1.
part, a part of which is to be simple and true, as he is most single and true.

Secondly, because they are daily conformed to Christ, who was the vprightest
of all creatures, in whose mouth 2.
was found no guile.

Thirdly, because they have received the Spirit of Sanctification, who daily
heales and impaires natural 3.
crookedness and hypocrisy; and renews the mind, and the man to think and
speak, and act things in truth and soundness.

Fourthly, they only are true worshippers, that worship 4.
God in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. they are that good ground, which brings
forth fruit out of honest hearts: a good man must be without hypocrisy, at
least reigning hypocrisy.

Let him therefore look to the uprightness of his Use. Reasons to look to
the uprightness of our hearts.
heart, whosoever would have an evidence of godliness. None but would be
counted godly; not any would be thought an Atheist, or an hypocrite, or a
neuter, therefore let men look to the uprightness of their hearts. And it
stands us in hand so to do:

First, because such a heart is Gods delight: whatsoever 1.
comes from us, is hence accepted, because it comes from a pure heart, even the
mite of a godly man or woman, when as the wickeds sacrifice is rejected, and
his talent accursed.

Secondly, because we can have no other comfort in 2.
the works we do; in the world we find our best duties traduced; David
dancing before the Lord is mocked; but he was sure he did it before the Lord
in the purity of his heart, and that was his comfort, 2. Sam. 6. 20, 21.
Besides,

Thirdly, it is not the quantity of our work, which we can stand upon, but
only the quality of it. Peter 3.
could not justify the quantity of his love, when Christ asked him this
question; Peter, love thou me more then these? only he appeals to Christ of
the quality of it, Lord, thou know that I love thee: if we can persuade
our selves that we do a thing of a good heart, and according to the
proportion of grace received, we may cheer up our selves, we shall be
accepted by the quality only.

How shall I know the uprightness of my heart? Quest.


By these notes or rules: Answ.


First, that is right which is tried so to be by a right Notes of uprightness.
line, and stands in correspondence unto it: The right line is Gods word, the
precepts of the Lord are right, Psalm. 19. 8. and then the heart is upright,
when it is made straight by the word, and is squared in all things by it. Every
man boasts of the rightnesse and goodness of his heart, that cares but a
little for Gods word: but we must be far from standing in our own
righteousness, which is as a filthy clowte, and take the square of Gods word,
and lay our hearts and affections unto it, that they may be ruled by the line
of God.

Secondly, a right line does ever discover that which is crooked; a good sign
of a right heart is to descrie and discover, but not without true sorrow and
grief, the crookedness and hypocrisy of it, and to labor to correct and
reform it. Psalm. 119. 80. Let my heart be upright in thy statutes, that I be
not ashamed: a right line shames a crooked; crooked legs are ashamed to be
seen: when a man fears, and is ashamed of his hypocrisy and crookedness,
and ever tends to straightness, it is a good note of some rightnesse of
heart.

Thirdly, consider the things which flow from the heart: if they be single and
pure, warrantable and right, then a man may know his heart is upright; for such
as the fruit is, such is the tree; if thou feedest on forbidden fruit, thou art
a bad tree, and thy heart far from uprightness; an upright heart suffers
not rotten speeches in the mouth, idleness in the hand, injustice in the life,
drunkenness in the brain, and disorder in the course.

Fourthly, consider the ends and aims of our actions; the upright heart aims
directly at Gods glory in all things, but the crooked heart propounds ever
some crooked end and sinister respect unto good actions; as many come to
Church, get knowledge, and profess Religion for vain glory and vain ends;
some thrust among godly persons, and into good company, not because they are
good or would be good, but because they would be thought so.

Fifthly, consider if thy heart be the same in private as it would be thought in
public. Psalm. 101. David will walk wisely in the perfect way, in the midst of
his house: and the conversation of the Saints has been always like it self.
Abraham walked in uprightness before God according to the Commandment, Genesis
17. 1. how did he reform his house, teach his family, instruct his servants,
and take God with him in providing a wife for Isaac, and in all things? Genesis
24. 63. Isaac was the same in the field as he was in the house, he went out
into the field to pray, says the Text. Daniel was the same after the dangerous
Law that he was before, he opened his windows thrice a day as he was
accustomed. So upright was Paul in his whole course, as he knew nothing by
himself, 1. Cor. 4. 4.

A good heart sets God often in sight as well in the Chamber as in the Church;
David set the Lord ever in his sight, and at his right hand. It is as severe
and zealous against his own crookedness as any other; and will not swallow
small sins no more then great, seeing Gods pure eyes are set upon and against
both. Uprightness is in every thing alike, without and within; it is not worse
in substance then in show, nay, it is better: It seeks to approve it self
before God and al men, first to God, whose eye is more respected then if all
the world looked on, and then to all men, but so as if none but God looked on
them: It desires to purge it self from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
and to grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.

That man, that finds these notes in him, may be a glad man, nay, he must be a
glad man, according as it follows in the Text, Be glad ye righteous:] from
the connection of the persons to this duty we may note, that

Only the godly man can truly rejoice with sound and lasting joy. Doct.
Isa. 65. 13. My servants shall rejoice, and ye Only the godly can soundly
rejoice.
shall be ashamed; my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry
for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit. The stranger shall not
enter into his joy, Prou. 14. 10. and it is called the joy of Gods people. Thus
the Scriptures ever limit this joy to the faithful: Psalm. 40. 16. Let them
that seek the Lord, rejoice: and Prou. 29. 6. In the transgression of an evil
man is his snare, but the righteous does sing and rejoice. The reasons of this
doctrine are these:

First, because none else are commanded to joy but Reasons. 1.
the godly, none else have warrant to rejoice: where do we read, that a
wicked man is bid to joy? and indeed, what cause is there, that he should be so
bid? What troubles him? his sin troubles him not, it is his hearts delight;
not temptations, for he swallows them all; not his conscience, for it is
asleep; not the world, for it is his Darling; not the Devil, for he is not
cruel in his own house; not outward afflictions, for he will not endure any:
al things are at peace with him, he mournes not, and therefore needs not be
called to comfort: the promise is, Blessed are they that mourn, and are
troubled and persecuted for the name of Christ; for they shall be comforted.
Nay, he is called from joy to howling, Iam. 5. 1. he is already glutted and
drowned in worldly delights and carnal joy, from which he is euerywhere
called, yea, a woe is pronounced on him, Luc. 6. 25. Woe be to you that rejoice
now: for ye shall mourn and weep.

Secondly, only the godly have cause to rejoice: 2.
for,

First, they only have the presence and fruition of the 1.
chief good, which is God himself; and are in covenant True causes of sound
joy only among godly men.
with God, by virtue whereof they are interessed in all the good things of
heaven and earth; as a wife in the goods of her husband. Here is a great cause
of joy indeed; a godly man has gotten this cause of joy, and therefore he may
lawfully rejoice.

Secondly, they only know that their names are written 2.
in the book of Life, which is a truer cause of joy by our Saviors
testimony, then if by the gift of miracles they were able to subdue the
Devils, Luc. 10. 20. Rejoice not in this, but that your names are written in
the book of Life. And then the godly know their names to be written in that
book, when they write their own names in Gods book by becoming believers;
for faith gives them privilege to be the sons of God, Ioh. 1. 12.

Thirdly, they only have escaped, and are set free from the infinite evils,
and sorrows of sin, with which all 3.
other besides themselves are beset, and bound over to damnation: And therefore
as Israel, having escaped the Sea, the Mountains, and Egyptians, and gotten
out of Egypt it self, sang and rejoiced, Exodus 15. 1. so have all the Israel
of God, being set free from hell and sin, and sinners, and the curse of
sin, just cause of joy and gladness, which all but they want.

Fourthly, only they have the Spirit of God, the Author 4.
and Preserver of this joy, which is therefore called the joy of the Holy
Ghost: only they are anointed with the oil of gladness, and clothed with the
garment of gladness; and have the Spirit of comfort sent into their souls,
who is the Moouer of this joy; and not so much makes our Spirits rejoice, as
himself rejoices in us; as he is said, not to make us make requests, but to
make requests in us, Romans 8. 26.

Fifthly, only they know, that Christ is theirs with all his merits, and thus
attain the joy of believing. He 5.
that sold all to buy the field, went away with joy that he had gotten the
field: So he that knows he has gotten Christ, and grows up in him as a
member in the head, and lives and moves by him, will rejoice in his purchase
of naked Christ. How did Simeon rejoice, when he had Christ in his arms? How
much more will a sound Christian, who carries him in his heart?

Sixthly, only they suck and draw their joy out of the 6.
Wells of sound consolation, Isa. 12. 3. that is, out of the Scriptures, which
are written, that their joy may be full, 1. Ioh. 1. 4. The privilege of Gods
testimonies, is, that they rejoice the heart, Psalm. 19. 8. These make known to
us, the things given us of God, these contain the glad tidings of salvation,
and the precious promises of grace and glory, which belong only to godliness:
here be the deeds and conueyances of their eternal inheritance, only
bequeathed to children; these be the Chariot of the Spirit, who yields no
argument of joy and comfort but from the Word, and all joy elsewhere sought is
carnal and presumptuous.

Seventhly, only they enjoy the sweet peace and joy 7.
of a good conscience, excusing and acquitting them in the sight of God, which
it self is a continual feast; and makes them glad and cheerful, Prou. 15.
15. This was the true cause of the heavenly joy, which the Apostles in their
labors and persecutions enjoyed, even the testimony of a good conscience, 2.
Cor. 1. 12.

Eighthly, only they have the hope of glory in soul 8.
and body, which is a fruit of justification, Romans 5. 3. and a sound cause of
joy; We rejoice, says the Apostle, under the hope of the glory of God, and
hope makes not ashamed. And not only this, but a grounded assurance also, that
all things in earth, which may seem to darken their hopes, shall be turned to
the best, Romans 8. 28.

All this may be a means to bring godly life in request, Use 1.
seeing it is the only joyful life, and none have indeed any sound cause of
rejoicing, but the godly. And here we are to meet with two objections, which
terrify men from godly life that lies now a days like refuse wares, vnaskt
for and unregarded.

First, that the world accounts the slate of Gods Object. 1.
children most lumpish, heavy, and solitary, yea, most uncomfortable; it
thinks that no joy, nor mirth, nor pleasure of their lives belongs unto them,
but if once a man begin in truth to live godly, he must bid a dieu to all
mirth and gladness, and betake himself to a mopish heaviness and sadness.

But this is a gross and foul deceit of the father of lies, whereby he has
much aduantaged his Kingdom, Answ.
and by a supposed want of joy, exceedingly puts godliness out of countenance.
Yet, first, true it is, that God helps and draws Christian joy out of godly
sorrow; and no man can attain this sound joy, but he that is soundly humbled
at the sight of his sins; and herein the World sticks; not seeing the
powerful work of GOD, who out of this darkness brings light; who sows
light to the righteous, and out of this sorrowful Seed-time brings forth a
white Harvest of joy.

Secondly, because now the heart being regenerate cannot carnally rejoice as
before, nor in carnal things, having better objects and causes of joy, on
which it feeds, the stranger that cannot enter into this joy, thinks he has
no joy at all, only because worldly joy is unsavory to him in comparison of
spiritual.

Thirdly, the World and wicked men set themselves to unsettle the peace of the
godly, and do often disquiet them, and will let them have as little joy as may
be. Yet;

Notwithstanding all this: First, the godly, even when they do not rejoice,
have just cause to rejoice; else our Savior would not have pronounced the
mourners blessed, even for the present: Blessed are they that mourn; nor have
said to the Disciples, In the world ye shall have affliction, but in me ye
shall have peace, Ioh. 16. 33.

Secondly, if they sorrow, they shall out-grow their sorrow, and their sorrow
shall be turned into joy, as Christ promised the Apostles, Ioh. 16. 20. The
redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with praise, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their head, they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and mourning shall fly away, Isa. 35. 10. So Isa. 61. 3. Christ
has appointed unto them that mourn in Sion, beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

Thirdly, our Text teaches, that God would not have the hearts of his children
at any time so possessed with sorrow, no, not for the most just causes, but
that they must support themselves, and rise out of it with heavenly and
spiritual joy, to which end serve all these commandments so thick (as we
say) and threefold, which were all idle and to no purpose, if their lives were
still to be led in a lumpish and sour manner.

Here therefore I would advise such as fear God, to look to two things:
First, to prepare their hearts by fullness of godly sorrow to be filled with
joy; seeing it rises out of serious sorrow for sin, and out of a broken
heart: we tune our harpes and musical instruments to sweet music, by
wresting the strings: neither must we (as we are too ready to) conceive these
two as enemies destroying, but rather as constitutiue and conseruing causes one
of another. Then, secondly, let Gods people be advised to look into their
privileges, which are such as may well, not only affect, but ravish them with
joy; and consider of their happy estate and translation into the fellowship of
GOD and his Saints: and that for these causes; first, that they may yield
obedience to Gods commandment, both here and elsewhere: secondly, manifest the
presence of the Spirit in their hearts, who brings with him peace and joy, and
settles the Kingdom of the everliving God in the heart, which consists in
these: thirdly, that they may not only take away this scandal, which Satan
and the wicked make advantage of, but also encourage others to get part in the
same grace, which keeps them in a cheareful and constant course of well-doing;
when they see that no trouble nor affliction can interrupt their joy: fourthly,
without true joy we can never praise God heartily, or serve him chearefully;
for no joy in God, none in his ordinances, none in our duties of either of our
callings; but we must needs be lumpish, and heavy, and soon weary of our
prayers, and hearing the word, and the special actions of our calling; wherein
if we had delight, we would not easily be pulled from them, but count much time
employed therein, as Iaakob did an hard prentiship of many years, but a few
days, because of his affection of love and rejoicing in his Rahel.

Another objection, which terrifies many from godly life, Object.
is, that the godly are so beset and compassed with troubles, sometimes inward
and sometimes outward, in themselves and theirs, in their goods, names, and
persons, as they cannot see what joy they can have in their lives.

No marvel if the world can see no cause of joy in the godly estate,
especially when the Sun and heat of Answ.
persecution tanneth and discoloureth them, seeing the godly themselves are
often out of love with their own condition.

For, First, they have a true sense of sin, and rather then they should not
have it, God himself will hide his face from them, and they are troubled.
Psalm. 104. 2^. So David in the 51. Psalm had by his grievous sins lost the
joy of his Salvation, which he desires the Lord to restore unto him once
again.

Secondly, the Church sometimes forfeits in a manner 2.
Christ's presence, and by unkind answers makes him go away in displeasure,
and then her beauty and joy is faded; and seems blasted, as plants are in the
absence of the Sun or far distance of it.

Thirdly, sometimes presence of natural corruption, and strength of rebellion
in the heart carries a godly 3.
man as a slave to execute the lusts of the flesh, whereby the Spirit is
grieved, and quenched, and seems quite gone; and this is a great cause of
sorrow and heaviness of heart; as we may see in Paul, crying out, O miserable
man that I am! etc.

But in all this there wantes not some cause of joy:

First, Seeing Christ goes not away, but he leaves some Godly in sorrow, want
not cause of joy.
pledge of his coming again; he puts his hand by the hole of the door, that
the heart of the Church may be affectioned toward him, Cant. 5. 4. and this
is that, which makes her in his absence sick of love; which argues some
delight in him while he is far off; and this delight and desire after him
gives her no rest till she find him again, and then she lays better hold,
and makes more of him then ever before. Neither does David so lose all joy by
his sin, but that he still desires and longs after it: which argues the
Spirit not to be quite gone; who only works such unspeakable groans after
himself in the hearts of such as he has once taken for his mansion.

Secondly, the joy of the godly is often ouercast with the mist of affliction,
and this dazles their own eyes, that sometimes their joy is hid from
themselves, and much more from others: But as it is in the heavens when a cloud
hinders the sunne-beames; or the interposition of the earth makes an eclipse
for a time, but afterward the Sun shall break out and shine gloriously: so is
it here: first, the promise is, Ye shall weep for a time, but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy, and your hearts shall rejoice, Ioh 16. 20. Secondly,
afflictions from the world for well-doing cast not joy out of a godly heart,
but feed it Iam. 1. 2. My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
afflictions: and 1. Pet. 1. 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a
season (if need be) ye are in beauinesse. The Apostles therefore rejoiced,
when they were whipped and set in the stocks and used like rogues for Christ's
sake: and the Saints rejoiced in tribulation and suffered with joy the spoiling
of their goods, Hebr. 11. Thirdly, those afflictions were comfortless and
justly to be sorrowed for, which could separate us from God, and from Christ
the only fountain of our true joy, but all afflictions help the godly nearer
unto God and Christ, working repentance, fear, shame, and remorse for sin,
and reconciliation, and so help our joy.

Thirdly, the godly have oftentimes less comfort of Why the godly have less
joy in their estate then they need.
their life then needs, because they mistake their estate, two ways
especially: First, when they are not able to distinguish between nullytie and
imperfection of grace: Oh they find no faith in their hearts, no fear, no
brokennesse of heart, when they (I will not say, belie the Spirit, but)
unthankfully deny his work in themselves: I grant here is imperfection of
these graces, but, that they are quite shaken out where ever they were in
truth, is not to be granted. Secondly, when they will measure their estate by
sense, and not by faith, whereas faith stands not by sense and feeling, but is
a secret force beyond these. A man in a swoone or in a sleep feels not his
life, and yet is a living man, and a sounder man if the qualme or sleep be
over: it is one thing to have grace, another to feel grace; one thing the life
of faith, another the life of sense.

Fourthly, the godly are often too hasty, and loath to stay their time of
preparing to their glory; this troubles them much that God delays them so
long, they fear he has utterly forgotten them: But he that believes makes
not haste: and, Mark the just man, his end is peace; not always his
beginning: If God delay long, yet he will come at last; let thy faith grow in
strength, and thy joy shall be abundant; thou shall not fear but that (as in
Sampsons Parable) out of the eater shall meat come, and out of strong
afflictions sweetness. By all which we may see the blindness of the World,
that can see nothing at all in the godly life worth the taking up, and who to
avoid the troubles of godly men, refuse to partake in their joys, which are so
sure and sweet as that no affliction or sorrows can befall them, in which
they may not rejoice, if it be not by their own default. But let the godly
themselves rejoice in their portion, that God has severed them from the base
brats and Ismaels of the World, whom he sends away with some gifts, but has
bestowed the peculiar liueli-hood of his own Isaacs upon them: Let them be
glad in the evils they have escaped, in the good procured them, within and
without them, here and hereafter, the least dram of which has more true
cause of joy in it, then if they were heirs of the World.

Secondly, see hence the unhappy estate of unrighteous men, Use 2. Wicked men
have often some joy, but never any sound cause.
seeing they are without all found joy, or cause of it: for,

First, what joy can he have, that is, a dead man, dead in sin, without the
life of God, without Christ the fountain of life and joy? surely, a dead man
that lies rotting in his grave, has as much cause of joy in that estate, as he
that is dead in sin has in his.

Secondly, what joy can he have in GOD, whose conscience continually vexes
and accuses him; in whom the spirit of fear and bondage rules; which keeps
and bars out peace with God; and much more the joys of the Holy Ghost? A
sound of fear is ever in his ears, Job. 15. 20. True it is, a wicked man may
labor to forget the troubles that haunt him, or to brawne his heart, not to
feel them, and set himself on some merry pin: to face out the matter, as
if he were at good ease; when all this is either a senseless estate, more
void of comfort then of feeling; or a laughter in the face, when the heart is
heavy; or the laughter of fools, (as Solomon says) whose property is to
laugh most, when they have least cause.

Thirdly, what true joy, or cause of joy can he have, on whom the sentence of
condemnation is passed, the execution of which sentence he may daily expect?
Surely, the greatest Monarch alive, if he were in chains under his greatest
Enemy, and condemned to dye, could take no joy of his wealth, greatness, or
of any earthly delight: but wicked men are in the chains of the Devil, and
abide under the sentence of death, ever ready to feed upon them. Baltazer
indeed was merry, and in his Revels with his Princes: but what cause had he,
when the Handwriting appeared on the wall? So Amnon was merry in his brother
Absoloms House, but what cause had he, seeing men were appointed presently to
kill him? Let a wicked man be as merry as he will, sure it is, his estate
gives him no leave.

Fourthly, what can minister true joy to him, that has no part in any of Gods
Ordinances, which begin and perfect the joy of Gods people?

First, for the Word of God, he refuses the joyful tidings of his salvation;
the doctrine of free Remission of sins, which only brings lasting joy, he
has no part in, nor in that Redemption purchased by Christ, and published in
the Gospel: thus the word is a bill of Indictment to him.

Secondly, the Sacraments seal nothing to him, but are as seals set to
blankes: for, having no part in the Covenant, he has nothing by the seals;
only he makes himself guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as Judas did,
and for want of faith eats and drinks his own damnation.

Thirdly, Prayer from him is not only not heard, but even abominable: besides,
he has no help of Christ's intercession (for he prays not for the World:)
nor of the Prayers of Gods people, because he is not of that communion.

Fourthly, the duties of his calling are sin to him, To the impure all things
are impure, even his best actions exclude him out of heaven, neither can a man
have any joy of his actions, till he can rejoice that his person is a member of
Christ.

Fifthly, the creatures of God he can no more truly rejoice in, then a Thief
can of a true man's purse: neither can that be true joy in the creature, that
rises from the creature, rests in the creature, and goes no higher then the
creature; but such is the wicked man's joy.

Sixthly, less joy can he have in his sufferings or sorrows, because, their
nature being not altered, they are no tokens of love, nor tend to their good
(as in the godly:) but are punishments in part and in hand, and flashes of Gods
everlasting wrath, and beginnings of Hell.

In the Lord.] from this limitation, which is the third part of the verse, we
may learn this instruction, namely, that

All the rejoicing of godly men ought to be in the Lord, Doct.
that is, spiritual and Christian, a joy worthy the Lord. All the rejoicing of
godly men ought to be in the Lord.
And then it is spiritual and Christian, when it has two conditions:

First, when it is in the Lord, as the author and fountain of all the good
we can enjoy, or joy in, yea the matter of our joy.

Secondly, when it is in the Lord, that is, according to the will of the Lord,
and not against it: so the phrase is used, 1. Cor. 7. 39. Let her marry, only
in the Lord, that is, according to Gods Word and direction, and not against it.

First, God must be the author and matter of our joy, as David made the Lord
his Song all the day long: for, First, how great reason have we to make him
the matter of our joy, of whom we are all that we are, both in our first and
second Creation? He is the Potter and we are the Clay: nay, we are his new
Creation and workmanship, regenerated, justified, sanctified, and saved: are
become his by a new covenant in which he accepts us as children, reconciled by
the death of his Son, in whom we may rejoice as in a merciful Father: yea
as a wife married to a most loving husband, by virtue whereof she has interest
into his person and whole estate. Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 11. We
rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the
atonement.

Secondly, this joy is most perfect, which rises of the presence of that which
is most perfect; and the greater the good enjoyed is, the greater is the joy:
and therefore in Heaven it shall be most perfect and glorious, because we
shall perfectly enjoy God, and see him as he is, in whose face is fullness of
joy.

Thirdly, to make God the matter of our joy, is to perpetuate our joy, and make
choice of that which shall never fail us: for as GOD himself is everlasting,
so shall the joy of his people be like a stream, which continually runs and
knows not the year of drought: yea it shall hold out in dangers, troubles,
and persecution, Romans 5. 3. as the Martyrs rejoiced in the very flames.

What? may we not joy in outward things, as meat, Quest.
drink, wife, children, wealth, honor? etc.

Yes, but never out of God, or without reference unto Answ.
him, neither in outward nor inward things: we hold all in capite, and must be
Homagers of all unto him; he must have the glory of all, as Ier. 9. 23. 24.
Let not the rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the wise man in his wisdom,
etc. but herein let him glory, that he knows me to be merciful and
righteous: this must be the chief pleasure, honor, riches, and wisdom of a
Christian, to know God reconciled, and to hold all in this tenure.

We may also rejoice in the means of salvation, but, if we rejoice not only
in Gods favor, but desire to bring something of our own toward it, as the
ignorant or wilful Papists do, This is not to rejoice in the Lord, but in our
selves. We must rejoice in our Prayers, but only because God is a God hearing
Prayer, in our hearing, reading, and receiving of the Word with joy, but in
this respect to God, that he teaches and speaks to the soul: in the duties
of our callings, but because we are in Gods Work: in the duties of love, but
because we lend to the Lord, and feed and cloth Christ: in all the comforts of
life, in the wife of our youth, in gracious children, in prosperity, etc. but
because and so far as these are pledges and fruits of Gods favor in Christ.
Yea more, we must rejoice in adversity and tribulation, because it is that
estate, which God sees best for us: yea in death it self, but as it is a going
to GOD, to enjoy him more immediately then we can in this present World.

Thus enjoy all things in God, and God in all things, and joy as much as thou
can: for all this while we rejoice in God performing his holy promises unto
us.

Secondly, we must rejoice in the Lord, that is, according to the will of the
Lord: now God's will measures and limits our joy, first, in respect of the
matter, secondly, of the manner, thirdly, of the measure: For the matter, it
restrains our joy from all unlawful things: For the manner, our joy in
lawful things must not be unlawful: For the measure, the best things must How
Gods will limiteth our joy.
have the best measure of our joy.

For the first: it suffers not men to rejoice in sin or such things as chase
God and his spirit away; as in swearing, excessive drinking, unclean and
filthy speeches, 1. For the matter.
cursed and blasphemous language, in wantonness and whoring; this is the
devils mirth and music, a mirth and laughter which is madness, like the
laughter of a thief upon the ladder ready to be turned off. The like may be
said of such as rejoice in railing, revenging, quarrelling, disgracing and
reproching of Gods children: Can such men rejoice in the Lord? nay, there is
none of all this cursed crew, or the former rabble, that can be glad, but when
God is furthest off, or forgotten and set out of sight: For let a man now put
them in mind of God, and the true causes of joy in him, by any sauoury word,
they presently with the devils in the Gospel think, and perhaps cry out, They
are tormented before their time.

For the second; Gods will permits not men to rejoice in the most lawful
things unlawfully, whether 2. Manner.
necessary or indifferent.

First, Indifferent things are meat, drink, recreation, wealth, prosperity;
in all which, and the like, if God be not still kept in sight, the joy in them
is unlawful. And if God be in the eye, then first, he will be inuocated to
bless all the comforts, even the least: Secondly, men would know measure and
moderation; that is, they durst not sit at the wine, nor be brought under the
power of the creature; durst not be lovers of pleasure more the^ of God, durst
not spend out so much precious time in pastime, and so little in private
exercises of piety: no man hires a servant to do nothing but play all the
week and year: and thirdly, if God be in the eye, in the end of all the joy
in the creatures he would be acknowledged to be he that gives power to get and
use substance; he should have the praise of his mercy returned him, as David
did, Psalm. 23. 5. It is thou that feedest me, spreadest my table, fillest my
cup, and anointest mine head. The most joy in the world is in those things
wherein men are most excessive, because they divorce the joy in the creature
from that in the Creator: And a general error poysoneth the common reioycings
of men, who think they cannot be merry and serve God too. But of all such
mirth as is severed from Gods fear, our Savior says, Woe be to you that now
laugh, that is, carnally, excessiuely, without God or his word: remember the
Apostles Canon, Rejoice with trembling.

Secondly, Things lawful, and necessary, must not take up our hearts so, but
that we reserve the chief room for God, and joy in him: as for example, Many
rejoice in their callings and diligent exercise of them (which is good and
commendable:) but herein they fail, that they bury themselves in earthly
business, and forget their general calling of Christianity, Gods Kingdom,
Word, Works, and Sabbath; whereas, were the joy in the calling sound, it would
be herein, that suppose thy calling were never so base, yet thou art in Gods
work, and in thy way, yea, in a course, which must be so far from hindering
thee in piety, as wherein thou might (as thou ought) hold God always in
thy sight.

For the third, namely, the measure of our joy, Gods word and will is, that our
chief joy be on the chief 3. Measure.
good; and as things in the degree of their goodness approach unto, or decline
from that, so must our joy be to them in greater or smaller measure: and here,

First, God must be our glory and our joy all the day 1.
long, that the blessed Father is our Father, the beloved Son of God our
Savior, and the holy Spirit our Sanctifier and Comforter.

Secondly, next to God, we must rejoice in his Image 2.
for his sake; and first, because Christ is the express Image of his Father,
we must rejoice in him above all men and Angels, even as the chief of 10000,
but especially that we conceive him in our hearts, as the blessed Virgin did in
her womb, for which she is bidden rejoice: Secondly, his Word carries his
image, in truth, holiness, light, eternity; we must therefore with David
rejoice in the Word, because there God and Christ, and the blessed Spirit meet
us with light and abundant comfort. The wise men seeing the Star, that led
them to Christ, rejoiced with exceeding great joy: The Word is to us this
Star, which leads us to Christ, first, in the Manger and on the Cross in
his humiliation, and then to his Crown and Throne in his advancement and
exaltation: Thirdly, The Saints of God carry his image, and therefore all our
delight must be in them that excel in virtue, Psa. 16. 2. and Psa. 137. 5, 6.
David considering the Church as the collection of the Saints, wishes his hand
to forget his cunning, and his tongue to cleave to the roof of his mouth, if
he prefer not Jerusalem to his chief joy.

Thirdly, next to Gods image, we must rejoice in 3.
such things, as by which God is most glorified; as first, when the Church
inioyes prosperity, when the Kingdom of God is magnified, his Scepter lifted
up, and set up in the hearts of men, Psalm. 122.

First, I reioiced (says David) when they said unto me, Let us go up to the
house of God. We read of Iethro, that seeing all that God had done for Israel,
he reioiced Exodus 18. 9.
much, and so must we when the Gospel has free passage, the ministry
established and entertained, and the ruins of the Church are repaired, more
then when we grow rich and wealthy in the world: therefore Christ teaches us
first to pray, Thy Kingdom come.

Secondly, when men are converted from their wicked ways, when the lost sheep,
the lost groat is found. If the Angels in heaven rejoice when a sinner
repents; much more must we, who are in more entire fellowship one with
another, then the Angels are with us. So the parable teaches, Luc. 15. 32. It
was meet we should be glad and make merry; for thy brother was dead, but is
alive, was lost, but is found. How did Paul rejoice, and wish Philemon to
rejoice with him, when his runnagate servant Onesimus was converted?

Thirdly, when our selves or others increase and grow in grace: The Apostles in
all their Epistles, break out into exceeding joy and thanksgiving, for graces
bestowed upon believers, that their faith was published abroad, their love
abounded, etc. 1. These. 1. 3, 4. and the Romans 1. 8. Philem. 4. 5. Col. 1. 3.
Phil. 1. 4.
Apostle John reioiced greatly to see the elect Ladies children walking in the
truth, 2. Ioh. 4.

If a man thus bestow his joy for matter, manner, and measure, he shall find
little room left for carnal and vain joys, which are not more short in
holding, then bitter in forgoing them.

All this admonishes us to rectify our joy, and thus to Use.
order it, by which only we put difference between our selves and the brute
beasts, who rejoice in fulfilling their appetite, but can rejoice in nothing
higher then themselves. Accursed is all that joy in the creature, which is not
begun, continued, and ended in the Lord and for the Lord. Dives enjoyed wealth
and pleasure, went in Purple, and fared deliciously every day, but he is now in
hell, and his tongue that called for nothing but pleasure, calls now for a
drop of cold water, but cannot have it.

By what marks may I try my joy, whether it be spiritual Quest.
and in the Lord, or no?

Know it by these rules: First, thy person must be in Answ.
Christ, thou must be a believer; if thy name be written Marks of spiritual
joy.
in heaven, thy joy is godly joy: no part in Christ, no part in this joy.

Secondly, thou gettest and hold it by the right hand of faith, and
therefore it is called the joy of faith, Phil. 1. 25. Christ for the confirming
of his Disciples joy, commanded them to believe in him, Ioh. 14. 1. and 1.
Pet. 1. 8. After ye believed, ye rejoiced with joy unspeakable and glorious:
more faith, more joy; no faith, no joy, small faith or desire to believe, small
joy.

Thirdly, diligent study in Gods word: for faith finds not joy every where, but
only in the Word. John 15. These things have I said, that my joy may abide in
you. The two Disciples going to Emmaus, and Christ conferring with them, said
afterward one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked
with us? Here then is a plain difference between Gods word and the writings
of men: all the words of Philosophers are legal, and knew no Evangelical joy;
for, which of them ever taught concerning remission of sin or salvation by
Christ? Therefore accursed are such blasphemous hell hounds as hold the word of
God as a policy, and say there are as good sentences in Poets and Philosophers
as in it.

Fourthly, examine what thy conversation is, Righteous and upright men must
rejoice: for sin grieves the Spirit and extinguisheth joy, but piety and care
of good conscience not only cheareth him, but also is a sweet feast within,
and that continual.

Fistly, and lastly, examine thy proceeding in mortification: for as it is 1.
Cor. 15. 31. By our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily: the
joy of faith makes a man labor and long to be disburdened of sin the cause
of sorrow, and willing to go to God, at whose right hand is fullness of joy
for evermore.

Thus have we by Gods grace finished this worthy Psalm, which begun with
sorrow, but ends in solace; we went forth mourning, carrying out our seed,
but now we bring in our sheaues with rejoicing; we have sowed in tears, now
we reap in joy. For which blessed fruit, the forerunner of our full harvest
of joys, at Gods right hand for evermore, and for all other comforts
accompanying the same; To God the Father and Fountain; and to Jesus Christ the
Meriter and restorer; and to the holy Spirit of consolation, the immediate
applyer, and sealer of it to the hearts of the Elect: be all praise and honor,
in all Churches for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE CHIEF things contained in this Book.
A
ALl accusers of Gods Child put together cannot object half so much against
him, as he can against himself. 150

Absolute sufficiency of Eternal life, set forth in seven particulars. 390

Afflictions serve to shake the godly out of security. 74

Afflictions, how said to be good. 75

Afflictions are no temporal punishments, nor satisfactions for sin, three
reasons. 75

Afflictions are all Gods hand ordeining. 92 inflicting. ordering.

Sundry considerations why the godly must not be discouraged by Afflictions. 103

Afflictions, in themselves long, are short and momentany in five respects. 107

Afflictions concurring in a person rightly disposed to prayer. 194

Angels not to be inuocated for sundry reasons. 213

Arc many ways gave testimony of Gods special presence. 222

Assurance of deliverance from trouble, is from assurance of remission of
sin, four reasons. 252

B
THe meanest Believer is an happy man. 40

Benefit of syncerity in three heads. 59

Benefits of open confession of sin to man, four. 143

Benefits of right using the Scriptures, three. 191

Benefit of experience in divine things. 267

Benefits of calling other forward in Grace, four. 314

Bridles in Gods hand to hamper intractable sinners, three sorts. 360

Brother must be helped from under his burden, and how. 12

A Brutish property, not to learn by Gods word for three reasons. 347

C
CAses of open confession, three. 70

Cases of public confession to men, two. 143

Christ took not away the lingering, but the malignitie of crosses. 106

Choice of matter for consideration in five heads. 123

Cheerfulness must be doubled toward the end of our way, for three reasons.
337

Every Christian must benefit the whole Church by his experience, 4. reas. 183

Church and members ever preserved in trouble, yea, from trouble. 276

Colors set upon sins to hide them, three sorts. 152

Compassion toward the sick consciences. 80

Comforts and directions to such as have long sought, and never found that they
sought for, in six grounds. 239

Comforts against sense of weakness after many experiences of God. 268

Comforts for godly men in trials, three grounds. 108

Comforts and directions for such as have long repented, and yet find no
assurance of remission of sin. 174

Conditions in seeking God, five. 222 and 234

All sound Confession must be made unto God, for four reasons. 141

Sound Confession reaches to all sin. 129

Slubberd Confession of sin. 137

Confession of sin private of man to man, in two cases. 144

Confession must be sincere, because to God. 146

A true Confessor must be his own utter enemy, for four reasons. 148

Unsound Confession described, by four properties. 161

Sound Consideration brings sound resolution, three reasons. 118

Benefits of Consideration. 122

How to Consider of a man's latter end, four directions. 124

True Conversion works against all sin alike, 3. reas. 135

Continuance in trouble lets the godly see the greatness of their sin. 231

Every man must get a Cover for his sin. 16

Many sorts of men Cover themselves with fig-leaues. 18

Couers of sin too short and thin. 90

D
DAnger of hiding and lessening sin, in four things. 138

Danger of sin in six things. 156

Delays of God whet up godly desires. 233

Delays of God to be distinguished from denials. 233

Directions and comforts in Gods delays, six. 235

Sundry ways of Gods Delivering his his servants.

Difference between the deliverances of the godly and of the wicked, in three
things. 249

Difference between trouble of conscience, and melancholy in four things. 80

Difference between Gods heavy hand on the godly, and on the wicked in four
things. 103

Difference between Christian confession, and Popish Auricular, in four
things. 145

Difference between the prayers of the godly, and wishes of the wicked, in 3.
things. 197

Difference between the godly and wicked, in their seeking of God, in five
things. 219

Difference between the hiding place of the godly, and of other creatures, in
two things. 258

Difference between Gods smiting his children and his enemies, in

3. things. 1. measure. 284 2. intention. 3. issue.

Difference between the godly and wicked man's misery in 4. things. 368.

Directions to help us in the considering of our selves, three. 123

Directions how to go in the ways of God, six. 333

E
ENemies to thankefulnes, 4. 298

Examples of Gods judgments no Sabbath Breakers. 227

Experience is the best teacher, four reasons. 265

Experience of Gods word necessary in every man's own person. 67

Three things concur to make up Experience. 268

Exhortations in Scripture to things above our present power, for four
reasons. 346

The Godlies extremity is Gods opportunity. 242

F
FAce of God, what. 220

Many Failings in our best performance of duties of thankefulnes. 301

To become fearelesse in troubles, three rules. 270

Finding of God, what, when, and how. 229

God will not be always found of godly seekers, two cautions. 230

Why the godly always Find not God when they seek him, six reasons. 231

Godly fail in Finding, when they fail in the conditions of seeking. 234

Gods glory finds out many ways when he is found of his children. 237

Four especial seasons when God will be found. 241

Folly of many, who in danger run from their hiding place. 264

Forgiveness of sins, two ways. 158

Fruits of remission of sins, three. 172

G
CHrist our Garment, use of it, means to put it on. 17

Gods Child may hold some parts of Godliness for a time, and yet not see, nor
confess his sins. 73

A Godly man must become his own greatest adversary. 150

God is sought in his presence, not in his essence. 220

Godly find a want of God in seeking him, five ways. 225

Godly sometimes left to wickeds cruelty for sundry reasons. 248

Godly not exempted from trouble, but preserved in trouble, four reasons. 274

Godly course called a Way, for four reasons, and Gods Way, three reasons. 326

Godliness is a going in Gods way, three reasons. 326

God bridleth intractable sinners, three reasons. 361

God must be yielded to, gently calling, four reasons. 362

God bestows outward gifts on wicked men, four reasons. 377

Godly never more compassed with mercy, then when compassed most with misery,
three reasons. 385

Godly always find some mercy above the present judgment, four reasons. 386

God teaches four things by his servants sufferings. 386

Godly man is an upright man, four reasons. 402

Godly only can soundly rejoice, two reason; 406

Godly often out of love with their own conditions. 411

Godly in sorrow want no cause of joy, four reasons. 412

Godly have often less joy in their estate, then they need, two reasons. 413

God only can forgive sin, four reasons. 29

Godly must see the vileness of sin, three reasons. 136

Every Godly man prays to the true God only, fine reasons. 212

Godly why sometimes seek God, and find not, six reasons. 238

Grace restraining, distinguished from renewing grace, by sundry notes brought
to four heads. 52

Grace, if sound, is never quite shaken out of the heart. 127

Grace is given often before the feeling of it. 161

Grace only prays for grace, six reasons. 192

Grace if true, is communicable, three reasons. 311

Grace compared to Fire, Water, a sweet smell, Leaven, Light, and why. 313

Greatness of the deceit of heart in sundry things. 63

Grounds to be known to raise up experience. 269

Guile of heart in respect of God, three instances. 44

Guile of spirit in respect of sin before it be committed, in four
instances. 46

Guile of spirit after sin committed, in three particulars. 47

Guile of spirit in respect of grace, six instances. 49

Guile of spirit in respect of the work of the word and spirit. 51

H
HAnd of God how many ways taken. 91

Hand of God must release from trouble. 97

God lays an heavy Hand often on his own dear children, seven reasons. 98

Gods heavy Hand no certain sign of hatred, four reasons. 101

Heavy Hand of God lies long on many of his dear ones, six reasons. 104

Happiness must be placed in Gods mercy, pardoning sin, for sundry
reasons. 36

Deceitful Heart can counterfeit any grace. 50

A wicked Heart will deceive it self what way soever God deal with it. 45

How a deceitful Heart carries it self to sin, both before the committing
of it, and after. 46

Godly Heart utterly shames it self, that God may be glorified. 69

Hatred of sin distinguished from rash anger against it, by sundry notes. 53

Health a special blessing of God, why. 81

The way to be heard in prayer, is to be godly. 198

Heart must be plowed, before Gods seed can thrive in it. 112

Hiding place of godly, is God himself, two ways. 258

Beasts hide themselves in earth, but the Christian in Heaven. 260

To make God our hiding place, three practices. 261

Not hinderers of grace in others only, but not helpers of the grace of
others, condemned. 315

House of God manifold. 222

I
IDolatry of the Romish Church as base as heathenish, 218

Iesuitisme, the Rebels Catechism. 208

Imitation of the Saints how far. 185

Incredible instances of Romish cruelty. 207

Invoke the true God only in trouble, three reasons. 211

Sound Joy has eight causes all proper to the godly. 406

Joy of godly men shall break out at length, as the Sun from under a cloud,
three reasons. 412

Our chief Joy must be in the chief good. 421

Christian Joy and sorrow, may, and must stand together, four reasons. 87

Judging ones self, the manner and parts. 149

The greatest Judgment can not do the godly the leastharme, four reasons. 246

L
NO learning to DAVID'S learning. 3

Light of God by which himself will be found, twofold. 223

Love to Gods children known to be sincere, by five marks. 54

M
Marks to know whether ever a man had the Spirit of God, or no. 131

Marks of Gods way, five. 332

Marks of spiritual Joy, five. 422

Marks of that sense of misery, that shall find mercy, six. 114

Means to be disburdened of sin. 01

Of Sanctification. 15

To get sin covered, four. 19

To keep the heart in good order, eight. 64

Of the spirits prevailing against flesh, four. 133

Of sound hatred of our own sins, four. 155

To be heard in prayer. 199

To help forward thankfulness, three. 289

Means to recall Gods mercies into memory, two. 291

To help us in singing to God, four. 308

To know our selves in Gods way, four. 332

To get understanding, four. 350

Of assurance of remission of sins, five. 174

To help memory of good things, four. 270

Mercy of God twofold. 230

Mercy manifested to any one, must be of use to every one, reasons four. 183

Mercy which must attend prayer, stands in three things. 201

Nothing is Mercy, but what proceeds from mercy. 256

Mercies of God how to be prized, five rules. 290

Mercies of God toward the godly, enlarged in three several kinds. 381

Mercies spiritual in this life, reduced to six heads. 382

Mercies meeting the Saints in the life to come, distinguished into one
Privative, two Positiues. 387

Mercies positive in the life to come, reduced to three heads. 388

Ministry that sets men's sins plainly before them, to be reverenced. 139

Minister must have a flame in his own heart, that must kindle another. 176

A good Minister must be a good man. 182

Minister must be a leader as well as an instructor, four reasons. 339

Misery of a wicked man, who cannot pray in four things. 195

Motives not to run in further debt with God, four. 27

To sincerity, seven. 60

To diligent custody of the heart, four. 61

To get a sense of our spiritual mysery, four. 115

To consider of our ways and estates, five. 120

To mercifulness, five. 202

To seek the Lord, four. 293

To get experience of God, three. 271

To Thankfulness, five. 294

To call one another forward in grace, three. 319

To get understanding, four. 352

To lay aside obstinacy in sin, five. 356

Music in Gods service, and the rules. 305

N
Natural men to be pitied. 320

Natural men obstinat against God and his word. 353

Natural man understands nothing of God and his word, without a teacher,
three reasons. 311

Notes of a sincere heart, four. 57

Of godly sorrow, five. 83

Notes or attendants of sound confession, nine. 148

Notes of a man discharged of his sins. 172

Notes to know when a man makes God his hiding place, four. 262

Notes of a man gotten out of obstinacy, five. 358

Nothing shall prevail against godly men to their hurt. 277

O
Objections for humane merits answered, five. 33

Objections to prove that one wicked man cannot convert another, answered. 180

Objections why men should not be so precise answ. 190

Objections for praying to Angels. 214

Objections for inuocating Saints departed. 215

Objections against certainty of salvation, answ. 35

Objections of the troubled heart not finding God so comfortably as it
desires, resolved. 290

Objections terrifying from godly life answered. 409

Observations to help forward experience. 269

Obstinacy arises out of five causes. 354

In the Old Testament, the Sword and Word might better concur in one person,
then in the new. 310

No Ordinances of God bring any true joy to wicked men, proved by six
instances. 415

P
PAtience sundry ways urged, from consideration of Gods hand. 46

And from the shortness of time. 285

Pardon of sin makes an happy man, four reasons. 31

Pardon of sin must be certainly believed. 35

Pardon belongs only to penitent Confessors, six reasons. 167

Pastor must have his eye on his flock, four reasons. 340

Patterns of mercy to be im'tated. 203

People must endure special application of the Word. 324

People must diligently attend to things taught, three reasons. 338

Plague of wicked men not to be heard in prayer, four reas. 236

Popish positions, trumpets to rebellion and treason. 208

Practices contrary to sound confession of sin. 137

Prayer is a seeking of God. 220

Presence of God both of Power and grace ever with his children. 276

Gods Preservation is Mediat, or Immediate. 273

Privileges of such as whose sins are remitted. 257

Promises of deliverance true, when godly seem most left in their enemies
hands, four ways. 249

Gods promise limiteth the measure, and his providence limiteth the time of his
childrens trouble. 275

Properties of true trust in God, four 392

All use of Psalms must edify. 2

Q
Quest. Why men feel not the heavy burden of sin, four reas. 8

How sin can be covered, seeing God cannot but see it. 14

How good men may comfort themselves, discovering the deceit of their own
hearts. 51

Why wicked men feel not so great a burden of sin unpardoned, as the godly
of pardoned sins. 78

How the body comes to be troubled by the mind, two reas. 79

Why all the godly are not alike terrified by sin, three reasons. 79

How a man may know his sorrow to be godly. 84

How Christian joy and sorrow may stand together. 87

How Afflictions evil in themselves, can be the hand of God, five ways. 93

How they be the hand of God when the Devils hand, or wicked men's be in them. 94

How a man in crosses may look at second causes. 95

Why the Lord lays so heavy things on his children, seven reas. 99

How long and tedious afflictions are short and momentany, in five respects. 107

How a man by confession can make his sins known to God, who knows them
before. 141

Why we must confess to God that which God knows already, three reasons. 142

How Confession can be sound before sin be pardoned, seeing nothing is
acceptable before pardon of sin. 161

How can faith be a full persuasion, when it is not perfect, answered in six
conclusions. 163

Whether God cannot pardon sin without the condition of Repentance, and godly
sorrow. 168

How Remission of sins is free, seeing we cannot have it without condition of
Faith, Repentance, Confession, etc, 170

Whether Christ died for all, and every particular man. 171

Whether an unregenerate man may save and convert a soul. 177

How can a man pray, and obtain the holy Ghost, who has him already. 193

Whether a wicked man may pray, seeing if he do, it is sin; if he do not,
it is no less. 195

How God hears, or rather hears not wicked men. 196

Whether Roman Religion be not of God, being so prospered, so strong, so
embraced, and defended by the great Kings of the earth. 209

Why the Kingdom of Antichrist has taken so deep roots, in the world, or
somany ages, four reas. 210

Why none are more troubled then godly men. 274

How the Church is ever preserved in trouble, and from it. 276

How we can seek or find God, who is never absent, but every where present.
220

Whether a man has free will to change himself. 345

Who is a righteous man. 397

Why and how sinners are called righteous and perfect, 4. reas. 398

Why godly men are called upright in heart, 3. reasons. 399

How we are said to rejoice in the Lord: namely, when our joy has five
properties. 401

How we may lawfully rejoice in outward things. 417

R
REasons why God will only pardon sins of such as are godlysorrowfull, six. 168

Reasons to look to uprightness of heart, three. 403

Rejoicing of godly men ought to be in the Lord, 3. reas. 417

Religion vpset and vpheld by cruelty, not of God. 264

Remission of sins follows a sound purpose of confession of sins, 4. reasons.
159

Remission follows not confession of sins, ex opere operato, against Popish
doctrine. 163

Sound Remembrance includes four things. 270

Repentance of Gods children, in respect of outward afflictions, may come too
late. 232

Righteousness Legal and Evangelical. 398

Romish Religion accursed of God for the cruelty of it. 205

Rules to uphold a weak Christian, not feeling his reconciliation with God,
four. 38

Rules of limitation of godly sorrow, six. 86

Rules of discerning the same godly sorrow, six. 83

Rules to know if we have the Spirit of God, four. 131

Rules of direction what to do in our falls, four. 335

S
HOw to be Safe in dangers, five rules. 251

God begins our Safety in remission of sins, and so must we. 255

To be Safe, be sincere. 265

Saints departed, not to be inuocated, why. 215

Scriptures most wickedly taken from the Layty by the Church of Rome. 187

Security may cast a godly heart asleep, till God awake it, 6. reas. 70

Selah, what it means. 109

Sense of misery must go before sense of mercy, 5. reas. 110

Service of God only acceptable from merciful men, 4. reas. 199

Sin a most intolerable burden, five reasons. 6

Sin a most odious thing in 3. respects. 15

Sin is an infinite debt, 4. reas. 23 Sin

Sin is only forgiven by God. 29

Sin pardoned makes an happy man. 31

Sin, before it be committed, how it insinuates it self. 46

God works a serious sight of Sin in his children, for 3. causes. 136

Sins against many means very sinful. 157

To see Sin in a true glass, 4. things. 375

Songs of praise be seem seasons of ioy' 5. reasons. 287

Matter of Godlies Songs must be spiritual, six reasons. 302

Songs, and wanton tunes, mistuning the heart, condemned. 306

Every godly man's sorrow is not godly sorrow, 4. reas. 82

Wicked man's sorrow for sin most helpless, and why. 89

Sorrows of the godly compared to the sorrows of a woman in travail, in 5.
respects. 283

Sorrows of wicked men in this life, of many kinds. 370

Sorrows of the wicked after this life in six things. 371

Sorts of by-ways beaten by many, six in number, condemned. 330

Stayres to rise up to happiness, three. 21

Spirit of God at length prevails against the corruptions of flesh, 4.
reasons. 125

We must Speak of our experience of God to every godly man. 191

State of an obstinate sinner most accursed, 5. reasons. 367. and 372

State of Gods children not uncomfortable in their sorrows, sundry reasons. 409

Summers fruits are not to be condemned for Winter-stormes. 278

Syncerity of heart urged at large. 57

T
THe best Teachers are they, who teach out of their own experience, 5.
reasons. 175

Teachers must make people to understand the word, and their own way, two
reasons. 337

Testimonies of Thankfulness for deliverances, four. 378

Thankfulness is as much, and as little as we can return to the Lord for all
his mercies. 287.

Many fail in Thankefulnes many ways. 299

There is a Time when God will not be found, though he be sought, 4. reasons.
228

Time is when God will be found of every godly man seeking him, five reasons.
237

Times of joy ever succeed times of sorrow to godly men, 5. reas. 280

No Torment in the world like torment of conscience, 3. reasons. 77

In Trials godly must set 3. things before them. 278

Troubles of the godly are already overcome by Christ. 281

Trusting in God has abundant mercy, 4. reasons. 380

V
Virtues and Vices of the Saints recorded, the former for imitation, the latter
for our instruction. 185

True Understanding has four things. 339

Unmercifulness hinders both the preferring of our prayers, and prevailing
of them. 200

Unthankfulness vnbeseemeth a reasonable man, and much more a Christian. 288

Uprightnes, what. 398

Vprightnes discerned by 5. notes or marks. 404

W
War with thy fins brings peace by the word. 140

Way of God preferred before all other in four respects. 327

Wicked men seek not God till too late. 229

Wicked men cannot be happy, two reasons. 376

Wicked have temporal mercies, but no true right before God, 4. reasons. 382

Wicked have often some joy, but no cause, 4. reasons. 414

Wicked how they are heard of God, or rather not heard, in six particulars. 196

Wicked in trouble how he seeks God, five things. 219

Willing and free subjection to God, urged by 3. reasons. 365

Word of God limiteth our joy for matter. 419 manner. measure.

Good Works cannot merit or justify. 33

Works of Gods justice recorded in Scripture for our instruction. 185

Word of God must be specially applied, 4. reasons. 321

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 19. l. 26. add, Christ teaches. Page 24. l. 28. for seat of a debtor:
read, state of a debtor. Page 25. l. 12. for, are able: read, are not able to
pay. Page 57. l. 32. for, darting: read, darling sins. Page 300. l. 3. put
out, yes. Page 369. l. 22. for, Secondly: read, First, the very course.


