CHRIST REVEALED: OR THE OLD TESTAMENT EXPLAINED.

A Treatise of the Types and Shadows of our SAVIOVR contained throughout the
whole SCRIPTVRE: All opened and made useful for the benefit of Gods Church.

By THOMAS TAILOR D. D. late Preacher at ALDERMANBVRY.

Perfected by himself before his death.

HIERON. ad PAVLIN. In promptu est Leviticus liber, in quo singula sacrificia,
imo singulae pene syllabae, and vestis Aaron, and totus ordo Leviticus spirant
coelestia sacramenta. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman and L. Fawn at
the sign of the Brazen serpent in Paul's Churchyard. M DC XXXV.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir MILES FLEETEWOOD Knight, Receiver General of
his Maties Court of Wards and Liveries: All welfare in Christ JESUS.
Noble Sir:
IT is a truth able to endure the most fiery times and trialls, I. Lambert
Martyr.
None but Christ, none but Christ. Ignatius expresses as much, drawing near
to his Martyrdom, Epist. ad Romanos.
Let come upon me fire, cross, meetings of wild beasts, cuttings, tearings,
breakings of bones, rendings of members, dissolutions of the whole body, and
all torments of the devil, (...), only that I may gain Jesus Christ. Thus he,
entreating the Romans not to intercede for him, and hinder his ^uffering for
the Gospel. And thus the servants of God in these last times, when Romanists
have thrust them into flames and other calamities.

Christ is all, Col. 3. 11^
and in all, said the Apostle.



He is the foundation of our election, Ephesians. 1. 4.

He is the price of our redemption, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

He is the cause efficient of our regeneration, Ephesians. 2. 10.

He is the author of our justification Ier. 33. 16.

He is the beginner and perfecter of our sanctification, Heb. 12. 2. John 15.
4, 5. He is the matter of our consolation, spiritual and temporal, c. 16. 37.
Romans 5. 1. He is the sweetner and sanctifier of all our troubles, Romans 8. 37.
etc. He is the assurance and pledge of our resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He is
the procurer and producer of our glorificatio^, John 17. 22. Rev. 21. 23. All
of the^ good grounds of comfort, and set forth the happiness of Gods people. All
of them disgrace merit, and the worthiness of the creatures, Men and Angels.
All of them magnify Gods love and wisdom, call unto thankfulness, and would
make us content with little. All invite labor, to make sure of a portion in
Christ, without whom all is as nothing. And finally, all command those that are
in Christ, to be all unto him, do all for him, give all, suffer all, speak,
live, die, rejoice in all through him, and with him expect all in his heavenly
kingdom.

Look to the Word, wherein all these Law, Romans 10. 4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.
First, by similitude, says Austin: when a man is come to the end of a way, he
can go no farther: so when a Christian is come to Christ, he has no farther
excellency to seek or go unto: in Christ there is enough and enough to
reconcile him to God, and bring him to heaven. Cont. Iul. 9.
Secondly, for perfection, says Cyril* When a thing is finished, it is said to
come to an end, as namely in weaving a garment* so Christ has finished,
perfected, and fulfilled the Law: he came not to destroy, but establish it: so
that in him we have a perfect righteousness to present God withal, even as the
Law required, Gal. 2. 16. 21. Thirdly, he is finis intentionis: the Law bids us
look to Christ, in whom only we can live: both the Moral Law, in the holy
precepts of it, impossible in this our weakness, therefore have recourse to
Christ, Romans 8. 3, 4. together with the curses and threats of it, whereby it is
a sharp Schoolmaster, leading to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. As also the Ceremonial
Law, all whose shadows figure out Christ and his benefits, Heb. 10. 1. Now is
Christ come (says Tertullian) who is the end of the Law, Do cibis Iud. cap. 5.
opening all the dark matters of it, anciently covered under the mists of Types
and Sacraments: An excellent master, an heavenly teacher, Cont. Faust.
a setler of truth to the uttermost. Austin calls Moses his ceremonies,
prenunciative or foretelling Observations: Advers. Iud.
and says, We are not now constrained to observe things used in the Prophets
time, Non quia illa damnata, sed quia in melius mutata sunt; not for any evil
in them, but because they are changed for the better.

What they foretold, and how they are changed for the better, this Treatise in
part discovers, and I purpose not now to discourse. These glorious times of
the Gospel show evidently, how much the truth excels the shadow: the virtue
common to the ancient believers, as well as unto us: Christ Jesus yesterday,
Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and the same for ever: but as the manifestation is more clear, so
the grace is more plentiful and comfortable. The same Testator made both
Testaments, and these differ not really, but accidentally; the Old enfolding
the New with some darkness, and the New unfolding the Old with joyous
perspicuitie.

This glorious dispensation of grace, as it stands by the good pleasure of God,
so also by his manifold wisdom, who in several approches of his mercy and
goodness draws still nearer to his Church, and yet reserves the greatest for
his Kingdom of glory. Even now, in this mavelous light of the Gospel, we
have our divine ceremonies and sacraments, see him afar off, know but in
part, darkly as in a glass, and receive our best contentment by the acts of
faith, while the Word and Spirit make us know the things freely given us of God
in Christ Jesus. But time shall be, when (to say nothing of the estate of the
Church after the ruin of Antichrist, and calling of the Jews) we shall in
heaven see him whom we believed, face to face, clearly, perfectly, immediately,
without Sacraments or Types, in the fullest vision, nearest union, and
absolutest fruition. Never till then shall we comprehend wholly what is the
marrow of that text, John* 14. 6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.

To your Worship I commend this Treatise of that illuminate Doctor, excellent
sometime in following and opening an Allegory, and now more excellent in
enjoying the Truth it self: of whom, while here a Preacher, you showed your
self a joyful Hearer (as of other faithful Pastors at this day) with
obedience of the truth, religious care of your family, integrity in your
office, love of good men, both in the Ministry and private estate, and all
Christian behaviors; as the fame of your sweet savor goes forth in the Church
of God, to which I doubt not but this Treatise will be the more welcome,
because of your worthy name prefixed. It is an Orphane, and the Widow desires
it should be your Ward, who in your love can best tender it, and by your
authority defend it sufficiently. The God of heaven increase all heavenly
graces and comforts in your noble heart abundantly, and add unto your days,
honors, and blessings of all sorts, till these shadows fly away, and the
true Day Star arise upon you in glory: the hearty prayer of one, who is, and
desires to be reckoned among

Isleworth June 20. 1635. Your Woe: truest friends, in every good service,
WILLIAM IEMMAT.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have heard of a demurre made, as though something were put forth under this
Authors name, which it none of his. I assure thee in the word of a Minister,
that for the works that have my Epistle prefixed (and I hear of no other
published with his name) there is not one note nor notion which is not the
Authors own, according to his papers. And the like I affirm concerning this
Treatise of Types, which now I publish. The use of it is manifold: To open
diverse places of Scripture: To show the meaning of legal shadows and
ceremonies: To declare the faith of the Elders, Heb. 1^. 2.
who received a good report: To manifest our faith, Ephesians. 4. 5.
one with theirs, one faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one salvation: To magnify
and commend Christ to every soul, that it may be saved, and he honored. To
discern and bewail the blindness of Gods ancient people, the Jews, and pray
for their return to the truth not catching at shadows: Of whom, in present I
may say with detestation of their madness, as he said against the
Philosophers, Nos qui non habitu, M. Min. Fell. Octav.
etc. We Christians, whose excellency stands not in outward things, but
spiritual, glory that we have found what they (with all their diligence) have
sought, and could not find. Why are we unthank^full? Why do we stand in our
own light, if the truth of the Deity has in this our age attained to
maturitie? Let us enjoy and make use of our own good, and follow the truth in
truth: avaunt superstition, be packing all impiety, let true religion be
preserved and flourish. Yet withal, Romans 11. 26.
seeing there is a promise that all Israel shall be saved, let us pray for the
performance, and that with all earnestness, as that converted Jew gave
exhortation to his son, So long pour forth thy prayers for the remnant of
Israel, Ludov. Ca^retus: 1553.
till God look from his high habitation, and see, and have mercy on his people
for the Lords sake, his Anointed, that in our days Judah may be saved, and the
children of Israel may dwell safely in their own land, and spend their days
in good, the Lord making his good Spirit to rest upon them.

William Jemmat.

A Table of the Contents of this Treatise.
I.
THe Introduction: containing five Propositions, of the Church, salvation,
covenant of grace, Christ, and the ancient ceremonies, p. 1 Five reasons for
those ceremonies, 2 Grace in the New Testament specially, how. 3 Ceremonies
called shadows for four reasons. 4 Threefold use of them to the Jews. 5 Gods
wisdom in appointing them: three ways. ibid.
II.
The Treatise: showing Christ prefigured by holy persons and things. 5
I.
Adam a type of Christ in creation, office, sovereignty, conjugation,
propagation. 6 The Ministry reverend for antiquity. 8 Antiquity of the
doctrine of free grace. ibid. Seek life by Christ's death. ibid. Get into
Christ the second Adam, as thou art surely of the first. Motives. 9
II.
Noah a type for salvation, righteousness, preaching, Arc, repairing the
world, sacrifice of rest, and a dove sent out of the Arc. 10 Preserve
integrity in the worst times. 14 Sins which are signs of judgment
approaching. 15 Comfort to be had in Christ our Noah. 16
III.
Melchizedek a type in Etymology, office, original, excellency of person. and
Priesthood. 17 Christ greater than Abraham. 20 Comfort by Christ our
Melchizedek. ibid. We are blessed by our Melchizedek. 21 By our Melchizedek the
Church abides for ever. 22 Excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the
Leviticall: eight ways. ibid. Sin not to be accounted slight, whose sacrifice
is so costly. 24
IV.
Isaac a type in birth, suffering, offering, escape, marriage. 24 A pattern of
obedience in 5. things. 28. Two rules. 29 A type of our resurrection. 31 Matter
of sweet consolation. 32 Look for help, though the case be desperate. ibid.
V.
Joseph a type in his person, actions, passions, advancement. 33 No news for
good men to be hated for their excellency. 37 All sufferings of the godly come
of God: ordained and ordered. 37 Comfort by Christ our Joseph: four ways. 38
Do to Christ as Joseph's brethren to him. 39
VI.
Moses a type in person, estate, office, suffering, sundry actions. 40 Our
doctrine is of God. 45 Be faithful in doing thy office. 46 Show faith in the
fruit of it: contrary to four sorts of men. 47 Assurance of our resurrection.
47
VII.
Joshua a type in saving, calling, miracles, valor, actions. 48 A fearful
thing to be an enemy of the Church. 51 Comfort in our salvation accomplished.
52 Duties we owe to Christ our Joshua, 53 Conditions to be observed in going
to heaven. 53. Six 54
VIII.
Sampson a type in person, condition, actions, sufferings, stratagems,
victories. 55 Judge none by outward calamities. 58 Strange means used by God
for the Churches good. 59 Our victory stands in patience and passion. 60
Fourefold comfort to Gods people. ibid. In Gods cause contemn greatest peril:
and prepare for death approaching. 62
IX.
David a type in person, vocation, wars, kingdom, office, Prophetical and
Priestly. 62 Enter upon no office without assistance of the Spirit. A note of
it. 70 Christ the true King of the Church. Nine ways more excellent than
David. 71 How God brings his servants to honor. 74 Church ever pestered with
homebred enemies. 75 Comfort to the Church, in 3. things. 76
X.
Solomon a type in person, condition, peacemaking, wisdom, glory, temple,
justice. 77 Duties to Christ our Solomon: two. 83 Fourefold comfort in our
Solomon. 84
XI.
Jonah a type in name, office, death, burial, resurrection. 85 Repent at the
Ministry of Christ's servants. 87. Motives. 88. Vocation of the Gentiles. 89
Our resurrection assured to us. 89 Power and wisdom of God to be admired. 90
Terror of sin, even in Gods own children: and comfort. 91
XII.
The Firstborn, types: as Gods peculiar, fathers of the family, preferred
before brethren, double portion. 92 Every mercy is the greater engagement unto
God. 95 Honor Christ as the firstborn of God: and how. 96 Threefold comfort
in the birthright 97 Forfeit not the birthright by sin. 98 Resemble Christ our
elder brother. 99
XIII.
Priests, types: in deputation to office, and execution: choice, consecration,
apparel: actions. 100 A cover for us in Christ for all deformities of soul
and body. 101 Qualities requisite in Ministers. 102 Eminency of Christ above
all creatures. 105 Ministers must increase their gifts. 106 Duties of private
believers. ibid. three sacrifices. ibid. No perfection but only in Christ. 108
Sin unpardoned, all service is abominable. 110 Wash and purge all with the
blood of Christ. 112. Notes of it. ibid. Effects of being so washed and purged.
113 Priests garments common, and peculiar to the High Priest. 114 Seven uses
thereof for Ministers. 125 Three uses for the people. Twofold instruction. 128
Comfort to the godly, in respect of their head and themselves. 131 Believers
highly esteemed, as precious stones. 133. sin to slight them. 134 Temperance of
Ministers. 135. marriage. 137. mourning for the dead. 140 Ministers duty. 147.
private Christians duty, as Priests to God. 149
XIV.
Nazarites, types: as set apart for God, abstemious, nourishing the hair, not
to touch the dead, and released of their vow. 150 Christ and his excellency to
be acknowledged: and power, wherein. 155 Difference of the Nazarites vow, and
Papists. 156 Be Nazarites unto God: in five things. 157
XV.
Clean persons, types: three sorts of legal uncleanness. 159 Meats and
unclean, how, and why. 160. two marks. 161 Issues unclean, corporal and
spiritual. 162 Leprosy of body, and of sin. 164. signs. 166 Church and
members subject to many defilements. 167 Look narrowly on the misery of sin.
168. good fruit thereof. 170 Miserable effects of inward uncleanness. 171
Washing legal, and of Christ's blood, 172 Smallest sinkes to be put away. 174
and how. 175 Offering purges the unclean: so of Christ, typified. 175 There
is a way to cleanse every uncleanness. 180 Have recourse to the means, 180.
motives. ibid. Be very careful to avoid spiritual uncleanness. 181 Oblation of
birds. 182. Comfort to the godly. 185 Affect purity of heart and life. Motives.
186. Directions. 187 Avoid all occasions of defilement. 189 No easy matter to
be rid of sin. 194 Separate between the precious and the vile: who must. 195
Christ discernes the leprosy of sin. 196 Only they are cleansed from sin,
whom Christ accounts so to be. 197 Marks of one cleansed from sin. ibid.
What is to be done before this cure. 199. and what afterward. ibid.
XVI.
Holy things, types of Christ. 200 Use of legal ceremonies. 201 Their fitness
to the Jews nature. 201. ends. 202 Sacraments and sacrifices, distinguished.
203 Sacraments ordinary and extraordinary. 204 Circumcision described in parts.
205 A sign of Christ, and seal of righteousness, how. 207 Be humbled for
natural corruption. 208. and imperfection of grace. 209 Be circumcised
spiritually. 209. what it is. 210. notes. 211 Mortification, if right, is
painful. 212 Motives to get the spiritual circumcision. 215
XVII.
Passover, a type in the choice, preparation, effusion of blood, eating,
fruits. 216 Christ a Lamb: and his perfection. 217 Christ two ways set apart
to be a Mediator. 219 The time of his ministry and passion ordered. 220
Christ must dye a violent death: time of it. 221 Jews division of the day into
four parts. 221 How Christ is to be conceived and received. 222 In all worship
look to Christ. 223 The preciousnesse of Christ's blood. 224 Applied. ibid.
Faith resembled by hyssope, how. 225 Christ's blood to be highly prized. 226
Precious things procured by it. 227 Profane not the blood of Christ. 227. how.
2^8 Feeding on the Lamb, and Christ: five conditions. 229 Danger of the soul:
and how it is to be avoided. 235 Directions for receiving the holy Communion.
236 Similitude of purging out leaven and sin. 238 Entire purging of the soul.
239 Whole Christ must be received. 241 and how. 242 Popish abuses taxed, about
the Lords Supper. 241
XVIII.
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, a type of Christ. 243 how. 246 Four constant
miracles to Israel in the wilderness. 244 Comfort by Christ as our guide. 248
in seven things. ibid. Confidence and security by Christ. 250 Notes of them
that receive comfort by this Pillar. 252 And how this comfort is to be
esteemed. 253 Mercy and Justice met in this type. 254 Follow Christ as a guide.
255 and how. 256
XIX.
The Red Sea, a type. 257 in three conclusions. 259 Miracles in the miraculous
dividing of the sea. 257 Benefits sealed up by Baptism: four. 261 Observe the
power of God. 261 The way to heaven filled with difficulties: and why. 262 Many
comforts by that great work of God. 263 Duty of them that will enjoy these
comforts. 264
XX.
Manna, a type of Christ. 265 matters of resemblance. 266 Why Manna putrified,
if reserved. 271 Christ infinitely better than Manna 272 Gods patience and love
to be noted. 274 how it should work in us. 275 Gods watchfulness and care
over his Church, to be noted. 275 Comfort thereby, and instances. 276 Gods
bounty toward his Church, to be noted. 277 His wisdom in ministering to his
Church, to be noted. 278 Manna why given daily, yet not on the Sabbath. 279
Moderation in natural things: and what is GODS measure. 280 Man of himself is
senseless of the things of Jesus Christ. 281 Whence this comes. 281 and of
what use. 282 Hunger and thirst for Christ: motives. 283 Take pains for him:
motives. 283 Observe times and places to meet with Christ. 284 Apply and feed
on Christ. 285 And how. 286 Be never weary of this Manna. 286 Motives. 287
Prize and magnify this Manna. 287
XXI.
Water out of the Rock, a type of Christ. 288 in three respects. 289 Christ
resembled by a rock: 290 and waters. 291 Christ ever present with his Church
295 our duty. ibid. An almighty power in Christ for his Church. 296 our duty.
ibid. Gods mercy to his people, admirable 296 See the fountain of grace
opened: and its super excellency. 297 Thirst for Christ: and conditions of it.
298 continue it: two rules. 299 Have recourse to Christ in this thirst:
motives. 299 Quench thy thirst, and be satisfied. ibid. motives. 300 Means to
get water out of this Rock: hindrances: helps. 301
XXII.
The brazen Serpent, a type of Christ 302 Gods justice here to be noted, and
equity of it. 303 Of fiery serpents, and the old serpent the devil. 304
Temptations called fiery darts, why 305 Observations about sin, deceit, folly,
poison, danger of loving it. 306 God appoints the means of health to soul and
body. 307 A brazen serpent, not golden: five reasons. 308 Christ lifted up
before us, how. 309 Application of Christ a saving remedy, far most
excellent. 310 God helps his people by weak, unlikely, and contrary means:
and why. 311 Grounds for faith in these troubles of the Churches. 313 Kingdom
of Antichrist, how fit for destruction. 314 The eye of faith must shut the eye
of reason. 315 Four things cannot otherwise be obtained. 315 Believe the Word
absolutely. 319 Pray for eye salve: and what it is. 320 Captivate thine own
reason and wisdom. 320 motives. 321 Man's reason, the mother of heresies. 323.
and 324. Natural reason, an enemy to the power of godliness. 325 What is to
be done to be cured spiritually. 326 Wounds of sin compared to deadly poison:
in four things. 327 Come for counsel to spiritual Physicians. 327 who
reproved. 328 Confess special sins: and go wholly out of thy self and all
other. 329 Look only unto Christ: and that two ways. 331 How this looking
cures us: by faith: and how by faith. 332 Marks of one cured by looking to
Christ. 333 Four qualities of the eye that looks to him. 334 Motives to look
upto our Serpent. 335 Use of comfort, in five particulars. 337 In this Treatise
are two things. 1 The Introduction, chap. 1. where 1 Propositions concerning
the Church of God. 2 Reasons of the ancient Ceremonies.
2 The Treatis it self, 6. 2. where 1 Christ is figured in holy persons: 1
Singular: eleven. cap. 2.-12. 2 Ranks, and orders of men;
separated and sanctified 1 By birth: the Firstborn, c. 13. 2 By office: the
Priests, c. 14 Deputation. Execution.
3 By vow: the Nazarits, c. 15 4 By ceremony: Clean persons, c. 16.
2 He is figured in holy things: c. 17. 1 Ordinary Sacraments, 1 Circumcision,
c. 18 2 Passover, c. 19
2. Extraordinary: answerable to 1 Circumcision, and Baptism: 2 1 Pillar of
Cloud and Fire, c. 20 2 Red Sea: c. 21.
2 Passover and Lords Supper, 2. 1 Manna from heaven c. 22. 2 Water out of the
Rock, c. 23.





Add hereunto the Brazen Serpent, c. 24.

CHRIST REVEALED.
JOHN 14. 6. I am the Truth.
CHAP. I.
HAving formerly delivered, Christ the truth of legal shadows.
that Christ is Truth as opposed to falsehood; we are now to show, that he is
Truth as opposed to the shadows and figures of the old Law. Introduction to
this Treatise
In the entrance into which Treatise, we must premise some Propositions.

1. That the Lord decreed to have always a Church



God is but one, and Christ is but one, who is the substance of it. As there is
but one hope of one eternal life, the end of the Covenant: and one faith which
is the mean to lead to that end, Ephesians. 4. 5.

the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. for substance,
Sacramenta sunt mu^ata, non fides. Aug.
alters and differs only in the form and manner of dispensation;
according to which, it is diversely propounded in the old Testament and New. In
the former propounded, as of the Messiah to come, from Adam unto his
Incarnation. In the latter, as of the Savior already come, and so embraced in
the Church from his first coming, to his second coming again.

God appointed a multitude of ceremonies to the ^ewes, for 5. reasons.
rites, figures, and shadows, to strengthen their faith in the expectation of
him. Of which multitude of Ceremonies, if more special reasons be demanded;
These may be given.

Gal. 4. 2. and appointed diverse types and ceremonies, as rudiments and
introductions, verse 3. fitted to the gross and weak senses of that Church,
which was to be brought on by little and little, through such shadows and
figures, to the true Image and thing signified, who in our Text calls
himself truth, in opposition to all those shadows.

Object. But the weaker and duller they were, the more need had they of clear
instruction; and God could have revealed Christ as clearly to them, Velata
sunt ista, donec aspiraret dies, and removerentur umb^^e. A^g.
as to us.

Sol. But as the Lord had observed this method in creating the world, he would
have darkness go before light; and in upholding the world he would have
dawning go before clear day: So in the framing and upholding the Church, he
would have Christ exhibited to the Fathers, as to the Wise men, in swaddling
clouts, which hid his glory. He respected them as children; he erected for them
in Iewry, a little free-schoole set up in a corner of the world; he appointed
the Law of Moses as a Primer, or A. B. C. in which Christ was to be shadowed in
dark and obscure manner; he would that Christ should come to his brethren, as
Joseph to his; who first obscured himself to them, and afterward made himself
better known. One compares it to Noah's 1. Opening the window of the Arc; 2.
Removing the covering; 3. Stepping forth himself.

II. Therein the wisdom of God provided for the further advancement of Christ
and his Gospel; Moses the servant. Hence, Ioh. 1. 17. The Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: The Gospel is called grace,
not because under the Law the same grace was not preached, but comparatively:
that was scarce grace to this which is more full, more manifest; as the light
in the dawning, Grace in the new Testament specially, how.
is scarce light in comparison of light at nooneday. There was grace, but here
is more grace. 1. In manifestation: The light of the Sun is sevenfold, and
like the light of seven days, as was prophesied, Isai. 30. 26. 2. In impletion
and accomplishment of that

which was but a promise of grace in comparison. Act. 13. 32. 3. In application
and apprehension by believers in all Countries, not only in Judea. 4. In the
grows and perfection of faith and grace in the hearts of ordinary believers
above them. Hence, Heb. 10. 1. the Law had but a shadow of good things to come,
and not the Image and truth it self: that is, It had a rude and dark
delineation of good things to come, as a draught made by a painter with a
coal; but the Gospel exhibits the picture it self in the flourish and beauty;
that is, the truth and being of it.

Hence also Paul to the Col. 2. 17. Ceremonies called shadows, for 4. reasons.
speaking of observances of the Ceremonial Law, says: they were but shadows
of things to come, but the body is Christ. Whence he would have us conceive:
1. That as the body is the cause of the shadow, and the cause more excellent
then the thing caused: So Christ was the cause of those Ceremonies, and more
excellent then they. 2. As the shadow represents the shape of the body, with
the actions and motions: So those rites and Ceremonies resemble Christ in all
his actions, passions, motions, as after we are to hear. 3. As the shadow is
but an obscure resemblance in respect of the body: So the Ministry of the old
Testament in rites and Ceremonies, is a dark representation of the body,
namely Christ and his spiritual worship. 4. As the body is solid, firm, and
of continuance, even when the shadow is gone: So the Ceremonies as shadows are
flowen away, but Christ the body and his true worship lasts for ever. In all
which Christ and his grace are advanced, as the publisher and perfecter of our
salvation without any shadows; whereas of the Law it is sad: It made nothing
perfect, Heb. 7. 19.

Non ex opere op^ato.
nor to be an acceptable worship by the worth of the work done, nor to
justify the observer: but to show justification by Jesus Christ, the truth and
substance of them; to be types of him, pointing at him in whom the Father is
pleased; to be Allegories and resemblances of the benefits of Christ,
exhibited in the new Testament; to be testimonies of the promise and Covenant
on Gods part; to be Sacraments and seals of faith on the part of the believing
Jew, exciting and confirming his faith in the Messiah.

IV. God would have this heap of Ceremonies; Use of them to the Jews.
in which the voice of the promised seed, and the sound of wholesome and saving
doctrine might be preserved in the Church, and propagated to posterity. 2. To
be external signs of their profession, by which God would have his Church
distinct from all nations of the earth. 3. To be to the unbeleeving Jews, an
external discipline to bridle them, and an exercise to frame them (at least in
external conversation) to the Policy, and Commonwealth of Moses; for else they
must be cut off, and excluded.

V. Gods wisdom in appointing these Ceremonies; Gods wisdom in appointing
them.
2. Enjoined a certain provision for the Ministry, which had no certain part
of the land allotted to them. 3. That the poor might be so provided for, as
that there might not be a beggar in Israel.

The former propositions and reasons being delivered by way of Preface, we now
come to show that which our Text properly calls for, that is: wherein or how,
Christ is the truth of those figures, and the body of those shadows of the
Ceremonial Law.

Christ was figured in the old Testament by holy Persons, The general division
of this Treatise.
and by holy Things. Of the most holy and eminent Persons who were figures of
Christ, I will propound some instances.

CHAP. II.
1. Adam a type of Christ.
THe first of them is the first Adam, who was so lively a representation of
Christ, as that Christ is often called the second Adam, Romans 5. 14. Adam was a
figure of him that was to come. Adam a type of Christ, in four things.
We will gather the resemblances between them into four general heads.

Adams, red earth; the first in his matter, the second not in his matter
only, but also in his bloody passion. 3. Both were Sons of one Father, and both
men but of no man their father, neither of them having any other father but
God. 4. Both created in the Image of God; Vterque ad imaginem Dei conditus,
uterque Deo charissimus.
the former, Genesis 1. 27. the latter the engraven form of his Fathers person.
Heb. 1. 3. 5. Both endowed with perfect wisdom and knowledge; the first Adam
so wise as that he gave fit names to all Creatures according to their natures:
in the second Adam dwelt treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2. 3. 6. Both
possessed of a most happy and innocent estate; in which the one had power to
persever, but not will: the other had both power and will. 7. The first Adam
was made in the sixth day of the week to the Image of God: the second Adam
toward the sixth age of the world appearing to restore that Image which the
first Adam quickly lost.

Adam was owner of Paradise, the heir of the world; sovereign Lord of all the
Creatures to whom they came for their names; the second Adam is Lord of heaven
as well as earth, heir of the outmost bounds of the earth, Psalm. 2. 8.
Commander of all Creatures; whom the winds and seas obey; whose word the
devils tremble at; and he keeps his sovereignty which the first Adam lost. 2.
Adam was appointed to keep the Garden and dress it, Genesis 2. 15. Christ the
second Adam was set apart to sanctify and save his Church, the Garden and
Paradise of God, Ephesians. 5. 26. 3. Adam was King, Priest, and Prophet in his
family: so is Christ in the Church, the family and household of faith, Primus
ecclesiae doctor audiens immediate a Deo quae ecclesiae era^t proponenda, ita
and Christus.
Rev. 1. 5. As Adam was the first Minister of the word in the Church,
delivering the promise of the blessed seed with certain rites and Ceremonies
to his children, and they to their posterity: So the second Adam is the chief
Prophet and Doctor of his Church, who always prescribed the pure worship of
God for matter and manner in the Churches of all ages.

III. In respect of Conjugation. 1. Adam Eve is formed: Christ dying the Church
is framed. Eve is taken out of Adams side, while he sleeps: out of the second
Adams side, while he was in the sleep of death, issues the Church. 2. Eve was
no sooner framed but as a pure and innocent spouse she was delivered by God to
Adam yet in innocence: so God the Father delivered the Church as a chaste and
innocent spouse to be married to the second Adam for ever, to be bone of his
hone, and flesh of his flesh. 3. Of Eve married to Adam he receives both a Cain
and an Abel into his house: so the second Adam has in his visible Church both
elect and reprobates, sound and hypocrites, as by many Parables is signified;
as of the field; the net, etc.

IIII. In respect of propagation. 1. Both of Isa. 53. 10. 2. Both of them
convey that they have unto their posterity, Romans 5. 12. 14. As by the first
Adam sin, and by sin death came over all men: so by the second Adam came
righteousness, and by righteousness life on all believers; and herein
especially was the first Adam a figure of him that was to come. 3. As the first
Adam merited death for all his posterity: so the second Adam life for all his.

Application follows.

I. To note the honor and antiquity of the Ministry which not the first Adam
only, Use 1. The Ministry ^everend for antiquity.
but the second also exercised. Despise at thy peril what they so honored;
think it too base for thy self to attend, for thy sons to intend: Neither
the first Adam Lord of the earth, nor the second Adam Lord of Heaven and earth,
did so.

Adam taught; Antiquity of the doctrine of free grace.
neither of them ever dreamed of the doctrine of works and humane merits. What
Adam learned of God in Paradise he taught to his posterity; what his posterity
heard of him, the same they delivered and left to their children; but they
never heard nor taught any other way to salvation, but by the promised seed: so
also what the Disciples heard of the second Adam, that they taught to the
Churches; but they heard the same of him. Act. 4. 12. And our doctrine being
the same with theirs, is not new, but more ancient then any other. For as this
is the honor of all truth, Quod antiquissi^^um, verissimu^. Tertul.
to be before error and falsehood: so of this truth, to have precedence of all
truths; It truly pleads antiquity, therefore verity.

Seek life by Christ's death.
as Eve out of Adams he sleeping, we learn to seek our life in Christ's
death. That death should be propagated by the sin of the first Adam, was no
marvel: but that life by the death of the second, is an admired mystery. Here
is the greatest work of Gods power fetched out of his contrary; of rank poison
a sovereign remedy by the most skillful Physician of hearts. Let the Jews
scorn a crucified God, and refuse the life offered by a dead man; they know
not the Scriptures, nor the power of God; who can and does command light out of
darkness, 2. Cor. 4. 6.
life out of death, all things out of nothing. How easily can ^e repair all
things out of any thing, who can fetch and frame all things out of nothing? He
is of power to make of clay and spittle (fit to put out the sight) a remedy to
restore sight. He can as easily save a world by the death of his Son, as
multiply a world by the sleep of Adam.

IV. Labor to be ingrafted into the second Adam, that as thou have borne the
image of the earthly, Get into Christ the second Adam, as thou art surely of
the first.
so thou may bear the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15. 49. 1. Because the
second Adam repayres whatsoever we lost in the first. By the first we are
enemies to God, by the second we are reconciled to him. By the first we all
dye, Motives.
by the second we are all made alive, 1. Cor. 15. 22. By the first we are left
to Satan's power, by the second we are guided by the Spirit of God. By the
first we lost all the Creatures, by the second we are restored to the holy use
of the^ all. By the first a necessity of death is brought in, Heb. 9. 27. it is
appointed for all men once to dye, and then comes judgment; but by the
second we have a recovery of the blessing of immortality and life. Whatsoever
the first Adam brings into the world by sin, the second carries out by his
righteousness. 2. Because by Christ the truth we recover more then we lost,
or ever should have had by the Type. For so the Apostle, Romans 5. 16. the gift
by the second Adam has exceeded the offense of the first. That as the first
Adam by eating the forbidden fruit has powered all evil into the souls and
bodies of all men, though they eat not of the forbidden tree: So the second
Adam by regeneration is made righteousness to those who had wrought no
righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and powered all good things into the souls and bodies of his members: The
first Adam by sin helps us into misery: but the second Adam not only helps
us out of misery, but advances us to the highest dignity; to be, of sons of
wrath, sons of God; brethren of Christ; members of his body; heirs of the
kingdom of heaven. By Adams sin we are all driven out of Paradise, an
earthly pleasure, in which we should have enjoyed an inconstant happiness:
but by Christ we are brought into the heavenly Paradise, our Fathers house. By
Adams sin we become unjust: but by Christ's holiness we are not just only,
but sanctified, graced, confirmed, glorified, into whom by faith we come to be
ingrafted.

CHAP. III.
2. Noah a type of Christ, 7. ways.
THe second instance is Noah, Noah a type of Christ, in seven respects.
a manifest type of the true Noah, and that in seven respects.

I. Both were fore-prophesied of to be Saviors, Genesis 5. 29. Lamech begat a son
and called his name Noah, saying: This shall comfort us concerning our works,
and sorrow, and curse of the earth; therefore he called him by a name
signifying ceasing, or rest: So of Christ, Mat. 1. 21. thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people: He shall be the true Noah that shall cause
Gods wrath to cease, and bring the afflicted soul to true rest and
tranquillity.

Differences between Christ's and Noah's righteousness.
and both to find grace and favor with God. 1. Noah was just in his
generation: So was Christ; have nothing to do with that just man, says Pilates
Wife, Mat. 27. 19. But with difference; Noah's righteousness was imputed, being
righteousness of faith, Heb. 11. 7. Christ's was inherent, a righteousness of
nature, person, and heart. 2. Noah was a perfect and upright man, Genesis 6. 9.
that is, not defiled with Idolatry, false religion, opinions, or external
crimes: but Christ was perfect simply and absolutely, Christus iam perfectus:
Noah curr^ns ad perfection^m. August.
Noah but comparatively. Noah was perfect but in part: Christ perfectly
perfect: Christ Legally: Noah Evangelically. Noah perfect by the perfection of
another: Christ by his own. Noah perfect because without open crime: Christ
being without sin. 3. Both walking with God, found grace with God. Noah, Genesis
6. 8. Christ, Luke 2. 40. 52. But Noah found grace by acceptance and
imputation: Christ by complete merit and satisfaction. Christ found grace by
his own perfection and justice: but Noah clothed with Christ's.

III. Both of them were Preachers of righteousness. Noah Christ's. Both invited
unto repentance. Both called men to avoid the Judgment to come. Both lived and
preached in a most corrupt age, when there was a general defection both in
doctrine and manners. Both their Ministeries were despised, and that despite
of both fearfully revenged; the one by water, the other by fire and sword:
both by utter desolation, as the like never heard of before.

IV. Both of them makers of an Arc, and Masters Noah of a material; Christ of
a spiritual, the Church. Noah to save sinners from the deluge of waters
temporal: Christ to save sinners from the deluge of Gods wrath eternal. Noah's
Arc and Christ's: 6. resemblances.
In the making of their Arkes they are very like. 1. Both do all about their
Arkes at Gods commandment. For as the Lord did not hide from Noah his decree,
Genesis 6. 13: So he communicated his whole will and counsel to his Son
concerning the salvation of the Church, Ioh. 8. 26. 2. As Noah takes many trees
at Gods commandment, and strongly closes them together, and pitcheth them
within and without against the waters: So does Christ make choice of trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, and compacts them together by the
bond of the Spirit, glewes and fastens them together by the glue of Christian
love, and pitcheth them within and without, fortifies and strengthens them
against the waters of affliction, temptation, persecution, that none shall
drown or overwhelme them. 3. As Noah prepared diverse rooms in the Arc for
diverse creatures: So Christ in his Arc appoints diverse places and functions
for believers here, and prepares in his Fathers house many mansions for them
hereafter, Ioh. 14. 2. And as Noah receives into the Arc clean and unclean
creatures and persons, a Sem, and a Cham: So the Lord Christ into his militant
Church, all sorts of Nations, sexes, persons, conditions; Jews, Gentiles; men,
women, noble, ignoble; believers, and unbeleevers; hypocrites, and sound
Christians. On this floor is wheat and chafe. 4. As Noah made a window into
his Arc, to give light to the creatures within: So Christ, by the Gospel
preached in the Church, enlighteneth the minds of those that are within;
without which light let in, they should sit in everlasting darkness. 5. As
Noah by the same direction makes a door to enter into the Arc, and but one
door for so very great a building: So there is but one door to the great
building of the Church dispersed far and wide, and this is Christ himself,
Ioh. 10. 7, 9. 6. As Noah the Master of the Arc enters into it, and receaves
and saves all that enter in with him; for which purpose he is contented to be
tossed up and down by those most raging waters, and had no more freedom from
fear and danger then others in the Arc: So Christ the Master of his Church,
to save his Church, himself enters into it, and is admitted into it by the
waters of Baptism; and was contented for the saving of others to be tossed
with waves and billows of affliction, ignominy, shame, sin, curse, yea the
torments of hell. That his Church might be in safety with him, he will be in
danger with her, and every way to help her, will be every way like her in all
things, sin excepted.

V. Both of them were repayrers of the world. Noah descended all the
inhabitants of the earth: from Christ all the inhabitants of heaven. The world
again was re-peopled and replenished by Noah's posterity: the Church and every
member is Christ's posterity. Both of them were preservers and providers for all
sorts of Creatures: But Noah as a steward; Christ as Lord and owner of them:
Noah for a few, Christ for all: Noah for a year and a little more, Christ
perpetually. To both of them the creatures came in, and were obedient to them.
Though never so fierce and savage out of the Arc, yet in the Arc they were
mild and tame: So to Christ the winds, seas, devils obey; and if Lions and
Cockatrices come into the Arc and Church they become as Lambs and little
children putting off all fierceness, Isa. 11. 6.

VI. Both of them offered a sacrifice of rest, and Noah, Genesis 8. 21. As men are
delighted with sweet savours, so was Noah's sacrifice pleasing to God. Sacrifice
of testification, and of satisfaction.
But his was a sacrifice but of testification, witnessing his faith and
thankfulness: The sacrifice of Christ was a perfect satisfaction, in which he
offered not the bodies of clean beasts as Noah, but his own body as a Lamb
without spot, not upon an Altar built by Noah's hand, but upon the Altar of his
Deity, not ascending to heaven by ordinary fire, but offered through his
eternal spirit, compard to fire, Heb. 9. 14. And therefore must fully satifie
his Fathers justice, appease his wrath, and be most acceptable in it self, and
must bring Noah's, and all other sacrifices into acceptance. And from hence it
was that with both of them God did make a covenant of grace for their
posterities, that he would never break out in such wrath against them,
confirming the same unto the posterity of Adam by the sign of the Raynebow,
and to the posterity of Christ by the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper.

Noah when the waters assuaged, and much of his fear and danger was past,
sends out the Dove who brought an Olive branch, a sign of joy, comfort, and
abating of the waters: So Christ Jesus his sufferings and labors being ended,
sent his Spirit forth (which had lighted as a Dove on him) and brings joy, Mat.
3. 16.
and peace, and comfort into the hearts of all believers, bringing in a
testimony, that Gods wrath is appeased, the waters are diminished, his love and
favor returned which is better then life.

Now to application.

I. In the type and truth learn: Use. 1. Preserve integrity in the worst times.
If all the world about us be given to wickedness, and we be cast into never
so wicked an age, then to labor to shine in the midst of a naughty
generation, Phil. 2. 15. It is a singular praise to be a Lot in Sodom, and in a
corrupt age to be unlike sinners. For light to shine and show it self in
darkness, Math. 5. 16.
is beautiful and glorious. Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works and glorify your father which is in heaven. To show our
selves sons of God, and children of light among enemies of God and light, is
a singular honor. Noah fashioned not himself to those corrupt times; nor
Christ to the evil behavior of that age. Never had Christians more need among
so many wicked fashions, to be exhorted not to fashion themselves to the world.
If a Preacher hold on a preacher of righteousness in singleness and sincerity
of heart, not fashioning himself to the present temporizers and men-pleasers,
Let all the world scorn, oppose, traduce him: If a private man hold forth the
word of life, and in blameless and pure conversation walk in a way which
leads against the stream and common current of the corrupt age: Both the one
and the other have here the type and the truth, Noah and Christ presidents for
the like actions, precedents in the same way.

II. In them both learn: That these are the days Sins which are signs of
Judgment approaching.
As it was in the days of Noah, etc: So shall the coming of the Son of man
be. As those sins in Noah's time brought the deluge of water: Matthew. 24. 38.
the same sins now reigning, shall bring and hasten the destruction by fire,
prophesied, 2. Pet. 3. The sins are these. 1. The sons of God marry with
the daughters of men: that is, the godly with the ungodly, religious with the
superstitious, believers with infidels, 2. Horrible contempt of the word. 2.
Pet. 3. 20.
As Noah preached by the power of the Spirit, and Christ himself by the Spirit
so as never man spoke; yet both were despised, and the Spirit resisted whereby
they spoke: So now godly Ministers must not think much to be despised in
their Ministry. For as it was in the days of Noah, and of Christ: So Christ
has told us it must be. 3. Profaneness of the Ministry, and general malice
against sincerity. As in the days of Noah, many Wrights and workmen were
busy to prepare an Arc for others; but themselves neither entered into the
same, nor saved by the same: And as in the days of Christ, the Scribes and
Pharisees professed themselves chief builders, but refused the corner stone,
and neither entered themselves nor suffered others, but envy Christ they could:
So shall it be in the days of the Son of man. 4. In the Common-state, and
men, apostasy, security, sensuality; men eat, drink, marry, but know nothing
of judgment, that is, will not know: So shall the coming of the Son of man
be, Mat. 24. 39.

III. In that Christ is the true Noah, all the true Comfort to be had in
Christ our Noah.
For, 1. He is ready to receive all that come unto him, who calls all the
weary: as Noah readily received all that offered themselves unto him. Let not
thy sin discourage thee, be thou never so unclean, get once into the Arc,
and thou art safe. 2. As Noah himself entered into the Arc, and abode there
all the time of danger, and tossing by the waters: So our Lord still abides in
the same ship of the Church with us; he is so much the more compassionate to
us, as he is acquainted with our sorrows; and though the danger and fear be
never so much, we shall fare no worse then himself will, who in all our
troubles is troubled with us and for us. 3. As Noah pitched the Arc within and
without, and so fenced it against the waves and raging billows and surges of a
world of seas: So does our true Noah strengthen his Arc and Church partly with
his promise, partly with his prayers that their faith fail not, as with pitch
within and without, so firm and sure, as let this little Arc of the Church be
tossed upon the waters of affliction, and tried by never so many temptations,
and persecutions in this sea of the world, it is so fenced and pitched that it
shall never miscarry. Noah's Arc indeed by tossing and beating of the waters
may be weakened and made worse: but Christ's Arc the Church, is made better
and stronger by trialls and afflictions, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that
I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. Noah's Arc at last
shall putrify and perish, but Christ's Arc shall never perish, but at last be
more perfect and glorious. 4. As Gods Covenant with Noah was his safety in the
Arc: (for look upon the Arc floating above water, laden with heavy burden,
fenced against the waters with a little pitch, perhaps not very skilfully, that
being the first vessel that ever was made for the water) without Anchor, mast,
stern, Pylot, or Master to govern it (for Noah was shut in by God) how should
it be but carried by winds and waves upon rocks, or hills, or sands, or trees,
or buildings, and so in an instant split all too pieces, but that the Lord was
Stearsman in all that voyage?) So the safety of the Church is, that it has so
faithful a Pylot, whose Covenant made in his Church is the wall and defense of
his people, more stable then the foundation of the earth. Which made David to
glory; Psalm. 46. 2.
Though the earth be moved, and the mountains tumbled into the sea, yet the
Church may glory in the salvation of her God. In our lesser trials, storms,
oppositions look to God our safety; Arca tandem ex di^uvio liberata: sic
Ecclesia.
be within the Arc, God will provide for thy safety. 5. The Arc had a time to
be freed from the deluge of waters: So the Church has a time for her
deliverance, Rev. 7. 14. Psalm 55. 22. Arca cessante diluvio in m^nte requiev^t:
Ecclesia mundi fluctibus ce^^antibus in c^ele^^imente.
6. When the flood of waters bated, the Arc rested on a mountain of Ararat,
Genesis 8. 4. So when the waters of affliction are dried up, the Church has her
rest in the holy mountain of God, Ps. 15.

CHAP. IV.
3. Melchizedek a type of Christ.
HEbrews 7. 3. He was likened to the Son of God. We must search wherein and
how Christ was the truth of that figure. Melchizedek a type of Christ, in 4.
respects.


I. In the notation of his name. Melchizedek signifies King of righteousness:
Our Savior was indeed King of righteousness, Heb. 7. 2. Isai. 11. 4. Psalm.
45. 6, 7. thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness, thou love
righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. Christ the Sun of righteousness shall arise. From
him all have righteousness as from a fountain.

Salem, of peace: Peace by Christ most excellent.
So Christ is called, the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. not of a corner, but of
all the world; and of Salem, that is, Hebr. 7.
of Jerusalem, Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King on Sion. On his shoulders was the
government laid. Of whom Zach. 9. 9. O Jerusalem behold, thy King comes unto
thee, he is just and saved himself, poor and riding upon an ass: But with
this difference, Melchizedek brings peace earthly, temporal: but Christ is our
peace, Ephesians. ^. 14. by whom we have peace with God; he guides our feet into
the way of peace, and leads us to peace eternal: So he was true king of true
peace, so was not Melchizedek. 2. Melchizedek was not only a King, but Priest
of the high God, Genesis 14. 18. So Christ was both King and Priest; King, Revel.
1. 5. Prince of all the kings of the earth: Priest, Heb. 4. 14. Our great high
Priest. This was not usual in the Jews Policy, or progeny of David to whom
only the kingdom was promised; neither would God admit the mingling of these
Offices among them, as in Vzziah, 2. Chron. 26. But as this dignity was
reserved unto Christ: so was it dispensed with in his special figure to be
both a great King and Priest.

Without father or mother, genealogy, Heb. 7.
beginning or end of days; without kindred, that is, none of these mentioned
in Scripture, or in the story of his life. Although he had both father, mother,
kindred, birth, death; yet the Lord of set purpose would have all these
concealed in Scripture, that he might be a more express type of Jesus Christ,
who was truly without father as man, Luke 1: 35. that holy thing which shall
be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God; without mother as God,
without kindred according to his Deity, in respect of his divine nature without
generation, for who can declare his generation? Isai. 53. 8. seeing he was
before all worlds eternally begotten of his Father. (...).
And whereas Melchizedek only had no beginning or end of life expressed:
Christ is only truly without beginning, neither shall have any end; for he
is the beginning and the ending. (...). Apoc. 1. 11.
And although his humanity had genealogy, beginning, and ending of life, yet
as he was the word he had none. And although as the Son he was from the
father; Melchizedek quoad Scripturam: Christus quoad naturam.
yet as God he was from none, but as the word was of himself. Here also is a
difference; Melchizedek was without genealogy according to Scripture: Christ
according to nature.

IV. In the excellency of his 1. Person, 2. Priesthood. Melchizedek was greater
then Abraham; for he blessed Abraham, and the greater blesses the lesser, Heb.
7. 7. signifying Christ the fountain and original of all blessing in heavenly
and earthly things, Ephesians. 1. 3. 2. Melchizedek refreshed Abraham and his Army,
returning weary from the battle and journey, with bread and wine. Here Abraham
was a receiver, Melchizedek a giver; a manifest type of Jesus Christ,
refreshing and comforting all his followers, and members of his militant Church
in their journey and weariness, with his word and Sacraments, Ego reficiam vos.
Matthew 11. 28. I will refresh you. 3. Melchizedek was man only and sinful:
Christ God and man without sin. Melchizedek as the son of God: Christ
indeed the Son of God.

2. For the excellency of his Sacrifice or his Priesthood which was greater
then Aarons. Pre-eminence of Christ's Priesthood above Aarons.
For, 1. Levi and Aaron paid tithes in Abraham's loins to Melchizedek, Heb. 7.
9. and the inferior pays tithes to the Superior: Such is the Priesthood of
Christ after the order of Melchizedek, Psalm. 110. 4.
not of Aaron. 2. In regard of the entrance. Melchizedek was not anointed with
material oil as Aaron, nor received his Priesthood from any other, but only
so declared by the mouth of God: So Christ succeeded none, received his
Priesthood from none, but anointed by the Spirit of God, Luke 4. 18. and made a
Priest by the Oath of God, Psalm. 110. 4. The Lord swear and will not repent,
thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. 3. In regard of the
continuance of his Priesthood. For as he receives it from none, so he passes
it not to any other, nor any can succeed him; but he endures ever, having an
everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. The Leviticall Priesthood ended
particularly in the death of every high Priest, and universally and finally in
the death of our high Priest: But Christ is eternal, who died but rose again,
figured in Melchizedek.

I. If Christ be the true Melchizedek, Use. 1. Christ greater then Abraham.
then must he needs be greater then Abraham, though the Jews vainly gainesay
it, Ioh. 8. 53. To him all our tithes and offerings, our sacrifice of praises
are due, as tithes and offerings due from Abraham to Melchizedek. He is
blessed and Prince only, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, unto him be
honor, and power everlasting, 1. Tim. 6. 15, 16. So the four and twenty
Elders, Revel. 11. 15, 17. And Angels, Beasts, Elders, and all creatures,
Revel. 5. 11, 12, 13.

II. For the comfort of the Church, Use. 2. Comfort by Christ our Melchizedek.
that Christ is the true Melchizedek, both a Priest and a King. 1. As he is a
Priest we are assured of a perfect reconciliation by his all-sufficient
Sacrifice. 2. Of sound instruction, for the Priest must teach the Law, his lips
must present knowledge. Ioh. 4. 25. When the Messiah is come he will tell us
all things. We detest the blasphemy therefore that tells us, that he has left
an imperfect doctrine, that must be eeked with traditions. 3. Of his blessed
intercession, which is meritorious and acceptable. Samuel out of his love to
the people, 1. Sam. 12. 23. says thus, God forbid that I should sin, and
cease to pray for you; but I will teach you the good way: Christ's love to the
Church is no less; therefore he will both teach and pray. 4. Of powerful
protection and safety. For he is not our Priest only but our King; not our
Doctor only, but our defendor; not a Priest only to pray, but a King to
obtain for us, and bestow on us what he prays for. What if he had never so
much power in teaching, if he were impotent in defending? But he is King of
peace in himself and unto us, Magnum in (...) habemus patronum.
We have a powerful advocate in heaven. They never tasted the sweetness of
this doctrine, that seek after any other Mediator.

III. Hence is the happiness of the Church. Use 3. We are blessed by our
Melchizedek.
As Melchizedek blessed Abraham: So Christ our Melchizedek has blessed all the
faithful posterity of Abraham, Ephesians. 1. 3. with all spiritual blessings in
Christ Jesus. But with difference. Melchizedek only pronounced blessing Genesis
14. 19. blessed art thou of God possessor of heaven and earth: But our
Melchizedek meriteth and bestows blessings of higher kind also then could
Melchizedek. For, 1. Christ blesses by meriting blessing, through his most
perfect sacrifice pacifying his Fathers wrath: Melchizedek offered no such
sacrifice to no such effect, his was accepted by mercy, not for merit, not for
his own sacrifice, but for Christ's. 2. By actual procuring the blessing of
remission of sins and righteousness restored, a more effectual blessing then
Melchidek could procure: His sacrifices could only signify these in the
Messiahs, not actually apply them. 3. By gathering, calling, ruling and
preserving in spiritual life his whole Church, as members of his own body,
and by the donation of his spirit: none of which blessings Melchizedek could
give. 4. By bestowing eternal life on believers, here in the first fruits,
hereafter in the harvest: whereof Melchizedek must be a receiver from him the
fountain, not a giver, 5. By publishing and pronouncing on believers all this
blessing in the preaching of the Gospel, and sealing it to the hearts of the
elect by the daily effectual voice of his spirit by the word: which
Melchizedek could not do. Therefore a greater then Melchizedek is here, and a
greater blessing then Abraham received from him. Let the world curse, wicked
ones rage and revile against the Church and members, yet as Isaac said of
Jacob, Genesis 27. 33. I have blessed him, and therefore he shall be blessed; the
same will Christ not say only, but accomplish to them.

IIII. Hence is the stability and perpetuity of the Church and members. Use 4.
By our Melchizedek the Church abides for ever.
That Christ is the true Melchizedek, that is, an eternal Priest; the Church
must be eternal. For a Priest cannot be without a Church, nor an eternal
Priest without an eternal Church, but of Christ it is said, thou art a Priest
for ever. Therefore Tyrants shall not wast it, time shall not outlast it, death
shall not hinder the being and happiness of it, no more then it could the
eternity of the Priest himself, who rose gloriously from the dead, so shall
the members. How happy a thing is it to be of this household.

V. The excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the Leviticall. Use 5.
Excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the Leviticall.
This is the scope of the Apostle in describing Melchizedeks Priesthood so
largely. For the Leviticall Priests were homagers to this, yea to the shadow of
it in Melchizedek while they were in Abraham's loins. 1. They were men only of
men: Christ the Son of God, true God and man. 2. They were sinful men, and
must offer first for themselves, and then for others, Heb. 5. 3. But Christ was
sinlesse, he needed not offer for his own sins, Heb. 7. 26. 27. 3. For their
office, they were but ministers of holy things, and of salvation propounded in
them: Christ because of this order was author of salvation to all that obey
him, Heb. 5. 9. 10. 4. They were many, and all ministers of a temporary
covenant: but he is but one, who has obtained a more excellent office in that
he is Mediator of a better testament established upon better promises, Heb. 8.
6. For the promises of the covenant of grace are more excellent then those of
the Legal covenant. 5. They offered often, and the repetition of sacrifices
argued their invalidity and imperfection: but he offered but once, and needed
not do it daily* Heb. 7. 27. which argued the perfection, Heb. 9. 28. 6. They
offered the blood of beasts which could not expiate sin, nor wash the
conscience of the sinner farther then purifying the flesh: but he (not with
blood of bulls and goats, but) with his own blood entered once into the holy
place having obtained an eternal redemption, Heb. 9. 12. and this blood
purges the conscience from dead works, verse 14. 7. They served in an earthly
fading Sanctuary made with hands, and entered into an holy place which perished
and failed, according to that elementary and temporary worship: but he is
minister of the true Sanctuary and Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not
man, Heb. 8. 2. this tabernacle is his own blessed body in which he performed
all his service, called, chap. 9. 11. a great and more perfect Tabernacle not
made with hands, and verse. 24. is now entered not into holy places made with
hands, but into the very Heaven to appear in the sight of God for us. 8. They
all ceased, dyed, one succeeded another; as mutable was their whole service,
which also ceased and deceased, and gave place to the truth of it when the
fullness of time came: but this true Melchizedek, being without beginning or
end of days, has an eternal Priesthood, Heb. 7. 24. and therefore neither
has nor needs any successor in earth. Whence every repetition of his
sacrifice bloodily or unbloodily in the Mass is an high and hateful
blasphemy, a denial of Christ's person to be above the person of Melchizedek,
and of his sacrifice to be above Aarons, or that it was offered by the eternal
spirit of his Deity.

VI. The excellency of the person shows the Sin not to be accounted (...)
whose sacrifice is so costly.
Melchizedek because he was but likened to the Son of God, Heb. 7. 3. could
not offer a Sacrifice to take away sin: he must be the Son of God indeed,
and God himself that must do that. The least sin which we account so light
could never be expiated, but by the blood of him that is God as well as man.
All created strength cannot stand under the burden of the least sin.
Therefore in the worthiness of this person see the unworthiness of thy sin
to hate and abhor it, and thy self in dust and ashes for it. An heinous and
execrable offense were that which nothing could take away but the death of the
Prince.

CHAP. V.
4. Isaac a type of Christ.
I. IN his birth Isaac, Isaac a type of Christ in five respects. 1.
the sone of Abraham the father of the faithful: a promised seed long before
he was borne, in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed. Yea so
strange was his birth, as that he was not to be borne by the strength of
nature, but of Sarahs dead womb when it was not with her as with other women,
insomuch as when the Angel foretold it to her she thought it impossible, Genesis
18. 12. So Christ the son of Abraham commonly so called. The only Son of
God by nature, who is the father of all the faithful, who are taught to say;
Our father, etc. The only true promised seed long before prophesied of, and
expected of believers before his manifestation about four thousand years.
Borne and incarnate not by the strength of nature, but by the power of the holy
Ghost after an unconceivable manner; so as when the Angel told his mother Mary
of his miraculous manner of birth, she thought it impossible, and said, How can
this be? Luke 1. 34. And in him only the whole spiritual seed of Abraham, all
Gods people of Jews and Gentiles were blessed. Psa. 72. 17. the Nations shall
bless him, and be blessed in him. Which Prophecy cannot be understood of
Solomon; for scarce his own nation was blessed in him, who by his sin lost
ten tribes of twelve from his own son: and verse 5. they shall fear him
so long as the Sun and Moon endure from one generation to another, verse. 11.
all Kings shall worship him and serve him: and, verse. 17. his name shall be for
ever: all these are true in Christ only. Thus as Isaac was founder of a mighty
state: so Christ of all the Church of God in all nations only blessed in him.
As Isaac was his fathers heir: So Christ heir of all things, Isaac has goods
only.

II. In his suffering. 1. Isaac was circumcised Luke 2. 2. Isaac in his infancy
was persecuted by Ishmael, Gal. 4. 29: So Christ by Herod, Mat. 2. 3. Isaac
carried the wood of the burnt offering upon his shoulders even to mount Moriah,
Genesis 22. 6: So Christ carried the Cross on which he was to be nailed, even to
Golgotha. 4. Isaac was led away as a Lamb to the slaughter: So Christ was led
away, Ioh 19. 16. to death. 5. Isaac without reply submitted himself to his
father even to the death; suffered himself to be bound on the wood, and yields
himself a burnt offering unto the Lord: Even so Christ without reply was
obedient unto his father unto the death, and was content to be bound, not as
Isaac for himself alone, but for us and them; and laid down his life a whole
burt offering, and a ransom for many, Ioh. 16. 28. Thus were both Lamb-like
sufferers, both bear their Cross, both without reply led away, both bound and
fastened on the wood, both willingly obedient to the death.

Et Isaac Christus erat, and aries Christus erat. Isaac sibi ^igna portabat:
Christus cruce^ propria^ ba^ulaba^ Pro Isaac aries, etc. Aug.
beloved of their fathers: Abraham did al at Gods Commandment, and lifted up
his hand: So Christ by the determinate counsel of God was delivered by wicked
hands. Abraham offers his Son freely: God more freely offers his son out of
his bosom. 2. Abraham by Gods commission rises early in the morning to
sacrifice his son; and Isaac rises as early to obey his Father: Act. 2. and
4.
So the Jews by Gods permission break their sleep, and early in the morning
proceed to the condemning of Christ, Cerva matutina.
who is called the Hind of the morning. Psa. 22. 1. compassed with dogs that
hunted his life; and Christ, as another Isaac, after his passion rose early in
the morning to fulfill the work of his Father. 3. Neither of them must be
offered every where or any where but both in a mountain, and such a mountain
as must typifie Christ's humane nature. Mount Moriah must bear the Temple built
by Solomon, a type of Christ's body, Ioh. 2. 19. Mount Calvary must bear the
body it self; and these two hills, if they be not one and the same (as
Augustine thinks, and it is not unprobable but that Golgotha was the skirt of
Moriah) yet could they not be far distant, the one being within the gate of
the City, and the other not far without, the nearest to the City of all. 4.
The Father lays first the wood upon both, and then both upon the wood, both
must feel the weight of the wood, no small wood to burn a man, a whole burnt
offering as Isaac: but the wood which Christ bore was far heavier. Ob molis
magnitudinem. Ob peccatorum molem.
1. For the greatness of the burden. 2. For the burthensomenesse of our
sins, Isay 53. 4. he bare all our diseases. And then both by Gods appointment
were bound on the wood, fastened hand and foot, not that either was unwilling,
but to retain the manner appointed for sacrifice. 5. Isaac must be offered
alone, the servants must stay at the foot of the hill a far off, little
knowing the business and sorrow in hand: So Christ must tread the Winepresse
alone, Isa. 63. 3. the Disciples fear and fly, and little consider the agony
of their Master. 6. The Father carries in his hand the sword and fire against
his own son; the sword signifying the justice of God, the fire his burning
wrath against the sins of men: Both bent against Christ, both sustained by
this Isaac; in whom the justice of God is satisfied, and the flame of his wrath
extinct and quenched.

IV. In his escape and deliverance. 1. The blow Abraham must hold his had,
Isaacs flesh must not be pierced or cut: The soldiers ready to break the
legs of Christ (as of the two thieves) must stay their hands; not a bone of
him must be broken. 2. Isaac offered, and three days dead in his fathers
purpose and mind, yet dyed not, but his Father received him as from the dead:
so Christ offered upon his Divinity dyed not, and his humanity dead in the
belly of the earth, after three days he revived, and raised himself again to
die no more. So both were delivered from death the third day: (...).
wherein the Apostle plainly makes him a type, Heb. 11. 19. from whence he
received him as in a type or resemblance, that is, to be a type or resemblance
of Christ's resurrection from death. 3. The Ram that was offered for Isaac was
caught by the head among the thorns, and hanged in a bush: Christ our
sacrifice was hanged on a tree, crowned with thorns, and so hung on the Cross
to expiate our sins compared to thorns and briars, which would for ever have
held us, if they had not held him.

V. In his marriage. 1. Rebekah was fair and Similitude of Rebekahs marriage,
and the Churches.
so the Church is fair in the beauty of Christ, and fair within. 2. She was
of his own kindred and flesh, Genesis 24. 4: so Christ's spouse is of the same
flesh which himself assumed. 3. She was wooed by his fathers servants, and
brought forwards toward Isaac: so the Church is wooed by pastors and Preachers
the servants of Christ, and so brought forwards by his friends toward the
bridegroom. 4. She resolved to forsake all her friends and comforts to come to
Isaac: so the Church forsakes all in affection and actually, being called to
enjoy her head and husband Jesus Christ. 5. She decks her self with jewels and
trims her self before she comes to Isaac, but covers all with a veil: so the
Church prepares her self as a Bride for a Bridegroom, trimms her self with
faith and graces as Jewels, but covers and vailes all with humility, modesty,
shame facenesse, as not worthy to be seen, much less matched to such an
husband. How Christ meets his Church.
6. In her coming toward Isaac, Isaac meets her: so the Church coming
toward Christ he meets her afar off, 1. by his grace of election, 2. by his
most entyre love and affection. 3. by most gracious acceptance. 4. In person
and Incarnation. 5. In glory and power at the last Judgment for her final
salvation.

I. In the type and truth note a pattern by which to frame our obedience, Use
1. A pattern of obedience.
Phil. 2. 8. Let the same mind be in us that was in them. 1. To be humbly
obedient unto our father as they. 2. Having never so difficult a Commandment.
As Abraham rose early to obey God; and Isaac as early to obey his Father; and
Christ was content early in the morning to be prosecuted to death: so let not
us procrastinate, but hasten to our duty, especially to our sacrifices of
prayer and praises early in the morning. Psalm. 108. 2. 3. As Abraham in
offering, nor Isaac in obeying consulted not with flesh and blood, acquainted
neither Sarah nor the servants, nor consulted with humane wisdom to hinder
obedience: no more must we in our obedience. So Paul Gal. 1. 16. professes of
himself that he communicated not with flesh and blood after he had a calling.
If flesh and blood will object any thing against obedience, and extol it self
against the knowledge of God, bring it captive into the obedience of Christ, 2. Corinthians. 10. 5. 4. Obey in suffering, as well as in doing; daily take up our
cross (as both they carried the wood of their offering) and not repine nor
reply. We must not think that by carrying our cross we can perform the
work of our redemption, Non ad (...) sic Christus tantu^. tamen quoad (...),
etiam propter (...).
for to that end it was carried by Christ only; yet we must carry it so far
forth as he is a pattern for our imitation, yea that we may be conformable to
the image of Christ, Romans 8. 29. 5. For the measure, stick not at heavy
crosses and burdens, they carried heavy loads of wood. We must not love our
lives to the death, if God call us thereto. For both they were obedient unto the
death, Phil. 2. 8. Such a testimony is given of the Saints, Revel. 12. 11. they
loved not their lives unto the death.

Now thus to frame our obedience are required two rules. Two rules for our
obedience.
I. A change and renovation of our crooked and corrupt nature, which is ever
rebelling against the law of the mind. Nothing (we say) is hard to good will:
But this good will is not to be found but in such as are regenerate by the
Spirit of God, who has made it of an unwilling, a willing will. And till this
change be made every commandment is impossible, and an intolerable yoke. Let
Christ give the same commandment to the young man, and to the disciples, of
leaving all and following him, it is an impossible task to the one, yet in his
natural estate, but an easy yoke to the other, who with the commandment
receive some secret power to draw them to obedience. Let the word command an
angry, furious, natural man to forgive his neighbor that wrongs him, and
bless him that curses him, and do good for evil, and recompense love for
hatred: Oh this is an impossible commandment, and flesh and blood cannot
possibly brook it; and indeed he must be more then flesh and blood that can
hear it, he must have a spirit subduing his will unto the will of God. Let
God speak (as he did to Abraham) to a man unconverted: Offer me up now, not
thy son, but thy sin, thy dear lusts; thy Usury, thy revenge, swearing,
lying, thy Herodias, thy Dalilah, thy darling, thy pride; take the knife into
thy hand, and with thine own hands kill it, sacrifice it, let out the life
blood of it: Oh what grutching, gainsaying, rising up against the word, and him
by whom God commands? Every natural man's sin is his Isaac, his child, his
best beloved, his joy and laughter, he cannot spare him, he cannot part with
him. Though the Lord be in never so great haste and earnest, they be not so
hasty as to rise up with Abraham, early in the morning to offer up their
sins; a plain evidence that as yet their nature was never changed, but they
are in their sins.

Rule II. In dangerous, and difficult, or costly commandments, propp up thy
faith with consideration of Gods power and truth. So did Abraham in this
difficult commandment; when he might have considered of a thousand strong
hindrances, he strengthened his faith by this, Heb. 11. 19. he considered
that God was able to raise him up even from the dead, whence after a sort he
received him. Thus he supported his faith in that word of promise, Romans 4. 20,
21. he considered not Sarahs dead body, but was fully assured that God (whom
he believed, who quickens the dead, verse 17.) who had promised, was also
able to do it. These two props upheld him, even the full assurance of Gods
truth in promises, and power in performing them. In duties of apparent danger,
the casting an eye on Gods truth and power will bring them forward, else they
never come on, Dan. 3. 17. Our God is able to deliver us, and he will; but if
not, etc. So in the time of danger and deep distress, cast thy self on the
might and truth of God, who quickneth the dead, who can say to the dead, live,
and they shall live. In duties chargeable, if thy obedience must cost thee some
part, or the whole of thy estate, look on Gods power and goodness. So the
Prophet to Amaziah, 2. Chron. 25. 9. what shall we do for the hundredth
talents? The Lord is able to give thee more then this. Object. But I know not
whether he will. Sol. Faith assures it self there is never any loss in
obeying God. It knows, the way to keep Isaac, is to give up Isaac. It has a
promise, whosoever forsakes house, lands, etc. for Christ, he shall have an
hundredth fold.

II. In both we have a notable type of our resurrection. Use. 2. A type of our
resurrection.
Isaac was raised the third day, as from the dead: but Christ indeed raised,
not as Isaac for himself, but as an head for his body and members. Which
assures us, 1. That we shall rise out of all pety deaths and dangers, for our
head is above water. Though the billows of afflictions inward and outward may
rinse us, and run over us, yet they shall not drown us because our head is
aloft. They may threaten and affright us, but shall not drown and destroy us;
we shall wade out well enough, because they can never go over our head any
more. 2. That we shall at the last day rise from all the death of mortality and
corruption; in which argument the Apostle is large to prove, that because
Christ the head is risen, the members must also rise again, 1. Cor. 15. 12.
For, 1. Can or will a living and powerful head be always dismembered and
sundred from the body? 2. Because Christ rose not as a private person as Isaac
did, but as the first fruits of them that slept, verse 20. 3. Because Christ in
his resurrection is opposed to the first Adam, verse 21: For as by the first
Adam comes death on all; so by the second Adam resurrection from the dead. This
is a sure propp and stay against all the miseries and occurrences of this life,
and against the bitterness of death, and horror of the grave, that we are
assured of a better resurrection, else were we of all men most miserable,
verse 19.

III. A sweet consolation. Use. 3. Matter of sweet consolation.
God watched every motion in both these Isaacs offering; how far Abraham
should go, how long, to the lifting up of the knife; and where he should stay;
and when was fit to say, do the boy no hurt: So he watched the executioners,
the crucifiers, how far they should proceed with Christ, but stayed them from
breaking his bones, and kept him from seeing corruption. So when Gods time and
term is come, the affliction and afflicter shall go no farther; a voice at
length shall come, and say: Stay thy hand, do him no hurt.

IV. Both were delivered, Use. 4. Look for help, though the case be desperate.
but not till the third day; the one when the knife was up, the other being
dead and hopeless, at least in the account of men, as appeared by the words of
the disciples which were going to Emmaus. Hence we learn to make this use for
the strengthening of our faith: Luke 24.
Then to look for help and deliverance when the case is desperate, and in
humane sense we are gone. There is life in this comfort, which assures us of
life, even in death, as Hos. 6. 2. After two days he will revive us, Gen^ 22.
and in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. In
all wants and extremities let Abraham's voice to Isaac comfort thee: God will
provide. Deus providebit.
If Isaac see Abraham's sword in the one hand, and fire in the other ready to
devour him, yet a little while and the sword shall be put up, and the fire
shall take another object. So the faithful sons of Abraham, seeing God the
Fathers sword of justice drawn against them, and the fire of his fury ready to
consume them, yet at length shall see by Christ the sword put up, and the fire
of wrath turned again into a flame of love and grace. Faith has a cheerful
voice: God will provide. Unbeleefe is full of repinings and murmurings: Oh how
should I be provided for, in this or that? I see no means, etc. Here the
difference holds which was between the ten spies and the two, Number. 13. If thou
see not the means for thy deliverance, go to the Mountain there is a Ram
for Isaac: hasten thy obedience, and God which set thee on work, will hasten
thy deliverance.

CHAP. VI.
5. Joseph a type of Christ, Joseph a type of Christ 4. ways.
4. ways.
I. IN regard of his person. 1. Joseph was the beloved Rahel, Genesis 30. 24.
as Christ was the first borne of the freely beloved Mary. Luke 1. 28.
2. Best beloved of his father, Genes. 37. 3. figuring Christ who was declared
the welbeloved in whom his Father delighted, Dec^rus facie, pulc^rior mente.
Matthew. 3. 17. 3. He was very beautiful, Genesis 39. 6. and his internal beauty
was more then his external: Christ was more beautiful then the sons of men,
and making us beautiful in his beauty. 4. Joseph was endued with such a
measure of wisdom and understanding as none was like him, in whom Gods Spirit
was. Genesis 41. 38.
For which cause he was called Zaphnathpaaneah, verse 45. that is, an
expounder of secrets: figuring Christ in whom were treasures of wisdom, and
the Spirit beyond all measure; who is therefore called the great Counselor,
and the Lamb only worthy to open the book, who only has the key of David
to open the secret mysteries of salvation. 5. In Jacobs last Testament, Joseph
is called a fruitful bough, whose branches run upon the wall, because out of
him branched two tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh, therein he was a type of
Christ, Genesis 49. 22.
who is not a fruitful bough only, but a root from whom all the tribes of God
branch out and flourish. And whereas those tribes are come to nothing; Christ
shall see his seed, and prolong his days. Isai. 53. 10.


Joseph was sent by his father to visit his brethren in the wilderness: Genesis
37. 15.
So was Christ sent to seek his brethren wandering in the wilderness, he was
sent to the lost sheep of Israel. 2. As at thirty years, Genesis 41 42.
Joseph was preferred to his Office by Pharaoh: So at thirty years Christ
entered his Office. 3. As by Pharaoh a virgin was given Joseph to wife, verse
45: So in the Church as a pure Virgin given by the Father to Jesus Christ, Joh.
6. 37.
as his Spouse to sanctify and save: All that the Father gives me, shall come
to me: and him that comes to me* I will in no wise cast out. 4. As Joseph out
of Pharaohs garners feeds all Egypt, all his fathers house, and the nations;
whence in Genesis 49. 24. he is called the feeder of Israel, and a stone, that is,
a rock or refuge to his brethren: So Jesus Christ is the feeder of Israel, and
of all the family of God in all Nations of the earth, not with temporal food
only, but with the Manna from heaven, the Word and Sacraments, and his own
flesh and blood, the incorruptible and indeficient bread and water of life. 5.
As Joseph in his lowest estate was both a Lord in the prison, and a comforter
of the prisoners, assuring the Butler of his life, and recovery of his place:
So Jesus Christ at his lowest abasement, was Lord over death and the grave,
having command of them, and his last breath on the Cross all most comforted
the poor thief promising him both life and glory. 6. As Joseph does all the
good he can for his brethren that had ill deserved it: For 1. He teaches them
how to live together, and commends brotherly love and concord, Genesis 45. 24.
fall not out by the way. 2. Teaches them how to speak to Pharaoh, and what
to demand. 3. Goes to Pharaoh, and speaks, and obtaines for them whatsoever he
would, and places them in Goshen the far of the land, till they come to
Canaan: So Jesus Christ above all lessons commended to us the new Commandment
of love, a badge of his disciples; teaches us how to pray, and what, in the
Lords prayer; himself intercedes for us, and obtains all that good is, and
provides for us in earth till we come to Canaan.

III. In his sufferings and passions. 1. The archers Gen 49. 23. that is, not
his Mistress only and Master, but his brethren also conspire against him,
although sent from his father in love, and comes in love to see how they do,
and to know their wants; yet they scorn him, behold yonder dreamer comes; they
consult to kill him, let us kill him and see what will become of his dreams:
So Jesus Christ came among his own, sent from his Father in love, pitying the
wanderings and wants of men; but the Jews scorn him for a deceiver, plot to
kill him, conspire against his life. 2. As his brethren sold him for twenty
pieces, stripped him naked, cast him into a pit, sent him as a slave into Egypt,
where he (being indeed free) became a servant: So Jesus Christ in his infancy
was sent into Egypt, sold by the Jews for thirty pieces, stripped naked of his
apparel, and in the form of a servant cast into the pit of death and the
grave, whence they thought never to have heard more of him, as Joseph's brethren
did. 3. As in this service Joseph was tempted to whoredom by his wanton
Mistress when they were alone, and that often and daily; but by strength of
grace stoutly resisted, yea conquered her and himself: So was Jesus Christ in
the entrance of his Ministry strongly assailed by Satan to spiritual
whoredom when he was alone in the wilderness, and that often set upon; yet by
the power of the Spirit overcame and conquered, so as the evil one found
nothing in him. 4. As in this service (notwithstanding his faithfulness and
innocence) Joseph was falsely accused, condemned, cast into prison with the
Butler and Baker: So was Jesus Christ, notwithstanding all his innocence
falsely accused, they lay things to his charge he never knew, as falsely
condemned, bound yea fastened to the Cross between the thieves, and cast into
the grave as into a prison, till the time of his deliverance came, that he was
taken out from prison and judgment, as Isai. 53. 8.

Joseph was separate from his brethren, Genesis 49. 26. that is, advanced by God
to honor above them all: So Christ was separate and advanced in glory above
men and Angels, Heb. 1. 4. has obtained a far more excellent name then the
Angels. 2. Though Joseph was shot at by the archers, yet his arm was
strengthened, the bonds and fetters were loosed, and he not only brought out
of prison, but advanced to be Lord over the whole land, and next unto Pharaoh,
having all administration delivered unto him: So Jesus Christ, although he was
a But or sign of contradiction* yet his arm was strengthened to raise
himself out of the grave, to loose all chains of sin, to loose all sorrows
of death, and being ris^n again was advanced and exalted above all creatures,
all power given him in heaven and earth, his throne set next unto his Fathers,
the Lord of his Church, and ruler of the whole earth, to him is committed the
government, and his bounds are the utmost hills, Psalm. 2. yea the whole
Church in heaven and earth is his to whom all power belongs. 3. As Pharaoh
every way honored Joseph; As 1. He richly decks and attires him, puts a golden
chain on his neck, Genesis 41. 42. 2. They must cry before him, Abrech, that is,
every man must bow to him. 3. Every man must depend on his word, Genesis 41. 55.
Go to Joseph (says Pharaoh) and what he faith to you, do ye: So God the
Father has highly exalted his Son Jesus, and given him not only the rich
robes of immortality and glory, but a Name above all names, that at his Name
every knee shall bow. He appointed not John Baptist only to be his
forerunner to make way for him, but all the Apostles and Evangelists cry
before him Abrech. Yea all faithful pastors and teachers whose office is to
bring men to stoop under the subjection of Jesus Christ. Yea he has given his
Son plenary authority to govern his kingdom, and commands us, as another
Joseph to hear him.

I. From the type and truth learn. Use 1. No news for good men to be hated for
their excellency.
It is no new thing for the best men to be hated and wronged for their
excellency and innocence. Joseph was therefore hated of his brethren, because
most loved of his Father, Genesis 37. 4. Christ was hated because he was the
light, and gave witness unto it. This is a certain truth, if God will
testify to a man, the world will testify against him, whose judgments are
contrary to his. If God will advance a man in grace, the world will depresse
him. If God be extraordinary to Moses, Aaron and Miriam his brother and sister
will hate him. If David be respected, Saul will envy him. Who can stand before
envy? not natural brothers. No marvel if men say as of old: If we let this
man alone all men will believe in him. Well: an evil eye is a sign of an
evil man, that dares in his thoughts check the Almighty for doing with his
own as he will. And a good man cannot expect a surer confirmation in
goodness, then to be hated for it; as in our type and truth. Let us on the
contrary there love most where God shows most love: nor let any Joseph leave
his goodness for the hatred of the brethren.

II. All the sufferings of Gods children are ordained and ordered by him. Use.
2. All sufferings of the godly come of God. Ordained by him.
1. They are ordained by God. So in the type Joseph sees Gods decree: It was
not you, but God sent me before you. So did the true Joseph: It is not thou
Pilate that could have any power over me, unless it were given from above,
Ioh. 19. 11. and Acts 4. 27. 28. against thy holy Son Jesus, Herod, Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel gathered themselves
together, to do whatsoever thy hand and counsel had determined. Let not us
look so much at men's malice as at Gods decree. So did David when he said;
Shimei curses because the Lord has bid him curse David, 2. Sam. 16. 10. If
for brethren we find enemies, let us say as Joseph; It was not you, God has
an hand in it. Ordered, and how.
2. Our sufferings are ordered by God. 1. For their measure, as in the type;
Come, say they, let us kill the dreamer, but they could not: So in the truth;
come let us kill the heir, and then the inheritance shall be ours; let us bury
him, and lay stones, and watch and seal, yet with all these they could not
keep him under. Fear not evil men, they shall not do as much as they will,
but as God will. 2. For the end, they cannot frustrate the counsel of God, nor
his dreams. Neither Gods glory nor Joseph's preferment can be prevented: So the
Jews, Let us put this seducer to death, and we shall well shift our hands of
him, what will become of his doctrine, of his Disciples: But all turned to his
greater exaltation, as Joseph's. Conclude hence, that all the hatred of evil
men, unjust accusations, false sentences, cruel executions shall not hurt, but
one way or other set forward our truest good. As both Joseph's and Christ's turn
to their greatest advancement, both their innocencies break out as the light.
And innocence is innocence, and will be so known, and shall be as the Sun at
noone day.

III. A singular comfort. Use 3. Comfort by Christ our Joseph, manifold.
Is Christ the true Joseph our brother? He will 1. know us when we know not
him, as Joseph. He will love us before we can love him, he will love us when we
shall not know it, his bowels will earne within him toward us, 2 Cor. 6. 9. as
unknown, and yet known. He is a stone of refuge to all his brethren, and
though he be rough for a while and try us with temptations and afflictions of
sundry sorts as Joseph did, yet he will at length make himself known to be
Joseph; he will say, I am Joseph, I am Jesus your brother. 2. As Joseph took
order that his brethren should be washed in his house, and set at his own
table: So our Joseph washes us in cleaner water, even the pure streams of his
blood, and makes us clean by the water of sanctification, sealing it to us in
baptism, and after feeds us at his own table, and sets before us the bread
and water of life, as in the sacrament of the Supper. 3. As Joseph sent his
brethren home with victuals without money, and with Chariots and all
necessaries for their journey till they came again to be fully provided for by
him: so our Joseph furnishes us in this our journey and travel with all
necessaries without our money or merits, until we come to dwell with him, and
he be all in all unto us. 4. As when Jacob and his sons came into Egypt, and
at that joyful meeting of Father and all the sons, Joseph went out to meet
them: So our Joseph meets us now in our way by his grace and spirit: and at
that great meeting of all his brethren shall make ready the clouds as his
Chariot, and come in person in state, and we shall meet the Lord in the air
and be ever with him.

IV. As Joseph's brethren behaved themselves to him, Use 4. Do to Christ as
Joseph's brethren to him.
Genesis 50. 17. So let us behave our selves to Christ. 1. Humble our selves, be
ashamed that we have so wronged our brother, pray for pardon; and as it is in
Zachery, look upon him whom we (that is our sins) have pierced; and lament
and be sorry for him, as one mourns for his only son. 2. Honor him. All
our sheafes must bow to his; he has that extraordinary blessing from above and
below, the blessing of his father is strong with the blessing of his Elders,
Genesis 49. 26. Christ is blessed in himself, and in his posterity in all ages.
3. Depend on him for food as they, and say with Peter, Ioh. 6. 68. Master to
whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life; and for all supplies
apply that to him which is spoken of Joseph, Genesis 50. 19. Is not he for us
under God? 4. Let his gracious promises comfort and feed us, as Joseph's
brethren were comforted by his, Genesis 50. 21. 5. Offer him such gifts as we
have, prayer, praises, duty, endeavor. Be encouraged, Joseph will accept small
and mean gifts from brethren, although he need them not, Genesis 43. 15. Our
Joseph despises not a grain of grace, not smoking flax.

CHAP. VII.
6. Moses a type of Christ, 4. ways.
MOses was a type of Christ. Moses a type of Christ, 4. ways Similes, non
pares.
Deuteronomy. 18. 18. A Prophet will I raise up like unto thee: Here is a similitude a
likeness, no parity no equality. This is the difference: Christ is worthy of
more glory then Moses, Heb. 3. 3. For Moses was mere man: Christ God as well
as man. Christ the builder of Gods house, Moses but a stone in it. Christ a
son in the house: Moses but a servant. Christ the Lord of his own house
being the Church: Moses a servant in his Lords house. Now let us see wherein
the similitude is.

Moses was of mean parents and birth: So was Christ of a poor decayed and
dried stock, and borne of a poor Virgin, who at her purification brought a
pair of Doves, a gift appointed for poor persons, Luke 2. 24. Whereas rich
folks must bring a Lamb of a year old, Lev. 12. 6. 2. Moses was no sooner
borne but he was exposed to the cruelty of King Pharaoh, and sought out to
death: So Christ in his infancy was sought by Herod to be. slain. But both by
Gods extraordinary and especial providence saved and delivered, that both
might be saviors and deliverers, the one by her whose son he was reputed,
the other by him whose son he was reputed. 3. Moses was a shepherd, he kept
the sheep of Iethro his father in law, Exodus 3. and while Moses was in that
private estate, we read of little concerning his life expressed till he was
forty years old: So Christ was a shepherd sent to seek and save the lost
sheep of his Fathers fold, of whose private life we read as little as of
Moses till he was thirty years old. 4. Moses was of a most meek and sweet
disposition above al men living, yet full of zeal and indignation against sin,
as at the erecting of the calfe, Exodus 32: So Christ a pattern of meekness:
Learn of me for I am meek; but most zealous and earnest at the abuse of the
Temple, Mar. 11.

II. In his office and function. 1. Both appointed Office of Moses and of
Christ.
Moses sent and raised to deliver Israel out of Pharaohs bondage: Christ sent
to deliver all the Israel of God from the Pharaoh of hell, and all his
oppression of sin, curse, damnation, the most heavy taskes and burdens.
Moses was appointed to lead Israel toward Canaan: So Christ to lead the
Church the Israel of God, into heaven. And whereas Moses was to lead them but
into the sight of Canaan, and the borders: Our Moses leads us into the heavenly
Canaan, and gives us possession. 2. Both were furnished by God to their office.
1. Moses was learned in all the learning of Egypt: Christ was learned to
admiration. His enemies asked, whence has he all this great learning? Ioh. 7.
15. And, Never man spoke like this man. Ioh. 7. 46. And at twelve years old he
sat among the Doctors conferring with them, Luke 2. 46. 2. Moses was furnished
with many mighty miracles, in Egypt, in the red sea, and in the wilderness
for the confirming of his calling: all types of the miracles of Christ by sea
and land, in towns and deserts to manifest his glory, Ioh. 2. 11. But with
difference, Christ wrought, by his own power: Moses by Christ. Execution
faithful for matter and manner.
3. Both joyfully executed their office whether we consider the matter, or the
manner. 1. For the matter. 1. Moses brings glad tidings to the Israelites of
their deliverance out of Egypt, and that from God, Exodus 29. 30. Christ brings
from God the glad tidings of eternal salvation, and deliverance from the
spiritual Egypt and bondage under Pharaoh of hell to all the elect of God. 2.
Moses received from God and delivered to his people the Law, and was a Mediator
between God and his people. Gal. 3. 19. the Law was delivered in the hand of a
Mediator: that is, Moses, as Acts 7. 38. Now Moses was Mediator of the Old
Testament, Non redemptionis, sed relationis.
not a mediator of redemption, but of receiving the law and delivering it to
the people, standing between God and them, as his mouth to them, and theirs to
him: But Christ our true Moses, 1. not only receives the Law, but fulfils it.
2. When Moses had broken the tables, to show how we in our naturne had broken
the Law, our true Moses repaires it again. 3. He writes the Law not in tables
of stone, but in the tables of the hearts of believers. John 1. 17. the Law was
given by Moses, but grace by Christ. Moses could not pearce the heart, nor
supply grace to keep the Law. 4. He is Mediator of a new Covenant, and surety
of a better testament, Heb. 7. 22. and 9. 15. 3. Moses gives Israel an
excellent pattern of the Tabernacle, and all the utensils to the very least
pinns about it: But our Moses delivers a perfect doctrine from heaven, and
certain and perpetual rules for the worship of God to his Church and the well
ordering of it even in the smallest things. And as nothing was left which must
not be framed to the pattern seen in the mount: So has not Christ left the
worship of God in whole or part, in great or small matters to the liberty of
men; for then he should have been less faithful then Moses. 4. Moses
instituted the Passover and sacrifices from God, offers the blood of beasts,
sprinkles the houses of the Israelites with the blood of the Lamb, Exodus 12.
by which they were saved from a temporal death, and the revenging Angel: But
Christ the true Moses instituted the supper of the Lord, sacrifices himself,
offers his own blood being the Paschall Lamb, who purges and saves from
death eternal. And as that house only was exempted which was sprinkled with
the blood of the Lamb: Dum extendebat manus Moses, prae se ^erebat typum eius
qui crucifixus est pro nobis. nam Quemadmodum servo extendente manus ce cidit
Ama^^ch, ita cum dominus manus extendit, dissoluta est acies diabel. Theodoret.
in Exodus
So in the Church salvation is assured only where the blood of Christ is
sprinkled, and apprehended by faith. 5. Moses prays for Israel with his hands
stretched out till the evening, and while he prays, Israel overcommeth
Amalek, Exodus 17. At Moses prayer Gods wrath is turned away. Numb. 14. Christ
stretches out his hands for the elect upon the Cross, and made intercession
for them in earth, and now continues so to do in heaven; whereby we are both
enabled to conquer our spiritual enemies, as also Gods wrath is appeased, and
grace and favor returned, Heb. 8. Thus, both for the matter faithfully
discharged their office in these five things. 2. For the manner containing the
difference, it is in Heb. 3. 5. 6. Moses was faithful in all the house of God
as a servant: but Christ as the son. Moses in his masters house: Christ in
his own house. Moses by delegate authority: Christ by proper power. Moses as a
servant foretells his masters coming: Christ declared the Lord present. Moses
in types and shadows: Christ in body and truth. Moses to one nation the Jews:
Christ taught all nations the true worship. Moses doctrine accuses, wounds,
John 5. 45. Christ's doctrine justifies, heals, etc.

III. In his passion and suffering. 1. Moses being Suffering of Moses and of
Christ.
fasted forty days and forty nights in the Mountain alone: Christ being to
preach the Gospel fasted so long in the wilderness alone. 2. Moses coming
armed with authority for the Hebrews good was rejected both in his person and
doctrine and message. The Hebrew could say, who made thee a judge? Exodus 2. 14.
And Pharaoh will not hearken, Exodus 7. 4. Nay Pharaoh raged and oppressed the
more: Our true Moses coming to save the Jews sped no better; for thus they
protested aginst him, We have no King but Caesar, Ioh. 19. 15. And we will not
have this man to reign over us. Yea his gracious words, and potent works were
still contemned and envyed by the wicked Scribes and Pharisees, as at this day
by all the wicked in the world, and there is no stilling of the rage of the
Devil and his instruments where Christ is truly preached. 3. Moses refused to
be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and left the Court of Pharaoh to be
partaker of the afflictions of Gods people, Heb. 11. Christ descended from the
glory of Heaven to save his elect, and to suffer with them, and for them as
Moses could not do. Yea he took on him our infirmities and sorrows, and on
earth refused his right to be a King when they would have made him, because his
Kingdom was not of this world 4. Both were willing to dye at Gods
commandment, both went up into a mount to dye; Moses on mount Abarim, Christ
on Golgotha. Both careful to supply their absence to their people: Moses by
appoynting Joshua his successor, Christ by sending his spirit to lead his
people into all truth.

Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness: Actions of Moses and of Christ.
So was Christ lift up, Ioh. 3. 14. 2. Moses obtained flesh in the wilderness
to feed many thousands: So Christ in the desert fed many thousands with a few
loaves and fishes. 3. Moses married an Aethiopisse, a stranger, black: Christ
marries the Gentiles strangers, and in the Encomium of his Church it is said,
I am black but comely, Cant. 1. 4. 4. Moses sweetened the bitter waters of
Marah by the tree cast in, Exodus 15. 25. Christ sweetens our afflictions by the
wood of his Cross, Heb. 2. 10. 5. Moses was called a God; Aarons God for
directing him in things of God, Exodus 4. 16. and Pharaohs God, Exodus, 7. 1. for
executing on him, as God, Gods judgments: But Christ is indeed God, most wise
in counsel, most potent in revenge. 6. Moses delivered Israel through the
Red Sea by his Rod, Exodus 14: So Christ his Church from death by his Cross
through the red sea of his blood. 7. Never was God so clearly seen by the eye
of flesh as to Moses, who talked face to face: But never did creature see his
face but Christ, Ioh. 1. 18. 8. As Moses was transfigured on an hill, Sinai,
and so glorious as Israel could not behold his face: So was Christ on mount
Thabor, so as his disciples were amazed, and wist not what they said. 9. As
Christ after death rose most gloriously: So Moses body after his death was most
gloriously raised, in which he was talking with Christ on the Mount in his
transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 2. 10. Moses face was covered with a veil: Our
Moses with the veil of his flesh hid the glory of his Deity, and put on
vileness instead of majesty that men might behold him, and see, and hear him,
and believe.

I. The doctrine of religion which we teach is of God. Use. 1. Our doctrine is
of God.
1. We teach no other then what Moses taught, nor no other then what Jesus
Christ taught, the one being faithful as a servant, the other as the son in
the house. For as there were not two Churches of the old and new Testament: So
is there but one faith, one doctrine in substance, only differing in manner of
delivery. 2. This doctrine was perfectly, fully, and faithfully delivered to
the Church, seeing both were so faithful. If there be a doctrine of traditions
unwritten; if a doctrine of merits, of purgatory, of intercession of Saints,
then was Christ unfaithful and did not reveal the whole will of his Father.
Paul a servant revealed the whole will of God, Acts 20. 27. Was the Son less
faithful? 3. This doctrine is fully and sufficiently confirmed by many and
mighty miracles both in Moses the servant, and in Christ the Son, and being
no new doctrine, it needs no new miracles. It is too idle to call for other
miracles, when they cannot prove that we bring any other doctrine. If we
should bring in strange and lying doctrines never known to Moses or Christ, as
they do, we would cast about for lying wonders, and pretend fabulous miracles
to prove them as they do.

II. Whatsoever office or function God sets thee in, Use. 2. Be faithful in
doing thy office.
be faithful; so was Moses the servant; so was Christ the Son. Have thou an
high place in Gods house as Moses? be faithful, see 1. Tim. 1. 12. Art thou
but a doore-keeper in Gods house? be faithful, in faithful performing of
whatsoever God reveals to be his will. Have thou received any talent? lay it
out to thy Lords advantage, else can thou not be faithful. Let thy care and
study be to be found not only faultlesse, but faithful in all things
according to thy Christian profession; that faithfulness may be thy praise
and crown in Magistracy, Ministry, private life, in the whole practice of
religion; and also thy comfort living and dying, when the Lord shall witness
unto thee as to Moses in his life time, Numb. 12. 7, 8. and dead, Deuteronomy. 34. 5,
10. Moses the servant of the Lord died, and there arose no such Prophet.

III. Labor to express the fruit of faith, Use. 3. Show faith in the fruit of
it.
Heb. 11. 26. to prefer the state of Gods people above all earthly profits
and prerogatives; account the despised condition of the Saints above the
admired happiness of wicked men. Moses would join himself to them when he
might have been in the height of honor: Christ would not be in heaven without
them, but endured more affliction, then Moses could, to enjoy them. Hence
observe four sorts of people that are not of Christ's nor of Moses mind. 1.
Politicians, who take the honor and profit of the Gospel, but will none of the
afflictions of Christ. 2. Proud persons, who will not look so low as on
afflicted Christians. 3. Temporizer^, that look a squint on them if any suffer
for well-doing. 4. Scorners, that despise the society and exercises of Gods
people as too base company and courses for them. Let all such know, 1. That
Christ in heaven scorns them not, nor withdraws himself from them, yea heaven
would not please him without them. 2. That the fellowship of a Kings Court,
such as Pharaohs, in riot, feasting, drinking, gaming, is hateful to a sound
mind in comparison of the society of the miserable and persecuted Saints,
though a fleshly eye cannot see it. 3. That it will be no great comfort to
believe the Communion of Saints and not enjoy it. 4. That they which despise it
here shall never enjoy it in heaven.

4. In the type and truth we have a sure argument of our resurrection. Use. 4.
Assurance of our resurrection.
Moses dead body, hid in the valley of Moab, none knew where, appeared glorious
on the hill Thabor, in Christ's transfiguration: Christ's body hid in the grave
comes forth glorious, and ascends glorious on mount Olivet. Both teach that our
bodies are not lost but laid up, and as sure as laid down in baseness, shall
rise in glory.

CHAP. VIII.
7. IOSHVA: A type of our true Joshua, Joshua a type of Christ 5. ways.
another Moses.
Joshua under the very same name is propounded a type of Christ. Saviors.
Both had the name Jesus, both saved their people (therefore Joshua is called
Jesus, Heb. 4. 8.) the type from temporal and external enemies, the truth
from spiritual and eternal.

Moses, who makes way to both. Calling.
2. Both guides going before Gods people. The type to the earthly Canaan: the
truth to the heavenly. 3. Both led them into the land. Joshua led the people
not only toward the land, but into the promised land. What was denied to
Moses, was granted to Joshua. Moses might not enter, nor those that had
disobeyed; but Joshua enters, and takes possession for himself, and for all
the people: So our Joshua has taken possession, and led us into the possession
of our heavenly Canaan. What Moses Law could not do for our infirmity, Christ
by his Gospel has done for us. That may show us the way: but this brings us to
the ways end, and gives us all our promised expectation. Thus our Joshua
carries us through from this wilderness to our rest. 4. Both divided the land,
and allotted to every man his portion. Joshua having entered Canaan, assigns
every one his portion, Josh. 14. 1. Christ ascended into heaven, prepares for
every believer a place, Ioh. 14. 2.

Miracles.
1. Joshua being to pass over Jordan divides the waters, and they gave way
unto him: Christ in the same Jordan divides the heavens, Matthew. 3. 16. and they
testify unto him, verse 17. Joshua divides waters, but he ascribes it to the
power of the Lord of all the world, Chap. 3. 13. But our true Joshua being that
Lord and God of all the world, by his own power commanded the seas and they
obeyed him. 2. Joshua becompassing the walls of Jericho, and the long blast of
rams horns overthrew the walls of it, Chap. 6. 5. Our Joshua by as weak and
vile means in the eye of flesh, even by the sound and blast of the Gospel
shakes down daily the high and thick walls of the Devil and Antichrists
kingdom, and of the Jericho of this world, which resists the people of God in
their passage to Canaan. By the preaching of the Gospel, typified by the sound
of the Trumpets, our Joshua overthrowes the wisdom, power, seeming sanctity,
and whatsoever strength of flesh is opposed to the power of the Gospel. 3.
Whilst Joshua was destroying the enemies of God, the Sun in the heavens at
his word stood still, and stayed his course as a willing spectatour of that
business, and deferred the night lest he should want day to smite his enemies
in, Chap. 10. 12. So our Joshua whilst on the Cross he was spoiling
principalities and powers, and opening the way to Canaan, commanded the Sun
to stopp his course, and hide his face, to witness to all the world the great
work in hand that day. Of both these days may be verified, Josh. 10. 14.
there was never before day like, nor after it shall be.

IV. In his fortitude, victory, triumphs. Both of Valor.
miraculously triumphant. 1. Joshua was the Judge and Captain of Gods people,
the leader of his Armies, Vterque magnus miraculis, magnus triumphis. Ambr. de
offic. lib. 2. cap. 20.
the mighty conqueror of all the enemies that rose up and resisted them. He
subdued both princes and people of the Canaanites. He set his foot on the
necks of five kings at once, and slew them, Chap. 10. 24. nay made his men of
war set their feet on their necks, and trample them as dung, and went on,
and in small time had slain one and thirty Kings with their Armies, Chap. 12.
10. Never had Israel so many enemies in their passage to Canaan, as Gods people
have unto that heavenly Canaan their country and rest, Moses non pugnat cum
Amalecitis sed Joshua, Exodus 17. 10. sig. quod non lex nos ab hostibus
libe^^et, sed Jesus Christus.
typified by that. Even all the gates of hell, the rage of Satan, the power of
sin, the allurements of the world, whole armies of temptations, a troop of
pleasures, honors, profits on one hand, a whole band of crosses and
discouragements on the other, a legion of lusts within our selves. But our
Joshua the mighty Captain not only of the Lords hosts, but who is the Lord of
hosts, is described to sit on a white horse, whose name is called Faithful and
true; and he judges and fights righteously, Revel. 19. 11. He has
valiantly triumphed over all enemies, spoiled principalities and powers, set
his foot on their necks, trodden Satan under his feet, and made us tread him
under our feet too. If Joshua have slain one and thirty Kings; Our Joshua has
slain so many thousand commanders. 2. By means of Ioshuas faithfulness and
fortitude not one word failed of all the good things which the Lord had said
unto Israel, but all came to pass, Chap. 21. 45. and 23. 14. So by means of
our Joshua, all the promises of God concerning heaven and happiness are
accomplished, which are all in him Yea and Amen. Heaven and earth may fail,
but not one jote of Gods promise but this Joshua will see it accomplished.

Joshua saved Rahabs house that had the red cord hung out at the window,
Actions.
because they had saved the Spies, Chap. 6: So Christ saves every penitent
sinner that expresses faith in his blood, and love to the true Israel of God,
especially his Ministers and Seers. 2. He graciously accepted the Gibeonites,
when they humbly sued and entreated peace of him: So a broken and a contrite
heart our true Joshua never despised. He that offers repentant sinners grace
before they seek it, when they seek it will not deny it. 3. When God by
Joshua had wrought that great miracle of stopping up the river Jordan, till
they passed over, Chap. 4. 2. Joshua commmanded twelve men of Israel to gather
twelve stones out of Jordan, and set them up memorialls of Gods great acts to
all posterity: So our Joshua having wrought many mighty miracles for the
confirmation of his holy doctrine, commanded twelve men his twelve disciples by
the preaching of the Gospel, to erect through all the world* a monument and
memory of the wondrous works of the Son of God in the working out of man's
salvation, and leading them to the heavenly Canaan.

I. What a fearful thing it is to be an enemy of God and his Church. Use. 1.
A fearful thing to be an enemy of the Church.
Never was Joshua so mighty against the enemies of Israel (not one of whom,
were he never so strong, could stand before him) as our Joshua is to root out
at once all his enemies. Art thou an enemy to Jesus, an hindrer of any of his
people in their way to Canaan? look to thy self. Suppose thou had power
above Joshua the type, art thou stronger then the true Joshua? He carries
victory in his banner. Julian shall cry with his guts in his arms: Vicisti
Galilaee.
O Galilean thou have the victory. The proudest enemy shall be as lambs grease
before a consuming fire. Our great Joshua shall set his feet upon thy neck,
and make thee the dust of his footstool; nay he shall set the feet of his
despised servants upon thy neck as Joshua did. The power of one and thirty
Kings shall not carry it against him. If thou art an enemy, hasten thy
repentance, else thou hastenest thy destruction. Qui non faciunt Dei
voluntatem, de iis fit Dei voluntas.
If thou work not the will of God, God will work his will on thee. And what
need any man be offended at the present prosperity of Gods enemies be they
never so great, seeing our Joshua shall suddenly blast their power and glory,
and dash them asunder as earthen vessels.

II. Comfort. Use. 2. Comfort in our salvation accomplish^d.
All the good word of God for the salvation of his people shall be
accomplished. 1. Though the promise may seem out of mind, Joshua shall
perform every word and syllable of that promise made three hundredth years
before. 2. Though there be never so many hindrances and mighty lets, they shall
not hinder. God promises the good land; but how should they get through Jordan,
seeing there is no other way? Now rather then his promise shall fail, he will
invert the order of nature; Jordan shall stop his course, nay run backward.
The like in their coming out of Egypt. God had said, that night they must out;
and the sea must give way to the promise. God promises Joshua to overcome 5.
Kings at once; an hard task, and one day is too little for it; but rather then
the night approaching shall dissolve the battle, and any of them escape, he
will command the Sun to stand still, and lengthen the day that his word may
be accomplished. Israel in passing to Canaan must pass the huge and terrible
wilderness forty years. Alas what shall they eat or drink? Can a barren
wilderness afford any food, or (if any) for so many hundred thousand men? But
before the promise fail, heaven shall rain Manna, the rock shall give
abundance of water. Has God promised thee daily bread, help in affliction,
refreshing in weariness, remission in sense of sin, a blessed issue in every
trial? Let thy faith give God the honor of truth. Heaven shall fall and earth
ascend before thou believing shall be frustrate, Isai. 54. 10. Has he
promised thee the heavenly Canaan? what if thou see armies of enemies, of
discouragements? thou being an Israelite shall not fail. For, 1. Nothing in
nature is so strong as the promise. 2. God has after a sort captivated
himself and all his creatures to thy faith. 3. He may defer the promise but
never deny it or himself. Wait still.

III. Is Christ the true Joshua? Use. 3. Duties we (...) to Christ our Joshua.
1. Acknowledge him our Captain and head. 2. Submit our selves unto him, as
Israel unto Joshua, Josh. 1. 11. 17. All that thou command us we will do,
and whether thou sendest us we will go; as we obeyed Moses in all things so
will we obey thee. 3. Follow him as our guide into that eternal rest, and
depend on him for our inheritance there. Moses cannot carry us in, for himself
must only see the land. So we may see the land of promise a far off in the
Law; but only Jesus can bring us in. For, 1. He alone is entered already to
take possession for us. 2. He has undertaken to carry us through our
wilderness to our Canaan.

IV. What conditions we must observe in coming to heaven, Use. 4. Conditions
to be observed in going to heaven.
as they in coming to the good land. 1. The land is theirs and possession
given, but many Canaanites and Jebusites must dwell in the Land under tribute
still, chapter 15. 63. and 16. 10. So notwithstanding all our promises of rest, and
possession of peace of conscience, in this world are some yea may Canaanites
and Jebusites to molest Gods people. But at last our Joshua leaves never an
enemy unsubdued. There shall nothing which is unholy get within the walls of
that City; he sees the last enemy destroyed, 2. They must not come into that
land till they were circumcised; for all the forty years in the wilderness
they were not circumcised, chapter 5. 3. 7. Till the shame of Egypt was remooved
verse. 9 Joshua cannot bring them into the promised land. Which shame (as Iunius
thinks) was the profaneness of their fathers contracted in Egypt, whereby
they grew careless of Gods ordinances. Our Joshua brings not us into our
Canaan so long as we are profane and uncircumcised; till he have circumcised
our hearts, and we be holy and sanctified: for without shall be dogs. 3. Joshua
must divide their inheritance by lot, and so every one must receive it; not by
right or desert, chapter 14. 2. And so God commanded Moses Numb. 26. 55: So our
Joshua divides to the elect their inheritance in the heavenly country, not for
their merits and deserts, but by his rich and free gift. If no Israelite could
claim of Joshua one foot out of merit and desert, but all of promise and
grace: much less may we our child's part in heaven. Gods mercy is man's merit.
4. Joshua gives them the land with this condition, that for so great labor and
travel in preparing so good a land they afford him an inheritance among them,
chapter 19. 49. Our Joshua was not inferior in labor and pains to Joshua in
purchasing us a better land; and we must give him the inheritance he asks (so
they did to Joshua) that he may dwell among us, or in the midst of us. Now the
inheritance he asks among us is our hearts purged by faith. He desires no
more of thee for all his pains but a little room in the midst of thee, which
himself will build and dwell in. If thou do not give him his demand, besides
thy unkindnesse and unthankfulness, thy heart shall lie as a ruinous wast, as
a nasty and stinking hoale, a cage of unclean beasts and lusts, yea an
habitation of Devils. 5. Joshua brings them into the good land, and as soon as
they eat the corn of the land the Manna cease the next morrow, chapter 5. 12.
So when our Joshua shall bring us into our good land to eat the fruit of it,
the good things and means of this world shall cease. The Manna the preaching
of the word, celebration of Sacraments, faith and hope, etc. But we are sure of
better means, or better things without means; in the hope and expectation of
which we must persevere in the faith, and walk in hope through our
wilderness. The fruits of that good land will be worth all our labor. 6.
Joshua brings none into the land but conquerours, and divides the land to a
conquering people: So our Joshua gives the land only to him that overcommeth.
Vincen^i dabo, Rev. 2.
And he that persevers to the end shall be saved.

CHAP. IX.
8. Sampson a type of Christ.
1. IN person and condition. Sampson a type in 4. respects.
1. His conception foretold by the Angel of God, Judge. 13. 5. So was Christ's.
His office foretold, he must be a Savior: Conception.
Borne beyond strength of nature, of a mother long before barren, Iud. 13. 3.
So was Christ. His mother saluted by the Angel as Mary was, that though she
was barren she should conceive a son, a savior; the one shall begin to save
Israel out of the hands of the Philistims, verse. 5. the other must save his
people from their sins. And this promise confirmed by a sign to both the
mothers, Nazarite.
Iud. 13. 4. Luke 1. 30. 2. Both must be Nazarites, Sampson by the Law of
Nazarites, Numb. 6. 2. Christ by occasion of the place in which he was educated
not by that Law. But as a Nazarite signified one that was separated and severed
from the common course of men to a more holy profession of sanctity, and to a
stricter care to avoid all manner of impurity, such a one the Prophets
signified Christ should be; not only holy and separate from sinners, but the
author of holiness. And as Sampson was sanctified from the womb: So was Christ
much more. So the Angel, The holy thing that is in thee is of the holy Ghost.
And herein beyond Sampson, for in Christ are all sanctified. 3. Sampson grew
and the spirit waxed strong in him, Growth in Spirit.
so as he became a Savior of incomparable strength. So Christ grew every way;
in stature, in favor with God and man; and the Spirit was so strong in him
(because it was not measured unto him as unto Sampson) as he became a Savior
stronger then the strong armed man. He was the true Sampson that overcame many
enemies, and slew heaps upon heaps. And although Sampson the type was at last
overcome by his enemies: our true Sampson is invincible, and has gloriously
triumphed over them all. Both of them were great deliverers; the one from great
thraldom and temporal misery: the other from a greater spiritual and
eternal thraldom under sin, the Law, Satan, hell, etc.

Sampson was a type of Christ in three especial actions. 1. He found meat in
the eater, Actions.
and from the strong sweetness, and brought some of it to his parents: Christ
by his death (which seemed to eat him up) brings us meat, the bread of life,
sweeter then honey; and out of this dead Lions mouth, that is, Christ dead,
comes sweetness. Christianorum processit extmen instar aepum.
Thence sprang whole flocks of Christians, like so many swarms of bees. 2.
Sampson loved strange women and went among the enemies of God for a wife;
August. ser. 107 de temp.
which might seem a sin in him, but that the text says, It came of God,
Judge. 14. 4. A type of Christ's love to the Gentiles, casting his love on her
that was not beloved, to make his despised and dispersed of the Gentiles his
spouse and wife: as Hos. 2. 23, I will have mercy on her etc. Where the whole
contract on both parties is set down at large. 3. Sampson put forth his mind
in parables and riddles: so did Christ his doctrine to the Pharisees, Mat. 13.
34.

Sufferings.
Sampson by Delilah to the Princes of the Philistims, Judge. 16. 5. Christ for
thirty pieces of silver unto the chief Priest. Both betrayed by their most
familiar; the one to the Philistims, the other to the Pharisees. Both under
pretense of love, Sampson by Delilah, Judge. 16. 15. Christ by Judas with a
kiss, Both apprehended by their enemies; both led away, both bound, both
brought forth at a great feast, both blinded, both scorned, both fastened to a
post, the one of the house, the other of the cross. 2. As Sampson offered
himself freely unto death among wicked men, as a most valiant Captain being
called to be a revenger of Gods enemies; and therefore it is said, Heb. 11. he
died (not as a selfemurtherer, but) in faith; that is, as a faithful servant
of God adventured his own life for the destruction of the enemies of God and
his Country, as every good subject and soldier (pressed to the field) ought to
do. So Jesus Christ voluntarily offered himself to death, and went out to meet
the apprehendors, and was content to dye among wicked men, and to be hanged
between two thieves, that he might destroy and scatter the powers of the
enemies of his Churches salvation.

IV. In victory and fortitude. 1. His first stratagem Stratagems and victories.
was that he overcame a stout Lion in the desert, and slew him with his own
hand, chapter 14. 6. and tare him, as one should have rent a Kid: So the first
powerful work in which our Sampson showed himself, was the conquering of the
devil that roaring Lion hand to hand, who assaulted him in the wilderness by
three horrible and hellish temptations. 2. Sampson slew with his own hand
(being alone) above a thousand men at once, having nothing but the Jawbone of
an Ass; a weak, base, and insufficient weapon for so great a war and
victory; and as it was unfit, so it was an unclean weapon of an unclean beast
by the Law, which his strict profession of a Nazarite should not have touched,
had it been out of case of necessity: So our true Sampson by as weak and vile
instruments, and as contemptible in the eyes of flesh conquers thousands daily;
while by the foolishness of preaching, by the doctrine of the Cross, by weak
earthen vessels he subdues whole countries and kingdoms unto him; that the
work may be known to be his own hand and power, and not the instruments. 3.
Sampson slew more of Gods enemies at his death then in all his life, Judge. 16.
30. And this was the effect of the death of Christ; when sin, Satan, hell,
the grave, and his enemies seemed to triumph over him, and make themselves
merry (with the Philistims) as having in their power their greatest enemy; but
suddenly he afflicted them more in his death then in all his life. This death
of Christ pulled Satan's house over his head; it was the death of death, and
squeasing of all enemies at once. 4. Sampson being in the City Azzah, and the
Citizens now lying in wait to kill him, and to make an end of so furious an
enemy whom they had sure within their gates, he arose at midnight and took the
doors of the gates of the City, and the two posts, and lift them away with the
bars, and laid them on his shoulders and departed, chapter 16. 3: So when satan
and sinners had buried Christ, laid a stone on him, sealed it, and watched him,
thinking they had him sure enough never to molest them more; he like another
mighty Sampson rose in his might, carried away the gates and bars of death
from himself and all his members. All the bonds of death and sin, with which
he was bound in our stead, he shook off, as Sampson did the seven green
cords, and broke their power as towe is broken when it feels fire. 5. Sampson
never had help from any other, in slaying the Lion, the enemies; but with his
own hand without any other second or weapon: So Christ in the wilderness
alone; in the garden at prayer alone; before Pilate alone, all the disciples
fled; on the Cross alone. No other must tread the winepresse; none must share
in the honor, nor conquest with him. Use 1. Judge none by outward calamities.


I. Not to judge of the piety or impiety of Gods children by their calamities.
Sampson has many enemies, many conflicts, many dangers; by the Lion, the
Philistims, the Azzhites, and his own wife; his life painful, his death
violent: Jesus Christ himself beset with enemies on all sides, as the sun
with moats; never free from conflicts with the Lion the devil, with his own
Jews, with Pharao, Saduces, Herodians; his person despised, his miracles
traduced, his life painful, his death shameful and accursed. Or inward.
Yet may we not judge either of them forsaken of God, who still assisted them
with his own strength, and was strongest in them when they seemed weakest.
Psalm. 73. 15.
Neither may we mis-judge the generation of Gods children in their conflicts
with Satan, with temptation, with sinners, or with the terrors of their own
hearts. 22. 1.
If they shall cry out; My God, why have thou for saken me? wait a while, and
Gods strength shall do great things in their weakness.

II. God can and usually does use strange, Use 2. Strange means used by God for
the Churches good.
weak, and unexpected means to overthrow his enemies, and the enemies of his
Church; his strength is most seen in weak things, his wi^dome working by the
most foolish. When a thousand enemies set upon Sampson at once without any
weapon or means of defense, he can use a jawbone to kill a thousand of them
when they think him far enough from any weapon; and if Sampson wants a
better and readier means against Gods enemies, he can by two hundred Foxes (a
most unexpected means) burn up their grain and fields at harvest time: Our
Lord by the foolishness of preaching can and does overcome his enemies; nay
God can and does by contrary means wrack his foes. Sampson shall marry a wife
among the Philistims to be an occasion of war and revenge, and this came of
God: whereas marriages among Princes ordinarily are made to compose and make up
differences, not to make them. Our Lord Jesus overcomes sin, death, hell,
grave, by suffering, by death, by descending into hell, by lying in the grave,
most unlikely or contrary means. Let Gods enemies fear revenge by every
thing, even where no fear is. An enemy of God and his Church is never safe,
seem he never so secure. An army of frogs shall drive Pharaoh out of his
bedchamber in the midst of his greatness; a fly shall choke Pope Adrian, if
other means be wanting; and proud Herod shall be eaten up, not by an army of
men but of lice.

III. The greatest victory against the enemies of the Church is by passion and
patience, Use 3. Our victory stands in patience and passion.
submitting our selves meekely unto God in obedience, walking in our callings,
and doing the work of God. Thus did these two mighty Sampsons most overcome
their enemies when they seemed most overcome by them. Our war (says Isidore)
is contrary to the striving of the Olympicks. Illic qui caedit and superat; hic
qui caeditur and perfert: Illic qui vicissim ferit; hic qui alteri maxillam
praebet: non in ultione, led patientia victoria ponderatur.
There he gets the garland which strikes and overcommeth; here he which is
struck and suffers. There he which being struck strikes again, here he
which offers his cheek to the striker. And thus he concludes; Our victory
consists not in revenging but in suffering. Oh let the children of the Church
lay aside worldly weapons, clamor, reviling, revenging speeches or actions;
and betake themselves to the weapons of the Church, prayers, tears, patience,
weapons mighty under God. The power of a Christian is patience, who must
overcome evil with goodness.

IV. In that Christ is the true Sampson, Use 4. Fourefold comfort to Gods
people.
here is much consolation, and many comforts to the Israel of God. 1. Comfort.
As Sampson revenged the wrong offered him in his wife: So will Christ: Mat. 25.
In that ye did it to one of these little ones, ye did it to me. And though
Sampsons wife may be taken from him and given to another: Christ's cannot. Ioh.
10. 28. none shall pluck them out of my hand. 2. Comfort. A mightier deliverer
is here then Sampson for Israel. For, 1. Though Sampson was strong to overcome
a Lion: our Sampson is stronger to overcome the Devil; Christ a mightier and
better Deliverer, then Sampson, in six things.
not in himself only, but for us, in us, and by us. 2. Sampson was strong,
but might abuse his strength, as he did in whoring and wantonness, which in
prison he repented: But Jesus Christ used all his strength for God, against
sin and his enemies. 3. Sampson abusing it, might lose his strength, for it
was not the parting with his hair, but his sin grieving the Spirit, that
weakened him: but Christ could not lose his strength, because he could not lose
his obedience. 4. Sampson was so strong, as the Philistines thought it
bootlesse to assay him with power, but by policy and indirect means they
conquer him: but our Sampson cannot be conquered neither by power, nor by
policy; for he is stronger then all, and in him are treasures of wisdom. 5.
Sampson overthrew the enemies, but that was his own overthrow: but Christ not
so; his conquest was to his most glorious exaltation, 6. Sampson as a type
only began the deliverance of the Church, but hindered by death could not
perfect it: Our Sampson perfected the deliverance and salvation of the whole
Church, and did more after death then in his life or death; and will most fully
perfect it for all his members in the resurrection. 3. Comfort. The glory of
Gods children appears not yet, but shall when he shall appear, 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
Sampsons strength for a time lurked in the prison: the glory of Christ's Deity
lay hid a while in the grave, but both most powerfully brake forth: So shall
the glory of the despised Saints, Psalm. 37. 6. 4* Comfort. We shall never
doubt of means to comfort and supply us in want. The same God that supplied
Sampson a Jawbone against his enemies, supplied him out of the same Jawbone a
well of water to drink when he was ready to faint. Psalm. 37. 3.
Trust thy self with God in thy wants, reserve to him all means, instruments,
and ways of bringing thee help. If thou see no apparent or great means of
thy comfort and supply, he can use weak and unexpected means; only walk in
thy calling, and the rock shall yield thee water rather then thou shall be
destitute in Gods way, or work.

V. In both learn to contemn the greatest and extremest peril in Gods
causes. Use. 5. In Gods cause contemn greatest peril.
Sampson offered himself to death, so did Christ; he went out to meet his
enemies, so must thou learn not to love thy life to the death, Revel. 12. 11.
and with Paul, not count thy life dear to finish thy course with joy. For a
man to thrust himself in hazard, Injussu Dei, privato assectu.
or venture his life without warrant from God, or by his own private motion,
is rash: but God calling, in standing against the enemies of the Church, it is
honorable. And prepare for death approaching.
In both, learn to prepare for death approaching, by faithful and fervent
prayer. So did both these Sampsons. And the issue will be comfortable as
theirs; that all thy life and combat shall not give such an overthrow to thy
enemies as such a death, though enemies seem never so much to prevail.

CHAP. X.
9. David a type of Christ in 5. respects.
AS all the Kings of Israel were express types of Jesus Christ, the head of
his Kingdom and of all the people of God, as they in their times were: So were
there two of them that were more manifest figures of him then all the rest;
Five things specified in which David was a type of Christ.
I mean David and Solomon. Of both which we are to enquire wherein the
resemblance consists. David was so special a type of Christ, as scarce is
any thing noted of Christ, but some shadow of it might be observed in David.

I. For his person. David the son of Iesse: Christ rod out of the stock of
Iesse, Isai. 11. 1. 1. Person.
Both of obscure and low parentage. Both out of dry and despicable roots. Both
Kings. Both Kings of Israel. Both their Kingdoms raised out of humility. Both
men after Gods own heart. Both David's; for even this root of Iesse was not
only commonly called by the name of the son of David, but of the name of
David himself, Ezech. 34. 24. My servant David shall be the Prince among
them; which was longafter David was dead. Jeremiah 30. 9. they shall serve the
Lord their God, and David their King, whom I will raise up unto them. Hosea 3.
5. they shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King: that is, not the
typical King David dead long before, but the Messiah the true David, to whom
only prayer and spiritual worship belongs.

II. For his vocation and calling. 1. Both called head of nations, Psalm. 18.
43. thou have made me the head of nations: 2. Calling.
which was not literally true of David, who was properly King of one little
corner in Judea; but of Christ the true David, whose Kingdom was from sea to
sea, and to the worlds end. David of a shepherd of sheep, was raised to be a
shepherd of men, even of Gods people: So was Christ raised of God to be the
chief shepherd of the flock, 1. Pet. 5. 4. And not of bodies, (...).
as David, but of souls, 1. Pet. 2. 25. 2. The time when. David was anointed
about the thirtieth year of his life, 2. Sam. 5. 4: and Christ was baptized at
thirty years, and invested into his Office. 3. The place where. David made
choice of Jerusalem for his royal seat and Metropolis, being anointed of God
to the Kingdom of Israel: So Christ, being anointed the everlasting King of
all the Israel of God, makes choice of Jerusalem there to rule and show his
power upon the Cross his chariot of triumph, crowned with a crown of thorns;
and after in his glorious resurrection, and ascension, sending the Spirit and
the Gospel. And as David added some of the borderers to the kingdom of Israel,
Psalm. 18. 44.
as himself says; strangers were subdued to him: So the true David adds to
the Church the whole body of the Gentiles; and has by the preaching of the
Gospel (the sword of his mouth) subdued the world to himself. 4. The gifts
fitting him to this function. As when David was anointed, the Spirit of God
came upon him, 1. Sam, 16. 13. and fitted him to the government of Gods
people: So our true David Jesus Christ, anointed with oil above all his
fellows, had the Spirit of God descending upon him in a visible shape, and by
that anointing filled, and furnished with the Spirit, and all needful graces
for the administering of his Kingdom. Four graces wherein David and Christ
excelled.
5. As David was preferred above all his brethren in four special graces: So
was Jesus Christ above David himself. 1. In wisdom and prudence, 1. Sam. 16.
18. the servants of Saul observed David to be wise in matters, and the Lord
was with him: and Chap. 18. verse 14, 15. when Saul saw that David was very
wise, he was afraid of him. Our true David had all treasures of wisdom and
knowledge; the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel
rested upon him, Isai. 11. 2. who is therefore called the great Counselor,
Isai. 9. 6. whose counsels are far beyond Ahitophels; his were as the Oracles
of God: Christ's were so. And our true David gets beyond his type. David in many
things (by his own confession) did very foolishly: Our true David never did
any thing but the wisdom of God shined in it; with whom not only God was,
but because he was God. Confilium, sine fortitudine and magnanimitate, i^e.
2, In fortitude and magnanimity (without which counsel were bootlesse) by
which he was able to encounter with a Lion, a Bear, with Goliath, and all that
rose up against him or his people. A man fitted for peace or war, with
counsel and strength. Whose description (in part) is contained in the
forecited place, 1. Sam. 16. 18. strong, valiant, a man of war, and wise in
matters. A type of our true David, who for fortitude is the invincible Lion of
the tribe of Judah; and not a valiant man only, but the strong God, Isai. 9.
6. the mighty God. See Tit. 2. 13. 3. In gifts of prophecy. He was able to sing
divine Psalms, and hymns to the praise of God; an holy penman of the
Scripture. A type of Christ, the true Prophet of his Church, not a penman, but
the Author of all the holy Scriptures. David a Prophet: Christ the Lord of all
holy Prophets. 4. In gifts of true sanctification and holiness; Sanctification
eminent in Christ 3. ways.
being a man after Gods own heart, commended for his uprightness in all
matters, save that of Vriah. A type of Jesus Christ; who by the devils
confession, was the holy One of God. 1. Himself being sanctified beyond all
measure. 2. Being the sanctifier of his people; the Author, meritour, and
applier of all sanctifying graces to his members, of whom himself is head. 3.
In his type were many foul spots: In him no spot nor stain. Therefore the
Church sings out his holiness from topp to toe, Cant. 5. 10. and concludes him
wholly fair and delectable, verse 16.

III. David was a type of Christ in his wars, 3. Wars.
secondly of his enemies, thirdly of his victories. 1. His followers. David had
a train. Followers.
1. Of poor men, and received such to him as were in debt, 1. Sam. 22. 2. The
Son of David had a poor train; and not receives only, but calls all
unto him that are heavy laden with the burden of sins, called debts,
promising he will ease them. 2. Afterward David had his thirty seven Worthies,
that valiantly fought his battles, 2. Sam. 23. and by their strength carried
wonderful victories: So had the Son of David his twelve Apostles, and
seventy two disciples, who as worthy and stout Champions, fought the Lords
spiritual battles, and mightily subdued the world under the government of
Jesus Christ, in whose place are succeeded pastors and teachers to the end.
Enemies: open
2. His enemies. 1. Open and manifest, not only Goliath that defied all Israel,
but Saul that casts a spear at him, that hunts him as a Partridge, that sends
out for him to bring him to death, and the house of Saul, Shimei railing on
him, and cursing him with an horrible curse, besides Amalekites, Philistims,
etc. So our Lord Jesus had open hostility against the great Goliath of hell, and
encountered him hand to hand, and conquers him in the wilderness. But Herod
hunts his life every where, the Pharisees revile him for a deceiver and
Demoniack, send out for him to take away his life, and the people of the Jews
pursuing him with all open hatred and hostility even to the death, and all the
wicked tyrants and enemies as so many Amalekites and Philistims. and secret.
2. Secret and underhand enemies, that should have been loyal and loving to
him, even his own people that flattered him with their mouths, but imagined
mischief against him, Psa. 41. 9. Such as Doeg, Achitophel. Nay he which eat
bread with him at his table, his familiar that went up to the house of God with
him. And more then all this, he that came out of his own loins, his own son
Absalom; besides the sons of his father, 1 Samuel 17. 28. So our true David had
not only his own Jews and brethren hating him with an horrible hatred, and
calling his blood upon themselves; but his own Disciple that had been so
familiar with him, that went to the house of God often with him, that knew all
his haunts and ways, betraying him, and delivering him to be crucified. And
thus Christ himself expounds that in Psalm 41. 9. of himself and Judas, Luke
22. 21. And therefore Interpretors expound such execrations, as Psa. 59. 13.
Consume them that they be no more, not so much literally against Saul and
other enemies of David; as against the Jews and enemies of Christ shadowed by
them; and so conceive them as they be Prophetical predictions of Jerusalem and
the Jews forty years after Christ's ascension, and of the present wrath upon
the hardened Jews, whose hatred against Christ lives at this day, as the
curse lives on them. Victories.
3. His deliverances and victories, with many of which the Lord honored him.
As 1. Saul lays wait every where to take him, and pursues him from place to
place; but David's feet were made like Hinds feet in expedition to avoid his
enemy whether Saul or Absalom; who chased him as hunters the silly hare, and he
escapes them all though narrowly and strangely. Christ Jesus was often sought
after and laid for by his enemies, no kind of snare was undevised to take him
in his talk, in his doctrine, in his life and conversation; no means
unattempted to take his person, but he escaped their hands strangely.
Sometimes he went through the midst of them all, who having strong purpose yet
had no power to take him, till the time wa^ come that he delivered himself. 2.
Saul having wearied himself in pursuit of David, sent messengers to take him
three several times, 1 Samuel 19. 20. but they among a company of Prophets began
to prophecy, the spirit of the Lord coming upon them, and they went without
him. So the Pharisees sent messengers to apprehend Christ and bring him before
them; but coming to him (as Saul's messengers to David) and hearing his
gracious words, had no power to take him; but went away preaching and
proclaiming (as they prophesying) never man spoke like this man, Ioh. 7. 46. 3.
In the comparison between Saul and David (David having slain Goliath) was sung:
Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand, 1. Sam. 18. 10. But
there is no comparison between the victories of David, and of this son of
David, who has slain the great Goliath the Devil who defied all the host of
Israel; and not destroyed the devil only, but overcame death, hell, the
grave; and chased before him all the armies of sins, and bands of temptations
which come out against the Israel of God. 4. in that noble victory David cuts
off Goliahs head with his own sword: So in the wilderness the devil, the
great Goliath used Scripture against Christ, and Christ overthrowes him and cuts
off his head by the same sword of the Spirit, the word of God. And now daily he
convinces the wicked enemies by the testimony of their own conscience, Romans
2. 15. He needs no other sword or weapon against them then their own.

IV. David was a type of Christ in his Kingdom: 4. Kingdom.
first, Entrance.
in respect of the entrance, secondly, of the administration, thirdly, of the
continuance or eternity. 1. David entered not without strong opposition, much
contempt and disdain: so our David. For of both it was verified, Psalm. 118. 22.
the stone which the builders refused, is become chief stone of the corner. No
man was more despised of Saul's courtiers then David, who was thought far
enough from the Kingdom: so no man so much despised and rejected of the
Scribes, Pharisees, chief Priests and people, as Christ. Barrabas an honest
man to him; and yet was mightily and unexpectedly invested into his Kingdom by
his glorious rising from the dead. 2. In his administration. Administration.
David will judge uprightly, and sing mercy and judgment; he will endure no
hateful person in his presence. But our David is the just and righteous Judge
of all the world; and most sincerely disspenceth mercy to the penitent sinner,
but feeds the impenitent with judgment. Eternity.
3. In the continuance or eternity. God promised mercy to David and his seed
for ever, Ps. 132. 12.
which promises are not to be extended to his carnal succession, for the
princely dignity is taken from them. Their glory was eclipsed in the captivity,
and where be now any of David's race according to the flesh? But the everlasting
seed of David is to be meant. 1. Christ himself, in whom his kingdom is
perpetuated. 2. The true Israel as well of Gentiles as of Jews by faith
ingrafted into the Messiah, in respect of whom shall be no end of his Kingdom.
Thus in all those speeches wherein David professes he will praise the Lord
among the Gentiles, 18. 49.
David must be taken as a type of Christ, who by his Spirit set forth the
praise and true worship of God among the Nations to the end of the world. And
so Paul Romans 15. 9. interprets it of the calling of the Gentiles. For David
could not do this literally and in person, among whom he never dwelt nor came,
but only in him whose type he was.

V. David was a type of Christ in respect of Christ his prophetical and
Priestly office. 5. Office Prophetical and Priestly. 1.
1. David by his sweet music allayes Saul's madness, 1. Sam. 16. 23. Christ by
the sweet voice of the Gospel stills the evil spirits which molest and vex
men, and gives them peace and quietness in mind and conscience. And in the
days of his flesh, how he sought to cure and allay the spiritual madness of
the wicked Scribes and Pharisees against him, is plain in the story. 2. David
brings back the Arc to his right place. 2. Sam. 6. So did Christ, the truth of
Gods Law obscured by the false glosses of Scribes and Pharisees; Math. 5. and
6. and 7.
and reduced the true sense and meaning of it, And freed his Church (signified
by the Arc) from the spiritual thraldom and captivity of the Law. 3. David
builds an Altar in the grounds of a stranger, 2. Sam. 24. 24, namely, Araunah
the Jebusite: The true David builds up a Church among the Gentiles, and sets up
Gods worship among them that were strangers from the Covenant. 4. David offers
a sacrifice, and the Lord accepts it, sending fire from heaven to consume it,
2. Sam. 24. 25. Christ offers the most acceptable sacrifice that every was* in
which both David's and all ours must be accepted; and in which alone the Lord
smells a savor of rest.

I. As the spirit of God came on David after his anointing, Use. 1. Enter upon
no office without assistance of the Spirit.
1. Sam. 16. 13: So did it on our true David after his baptizing: to fit them
to their weighty offices. Learn 1. That he that is not fitted and furnished
with gifts of the spirit in some measure, and attempteth any office in the
Church or commonwealth, is not called by God; whose wisdom will not send a
blind man for a seer, nor a dumb man on his message or errand. Would a man know
whether he have received of this spirit for his office? A note of it.
A note is, when God stirs up his will in that office to perform all the
desire of God. Isa. 44. 28, he says to Cyrus: Thou art my shepherd, thou
shall perform all my desire. The Magistrate is a shepherd; he must do in
judgment what God himself would do in repressing vice, and cherishing
religion, else the spirit (who is not contrary to himself) leads him not. The
Minister is a shepherd; he must speak nothing but what God would speak for
the encouraging of grace, and disgrace of sin and sinners. God speaks peace
to his people and feeds the impenitent with judgment, and he that in his
ministry does speak sweetly to wicked men, and broacheth a vessel of gall
and wormwood for godly men to drink, is not sent by God on that errand: he
crosses the spirit which he pretends. 2. Art thou a private Christian, see
that the same spirit rest on thee, and that thou have received of the same
anointing. For 1. he that has not the spirit, Romans 8. 9.
is none of Christ's: and 2. what is it to us that the spirit rest and light
upon Christ, if he should determine all his fruits and graces upon him? But in
that the sweet ointment and Balsame poured upon the head of our high Priest
runs down to the skirt of his garment, that is, to the lowest member of his
Church, Psa, 133. 2, hence are we sweetly and admirably refreshed. Find thou
emptiness or want of grace? fly to this fullness, but observe the diverse
manner. To the head is given the spirit in all fullness: to us members, of that
fullness, Ioh. 1. 16. To him beyond all measure: to us according to measure.

II. That Jesus Christ is the right and undoubted King of his Church of whom
David was but a shadow. Use. 2. Christ the true King of the Church. And 9.
ways more excellent then David. 1. Original.
And it will be worth our labor to enquire how far the truth exceeds the
type. 1. For original, David's kingdom and all other Kings and kingdoms are
mediately from men, either from some mean family, as Jshais, or some greater
house in some corner of the earth: But the kingdom of Christ is immediately and
unchangeably from heaven. Dan. 2. 44. the God of heaven shall raise up a
kingdom, that is immediately; for mediatly all kingdoms, Kings, and power is
from him. 2. In Unction.
All they are anointed. 1. by men, 2. with material oil. 3. to be temporary
Saviors. 4. from temporary dangers. But Christ's annoynting was by the Spirit
of God, with more divine and excellent oil above all his fellows, Psalm. 45.
7. that he might be a spiritual and eternal Savior; a Jesus saving his
people from their sins, and such spiritual evils as pertain to the life to
come. 3. Their titles are stately and glorious. David as an Angel of God,
Titles.
as the woman of Tekoah said, so Caesar Augustus; Charles the great,
Constantine and Alexander the great, to set out their glory. But all these are
nothing to the true and undoubted title of Jesus Christ: Rexreg^, and Dominus
dominantium.
who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. And if this were too
little he has another, for he is God and man in one Person: our Immanuel, a
style too high for Pope or Potentate, for men or Angels, Isay 7. 14. 4. Their
Scepters are of metal, gold or silver, Scepters.
and by them they save or slay innocent or nocent: But his Scepter is but
verbal, which he holds in his mouth, Rev. 19. 15.
the word and breath of his mouth more pure then the gold of Ophir, more potent
then all the Scepters of all Kings put together: By this he slayes the wicked.
Hos. 6. 5. I slew them with the word of my mouth. 2. These. 2. 8. he shall slay
that wicked man of sin with the breath of his mouth. Other Kings by their
Scepters can kill men, but cannot make them alive again when they have done:
but Christ by his word can quicken and make alive dead souls and bodies. They
by theirs can be dreadful to men: Christ by his drives back State.
1. Their banners and ensigns express their noble acts, and the honorable
exployts of them and their progenitors, which are glorious in the eyes of men:
Christ's banner for his kingdom of grace is his Cross, or rather the Gospel,
a doctrine of the Cross, to the world foolishness or baseness; but in his
kingdom of glory, the sign of the son of man, that is, such glory and power
as agrees to none else. 2. Their servants and attendants must be rich, stately,
noble, and the sons of great Princes must be nearest to attend them: Christ
Jesus (in contempt of what the world admireth) will have his servants poor,
meek, lowly; not such lofty Lords as so far excel the Emperor in worldly
glory as the Sun the Moon, the Popes ridiculous claim; and yet they be
sons of God, heirs of heaven, brethren of Christ, and of the royallest blood
that ever was. 3. When they ride in progress, they show their state, pomp,
and worldly glory. Great Alexander gets upon his Bucephalus: Pompey triumphs
upon an Elephant: Anthony rides upon Lions, Aurelianus upon Hearts and bucks.
Christ (had his kingdom been of this world) could have imitated them. But
while he was in the world (to show that his kingdom had no similitude nor
correspondency with the pomps of earthly kingdoms) in his progress he gets
on an ass, and instead of a saddle of state he had poor men's clothes spread
under him. But when he shall show his glory, he shall ride upon the Clouds as
on an horse with such attendants and majesty as all the Potentates on earth
were never capable of, nor shall be able to behold. 6. In amplitude and
absoluteness. They will be free Absoluteness.
their will and every word of theirs must be a Law: But never was any kingdom
absolutely Monarchical but Christ's, al earthly Kings ever held in fee of him.
Prove. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign. Never any other included all kingdoms of the world in it,
and under it, but this. Never any to whom all Princes were subject, but this,
Never was there any of them which shall not be broken to pieces by this little
stone, if it stand in opposition against him, Dan. 2. 45. 7. In dispensing
Justice. Exallegatis and probatis.
1. They must judge by evidence and proof, by the sight of their eyes, and
hearing of their ears, but he shall not do so, Isa. 11. 3. For he shall try
and discern the reins, and secrets of all hearts, and shall judge things as
they be, not as they seem. David judged according to the hearing of his ear,
rashly against Mephibosheth: Christ shall not do so. 2. They can pronounce
their subjects just and innocent: but he can make them innocent and just,
communicating his own righteousness to them, which no Prince can do. 1. Cor.
1. 30. He is made to us righteousness. 8. In means of upholding and Means of
upholding it.
1. They must win holds, as David Sions fort, and enlarge themselves by force
of arms, dint of sword, multitude of soldiers: But Christ sends but twelve
unarmed poor men, who won and subdued the whole world with the word only in
their mouths, such a word as was the greatest enemy to the world, 2. Cor. 10. 4.
and corrupt fashions of it. This is the weapon mighty under God to cast down
holds. 2. They, if they want men, money, munition, must despair of attaining
or retaining their rights: But Christ's kingdom (being neither set up, nor held
up by military power) shall be upheld by the invisible and secret power of the
spirit. If all worldly power be against it, never despair, Things to be
attained.
In them the best things are honor, pleasure, external prosperity, Romans 14.
17.
and this for a time: But Christ's Kingdom stands not in meat or drink, but in
righteousness, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, in grace here, and
glory hereafter. The wealth of Christ's subject is to be rich in grace, rich in
good works, his honor to be of the stock and lineage of Christ, his pleasure a
patient and painful expectation of the pleasures at Gods right hand. And these
being eternal, the kingdom of Christ must needs be eternal: now this being
the glory of the kingdom of Christ, we have need of faith to discern it, and a
great measure of humility before we can resolve to become subjects of it. The
thief on the Cross asking Christ to remember him in his Kingdom, Augustine
asks him: What Royalty do thou see? Quidregiu^ vides? videsne coronam alia^
qua^ spinea^, sceptum aliud quam clavos, alia^ purpuram quam sanguinem, aliu^
thronu^ qua^ cruce^, alios ministros qua^ carnifices?
See thou any other crown then that of thorns, any other Scepter then Iron
nails, any other purple then blood, any other Throne then a wooden Cross, any
other guard then executioners? Was there now so great faith in Israel? Let our
faith touch the top of this Scepter, let us submit our selves to his word for
the present, and cast our eye beyond the present upon his second coming, when
we shall see him ride upon a white horse, not upon garments but upon the
Clouds in power and great glory; entering, not Jerusalem, but the stage of the
whole world; to render unto every man (even Kings) according as they have done
in the flesh good or evil.

III. David was called and anointed to be King, Use 3. How God brings his
servants to honor.
but between that and the installing, or enjoying of his Kingdom, he had many
troubles, doubts, and fears that made him stagger, and say: I shall surely one
day fall by the hand of Saul: So was the true David Jesus Christ anointed with
the fullness of the Spirit, and called to be King of his Church, but before his
installation into his Kingdom, many afflictions, persecutions, fears, yea
death it self overtooke him for our sakes, Isa. 53. Wherein he said, My God
why have thou forsaken me? So must it be with us, who must be content to suffer
before we can reign; to be crowned first with thorns as Christ was, and stand
with Christ on Mount Golgotha, before we come to Mount Olivet, see Acts 14. 22.
It is so ordained by God, V^per angusta ad cugustu^, per spinas ad rosas, per
motu^ ad quiete^, per procellas ad portu^, per virtu^e^ ad gloria^, per arma ad
triumphu^, per bella ad pace^, per cru^e^ ad c^lu^ contendamus.
that we should make our way through a strait to state, through thorns to
Roses, through troubles to rest, through storms to the haven, through virtue
to glory, through conquest to triumph, through war to peace, through the
Cross to heaven. And this process God the father strictly observed with his
beloved son, as was necessary, Luke 24. 26. Phil. 2. 8, 9, he was humbled,
therefore God exalted him. And this is the Lords honor, to honor his servants
raised from the dunghill; that they may know the way to glory lies by humility.

IV. It was ever the lot of the Church to have in it secret and inbred enemies,
Use 4. Church ever pestered with homebred enemies.
as David and Christ had; even such as eat bread at his table, and dipped in
the dish; and these have always prooved more mischievous then open and
foreign enemies. The Church ever had hypocrites and false brethren, Satan's
spies; who, professing the same Christ and religion, eating bread at the same
table of the Lord, and making show of friendship in the communion of Saints,
joining in the hearing of the word and prayer, yet watch the haunts of Gods
servants to spy their weakness, and where they lie open to advantage. Every
one sees they advantage not themselves, but by all means undermine the Gospel
and professors; so as the silly dove of Christ can find no rest for the soale
of her foot. And never was the Church so wounded as in the house of her
friends. Cant. 1. 5. The sons of my mother were angry against me. This being
the estate of the Church, to be hunted as the silly hare from one Mush to
another, and no where safe, it must make us 1. more wary. 2. desire our rest.
3. love that promise, Come with me from Lebanon, Cant. 4. 8.
etc.

David. Comfort to the Church, in 3. things.
1. We have strong deliverer and deliverance. David pulled the sheep out of
the Lions mouth, and the Lamb out of the paw of the Bear, 1. Sam. 17. Christ
the true David has delivered his chosen flock out of the power of Satan,
death, and damnation. 1. Cor. 15. 27.
3. Be contented to be rejected of all sorts of men: not enemies only but of
brethren. So was David, so Christ, and the servant is not better then the
Master. It was ever the lot of truth to be rejected of the builders, as was
David, as was Christ: few nobles, few wise: nay many great Rabbis (professing
the key of knowledge) were greatest enemies to the truth, as the truth is in
Christ, that is, to the sincere profession and practice of Christianity. Nay
the basest sort made mouths and scorned them both: And are there not now such
as would scorn out the truth of grace were it possible? 3. Though Christ the
chief corner stone may be refused, he cannot be remooved. David must be King
against all the hearts of his enemies. So Christ shall keep his place and
headship against the gates of hell: he is a King everlasting in his Church, and
of his Kingdom shall be no end. Mat. 28. 20.
He is a King ever present in his Church, and needs no Vicar, nor has put it
off to his pretended Vicar, who claims to be King of Priests and Princes. He
is a King present in his Church, not as Baal among his worshippers either
asle^pe, or in his journey, or otherwise taken up, but ever intent for the
safety of the Church, watching ever to overturne the open power and private
policy plotted and planted against his kingdom. Let us with faith and hope
ever lift our eyes up to his banner, and stand close to our victorious
Captain. For as Soldiers losing the sight of their Ensign are in extreme
hazard of confusion: so we, if we suffer Christ to slip out of our eyes and
hearts, hazard the loss of our salvation.

CHAP. XI.
10. Solomon a type of Christ: in 6. things.
I. IN person and condition. Six things wherein Solomon typified Christ.
Both Salomons; both Iedidiahs, that is, beloved of God; both Kings of Israel,
both Kings in Jerusalem, both Preachers in Jerusalem, both somes of David, yea
both sons of God. Person.
2. Sam. 7. 14. I will be his father, and he shall be my son: But with this
difference, Solomon was the son of God by adoption and grace: the true
Solomon by nature and eternal generation.

II. Solomon was a peacemaker, full of peace. 1. Chro. Pacisicus.
and I will give him rest from his enemies; therefore his name is Solomon, and
I will send peace and quietness on Israel in his days. A notable type of our
Solomon, who himself is the Prince of peace, Isay 9. 6.
whose Scepter is a Gospel of peace, whose subjects are sons of peace, whose
kingdom stands in righteousness, joy, peace, etc: at whose birth the Angels
sang, Peace on earth. But with difference, Solomon could preserve only outward
peace: but Christ makes up our peace with God and all Creatures, and brings
sweet peace and upholds it in our consciences. 1 Kings 4. 25. Solomon procured
that in his days all Israel and Judah dwelt without fear, every man under his
Vine and figtree, in respect of outward tranquillity and security: but our
Solomon, that every believer is redeemed from enemies to serve God without
fear of sin, Luke 1. 74.
Satan, hell, damnation. Solomon brought peace but could not establish it in
his own days, much loss after him; for presently after, the kingdom was
rent into pieces: But our Solomon brings a peace which none shall take away.

Solomon excelled all other men in wisdom and knowledge, 1 King. 4. 29, 30.
But Christ is the wisdom of the father, Wisdom. Christ greater then Solomon,
in wisdom, 5. things.
and far excells Solomon; as in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2. 3. For 1. Solomon had wisdom by donation and gift: Christ's
was native and proper. 2. Solomon by all his wisdom knew not men's thoughts:
but Christ knew what was in man, Ioh. 2. 25. 3. Solomon though very wise in
himself could not infuse his wisdom into others to make them so: But Jesus
Christ is made of God our wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. because he is not only our
head as King, but as Mediator, unto whom we as members are mystically united.
4. Solomon was not so wise in the beginning of his reign, nor in the end: but
our true Solomon was never destitute of the wisdom of God. 5. Salomons wise
sayings have commended his wisdom in all the Church of God; the fame of his
wise speeches and actions spread through the World: But much more has the fame
of Christ's doctrine and miracles, Joh. 7. 46.
Mat. 4. 24. And never man spoke like our Solomon, by his adversaries
confession; therefore not Solomon.

Solomon was a type of Christ in that he was a King of greatest royalty, wealth
and glory that ever was. Royal glory.
He so enriched his subjects, that silver and gold were as common to them as
stones in the streets, 1. King. 3. 13. no King on earth was like Solomon: but
Solomon was no King to Christ. In Christ, far greater and better.
Cant. 3. 11. Come forth ye daughters of Sion, look upon King Solomon with the
crown wherewith his mother crowned him etc. That was (no doubt) royal and
glorious to behold; but we shall see all Salomons glory nothing to Christ's. For
1. Solomon had but one Crown: Revel. 19. 12.
but Christ has many Crowns on his head, 2. The maids of Sion admire Solomon
for his, and reverence him: but all the Saints in earth and heaven honor and
worship Christ with divine honor, which is given to none but God. 3. Solomon
without wealth and abundance cannot enrich his subjects: but Christ out of
poverty enricheth his: He being rich became poor to enrich us. 4. Solomon
enricheth his people with silver, gold, and earthly wealth: Christ the true
Solomon does his with heavenly and spiritual wealth; as of wisdom, the price
of which is above silver; of faith much more precious then gold; and all other
graces to which all worldly wealth is but as stones in the street, yea dung and
dross. 5. Salomons throne was set above all the thrones of the Kings of the
earth: but Christ's far above Salomons. He is the great King of glory exalted
unto the right hand of God; and rules not a small corner of the earth, but
has all power in heaven and earth. Neither does Christ's humility and abasement
hinder his glory; for when he was lowest he showed greater glory in the least
of his many miracles, then Solomon in all his royalty. Nay more, he was more
triumphant upon the Cross, and rode in more magnificence then ever Solomon did
in all his golden Chariots.

V. Solomon was a type of Christ in 1. building, dedicating, In templo
1. aedificando. 2. dedicando. 3. constituendo

3. ordering the Temple. 1. In the building. 1. Solomon according to the
wisdom and large heart which God gave him, built God an house wherein he dwelt
at Jerusalem; for God kept house and fire in Sion, Isa. 31. 9. and Solomon set
him up a standing house. Structure.
Our true Solomon builds an house for God, even for the blessed Trinity to dwell
in, Joh. 14. 23.
Not a material house of stones, or of gold, silver, wood, marble; but a
spiritual house of living stones. And as the house is spiritual: 1 Peter 2. 5.
so are the means and instruments he uses. His rule is the word of God; Psa.
19. 4. Their line is gone forth through all the earth, and their words into the
ends of the world. The hammer by which he hewes and polisheth these rugged
stones is the same word or doctrine of the Law. Jer. 23. 29.
The cement by which he couples them to the head, is faith, and to the members,
is love and charity. 2. Solomon being to build his Temple could not find matter
enough for his building in his own country of Judea, but sent abroad to Hiram
a Gentile, and to Pervaim (now Peru as some think) and to other far and
remote parts for supply: So our Solomon for his spiritual building gathers
matter not only out of Judea his own ancient people, but contracts friendship
with the Gentiles, and these come in out of the most remote parts of all the
world to set forward that building, therefore the Church is now Catholic. 3.
Solomon prepared great stones to lay in the foundation of the house: 1. King.
5. 17. but as great and costly as they were they could not uphold that house,
but it must fall to ruin and destruction: Our true Solomon by inimitable art,
lays himself, a foundation in Sion: Isay 28. 16.
an elect, precious, and chief corner stone, Upon which firm foundation, he
so aptly lays and knits every living stone, that is, every believer, that all
the gates of hell cannot prevail against any one of them, Mat. 16. 18. 4.
Solomon in that building prepared and hewed stones in Mount Lebanon, 1. King.
6. 7. and being so squared and fit, not an axe or hammer, nor any tool of Iron
was heard while the house was a building. Our Solomon admits no stone into his
building which is not first prepared and initiated by the word and Sacraments,
and being fitted, lays them on the foundation without any more shaking by
hammer or hatchet, and knits them to the other stones by the durable cement of
Christian love and charity, so as now the noise of contention, nor blows of
bitterness and hatred are heard among them any more. Dedication.
2. In dedication of the Temple. 1. Solomon consecrated that house to the
service of God by solemn prayer, imploring his eye of protection upon it, and
his presence with it upon all occasions and necess^ties, 1. King. 8. 14. Our
Solomon has also dedicated his house, and by solemn prayer commended it to
the care and custody of his heavenly father: John 17.
Nothing needful for his Church has he forgotten to procure for it, not
only by that most effectual and meritorious prayer, but also by his
continual intercession now in heaven for it. 2. In that dedication Solomon
framed a most excellent prayer, the form of which is registered in Scripture:
but our Solomon has delivered us a form and pattern of prayer: which is a
great part of the riches of the new Testament above the old. Order set.
3. In ordering the Temple, that is, in the constitution of Gods true and
public worship in that Temple, in appointing the several offices and officers
of it. A type of Jesus Christ who ascending on high appointed the officers of
his Church; some Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, and some Pastors,
and Teachers for the building up of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 1. Cor.
12. 5, there are many administrations, but the same Lord.

VI. Solomon was a type of Christ in wise dispensing Administration of Justice.
2. of execution or manifesting them. 1. For the gifts, they are notably
signified in Salomons Throne, which was exalted above all the Thrones of all
Princes; Salomons Throne: six things opened.
described, 1. King. 10. 18. 1. The matter was Ivory and gold wherewith it
shined: Signifying the sincere and upright disposition of Solomon to justice
and equity, shunning all corruption and by-respects which make men pervert
Justice. And as these virtues made Salomons throne to shine: so the royal
throne of Christ is a throne of Justice, a great white Throne, Rev. 20. 11.
Nothing but sincerity and purity proceeds thence. He justifies no wicked
person or cause, nor takes the ungodly by the hand. 2. The state of it. The
King ascended to it by six stayres, signifying that the King rises above all
his subjects many degrees in practice of many virtues; wisdom, prudence,
justice, fortitude, piety: So Christ's Throne is infinitely exalted above all
Princes, above men and Angels, dominations, principalities, thrones, and set at
the right hand of God; and himself as infinitely transcendeth all creatures in
practice of all graces, in perfection of all holiness. 3. The figure was
round: signifying the perfection and simplicity of the mind in the Judge
discerning causes; who could not abide any deceitful, fraudulent, or
hypocritical courses or corners: Such is the Throne of Christ, in whom was
never found guile nor deceit, neither can he abet, or not hate it in any. 4.
There were two pillars or bars to bear up the arms of Solomon: signifying
the rewards and defense of good men, and the punishment and repressing of evil
men by the power of his arm, whereby Kings and kingdoms are sustained: So our
Lord Jesus upholds his kingdom by reward and punishment; Premio, and paena.
and in the last day shall set the sheep at his right hand, and the goats on
his left. 5. Two Lions of gold standing by the stays: noting the power and
fortitude of the King, whose strength is as the strength of Lions against
enemies, and to put in execution wise and sovereign counsels. But Salomons
strength was weakness to the strength of Christ; who as a courageous Lion of
the tribe of Judah shall tear and spoil his enemies, and none shall rescue,
Hos. 5. 14. 6. The foot stool of it was of gold, 2. Chr. 9. 18. to note the
freedom of the King from covetousness; that he ought to have his wealth under
his feet, and so master them as they neither overcome nor corrupt him: So
Christ the Judge of the world most perfectly despised the world; and at his
appearing shall set it under his feet and burn it. 2. For administering
according to those gifts. Solomon did with such admirable wisdom judge
between the two harlots for the living child, as all Israel hearing the
judgment feared the King; for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to
do justice, 1. King. 3. 28. But our Solomon is the just Judge of all the
world, who shall pass a righteous sentence between the godly and the wicked,
in that great and terrible day. Mat. 25. when all flesh shall see and admire the
wisdom and power of God in him to do justice.

For application, briefly.

I. A greater then Solomon is here, Use. 1.
Luke 11. 31. 1. Hence our Savior persuades to come to him to partake of his
wisdom, Duties to Christ, our Solomon.
wealth, peace, grace. But the Queen of the South shall rise up against this
generation. For she 1. a woman of weak sex. 1 Hear him.
2. a Queen enjoying pleasures at home. 3. undertook a long journey from the
ends of the earth, Mat. 12. 42. 4. Set aside the weighty affairs of her
kingdom, the charge of her journey and gifts to Solomon not small, 1. King.
10. 10: the dangers, weariness, and all to hear the wisdom of Solomon, yet
as a Gentile did all this: But many men and women professing Christianity will
not step over their thresholds to hear the wisdom of a greater then Solomon.
Ob: If Solomon or Christ were here, we would. Sol. 1. The Jews would say so,
but would not. 2. He that hears you, hears me. 3. He that will not hear
us, would not hear Christ himself. Ob: We have business and occasions. Sol:
1. Many make occasions which might be avoided. 2. Many pretend occasions. 3.
Many have occasions, but so had this Queen, who would not be hindered from
Solomon by the weighty affairs of a kingdom. 4. Whose occasions ordinarily
hinder them, 2. Wait on him and think thy self therein happy.
they shall never taste of the supper. 2. Hence we must labor to account it
our happiness that we may have liberty to wait on the true Solomon. So the
Queen of Saba: Happy are thy servants that may attend on thee, and hear thy
wisdom. So our Savior himself: Happy are they that hear the word and keep
it. Happy we, if we saw our happiness, that we need not with such cost and
toil seek after our Solomon. For he comes to us, and knocks at the doors of
our hearts, and offers to enrich us with treasures of wisdom. Let us open our
gates that this King of glory may enter in. Let us receive the rules of wisdom
from his mouth, and consider how unhappy they are that despise the word, of
which both the Salomons were preachers.

II. Comfort that Christ is the true Solomon 1. Great were the blessings which
Solomon procured to Israel, Use 2.
but all temporary, and outward: but our Solomon procures greater, Fourefold
comfort in our Solomon.
spiritual and eternal. 2. Solomon prays, and is heard for all that pray in
the temple, 1. King. 8. Christ prays, and merits that all prayers of Saints be
heard, Ioh. 17. 3. Solomon could not be present in all his Kingdom at once.
Cant. 8. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard, and let it out to dressers: verse. 12. but
my vineyard is set before mine eyes. Himself still walks in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks, and watches for the good of it. 4. All the excellencies
which now we see and enjoy in Christ, are nothing to them we shall see, as
the Queen of Saba, half was not told me in my country. So as the glory,
delight, pleasure, which our Solomon now gives us must affect our hearts to
renounce carnal delights, and pursue those that are above. What is earth to
heaven, that is, faith to fruition? This is that, Cant. 3. 7. Behold his bed is
better then Salomons, which was for price and safety most excellent; for
threescore valiant men stood about it every night. But the spiritual marriage
bed in the marriage chamber (the kingdom of glory) surpasses all
comprehension: all sweetened with incense of holiness, happiness, glory,
immortality, better then the best perfumes, there is perfect security, and
lasting joy on their heads for ever.

CHAP. XII.
II. Jonah a type of Christ: in 4. respects.
Jonah was a type of Christ, Four things delivered in which Jena^ was a type.
as Mat. 12. 39, No sign shall be given them, but the sign of the Prophet Jonah.

I. In his name and office. Both Ionahs, both doves, one in name, the other in
nature. Both mournful, one in a sea of sorrows shut in the whales belly, the
other a Name and office.
and such as no man ever sustained and overcame. Both Prophets, Jonah sent to
preach repentance to Niniveh: Christ the true Jonah, the great Prophet of the
Church was sent to preach the same doctrine to the world Mat. 4. 17. Then Jesus
began to preach and say, Amend your lives etc. Both of them in express words
must signify to their hearers, that without repentance they were in state of
perdition.

II. In respect of his death and suffering. In the Kind of death.
2. manner, 3. fruit. 1. The kind; it was a willing death, a free will
offering. For as Jonah when the tempest was raised, freely offered himself to
death when the Mariners would feign have saved him, Ion. 1. 12. take me, and
cast me into the sea that the tempest may cease: So, when the storm of Gods
wrath was boistrous against the sins of mankind, Jesus Christ our Jonah
offered himself to the death; for he had power either to lay down his life,
or to retain it, Ioh. 10. 18. No man takes away my life from me, but I lay it
down of my self. Ioh. 18. 5, Egosum. Manner.
I am he. 2. The terrible and dreadful manner. For as Jonah was swallowed up of
the Whale who made but one morsel of him: So Christ was swallowed up of death,
and seemed wholly devoured of the curse of God. And as the one cried in the
Whales belly, and out of the belly of hell, Ion. 2. 2, and verse. 4. I am cast
away out of thy sight: So the other cries upon the Cross, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Both of them were in so extraordinary death, as in their
sense they were in the deepest Hell. And fruit.
3. The fruit of it. 1. The appeasing of the wrath of God his Father. For, as
Jonah once cast into the Sea, the winds were stilled, the sea ceased from her
raging, Chap. 1. 15. and there was a great calm: So Christ by his death
pacified his Fathers wrath, stilled the rage of Satan, abolished the horror of
death, which otherwise had never been still and calm toward us. 2. To save
his fellows. For as Jonah must be cast into the sea to save his fellows from
drowning, Chap. 1. 12: So must Christ be overwhelmed with the waves of his
Fathers displeasure, and (as Jonah) be put to death by those that should have
preserved him: but not for any desert of his own, but to save his companions
and brethren in the same ship with him from death and drowning: For so was the
signification of his name, Jesus; so himself affirmed, Matt. 20. 28. The Son
of man came to give his life a ran some for many. So also Caiaphas prophesied:
It is fit that one man die for the people, and that the whole Nation perish
not, Ioh 11. 50.

Jonah we have a type of Christ's burial, noted by Christ himself. Burial.
For as Jonah was in the belly of the fish, Matt. 12. 40.
three days and three nights: So must Christ be detained in the grave, and
lie under burial three days and three nights, (parts put for the whole, as
perhaps also in Jonah) till the case seemed desperate in both; not only in
their own apprehensions (as I have before showed) but in the disciples
apprehension. Luke 24. 21. We thought this should have been he that should
have delivered Israel, and behold this is the third day.

Jonah was a manifest type of Christ in his resurrection. For, Resurrection.
1. As Jonah was taken into the belly of the Whale whole, and passed through
the ranges and armies of teeth as sharp as spears, without breaking or
crushing one bone of him, or the least limb of his body: So Jesus Christ passed
through the strait gate of death, but as one bone of him was not broken; the
special and extraordinary providence of God in both of them watching the whole
business. 2. As the Lord spoke unto the fish, and the fish against his will
must cast up Jonah on dry ground: So the belly of the earth can keep Christ no
longer then the third day (no more then the belly of the Whale could keep
Jonah) his blessed body must see no corruption. 3. As Jonah returned from his
grave with a song of praise and thankesgiving, Chap. 2: So Jesus Christ
returned to life from his grave with a song of triumph and victory,
fore-prophecied, Hos. 13. 14. and accomplished, 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death where
is thy sting! O grave where is thy victory! 4. As Jonah an Hebrew goes not to
preach to the Ninivites, being Gentiles, till after his resurrection out of the
belly of the Whale: So Jesus Christ an Hebrew, not till after his resurrection,
leaves the obstinate Jews; and by his Apostles ministry and preaching turns
himself to the Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. 5. As Jonah after this delivery, went
and preached the doctrine of repentance with great fruit and success, to the
conversion of all Niniveh, and preventing the fearful wrath denounced to come
within forty days: So our Lord Jesus after his resurrection and ascension,
sending out his Apostles to preach repentance and remission of sins, mightily
prevailed, and suddenly converted many nations of the Heathen, and brought them
to faith and repentance.

For Application:

I. Let us acknowledge a greater then Jonah here, Use. 1.
Matthew. 12. 41. Lest as the Ninivits shall rise up against the Jews, Repent at
the Ministry of his servants.
they rise also against us if we convert not, nor repent at Christ's doctrine
as they did at Ionahs. For 1. Who are they to us? Motives.
They barbarous Heathens, and Gentiles, never instructed before: we have been
trained in the Scriptures from childhood. 2. What were their means to ours?
Jonah preached but three days to them: Christ has preached, not three days
as he, nor three years as to the Jews; but above threescore years. Christ a
far more excellent Preacher.
He preached one sermon: Christ a thousand. 3. What was their Preacher to ours?
1. Jonah was a weak man: Christ is God and man. 2. Jonah a sinful man, cast
into the sea for his own sin: Christ an innocent man, cast into the sea for
our sin. 3. Jonah a Prophet, a servant: Christ the Lord of all the holy
Prophets, therefore of Jonah. 4. Jonah a stranger to them: Christ of our own
kindred and family. 5. Jonah preached unwillingly: Christ preached freely, and
spent himself for us. 6. Jonah preached nothing but destruction of them and
their City: Christ a sweet doctrine of grace, salvation, and the promise of a
kingdom of heaven. 7. Jonah came indeed out of the belly of the Whale, but did
no miracle for confirmation of his doctrine: Christ came both from the bosom
of the Father, and from the heart of the earth, and did innumerable signs and
miracles in which we see his glory. 8. Jonah a most angry and impatient man,
would feign die because the Ninevits did not: Christ a mirror of patience will
die least his hearers should. 9. To Jonah no Prophet gave witness, or foretold
of him: To Christ all the Prophets gave witness, Act. 10. 43. and spoke before
of him. Shall now Nineveh repent in sackcloth and ashes by Ionahs Ministry of
three days; and shall not we by Christ's constant Ministry of threefore
years? Shall Nineveh condemn Judea for not acknowledging a greater then
Jonah; and shall it not condemn us not repenting? whose sin shall be far
greater then that of the Jews, who rejected Christ in his abasement and
humiliation; but we reject the Lord of glory, now exalted.

II. In the type and truth the freedom of Gods favor in the calling of the
Gentiles. Use. 2.
Jonah was a preacher of grace to the Gentiles: Vocation of the Gentiles.
and Christ was a preacher of grace not to Jews only, Romans 9. 6.
but the Gentiles also: being given for a light to the Gentiles, that he might
be the salvation of Gentiles to the farthest parts of the earth. For 1. God is
not the God of Jews only, but of Gentiles also. Romans 3. 29. 2. Christ was the
promised seed in whom all nations must be blessed. Genesis 22. 18. Hence comes in
our title to grace, and not from any desert of ours. For what is amiable in the
wild Olive? It is only Gods free calling, who calls her that was not beloved,
to be beloved.

Object. If we be grafted into Christ, and received into grace, all is well,
we are in state good enough.

Sol. Some are grafted into the Church by profession of mouth only, as all
were not Israel that were of Israel: and some planted into it by the faith of
the heart. The former are not altered from their wild nature: the other are
renewed to the Image of Christ. Therefore let none content themselves with
external profession, joining in the word, sacraments, and prayer; but labor
for soundness of faith and grace, by which only we become branches of the
true Olive; whereas to be hanged as a scien, by a thread of profession, will not
keep it from withering.

III. In both we have a certain Emblem, Use. 3.
and proof of our resurrection. Our resurrection assured to us.
Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jonah and Jesus be in us, he
shall also quicken our mortal bodies, and if the head be risen the members
must rise also. For as God spoke to the fish, and the fish gave up Jonah as
from the dead: so shall God speak to the earth and sea and all creatures, and
they shall give up their dead. Isa. 26. 19. he shall say to the earth give, and
to the sea restore my sons and daughters, and they that are as seed under
clods shall awake and sing: And these dry bones shall be again covered with
sinews, flesh, and skin, as Ezekiel. 37. 6. For as it was impossible for Christ to
be held ever under death, Acts 2. 24. as impossible is it for his members. Let
us comfort our selves in the approach of death to our selves, or our friends,
and by rising before hand from the grave of our sins, provide for a blessed
and joyful resurrection. 2 King. 13. 21. a dead body, cast into Elishaes
grave, quickened: so our souls and bodies.

IV. The wonderful power and wisdom of God, Use. 4. Power and wisdom of God
to be admired.
that can draw light out of darkness. Ionahs casting over board into the sea
was the occasion of converting the Mariners: Even so Christ's death converted
many of them that were causes and authors of it. Acts 2. 36. 41. And as the
Mariners lives were saved by casting Jonah into the sea: so all believers by
the death of Jesus Christ. 1. Let us not measure Gods works by carnal senses.
This made the two disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24. to make but a bad
argument: He is crucified, and behold this is the third day; therefore though
we thought he should have redeemed Israel, we are deceived. Whereas faith
would have made a clean contrary conclusion: He is crucified, and this is the
third day; therefore he is the Redeemer. The Jews, not knowing the Scriptures,
and power of God, are hardened against Jesus Christ, expecting a great Emperor,
as Julius Caesar, or some great Monarch; not able to see that by so base a
death, life could be procured. The carnal protestants are held off from the
true embracing of Christ, because they see the truth and sincerity of Christ
every where so resisted and hated by great Rulers and Doctors; as if it had not
been so in Christ's own person and Ministry; or as if Christ was not set as a
sign or butt of contradiction, whereas, therefore it must needs be he. 2. Let
us admire Gods power and wisdom, and patiently with Jonah expect after
darkness light. And seeing God can turn the greatest evil into the greatest
good of his Church; let us labor to make benefit of all evils happening to our
selves and others. 1. Even of our sins themselves, to make us more humble and
watchful for time to come. 2. Of our sufferings, as Jonah and Christ learned
obedience by the things they suffered.

V. In the type and truth we have, Use 5. Terror of sin, even in Gods own
children.
first terror on the one hand, secondly comfort on the other. 1. We see the
weight of sin committed pressed Jonah into the deepest sea of evils; and
sin imputed thrust Christ into a deeper sea, even the deepest hell. Both seem
left of God in the hands of death; both cry out as left in the depth of hell.
1. Do thou run from God and duty, and though thou be Gods child, thou
may find God pursuing thee, as if he were an utter and irreconcilable
enemy. 2. Make as light a reckoning of sin as thou can, the least of them
shuts us or Christ out of heaven. Does Christ undertake thy sin, he sees not
heaven till he die for it? Sin imputed will not let Christ enter into heaven,
but by his own blood, yea through Hell. Thy sin repented of held Christ, an
innocent, out of heaven till he dyed for it: but where shall ungodly and
impenitent sinners appear? 2. This same collation affords us sundry grounds of
comfort. And comfort.
1. Both seem forsaken, neither of them was so; but both of them go to his
God. There is no time nor place wherein the child of God may not boldly go to
God, and pray to his God, and say: My God, my God. 2. No deep is so deep but
Gods hand can reach help into it, even into the Whales belly, Vhiputabatur
interitus, ibi custodia.
and heart of the earth. 3. The extremest misery and death it self work to
good to the godly. See it in Jonah: Where was feared p^rdition, there was found
preservation. The Whales belly was a prison indeed, but to preserve him alive;
a deep gulf and a sea, but to save him from drowning. Can any man save a man
from drowning by casting him into the sea? but God can. 4. When the case seems
most desperate, then the Lord steps in to help; when no help can be expected
any other way, after three days and three nights Jonah must be cast up, and
Christ raised up. Never fear extremities, but then exercise thy faith most,
for then is God the nearest: however, trust in him though he kill thee, Job 13.
15. 5. The deepest sorrows of Gods children end in greatest joy. God has a
dry ground for Jonah after a sea of misery: a glorious ascending for Christ
after his lowest descent. Whatsoever the sorrowful songs be that Gods people
sing here in Egypt or Babel, they shall end in songs of joy and victory, and
be changed into the songs of Moses and the Lamb. Rev. 15. 3.

CHAP. XIII.
The first borne: Types of Christ, 4. ways.
HAving spoken of holy types in sundry special persons; now of personal types
in some ranks and orders of men, Four ranks of sanctified ones under the Law.
sanctified and specially separated to the Lord. Of whom, 1. Some were
sanctified by birth, the firstborn: 2. Some by office, Priests, especially
the High Priest: 3. Some by vow, as Nazarites: 4. Some by ceremony, as clean
persons, legally cleansed from uncleanenesse. Of these the first borne were
special types of Jesus Christ.

I. As they were Gods peculiar. Exodus 13. 2. Sanctify it is mine.

Quest. How were they Gods? The first born, types in four respects.


Answ. 1. By common nature. But so were all both first and last borne through
the world. For all the world and inhabitants of it are his, Exration^
Communis naturae. Communis gratiae. Juris singularis.

Psalm. 24. 1. 2. By common grace. So all the people of the Jews by reason of
common grace were his, with whom God had plighted his gracious covenant, which
was made to Abraham and all his seed, wheresoever they were borne; of whom he
made choice as his peculiar, though all the earth was his. Exodus 4. 22. Israel
is my first borne, that is, not only the first people and nation that first
professed the true worship of God, and had priority of the Gentiles who were
younger brethren; but the first borne by a special election and choice of that
from all other people; whom he would accept as his beloved in the Messiah the
first born of all creatures, and among whom he would stablish his covenant, and
raise up his worship, thus he dealt not with other nations. 3 By a special
right. The first borne of Israel were Gods by a singular right as no other
children of any other family were, namely by right of that singular deliverance
of all the first borne when he destroyed all the first borne of Egypt. And
therefore presently after that destruction he makes challenge of them, Exodus
13. 2. Thus is Jesus Christ the Lords first borne by a singular right, not
common to man or Angel, whether we respect his nature or office. Primogenius,
ante que^ nullus. Vnig enitus, post quem nullus.
1. In his nature he is first born, as son of God, the first begotten of all
creatures, Col. 1. 15. begot before all Creation. And thus he is not only the
first begotten, before whom there was none; but the only begotten after whom
is none. John 1. 14. the only begotten Son of the Father; the first borne
without a second or brother. 2. In his office he was first borne by special
prerogative. 1. for the kind. 2. for the undertaking. 3. for the
accomplishing. 1. For the kind, in that he was Mediator, God and man in unity
of person, and the only redeemer of his Church. In this regard, Romans 8. 29. he
is called the first borne among many brethren. Which phrase notes quality, not
equality with him, some similitude but no parity between him and believers. He
holds his birthright as the Son of God by nature; and we by grace made the
sons of God, he disdaines not to call us brethren. 2. For undertaking his
office. 1. In his incarnation, he was the first borne of his Mother. Hieron.
advers. H^lvid.
Mat. 1. 25. till she had brought forth her first borne Son; not in respect of
any that his mother had after him, but because she had none before. 2. For the
strange manner. He was the first borne of a virgin, and so never had brother.
3. He was the first borne without sin. 3. For accomplishing his office in his
resurrection. He is called the first begotten or first borne of the dead two
ways. 1. In respect of his father who first begot him from the dead. Whence
his resurrection is called a begetting. Act. 13. 33. thou art my son, this
day have I begotten thee; the Apostle applying it to the resurrection of
Christ. And had not the Father thus begotten his son from the dead, we had
never been raised from death. 2. In regard of himself, whose privilege it was
to raise up himself from the dead by his own power, Romans 1. 4. As himself
said, I have power to take up my life again. And being risen, he was the first
that ascended in body and soul into heaven. Thus consider Christ, as God, as
Mediator, as incarnate, as raised, and ascended; he is the Lords first born,
and the birthright belongs to no other.

Isa. 9. 6. Father of eternity. 2 the office of a father. 1. He supplies the
means of spiritual life, as they of natural. 2. He nurtures and teaches
his Church. 3. He provides for the present, and bestows the inheritance of
eternal life.

brethren, and were chief in office and authority, rulers in the house after
their fathers, and Priests in the family, before the Leviticall order was
established. Genesis 27. 29. when Isaac blessed Jacob for Esau, supposing him the
first borne, one part of it was: Be Lord over thy brethren, and let all thy
mothers children honor thee. So all the sheaves must bow to Joseph's. And Genesis
49. 8. when Jacob blesses Judah, this is added as his right: Thy fathers
sons shall bow down unto thee. Here in they were special types of Christ;
who in all things must have the pre-eminence as first in time, in order, in
precedence, first in the excellency and dignity of his person. Of whom, Heb. 1.
6.
coming into the world, was said: Let all the Angels of God worship him. And
for glory and authority he sits on his fathers throne, the only King of kings,
who has a name above all names. Phil. 2. 9. And Heb. 2. 9. we see Jesus
crowned with glory and honor, the head of the mystical body, the Prince and
head of all his brethren. And besides he is the high Priest of our profession,
by offering up himself a sacrifice for us. Thus Christ is first in order, in
glory, in Priesthood.

IV. The first borne had a double portion in goods, Deuteronomy. 21 17. Signifying 1.
The plenitude of the spirit and grace in Christ, Psalm. 45. 7.
who was anointed with oil of gladness above all his fellows. 2. The
pre-eminence of Christ in his glorious inheritance, advanced in glory and
majesty incomprehensible by all creatures.

I. Out of the occasion of the Law of the first borne, Use. 1. Every mercy is
the greater engagement unto God.
learn, that the more God does for any man, the more he ought to conceive
himself to be the Lords, and the more right and interest the Lord challenges
in him. For therefore the first borne were his by a special right, because he
had not only delivered them out of Egypt, as others; but from the special
plague of Aegypts first borne. Special mercies call for special service. More
mercies are more bonds of obedience. And new mercies are so many new cords to
draw and fasten us to God and duty. Is it not reason, that the more it pleases
the Lord to become ours, the more we should become his? Ought not great
benefits become great binders? And should not great love be a great loadstone
of love? Should not strong cords of Gods love draw us strongly to love our God?
Examine the increase of Gods mercies on thee in all kinds, and whether they
have had this fruit, to make thee more dutiful. Has God multiplied blessing
on thy head that thou should bless thy self in wickedness? Has God
continued mercy that thou should continue sin? Art thou the Lords by
Creation, providence, redemption, stored with all personal kindnesses
pertaining to life and godliness, to continue a slave to sin and Satan?
Remember good Joseph's conclusion, Genesis 39. 8, 9. My master has dealt thus and
thus with me, advanced me from nothing to this estate, committed all to my
trust, kept nothing from me but thee, How then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God?

2. If Christ be the true first borne, Use 2. Honor Christ as the first born of
God,
of whom all they are but types; we must give him the honor of his birthright.
The whole Church, and all the sons of that mother must honor him; all the
sheaves of the brethren must veil and bow to his sheave. Let not the
baseness of his birth, the humility of his life, the ignominy of his death,
the shame of his cross, the poverty of his professors, the weakness and
frailty of his followers, draw our eyes aside from him (as the Jews at this
day) but acknowledge him the first borne, esteeming him (as does the Church)
the chief of ten thousand; and with the Apostle esteem to know nothing but
Christ and him crucified.

Quest. How shall we honor Christ as the first born?

Sol. 1. If we honor him with the same honor that is due to the Father, and
how.
John 5. 23. 2. Advance his estate above our own or other men's, confess and
profess his name though with loss and disfavour. 3. Depend upon him, and make
him our chief refuge, for all the family depended on the first borne for
protection, so do members on the head. 4. Greeve to offend him by sin. How
pitifully can men and women grieve for the death of their first borne? So much
more should we that our sins have pierced Gods first borne, Zach. 12. 10.

III. Here is a ground of much consolation. Use. 3. Threef^ld comfort in the
birthright.
1. In that Christ being the truth of the first borne, from him the birthright
is derived unto us believers as it was from Reuben unto Judah, and we partake
of the same birthright with our head. For here is a difference between the
type and truth of the first borne. They had all their privileges for
themselves: but Christ not for himself but for us. Whence his elect members
are called the Congregation of the first borne written in heaven, that is,
whose names are written in the book of life. And farther; the more those first
borne had, the less had the other brethren: but the more Christ has, the more
have we, seeing of his fullness we receive grace for grace. If he be strong, he
is strong for us, if rich, he is so to us. If he be Prince and Priest of his
family the Church, hereby we recover the dignity we had lost by sin; and of
slaves and vassalls of corruption, are made Kings and Priests, that is, the
first borne to God, Rev. 1. 6. If he have a double portion of the spirit, so
have we by him. Isa. 40. 2. speak to the heart of Jerusalem, her iniquity is
forgiven; she has received double at the Lords hand for all her sins, that
is, a double portion of grace and favor. As Joseph made Benjamins mess to be
doubled: so our Jesus doubles his spirit on the elect. If he have a double
portion of glory, immortality, and heavenly inheritance; so have we in him,
being coheires with him in the same inheritance, Romans 8. 17. 2. Comfort. Being
Gods first borne through Christ, we are dear unto God. So Exodus 4. 22. Israel
is my first borne, that is, dear unto me, as the first borne, commonly are
dearest to their Parents. Israel, before his receiving into the Covenant, was
the worst of all people, and smallest in it self, and in Gods eyes, Deuteronomy. 7.
and 9. 4. But afterward being (in the right of the Messiah) Gods first borne,
became dear to him as the apple of his eye. Now what a joy is it to the
believing soul to see God a father look toward it as a father to his first
borne? So fares it now with us, being so made in Christ. 3. Comfort. God takes
notice, and revengeth all the wrongs done to the Saints, because they are his
first borne. Let Egypt offer injury to Gods first borne, God will say, Slay
every first borne of man and beast in Egypt; let them see, in the punishment,
their sin. For can a tender father see an arm or a leg of his first borne
cut off? Would it not go to his heart to see him dismembered? And can the Lord
Jesus endure any wrongs and cruelties done to his members, and this not pierce
his bowels? A man may sometime see his child in want, and correct his first
borne for his farther good, send him to be schooled and trained in some course
under a sharp discipline; but to see him wounded, to see him bleed, cast off,
trodden under fee^, he cannot endure: No more the Lord. Let no man, never so
great, dare to wrong the godly; for he will rebuke Kings for their sakes.

IV. Seeing in Christ the first borne we attain the birthright; Use. 4.
Forfeit not the birthright by sin.
let every Christian beware of profaneness, and passing away his birthright
as Esau, who sold his birthright for pottage, Heb. 12. 16. and therefore called
profane. So do they that exchange spiritual things for temporal, earth for
heaven. As many, who pretend a part in Christ; but in Esaus language say: Give
me my pottage, my silver, my honor, my profit, my pleasure, let them take
their religion, their preaching, praying, and preciseness, a bird in hand is
worth two in the bush. This contempt of their privileges robbed the Jews of
them, who being cast out of favor, of first borne become the last of all
people, and now we Gentiles are stepped into their birthright. Let us be wise in
the entertayning our prerogative conscionably, express our love to Christ and
his Gospel, not hatred, as they, least provoking the Lord he deal with us in
justice as he did with them. For if he spared not the natural branches (Romans
11. 21.) What reason has he to spare us?

V. Learn to grow in conformity with our elder brother Christ, Use 5. Resemble
Christ our Elder brother.
with whom we cannot be equal, but like as brothers. All must have one
father, one flesh, one spirit. For the brotherhood stands not in communion of
flesh and blood, for so every man were his brother, but in the spiritual union
by regeneration, Ioh. 1. 13. We must be like him in affection, like him in
affliction, like him in the combat, and like him in the Crown. How like unto
Christ is he that resists and despises the spirit of grace, that having only
humane nature, has no whit of that divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. When heardest
thou this first borne brother to swear or lie? Or be idle in speech, wanton in
behavior, careless of his course, or company? When was he ashamed of thy
cause, of thy Cross, yea or curse? But thou art ashamed of his Cross and
cause. When did he revile, rebuke, hate? Would he be like us in every thing,
even in our evils, sin only excepted? should not we be like him in grace,
to be like him in glory?

CHAP. XIV.
Priests: Types in the deputation to their office.
OF the ranks and orders of holy persons some were sanctified and separated to
the Lord by office or function, Priests, types of Christ, wherein.
As the Priests and high Priests, who of all other were most express types of
Jesus Christ. Heb. 4. 14. We have a great high Priest, which is entered into
heaven, even Jesus the Son of God.

The Priest a type of Christ 1. In deputatio^ to his office, wherein 1. his
choice 1. for his tribe 2. for his perfections.
2. his consecration. 3. his apparel.
2. In execution of it. Actions 1. Common. 2. Ministerial.


Sect. I.
I. The Choice had respect 1. To the tribe. He must come of one only tribe of
Levi, The choice respected, 1 Tribe.
which was by God of all the tribes separated, and appointed by God to exercise
the Priesthood in the Tabernacle, and to perform whatsoever belonged to the
holy Ministry. This signified Christ our Mediator who must be a special and
singular man, taken from among men, Heb. 5. 1. as they, true man as they. For
he must be true man in nature and affection that must mediate and negotiate
man's cause with God, and so taken from men to stand in the midst between God
and man. True it is, our Lord came not of Levi, but out of Judah, Heb. 7. 14.
with the reason, for he was not to be after the manner of Aaron, but of
Melchizedek, verse 15: and because he was to change the Priesthood, and would
do it in the tribe, and was to be a Priest not after the carnal
commandment, but after the power of endless life, verse 16. But yet he was
expressly typed by those Priests. Neither was it without a spiritual
signification, that Aaron the first of those high Priests should be Moses
brother. For what more brotherly league then of Christ to Moses, of grace to
the Law, 2. The perfections.
and of the new Testament to the Old? 2. To the perfections. For in the choice
of the Priest were requisite many external perfections. Levit. 21. 17.
Whosoever of thy seed has any blemishes, shall not prease to offer the bread
of his God. He must not be blind, lame, nor misshapen. Wherein the Lord would
not only provide for the dignity of that calling in that infancy of the
Church; which otherwise (if the Priesthood had been in outward show
contemptible) many might have drawn not their persons only into contempt, but
even all such holy things as they handled: But especially to signify Jesus
Christ our high Priest to be without all blemish, the only immaculate Lamb
that takes away the sins of the world. For although no other mortal man
could be without some blemish of sin or other; yet it became us to have such
an high Priest as is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Hebr.
7. 26. And as our Lord was spotless, and without all blemish; so also perfect
in all parts and perfections. He wanted no part, no gift, no sufficiency to
discharge that function too weighty for men and Angels.

I. In this our unblemished high Priest we have a sufficient cover for all our
blemishes both of soul and body. Note. 1. A cover for all deformities of soul
and body
1. If never so blemished in soul by sin, by infirmity, if we have a
thousand wants and eye-sores; if we bewail and resist them, here is help and
remedy in our high Priest against them all. For as those persons that had such
blemishes might not stand at the Altar to do duties there, yet they were
allowed in the Congregation, and to eat from the Altar of the sacrifices as
the Priests did, Levit. 21. 22: So all defects and weaknesses, which the Saints
carry as a burden, shall not hinder them from participating in the good things
purchased by Christ's sacrifice, nor cast them out of place of the elect,
neither here nor for ever. 2. Be thou never so blemished, and deformed, or
maimed in body, now (the truth being come) God respects not according to the
outward appearance. And although the honor of the Ministry must be
respected, and the choicest of our children are not too good for Gods service;
yet now it is far better, a good Minister without an eye, or a hand, or foot;
then a Congregation without a good Minister.

II. All these outward perfections of the body in all the Priests high and low,
Note. 2. Qualities requisite in Ministers.
point us to such endowments and gifts of mind which the Lord expects in
Ministers, before they attempt this high calling. 1. He of all men must not be
blind or ignorant. Hos. 4. 6. Because thou have refused knowledge, thou art
rejected from being a Priest to me. How should he be a light to others that
himself is in darkness? If the eye be dark so is all the body. 2. He must
not have either a blind or a blemished eye, an eye filled with envy at another
man's gifts and prosperity: Nor a squint eye, looking indirectly upon every
thing; not aiming at Gods glory, or the building of Christ's Kingdom, but his
own glory, wrath, lusts, ends. 3. He must not be lame or cripled in his feet,
but make right steps to his feet, Heb. 12. 13. Upright in his way; not right
doctrine only, but right life also. 4. He must not have a flat nose, that is,
without discretion, or judgment to discern truth and falsehood, good and
evil, things fit and unfit. As the nose discernes smells; so to discern
companies and courses. 5. He must not have a crooked back, bended downwards
and almost broken with earthly cares; hindering his eye from looking toward
heaven, and interrupting heavenly contemplations and study. And so in the
rest. Would God such care were had in the choice and permission of Evangelicall
Ministers, as in the Old. We should not see the Churches pestered with so many
unworthy illiterate men fitter for any trade then this so holy calling.

Sect. II.
II. His consecration set down, In the consecration three things.
Exo. 29. 1. wherein were three things. 1. Washing. 2. Anointing. 3. ^
Sacrificing and purifying with blood. And this consecration to continue seven
days together. Which in general shadowed the surpassing sanctity and purity
of Christ above all other men and Angels: Whom the devils themselves call that
holy One of God, Mark. 1. 24. In special, 1. Washing.
verse 4. the washing did not only admonish them to cleanse and purge
themselves from the inward defilement of their sins before they undertook
that holy calling; but plainly pointed at the washing and Baptism of Christ;
who undertaking his Ministry went into the water and was baptized, Mat. 3.

The anointing by the holy Oil, 2. Anointing: When.
verse 7. signified the anointing of Christ with the holy Spirit without
measure. Isai. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord has anointed me to preach. Psalm.
45. 7. God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
all thy fellows. In which regard Christ was called by eminency, Vnctus Dei.
Nolite tangere unctos meos.
the anointed of God; and the Priests as types, touch not mine anointed. Matter.
In this anointing. 1. The matter, holy Oil; signifying the Spirit of God and
his gifts, for much similitude and agreement between them. 1. That was made of
the most precious things in all the world, Exodus 30. 25: So the holy graces of
the Spirit are the best things in the world, Luke 11. 13. there is no gift to
this. Oil swimmes aloft: So the Spirit and graces are highest. 2. No stranger
had that Oil, but only persons and things sanctified: So none but Gods Elect
have these precious and saving mercies. Ioh. 14. 17. The world cannot receive
it, that is gifts not common, but of sanctification. 3. That perfumd all the
place where it was: It is the Spirit of God that sweetens and perfumes all our
actions and natures, otherwise most corrupt and loathsome to God. 4. That
sanctified the thing to which it was applied, and set it aside to an holy use.
Without this Oil the sacrifice of the Jew was as if he had killed a dog. It
is the Spirit that sets us apart, and sanctifies to the Lord us, our persons,
our actions, 2. Tim. 2. 21. The service that wants the spirit is hateful to
God. 5. Oil is clear and shining, and makes other things anointed to shine:
The holy Ghost within, enlightneth the mind, and brings in the true light and
knowledge of God. 1. Ioh. 2. 27. the anointing shall teach you all things. 6.
Oil has the force of fire in penetrating and subtly pearcing, and is the
fuel and feeder of fire and flames: So the Spirit of God is a pearcing fire in
the heart, and kindles and maintains in it the ardent flames of the love of
God. Holy thoughts as sparks fly upward. 7. Oil suppleth, cherishes,
comfort: So the Spirit of consolation anoints with oil of gladness, Psalm.
45. 7. It is he that brings peace and tranquillity into consciences. 2. The
measure, powered in abundance upon Aarons head. Measure.
Not dropped but powered, signifying the abundance of gifts and graces most
plentifully conferred upon Christ our head. For as it was proper to the high
Priest to be anointed on the head, whereas the common Priests were anointed
but in their hands, not on their heads: So was Christ as the head anointed with
oil above all his fellows, and received the spirit beyond measure,
Communication.
signified by pouring on the head. 3. The communication of this oil. It stayed
not on Aarons head, but ran down his beard even to the skirts of his
garments: signifying that the Spirit of grace distills from the head unto all
the members of his mystical body the Catholic Church. First the Spirit
descends and sits on Christ's head, then on the Apostles, in likeness of fiery
tongues, running down as it were by Aarons beard; and from them upon other
inferior persons believing their word, Psalm. 133. 2.
as unto the skirts of his garment.

Now a threefold Application hereof.

I. In the anointing of the high Priest, Note. 1. Eminency of Christ above all
creatures.
the eminency of Jesus Christ above all creatures; whose very Name carries in
it a note of principality, being called the high Priest of our profession. Heb.
3. 1.
And in that this whole consecration of the high Priest, in most solemn and
stately manner was but a dark shadow of his solemn inauguration into his
Office. And by this anointing Christ is differenced from the most excellent
Priests and Prophets that ever were, Aaron, Moses, Elias. Some of them had a
most glorious vocation, as Moses, and in the entry of their callings, graced
with most divine and powerful miracles: but never any had the spirit sitting
on his head but he. None of them by their anointing had all graces, nor any
grace in perfection, but only begun and in small degree. Moses a believer
wanted faith sometime, as when he smote the Rock which he should have spoken
to; and the meekest man in the world was sometimes to seek of his meekness.
Aaron, though the oil was powered on his head, was weak; as in murmuring
against Moses, and in making the calfe: But in our high Priest all graces and
virtues were not inchoate only, but perfect. In him knowledge of God was most
perfect, holiness most perfect, and all kind of graces in highest degrees.
Grace sits in his lips, not only to move the mind, but to change it. None of
them by anointing could receive graces for others, but for themselves only:
but he receives such a measure as runs over to the sanctifying of the lowest
and meanest of his members. Hence, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. the anointing which we have
of him, dwells in you, and teaches you all things. And 2. Cor. 1. 21, 22. It
is God that anointeth us in Christ; and seals, and gives us the earnest of
the Spirit. Thus our Lord Jesus is advanced above all, his oil shines
brightest, and swims aloft above all others.

II. In Aarons and Christ's anointing and furnishing to their Office: Note. 2.
Ministers must increase their gifts.
Ministers must labor for a greater measure of this ointment then others, to
run down from them to their skirts. They must pray by the Spirit, watch by
the Spirit, walk by the Spirit. An unconverted Minister may do another good,
but he has no promise of blessing, nor does any good to himself. As the holy
ointment was kept in the Sanctuary: So Christ is the Sanctuary whence this oil
comes. The pipes are the word preached, Sacraments, prayer, societies of the
Saints and Gods people. And such Ministers as contemptuously contemn the
conduit-pipes through which this oil drops and flows, scorn to come to
Sermons, and join in holy exercises; how does their oil dry away? Instead of
this oil that should fall from them, a deal of pitch and slime, froth and
filthiness falls on their skirts.

III. In the communication of this ointment unto us the skirts, Note. 3. Duties
of private believers.
we learn that Christ is not for himself, but for us. And therefore, 1.
Examine if thou be anointed. This is to be a Christian, to be anointed as
Christ was. Scornest thou this holy oil in thy self or others? Know thou
shall one day wish the mountains to fall on thee, on whom this oil falls not.
2. Hence draw strength in temptation. Remember, If solicited to sin, Oh I
have the anointing; I am taken up, and set apart to Gods use; I am for God and
his glory, Neh. 6. 11. 3. Use means to attain a farther measure, and be liker
Christ. Thou missest a Sermon, or the Sacrament; thou know not what drops of
oil thou have missed. 4. Have a care to walk as such as are anointed,
smelling sweet every where in holy lives, speeches, prayers; in all things
edifying thy self and others. Leave a sweet smell every where behind thee.
Let it drop down from us to others round about us.

The third thing in the high Priests consecration was sacrificing, 3.
Sacrificing. Three sorts of sacrifices.
Exodus 29. 1, 2. In which, 1. Observe in general, that the Priests must be
consecrated by offering all sorts of sacrifices for them; and therefore they
must take a calfe, two rams, unleavened bread, cakes and oil, verse. 1, 2. 1.
Because of the special holiness and honor of their calling who are to come
so near unto God, who will be specially sanctified in all that come near
him. 2. Because sin in them is more hateful then in any other, and in
expiating their sins, as much is required as for the sins of all the
Congregation. 3. Because they were to offer unto God all the gifts and
sacrifices of all the people of all sorts; and therefore for them must be
offered all sorts, to sanctify them not only in general, but to their
special services between God and his people. 1. A sin offering: Particulars
6.
2. In particular: The first of these sacrifices must be a sin offering,
verse 10. For which they must; 1. Take a calfe and offer him for the expiation
of sin, verse 14. This young calfe was a type of Christ, who only by his own
oblation expiated our sin, which otherwise made our selves and duties most
hateful. 2. This calfe must be presented before the Lord and his Congregation:
signifying the willingness of Christ to offer up himself for the sins of
men, John. 19. 11. 3. Aaron and his sons must put their hands on the head of
the calfe, verse 10: not only to confess they were worthy to die for their
own sins, but to profess also that the death which they deserved, was by the
death of the Messiah (the high Priest of the new Testament) removed off them,
and transferred upon the beast. And not only the imputation of our sins upon
Christ; but also is signified that we must lay our hand by a true faith upon
Christ our head, if we expect any comfort from his death and passion. 4. The
calfe must be killed before the Lord, at the door of the Tabernacle, ver. 11:
signifying both the death and crucifying of Christ, as also the fruit of it by
the place. That by his death, as by a door, an entry is made for us into the
Church, both militant and triumphant, Heb. 10. 20. 5. The blood of that
sinne-offering for the Priest must be put on the horns of the Altar, and the
rest powered at the foot of the Altar, verse 12: signifying; 1. The sufficiency
of Christ's death to purge and reconcile us to God. 2. The plenty of grace and
merit in it for many more then are saved by it. For being sufficient for all,
it is not helpful to all, nor to any that tread under foot this precious
blood; the extent of the benefit is to all the elect. 3. The large spreading
and preaching of the Gospel of salvation by Christ's blood, through all the
coasts and corners of the earth (as the blood sprinkled on the four corners)
and that by the finger, hand, and ministry of men. 6. The fat must be offered
unto God; but the flesh, skin, and dung must be burnt with fire without the
host: signifying: 1. That Christ offered himself, and the best parts he had,
suffering in soul and body. 2. That he must suffer without the host, without
the gate of Jerusalem, Heb. 13. 12. and carried out our sins out of Gods
sight. 3. That nothing but blood comes on the Altar: For only the blood of
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Note hence, Note. No perfection, but only in Christ.
that the Priests in the Law must be put in mind that they were sinners, and
needed a sacrifice for themselves. By which they were to take notice of a
difference between themselves and our high Priest. 1. There was no perfection
in their persons; for they must offer, and lay their hands on the head of the
sacrifice, confessing guiltiness. 2. Nor in their Ministry, in which the high
Priest need offer for his own sins. 3. Nor in all their Consecration; they
could offer no sacrifice to wash away any sin, their own nor others; only
they did point at the sacrifice of Christ: but by his consecration he could
offer himself a meritorious and sufficient sacrifice for the sins of his
elect. Thus is our high Priest advanced above them all.

The second of these sacrifices in the Consecration of the high Priest was to
be a burnt offering or Holocaust. 2. A burnt off^ing, or Holocaust.
The use of which was to signify the dedication of himself and all that he
had, Particulars 4.
to be purified by the Spirit (as by fire) to the use of God in his service, as
that Holocaust was, ver. 15, and 19. Most things in this were common with the
former. 1. The blood must be sprinkled on the Altar round about: signifying the
full remission of sins purchased by the blood of Christ, and the
communication of all his benefits, and the virtue of his whole passion to be
applied to the whole Church; for sprinkling still betokens application. 2. The
inwards and legs must be washed in water, ver. 17. signifying that Christ
should bring no unclean thing in his offering, but he should be absolutely
pure within and without; in his mind, thoughts, affections, signified by the
inwards; and in his conversation, motions and walkings, signified by the legs.
3. The burning of the offering wholly, ver. 18. signified 1. the ardent love of
Jesus Christ; who was all consumed as it were with the fire of love and zeal
toward mankind upon the Cross. 2. The bitterness of his passion in his
whole man, who was as it were consumed wholly with the fire of his fathers
wrath due to the sins of man. 4. As the burnt offering ascended up to heaven
in fire: So Jesus Christ having offered himself a whole burnt offering
ascended up into heaven, and so obtained an everlasting redemption for his
Church. From whence also he sends the fire of his Spirit, as on the Apostles,
so on all believers in their measure. John 14.

Note from this sacrifice for the high Priest; Note. Sin unpardoned, all
service is abominable.
that first he must offer the sinne-offering, and then the other sacrifices for
consecration. This burnt offering nor the others following could never have
been acceptable, if the sinne-offering had not gone before, and sin by it
expiated. Learn hence, that so long as we are in our sins, all our
sacrifices and service are abominable. Sin unremoved lies in the way of thy
prayer. The blind man could say, God hears not sinners. John 9. 31.
And David, If I have delight to sin, Psalm. 66. 18.
God will not hear my prayer. Sin unrepented and unpardoned makes thee
hateful in the house of God; thy hearing does but more harden thee, the
sacraments become poison unto thee, for thou by thy sin castest poison into
the Lords Cup, and so eatest and drinkest thy own damnation.

Let this be our wisdom, Use.
first to offer our sinne-offering. It is the Lords own counsel. Isa. 1. Wash
you, cleanse you, and then come and let us reason. And as our Lord advised us
in case of reconciliation with man, we must much more practice in case of our
reco^ciliation with God. If thou have brought thy gift to the Altar, and thou
remembrest that God has ought against thee; first reconcile thy self to God
and then to man, and so bring thy gift. There be two graces which we must bring
before God in all our services in which we would find acceptance. The former
of preparation; that is, repentance which prepares aright to the performance
of good duties. The latter of disposition; and that is faith which disposes
the party aright in the whole carriage of them, for this purifieth the heart,
exciteth the will, sees the weakness, seeks a cover, and finds acceptance.

The third sacrifice in the consecration of the high Priest was the
peace offering, 3. A peace offering, or sacrifice Eucharisticall.
or the Eucharisticall sacrifice; the use of which was, both that Aaron should
show his thankfulness to God who had advanced him to so high an office,
Particulars 4.
as also to obtain of God by prayer such high and excellent gifts as were
needful for the execution of the same: and this points directly at Jesus
Christ. 1. The blood of this Lamb was to be put on the lap of Aarons ear,
upon the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot.
Signifying 1. That all the actions of Christ, his hands, feet and parts were
red with his passion. Psalm. 22. 16. they pierced my hands and feet. 2. The
whole obedience of Jesus Christ to his father even to the death, Psalm 40. 6.
called a piercing or boaring of the ear. 3. That it is Christ who sanctifies
the ears, hands, and feet of the Priest and people. The ear to hear divine
Oracles, the Priests must first learn then teach. The hands to work the
actions of grace and holiness. The feet to direct and lead into all holy
motions and conversation, all must be washed by the blood of Christ that we may
be wholly clean. As both our Savior teaches by the washing of the disciples
feet, John 13. 5, 6. As also in Peter's request, Lord not my feet only, but my
hands and head, John 13. 9. 2. A part of this sacrifice went to the Priest,
part to the offerer, signifying that both Priest and people have part and
interest in the death of Christ; as also that Christ did not only deliver
himself to death for us, as this Ram, but also gives himself to feed us to
eternal life. John 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed. 3. It must be heaved up
before the Lord, and shaken too and fro every way. ver. 26. Signifying 1. The
lifting up and heaving of Christ upon the Cross. 2. The heaving up of our
hearts in thankfulness to God for so great benefits. 3. That the merits of
Christ our true sacrifice, and benefits of his death should, by the preaching
and publication of the Gospel, be spread abroad into all corners of the world,
as that sacrifice was shaken every way, East, West, North, and South. 4. This
sacrifice must always be offered up with cakes of unleavened bread tempred
with oil, ver. 23. Signifying, 1. the most perfect purity of Christ's life and
doctrine without all leaven of sin. 2. That Priest and people must in service
to God lay aside all leaven of maliciousness. 3. The oil notes the soft and
loving kindness of God and Jesus Christ, chearing and suppling the conscience
by the sweet meditation of it; as also how joyfully and gladly we ought to
serve the Lord, and with cheerfulness present before him all the parts of his
worship.

Note hence, Note. Wash and purge all with the blood of Christ.
as the ear, hands, and feet of the high Priest must be touched with blood
before he attempt any part of his office: so our care must be that all our
parts all our actions and affections be touched and purged with the blood of
Christ. So David, Psalm. 51. 2. Wash me thoroughly. Reason. 2. Because sin has
defiled the whole man; all his parts, all his actions, all within him, all
without him. 2. This foulness sticks so fast, as it is no easy matter to be
cleansed. Nothing in the world can fetch out this soil but the blood of
Christ. Not all the water in the sea, nor all the holy water in the Sea of Rome
can wash away one sin. 3. All thou do or performest depends upon the merit
of this blood, and dignity of this person and passion for acceptance. The
knowledge of thy duty must be sprinkled with this blood, for that is signified
by the ear. The undertaking of duty, by the hand. The progress and
perseverance in it by the foot. All must be presented in him and by him, and
find grace and acceptance. If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me.

Qu. How may I know that the blood of Christ has touched and purged me? Notes
of it.


Ans. 1. It is not enough that Christ's blood be shed, but it must also be
sprinkled. If thou contentest not thy self that Christ has died for all, but
see how necessary it is to apply it to thy self. 2: If thou have an hand to
lay hold on Christ's blood and besprinkle thy self with it. A man washes his
face with his hand. This hand is faith, which takes up the blood of Christ, and
applies it to ones self, as did Paul, who dyed for me. 3. If it wash the whole
man within and without, which no other blood could do. The blood of sacrifices
under the Law could not sanctify the conscience, but only the outside, Heb.
9. 9. but this can and must purge the conscience from dead works, ver. 14. And
under conscience is contained the whole innerman, Merito ^anguinis
satisfaction. Spiritu naturam nostra^ regenera^te.
purged by the merit of his satisfying blood, and by his spirit renewing our
nature. And for the outward man, 1. If thy right ear be touched, thou have
the hearing ear rightly to hear the word of God. Thou hear to learn; for
to hearken is better then the fat of Rams. 2. If thy right hand be touched,
that thou art an active Christian, not an hearer only of the word but a doer,
and unto knowledge of the doctrine of faith joynest obedience of faith, thou
keep the faith working, as knowing that obedience is better then sacrifice,
thou dare not do what seems good to thy self, or is right in thy own
eyes, but what is rightly ruled by Gods word, for that is the right hand
touched. 3. If thy right foot be touched, that thou walk in the right way
with a right foot, not making crooked paths to thy feet, but ordering thy
conversation aright. And all this with right ends and affections, the feet of
the soul laying aside all sinister ends and intentions in all thy obedience,
and directing all to the honor of the true Aaron and high Priest Jesus Christ.
4. If thou find the effects of Christ's blood sprinkled. Effects two.
1. Pacification of conscience, for this blood speaks better things then Abels
for us, and in us; for us, to God by intercession: in us, by persuasion that
the Lord looking on the blood of Christ, rests wholly on it as a full
satisfaction for all our sins; for this is the end of shedding, remission of
sins, Mat. 26. 28; therefore of sprinkling. 2. Daily sanctification through
this sprinckling. 1 Pet. 1. 2. For out of the side of Christ issues water as
well as blood; the one redeeming from condemnation, the other from vain
conversation, the one purges from the death of works, Heb. 9. 14.
the other from dead works themselves, The sprinkling of this blood admits not
security, or idleness, and carelessness; nor suffers a man to sin against
this blood by impenitency, unbeleefe, despising of grace, horrible swearing,
and foul lusts. But makes the Christian truly noble, as one now descended of
the blood of Christ; scorning the base and foul courses he formerly affected.
Find these marks, and comfort thy self, thou art sprinkled with Christ's
blood. Thy whole course is sanctified; all thy hearing, all thy obedience, be
it never so weak in it self, be thy unworthiness never so great, it shall
be no bar to thine acceptance with God, for every thing sprinkled with this
precious blood is sweetened and accepted.

Sect. III.
III. The third thing in the deputation of the Priest to his office, is his
apparel, appointed by God, and called holy garments, glorious and beautiful;
far differing from all other men's. And they signified, 1. The function to be
glorious and excellent. 2. The fitness of their persons to that office. 3. The
glory of the true high Priest Jesus Christ, of whom Aaron was but a figure. For
all the glistering show of these Priestly garments set forth the more the
Angelical brightness of all the virtues which should shine in Jesus Christ.
The Priests garments in number ten, whereof four belonged to inferior
Priests.
The Priestly garments appointed by God were ten in number; of which ^oure
belonged to the inferior Priests, Exodus 28. 40. 42. 1. A linen garment: Which
signified the white garment of CHRIST'S righteousness and innocence; 1. A
linen garment.
which they were to appear in before the Lord if they would be acceptable in
their persons or duties. Noting to us by the way, that every godly Minister
wears a white linen garment, not woven and made by men, but by God; not
without him, but within him; not a shadow or ceremony, but the substance and
truth, to which all shadows give place. Nay there is no private man that is
godly but he must wear this white linen garment, having put it on in the
laver of regeneration: as Gal. 3. 27. whosoever are baptized into Christ, 2. A
girdle.
have put on Christ. 2. A girdle verse. 40. which signifies constancy and
stability in the truth, both in our high Priest Jesus Christ, who was not a
reed shaken but a firm rock: as also in his members, who are commanded to
stand fast, their lines girt with verity, Ephesians. 6. 14. Hence follows, That the
Ministers word must not be yea and nay; his course must be constantly gracious
and watchful. And for private Christians, Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good thing that the heart be
stablished with grace. 3. A bonnet, 3. A bonnet.
verse. 40. A symbol and sign to them of Gods protection still covering them
in their faithful service: signifying to us the Lords cover and faithful
protection both over our head, and over his members for his sake. So as, every
faithful Minister has a bonnet, Christ carries him as a star in his right
hand, and covers him from the rage of Satan and the world, else should he not
stand a minute. And every faithful member of Christ is so covered as an hair
cannot fall (much less the head) without the will of his heavenly father. 4.
Breeches.
4. The breeches, ver. 42. putting more comeliness upon the uncomely parts.
Signifying to them and us 1. What reverence we ought to use in the service of
God; far remooving thence every uncomely thing. 2. Shadowing out the true and
perfect holiness, with which Christ's humanity was clothed; and not only with
that but with the Majesty of his deity, which highly graced and honored the
despised and frail humanity, which had no form nor beauty, Isa. 53. 2. 3. Not
darkely representing that care and respect which our Lord and Savior Christ
has of his inferior, base, and despised both Ministers and members through
the world. Isa. 41. 14: fear not worm Jacob; I will help thee.

To the high Priest belonged six peculiar garments, To the high Priest six.
First the Ephod, ver. 4. In which 1. The matter, it was not wool or silk, 1.
The Ephod: where Matter.
but linen which rises out of the earth, Ezech. 44. 17. Signifying that holy
flesh of Christ which vayled his deity as a garment; and that it was taken not
from heaven but from his mother on earth, as the matter of that garment grew
immediately out of earth. Form.
2. The form, it was a long white garment: signifying the long white garment
of Christ's absolute righteousness; white, innocent and unspotted; and long, to
cover all our nakedness, without eeking or patching of merits. Ornament.
3. The ornament of it. In it were set two Onyx stones, and in them the names
of the twelve tribes of Israel engraven, which Aaron carried upon his
shoulders: signifying 1. That the names of the godly are not lightly written
but fast engraven in the love and memory of Christ, as those names were
engraven in very hard stones. 2. That Christ does still carry his Church on his
shoulders; lifting them up out of dust and misery, and bearing them upon the
shoulders of his power and providence as on Eagles wings, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. Or as
the good shepherd brings home the sheep on his shoulders, Luke 15. 5.
According to his gracious promise, Isa. 46. 4, I have made you; I will also
bear you, and I will carry you and deliver you. Use.
4. The use of it. The high Priest in this garment carried on his shoulders the
names of Israel into the Sanctuary before God: so our high Priest in the
garment of his righteousness presents his Church (shadowed by the twelve
tribes) without spot or wrinckle or any such thing; and carries into heaven on
his shoulders, even into the true Sanctuary not made with hands, those whose
names are written in the book of life. Distinction.
5. Distinction. As the high Priest carried the names in several precious
stones, and severally engraven: so our high Priest takes special notice of
every particular member of the Church, neglects not the meanest, but knows
them by name, as the head can name every member of the body, and contemnes not
the meanest. Rev. 3. 4, the Church of Sardi had a few names, that is, godly
persons so well known to Christ as men by their names. Propriety.
6. The propriety of it. It was not lawful for any but Aaron and the high
Priest to use this garment, nor might any imitate it, for it was the fall of
Gideons house, Judge. 8. 26, 27, for making an Ephod like that of the Sanctuary.
It is true there were ordinary Ephods holy garments common to inferior
Priests, as Saul put to the sword four score and five Priests that wore an
Ephod, 1 Samuel 22. 18. And used by the Levits, as Samuel very young ministered in
an Ephod, 1 Samuel 2. 18. And it may be there were some garments called Ephods
which great men did wear, and no holy garment, as 2 Samuel 6. 14. David danced
before the Arc girt with a linen Ephod. But this Ephod was peculiar to the
high Priest, and in no garment else might he present the names of the twelve
tribes: signifying that no garment of righteousness may be expected or
imitated, in which God can behold his Church, but this of Jesus Christ. And
whosoever seek elsewhere, are abolished from Christ to their destruction, Gal.
5. 2. 4. Oh the fearful case of Papists that seek to have their names
written in another Ephod of their own weaving and making!

The second garment peculiar to the high Priest, 2. The breastplate of
judgment.
was called the brestplate of judgment, ver. 15: the most precious part of all
his garments.

I. In respect of the twelve costly and glistering stones which were set in
four rows according to the number of the tribes, Precious stones Shining.
ver. 17. to the 22. In which 1. The shining of these stones signified the
shining purity and innocence of Jesus Christ both in himself, and in his
members. If they be pure as the sun, fair as the Moon, what is he? Worth.
2. Their price, of great value and worth: signifying what a price the Lord
Jesus valued his Church at. He accounts not believers as common and base
stones, but more precious then his own life. How vile and despicable soever
they seem to men, and trodden under foot here below as common pebles; yet
Jesus Christ sets another price on them. 3. Their place or situation. Place.
They are set in the pectorall, and Aaron must carry them on his heart:
signifying that Christ has as much care of his Church as if it were enclosed
in his heart; lets out his blood to make room in his heart for them. Number.
4. Their number, Twelve, according to all the tribes: noting that there is a
room in the heart of Christ for every one of the elect. None can anticipate or
prevent other. With him is plentiful redemption. The former without the latter
shall not be perfected, Order.
Heb. 11. 40. 5. Their order. They stand in four rows in a comely quadrangle:
signifying the comely order that Christ has stablished in the Church: some in
higher place, some in lower, some of one rank and virtues, some of another, as
those stones, but all stand seemly and fitly* And this order we must
maintain, keep our ranks as they did. Figure.
6. The figure. The four square, ver. 16: signifying the stability and
firmness of the Church, as a four square turn it any way is firm. Satan
and all deceivers shall not pick one stone out of Christ's Pectorall. The gates
of hell shall not prevail against him that is fixed in that rock and stone of
Israel. Use.
7. Their use. That Aaron, who before bare the names of Israel on his shoulders
before the Lord, might now bear them on his heart continually for a
remembrance before the Lord, when he goes into the holy place, ver. 29:
signifying 1. The ardent love of Jesus Christ toward his Church, who bears it
not only on his shoulders as a shepherd, nor only in his arms as a nurse:
but upon his heart, and in his heart never to forget our good. If Aaron may
forget the names he carries upon his shoulders, he cannot the names upon his
breast or heart, so cannot Christ forget the Church he has taken into his
heart. Isa. 49. 15, Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on
the son of her womb? though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee.
2. Bearing of the names continually before the Lord on his heart, signifies
the continual mindfulnesse and intercession of Jesus Christ for his Church in
that heavenly sanctuary, Heb. 7. 25. By virtue of which all our prayers get
audience and acceptance. Quantity.
8. The quantity. As all the names of Israel were gathered into a narrow
compass: so Jesus Christ our Mediator shall gather together into one, all the
despersed sons of God: and present them before God as the most beautiful and
precious parts of the world, Ioh. 11. 52. He shall make a short account in the
earth, in comparison of the wicked who will take up more room.

II. In respect of the Urim and Thummim which were put in the brestplate of
Judgment, Vrim and Thummim. Non est manifestu^ apud nos quid haec significent.
Rab. Da.
ver. 30. Of which Rabbi David a Jew says: It is unknown to us what these
signify. And what this precious monument was (put by Gods appointment into the
fold of the Pectorall) no man living can tell. I take it to be no workmanship
of man, but a sacred monument immediately received from God. But expressly they
signified Jesus Christ 1, in their names, 2, in their use.

1. Their names, Names.
Urim and Thummim. Urim signifies lights in the plural number. Note that
there were not lights and shining before in the Pectorall by the many precious
stones: but here is a glorious light shining above them all, to which their
light is obscurity. Plainly signifying Jesus Christ in whom are hid treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. He is the light of the world, Ioh. 9. 5.
Which enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, Ioh. 1. 9. There are
many lights, as stones and stars, in the world: but he is the sun, nay he is
lights. With him is many-folded wisdom. (...).
And without him is nothing but darkness, sin, death, inner darkness and
utter, Ioh. 8. 12. Thummim signifies perfections. And to whom can this point
us but unto Christ; in whom alone are all perfections of holiness and graces.
There is illumination in the twelve stones the Church, but not any perfection;
there is some purity in the stones, but far from perfection of it. In Christ
is perfection in all parts; and from him alone we must expect our perfection.

II. The use of them was to receive by them answer from God when the high
Priest consulted with him, Use of them.
verse. 30. For when the Priest asked counsel of God, God is said to answer by
Urim, that is, not by the color of the stones, nor the changing of color by
brightness, blackness, or bloodinesse of them (as some Jews) but the Lord
answered by voice. Numb 7. 89. And therefore it is called the Urim of
Judgment, not because it self gave judgment or decided causes; but because
the Lord answered when the Priest applied the Urim and Thummim. This directly
looked at Christ, as to whom 1. all secrets and Mysteries are perfectly known.
He is the Lamb with seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, Rev. 5. 6.
Only worthy to open the book, ver. 9. because of his abundant grace and
wisdom, signified by the seven spirits. 2. Who makes known and continually
reveals to his Church and members, as their need requires, whatsoever is meet
for them to know, by such means as himself has sanctified.

Now although this was a great privilege of the first Temple; and the second
did want it, that they might not be kept from desire and expectation of the
true Urim and Thummim: yet we in the new Testament are far beyond them. For
as the Oracle by Urim was certain for direction: so Christ is the most perfect
rule and direction shadowed by that. As the Urim answered by voice: so Christ
by his word preached. As God spoke then by Urim to the Priest: So now by his
own son. Heb. 1. 2. Would thou have God answer thee? go to the Urim. 1.
Frequent his ordinance. God then answered, when the Priest consulted. 2. Pray
for wisdom. If any want wisdom, let him ask of God and it shall be given
him, Iam. 1. 5. 3. Fear God. Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him. 4. Follow and obey the voice. John 14. 21. If any love me and
obey my commandments, I will love him, and reveal my self unto him. John 7.
17. If any man do the will of God, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of
God.

The third peculiar garment of the high Priest was the robe of the Ephod, 3.
The Robe: Particulars. 4.
Exodus 28. 5, 31: On the skirts of which were fastened, 1. The Pomegranats of
blue silk, and purple, and skarlet round about. This fruit has a most
pleasant smell, sweet in it self, and sweetning other things round about it;
and is full of precious juice and liquor: 2. Bells of gold between them round
about, a golden Bell and a Pomegranat; the use of which was that his sound
might be heard round about when he went into the Sanctuary and holy of Holies.
The whole garment signified the righteousness of Christ's humane nature, which
is, 1. Most sweet it self, having a most pleasant savor as the Pomegranate.
2. Full of most precious juice and virtue, to qualify and abate the raging
heat of Gods displeasure, as the juice of Pomegranats does allay the burning
heat of an ague that would shake the body to pieces: 3. Casts upon us a sweet
savor being wrapped in it: For we by nature, stinking in our sins and
rottenness, are loathsome to the Lord; but once covered with this mantle, we
are a sweet savor to God; who now speaks of us as Isaac of Jacob covered in
his elder brothers garments: My son is as the savor of a field which the
Lord has blessed, Genesis 27. 27. 3. This garment has a sweet sound, as of
golden Bells, which to hear were most delectable: because the garment of
Christ's righteousness brings grace to us no otherwise then by the sound of the
Gospel. For faith, by which we put on Christ, is wrought by hearing the sweet
sound and golden Bell of the Gospel. Whence some have thought, that by this
part of the Priests Attire, is shadowed the Prophetical Office of Christ.
Sweet is the Proclamation of the Gospel of peace. 4. The use. That by these
Bells the Priests must be heard when he goes into the Sanctuary: signifying
the power of Christ our high Priests perpetual intercession (being entered into
the Sanctuary of heaven) for his elect and chosen.

The fourth peculiar garment was the Miter or bonnet upon his head, 4. The
Miter: Particulars. 3.
verse 36. 1. Made of blue silk and fine linen, verse 39. like (as it seems)
to an half coronet. 2. Beautified with a golden plate, on which was written:
Holiness to the Lord. 3. The use. Aaron must ever have it on his forehead
while he bears the iniquity of their offerings, to make the people acceptable
before the Lord, verse 38. 1. The miter and crown on the Priests head
signified, 1. The Deity of Christ our head, which as a crown or circle wants
beginning and end: 2. The Kingly Office of Christ, with all that honor and
crown of glory set on the head of our Redeemer, to whom all power is given in
heaven and in earth. And according to his power is his name; for God has
exalted him, and given him a Name above all names, Phil. 2. 9. His style is not
only King of Saints, Revel. 15. 3: But King of kings, and Lord of lords, Chap.
19. 16. 2. The golden plate in which was written, Holiness to the Lord, did
not only distinguish it from the miters of the ordinary Priests, which wanted
such a plate: but specially typified Jesus Christ our head, in whom was most
conspicuous (as in a man's forehead) a most divine and perfect holiness, purer
then the gold of that plate. Who was not holy only, as other sanctified
persons, but holiness it self. Holiness in his person, holiness in his
nature, holiness in all his actions and passions; holiness in the fountain
and original, whence all streams of holiness issue forth to his elect
members. So Ioh. 17. 19. I sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified.
Never was there so pure a plate, such shining holiness, so deeply ingraved as
nothing can raze it out for ever. 3. The use was significant; that as the high
Priest, having on this plate with this inscription, got the iniquities of the
people pardoned, which he bare before the Lord: So our high Priest Jesus
Christ, presenting before his Father, his most absolute holiness, gets a
pardon for all our sins, which he bears upon himself. And as their sins
were pardoned in respect of the high Priest, who represented Christ: Propter
summum Sacerdotem.
So both theirs and ours are indeed and truth pardoned, for the true and
eternal high Priest, who is Christ himself.

The fifth peculiar garment was the embroydered Coat of fine linen, 5. The
embroydered Coat.
verse 39. which was a beautiful, costly and large garment, reaching down to
his feet, covering most of his body; curiously wrought with most precious
matter and cunning workmanship: which noted the dignity of the person, and
office of the high Priest. For in old time long white garments appertained to
men of high place, and excellent in wisdom: As in Joseph's advancement, Genesis
41. 42. he was clothed with white fine linen, when he was to be Viceroy,
and next in authority to the King. See Ester 6. 8. how Merdecai was apparalled
by the Kings command. This garment was most proper to our high Priest of the
new Testament Jesus Christ; who is by it described, Revel. 1. 13. clothed with
a robe down to his feet. Noting, 1. The excellency of his person; who is
Prince of peace, Three things in Christ noted hereby.
Isai. 9. 6: For so, long white garments ever betokened peace both within the
Church and without. 2. That he excelled in wisdom and counsel, being the
great Counselor, and the spirit of counsel and understanding resting in his
breast, Isai. 11. 2: For to such also these garments belonged, Dan. 5. 7, 16. 3.
The lovely and beautiful connection and conjunction of his Prophetical,
Priestly, and Princely Offices; sincerely and perfectly fulfilling them, and
appearing before God in them as in a most costly embroydered garment consisting
of many pieces, and many colors fitly couched and laid together. And this
garment he ware not only in earth (as the Priests did) but now after his
ascension he continues to perform the Offices of the high Priest for his
Church: in the same embroydered garment presenting before God the merit of his
only sacrifice, and making intercession to the Father for it.

The sixth garment is the girdle of needle work, 6. The girdle.
verse 39. Of diverse matter, linen, blue silk, purple, and scarlet, and of
diverse colors, Chap. 39. 29. The use of it was to fasten the Priests garments
unto him, that they might not hang loose upon him in his Ministration; And
specially points out unto us our high Priest Jesus Christ described after his
ascension, Revel. 1. 13. to be girded about the paps with a golden girdle.
Noting in Christ four things. Four things in Christ noted thereby.
1. The truth and constancy in accomplishing all the gracious promises of the
Gospel; seeing our high Priest is girt about with the girdle of verity. 2. His
justice, integrity, pure and incorrupt judgment as gold. Isai. 11. 5. Justice
shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
3. His readiness to do the office of a Mediator. Girding of the attire has
ever been a sign of readiness, and diligence in business undertaken. So
Luke 12. 35. Let your loins be girded about. 4. His mindfulnesse and care in
performing his office. For as not girding is a sign of carelessenesse and
negligence: So girding, of care and industry. So our Lord and high Priest never
carelessely cast off any poor and penitent sinner: But in the days of his
flesh minded their misery; and now in heaven keeps on his girdle, casts not off
the care of his Church, but perpetually accomplisheth whatsoever is needful
for her salvation.

Sect. IIII.
I. In these garments, Seven uses for the Ministers. No baseness in a Minister.
some things necessary for Ministers,

II. As the Priests had variety of holy garments: so Variety of gifts.
If every sheep of Christ's fold must add to his graces, much more the Pastor
of the flock. If every child of God, (...).
much more the father in the faith begetting others to God. He is not only a
disciple of Christ, but an instructor of others. He must therefore be stored,
1. With variety of knowledge to bring forth things new and old. 2. Variety of
Ministerial gift to instruct, exhort, reprove, correct. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 3.
Variety of saving graces, to be an example in word, conversation, in love, in
spirit, in faith, in pureness. 2 Timothy 4. 12. 4. Variety of external and
civil virtues. 1 Timothy 3. 2. to the 8. and Tit. 1. 7. More gifts are expected
in the builders of the house then in any stone of it.

(...).
Ministerii. Personae.

in whom are required graces ministerial and personal. The former, that he
may shine before the congregation in the light and purity of wholesome
doctrine. The latter, that he may shine in integrity and perfection of manners
and conversation, (...).
so far as humane frailety will suffer. The Urim must enable him to divide
aright, and furnish him with wholesome precepts. The Thummim must fit him to
walk aright, and to go forward in holy practice. The lights of the world must
give light both ways. Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Let thy Vrim and Thummim be on the man of
thy mercy. Mal. 2. 6. The Law of truth was in his mouth, Typus fidelium in
doctrina and integritate morum.
and he walked in truth and equity. And 1 Timothy 4. 12. the Apostles Canon is,
that every Timothy should be a type of believers in doctrine and upright
conversation. I would all ours might be found such types. Then should not so
many parishes have lamps without light, Ministers without the light of saving
knowledge, and integrity of conversation.

Special holiness.
so the Ministers of the new Testament must labor for special holiness. If
every mean servant in the house must be holy, much more the steward of the
household. And if every private Christian must follow holiness, without which
no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. much more the ministers. They that carry the
vessels of the Lord must be holy. Alas, how afraid are many of this Plate, for
spoiling of their preferment? It was a chief grace of the chief Minister of
the old Testament: with us a chief disgrace; and too much purity to carry
holiness in our foreheads in our profession. We can put on this plate in the
Pulpit, and suppose it fit for the Temple, but in our private houses cast it
aside.

V. As the Priests must have in their skirts both bells They must be good
preachers and good livers
1. The bells allow them not to be dumb dogs, Isa. 56. 10. but the sound of
the Law and Gospel must clearly sound in their mouths to be heard afar
off. 2. These bells must be of gold, to put Ministers in mind that their
doctrine be pure; not corrupt, not savouring of Popery, liberty, or
selfe-respect. 3. They must never come into the congregation without these
bells; for Ministers must still be furnished with some sound matter of
instruction and edification. How is it then that many come into the
Congregation and never bring bells? Many are afraid lest the sound of their
bells should be heard too much, and that it would disgrace them to be counted
diligent preachers? And many scorn others that their bells sound so often? 2.
To the bells ministers must join Pomegranates: With the wholesome word join
good works and holy life. He caries the bell, a minister whose life is
agreeable with holy doctrine. Mat. 5. 19. He that keeps the commandments, and
teaches others so to do, shall be great in the kingdom of God. John Baptist
had, both bells (being a burning light in himself) and Pomegranates; being a
shining light unto others. And as the Pomegranates smelled sweet: so must
ministers labor to leave a sweet smell behind them every where. Their
conversation must not savor of lightness, pride, ambition, covetousness,
contention, profaneness, etc.

VI. Love the flock dearly.
As the Priest must have the tribes be graven on his breast: so must the
minister his flock committed to him; who must be dear to him, Illud quod
Christiani sumus, propter nos est; quod autem praepositi sumus, propter vos
est. Aug. de Pastor. cap. 1. Illud quod mundani sumus (potius quam Christiani)
propter nos est.
and taken up into his heart. And hearty love would force them to feed the
flock, in season, out of season, and set forward their salvation and
instruction; and seek them, not theirs. In that we Ministers are Christians,
we are so for our selves; but in that we are Ministers of Christ, we are so for
you. Some wholly forget the second, and I wish not the first too. Who may
rather say: In that we are worldlings (rather then Christians) we are so for
our selves. Their flocks are slightly engraven in their hearts.

Still keep on these holy garments.
for these garments differ some what from theirs. They might put off their
garments when they came out of the holy place: but ministers of the Gospel may
not put off theirs when they come out of the Church; no nor when they go to
bed, nor about any business; they must never come off. Many are so dissolute
and ungirt, and these garments are so loose on them, as they give just occasion
to the people to say; that they be good only in the Pulpit; and so their people
learn of them to be good only in the Church. We must girt our graces fast to
us. This is the only ministerial apparel appointed by God.

Sect. V.
Now for the people of God:
Three uses for the people.
yet his apparel remained and was put upon the next. This teaches us that we
all have but one high Priest, Two fold instruction.
whose robes we must put on, which are lasting and never worn out. For 1.
there was but one Mediator between God and man while Aaron lived; a type of
that our only Mediator between God and man Jesus Christ. 2. There were
garments but for one, although they passed from one to another as that
Priesthood did: So no other robe save of this one and only true and high
Priest must be presented before God; no robe of our own works or merits; no
robe made or woven by men or creatures; not by Popes, Saints living or dead, or
Angels. We must never change this garment; nor abide to see any challenge it
but the high Priest our Lord Jesus. And hence for ever detest the wicked and
abominable Mass, with those sacrilegious Priests, who usurp these garments of
Jesus Christ and tell us they offer propitiatory sacrifices for the sins of
the quick and dead. The thieves that spoiled Christ of his garments, and
divided them among themselves, did him no such despite as these thieves do,
who rob him and disrobe him of all his glory.

II. Every Christian is made a priest unto God by participation, Use. 2. As a
Priest, offer spiritual sacrifices.
Rev. 5. 10. But not legal and external; for they were dated by the
priesthood of Christ: but Evangelicall, improper, and spiritual. Neither to
offer real, and external sensible sacrifices, which all had end by Christ's
only sacrifice upon the Cross: but spiritual sacrifices; such as, Calves of
the lips, Heb. 13. 15. The sacrifice of a broken heart. Psalm. 51. 17. Of alms,
with which God is well pleased. Heb. 13. 16. Of mortification. Romans 12. 1. and
of good works and duties of all sorts. Of prayer, Psalm. 141. 2. Now before any
of these sacrifices can find acceptance we must all put on holy and spiritual
garments. Never was any priest or performance pleasing without his garments;
the use of which was to cover and adorn.

Quest. What garments must we put on?

Answ. Jacob before he could get his fathers blessing must put on his elder
brothers garment, In our priestly garments.
Genesis 27. 15. so must we put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 13. 14.

Quest. How?

Answ. Put on whole Christ, How put on.
as the Priest all his garments. 1. By making him our own; we must wear our
own garments. Special faith unites to Christ, and marieth us to him, that he
is ours, and we his. 2. Cover thy self with the sacrifice of his death. Adam
having sinned covered his nakedness with skins of dead beasts: signifying that
all his sinful posterity must cover themselves with the sacrifice of Christ
dead; the righteousness and perfection of which, is the linen Ephod in which
thou being wrapped, must offer up thy sacrifice. 3. Array thy self with his
virtues, to adorn and deck thee. This is the broidered coat which thou must
wear, of manifold virtues and graces; which as jewels and ornaments must shine
in thy life, as the many glistering stones did in the breastplate. So the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 24. Put on the new man created after God in righteousness
and holiness. 4. Put on Christ by Christian profession. Our apparel is seen,
and makes us known to others. Servants make themselves known by their cloth
they wear, whose they are. The Priest must put on the Plate on his forehead,
and we are commanded to carry the name of God and the Lamb in our foreheads,
Rev. 14. 1. that men may never see our faces, but therein read the holiness
and innocence of our conversation. 5. Put on the girdle, Have thy loins
girded. Luke 12. 35. Stand in a readiness, 1. To all duties of Christianity.
2. To all acceptable sacrifices of faith, repentance, prayer, praises,
obedience. 3. To offer up our selves by life or death to the glory and praise
of God. We had need be thus begitt that we may stand to the confession and
profession of the truth, not knowing when or what trials will come; besides
that the world, nor pleasure, nor lusts seldom find us unprepared. And can he
be a good subject who is always unprepared for his Princes service; but ever
ready to serve his enemy. Use. 3. Comfort to the godly.


III. From the being arrayed with these garments, the poor members of the
Church have a ground of much comfort; in respect 1. of their head so arrayed.
2. of themselves, and in respect of themselves considering those garments. 1.
in the general. 2. in the particulars.

First, 1. In Christ so arrayed.
in respect of our high Priest Jesus Christ thus gloriously arrayed. 1. In the
Ephod we see his mighty power, who caries his Church upon his shoulders of
power and protection. Alas I where should we lie if our Lord did not lift us
up, and bear us up! But now we never need to discourage our selves, by casting
what shall become of the Church or religion, if such and such projects
prevail, for so long as we are on Christ's shoulders we are safe. 2. In the
Pectorall behold the ardent and surpassing love of Jesus Christ to his Church.
For as he caries us on his shoulders by his power: so he caries our names on
his heart by his love. This our true high Priest cannot forget his Saints when
he seems to turn his back on them, but still has their names before his
eye. And this is the happiness of the Church, in which she may well rest her
self; that (according to her prayer Cant. 8. 6.) Christ sets her as a seal
on his heart, and as a signet on his arm. How is it possible to forget that
which is sealed on the heart? How can the eye look off the signet on the arm?
For a signet, because it is most precious, is most carefully kept; and being
upon the arm of Christ, what arm can pull us off from him?

Object. Oh that I might know my happiness to be set on Christ's heart!

Sol. If thou would be set as a signet on the Lords arm, become the Lords
servant, and be faithful in this service. See Hag. 2. 23. O Zerubbabel my
servant, I will set thee as a signet. 3. In his Miter we see our high Priest
crowned with honor and glory above all men and Angels. And all the Church must
say (as Psalm. 132. 18.) On him let his Crown flourish. And if the dignity of
the head be the honor of the members, and the power of the head the safety of
the members: then from hence we have no small consolation. 4. In his Plate we
see holiness engraven on his forehead, that all our senses and thoughts must
be fixed in the forehead of our only high Priest, from whom all holiness
flows to his Church, Oh what matter of joy is it to see, that we (in our
selves so foul every way, in our nature, in our course, and shut out of heaven
where no unclean thing comes) have in him a fountain of holiness set open
for us! For he is made to us of God wisdom, sanctification, etc.

Secondly, 2. In respect of themselves. In general.
in respect of themselves (by means of Jesus Christ) the members of the Church
thus arrayed enjoy sure and stable consolation. For 1. In general they all
afford us this comfort, that through Christ our high Priest we are beautiful
and glorious, yea our beauty is made perfect through his beauty. Psalm. 45. 9.
The Queen stands in most royal and costly garments. Never had Solomon's Queen
in all her royalty such sweet perfumed and precious garments, Psa. 45. 9.
as has the spouse of our true Solomon. For 1. Those were provided by Solomon:
Kings daughters in thy precious garments: but these provided by Christ out of
his wardrobe; and will not endure any other garment or ornament brought or
procured elsewhere. 2. Those were material, gold, silver, and precious stuff
out of earth: but ours are spiritual and heavenly. What the glorious robes of
the Church are, see Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; for he
has clothed me with garments of salvation, and covered me with a robe of
righteousness, and decked me as a bride with Jewels. What is gold, silver,
silk, pearls; to righteousness, holiness, life, immortality and glory? 3.
Those were corruptible and soon cast off: but these never wear not tear. For
all the sons and daughters of God are clad with incorruption and immortality,
and are heirs of eternity. Now it were no small comfort that we, being so
naked and foul, wallowing in our blood and filthiness, Ezekiel. 16.
or covered with filthy clouts and rags of sin, and the apparel of death,
should have these taken away, Zach. 3. 4. But to be thus arrayed and covered,
yea decked and adorned with such beauty and glory, is more cause of joy and
comfort.

II. In their parts they assure our happiness, In the particulars.
and seal up our comfort:

I. The Pectorall shows how God esteems of believers; Believers highly
esteemed, as precious stones.
signified by the twelve precious stones. 1. For price. A great sum of money
will not buy one of these precious stones. For we are not redeemed with gold,
silver, or corruptible things; but with precious blood. He must be some great
King that must buy an Union; but he must be the great God that can purchase
one of these precious stones, Act. 20. 2. For shining and beauty. If a man were
clothed with the Sun, he must needs shine gloriously. The meanest believer is
clothed with the Sun, Revel. 12. 1; and shines in the firmament of the
Church with the beams of Christ's righteousness as the Sun in his strength.
3. For hidden virtues and secret operation. The godly have not a shine and
show, but the true substance of many virtues and graces secretly laid up in
their hearts, and working mightily in them: the stones out of common Quarry,
that is, common men have not such things. 4. For rareness. It is an hard thing
to find a godly man, these are rarer then most precious stones. Elias could not
see one in the world besides himself, though there were many. 5. For their
estimation, and the reckoning of them with God and good men. Although the world
out of ignorance and malice scorn this pearl, and as swine tread them under
foot; yet the Jeweller knows them; our high Priest places them upon his
breast. And a wise Merchant knows that a pearl trodden under foot is a pearl:
and in it self, a pearl lying in the quarry or sands unknowen, or trampled in
the dirt or myr^, is as good at when it is taken out. Thou that art an enemy to
good men: Sin to slight them.
1. See how far thou art from Gods judgment. 2. If thou knew their worth,
where now thou tramplest them, thou would take them into thy heart. 3. One
day thou shall desire their glory, but too late.

As Pomegranats.
Which, 1. In themselves have no great beauty without, or on the outside. 2.
Their place is below, and they hang in the skirt of the garment: But within, 1.
They carry the color of blood, are washed in the blood of Christ. 2. They are
full of excellent juice and liquor, of grace and piety. 3. They cast a sweet
smell from them, and leave a pleasant savor behind them: And therefore Christ
fastens them to himself inseparably, as the Pomegranats were fastened to the
high Priests garment. Be thou a fruitful Christian, no matter what place thou
art in, or in what account among men: Our high Priest has use of thee, and
must not go into the Sanctuary of heaven without thee, though thou hangest in
the skirt of his garment.

As heirs of the crown of righteousness.
For he has trodden all our enemies not only under his feet, but under ours
also, Romans 16. 20. Let us not cast down our hopes and hearts; our high Priest
is stronger then all the enemies that can rise up against the Church. And we
may courageously combat against sin, errors, heretics, being sure of
victory through the Crown and Miter of Jesus Christ. This Miter of Christ
shall fetch down the Miter of Antichrist for us. This Crown of our high
Priest shall shake down his tripple Crown, and has already blasted him. And
though these Babylonians begin to wriggle, as a snake deadly wounded, with hope
to reign in these Churches as sometime they did; and for the sins of the
land, they may recover power by their craftiness to surprise some ignorant,
silly, and unstable persons: yet shall they prevail against none whose names
are written in the book of life; but by the power of our Captain we shall
tread down both Satan's and Antichrists kingdom, and prevail against all that
rises up against the power of Christ.

Sect. VI.
Priests, types in the execution of their Office.

Having declared how the high Priest, and priests of the old Testament
resembled our high Priest of the new Testament Jesus Christ in respect of his
solemn inauguration and investiture into his Office: Now we are to show how
he farther typified our Lord, in respect of his administration and execution of
i^. Many are the special Laws which the Lord gave to the Priests concerning
their careful carriage of themselves above others, and these may be reduced to
two heads. 1. As concerning their common actions. 2. As concerning their
actions ministerial.

Concerninig his common actions, Common actions of the Priests: 3.
he was prohibited diverse things which were lawful in other men. I will
mention three.

I. The Priests must keep an holy abstinence from for the time they entered
into the Tabernacle, Abstinence from wine and strong drink.
Levit. 10. 9. a Law was made for all the Priests, upon occasion of Nadabs and
Abihues punishment; who being (as it seem) drunk, offered strange fire, and
were burnt by fire before the Lord. And the Lord gives a reason of this law:
lest their minds or senses might be distracted or disturbed, so as they could
not rightly discern or execute, the things pertaining to God, (...).
and things pertaining to men, Heb. 5. The use of the Law was: 1. Typical,
shadowing out the most holy and sober course of our high Priest Jesus Christ,
The use of this law.
who was never unready or unfit for any part of his Office, but in all
perfection of judgment and understanding faithfully performed and fulfilled
all righteousness. 2. Perpetual, carrying in it a perpetual equity for all
Christian Pastors, and Ministers, who must use such creatures and liberties
sparingly, as they help their natural infirmities by them, and help
themselves forward in the exercise of prayer, study, preaching, and other
Ministerial duties; but not to dull, or to make themselves gross or
distempered by them. And hence is the same law repeated in the new Testament,
Tit. 1. 7. A Minister must not be a lover of wine: Not inhibiting all use of
wine and strong drink in case of necessity; as in grief of heart, Prou. 31. 6.
or for healths sake, Timothy may drink a little, 1. Tim. 5. 23; yea and for
honest delight at Feasts and Marriages may be a more liberal use of wine, as
John 2. where Christ himself was present. But he may not be a quaffer, or
wine-bibber, one that sits at the wine or pot, swilling in wine or strong
drink; because this is as great an hindrance to the faithful performance of
Ministerial duties, Intemperance in Ministers very hurtful.
as may be. For, 1. It troubles the understanding, Hos. 4. 11. wine takes away
the heart: It disturbs the memory; Prove. 31. 5.
lest he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment, not being able
to discern between clean and unclean. 2. It disables and withdrawes a
Minister from all his duties. While he sits at the wine or strong drink, how
can he sit at his study? How can he attend to reading, meditation, to
exhortation, or doctrine? How can he but be disturbed from ardency of prayer?
Or how dare he (if he could) pray? How can he keep watch with God, or over
his people, or over himself? 3. It disables the duties themselves, suppose
them done never so well; seeing by this vice he has made himself and his
calling so contemptible. What authority can an Oracle have in a drunken man's
mouth, Prove. 23. 33.
which cannot but use to speak lewd things? 4. How can such a man's course but
wage open war with holy doctrine? He must needs shake hands with as base and
wicked company, as a country yields; and give his hand to scorners. Hos. 7. 5.
Wine is a mocker, and acquaints a man with mockers of God, and of all good
things, and all good men. He must needs be an enemy to all that are not of his
own strain; to all that call men to sobriety and temperate courses, and
scorn them as too pure and precise. Hence shall a godly careful preacher have
all such Ministers in a country at war with him. A man being once warmed
with strong drink, how many things break from him in his speeches, in his
actions, unseemely, unsavory, and disgraceful to his profession? These things
being so, we cannot but lament that this sin is so much crept into the
Ministry, even in all parts of the Christian world. Alas that the stewards of
Gods house should sit with drunkards, and drink, and be drunken, Luke 12. 45!
Drunkenness was wont to fly the light, they use to be drunk in the night;
and should the lights themselves be drunkards or associats with them, and in
the light?

II. A second Law for the common actions of the Priests concerns their
marriage. God does not forbid Ministers marriage, how ordered.
but only orders it for the holy, modest, and grave carriage of it in this sort
of men above all other. And therefore the Law of God forbids his marriage with
three sorts of women, Levit. 21, 14. Whom they may not mary.
1. He must not mary a widow, lest 1. She might prove with child, and bring
in a strange seed into the Priesthood, provided against, verse 15. 2. Lest
settled stoutnesse, or evil disposition should hinder her fitness for him, who
must not be disgraced in one so near him. 2. He must not mary a divorced
woman, that has been put away from her husband, because it may be presumed
she was put away for her misbehaviour, or badd carriage toward her former
husband. 3. He must not mary one defiled neither voluntarily or violently;
such a blot must not lie on his wife, lest his function be disgraced. But the
law allows him only two sorts of women to mary, And whom they may.
1. A maid, or virgin, verse. 13; because she may be more easily guided and
ruled, and won to frame her self to duty and obedience; and she must be of
his own tribe or stock, both for the credit of her parentage, and for the
certain knowledge of her education and manners before he took her to
himself. 2. The widow of a Priest, Ezech. 44. 22. For it is presumed that such
a one has been already trained to modesty, to sobriety, to a chaste and sweet
behavior beseeming the wife of a Priest.

This Law is both ceremonial and significative, Typical use of this ordinance.
as also has in it a perpetual truth and equity. In the former use it has
an eye unto Christ's marriage with his wife the Church. Our high Priest marieth
not any harlot, or polluted Synagogue, defiled with Idolatry, which is
spiritual fornication, and going an whoring from God, doting upon idols,
merits, other Mediators: Neither with a divorced woman, such as is the
Synagogue of the Jews, as now they are in the East; and the Synagogues of
Satan and Antichrist, as now they are in the West, since their Tridentin^
apostasy and Anathematizing the doctrine of Christ; to both whom God has
given a bill of divorce. Christ our high Priest is not married to either,
howsoever the Church of Rome pretend a marriage with him, and show us their
Baptism, and Lords Supper as the ring and confirmation of their marriage. But
we know it will neither make her an honest woman, nor prove her now a lawful
wife to show her marriage ring, who having played false with her husband, is now
long since divorced from him. Jesus Christ marries a virgin chasi and
undefiled, that is, holy and unspotted by imputation of his own
righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 2.
and washed by water through the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. He marries her of his own
tribe: For as the first Adam must not marry a wife but of his own flesh, and
out of his own side: so the second Adam marryeth a wife issuing out of his
own side, flesh o^ his own flesh, and bone of his bone. And he will take to
himself again the high Priests widow, the people of the Jews, and marry them
into one body with the Gentiles. So much for the signification.

Now the perpetual equity of this Law binds the Ministers of the new
Testament; Perpetual.
who are not prohibited marriage by the Scripture, no more then the Priests of
the old Testament: Ministers marriage, lawful.
But for the honor and credit of this office and function care must be had,
that their wives especially be honest, sober, free from scandal, and framed to
the rules of the Apostle for Ministers wives, 1 Timothy 3. 11. and for the
preventing a number of scandals that else may arise within, and lie upon his
family. This care being had, they being married shall be as holy and honorable
in their function as the Priests of the old Testament: who being married, were
said to have the Crown of God upon their heads, and to offer the bread of God,
and to be after a special manner, Against the practice of Romanists.
holy. But how detestable is that filthy whore of Rome, whose filthy virgin
priests hate marriage but not lust; refuse Gods own ordinance, and honest
wives of their own, and like fed horses neigh after their neighbors wives,
and cover the country with a bastardly brood; and hold in their doctrine,
better they should have an hundred Concubines then one married wife, and in
their practice adjudge married ministers to death, but adulterous priests to a
light penance, and that bought out with a trifle or word of a friend. Bale. De
actis Romanorum Pontificum.
One story is memorable out of the book of the Acts of the Roman Bishops:
when the Kings visiters in England, in the year 1538, visited the Abbyes, they
found in some of their styes rather then religious houses, five, in some ten,
in some twenty Sodomits and adulterers, of which some kept five, some seven,
some twenty harlots. So Gregory the first, enjoining single life to the Clergy,
sent for fish to his ponds, and had six thousand heads; whereupon (sighing) he
said, It is better to marry, then to burn. Bid denies the story, although of
Huldericus Bishop of August^ to pope Nicholas.

III. A third Law for common actions. Mourning for the dead.
He must be very moderate in mourning for the dead. Lev. 21. 2. 3. the ordinary
priest must mourn, only for his mother, father, son, daughter, brother or
his sister (if a maid) because she was yet in the house and family; but without
the family he might not lament for any, no not for the prince, ver. 4.

Quest. Might he not mourn for his wife? Whether for the Wife.
For some think not, because she is not named, neither in that Law, nor in the
repetition of it, Ezech. 44. 25.

Answ. I think he might: But the wife is not named, because 1. she is one with
himself, 2. if for daughter and sister, much more for wife which is nearer, 3.
the Prophet Ezechiel was charged not to mourn for his wife, being a Prophet
and priest, Ezech. 24. 16; which seems an exception from the ordinary manner.
But for the high Priest, Levit. 21. 12.
he might not mourn for any of them named, neither (in likelihood) for his
wife; nor uncover his head; nor rent his clothes, nor go to any dead body, nor
go out of the Sanctuary, for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is
upon his head.

This Law had in it both ceremony, Ceremonial use hereof.
and perpetuity in substance of it. In the ceremony, the Priest might not
mourn for the dead, 1. Because mourning for the dead was counted a Legal
uncleanness, ver. 11. 2. The oil of holy ointment was upon his head, being
oil of gladness. 3. They must be contrary to the foolish manner and fashion
of the Priests and people of the Gentiles, who were so passionate and excessive
in their affected and sometimes forced mourning, as they fell into indecent and
unlimited behaviors. 4. The Priest, and especially the high Priest, was to be
a type of eternity, and therefore must show no such sign of weakness and
corruption, as weeping is. Hence it is, that we read not of the death of an
high Priest, but ever before his death another was appointed and installed. So
before Aaron dyed, Eleazer was installed; and before his death was Phinehas,
Numb. 25. 3.
Numb. 20. 28, Hence it is, that we read not of their reigns and times, how
long or short any of them lived, as of the Judges and Kings; which closely
notes and implies unto us, that they were types of eternity and immortality.
5. In the ceremony this Law has a special aim and respect to Jesus Christ
our high Priest, in whom was no blot, no spot, or moral pollution, as that
high Priest most carefully was restrained from every Legal pollution. He wept
indeed sundry times for the dead, as for Lazarus etc. because he was to abolish
the Legal ceremonies, and this among other. It being in him sufficient that
most perfectly he preserved himself from moral pollution: In which sense he
never uncovered his head, that is, was never so weak or inglorious by passion,
but that he ever maintained union with his father, and abode the powerful head
of his Church. Neither did he rent his garments, that is, his holy flesh baked
as it were in the oven of afflictions, extended and rent on the cross, cast
aside in the grave, was never rent off from his divinity, but was ever from the
first moment of Hypostaticall union, present with it, and shall be for all
eternity. He never goes out of the Sanctuary to mourn for the dead, for the
crown and oil of God is upon him. For as in his life he (being most holy) was
not subject to be quite subdued in the house of death: so now after his
resurrection he has attained all excellency of glory and happiness, free from
all misery and sorrow, never to be interrupted any more by any grief or
adversary power. Revel. 4. 9, 10.
The Crown of God is set upon his head for ever.

The perpetuity and substance of this Law concerns both Ministers and people.
Perpetual.
1. To teach both the one and the other not to grow into excess of sorrow or
passion, but to be examples of gravity, moderation, and well weilding of
affections; and to be patterns of patience and holy obedience in suffering
extreme adversities, as well as in the actions and exercise of practick
virtues. 2. To give testimony of their hope and assurance of the happy
resurrection of their friends, 1 These. 4. 13.
for whom they must not sorrow as men without hope. 3. To show that no occasion
or natural affection, no not the nearest and greatest change befalling their
outward estate might distract them from their charge and duty; or so disquiet
the peaceable tranquillity of their minds, as any part of their duty might be
hindered for matter or manner. And therefore in this case our Savior
(confirming the perpetual equity of this Law) says, Mat. 8. 22.
Let the dead bury their dead, follow thou me. And the Lord is so strict in
this case (Lev. 10. 6) that when Aarons sons were so strangely slain before
his face, he must not mourn nor stir a foot out of his Ministry, lest he
dye, and therefore the text says: Aaron held his peace, ver. 3. So no outward
respect of duty to friends must call us from duty to God.

Ob. If the Priest must not weep, how could they seriously repent of their
sins?

Answ. The Priest must not weep for any temporal losses, nor for personal
losses; and in natural regards he must be impassionate: Ierem 9. 1.
but for his sins he might. Jeremy a Prophet and Priest wishes his head a
fountain of tears, The high priest must weep for his own and the peoples
sins in the day of expiation, and if he weep not, he must dye. So Joel 2.
17. all the priests must howl, and cry, and weep between the porch and the
Altar. Christ wept often, Sin, the proper cause of mourning.
and all for sin: as, for Lazarus, on the Cross, over Jerusalem. Whence we
note: 1. That the proper cause of mourning, is sin. He that must not shed a
tear for any other cause in the world, must shed tears for his sin upon pain
of death. Oh that they would think of this that glory in their sin! 2. Let
us so order our affections, as that our principal mourning may be for our
sins; and bind up our affections for outward and natural losses and
crosses, so as we may have them loosed in spiritual. This law tells us, that
sorrow for our only son or brother, or the dear wife that lies in our
bosom, Mischiefs of sin.
ought to be no sorrow in comparison of sorrow for sin. Which, 1. separates
from God: 2. makes Christ absent, and stand aloof: 3. grieves the Spirit, and
makes him heavy toward us: 4. seperates soul from body, yea (without
repentance) soul and body from heaven and happiness. Let us, who have been
excessive in worldly sorrow, turn the stream against our sins; and in all
crosses set our heaviness rather upon some sin in our selves, which might
cause the cross, then on the cross it self.

Sect. VII.
Now it follows that we show how the Priests figured ministerial actions. Of
these kind of actions some were common to inferior Priests, Ministerial
actions of the Priests.
some proper to the high Priest.

I. Common actions were six. Common actions of all Priests: 6.
1. The Priest must kill the sacrifices and none but he: signifying Jesus
Christ his voluntary action in laying down his life for believers; none could
take away his life from him. And he was to be as well the Priest as the
sacrifice; John 10. 18. I have power to lay down my life. 2. The priests
offered the blood of the sacrifices to God, and sprinkled it on the Altar; for
they were ordained for men in things of God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for
sins. Heb. 5. 1.
No man might offer his own sacrifice, Levit. 7. 4.
but he must bring it to the Priest: there was no coming to God, but by the
priest: Figuring out Jesus Christ who offers up himself a sacrifice for the
sins of the world, upon the Altar of his Deity, which gives both virtue and
merit unto it. No other can offer to God bloody or unbloody sacrifice upon this
Altar, but himself. John 17. 19. I sanctify my self for them: even as the
Altar sanctifies the gift. 3. The Priests prepared the body of the sacrifice
(Lev. 1. 6.) flayed it, divided it into several parts, washed the intrailes,
put fire unto the burnt offering, consumed the fat, cast the filth and dung
into the place of ashes: Signifying, that Christ himself alone did the whole
work of redemption. He suffered the heat of Gods wrath and justice; he puts
away all our filth, and covers it in his own ashes; he burns up our fat, that
is, the senselessenesse of our sin, and all that savoureth of the flesh, by the
fire of his Spirit; and inwardly purges and wholly washes us in the fountain
of his own blood. 4. The Priest must teach the people; Mal. 2. 7.
His lips must preserve knowledge: and the people must depend on his mouth:
signifying the action of this great teacher of the Church, who brought to us
from the bosom of his father the whole counsel of God concerning the
redemption of mankind; which could never have entered into the heart of man,
but by the teaching of this great Prophet, Isa. 52. 4.
Deuteronomy. 18. 15. He has the learned tongue, Psalm. 45. 2.
and Grace is poured into his lips. He therefore having the words of
eternal life, we must depend on him, and hear him. 5. The Priest must pray
for the people, Numb. 6. 23.
and bless them. A form of blessing is prescribed for Aaron and his sons,
laying their hands on the children of Israel: signifying the strong prayers and
intercessions of Jesus Christ for his Church, who was heard in all things, Heb.
5. 7.
as himself witnesses, John 11. 42. Father I know^ thou hear me always:
John 17.
And accomplished not only in his holy intercession upon earth, and now in
heaven: but manifestly in that blessing of his disciples by laying his hands
upon them, which was his last action upon earth, Luke 24. 50. 6. The Priests
were to preserve the Oil for lights and the incense, and for the daily meat
offering, and the anointing oil. And the oversight of the whole Tabernacle,
and all in the Sanctuary, and all the instruments belonged to their care for
the safety in moving, carrying, standing, etc. signifying Jesus Christ the
preserver of all grace in his Church. He only watches for the safety of his
Church, for the upholding of his holy ministry, and all holy constitutions
which else would quickly be broken up. He plants the Ministry, and he removes
it at his pleasure. He has the seven stars in his right hand. He is the great
Archbishop of souls to the whole Church, and no other in this kind but he:
So much of common actions ministerial.

II. Actions more peculiar to the high priest were, Actions proper to the high
Priest.
1. daily. 2. weekly. 3. yearly. 4. continually.

I. He must daily, Daily.
1. dress the holy lamps and lights morning and evening before the Lord, Lev.
24. 2, 3. to preserve the lights from going out. Shadowing Christ, the true
light, by whom the light of true doctrine must ever shine in the Church, and
never go out; by which the true believers shall be delivered from darkness
and death. This was formerly figured by Goshen, there was light when three
days darkness was over all Egypt. And this was figured by the pillar of fire
that never failed till they came to Canaan. 2. he must daily burn incense
before the Lord upon the Altar of sweet perfume: Exodus 32. 7, 8.
signifying Christ our high Priest daily offering up, 1. our duties and
services done by his appointment, and which through him smell as a sweet
incense acceptable to God. 2. our prayers, called odours of the Saints, Revel.
5. 8.
and a sweet incense. And as no incense pleased God but that which was offered
upon that golden Altar: Psalm. 141. 2.
so no duty or prayer of ours is farther accepted then offered up by him and
from him, whose golden purity gives merit and worth unto them. Revel. 8. 3.
And as the incense must be offered up by the high Priest morning and evening:
so the continual virtue of Christ's merit ascends daily before God, and
perfumeth all the Sanctuary, neither is there any other way to the father but
by him.

II. He must weekly make the shewbread, Weekly.
and set it before the Lord continually. Exodus 25. 30. And more expressly,
Levit. 24. 5, 6. Every Sabbath he must set on the table twelve loaves according
to the twelve tribes, and take the old away, to the maintaining of his family;
for which use they might well suffice, every loaf weighing about seven or
eight pounds. Here was a figure of Christ the true bread of life, who sets
himself (in the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the
Sacraments) before the face of God (that is, in the assemblies gathered
together every Sabbath,) the most sufficient food and refreshing of the Church,
to continue it in life, strength, and good estate from Sabbath to Sabbath till
that eternal Sabbath come.

III. He must yearly once (and that in the day of expiation) go into the Holy
of Holies, Yearly.
Exodus 30. 10. and Lev. 16. 2. and 34. to make an atonement for himself, for
all his house, and for all the people, but not without blood. Signifying, that
Christ by one alone sacrifice of himself has opened the Sanctuary of heaven,
and by his ascension has made entrance into it on our behalf, and there
appears before God once for all to make intercession for us. See Heb. 10. 12,
19. And as he must go alone without all attendants: so Christ must tread the
winepresse alone. Isay 63. 3.
No friend, no disciple, stands with him; no fellow, no companion goes with him
to make atonement; but all fear and fly, that we might cast our eye on no
other Mediator but him, 1 Timothy 2. 5.

IV. He must continually decide the highest controversies; Continually.
he must judge between the clean and unclean; he must excommunicate the one
out of the congregation, and receive in the other when he was legally cleansed.
Signifying Christ, who in the Church and Scriptures is the supreme Judge of
all controversies. It is his word alone can bind or loose, justify or
condemn. According to his direction obstinate persons are to be cast out, and
penitent offenders received in. As Pharaoh to Joseph, so God to Christ: Without
thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt. Gen 41.
44.

I. Ministers of the new Testament must learn hence to attend diligently on
their charges; Use for ministers.
and know, that the substance of all these duties lies as heavy on their
shoulders, as upon those Priests of the old Testament. Every conscionable
Minister is bound. 1. To prepare sacrifices to the Lord. In the old Law the
Priest presented dead sacrifices: but we must offer living ones. They dead
beasts: but we living men, quickened by faith, alive by the Spirit of God, holy
and acceptable. They external and unreasonable: Romans 12. 1.
we reasonable and spiritual, such as God (who is a Spirit) may accept and
delight in. They must first kill and then sacrifice: so we can never present
any man an acceptable sacrifice, without killing his sin. As the poor beast
must be killed, and cut in pieces, and then offered: so we must by the sharp
knife of the Law (urging repentance and mortification) cut asunder the
heart strings of sin, mangle the body of sin, and let out the lifeblood of
man's lusts and corruptions. And as they having slain the beast must wash the
entraile, burn the fat, cast the filth and dung into the place of ashes: so
the Minister after his labor in mortifying sin, must bring men to the lavour
of sanctification, separate them from their foulness, and bring them to full
holiness in the fear of God. 2. The Priest must preserve knowledge, his lips
must feed many, he must stand in the counsel of God, and be as his mouth:
And as Jesus Christ brought the whole will and counsel of God from the bosom
of his Father: So must his Minister declare that whole counsel to the Church,
and keep nothing back. Act. 20. 27.
3. The Minister must daily dress the holy lamps and lights morning and
evening, and preserve the light from going out; he must provide oil for the
continual feeding of the lights, that is, by painful and diligent study of
the Scriptures and meditation he must furnish himself to the work of the
Ministry, that the light of holy doctrine may shine by him on all occasions;
that having the tongue of the learned he may be always ready to speak a word
to him that is weary, and never want words of comfort which may be as oil to
the distressed soul. 4. He must daily burn incense before the Lord upon the
Altar of sweet perfume, that is, offer daily prayers as sweet odours in the
Name of Christ, who is the Altar of sweet perfume both for himself and his
people. He must pray also for the people and bless them; as Samuel, God forbid
I should sin against God, and not pray for you. For his office is to stand
between God and his people. Every man must be his own mouth to God; but he
must be the mouth of every man. 5. He must weekly set the Shewbread before
the Lord, that is, propound Jesus Christ the true bread of life, the Manna that
came down from heaven, the continual strength and nourishment of the Church
of God, both in the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, which the ancient
Church did weekly celebrate, as the Priest did weekly set these loaves. Nay
he must not only set them before others, but himself must feed on them, as
the Priests did on the Show bread, all the week and year long, lest it befall
him as that Prince, 2. King. 7. 20. that saw plenty of food with his eyes, but
tasted not of it; for being trodden under foot, he died.

II. Every Christian as a Priest unto God must 1. Use: For the people.
Daily labor in his own mortification: Every day kill some beast or other,
some lust or other that as wild beasts are untamed, and dangerous to the
soul. 2. Morning and evening dress his lights, and look to the clearing of
his lamps; setting himself a task of daily reading the Scriptures for the
clearing of his judgment, and the informing of his mind, and for the
reforming of his heart and life, that he may shine every day more clearly then
other in holy conversation. 3. Every day burn incense before the Lord, upon
the Altar of sweet perfume both morning and evening. Every Christian, morning
and evening must offer up daily prayers and praises as a sweet smell unto God.
That as the smoke of sweet incense goes upward and disperseth it self abroad
in the air: so the incense of prayer ascending may disperse it self abroad
for the benefit of the person, family, Church, at home and abroad. What else
calls the Apostle for, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
saying: Pray continually, in all things give thanks, but that the Lord should
smell the sweet odours of our morning and evening prayer, especially when we
rise and go to rest? How this duty is neglected, and with manifest contempt
and loss, every man's conscience can tell him. Now in offering this incense, 1.
See no strange incense be offered, that is, no prayer without faith. 2. None
but upon the Altar of incense, none but in the Name of Christ. 4. Every week
on the Sabbath day (as the Priests in the Law) provide himself of shewbread,
to serve for his provision all the week, that is, make such conscionable use
of the holy Ministry, as he may preserve life of grace, and strength of
grace, which falls to consumption in the soul except it be continually
repaired, even as the body wastes without natural food. 5. Every year set
apart a day of expiation, to make an atonement for himself, for his house, and
all the people. This proportion shows it not amiss once a year to set apart
a day of humiliation in serious fasting and prayer, to make atonement for our
own and others sins. The equity of which seems not only grounded in that
Law, Levit. 16. 29. which enjoines the Jew a yearly standing fast, wherein once
a year every soul should humble it self with fasting before the Lord in one
of the great assemblies; and Chap. 23. 27. binds all unto it: But also in good
reason, Reasons for a yearly fast.
seeing a years space might bring about many just occasions, 1. Many sins
might be committed to provoke the Lord, 2. Many judgments let in, or to be
let in for those sins, 3. Many mercies wanting, which by ours and others
sins we are worthily deprived of. And although we ought continually to
humble our selves for our sins; yet to help our infirmities, and to do it
thoroughly, it shall avail us much, to set a special time apart for it, as
such who out of sound judgment esteem we have sufficient cause once a year
thus deeply to humble our selves. For howsoever the Jews had daily expiatory
sacrifices, yet the Lord held it not superfluous to appoint them besides one
set and solemn day of expiation. So is it no less needful for any Christian
(notwithstanding his daily humiliation) to help himself in his repentance by
one day in a year at lest, of more solemn expiation.

CHAP. XV.
Nazarites types of Christ.
THe third order or rank of holy persons types of Christ are the Nazarites,
Nazarits, types of Christ 5. ways.
who were sanctified by vow or special profession; and not obscurely shadowing
Jesus Christ the only true and perfect Nazarite. For,

I. The name Nazarite by which Christ must be (according to the ancient
prophecies) called, Matt. 2. 23. and in contempt was by the Jews so styled in
the superscription of the Cross) signifies one separated and set apart from
others; and is ascribed to three sorts of men, usually set above others.
Separate, or set apart 3. ways.
1. To such as are set apart for singular sanctimony, as the high Priest, whose
crown of sanctification on his head is called Nezer, Exodus 29. 6. 2. To such
as in dignity and authority are separated from others; as Kings, whose royal
crown or diadem is called Nezer, 2. Sam. 1. 10. I took the crown that was
upon his head. 3. To such as were separated by some religious vow, as to this
order of the Nazarites; whose hair increasing on their heads, as an external
sign of their vow, was called Nezer, Numb. 6. 18. By which order the Lord
would have the eminent sanctity of Jesus Christ to be typified, as well as his
sacrifice and kingly Office by Priests and Kings. He was indeed the only true
Nazarite separated from sinners, holy, harmless, and undefiled, Heb. 7. 26.
For, 1. His profession was, Christ eminent for sanctity, in 6. respects.
I am not of this world, Ioh. 8. 23. 2. He is called (Dan. 9. 24.) the holy of
holies, or the most Holy (a title never ascribed to the most holy persons on
earth by resemblance:) For as the holy of holies (a type of Christ) was
separated from the rest of the Tabernacle and Temple, and excelled both the
outer and inner Court in holiness: So Jesus Christ surpassed not only common
men but the holiest of men, as far as the sanctum sanctorum excelled both the
sanctum and atrium. His divine holiness far excelled the most pure
Nazarites, who yet are said (Lam. 4. 7.) to be purer then the snow, and whiter
then the milk. 3. He was not of unholy made holy as they, but he was always
holy and without all stain of sin, from the first moment for ever: That holy
thing which is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost, Matt. 1. 20. 4. His
holiness was not from any other, but of and from himself, whereas whosoever
else have any holiness it is from him. 5. His holiness was essential (not
accidental) as he was God; and as he was man (by the union of the manhood
with his divine nature) was bestowed upon him in full measure, yea beyond
measure; and therefore is called, fullness of grace and holiness, Ioh* 1. But
in the most holy men this holiness is a received quality by communicating of
his spirit, and that imperfectly and in small measure. 6. They might be holy in
part for themselves, but could not impart that holiness to others: But Christ
is not only holy in himself, but sanctifies them and the whole Church; he
being the original and fountain of all holiness. They might be legally
clean in some actions: but he was morally clean in all observations. They in
some passages of their life: but he in his nature, in his disposition, and in
the fulfilling of all righteousness.

(Numb. 6. 2, 3.) must abstain from wine and strong drink, and all that
comes of the grape. Abstemious: and why.
1. Because they were to study the Law of God, and the Lord will not have them
meddle with any thing that might trouble their brain, or unfit them to so holy
studies. 2. He would have them paterns of sobriety and temperance, and
restrain them from whatsoever might stir up lust, or occasion intemperance.
In which, what else did they but shadow our Savior Christ? Who was a true
Nazarite, not in the letter and ceremony (for he did drink wine, and
miraculously provided it for others; yea ordained wine an element in the
Supper, that every Christian might drink it) but in the morality and truth of
the thing he was the only perfect Nazarite. Never was any so intent in study,
invocation, preaching, acting, and suffering all things for our sake, as he
was. Neither was any creature so abstinent and temperate as he was; he fasted
forty days and forty nights, and after that (being hungry) he would eat
nothing till all his temptations in the wilderness were ended. As of all other
virtues, so he was an unfailing pattern in this of holy abstinence and
unviolated temperance.

III. The Nazarites were enjoined to let their no razor must come on their
heads all the time of their vow and separation, Nourishing the hair.
Numb. 6. 5. By which ceremony the Lord intended two things. 1. He would have
them most unlike and contrary to the religious orders of the heathen Idolaters,
who usually nourished their hair to offer in sacrifice to their gods, as in
many examples I could show: But these must not diminish their hair all the
time; and when they cut it off they must burn it with fire. 2. To be a means
to avoid finenesse and delicacy in curious trimming of the head, and care of
the flesh, which is a great enemy to religious thoughts and exercises. So the
Apostle implies, the more care of the flesh, Romans 13. 14.
the less of putting on Christ Jesus. 3. Long hair in men is a sign of
strength, as in Sampson. And by this law the Lord would put them in mind that
as they were to avoid esseminate softness and delicacy; so to be manly,
strong, and courageous in performing duties, and resisting stoutly all the
temptations and baits that might allure them from the duty undertaken. As for
our Savior (whom they shadowed) it is not likely he nourished his hair,
because the Apostle says, it was (in that age) uncomely for men to have long
hair. 1 Cor. 11. 14.
If a man have long hair it is a shame unto him. And then are all the Romish
paynters quite out, who paint him with his hair lying round about his
shoulders: but Painters and Poets may lie by authority. Pictoribus atque
Poetis, Quidlibet aud^ndi semper fuit aequ^potestas. Hor.
It was enough for him, that he was a Nazarite in the truth and substance of
that Law, although not in the letter and outward ceremony of it. In which
respect how did he neglect himself; who being the Lord of all, denied himself
of all rights and comforts. He was so far from all delicacy, that (with an
utter refusal of all delights of flesh) his whole intention was set on his
function and office, submitting himself to sorrow, curse, etc. Besides, what
courage and fortitude, did he express through his whole function and office,
in overcomming sin, death, Satan, the Cross, Hell, and all adversaries?
Sampson the strongest of all Nazarites was but a weakeling to him; his
adversaries, flesh not spirit; his power, faint and failing, yea changed into
weakness.

Not touch the dead.
nor meddle with the funerals of father, mother, brother, sister, or any of
their kindred, though they might pretend never so much piety, affection, or good
nature. By which Law the Lord would teach them two things, 1. That no changes
of this life, nor loss of their dearest friends should turn them aside from
their duty, or from the observation of the Law of their profession. 2. To teach
them constancy, patience, and magnanimity of spirit in the greatest outward
afflictions, and not to show a weakness or passion in open or excessive
lamentation. Our Lord although he did touch the dead, and was at funerals, and
wept at the raising of Lazarus, and so observed not the ceremony of Nazarites,
because he was no Legal Nazarite, but was called a Nazarite as being the
truth and substance of all the Legal Nazarites, as in all other things so in
this: For he only was the Master, and had the true command of all his
affections; never exceeded measure in any thing, never was defiled by any
person dead in sin, never by any dead work, never touched or came near any
such defilement, which Legal Nazarites could not avoid.

Number. 6. 13. plainly by that figure leading us unto Christ, Released of the vow.
the only door by which we enter, and have liberty to come into the presence
of God, and obtain freedom from the sin and weakness of any duty we
perform before him.

Now for application.

I. Acknowledge Christ the true Nazarite. Use. 1. Christ and his excellency to
be acknowledged.
Upon his head let his Crown flourish. As it was said of Joseph, Genesis 49. 26,
he was separate from his brethren: so was Jesus Christ separated from all other
men and Angels, 1. In holiness and purity, being advanced in holiness above
all creatures: He alone in propriety and perfection is a Nazarite purer then
snow, and whiter then milk; yea his measure runs over to his Church, Ephesians. 5.
26. 2. In excellence and perfection of all virtues and graces, he is that
Netser, Isa. 11. 1, the branch or flower which always flourished in all kinds,
and perfections of virtue and graces, and casts from him far and near a most
sweet smell, sweet and acceptable to God and men. And his great power* wherein.
3. In power and authority. The Kingdom is his and power and glory; all power
is given him in heaven and in earth. He has power, 1. to do us good; 2. to
withstand our evil; 3. to tread down Satan, sin, death; 4. to rescue his
Church, to confound Antichrist and all enemies: 5. to finish the grace and
glory of his Saints.

Why must Christ be so pure a Nazarite? Object.


1. Because his passion could not have been acceptable, Answ.
if his person had not been as pure as the sun. 2. He was to be not only
righteousness in himself as other Nazarites, or righteousness in part: but
he must be a perfect righteousness to many. Object. But how could he be so
pure coming of Adam as they did? Sol. He came of Adam, not by Adam, as they
did; that is, he came not by natural propagation from Adam, but was conceived
by the holy Ghost, and so all original impurity was stopped in the very first
moment of his holy conception. Object. But did not he take the same infirmities
coming of Adam as they did? Answ. No, he took such infirmities as he pleased,
to fit him for a merciful high Priest, not to hinder him, and therefore he
took such infirmities from Adam as were miserable, but not damnable, and so
remained a pure Nazarite without all sinful frailty.

II. Christ the true Nazarite being come, Use. 2. Difference of the Nazarites
vow, and Papists.
all shadows must fly away, and therefore this order of Nazarites gives no
color or approbation to any order of Popish votaries or monastical persons
now in the new Testament. Besides, that white is not more contrary to black
then monastical vows to this. For 1. The Nazarites were appointed by God
himself: theirs devised by themselves. 2. Their vows were of things possible,
in their power, and temporary: these are of things impossible, without their
power, and during life, be the party never so unable to endure it. 3. Their
vows (though appointed by God) were not able to merit remission of sin and
eternal life: but these say that they merit for themselves and others, that
their vows are parts of Gods worship (which never came in his mind or book)
and a state of great perfection: Whereas, Nazareus non fuit caeteris iu^^^or,
sed aptior ad officia.
a Nazarite was not more righteous then others, but better fitted for his duty.
4. Nazarites might not cut their hair: their order stands in cutting and
shaving that they may still look neat and effeminate. 5. Nazarites drink no
wine nor strong drink, and are very temperate in their diet: these belly gods
eat up the fat, and pour in the sweet till they be monsters, that the very
fasts of Friars (for the delicacy and abundance) is become a proverb. 6.
Nazarites might not come at funerals: these follow them (as flies do fat meat)
and suck out thence their greatest profit, and sweetest morsells. 7. Nazarites
(notwithstanding their vow) lived in holy wedlock: but Popish votaries abhor
marriage, not lust or whoredom. Yet from this order they would establish their
disordered orders, as contrary as darkness to light.

III. The shadow of the Law is vanished away, Use. 2. Vmbra legis^va^^i^,
illuxit veritas Evangelii.
and the truth of the Gospel is broken forth as the light, says the Canon
Law. Every Christian must be a Nazarite not by vow of separation, but by
imitation and resemblance of Christ the true Nazarite. For

I. He must be separate from others, Be Nazarites, and how.
1. He must see that he be separate from ungodly ones, as one advanced to an
happy estate in Christ. 2. That now his mind, affections, speeches, and whole
course be contrary to the course of the world; and so (as Joseph) separate
himself from the evil behavior, and manners of his brethren; yea complain
of them to his father. 3. He must be content if his brethren separate from
him, as did Joseph's brethren when they sold him into Egypt. This is to be a
Christian Nazarite.

II. This Christian Nazarite must strictly keep the rules of his profession.
^. he must labor. 1. to preserve the vow of holiness made in Baptism, study
and follow after sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3.
This is the will of God even your sanctification, he must resign himself
wholly to God; 2. carefully to avoid the least defilement of sin. The Lord
made a Law (Numb. 6. 9.) that if any dyed by a Nazarite casually and suddenly
(though he could not avoid it) he defiled the head of his consecration; he
must be shaven and come and offer a Lamb for a trespass offering, and then
begin his vow again. Wherein the Lord shows that he will not endure any sin
in his servant (though not willingly committed, nor intended) if it be but
casual or by hap, and stirs up thereby our watchfulness against all, even
the least sin, and urges the shunning of the least touch of dead works:
Jude 23, hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. 2. He must study the law
of the Lord to grow in knowledge and conscience. Men deceive themselves that
think there be no students but those whose profession is learning, contrary to
Psa 1. and Ioh. 5. 39.

III. He must avoid intemperance, surfeiting, drunkenness, strongly watch and
ward against natural desires, against the allurings and baits of sin,
remoove impediments of faith and godliness, strive both against inward
corruptions and outward occasions. How many of much hope, by the immoderate
desires and use of these outward things have besotted themselves? It is to be
doubted that the delicacy of this age affords but a few Nazarites.

IV. He must restrain his passions and affections in the use of every thing
about him; use every thing weanedly, as not using it; not suffering any thing
to steal our hearts from us, for then we can hardly moderate our selves in
the parting from it. Nazarites in all changes must be unchangeable in their
profession: so must Christian Nazarites.

V. When he has done all in his general vow and course of holiness, he must
retain humility, bewail his wants, confess how unprofitable he is in his
service. The Nazarite that had gone through his vow in the best manner, in
giving it up must bring a burnt offering and a peace offering; confessing his
wants, and craving acceptance: so must we in our best strife and endeavors,
present our duty with that burnt offering and peace offering made by Jesus
Christ; and in that only seek and find acceptance.

CHAP. XVI.
Clean persons: Types of Christ.
THe fourth rank of holy persons pointing us unto Christ, Cleansing the
unclean a type of Christ.
were such persons as were cleansed from any legal uncleanenesse. The persons
legally unclean were of several sorts, and every sort had his several sort of
cleansing, all of them looking toward and leading us to Jesus Christ. To give
some taste in some particulars. Legal uncleanenesse was caused. 3. Sorts of
uncleanness.
1. from without, by touching or tasting. 2. from within, as unclean issues. 3.
from within and without, as Leprosy. Order requires that we should speak, I.
of the several uncleanness. II. of the several cleansings.

Sect. I.
I. The kinds of legal uncleanenesse were three:

I. The first kind of legal uncleanenesse was by eateing or touching any
unclean meat or creature, By meats or creatures that were unclean.
Lev. 11. 11. and 28.

Qu. How did the creatures become unclean, which God had made good?

Ans. The Law of distinction of meats was not therefore ordained because those
creatures were evil in their nature (for God saw all his works very good) but
prohibited only in their use. Whence this uncleanness.
Neither does the Lord pronounce them unclean by their creation, but by a
temporary institution which restrained their use and touch.

Object. It seems they were so by creation: for before the ceremonial Law,
there was a distinction of clean and unclean in Noah's time, Genesis 7. 2.

Answ. It was before the writing of the ceremonial Law, When it began
but not before the being of it, it being delivered to Adam and his posterity
by Gods lively voice. Besides, by that institution they were forbidden only
for sacrifice: but by this forbidden for common use and food, yet still clean
in their own nature.

Quest. But how can these creatures defile a man, and that of our Savior be
true, Mat. 15. 11. That which goes into the mouth, How it could be.
defiles not the man?

Answ. Now under the Gospel whatsoever goes into the mouth defiles not, in
respect of lawful and limited use: And under the Law it was not the creature
that defiled; but the transgression of Gods institution in it. In the beginning
God permitted all other trees to Adam, only restrained him in the tree of
knowledge of good and evil; which therefore ceased not to be good of it
self, but became evil in Adams use, because of the commandment: not the
apple, not the eating were in themselves defilements, but sinful eating
against the commandment.

Quest. But what ends or reasons were there of this prohibition of meats?
Meats why prohibited.


Answ. Very many. 1. To show the Lords sovereignty over his creatures, who has
liberty to permit or forbid any creature at his pleasure without impeachment of
himself or the creature, he may do with his own as he will. 2. To teach all
persons to depend on God and his word of allowance for and in the use of all
things, even for meats, and drinks, and all comforts; seeing man lives not by
bread, but by every word of God. 3. To train up his people in temperance and
obedience by restraining them so many creatures in earth, air, and sea, as
good as any other. 4. That his people might profess open detestation of the
heathenish superstition about them. The Egyptians took for gods, oxen, sheep,
goats, doves: God will have his people sacrifice these to his service, and
eat those creatures which they (out of heathenish superstition) might not
touch. The heathens used to offer many kinds of beasts to the Moon the Queen
of heaven, and to Bacchus: God will have his people detest both in sacrifice
and meat those which they so offered; all to show how contrary we ought to be
to Idolaters in whatsoever we may. 5. To distinguish that people of God from
all the nations; God esteeming them by his grace in the Messiah a clean people
and all other unclean. And this was a wall of partition between Jews and
Gentiles till Christ by rending the veil brake it down also, as in Peter's
vision, Act. 10. 15. 6. The Lord by this difference of beasts would have them
conceive a difference of persons shadowed thereby; of whom some are clean,
some unclean; the former being elect are cleansed by faith from their pollution
of sin, the other remain foul and filthy still.

Quest. How shall we know the clean from the unclean?

Answ. 1. The clean are known by the two common marks of clean beasts,
Mark, of clean beasts.
Lev. 11. 3. 1. They divide the hoof; that is, rightly distinguish of things,
between nature and grace, between Moses and Christ, between the law and
Gospel, truth and falsehood. They will not receive things in gross, and hand
over head; but being spiritual discern all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15. 2. They chew
the cud, that is, after hearing and reading the word, they meditate, ponder,
apply, and digest it: as Mary laid up the words in her heart, Luke 2. 19. 2.
The unclean are known by some naughty and unclean property. Some like the
dogs that profane the most holy things; bark against the word and preachers
of it; never chew the cud nor digest the word. Some like the swine (2 Pet. 2.)
having their mouths always rooting in the earth, cannot look up toward
heaven; all for their belly; good for nothing but the knife: neither for
plough, nor cart, nor burdens, nor saddle, nor wool, nor milk; but only to
feed and dye; besides (while they live) their filthy wallowing in miery lusts
and puddles of corruption. Some like the hare, fearful creatures shrinking
from faith in God in temptation, and from profession of it in times of danger
and persecution; more fearing crosses and losses then God himself, or the
loss of salvation. These unclean creatures cannot enter into heaven: The
fearful, Revel. 21. 8.
etc. shall have their part in the lake, etc. Of the same rank are the Conies,
that burrow and treasure in earth, and neglect to treasure where thieves
neither dig through nor steal. Mat. 6. 19, 20. Some like the Ravens, black
and unnatural, feeding on carrion. Some like the Ostrich, gross hypocrites,
with fair wings but cannot fly. Some like the Sea-meaw, partly living on
water, partly on land: partly will be saved by faith, partly by works; carry
fire and water, blow hot and cold, of any or no religion. And so much might be
said of the properties of the rest.

Sect. II.
By an unclean issue.
for which were appointed ceremonies of purification, Lev. 12. and cha. 15. 6.
All those unclean issues (of which we must read and speak modestly) lead us
by the hand, What it teaches.
1. Into our selves and the consideration of our natural corruption, the
running issues of which meet us every where. 2. Out of our selves to the
remedy, which is by Jesus Christ our sanctifier. The description of this
foulness shows what we are by nature, and in the first Adam. The manner of
the cleansing shows what we are by grace, and in the second Adam, in whom
alone we attain cure and remedy. To explain which, we must know that* 1.
Those laws concerning our unclean birth, and the woman's purification after
every birth, put both the Jews and us in mind how that the common nature of
man is horribly polluted by sin, which is every where called by the name of
uncleanenesse; Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has
my mothor conceived me. Isa. 64. 6. We have all been as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousness as filthy clouts. Job 14. 4. Generatum sequitur naturam
generantis.
Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? there is not one. John 3. 6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; because that which is begotten,
participateth of the nature of that which begets. And this uncleanenesse is
not in any one part, but sticks to the whole man both in body and soul,
polluting the mind with blindness, the will with rebellion against the will
of God, the conscience with senselessness and horror, the affections with all
manner of disorder, the whole outward man with resistance and repugnancy to the
Spirit. Romans 8. 7. 2. As from these inward issues the outward man was many
ways polluted: So the Jews and we are put in mind, that from that filthy
puddle and fountain of original sin issue continually many unclean issues
into the life and conversation. Mat. 15. 19. Out of the heart come evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
slanders: These are the things which defile the man. 3. As these unclean
issues defiled whatsoever they touched, Lev. 15. 4. to the 15. so herein is
noted to them and us, the infection of sin and spreading of it, and that the
corruption of nature (which will put forth it self in every thing) polluteth
all that we touch: Tit. 1. 15. Unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is
nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled. 4. As those
unclean issues excluded and shut them out of the camp and society of Gods
people till they were staid: so the foul issues of natural corruption (till
stopped and stayed by grace) estrange us from God, and from the common wealth
of Israel. Ephesians. 2. 12. The effect of all moral uncleanness is to thrust
every man and woman under the curse of the Law and wrath of God; who can no
more abide a man in the foulness of his nature, then men can the spawne of a
most venomous serpent. In Adam all died. 5. As the description of those issues
brought the Jews to the legal purification; for when the Jew saw the danger
of his uncleanness, and that if he separate not from it he shall die in it
for defiling Gods Sanctuary, verse. 31. this made him seek to the remedy: So
the true understanding of a man's forlorn and desperate estate by nature; and
that except a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he can never
see the kingdom of God, John 5. 5.
this makes a man fly out of himself to seek righteousness and purity in
the means which God has appointed. And thus by the very description of our
uncleanness we are led unto Christ, by whom how we are to be cured, we are
after to see.

Sect. III.
By leprosy.
more hateful. None so lively resembled the native face of sin; none had so
solemn and significant rites for cure; none did more expressly shadow all
constitutions as conduce to the purging and removing of sin; and consequently
none more forceably led us to Christ, who is not in any Ceremony more lively
figured. The Lord would have the Jews and us in this instance to be ledd by
things sensible to things intellectual; Per sens^^^lia ad intelligibilia*
by an external and sensible disease to be carried to that which is internal
and less sensible, for the most part. And though of all bodily diseases, none
more expressly declares the disease of sin in the soul then leprosy; yet it
comes far short of it in the desperate and dangerous properties of it. We
must therefore prepare men to Christ by describing the foulness and misery of
the disease. 1. Leprosy proceeds from poisoned and corrupted humors in the
body: Sin declared odious.
So sin is nothing else but the poison and corruption of the soul. And this
spiritual leprosy is far more miserable then the other; for that of the
body is only a punishment, Poena. culpa.
this is a guilt. And who can deny but the corruption and poison of the soul
and spirit, is far more poison full and mortal then poison of the flesh? In
al^.
2. Bodily leprosy is a disease of some men: sin is of all men, and of all
the man. Bodily leprosy spreads over all parts of the body, but cannot reach
the soul: but this spreads over the whole man; the soul and all the faculties
are weakened and tainted; there is, not a debility only, but a corruption in
the understanding, will, conscience, memory, in all affections, in all senses,
in all parts; no man, no part of man exempted or excepted. God hates.
3. No disease is more stinking, and hateful to men then leprosy: So nothing
is so hateful and abominable to God as sin; his eyes cannot abide to behold
it; he will not endure it in his dearest servants, no nor Angels themselves,
unrevenged; he esteems the sinner as dung. Infection.
4. No disease more contagious and infectious: A leper must meddle with nothing
unless he would defile it: All he can do is to make others unclean by
breathing, touching, conversing. The plague of pestilence is not so infectious
as the plague of leprosy, so called, Levit. 13. 20. infecting houses, walls,
vessels, garments: Nothing is so infectious as sin, which not only fowls
the person or house, but heaven and earth and all creatures are subject to the
vanity of it. Neither can an impenitent sinner do any thing but make himself
and others unclean, by the filthy breath of his corrupt communication, by his
wicked example and conversation: No leaven is so spreading, no pitch so
cleaving. Excommunication.
5. Leprosy of all diseases separated the infected persons from the fellowship
of all men both in civil and divine ordinances for many days; and if they
proved incurable (suppose them Kings) they were utterly and for ever excluded
the host, as Vzziah, 2. King. 15. 5. Neither might they come to the Temple to
join in holy things; for the Temple was legally the most holy place, and no
polluted thing might enter into it: So in our sin unrepented, we are out of
the camp, aliens from God. Sin shuts out of the communion of faith and
Saints; shuts out of the state of grace and salvation; Quoad Consortium, Quoad
Locum. Quoad Praemium.

it shuts out of the Congregation of God in earth and heaven: No fellowship,
place, or reward with them. 6. Of all diseases none is more painful, Pain and
danger.
sorrowful, mortal, or incurable; and therefore they were enjoined to put on
mournful garments, seeing God had inflicted so lamentable a disease on them,
so hardly and seldom cured as most did carry it unto death, as Gehezi and
Azariah. In which the Lord (as in a glass) would show us the extreme sorrows
and pains that wait on sin unpardoned; sorrows of this life and of the life
to come: And that we should put on mourning garments of timely sorrow, and
afflict our selves for our sins, seeing we are all poisoned with so
incurable a disease, as there is no hope to expect any cure in this life; for
every man carries the running issues of sin to his death natural, Signs of
sin and leprosy.
the most to the death eternal. 7. The signs and symptoms of leprosy are
most correspondent to the symptoms and effects of sin in the soul. 1. As
there is a debility and weakness of all parts because the spirits are
exhausted: so sin weakens all faculties, because the spirit of grace is
resisted and driven out. 2. There is a tumor and swelling in the flesh: here a
tumor and proud swelling of mind; none more proud then he who has least
cause. 3. There is burning and thirst through the adust and burnt blood by
melancholy whereof it arises: here is inflammation and burning of anger, of
lust, and thirst after the world, after revenge, after preferments; and this
insatiable as every sin is. 4. There is filthy putred matter still breaking
forth most loathsomely: so here from within breaks out corrupt matter of envy,
of hatred of goodness, of uncleanness in speeches and behavior. 5. There is
an hoarse and weak voice: here the voice so weak as it cannot pray, or cannot
be heard. God hears not sinners; for either they pray not at all, or they are
in their sins. 6. There is a filthy stinking breath; and therefore they must
cover their lips, that by their breath they might not infect others: So here is
a filthy breath of corrupt communication, of unclean and adulterous speeches,
swearing and cursing speeches, lying and false speeches, slanderous and
uncharitable speeches; and seldom do such cover their lips, being like the
unclean vessels of the Law which were ever open to the corrupting and
poisoning of numbers.

Sect. IV.
I. From the former description of legal uncleanness, Note. 1. Church and
members, subject to many defilements.
note the state of Gods Church and people here upon earth, subject unto many
sorts of defilements and pollutions within them, without them, and on every
hand of them; by foul and unclean creatures and persons, by foul courses and
actions, which a godly man may not touch or taste but he is presently defiled,
as he that touches pitch cannot but be defiled with it. Where be they that
will see no Church, if they see any uncleanness? Or who say that God is in no
such society where any pollution is? seeing God vouchsafes to walk among his
own people, who were daily subject to so many legal and moral pollutions.
God might (if it pleased him) wholly purge his floor here upon earth; but it
makes more for his glory to suffer sin and evil, and to set the Saints in
the midst of defilements here below. And why.
1. There must be a difference between this heaven and earth, and that new
heaven and new earth in which dwells nothing but righteousness; for had the
Saints no war, there needed no watch, there could be no victory; if no seed
time, no harvest. 2. GODS mighty power is more manifest in gathering and
preserving a Church to himself out of sinners, and among sinners; and he
magnifieth his mercy both in covering and curing so great and many corruptions.
3. The godly in sense of their uncleanness are kept low in their own eyes,
and watchful of their ways; and so are driven out of themselves unto Christ
for righteousness, and unto God for strength continually, as privy unto their
own continual weakness. So to subdue presumption Paul must have a buffeter,
and to way-lay security coming on Israel, all the Canaanites must not be
subdued. 4. In that they cannot expect freedom from foulness and
uncleanness here below, they may the rather desire and aspire to that
heavenly Tabernacle into which no unclean thing can enter, Rev. 21. 27. and
wish to be translated thither where righteousness shall dwell, yea the
righteous and holy God shall dwell immediately in the midst of his Saints, and
all things together with themselves shall be most absolutely clean and holy.

II. The Lord by so large a description of legal uncleanness would have them
and us look more nearly and seriously upon our own misery by sin, Note. 2.
Look narrowly on the misery of sin.
both in the cause, and in the effects of it. The former by bringing us to the
contemplation of the foulness of our natures, and uncleanness even in our
birth and original. For howsoever men little esteem or bewail this
uncleanness of nature and original sin; (...).
yet the Apostle (better acquainted with the nature of it) calls it, The sin;
and the sinning sin; and the sin which dwells in us, and compasses us
about, Romans 7. 17. Neither can a man ever be truly humbled and prepared for
Christ, nor can expect a good estate in him, whose daily corrupt issues from an
overflowing fountain make him not seem marvelous filthy and unclean in his
own eyes. 1. What is the reason that so many do Pharisaically pride
themselves, if not in the goodness of their persons, yet in some blind hopes
and presumptions that they be not so bad as they are, or as some others be: but
because they never saw themselves in this glass; which only lets a man see
himself a mass of sin, a lump of uncle^nnesse; and that no good thing is in
his nature, which in no part is free from the running issues of that festred
and inbred sin? 2. Why do many dote upon their own works and sightly
actions; either to Popish confidence in them as meritorious, or at least (with
many Protestants) to rest in the civility and morality of them without farther
pursuit of the power of religion: but that they see not that so evil trees
cannot send forth any good fruit, nor so bitter fountains any sweet water?
which could they but discern, they would be weary of the best of their
righteousness, and cast it away (with Paul) as dung; and conclude that when
Aloes and wormwood yield a sweet taste, then might their fruits be sweet and
tastefull to God and themselves. 3. Why do so many thousands contest against
grace, stand upon their honesty, good neighborhood, hospitality, charity; they
thank God they are no blasphemers, no drunkards, adulterers, murderers; they
wash the outside, come to Church, hear sermons, are outwardly clean and
formal; no man can challenge them, no nor they themselves? but because they
never saw the infection of their souls, nor the inordinacy of their inner man,
which is a fountain ever overflowing all the banks: most dangerous, most
secret: hardest to find out, and hardest to cure, and this deceives thousands
in their reckonings. 4. Why is the righteousness of faith in the blood of
Christ so much undervalued, and men so hardly driven out of themselves to seek
righteousness by him? But because they see not their own uncleanness, and
therein their hateful estate before God until Christ the high Priest have
made atonement for them. For as that man who (being sick to death) feels not
his sickness, nor discerns the depth and dangers of it, seeks not greatly
after the Physician, he applies either no means, or some idle and impertinent
things to small purpose: so he that sees not the misery of his disease of
sin, sees not the need of Christ, neglects the right means, and contentedly
deludes himself, running any whither but to the right remedy.

It is fit and fruitful to look a little nearer this disease of nature, Good
to see and know our filthiness by sin.
that we may not only make conscience of the foulness of nature, but be
thrust out of our selves to the means of our cleansing: Considering 1. That
this unclean issue (which the legal issues point us unto) is a sin against
the whole Law of God in all branches of it, whereas other sins are against
one of the Tables, and one of the Commandments. 2. This poison of nature is
the same in all men, that all may be humbled who are borne children of the
devil, enemies to righteousness, all of us being in our very birth sons of
death: for in Adam all are dead. And as an image of rotten wood must needs be
rotten: so we, hewne out of so rotten a stock. Who is it that is not a Leper
from the womb? Let any man thrust his hand into his bosom, as Moses did,
Exodus 4. 6. and he shall pull it out again leprous, and as white as snow.
Every man has cause to cry with the Leper, I am unclean, I am unclean. The
spawne of a Serpent are Serpents; and what are we but the spawne, the seed of
Adam? 3. This Issue is a general disorder of the whole man, and of all parts.
Neither is bodily leprosy more general and universally spread over all the
members, then sin in the soul, which is seated in all the members, (...).
so as from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is nothing
sound: but a general ataxy or disorder in want of all goodness in all parts,
and pronenesse to all evil. 4. Miserable are the effects of this close
uncleanness: As 1. In this Image of sin, no ugly toad can be so hateful to
us, as we unto God. 2. The whole man lies subject under the curse and wrath of
God; Romans 5. 18, the fault came on all to condemnation. 3. Nothing can proceed
from us but what is foul and damnable. What can a Serpent cast out but poison?
Whatsoever our own strength or will can bring forth is tainted with this
leprosy; for freewill remains only to evil. 4. Nothing without us that we
can touch, but we taint, Miserable effects of inwa^d uncleanness.
noted in the infection of houses vessels, garments. Both earthly things, all
the creatures, all our comforts, actions, to the unpure all is so: Yea divine
actions, the word, Sacraments, prayer, alms, all polluted by us and to us, so
long as we be unconverted and in our unclean nature. 5. An unregenerate man
can converse with no man, but (as a Leper) he infects him by example,
provocation, corrupt opinions, frothy speeches, fruitless behavior. And if
they that poison men's bodies are worthy extreme punishment, and every man
detests them: how much more severe wrath of God are they liable unto, that do
nothing but poison men's souls? 6. No Leper was so worthily cast out of the
camp; as all of us by nature are worthily cast out of the society of Saints in
earth and in heaven, yea from the presence and fellowship of God and Jesus
Christ, and that for ever. Sin properly shuts out of heaven, no unclean
thing comes there: nothing more hateful to God, nothing but that hated by him.
7. All this misery we our selves can neither discern nor remedy. It makes us
pure in our own eyes, though we be not washed, Prove. 30. 12. We lie wallowing
in our filthiness, and delight in it as the swine in the mire, and never are
cured till we get out of our selves to the high Priest, in whom only it is
perfectly to cleanse and cure us. Now seeing in this glass our own disease
and need of cure, let us return to the means of our cure in these three
several sorts of uncleanness, and in the legal be led to the cure of moral
uncleanness.

Thus of the kinds of legal uncleanness.

Uncleanness cured by washing, and offering.
1. by ablution or washing. 2. by oblation or offering. Both these were
appointed for all kinds, as in particular. 1. for unclean touchings and
tastings, the parties must wash their clothes, Levit. 11. 40. 2. for unclean
issues they must wash themselves and their clothes, Levit. 15. 13. 3. for
uncleanness of Leprosy they must wash themselves, their clothes, and besides
shave off all their hair, and stay seven days without the camp, Lev. 14. 8,
9.

Sect. V.
I. The first means of purging Legal uncleanness is washing; Washing: blood
of Christ.
which shadowed out the washing of the sinner in the laver of Christ's blood.
All the water in the sea cannot wash away the least sin; that great work is
appropriated to the blood of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1. 7, the blood of Jesus Christ his
son cleanses us from all sin: Rev. 1. 5, who loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his blood: which blood is opposed to all legal washings, Heb. 9.
9.

Object. Lev. 11. 44, this washing is called a sanctification.

Answ. Sanctification is twofold 1. by the outward sign, Externi symboli and
professionis. Veritatis internae.
2. by the inward truth. They by washing, symbolically and in outward
profession by these rites sanctified themselves: but thereby believers were led
to the internal truth, and the laver of the blood of Christ. All this washing
then leads us to the blood of Christ, by which is meant his whole passion and
obedience; by the merit whereof he has procured both remission of our sins,
and mortification of them. And herein is no small resemblance 1. Washing is an
applying of water to foul parts: Resemblance.
so in the cleansing of sin must be a special application of the blood of
Christ; called, Heb. 9. 14, the sprinkling of Christ's blood upon the
conscience. Which is nothing else on Gods part but the imputation of Christ's
sufferings to us: and on our own part the application of them to our selves by
the hand of faith. 2. In Washing is a rubbing and scowring off of uncleanenesse
which will not easily off; and in some foulness they must wash often for the
surenesse of the work: noting the pains and true endeavor of the repentant
heart in mortification, and afflicting it self. It is well contented with any
beating and wringing, so he may fetch out the stayne of sin, which sticks as
close as his flesh to his bones. 3. The unclean party was to wash himself,
that is, his whole man and every part: which notes total sanctification in
the whole man and all parts and members, that the washing may be as large and
general as the foulness is. For whatsoever part is not washed by Christ,
has no part in Christ, which made Peter say, not my feet only (Lord) but mine
hands and head. 4. In the foulness of Leprosy he must wash again and
again: to note, that after our justification by the death of Christ, we must
look to a second washing of sanctification by his spirit. And because we have
still washing work with us, we must be still washing our selves by daily
labor in our own reformation. This was more lively signified in that other
ceremony added to washing in the Leper, that he must shave his hair again
and again: signifying the paring away of superfluities and lusts as fast as
they grew; and a voluntary departing from his own secret corruptions, which
were as many as the hairs of his head, and no less rooted in him; that well
he might shave and loppe them, but he was out of hope quite to unroot them as
long as he lived. He must keep them under but cannot be rid of them: He must
shave the first day and the seventh day, and resist his lusts, which daily grow
up on him, as hair cut, quickly grows again. 5. The unclean person must
wash his clothes as well as himself: signifying that we must part with all
impurity even the least, at least in endeavor, cherishing none, favoring
none. He must hate the very garment spotted by the flesh, all occasions, and
appearances of evil, esteeming the least spot of sin foul and filthy
enough. And all this is requisite in purifying of the soul.

I. Labor against the smallest sins. Use. 1. Smallest sins to be put away.
Be not a mental adulterer, banish unchastity in the eye and mouth, avoid
wanton company, as did Joseph that of his Mistress. Thou art no drunkard, or
great swearer, but art thou a companion of such not reproving them? No Papist,
but a friend and patron, as seeing no great harm in their superstition? No
Atheist, but a scorner of the persons and doctrine of godly teachers? what
do thou but foame out thy own shame? If thou should keep thy self never
so pure, but partakest in other men's sins, thou art unclean. This reproves
Magistrates, who (though they themselves come to Church, yet) suffer others in
time of divine worship to lie in streets, houses, fields, openly, etc.
profaning thus the day of the Lord, which is to be kept holy to our God. Or
if they be ordinary abettors of idle persons and gamesters by example. This
brandeth Ministers, openly pleading for drunkards and hateful blasphemers.
This defiles masters, parents, husbands, that suffer their families to run
into profaneness or riot.

II. In all these touches go to the fountain opened. Use. 2.
Zach. 13. 1. Go to Christ, wash, and be clean.
Every Jew had his waterpots to keep water for daily purification, John 2. 6.
but now the house of David and Jerusalem, that is, all the godly have a
fountain opened by the death of Christ. We must every day be washing and
cleansing our selves in that fountain, from all filthiness of flesh and
Spirit.

Sect. VI.
II. The second means of purging legal uncleanness is oblation, Offering.
Christ offered himself.
or offering some atonement to the Lord, this directly leads us to Christ. For
howsoever an unclean person must wash himself and his clothes, yet no Jew
could make an atonement for himself: but this was common to all uncleanness
legal, the Priest must make an atonement for the unclean person. For all
uncleanness in general, Lev. 16. 30. In special, for uncleanness in
touchings. Numb. 19. 4. In issues, Lev. 12. 8. and 15. 15. Washing not
sufficient without offering.
In leprosy, Lev. 14. 53. Noting by the way, that all that we can do, cannot
make atonement for the least spot of sin. Let us wash our selves as often as
Naaman in Jordan; yea let us take snow water to us, and wash our hands most
clean; yet our own cloths will make us foul, and God will plunge us in the
pit, if our Lord Jesus (the high Priest of the new covenant) make not
atonement for us. A fit note against all humane satisfaction and merits.

The offering for the legal uncleanness by touching, Red Cow.
and the sprinkling water made of the ashes of that red Cow, prescribed by God
to this purpose, Numb. 19. called water of expiation. Christ. Pro Christoaries,
pro Christo agnus pro Christo vitulus, pro Christo ^ircus, totum Christus. Aug.
That all this ordinance typified Christ to the Jews, the Apostle expresses,
Heb. 9. 13, 14. when from the blood of this red cow he leads us to the blood of
Christ, saying: If the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer,
sprinkling them that are unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the
flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead
works; wherein he not only compares but infinitely advances the truth above
the type. Difference.
For 1. that was symbolicall and figurative: this spiritual and substantial.
2. that was external and temporary: this internal and eternal. 3. that only
a purifying of the flesh: this of the Spirit and conscience. 4. that cleansed
from legal and bodily pollution: this from moral, called dead works 1.
because they proceed from death of sin. Dead works, why.
2. because they lead to eternal death.

For the explaining of this ordinance consider four things. 1. whence the Cow
must be. 2. the properties or qualities. 3. the actions about her. 4. the use
and end of it.

Moses out of the heard. 1. All the congregation, for not one in the
congregation but needs a means of purging. 2. This means must be a Cow, not
an Ox or Bull. The imbecility of the sex notes the great humility of our
Lord Jesus; who being the mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah, would so abase and
weaken himself for our sakes. 3. They must take her from the heard: so our
cleanser must be taken from among our selves, being true and perfect man,
taking our nature and our flesh, yea our infirmities as the weak sex
imports, in all things save sin like unto us.

1. the truth of Christ's humane nature, being of the same red earth that the
first Adams body was. 2. the grievousnesse of sin which he was to undertake,
and the scarlet stain of it. Isay 1. 18.
3. the bitter and bloody passion of Christ, Isa. 63. 1.
and his cruel death. The red skin of the Cow resembled the red garments of
Christ all besprinkled: 1. With his own blood. 2. with the blood of his
conquered enemies. 3. presented unto his father, like the coat of Joseph, all
stained with blood. 3. The Cow must be without spot or blemish: to signify the
purity of our Lord Jesus, in whom was never any spot or stain of sin. Though
he was contented to be counted a sinner, yet he was no sinner: And though he
had sin on himself, he had none in himself: as the Cow was slain for sin,
not being sinful. Christ was ruddy through his passion, Cant. 5. 10.
yet most white and spotless by his most perfect and absolute righteousness.
She must be without yoke, on which never yoke came: signifying, 1. that Christ
(not necessarily, but) voluntarily took our nature, that he might free us from
our yoke. 2. his absolute freedom from all the yoke of sin, farther then he
voluntarily undertook the burden of it. 3. that he was never subject to the
yoke of humane precepts and commandment, being the Lawgiver to prescribe
Laws to all, not to receive Laws from any. 4. that none could compel him to
suffer for sin, but his whole obedience active and passive, was a freewill
offering, he having power to lay down his life, and to take it up again. 5.
he was more free from the yoke then any red heifer could be. She indeed must be
free in her self: he not only free in himself, but he must free all
believers from the yoke; whom the son sets free, they are free indeed.

III. The actions about the Cow were five, ver. 5. 1. Action. 1. The
congregation must deliver the Cow to be slain: so was Christ delivered to be
slain by the whole body of the Jews. 2. She must not be delivered to Aaron but
to Eleazer his successor: signifying that the death of Christ serves all the
successions and ages of the Church, and must be taught by the ministers of all
ages. 2. Action. She must be led out of the Camp, and there burnt whole to
ashes; her skin, flesh, blood, and dung, ver. 5. Signifying 1. that Christ must
be led out of the gate of Jerusalem to suffer, Heb. 13. and there 2. must be
crucified, by which he was made a whole burnt offering. 3. that whole Christ is
our comfort, his flesh our meat, his blood our drink, yea the very base dung
of those contumelies cast upon him were a part of his sacrifice offered up in
the fire of his passion for us, to sweeten and sanctify ours. 3. Action.
Eleazer must take of the blood with his finger, and sprinkle toward the
foreside of the Tabernacle of the assembly seven times, ver. 4. Signifying 1.
the purging of us by the blood of Christ sprinkled on the conscience. 2. that
Christ's death profits none to whom it is not specially applied: for the Cowes
blood must be not shed only, but sprinkled. 3. that only the people and
congregation of God have benefit of the death and blood of Christ, for it was
sprinkled directly before the Tabernacle. 4. the seven times sprinkling notes
1. that that one oblation has virtue and merit enough. 2. the perfection of
justification. 3. the need of often application of Christ's death. 4. the
duration of it to all ages. 4. Action. She must be burnt with Cedar wood,
scarlet lace, and hysope, all which must be cast into the fire with her, ver.
6. signifying 1. three things in Christ. 1. the Cedar of incorrupt life. 2. the
scarlet of fervent love to mankind. 3. the hysope of savoury obedience in all
things to his father, all which were in all his sufferings, and fire of his
passion sweetning it. 2. they noted three things arising from Christ's
sufferings. 1. immortality, signified by the Cedar, which is not subject to
putrefaction. 2. the scarlet, the merit of his blood applied to justification.
3. the hysope of mortification, healing our corruptions, as hysope has an
healing quality. All these three properly arise from the passion of Christ. 5.
Action. A clean person must gather the ashes of the heifer, and lay them
without the Camp in a clean place, ver. 9. signifying 1. the burial of Christ
in a clean and new tomb wherein never man lay, a clean place never used
before. 2. that the merit of Christ's death is ever laid before God in the
highest and holiest heavens. 3. the Christians account of Christ's merit and
passion, who lays them up as his chief treasure in the clean place of a
pure heart and conscience, an only fit closet to keep the mystery of faith in.

IV. The use and end of these ashes was twofold, ver. 9. 1. They must be kept
for the Congregation: signifying that there shall never want supply of grace
and merit from the death of Christ to any believer that sees his need of them.
2. Of them was made a water of separation, thus: A clean person took of the
ashes of the red Cow burnt, and put pure water into a vessel, and taking
hysope dipped it, and sprinkled it upon the tent, the persons, and vessels, and
upon the unclean person the third and seventh day, and so he (washing his
clothes and flesh with water) was clean at even, ver. 18, 19. signifying 1.
that the blood of Christ is the only water of separation for persons separate,
to separate them from their uncleanness. The water made of the ashes of
Christ's death and bloodshed, sprinkled upon the unclean, can only purge the
conscience from dead works. 2. that this blood of Christ must be sprinkled
with hysope of faith and mortification. For hysope has a cleansing quality,
and is put sometimes for that which only and properly cleanses, Psalm. 51. 7.
purge me with hysope, that is, with the blood of that eternal sacrifice,
figured by that which is sprinkled with hysope. 3. that this blood of Christ
must be often applied; the third day, and the seventh day: The death and merit
of Christ must be often meditated and applied to the heart. For it is a
perpetual and eternal purging and sprinkling water in the Church, and we must
have daily recourse unto it.

I. That the Lord has appointed means for cleansing all kind of impurity:
Note. 1. There is a way to cleanse every uncleanness.
1. That his people and we might know, that by no infirmity and frailty we
shall fall quite out of the grace of God: 2. That the Lord takes not the
forfeit of all the scapes, and foul falls of his children, utterly to forsake
them: seeing the Jew that was legally polluted seventy times seven times, was
as often received in again as he was cleansed, according to the purification
of the Sanctuary: 3. That we should not despair, nor the weak Christian be
quite dejected in the sense of the multitude of his frailties and foul
touches, seeing the Gospel affoords us the remedy and means to cleanse all
moral uncleanness, no less certainly and fully, then the Law to the Jews, to
purge their legal.

II. As the Jew was no sooner defiled by touching a dead man, Note. 2. Have
recourse to the means.
or bone, or grave, or tent, or any thing about him, but he must presently
repair to the means of legal cleansing: So every Christian defiled by the
least touch of any dead work must have recourse to the remedy appointed in the
Gospel. The Law appointed the water of the ashes of a redd Cow: but the Gospel
appoints the redd blood of Jesus Christ, sprinkled and applied by faith (as by
hyssope) upon the conscience. Consider, Motives.
1. The necessity: The person defiled not having this sprinkling upon him shall
be cut off from Israel, verse 13. So whosoever has not the blood of Christ
sprinkled upon his soul, shall be cut off from the number and inheritance of
the Saints, Mark. 16. 16, he that believes not shall be damned. 2. Every sin
is a separation from God, who being a God of pure eyes cannot abide the filth
of it; and therefore we had need continually to have this water of separation
for the washing of our hearts daily, and often every day; because it is
gathering some uncleanness every hour, yea every moment. 3. An unclean
creature or vessel could not be of any service to man, for he must not touch
it till it be cleansed: So a sinner so long as he is unclean and impenitent
cannot be of any good use, nor present any acceptable service to God. Isai. 1.
And therefore the Prophet, Wash you, and cleanse you, and then come. No man
dare present any thing to a King with a foul hand: the Lord will accept no
such present. 2. Cor. 6. 17, 18. touch no unclean thing, and I will receive
you, and be a father unto you: Implying that the Lord will not receive him
that any way communicats with sin, if obstinate and impenitent. 4. Nothing
else can recover our beauty and first estate of holiness and happiness but
this laver. A cloth once soiled never recovers the beauty and whiteness but by
washing. This laver only brings back a white and unspotted innocence. All the
holy water in the Sea of Rome cannot wash one sin; for that has no
commandment, no institution, no promise. Besides, all legal Ceremonies are
dead, which in their life time could not cleanse by the mere deed done, Ex
opere operato.
as they say theirs does. 5. How vain is it to see men and women curious and
careful in washing their bodies and clothes, they will not suffer the least
spot on them, but wash them weekly: and yet go on year by year in the foul
defilements of sin, and never desire to be washed and rinsed in the water of
separation; nay nothing more troubles them then to be called to reformation? A
cleanly man will have his clothes washed weekly, but his hands and face every
day: A cleanly Christian will not be less careful of his heart. Note. 3. Be
very careful to avoid spiritual uncleanness.


III. Seeing there was so much business in legal cleansing of the least
foulness; how careful were the Jews to avoid those foulenesses? and how much
more should Christians be to avoid the moral? 1. In themselves. A good heart
will be affected with the least touch of sin, as David to cut Saul's lappet,
and to avoid appearance as well as evil it self. Iustus metuit non solum a
peccato, sed and a contagione and la^e peccati. Ambr. de institut. virg.
2. From others. For the Jew might be impured from others as well as by
himself. We must not communicate in other men's sins, 1. Tim. 5. 22. The just
man bewareth not only sin it self, but even the contagion and infection of
sin. Watch thy self; as privy to thine own weakness, and thy adversaries
subtlety and strength. Watch against others sins; as being beset with snares.
Resolve with good Jacob, Genesis 49 6. Into their secret my soul shall not come.
This strict watching is counted commonly foolish preciseness, nicety, hateful
purity: but God esteems it otherwise. It is an apparent loss of men's favor,
preferments, and worldly helps: but he only finds the favor of God, and the
happiness to see God.

Sect. VII.
Birds.
Levit. 15. 14, 15. In this, 1. What fowls must be prepared for the offering;
two Turtles, or two young Pigeons; and so for the woman's, verse. 29. Of the
clean kind of birds: signifying and resembling the purity of Christ's humane
nature. Besides his innocence, simplicity, meekness, chastity, charity,
fruitfulness; of all which virtues these Doves were express Emblems. 2. What
was the use of these fowls: 1. They must bring them to the Priest: No man must
offer his own sacrifices, but must present them to God by Christ the only
high Priest: 2. They must bring them to the door of the Tabernacle; for
public service must not be privately performed; and figured our entrance by
Christ the door: 3. One must be made a sin offering, the other a burnt
offering. The sacrifices were types of that only sacrifice of the Son of God
our Redeemer, performed upon the Altar of his Cross, for the expiating the
sins and foul issues of the whole world. In them both, 1. what they were, 2.
what were the ceremonies about them. 1. The sin offering was a sacrifice in
which the whole beast or bird was not consumed with fire (as the burnt offering
was) but slain for the expiation of sin: The use of which was to figure and
seal up to the Jews the expiation of their sins in Christ. Heb. 9. 26.
Now Christ is made manifest for the doing away of sin, by the slain
sacrifice of himself; and see verse 28. The burnt offering was a sacrifice in
which the whole beast or bird was consumed with fire offered up therein to God
for a savor of rest; namely to appease and pacify Gods wrath for some sin, or
sins committed: Which signified that Christ was to be a whole burnt
offering, and to be wholly consumed in soul and body with the fire of his
Fathers wrath, that he might be a sweet smelling savor for us. He gave
himself for us, Ephesians. 5. 2.
a sacrifice and oblation for a sweet smelling savor. Neither did the
believing Jews think that God was appeased by any virtue in the burnt
offering, but through the eternal sacrifice of Christ shadowed therein. 2.
What were the ceremonies about these fowls, for they all pointed at Christ. 1.
For the sin offering of fowls, the ceremonies are appointed, Levit. 5. 8, 9.
and they be three. 1. Rite. The Priest must wring the neck of the Dove
asunder, but not pluck it clean off; Levit. 1. 15.
and the same rite in the burnt offering: The neck must be pincht with the
nail of the Priest to let out the blood, but the head must not be plucked off
from the body: Signifying. 1. That although Christ was to die, yet his divinity
and humanity should not be severed. 2. That the death of this innocent Dove
should not interrupt his head-ship of the Church. He was to be pinched to
death; but his head should not be severed from his body and members, which is
his Church. 3. That Christ should die indeed, but no bone of him must be
broken, Ioh. 19. 36. shadowed also in the Passover. 2. Rite. The Priest must
sprinkle the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the Altar, verse. 9.
and the like in the burnt offering, Chap. 1. 15: signifying that all the virtue
and merit of Christ's blood for the purging of sin, was drawn from the Altar
of his Deity. He must be God that must purchase the Church with his blood, Act.
20. 28.
and 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ. 3. Rite. All the rest of the blood must
be powered out at the foot of the Altar: signifying not only the pouring out of
the blood of Jesus Christ our true sin offering upon the Altar of the Cross,
without which shedding of blood can be no remission of sins: but also the
blood powered at the foot of the Altar, that is, those clots and drops of blood
plentifully flowing from him in his agony before his passion, Luke 22. 44. as
he was going up to the Cross. 2. For the Dove appointed for the burnt
offering (besides the former rites) some other are appointed. Levit. 1. 16.
1. The Priest must pluck out the maw with his feathers, and cast them besides
the Altar on the East side in the place of the ashes: For these were things
unclean; and signified that Christ should bring no unclean thing to his
suffering, but present a most spotless and holy oblation to the Lord; for else
had it not been of sweet smell. 2. The Priest must divide and cleave the bird
with his wings, but not asunder: signifying Christ, who seemed by his death to
be burnt, extinct, and perished; for so he was in the esteem of his own
disciples as they were going to Emmaus: but yet he was not quite sundred, but
rose again by his own power, and ever lives sittting at his Fathers right
hand to make requests for us. Yea his own words might seem to imply a
sundring, when he says; Why have thou forsaken me: but that the ingemination
of his former words (my God, my God) does strongly prove the contrary. 3. This
bird must be thoroughly consumed to ashes, to make it a sweet savor to the
Lord, Levit. 1. 17: signifying that never was any thing so grateful and
acceptable to the Lord, as the whole burnt sacrifice of his Son; in which he
smelled a savor of eternal rest. To which the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm. 20. 3.
Let him smell a savor of all thy oblations, and turn thy burnt offerings
into ashes. 4. When all these rites were observed, the party that was unclean
shall be clean, Levit. 12. 8. and Chap. 15. 13, 28: signifying that a party
justified by Christ's blood, and exercising true repentance, and the study of
holiness and new life; is brought in again into the right and fellowship of
God and his people, whatsoever his uncleanness formerly has been. And thus
has the legal cleansing of this person brought us to the Evangelicall in
Jesus Christ.

I. Sundry grounds of consolation to the Church and people of God. Note. 1.
Comfort to the godly.
1, As Christ seemed clean divided and sundred from his Father and from his
Church but was not: so his members often seem quite sundred from God and all
comfort, but are not, 2. Cor. 4. 8. and Chap. 6. 9. A godly man may be in such
a straight as David was, when thus he brake forth to Jonathan; As the Lord
lives, and as thy soul lives, there is but one step between me and death:
and yet when he can see no passage, God makes a passage forth. Hence may a
Christian (with Paul) challenge all perils and dangers, and contemn them as
too weak to separate us from Christ, Romans 8. 39. yea in all things we are not
only conquerours, but more then conquerours. So was Christ in death, and from
under the grave more then a conqueror. Let a Christian be slain it hinders
him not from being a conqueror; and what ever he may lose, he loses not the
love of God; who loves him to the end, whom he once loves; and therefore
only the sound Christian is in a sure estate. If sorrow be for a night, joy
will return in the morning; after darkness as sure to see light. As Jesus
Christ keeps his headship, and death cannot sever him quite: so the members
may be pinched (yet not quite off) but abide members still. 2. As the special
providence of God watched his own son, that though he was in wicked hands
that wanted no will, yet they were kept from breaking one bone of him: so does
the same providence watch over his members; that howsoever the wicked of the
world pinch and press them, Psalm. 34. 20.
yet the promise is made to them, He keeps all their bones, not one of them is
broken, that is, without the will of our heavenly Father, as Mat. 10. 29. Not
an hair shall fall; for the same providence watches the head and members.
This consideration is used by Christ to remoove excessive fear of men. If thou
see thine enemies increase as bees about thee, ready to strike and sting: Let
thy ways please the Lord, he can 1. turn their hearts to peace as Esaus to
Jacob when he purposed his death; and Labans to Jacob when he intended evil
entreaty toward him. 2. He can turn their counsel to folly, and bring it on
their own heads, as in Haman and Achitophel. 3. He can turn their evil to
thy good and salvation, according to the saying of Joseph to his brethren, Ye
intended evil against me, but God turned it to good as this day. 4. He can
take them off at his pleasure; he has an hook for Zenacherib; and Balaam
shall not curse though he would never so feign. 3. In that Christ brought no
unclean thing to his sacrifice (figured in pulling out the maw and feathers,
and casting them beside the Altar in the place of ashes) we have comfort in
the offering of all our service and sacrifices of prayer, Note. 2. Affect
purity of heart and life.
praises, alms, duties, all unclean in and from us: but presented in Christ's
sacrifice no uncleanness is in them.

II. How careful the Lord is that his people preserve Motives.
pureness among them, that the holy God may walk amongst an holy people: And
teaches how careful we Christians should be to cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And that we should be ever
stopping up those unclean issues which disturb our chastity of body or mind,
which these Legal issues specially aim at. Oh this chastity of mind and body
is a singular grace. For 1. It stands with the will of God; 1 These. 4. 3, 4,
This is the will of God even your sanctification; and that every one possess
his vessel in holiness and honor. Casta Deus men's est, casta vult mente
vocari.
2. It stands with the nature of God, which is most holy and pure; God is a
pure chaste Spirit, and will be prayed unto with a pure and chaste heart. How
can foul fornicators and adulterers think that their prayers can get into
heaven, and themselves shut out? 3. By holiness and chastity of mind and body
thou becommest a Temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19: Without which thou art
no better then a swinesty, fit for foul spirits and devils, that delight in
uncleanness to harbor in 4. It stands with the honor of the body; which 1.
is for the Lord, that is, created for the glory of the maker. 2. the Lord is
for the body, namely to redeem it, so as the body also is a part of Gods
purchase. 3. the Lord is the head, and the bodies are members of Christ. Oh
what a great wickedness (as Joseph calls it, Genesis 39. 9.) to make it a member
of an harlot? 5. Follow holiness and chastity; without which thou shall never
see God either in grace, or in glory, Heb. 12. 24. What makes the harlots so
sottish, so graceless in the midst of powerful means, but that their
hearts are taken away, Hos 4* 12.
Gods plague has already seized upon them in great part, for they cannot see
God in grace offering repentance, and therefore they shall never see him in
glory. Now the best directions for stopping these running issues, are:

I. Direction. Begin with the heart: why.
Begin at the fountain; labor for inward purity first. For 1. Whence issue
these but from a wicked and impenitent heart? 2. God looks first at the
cleanness of the heart, knowing that if he find that unclean nothing is
clean. 3. Morality and cleanliness make a man care for the cleanness of his
face, but grace and religion must make him look to the cleanness of his
heart, Ier. 4. 14. Because he knows that no beauty of the face can allure a
man so much, as the cleanness of heart allureth. 4. Get grace into thy heart,
and it cannot choose but send out, as Christ says, According to that which is
within. According to the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, the eye
will look, the hand will work, the foot will walk. Get thy heart purged and
washed, and it is impossible that thy life should be foul. 5. In vain do men
struggle and strive to cast off some wast boughs of sinful actions, if they
seek not to strike up the root. Thou would avoid oaths and lies in thy
tongue, but shall never do it while thou have a swearing and lying heart. Thou
would avoid fornication and adultery in the act, in the eye, in the speech,
but never shall thou stop this issue, if thou have an adulterous heart: And so
in other sins.

Quest. How may I cleanse my heart? How the heart may be cleansed.


Answ. Cleanness of heart is in two things. 1. Justification by the blood of
Christ imputed and applied, Ioh. 15. 8. 10. 2. Sanctification by the spirit,
which stands in two things. 1. In parting with our filthiness, as evil
thoughts, pride, hypocrisy, stubbornness, malice: in a mortification of all
inward lusts. 2. In attaining a new estate in all the inward faculties, a
planting and cherishing of all graces. Thus (as our Savior says) he that is
washed is all clean.

II. Direction. Proceed in cleansing the life.
From the foundation come to the streams. If the heart at any time be inflamed
with the fire of concupiscence, and begin to boil over, stay the issue with
all expedition.

Quest. How?

Answ. 1. Covenant with all thy parts that none of them shall fulfill the lusts
of the flesh. Specially, covenant with thine eye, as Job, with thy tongue not
to name any filthiness, as it becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3, with thy hand not
to execute any inordinate desires. 2. Threaten thy members; that thou will
pluck out thine eye, cut off thy hand and foot rather then by them offend God
and thy conscience. If this will not serve, beat down thy rebellious members
(as Paul) with labor.

3. Direction. Avoid occasions of defilement.
Avoid occasions of defilements by the unclean issues of others, so did the
Jews. As 1. Come not near unclean persons, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Avoid swearers,
drunkards, gamesters, wantons, Prove. 4. 14. 2. Avoid the seat they sit on; A
place of shorter rest, Psalm. 1. 1. Blessed is he that sits not in the seat of
wicked men; Lev. 15. 6. 3. Shun the bed they lie on, Lev. 15. 5; A place of
longer rest with them; as one delighting in their fellowship, and tumbling with
them in filthiness. Vt salivaore excutitur, sic sermo.
4. Beware of their spittle, ver. 8. Words are cast out of the mouth as
spittle. Neither assent to their speeches and persuasions, (which are still
against God) nor be dismayed from good things by their threats and reproaches.
This filthy froth and spittle daily pollutes many that are careless to avoid
it.

Object. Alas it is impossible then to avoid unclean issues. I cannot but
daily and hourly touch some filthiness, unless I run out of the world, and
from my self.

Sol. 1. Therefore as the woman having the bloody issue, thrust in daily to
touch the hemme of Christ's garment, Marc. 5. that his blood may heal thy
bloody issues. 2. As seeing need of daily mercy, to true watch join prayer, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20.
as Hezekiah, The good Lord be merciful to him that is sanctified, although
not according to the purification of the Sanctuary: And the Lord heard him: So
will he thee, where he finds a true endeavor after cleanness.

Sect. VIII.
Lev. 14. where we read of two sorts of oblations prescribed. Leper two ways
cleansed.
1. For the cleansing of him that he might come into the tent. 2. After his
cleansing and coming into the tent, he must offer three Lambs, one for a
trespass offering, one for a sin offering, another for a burnt offering,
with a number of ceremonies about the Lambs, all leading to Christ. But in
this place we are only to speak of the former, concerning his cleansing, Lev.
14. from ver. 2. to 8. Where 1. The Leper to be cleansed must be brought to
the Priest. For he only must discern and pronounce of it, whether it be cured
or unclean: signifying that the sinner that desires to be cleansed, must
hasten to Jesus Christ the only high Priest of the new Testament, who only is
able to cleanse and heal our leprosy of sin, and herein is far beyond all
those types. The Priest could discern of bodily leprosy, and pronounce them
clean if they were so, but he could not make them clean if they were not.
But Jesus Christ can properly forgive sin, the souls leprosy, being the
healing God, and only Physician of souls. 2. The Priest must go out of the
camp unto him to consider him: to signify, how Jesus Christ finds us when he
first comes unto us, namely such as (having the most loathsome leprosy running
upon us) have no right to the communion of Saints, nor to any of the
privileges of Gods people, but outcasts and aliens from God, from the faith,
and from the common wealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12. 3. The Priest must first
see him healed, and then proceed to the exact cleansing, ver. 3. signifying a
twofold action of Jesus Christ in the curing of the leprosy of sin. For, 1. he
must heal the sinner by the grace of justification and sound conversion: but
this is not all, for there remains a great deal to do before we can be fou^dly
cleansed. And therefore 2. he must bestow on us his Spirit, to work in us a
daily growth and proceeding in sanctification, before we can be pronounced
clean. 4. The Priest must prepare 1. two little live birds of the clean kind,
ver. 4. 1. two birds, to note the twofold nature of Jesus Christ, his deity and
humanity. 2. two little birds, to note the humility and mean esteem of our
Lord and Savior Christ. 3. two clean birds, to note the unspotted and
surpassing purity of both his natures. 4. two live birds, one to die and the
other to live, to note that Christ had one nature to dye in, another not
subject to death: As also the twofold estate of our Lord Jesus, his suffering
and dying estate, and his glorious and exalted estate. 2. he must prepare Cedar
wood, scarlet, and ^ysope: noting (as we have heard) the excellent graces that
Christ brings to his oblation, both in regard of himself, his Church, and his
father: And signifying that Christ and his graces are inseparable: And teaches
that no man can think to be cleansed by the blood of Christ, that is
careless to receive his graces; which thou must as eagerly desire as himself.
5. The use of these materials of cleansing, concern 1. the dying bird. 2. the
living bird. 3. the party to be cleansed.

First concerning the dying bird. 1. One of the birds must be slain: pointing
at the death of Christ, without which is no purging or cleansing of sin, Heb
9. 22. But one bird only dyed* so Christ was put to death concerning the
flesh. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 2. It must be slain over running water, that the blood
might fall into the water. The blood falling into the water signified: 1. that
a fountain of grace by the death of Christ is opened both for justification
and sanctification. For water and blood here meet, shadowing the streams of
water and blood issuing from the side of Christ in his passion, 1 John 5. 6. 2.
The bird slain over running water signified the innocence of the death of
Christ, for though he must dye, yet his blood is in pure streams, as running
water is. 3. That this water must be running water, not standing; signifying
that there is a continual cock and conduit of grace overflowing from this
fountain, ever running and issuing from Christ to the refreshing of thirsty
and weary souls believing in his name. 4. By the falling of the blood into
running water might also be signified, that the death of Christ should run into
the Ministry of the Gospel, as the waters from under the Sanctuary every way.
As Christ spoke of Mary's fact preparing him to his death: so much more of his
death it self, what he has done and suffered shall be every where preached
to the worlds end. 3. This water must be in an earthen vessel. Not only to
signify that Christ must sweat and power forth in his death, water and blood
according to his humane nature, (which for the time of his abasement was a
frail and brittle vessel, subject to infirmities and contempt, and in all
things like unto ours only sin excepted) but also that this blessed treasury
of the Church should be retained and held in earthen vessels, that is, the
faithful ministers of Christ; how contemptible soever they are in the world,
yet these shall carry and disperse these blessed mysteries unto men, as 2 Cor.
4. 7.

Secondly, concerning the live Sparrow. The general signification of it was
Christ now alive raised from the dead, who can dye no more, but ever lives,
and sits at the right hand of God, and that by the power of his divinity.
And 1. This Sparrow must be used also to the cleansing of the Leper. For
neither the humanity of Christ without his deity, nor his deity without his
humanity can cleanse or justify the sinner. Neither the life of Christ without
his death, nor his death without his life can avail us to righteousness. Acts
20. 28. God shed his blood to purchase the Church to himself. 2. The Priest
must dip the live bird, and the Cedar, and scarlet lace, and hysope in the
blood of the Sparrow slain and pure water, ver. 6. signifying 1. That the
deity of Christ (which is impassible in it self) can yield us no comfort
alone, had it not been joined to an humanity subject to passion, which is
plainly meant by dipping the live bird in the blood of the slain. For
therefore the son of God must take our nature, to better our nature, and take
our flesh, Heb. 2. 14.
that by death he might destroy him that had the power of death. 2. The
scarlet, cedar and hysope must be dipped also, to show that all the graces we
receive from him must be dipped in his blood, by which alone we have both
access unto grace, and acceptance into grace. For by the dipping and union of
this live bird and slain, we come into the grace and favor of God, being
united first to his humanity, then to his divinity, and so are knit to his
whole person, and by him we come to the father. 3. The Priest must let the live
bird go into the broad field, ver. 7. signifying 1. Christ's escape and
deliverance from death, and the power of the grave. 2. His exaltation after he
was once consecrated, his ascending on high, and being made higher then the
heavens, Heb. 7. 26. 3. The publication and manifestation of righteousness
purchased by the death of Christ, in the broad and open field of the Church,
and this in the daily ministry of the Gospel.

Thirdly, concerning the party to whom this cure must be applied. The Priest
must sprinkle on him that is to be cleansed, this blood seven times: signifying
1. That only Christ Jesus does sprinkle his blood on penitent souls, from whom
only they must expect pardon and purging from sins. 2. That Christ's blood must
be particularly applied to every believer, to every thing that is to be
cleansed: Partly by Gods imputation of Christ and his merits to the penitent
sinner: Partly by his Ministers in the publishing and special applying the
particular promises to every soul that is weary. 3. Seven times sprinkling
notes 1. Perfect justification by the blood of Christ, the number of seven
times, perfect sprinkling; he is able perfectly to save all that come unto him,
Heb. 7. 23.
and needs no other seeking of other merits to satisfy or justify. 2. To
put the unclean person in mind how hardly he parts from his foulness: and
us, that it is no easy thing to be rid of sin. 3. How weakly and imperfectly
our selves apply the blood of Christ, that have need of so many sprinklings: to
humble us for our weakness of faith, and slow progress in sanctification.

Sect. IX.
I. All these ordinances and ceremonies in discerning and curing this disease,
Use. 1. No easy matter to be rid of sin.
in general teach us two things.

I. That it is no small business to be rid of the leprosy of the soul, and
infection of sin; which was but shadowed in that, as that was occasioned by
this. For whence is bodily leprosy, but from leprosy of the soul? Or what is
it that strikes the body with such contagious sickness, but the infection and
sickness of the soul? As in Gehezi, Mariam, Vzziah; whose bodies were so
foully infected and deformed by the leprosy of the soul, and corruption of
heart. And who sees not how the Lord would lead them and us to take special
notice hereby of the souls leprosy by sin, in that he commits the
knowledge and discerning of this disease of leprosy to the Priests, sending
them to the Physicians of their souls and not to the Physicians of their
bodies, whom one would think, it more specially and properly concerned? This
should admonish us all, that if there be so much ado to get clean bodies,
clean faces, clean skins; how great our care and business should be to get
clean souls, the soil of which cleaves not to the skin only, but sticks
closer to us then our skin or bones; and yet we think every slight sigh, or
Lord have mercy, or three words at our death sufficient to rid us of our
sins, and souls leprosy.

II. How careful the Lord is to sever the clean from unclean for fear of
general infection. Separate between the precious and the vile.
Teaching 1. the Magistrate, that as the Lord puts difference between him that
swears, and him that fears an oath: so should they to encourage and
countenance the clean person, that is, the godly and faithful. David set his
eyes on the godly in the land, not to malign or wrong them, but to cherish
their persons, and help up religion and the fear of God in them: As also to
discountenance and terrify the foul blasphemer, the drunkard, Sabbath
breaker, idle persons and gamesters, that thrust themselves out of their
calling all the week long. But if a man by his course shuffle clean and
unclean together, nay run with the unclean, and countenance gamesters,
swearers, bibbers, how does he execute the judgments of God? 2. A good
minister then stands in the counsel of God, when he severs the precious from
the vile, Ier. 15. 19. The Priest in the Law must pronounce him clean that is
so indeed. He durst not pronounce a foul person to be clean, nor a clean
person foul. Then how dares a man that stands to judge between the Lord and
his people, scandalize or scorn such as endeavor most to be clean? How comes
it that we do not hear drunkards, adulterers, thieves, swearers, blasphemours
so rated and disgraced as them? Or how dare men sell praises of religion to
foul Atheists, swearers, haters and despisers of goodness (as if men should
gild rotten posts, or wash dead bricks) making them at their death seem as
white as lawne, who all their life were white as Lepers? Well, let not the
despised members of Christ be discouraged; we know that the judgment of Christ
shall pass righteously between the clean and unclean. If thy heart be
upright, let all men cast the foul brand of an hypocrite on thee, Jesus Christ
shall pronounce thee clean. 3. Every good man must and will be glad of this
separation, rejoice in that arbitrament that differenceth clean and unclean,
as most savoury. Wicked men can abide nothing less then this shedding and
differencing of men. Whence are so many tumults? Oh you are more holy then all
other, you are the pure ones, you are all clean, etc? but because they have
learned a trick to deceive themselves, and to hide their foulness (as they
think) by crowding all into one confusion. Now is that doctrine only
intolerable that fetches them out of their holes, and casts them out among
their unclean fellows, for whose company they be a great deal fitter, then
for the society of Saints and believers.

II. Note in special. Use. 2. Christ discerns the leprosy of sin.
1. In that the Leper must be sent to the Priest to have his leprosy
discerned: we see that our Lord Jesus (who was typified by the high Priest) can
discern our leprosy. Thou may hide thy sin from man, but thou can not
deceive him, no idle excuse or fig-leafe can cover thee. If he see thee an
adulterer, a swearer, an unjust person, a covetous or proud person, if he see
thee an enemy, a profane person; he will judge thee a Leper. Thou can not
sin (though never so secretly) but thou art sure to be discerned and tried,
by him whose eyes are as a flame of fire. And if he judge thee a leper, he will
pronounce thee a leper, and thou can not appeal from, but must stand to his
judgment. What if men applaud and commend thee for an honest man, a good
neighbor, a just man, if he judge thee a leper? What had it been better, if
all the congregation had taken part with a leper, if the Priest pronounced him
unclean? And if he pronounce thee unclean, he will shut thee out of the
camp, out of the society of God and his Saints, till thou be est seasonably
cleansed. Men may fail in their censures, and shut out the clean for unclean
(as Ioh. 9. 34. the Jews did the man that was borne blind) and hold in the
unclean for base respects: but Jesus Christ he shuts him out unpartially, whom
he pronounces a leper.

II. Then was the leper healed, when in the judgment Only they are cleansed
from sin, whom Christ accounts so to be.
The Priest could not make him clean, but pronounce him clean: Even so, thou
art then cleansed from thy sin, when in the judgment of Christ (our high
Priest) thou art so; who not only can pronounce thee clean, but make thee so.

Quest. But how may I know that Christ accounts me clean?

Answ. When his word by the mouth of his servant pronounces thee clean,
accounts thee so. Whatsoever ye bind or loose in earth, shall be bound and
loosed in heaven, Matthew. 16. 19. with Ioh. 20. 23. Christ only properly
pardons sin, and remits it, 1. by merit; 2. by efficacy of conferring; and no
Minister can thus remit sin: But every Minister must pronounce and declare
pardon to penitent sinners; and when he does this in Christ's Name, Christ from
heaven pronounces the leper to be clean.

Object. But there may be error in the Priests sentence, and the Ministers
judgment is not infallible.

Sol. The sentence of the Priest was infallible, if he kept him to the rules
of inquisition: And the Minister pronouncing pardon upon penitent sinners
cannot be deceived; though thou may deceive thy self in applying promises
and grants of pardon not belonging unto thee.

Quest. What are the rules of inquisition of direction?

Answ. 1. If by rubbing the place he see it grow red the leprosy is in way of
cure; Marks of one cleansed from sin.
if it be not red by rubbing, it is incurable: So if the sinner be ashamed and
blush at his sin, if godly abashment has begun his repentance, it is a good
sign of cure. 2. If the spot pricked with a needle, there come forth blood, it
is in the way of cure: So sinners pricked with the needle of the Law, if they
have sense of pain which makes them cry out of themselves, and see the need of
Christ, it is a good sign. Men pricked now adays, stir up their blood
against the Physician; but such are far from cure. 3. A leper was healed when
his leprosy was stayed, and went no further: So he is to be pronounced clean
who truly turns to God; sin has lost dominion in him; sin grows less
and less; the stirrings of corruptions are abated; he cannot do as he has
done, or would do; nor forget that he was cured. 4. When the conscience is
bathed in that fountain in which water and blood have met, then is the leper
clean. When by the merit of Christ the sinner is fully justified, and by the
Spirit of Christ he is in part sanctified, and rises up toward full
sanctification; then is he truly pronounced clean.

Object. Alas! I am then unclean still; I find much foulness and folly
present with me.

Sol. 1. The leper and sinner may be truly cleansed, never fully in this life;
for every day will make him foul even after true repentance: but we must
daily renew our repentance for daily cleansing. 2. Remember, that the leper
must shave his hair again and again, but he leaves the roots behind; yet
he was pronounced clean, though the hair was still growing, and for all the
roots. 3. The running water in the basen for the cure of the leper, signified a
continual flowing of a fountain of grace from Christ to the heart of the
sinner, for his continual washing.



I. Before the cure. 1. As the leper discerning his What is to be done before
this cure.
esteemed him an happy man that was clean: So thou seeing this disease, must
judge thy self most unhappy and miserable of all men, as Paul, Romans 7. and
never think thy self happy till thou have got a cure, Psalm. 32. 1. Every
leper cried out, I am unclean: the same must be thy complaint and cry. 2. Get
thee to the Priest: Go to Christ in humility, as that leper (Matt. 8. 2.) Lord
if thou will, thou can make me clean; and the least touch of Christ shall
make thee clean, ver. 3. 3. Naaman, being struck with leprosy, must wash and
be clean: So must thou bewail and lament thy estate; wash thy self in the
salt sea of tears, that God may wash thee with a sea of mercy. Especially in
greater sins (as in a deeper leprosy) take up deeper humiliation and
repentance; as David washed his couch with tears.

II. After the cure. 1. And what afterward.
If God have healed thy leprosy, Naaman, 2. King. 5. 15. Not as the nine
lepers, of whom none returned back to give thanks. Luke 17.
Would to God one of ten were as thanfull as we ought, for so great a cure. 2.
Bring thy gift to the Lord for the curing, for so the lepers were enjoined:
that is, pay thy vows; offer up thy self and all thy obedience, an acceptable
sacrifice unto God, Romans 12. 1. Resign unto God; present all thy sacrifices by
the high Priest Jesus Christ, in whom alone thou can find acceptance.

Object. Alas, I have nothing worthy giving unto God.

Sol. 1. Thou can give no less then true endeavors of obedience; and then,
be they never so weak, he that accepts the will for the deed, will accept
them. 2. God prescribed a smaller offering for the poor then for the rich; the
poor man must provide a sacrifice according to the labor of his hands: To
comfort the weak Christian, who offering according to his ability, is
respected according to that he has, not according to that he has not. 3. The
third thing after the cure is to avoid the company of lepers, 1. Cor. 5. 11. If
a man be an incorrigible sinner, let him be to thee as an heathen or Publicane,
Matt. 18. 17. A good lesson for Masters of families to cast out leprous persons
from the rest. It is incredible what mischief one swearer, one drunkard, one
wanton, one profane beast may do in an house. We have not more usually seen
an whole house infected, and poisoned up by one plaguie person: then whole
houses corrupted by some one lewd person; which suffered (as one swine in a
garden) roots up all that is good.

So much of holy persons: Now follow holy things.

CHAP. XVII.
Holy things, types of Christ.
HAving now entreated at large of such holy persons as we have seen express
types of Christ; The second general head ensues, which is to speak of holy
things. All which in the old Testament, and Jewish policy did especially aim
at, and point out Christ after a far clearer manner then did the former. And
therefore for the confirming of our faith in the new Covenant, we must go on
to show the correspondence and agreement of the Scriptures in both Testaments:
And that Christ is the same in both; and the faith of believers the same in
substance, only differing in the manner of exhibition and publication.

A man that superficially looks over the books of Moses, and sees so great an
heap of ceremonies and ordinances, would wonder what the Lord meant to enjoine
so many, and (as reason would judge) so needless institutions to his own
people; of which they can make nothing by cursory, scarce by considerate
reading. And hence (whereas the Jews were so superstitiously observant of the
books of Moses, as that they had at their fingers ends a great number not of
the precepts only, but of the letters and pricks of every book and chapter:)
Christians (unless it be in point of history) almost reject the books of
Moses; not for their credit and truth, but for their utility and use, as not
touching them. But to him that reads and considers will appear: Use of
legal ceremonies.
1. How truly our Savior affirms (Ioh. 5. 46.) that Moses wrot^ of him:
partly by promises and prophecies, and partly describing him in figures and
shadows; so as, had the Jews believed Moses, they had also believed in him: But
rejecting Moses (not in the general; for generally they believed him, and
magnified him as their greatest Prophet: but) in the special prophecies and
promises concerning the individual person of Christ; therefore they could not
believe in Jesus Christ. 2. How aptly and wisely the most wise God did
accommodate himself to this people, in loding them with so many burdensome
ceremonial constitutions, Fitness to the Jews nature.
and yet not one of them in vain. For, 1, Consider the nature of the people;
it was rude and dull, and needed corporal and external elements and rudimen^s
to help them. Besides it was not only naturally superstitious, and addicted
to idolatry: but had lived some Centuries of years in Egypt, and was infected
with Egyptian rites. And further, they were now to go into the land of the
Canaanites, and were in danger to learn their fashions, Deuteronomy. 4. 16: And
therefore the Lord would prescribe to their whole life (both in sacred and
civil things) abundance of Ceremonies; whereby their senses should be
exercised, their faith excited, their obedience preserved, and themselves
restrained from devising on their own heads, or appointing to themselves any
other worship or form of service, then that of the Lords own prescribing,
which should find them work enough, and take up their minds sufficiently. 2.
If we look on the many kinds of rites, and ordinances, and compare them with
the many ends which the Lord had in ordaining them, we shall conclude none of
them were idle or superfluous. Ends of ordaining them.
For, 1. God would have the glory of Christ's Kingdom shadowed, and his own
religion gloriously propounded, and reverently received, not exposed to any
contempt; and therefore appoints the erection and sanctification of a stately
Tabernacle with all the costly vessels, and holy persons garments. 2. He would
train up that people in piety, and stir up in their hearts an earnest sense
of sin, and hunger after mercy: and this he will do by appointing so many
kinds of sacrifices, and rites about them. 3. He would frame them to purity and
sanctimony of heart and life, and will help them hereto by the many lavers,
purifications, cleansings, and sanctifications, of which we have heard in
part. 4. He would nourish natural love among his people; and for this end
appoints many feasts, meat and drink offerings, and many solennities to
appear and rejoice before God. 5. He would have them testify their
thankfulness for his great bounty, and acknowledge themselves homagers as was
fit. And therefore ordaines a number of oblations, first fruits, tithes, vows,
firstborn, and many more institutions to testify their gratitude. 6. Many of
Gods great works must be held in their eyes, and must not be suffered to slip
out of memory. And for this purpose served many of those institutions; as Deuteronomy.
6. 20. when thy son shall ask thee in time to come, etc. For this end the
Passover must be yearly celebrated, Exo. 12. 14. and Chapter 13. 14. So also the
feast of Tabernacles, Levit. 23. 42, 43. 7. The Lord so ordered, as the Jews
could not cast their eyes any way within doors or without, but some shadow or
other should meet them, and preach unto them either Christ or some grace by
Christ, or some duty unto Christ. In the fields they had first fruits, first
borne of cattle: In their houses the lintels must have the Law written: In
their bodies Circumcision was a teacher: on their clothes, fringes: If at
their tables, choice of meats: If on their children, the first borne a type of
Christ. So for times, places, and the rest.

But that we may propound to our selves some good order and familiar method,
Substantial things pointing at Christ.
in which we must bound our discourse: We must know that all the holy things in
the old Testament poynting at Christ, were 1. Substantial. 2. Circumstantiall.
Substantial are such as concern the parts and substance of Gods worship
Circumstantial are such as concern some inferior things about that worship. The
former may be referred to two heads. 1. Sacraments. 2. Sacrifices. Sacraments
and Sacrifices.
The difference: In Sacraments we see God giving us all good things in Jesus
Christ: In Sacrifices we present all our duty to God by Jesus Christ. Now for
the Sacraments of the old and new Testament in general, Differences.
we must in one word know, that they are outward signs, seals, and
confirmations of Gods word and promise of grace. For the Lord knowing and
tendering the weakness of man would inform him of his good will and pleasure
two ways. What Sacraments are in general.
1. He would speak to his mind and understanding by his word and promise.
Word and Sacraments go together.
2. to his outward senses by external signs and Sacraments, called by some of
the Fathers, visible words. He is not contented by his word to declare his
will, but also by Sacraments to witness and sign that word, for our more full
instruction. If before the fall he covenanteth (by his word) life upon
condition of works, he adds a twofold sign to the senses of Adam, the tree
of life, and the tree of knowledge. If after the fall he give a promise of the
blessed seed, Genesis 3. 15. he enjoyneth to Adam outward sacrifices and signs of
that his word. If to ancient believers before Christ he promise deliverance
from sin, death, and hell on condition of faith in the Messiah to come, he
seals up this promise by two standing Sacraments: Circumcision, and the
Passover. If to believers of the new Testament he accomplish in his Son, all
those ancient promises, and now preach salvation to all that believe in the
name of Christ crucified, dead, buried, raised, ascended, and sitting at the
right hand of his father, as Ioh. 3. 16, This promise he confirms with two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as special seals of his grace.
Thus is the Lord still like himself in all ages, and provideth fully for our
direction and consolation, for our strength and assurance in the Covenant of
grace and salvation.

But to come nearer our purpose. The Sacraments of the old Testament were
either before the fall, or after. Of the Sacraments in Paradise before the
fall; we are not to speak, as the tree of knowledge, and the tree of life:
Because 1. They sealed the Covenant of works, not the Covenant of grace. 2.
They concerned the first Adam without any respect or reference to the second
Adam: There was no need of Christ, and consequently no type of him. We are
only to speak of Jewish Sacraments types of Jesus Christ, and so reject them
which never aimed at Christ, but were before any distinction of Jew or Gentile.
These Jewish Sacraments were either 1. Ordinary or standing. Sacraments
ordinary and extraordinary.
2. Extraordinary and occasional. Ordinary were 1. Circumcision. 2. Passover
Circumcision was the Sacrament of entrance and receiving the Jew into Gods
covenant. The Passover was a Sacrament of continuance and growth in that
Covenant. Extraordinary, which were in some resemblance both to them, Antitypes.
and the two Sacraments of the new Testament. 1. To Circumcision and Baptism
answered the Sacraments of the Cloud and the red Sea. 2. To the Passover and
the Lords Supper answered Mannah from heaven and water out of the Rock. Of
these we must (by Gods assistance) speak in order, not what we might, for that
were endless, but what we must necessarily, so far as they preach Christ unto
us, or may set us nearer unto him.

CHAP. XVIII.
Circumcision, a Type.
Herein 1. What it is. 2. How it figures Christ. 3. Observations.
I. CIrcumcision was a sacred rite ordained by God; Definition of Circumcision
expounded in parts.
wherein, by cutting off the foreskins of all the males of the Jews in the
eighth day, the Covenant of God made to Abraham was sealed up to him and all
his posterity. 1. A sacred rite ordained by God: God is the Author: For 1. He
only that can promise and give the grace, can seal the Covenant. 2. Abraham
received it of God, Romans 4. 11. therefore God gave it, 3. the institution is in
Genesis 17; where is the word of institution, 1. Manda^o.
1. in commanding, 2. in promising. 2. The subject of Circumcision were all the
males of Israel descending of Abraham. 2. Promisso.
For these must be distinguished from all families of the earth, Genesis 17. 4.
Neither may we think that women were excluded out of the Covenant of grace,
for they were comprehended under the Circumcision of males. And God spared the
weaker sex; because it was enough to bring them within the number of Abraham's
posterity, to be borne of the males circumcised. Besides, as the males carry a
special type and resemblance of Christ, (as 1 Cor. 11. 3) in order to the
female: so was it fit they should have the thing and ceremony of Circumcision,
and the female only the virtue and efficacy, Junius. 3. The part must be the
part generative. Genesis 17. 13, My Covenant shall be in your flesh; and ver. 11.
Circumcise the foreskin of your flesh. The very place shows that Circumcision
aimed to remedy the corruption and uncleanness of man's nature, whereof it
admonished Abraham and his posterity. For neither Abraham nor any of his were
chosen into the Covenant, because they were cleaner or holier then other; but
that they might be holier. Gods election is free, who makes choice of them that
need Circumcision as well as any other. 4. The time, the eight day: Because 1.
the Lord had a merciful respect to the tenderness of infants, 2. not to
distinguish, but that those infants also were within the Covenant, that dyed
within that time: 3. because whatsoever was borne of man or beast was Legally
impure, and in their blood till the eight day, and therefore no beast must be
offered to the Lord till the eight day, Exodus 23. 19. and chapter 34. 26. No nor
men of other nations servants or other must be circumcised but upon the eight
day from their coming in, 4. this precise observation of the eight day was not
without a mystery, either poynting to the resurrection of Christ on the eighth
day, or leading beyond the week of this present life (in which we cannot be
perfectly circumcised) unto that eight day in the life to come, when all our
corruption shall be cut away, and perfectly and at once abolished. 5. The end
of Circumcision was to seal up Gods Covenant made with Abraham. This Covenant
had three clauses, 1. of the multiplying of his seed in Christ: 2. of the
inheritance of the land of Canaan, being a type of Heaven. 3. of the blessed
seed, the Messiah that was to come of him typified in Isaac, and so was
Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11.

II. Circumcision figures Christ:

I. As it was a Jewish Sacrament, Circumcision a figure of Christ
wherein Christ shined out clearly; who was and is the substance of all
Sacraments both Jewish and Christian; for Christ is the substance of the whole
Covenant, and all the seals of it. In this sense the Apostle calls it a seal
of the righteousness of faith: Romans 4. 11.
Namely 1. a seal of secrecy, How a seal of righteousness.
that locked up the Covenant only to that people. 2. a witnessing seal
whereby (as by a visible, perpetual, and sensible sign in their flesh, which
they could never lay off) the Lord would still hold in their senses, his own
promise of grace made unto them in the promised Messiah, and their promise of
obedience made back again unto God to become his people. Which promise of
theirs, howsoever they were to endeavor in; yet could it not be fully
performed for them, but in the promised seed, in whom their imperfect obedience
and endeavors were to be covered and accepted. And thus is every Sacrament a
sign 1. of grace. As every Sacrament is likewise.
2. of duty, and a religious sign binding God to man and man to God; 3. a
strengthening and confirming seal, by which the Lord pleased to ratify the
promise of grace, and seal up to them the inward and invisible circumcision of
the heart; called the Circumcision of Christ, Col. 2. 11. Because he only by
his spirit can work it, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

II. Circumcision figures Christ, as it was a sign, 1. memorative of the
Covenant of God made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. 11. which merciful
Covenant was founded in Christ Jesus, out of whom God never contracts Covenant
with any man. He only slayes hatred, and makes God and man to walk together
as friends. 2. figurative, or representative; foreshewing 1. that the Messiah
should be borne of Abraham's seed, Three things foreshewed.
and not of the uncircumcised nations, who being to be a Minister of the
Circumcision, Romans 15. 8.
was also to receive Circumcision himself, which was shadowed in all their
Circumcisions. 2. in their shedding of blood by Circumcision, was represented
to their eyes the shedding of Christ's blood; not only in the first fruits of
his bloodshed in his Circumcision (which was a part of his humiliation, and a
parcel of the price paid for our sins) but also the full pouring out of all
his blood in sacrifice upon the Cross, wherein the Circumcision of Christ was
fully accomplished. 3. was shadowed their duty also; that having shed the first
fruits of their blood in Circumcision in obedience to God, they should be ready
to shed all their blood for him whom they expected to shed all his blood for
them. 3. A distinguishing sign of the Jews from all other people who were
without God, without Christ; and they only a chosen seed in that blessed seed,
in whom all their prerogatives were conferred and established. Demonstrates
wound and cure.
4. A demonstrative sign, 1. of the natural sin and disease of man; and
therefore it was placed in the generative part, to admonish Abraham and his
posterity of their uncleanness; for things clean need no Circumcision nor
ablution. Abraham and his seed must be led out of themselves. 2. to demonstrate
the cure and remedy by the Messiah to come, cleansing our natures two ways,
How Christ cures us.
1. by bearing upon himself the imputation of our impurities; 2. by healing
them in us, partly by his merit and bloody death bestowing a perfect
righteousness upon us; partly by his Spirit daily sanctifying and circumcising
our hearts: thus has this Sacrament preached Christ unto us.

Now the observations to make it useful.

I. Take notice of our own estate to humble us, Use. 1. Be humbled for
natural corruption.
both in state of nature, and in state of grace.

I. In our nature, we are all sprung out of a corrupted seed; which although
we would forget, yet the Lord in this Sacrament took care that his people
should carry upon their bodies the sign of sin and death, seazing upon their
whole nature. In place of which comes our Baptism presently after our birth;
showing that a man in his very first frame is filthily polluted, and goes
astray even from the womb, Psa. 58. 3. Whence also it is called, Original
sin. 1. because it has been from the beginning of the world. 2. because it
is the original and beginner of all sin in us; it is the first of all our
sins. 3. from our beginning, even from our conception. Psa. 51. I was
conceived in iniquity; and we from it called the children of wrath, that is,
laid under wrath even from our childhood, Ephesians. 2. 3.

2. After grace received see the weakness of our faith. And for imperfections
of grace.
Abraham, the father of the faithful, needs this pledge and seal to support
his weak and shaking faith. Who can say, my faith is strong enough, which is
ever imperfect in the best, who know but in part, and believe but in part? Why
else did the Lord appoint the use of Sacraments to the strongest believers, and
that all their life long; but to put them in mind of the weakness of their
faith, which needs such continual props and supports? Neither is it marvel
that men are so heavy to the reverent receiving of the Sacrament, because they
see no want, no need, no benefit of faith; they feel not the weakness of
faith, which would breed desire of strength, and drive them to the diligent use
of the means.

II. If Christ be the truth of circumcision, Use. 2. Be circumcised spiritually.
then every Christian in the new Testament must be circumcised as necessarily
as the Jews in the old. And though the ceremony and act of circumcision be
worn out: yet the truth of circumcision as nearly belongs to us now adays,
as of old it did unto them. Col. 2. 11.
In whom we are circumcised through the circumcision of Christ, speaking of
the Gentiles converted unto Christ. In which words, the Apostle plainly
distinguishes between Jewish circumcision and Christian, between legal
circumcision and Evangelical, between Moses his circumcision and Christ's. Here
1. What this Evangelicall circumcision is 2. the difference from Legal. 3. the
marks and notes of it. 4. the motives.

This Christian Circumcision is described (Col. 2. 11.) to be a putting off
the sinful body of the flesh; What the Evangelicall circumcision is.
that is, in plain terms, the mortification of the body of sins that are in
the flesh. For the truth and kernel of Circumcision never stood in the cutting
off a piece of skin (that was but the shell of it) but in cutting off the
lusts of the heart and life, and parting from corruptions of nature, which
rebel against the Spirit. And this we have in Christ alone, being as far
beyond the Circumcision of the old Testament, as the truth uses to excel the
type: as far as Christ is beyond Moses, or heaven above earth. This renovation
of mind was 1. signified by that Ceremony. 2. promised by every Circumcised
person.

The difference between this Evangelicall and that Legal Circumcision,
Difference from legal circumcision.
is 1. In the efficient. That was appointed by God to be made with hands: but
this is a wonderful work without hands, done by the finger of God himself.
The mortification of sin is so honorable a work, as the hand of man and
Angels cannot do it. 2. In the subject. That was wrought upon the seed of
Abraham according to the flesh: this only upon Abraham's seed according to the
faith, upon believers and members of Christ. That upon the Jew without: this
upon the Jew within. That upon Ismael as well as Isaac: here no Ismaelite is
circumcised. That was Circumcision of the naturally borne, Nascentium.
Renascentium.
and males only, of Jews only: this is of the supernaturally borne again,
male or female, Jew or Gentile, for in Christ all are one. 3. In the proper
seat. That was ceremonial in the flesh* this moral in the heart. In that a
natural part was wounded: in this the very corruption of nature. That dealt
with flesh in substance: this with the body of flesh in quality. 4. In the end.
In that every man was circumcised in himself, and his blood shed to fulfill
the rite of the Law: in this all believers men and women are in Christ's blood
once circumcised to fulfill the rigor of the Law. 5. In the effect. By that,
the person was received into the society of Gods people according to external
profession: by this the sinner is received into inward and eternal fellowship
with God, and into communion with Gods people. 6. In the latitude or extent. In
that, the Priest circumcised in one part of the body: in this Christ our high
Priest circumciseth the whole man. In that, one beloved part was cast away with
grief and sorrow: in this, the whole corruption of nature, and all beloved
sins; with no less grief and sorrow of heart for them. 7. In the durance
and continuance. Qui signum destruxit, veritatem induxit.
That was temporary, but till the coming of Christ; who razed the type, and
raised the truth: but this is to continue for ever, till the second coming of
Christ; and is most perfectly finished and consummate in heaven.

The notes or marks to know inward circumcision attained by Christ, Notes of
inward and spiritual circumcision.
are these. 1. The party to be circumcised was presented and offered to this
ordinance of God, as willing and contented to part with his flesh and blood in
obedience to God: so here thou have begun thy circumcision, if thou have
offered up thy soul, body, and all, a reasonable sacrifice to God, Romans 12. 1.
willingly mortifyng all the deeds of the flesh, and denying and renouncing all
fleshly lusts and affections, which are as near and as dear unto thee as the
parts of the body. So Col. 2. 11. it must be a putting off the sinful body;
implying, not a suffering it only to be violently taken and cut away: but a
voluntary putting away, and parting with it. Indeed in legal Circumcision the
infant could not cut away the flesh of his body: but in Evangelicall
Circumcision thy self must put off this sinful body of flesh, and be more
then a mere patient. 2. As there the whole body was wounded in one part: so
see thy whole body of sin be wounded in all parts, Special parts to be
circumcised.
not one member spared, Col. 2. 11. put off the sinful body: No sin must
reign, none unresisted. And therefore, 1. Labor for an heart circumcised.
There the Lord begins this work, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and Chap. 10. 16. there see thou
have begun. See thy desires be sanctified; that the thoughts of thy heart and
inward affections be watched and guarded; not suffered to be earthly, wanton,
impious, disordered, or unfruitful. This purging of carnal affections, and
fastening them on the right object, is a note of inward circumcision, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. 2. See thine ear be circumcised. Act. 7. 51. the Jews are reproved for
uncircumcised ears. All sins of the ear must be circumcised; and that is
done in opening them to hear God and good instruction, and shutting them
against slanders, false tales, wicked counsels, doctrines of liberty, and the
like. 3. Circumcise thy lips; which then are so, when they are able to speak
for God. Moses (in Exodus 6. 12.) complains that his lips were not enough
circumcised. All the sins of the tongue must be cut off. This circumcision
admits not a lie, an oath, a slander, a deceitful, or filthy, or unclean
speech, unmortified. 4. All sins of the eye must be circumcised, by making
covenant with this member; not suffering the eye to be envious, covetous,
wanton, scornful, adulterous. And so examine all the parts, that no sin be
peaceably admitted, without drawing blood upon it, as was in circumcision. True
mortification is painful.
3. As in that Circumcision was sense of much pain and grief in the body; as
we see in the Shechemits, Genesis 34. 25: So in this (where ever it is) is
affliction of conscience, pain of spirit, pricking in the heart; as in the
Converts, Act. 2. 37. which makes the circumcised mourn, and cry out of
himself; judging himself, and breaking his heart with godly sorrow for sin.
The Priest could not take the knife, and cut off the piece of flesh without
pain and sorrow of the child: Neither can the Minister take the sharp weapon
of the Law to wound and cut the body of flesh in any part, but it will be
painful and sorrowful to the child of God; who will judge and condemn
himself, and dares not stand out the threats of the Law, as many contemptuous
rebels do. An hard and secure heart is an uncircumcised heart: good Josiah
will tremble at the word; but all Gods words and plagues stir not Pharaoh. 4.
As that part cut off was never set to the body again, but was taken quite away
for ever: So in this circumcision of Christ, is not a parting with sin only
for a time, but a ceasing of sin, that is, a constant endeavor to forsake
all sins, inward, outward, secret, open: A parting from pleasing, profitable,
dear, and bosom sins; saying to them (as Ephraim to his idols, Hos. 14. 9.)
get ye hence; what have ye to do here? with resolute purpose never to give
them entrance, or entertainment more. Those that fall to their former sins,
as who forget they ever washed (like dogs and swine) were never circumcised.
The skin once cut off died for ever: such a dying to sin must be in this
circumcision. 5. In that was a joining to Gods people, and a receiving of the
party into the Church and family of God: See if thou be joined to Gods
people, not in outward profession but in sincere affection; embracing them that
fear God, delighting in their society, giving them the right hand of
fellowship, and with the hand the heart; separating from the fellowship of the
uncircumcised and profane, as the Jews meddled not with the Samaritanes. Do
thou profess circumcision and grace by Christ, but oppose and pursue the
professors of Christian religion, as Ismael him that was borne after the
promise? A plain sign, all thy circumcision was made with hands. Thy body was
washed with water of Baptism: but thy heart is unwashed, untouched with any
water of saving grace. 6. In that was a joining and admittance to the outward
worship of God, and external communion in all holy things: so here thou art
become a true worshipper; not outwardly in the letter and ceremony, but
inwardly in spirit and truth: A Jew within, Romans 2. 29. Phil. 3. 3. We are the
Circumcision, which worship God in the spirit. He that worships formally, for
fashion, for Law; and in the mean time can contemn the power of godliness;
cannot away with inward watchfulness, sincerity, strictness: though by
Baptism he be brought to the external communion of the Church in holy things;
all is but in the letter, without all circumcision of the heart. 7. In that was
much rejoicing as in a great privilege; and the Jew did much boast, and bear
himself upon this prerogative; partly upon the external work; partly on
their distinction by it; partly because it manifested them sons of Abraham
according to the flesh: and much was their praise among men: But true
circumcision rejoices not in Abraham, but in Christ; has no confidence in the
flesh, but renounceth all outward things, and settles his rejoicing in Christ
alone and his merits; counting all other things dross and dung in comparison
of him. Let the Jew trust in Circumcision by the work wrought, as our
Judaizing Papists do in their Sacraments; Let him glory of Abraham his father,
Ioh. 8. 33. that he is beloved because the seed of Abraham: We are chosen in
Christ, not in Abraham. In him we have atonement and become a beloved people,
and not in Abraham. In him we come boldly to the throne of grace, and speed in
our suits: In him we glory all day long. We trust not in good meanings, as
simple ignorant persons; nor in merits, as wilful blinded Papists; nor in any
thing within us, nor without us, nor without Christ. All our joy and trust is
in himself alone. And this is true inward Circumcision, Phil. 3. 3.

The Motives are. Motives to get the spiritual Circumcision.
1. All outward service and Ceremony without this, is rejected; as preaching,
hearing, praying, fasting, weeping. All thy service and labor is lost, if by
the Spirit of God thy mind be not renewed, and faith and conversion wrought in
thy heart. For as the Jews (being circumcised) were challenged to be
uncircumcised (though they had the foreskinne of the flesh cut off, and had the
circumcision made with hands) and were so far unworthy of Abraham's ^eede, as
that they are called, Witches children, seed of the whore, Isai. 57. 3. and
Act. 7. 51: So art thou not circumcised, which art only outwardly, Romans 2. 28.
A Jew without, or outward, is as good a worshipper as thou. 2. If we cannot say
truly, that now not the Jews, but we are the circumcision, Col. 2. 11. our
persons are no better before God, then an uncircumcised person in the law.
Therefore if thou art not thus circumcised, thou art. 1. an exceeding hateful
person. So David of Goliath by way of reproach and contempt: This uncircumcised
Philistine. 2. thou have no part in the promised Messiah no more then he. 1.
Sam. 17.
3. no portion in Canaan, not a foot in heaven: all thy portion is in earth. 4.
no member of the true Church, but without the Communion of Saints. 5. as he was
in state of death and judgment, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ier. 4. 4, 14: so thou shall be
condemned as surely for want of a sanctified and circumcised heart, as he for
contemning circumcision of his flesh. Col. 2. 13. Ye were dead in the
uncircumcision of the flesh; without the life of God in grace, without hope of
the life of glory.

CHAP. XIX.
The Passover, a type.
THe second ordinary Sacrament of the Jews, lively representing Jesus Christ,
was the Passover, instituted, Exodus 12. to be a lively type of Christ. 1. Cor.
5. 7. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. The name of this Sacrament
has in it the occasion, for it was (by God) therefore instituted in memorial
of their great deliverance in Egypt, when the destroying Angel (who slew all
the first borne in Egypt in one night) passed over all the Israelites houses,
whose doors and posts were striked with the blood of the Paschall Lamb slain
and eaten in that house. Wherein the godly Jews were not to fix their eyes in
that external sign, or the temporary deliverance signified; but to cast their
eye of faith upon the Messiah and true Paschall Lamb; by means of whom, the
wrath and revenge of God passes over all those, whose souls are sprinkled
with his blood, and who by true faith feed upon him. And therefore, howsoever
the word, Passover, has in Scripture many significations, both proper and
figurative; I understand by it the whole institution of God concerning the Lamb
called Paschall. In which we shall see Jesus Christ most lively pourtrayed
before us; and that this one legal Sacrament preached (not obscurely) to the
ancient Jews, the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and grace of salvation by the
only suffering of Jesus Christ. This will appear in five things. 1. In the
choice of the Sacrifice. 2. In the preparing of it. 3. In the effusion of
blood, and actions about it. 4. In the eating and conditions therein. 5. In the
fruits and use.

Sect. I.
I. In the choice of the Sacrifice. The Lord appointed Paschall Lamb a type in
the choice.
or a kidd: notably signifying Jesus Christ; whom John Baptist called, the Lamb
of God, taking away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1. 29. Christ is a lamb,
Christ a Lamb. Denominatione. Qualificatione.
1. In name, Revel. 5. 6. In the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb. 2. In
qualities, in respect of innocence, patience, meekness, humility, obedience to
the will of his Father to the death, not opening his mouth, Isai. 53. 7, in
fruitfulness and profitablenesse to feed us with his flesh, Adumbratione.
and cloth us with his fleece of righteousness. 3. In shadows, being figured
in all those lambs slain, especially in the Paschall lamb. In which shadows
or figures he was (not yearly only, but) daily held before the eyes of
believers; and so here we consider him. In this Lamb for his choice must be
four conditions.

1. Condition. Choice.
It must be a lamb without blemish, verse 5. every way perfect without any
spot or defect: Christum fuisse (...), amici pariter and inimici testati sunt.
signifying the most absolute perfection of Jesus Christ; who was, both in
respect of his person and actions, without all spot and exception. 1. Pet. 1.
19. as of a Lamb undefiled and without spot. Perfection of Christ.
Heb. 7. 26. Such an high Priest it became us to have, as is holy, undefiled,
separate from sinners. The reasons are two. 1. Because else his ransom were
insufficient. 2. He must be perfectly righteous that must become a
righteousness to many.

2. Condition. His excellency
It must be a male, for three reasons. 1. Reason. To note the excellency,
strength, and dignity of Christ, proper to that sex. For although he seemed a
most weak man in the state of his humiliation; yet must he be, not effeminate
but masculine; strong, stout, and potent to destroy sin and death, and to
foil all the enemies of man's salvation. Christ indeed must be the seed of the
woman; but the woman must bring forth a manchild, Rev. 12. 5. And though he
must be borne of a Virgin, yet the Virgin must bring forth a son, Isa. 9. 6.
For he must divide the spoil with the strong, Isa. 53. 12. 2. reason. Consider
Christ in both his natures, it was fit he should be a male as the Lamb was. 1.
as he was the Son of God it was meet he should be of the more worthy sex
of men; for it was unfit that the Son of God should be the daughter of man.
2. as being man, he was to be the Messiah, the seed of Abraham, the Son of
David; and so to be circumcised, to be a fit Minister of Circumcision. 3.
reason. Consider him in his office. He was to be a King, a Priest, and a
Prophet of his Church; all which necessarily require him to be a man, a male,
as the Lamb was. We conclude therefore hence, that being the head of the whole
Church, he must be of as worthy sex as any of his members.

III. Condition. Christus in medio aetatis flore immolatus cuius conditionis
rationem vid. Iun. in Exodus 12.
The Lamb must be of a year old, ver. 5. to signify that Christ dyed at a
full and perfect age, in his strength; and therefore had experience also of our
infirmities. For a Lamb of a year old is at his state and growth, and a Lamb
of a year old is acquainted with many miseries: Even so our Savior, living to
the full strength of a man, was a man full of sorrows, and acquainted with
infirmities. See Heb. 4. 15. we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted like us, yet
without sin.

IV. Condition. He must be taken out of their own flocks and folds: For so
Moses to Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 25, thou must allow us our beasts for sacrifice to
offer to the Lord. Plainly signifying, that Christ was to be an Israelite: and
within the fold of Gods own people; for he was to be of the seed of Abraham;
and salvation was of the Jews, Ioh. 4. 22. Yea and the Lords own Law
requires, that the King should be taken from among his brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 15:
and much more the King of the Church, being King of all Kings.

Sect. VII.
II. Jesus Christ was as evidently expressed in the preparation of the Paschall
Lamb* Paschall Lamb a type in the preparation. Where 6. Observations.
wherein the Jews were tied to six observations.

I. Observation. The Lamb must be severed from the flock, ver. 6: to signify
Jesus Christ separated by God the Father to the office of Mediator; and that
two ways, 1. by Gods eternal decree; Christ two ways set apart to be a
Mediator.
he was a chosen servant of God to the most excellent service in heaven and
earth. Isa. 42. 1, My elect servant. And thus is called a lamb separated from
before the foundation of the world, 1. Pet. 1. 20. 2. In due time actually
separated from all the rest of the flock, by 1. a supernatural conception by
the holy Ghost; whereby he became an high Priest separated from sinners, all
the rest of mankind remaining sinners. 2. by a miraculous birth of a Virgin,
being the seed of the woman. 3. by an unconceivable union of the two natures,
divine and humane, in one person; by which he became our Immanuell, God with
us. 4. by a solemn and heavenly inauguration into his office at the brinke of
^ordaine; by which he was openly proclaimed the chief Doctor and Prophet of
his Church. Thus it became this lamb of God to be actually separated from all
the rest of the flock: because for all the rest he was to pay a greater ransom
and price, then any other that could be found amongst all mankind.

II. Observation. The lamb thus separated must be reserved and kept alive
four days; even from the tenth day of the first month till the fourteenth day
of the same month, ver. 6: Wherein was signified the very particles of time of
Christ's both Ministry and passion. 1. for his Ministry. The time of his
Ministry and passion ordered.
Christ must not be sacrificed presently so soon as he is borne, nor so soon
as he is baptized and separated, but after that separation must live about
four years to preach the kingdom of God, and then be offered up; that his
death might not be as a seal to a blancke, but might confirm all that holy
doctrine delivered by his own mouth and Ministry to the world. 2. For his
passion. The time of it depended not on the will of man, for his enemies sought
many a time before to slay him; as Herod in his infancy, Mat. 2. 16. the Jews
took up stones to stone him, Ioh. 8. 59: the Nazarites would break his neck
from an hill, Luke 4. 29. And many other attempts were made against his life;
but his time was not then come, the lamb must be reserved four days. And
this very moment of time was determined and registered in Gods most certain and
unchangeable computation: Act 2. 23. being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God. Whose wisdom so ordered that, Quia Dominus
decima die eiusde^ mensis, hoe est ante quinque dies paschae in Civitatem in
qua pateretu^, erat ingressurus.
1. as the lamb was taken in the tenth day of the first month: so Christ came
into Jerusalem about the tenth day of the same month to suffer; as appears,
Ioh. 12. For upon the sixth day before his passion, he came to Bethany, ver. 1.
and the next day he went to Jerusalem, which was the fifth day before his
passion, ver. 12. 2. as the lamb must be slain the fourteenth day of the
first month (which answers to our March) and at the full of the Moon:
Anselm. in Math. 21.
So, that no man might be deceived in our Paschall lamb, he must be sacrificed
at the Passover, the same day that the lamb must be slain; In the full Moon
to note the fullness of time now come which was so long before appointed, and
in such a month as when light prevails against darkness, and every thing
revives and springs: to signify that Christ by his suffering chaseth away our
darkness and death, and brings in light and life, and a blessed spring of
grace and glory.

III. Observation. The Lamb must be slain, ver. 6: Christ must die a violent
death.
but by a violent death, and that by Israel. Noting 1. that Christ must be put
to death by the Jews, 2. that the benefit and merit of his death redounds to
his Church only: The Redeemer must come unto Zion, Isa. 59. 20.

Object. How was he then a lamb slain from the beginning of the World, How
from the beginning of the world.
before the Jews were in being?

Sol. Two ways. 1. in regard of Gods decree, whereof a promulgation was made
in promises and types, and an acceptance as if it had been already done: 2.
in regard of man: Semel actu, semper sructu.
He was slain only one time as to the act, but in all times as to the fruit:
because the perpetual power and efficacy of Christ's sacrifice was begun with
the world, and extended to all believers of all ages, who only diversely
apprehend it.

IV. Observe. The time of Christ's death noted.
The lamb must be slain between two evenings: Heb. 9. 26. 3. that Christ's
sacrifice was to succeed in the same time of their evening sacrifices, which
were daily to be offered, Exodus 29. 41. and so to put end to them, Dan. 12. 4.
to note the very hour as well as the day of Christ's suffering on the Cross.
Jews division of the day into 4. parts.
To understand which we must know that the Jews distinguished their
artificial day into four parts: From six to nine, from nine to twelve, from
twelve to three, from three to six: This last part was counted the evening of
the day, and the next three hours the evening of the night: In this fourth
part of the day used the Paschall lamb to be slain, and the rest of and all
their heaviest burdens. 3. All that sprinkling of blood in their houses, so
long as they despise the blood of Jesus Christ, shall never get them protection
from the revenging Angel. We must pray that God would please at length to
remove their veil from their hearts, that they may submit themselves to the
righteousness of God. Romans 10. 3: that so all Israel may be saved by
acknowledging the deliverer out of Zion; of whom was prophesied (Isai. 59. 20,)
That he shall turn away the ungodliness from Jacob.

Sect. III.
III. The Paschall lamb directly aimed at Christ our true Passover, Paschall
Lamb a type in effusion of blood.
in respect of the blood and actions about it, which were three.

1. The blood of the lamb must be saved in a basen, Actions.
verse 22. It must not be shed upon the ground to be trodden under foot: The
preciousnesse of Christ's blood.
signifying the preciousnesse of the blood of Christ: 1. in respect of God; 2.
of Christ; 3. of the Church. For, 1. God the Father highly prizeth this blood,
and saves it in a golden vessel, that it may be ever before him; and that the
streams of it may pacify his displeasure, and confirm the Covenant of grace
with his Church, Whence it is called the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 9. 18 2.
It was precious in regard of Jesus Christ; seeing every drop of it was the
blood (not of an innocent man only, but) of one that was God as well as man,
Act. 20. 28. God with his own blood purchased the Church; and therefore it was
a blood of infinite virtue and infinite merit. 3. Every true member of the
Church does most highly esteem it, as the most precious thing in all the
world; and with great care and reverence receives it into the vessel of
precious and saving faith, and there keeps it safely, as men do their most
precious commodities.

2. The blood of the lamb must be sprinkled upon the lintell and side posts of
the doors of the Israelites, verse. 22. 1. In that it must be sprinkled, Blood
of Christ sprinkled, or applied.
it signified that the blood of Christ must be applied unto us; for our
righteousness stands not in the shedding of Christ's blood, but in sprinkling
and application of Christ's blood shed and sprinkled upon our souls and
consciences to purge them from dead works. 2. It must be sprinkled upon the
posts and doors, so as the Israelites could neither go out of doors nor in,
but they must see on all sides the blood of the lamb: signifying that they and
we should both at home and abroad, going forth and coming in, and on all
occasions have the passion of Jesus Christ before our eyes, in the holy
meditation and deep contemplation of it. 3. It was not enough for the Jew that
the lamb was slain, and the blood shed within the house; but it must be
sprinkled without doors, that every man might see it: and signified, that if
Christ blood and the merit of it be shed in the houses of our hearts for
justification and righteousness, the sprinkling of it will appear and be
seen without, in holy life and practice of sanctification.

3. This blood of the lamb must not be sprinkled with the bare hands, but with
a bunch of hyssope dipped in Faith resembled by hyssope, how.
verse 22: which signified, that every one which puts forth his hand, is not
sprinkled with Christ's blood, unless he have provided this bunch of hyssope.
Hyssope is faith: Hyssopus fides est Augan 4. Number. 33.
and faith resembles this herb in four things. 1. It is a ground herb, low
and weak: so faith in it self, Herba humilis.
and in us, is weak, frail, feeble, and of most despised. Neither has every
man that has hyssope in his garden, this bunch of hyssope in his heart. 2.
Rooting in a rock. Radicibus ^aerens in petra.
(for so it used among the Jews) whence some thought it to be Pellitory of the
wall. Faith roots it self upon the rock Jesus Christ, and cannot grow or
prosper in any other soil. Other hyssope roots in earth, Purgans, and sanans.
this in heaven. 3. It is an herb cleansing and curing. Faith only is an
herb of sovereign virtue both to purify the heart, Act. 15. 9: and to heal
all the wounds of conscience. Act. 16. 31. the Jailer wounded and pricked in
heart must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and be saved. Our Lord himself
was wont to say to distressed persons, According to thy faith be it to thee.
Praecaeteris recipiendo and aspergendo liquori valde apta.
4. It was fitter then other herbs for the receiving and sprinkling of liquor:
so faith, although a low and weak plant, is only fit to receive the precious
liquor of the blood of Christ. Only faith draws virtue from Christ; as in the
poor woman that stood behind Christ, Mark 5. 34. And the want of this bunch
of hyssope disables Christ from doing thee any good. Christ could do nothing
in Capernaum for their unbelief.

I. Note hence, Use. 1. Christ's blood, to be highly prized.
how we are to prize and magnify the blood of Christ. For if the shadow of
this precious blood must be so preserved, so carefully saved in a costly
vessel: how much more ought the blood it self?

Quest. How may I prize the blood of Christ? How.


Answ. 1, Consider, with the dignity of the person, the infinite value of it:
That it is able to purchase the whole Church of God, Act. 20. 28. which a
thousand worlds of wealth could not do. No wealth in heaven or earth besides
this can redeem one soul: And therefore the Apostle, 1. Pet. 1. 19. sets this
precious blood against all corruptible things, as gold and silver, and things
so much set by amongst men. 2. Consider the precious things which it procures
us both in earth and in heaven.

1. Here below it procures us four things. Precious things procured by it: On
earth.
1. Reconciliation and peace with God, Romans 3. 25. and Ephesians. 2. 13. we which
were far off, are made near by the blood of Christ. 2. A sweet tranquillity
of mind and peace of conscience, which all worldly treasure cannot purchase;
because now we are within the Covenant of God, living in his love which is
better then life; and in this love is no lack, but an abundant supply of all
needful things. All which Covenant of grace is made and ratified by this
blood, therefore called the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 9. 3. Victory against
all the malignity of our spiritual enemies even the greatest: Satan himself
who is overcome by the blood of the lamb, Revel. 12. 11. 4. Immunity and safety
from all the judgments and dangers threatened against our sins; else had we
died without mercy for despising Moses law, Heb. 10. 28. For if there were such
force in the blood of the type, that by the effusion of it the Israelites lay
safe and untouched of the revenging Angel, Heb. 11. 28: much more in this blood
of Jesus Christ to cover believers in his Name, from the hand of Gods revenge
due to our transgressions.

2. This precious blood now in heaven procures us the most needful and
excellent good things above all that we can imagine: In heaven.
Especially two ways. 1. By opening heaven for our prayers; for this blood
pleads for us now in heaven, and speaks better things for us then the blood of
Abel, Heb. 12. 24. That called for vengeante against the sinner: this
entreats for daily grace for daily sins, and procures daily mercies for
daily supplies. 2. As to our prayers, so this blood opens heaven to our
persons. This blood only rents the veil asunder, and makes a way into the
holy of holies, and gives entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Heb. 10. 19. by
the blood of Jesus we are bold to enter into the holy place. This blood is the
only key that unlocks heaven; for else the Lord dwells in light which no flesh
can have access to, 1 Timothy 6. 16. namely without Christ and the shedding of
his blood.

II. Is the blood of Christ so precious? Use. 2. Profane not the blood of
Christ.
take heed of profaning this precious blood; take heed of sinning against it.
Consider of that sore punishment which he is worthy of, that treads under foot
the son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament unholy, Heb. 10. 29:
He cannot express the greatness of the punishment in words, but leaves it to
all men's minds to consider of.

Quest. How may a man profane this blood? How that may be done.


Answ. 1. By undervaluing it; as Papists, who think it insufficient to ratify
the Covenant unto them without other additions and supplies from themselves and
others; yea ascribe as much to the blood of Thomas Becket and other traitors,
Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, etc.
as to this blood. 2. To be ashamed of Christ and his sufferings. The Jews
must strike the lintells of their doors with the blood of the Paschall Lamb,
that all might see they were Israelites: signifying that we must openly
profess Christ, and not be ashamed of his death and ignominy, which is the
life of the world, at which, notwithstanding, the greatest part of the world
stumbleth at this day. To shame at the profession of Christ, is to contemn his
blood. 3. To contemn it in the means in which the Lord would hold it before
our eyes: To reject or neglect the preaching of the word, wherein Christ is
crucified before our eyes, as he was to the Galatians, chap. 3. 1. To neglect
and despise the Sacrament, in which his blood is after a sort powered out to the
mind and senses: Or unpreparedly to receive the Sacrament, and in the
unworthiness of a guilty conscience; is to make ones self guilty of the blood
of Christ; as Pilate, Judas, and the soldiers were. 4. To despise and wrong the
godly, descended of the blood of CHRIST: redeemed with the blood of CHRIST: To
hate the Church of God, and abuse the members of Christ; is to crucify again
the son of God, and despise the price of our purchase. Mat. 25. 40.
In that ye do it to one of these little ones, ye did it to me. Thou can not
draw blood of the Saints, but thou sinnest against the blood of Christ. 5. To
profane it in graceless swearing, as those branded bell-hounds that swear
commonly by wounds or blood, as if this precious blood were to be engaged on
every base occasion. Well, they carry wounds in their consciences, and power
out the life blood of their souls.

Sect. IV.
IV. In eating the Paschall Lamb, Paschal Lamb, a type in the eating.
Jesus Christ was typified. To this eating many conditions are required,
concerning 1. time. 2. place. 3. persons. 4. manner. 5. measure. 5. Conditions.


The time. It must be eaten at the same time; and in Time.
1. In the evening to signify our estate of darkness and misery by sin and
death, till Christ came, and when Christ came to be our ransom. 2. In one and
the same evening, to note the holy agreement and consent of the whole Church in
the faith of Christ's death and passion; to which well agrees the constitution
of our Church, ordaining the supper succeeding it in the same time, so all
superstition and formality be avoided.

The place. 1. Every particular Lamb must be eaten Place.
to signify the unity of the Church of God, the house of the living God, and
the spiritual conjunction and agreement of all the faithful in one bread and
one body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. 2. If one house sufficed not to eat up one Lamb,
they might call in their neighbors to a competent number; which might be
about a dozen, as in our Saviors family: to signify 1. that the Gentiles in
time, by the voice of the Gospel, should be called in, to the participation of
Christ the lamb of God, and to the fruition and feeding of the same lamb with
the Israelites. 2. no number is assigned, because the Lord only knows who are
his. 3. because there were many lambs to be slain, they must be eaten in
many houses; so as no man must abstain from the Passover in pain of death:
signifying the special application of the same Christ to several persons,
families, and the Church is no salvation. 3. In the night of errors, heresies,
afflictions, and persecutions for the truth (when God revengeth the worlds
contempt of his grace) if we would be safe we must keep our selves within
the Church, not departing from the particular house or Church in which we are,
to join to Idolatry or errors, least Gods revenge overtake us, as the waters
overwhelmed all that were without the Arc.

II. The manner prescribed to all Passeovers ensuing stood in three
observations. Manner common to all Passeovers.


1. They must eat it with unleavened bread: signifying, that if we would feed
on Christ our Passover, we must purge out all old leaven, and become a new
lump, 1 Cor. 5. 7. This old leaven is the fusty, swelling, and spreading
corruption of our own wicked nature, the leaven of sin, false doctrine,
heresy, corruption of manners, sour and tart affections, that will not stand
with the receiving of Christ and his benefits. All this we must purge out, and
study for sincerity and truth in judgment, in affection, in action.

2. They must eat the Passover with sower herbs, as sauce: signifying, 1.
true repentance and godly sorrow of heart to be inseparable with the true
apprehender of Jesus Christ: 2. that Christ and his Cross are inseparable, and
that afflictions (as sour herbs) are the most whole some sauce of
Christianity: Sour indeed, and unpleasing to the flesh, but profitable 1. to
prepare and provoke the appetite with more cheerfulness and ardency to all
godly duties of prayer, hearing, Sacraments, mercy, patience, hope, etc. Romans
5. 3, 4. 2. to whet and provoke to the practice of all Christian duties of
mercy and love. 3. to excite the desire to be fully fed with that sweet tree
of life, and that blessed Mannah (in which is no sowrenesse) in the kingdom of
glory, Rev. 2. 17.

3. They must always in eating repeat and confer of their deliverance out
of Egypt, and in memory of that benefit provoke their thankfulness of God,
ver. 26. 27. adding as it were to the Sacrament a word of instruction:
signifying 1. that we should always remember the death and passion of Christ
with due thankefullnesse for so great a deliverance by it: if they must still
speak of their temporal deliverance: much more we of so great and eternal
deliverance by it, from the spiritual servitude of sin, death, the devil,
and damnation: 2. it shadowed herein its successor in the new Testament, for
the Sacrament of the Supper was therefore instituted to keep in remembrance
the death of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. 3. to be a rule for
all Sacraments, Vt accedat verbii ad elementum.
wherein it is necessary, that the word be joined to the Element: I mean the
word of Institution, and (if it may be conveniently) of exhortation, that the
seal may go with the Charter, as (even in these shadows) the Lord himself
straightly enjoined: these were the Laws prescribed for the Anniversary
Passover, both in Exodus 12. 14, and Numb. 9. in neither of which is any
mention of any of the former Laws proper to the first Passover.

The last condition in eating concerned the measure. whole eaten: Measure of
eating it.
signifying 1. Our perfect communion with Christ, who are as nearly united
unto Christ, as the meat we eat, which is turned into our own substance. 2.
That nothing in Christ is unprofitable. 3. That Christ must be received wholly
without dividing of his natures, or destroying any of his offices. Arrius
divides the Lamb in denying his Godhead. Manichoes, impugned his humanity.
Neither eat the whole lamb. The Papists destroy all his Offices. Whosoever
deny any fundamental Article of Religion, they divide the lamb. To eat the
whole lamb, is to believe whole Christ; Fides est una Copulativa.
according to the rule, Faith is but o^^, yet a copulative: Deny one, overthrow
all. Hitherto served that Iniunction, that no part of the lamb must be
reserved till the morrow; but if any remained it must be burnt with fire,
verse. 10. The Lord in his infinite wisdom would prevent all the occasions of
idolatry, which is easily admitted in the reservations of holy things: As in
Popery, what a deal of idolatry is crept into the Church by reserving
superstitious relics, and especially their consecrated or conjured bread; as
if this condition did not condemn expressly that Popish reservation of the
host or breaden god? Add hereunto, that the Jews requiring the body of Christ
on the Cross to be taken away that night before the Sabbath, Ioh. 19. 31.
fulfilled (against their knowledge) this Prophecy: Nothing of the Paschall lamb
must be left till the morning.

Sect. V.
V. The Paschall Lamb is an express type of Christ in respect of the fruit and
use of it, Paschall lamb, a type of Christ in the benefits.
which is security and safety from Gods revenge, ver. 23: For as by the
sprinkling of the blood, and eating of the flesh, the Jews were defended from
the revenging Angel, and the destroyer passed over the house where he espied
the blood sprinkled: So the blood of Christ applied to the conscience, causes
the wrath of God to pass by those that are so sprinkled. And as they could sit
in the house safe, and not fear the stroke of the destroyer, because of the
blood sprinkled; so whosoever by true faith feeds upon Jesus Christ, and are
died with his blood, rest secure and fear not the destruction and revenge due
to wicked men. Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance of
faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience.

I. Use. 1.
As the Jews dwelling in Egypt were in great danger of the revenging Angel,
who was to pass through the land: So all the Israel of God, dwelling in the
midst of the Egypt of the world, Danger of the soul: and how it is to be
avoided.
and too too much tainted with the fashions of it, have no small cause to fear
the judgments and revenge of God, which must pursue the sins of it; and also
to use means for their own safety in the night of trouble and revenge, as the
Israelites did.

Quest. What means?

Answ. The same that Israel did. We must, 1. Sprinkle the house of our hearts
with the blood of the Lamb, Heb. 10. 22. sprinkled in our hearts, etc.
Whosoever were sprinkled with the blood of the lamb, were safe. Was there so
much power in the blood of the type; and not much more in the blood of the
truth? 2. Get into the house of the Church, and fellowship of the faithful;
for such as are true members of the Church (which is the house of Saints) are
secure from the plagues of wicked men. Isai. 27. 3. I the Lord do keep the
vineyard: I will water it every moment: lest any assail it, I will keep it
night and day: and Isai. 37. 18. My people shall dwell in the Tabernacle of
peace, and in sure dwellings, and in safe resting places. Noah can be safe no
where (in the deluge) but in the Arc: And out of the Church is no salvation,
or safety. 3. Thou must abide in the house all night, and go not forth. Except
the Israelites abide in the house, they cannot be safe: except thou abidest in
the ship of the Church, thou can not be safe, no more then any of Noah's
company if they had stepped out of the Arc. We must adhere constantly to the
true Church, and not forsake the fellowship, or depart from it by Apostasy, or
revolt; which brings certain shipwreck of faith. Consider, Heb. 10. 25. 4.
Patiently await for the morning, even the bright rising and appearing of Jesus
Christ the Sun of righteousness, coming again to our deliverance; whether
publicly to general judgment, or personally in special to our selves. For
he shall bring health ^^der her wings, Mal. 4. 2.

II. In the whole precedent discourse is a fruitful direction for Christians
for their holy use of the Sacrament of the Supper, Use. 2. Directions for
receiving the holy Communion.
which is come in place of the Passover.

1. As he must be circumcised that must eat the Passover: so must he be
baptized that must be admitted to the Supper; that is a reverent professed
Christian. For holy things must not be cast to dogs, Matt. 7. 6. The word and
Sacraments are childrens bread, and must not be cast to dogs, that is,
obstinate enemies, scorners, blasphemers, to men of uncircumcised lips and
ears, who wilfully repel the means of their cleansing. So much the more pity
is it that all sorts of notorious evil men thrust into the presence chamber of
the great King, yea sit down at the Lords Table, and like swine swill in his
cup without control, or any rebuke in many places: Open blasphemers,
common-drunkards, scoffing Ishmaels, noted adulterers, obstinate sinners: And
where is the care to preserve the holy things of God from pollution, contempt,
and profanation? Would a man spread a table for dogs or swine? If the shadows
of these holy things might not be cast to dogs: is it nothing to expose to
them the body and substance it self? 1. Cor. 11. 30. for this cause many are
weak and sick among you, and many sleep.

2. As the Lamb was taken in the tenth day, but was not slain till the
fourteenth, that it might be before their eyes all the four days before, for
the helping of their meditation, and due preparation to the eating of it: So no
man must come to the Supper without due preparing himself. For if so long
preparation was by God thought fit for the shadow: what preparation can be
thought fit and sufficient for the substance, 1. Chron. 35. 6? It was the
counsel of Sol^mon, Prove. 23. 1. When thou sit down at a great man's
table, consider diligently what is set before thee* Much more here at the great
Gods Table, no consideration, of the Author, matter, manner, end, fruit, and use
can be sufficient. What a fearful thing is it to come as most men do, not
considering the Lords body? How miserable was the sentence of that guest, that
sat down at the Kings table without his wedding garment? Matt. 22. 13.
Our common preparation is, to put on our best clothes, and to cover our bodily
nakedness in most curious manner: In the mean time the Lord sees, and men's
own consciences witness against them, how naked their souls lie, and
filthily discovered. The due preparation to this ordinance would be attended
with more comfort within, and more reformation without, then we can epsy in
most communicants.

3. As the Paschall lamb must never be eaten without sower herbs: so we must
never come to the Sacrament without true humiliation and sorrow for sin.
There can be no sweetness in the blood of Christ, till the heart be full of
bitterness for sin. For as sower sawces whet the stomach, and provoke the
appetite: so true sorrow for sin, stirs up our desire and appetite after
Jesus Christ, and prepares us to all good duties, and holds us in a fitness to
pray, to hear the word* to the Sacrament, to works of mercy, etc. What a sweet
sowernesse and bitterness is that which brings such delectable sweetness and
refreshing after it? Any man of reason would make hard shift to drink down a
bitter potion to help his bodily health: and much more a godly man will be
contented to digest godly sorrow for the procuring of heavenly joy, and the
sweet comforts of Gods salvation.

4. As the Jew might not eat the lamb, till he had purged all leaven out of
his house: So we must not come to the Sacrament without the forsaking of our
sin. Never can a man expect any comfort by Christ's Sacrifice that hides the
old leaven in the corners of his heart. Whence the Apostle, 1. Cor. 5. 7.
exhorts the Saints, to purge out the old leaven; because Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us. Here is to be considered, 1. What this leaven is, 2.
What is the purging of it. 1. This leaven is not only the leaven of corrupt
doctrine, which suddenly sowreth the truth and lump of the Gospel, as leaven
does a lump of dowe: but also the leaven of sin, both in the corruption of
nature; (which is the old leaven in our selves, and has sowred all the lump of
whole mankind, and every man, and every faculty of man) as also in corrupt and
vicious conversation, which sowreth and leaveneth others with himself in
societies. 2. The purging of this leaven is, 1. In correcting and repenting
sin past; when a constant care is nourished to find it out, and to cast it
out: 2. In serious conversion and turning to God; both which are expressed in
Ps. 34. 14.

Sect. VI.
Quest. How may we purge out this leaven?

Answ. Imitate the Jew. For why should a Jew be more careful in the shadow and
ceremony, Similitude of purging out leaven and sin.
then a Christian in the truth and substance?

I. The Jew begins to purge within, and banish it out of his house: So begin
thou to purge the inside first, Ier. 4. 4. Wash thy heart, O Jerusalem. An
hypocrite can wash his face, but a sound Christian looks to his heart. Many can
purge their mouths and outward man about the time of the Sacrament; but the
heart is stuffed with maliciousnes, envy, profanene^se, and ungodliness. Many
can be busy to purge other men's houses; but the Jew must purge his own house.

II. The Jew purged out all leaven, and spared none not a morsel or a crumme:
And shall not a Christian count every sin a pollution, and hateful to God?
Shall any say, Is it not a little one? I may swear a little; be drunk, if
sildome: I may not kill; but rail and revile, and speak my mind: I may not be
an adulterer, but wanton in speeches, looks, behaviors, and in my company: I
may not go to plough on the Sabbath; but may buy and sell, ride abroad, or be
idle at home. Why? Is not a little serpent, a serpent; or a little poison,
poison? Is not a little leaven enough to sower a whole lump?

III. The Jew carefully and narrowly searched and swept every corner and cranny
of his house, that not the least crumme might escape him: And shall not we as
carefully throw out this leaven out of every power of the soul, and every part
and member of our bodies? That every one may possess his whole house in
holiness and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. How does the Scripture teach us to purge
this leaven out of all corners? Entire purging of the soul.
As 1. Out of the conscience; to serve God with a pure conscience, 2. Tim. 1.
3: 2. Out of the affections; prescribing love out of a pure heart, Eccles. 5. 1.
1. Tim. 1. 5. and to take heed to our feet coming to the house of God: 3.
Out of our senses, Psalm. 119. 37. turn away mine eyes from regarding vanities;
Job 31. 1. I made a covenant with mine eyes. So to shut the ear from hearing
blasphemy against God, or men; and not to be agents and abetters of
blasphemers: 4. Out of our speeches, Psalm. 39. 1. I said I will look to my
ways, that I offend not in my tongue: And in stead of this leaven to accustom
our selves to the language of Canaan, Esaias 19. 18.
and gracious speeches tending to edification, ministering grace to the hearers.

IV. A Jew must begin his purging seven days before, and hold on all the feast
on pain of death: How much more should we begin to purge our selves
betimes, and hold on so long as our Passover lasts? And because our Passover
is not annual, as that was, but continual; we must continue our cleansing
and separating from this leaven which is not easily washed out. Thou haste but
trifled in this business that hangest down thy head for a day, and art
penitent for the time of the Sacrament, unless thou continuest to reform and
renew thy heart and life, and conscionably avoidest all leaven of sin all thy
life; which is, or ought to be a continual Christian Passover.

V. As the ^ews must eat the Passover with their loins girt, with staves in
their hands, eating in haste as tending to their Country: So we must never
come to the Sacrament, but with holy hearts and meditations: 1. Seriously
considering what strangers and pilgrims we are here below; not having any
continuing City here, but are seeking a Country, Heb. 13. 14 He that is a
true eater of our Paschall Lamb, must not pitch down his staff here; but as
Christian Rechabites, Ier. 35. esteem themselves strangers, content themselves
to dwell in tents ever ready to remove; not distracting themselves in building
houses, or planting vineyards, or seeking great things for themselves. Hence
was that commendable admonition of the ancient Church, in the time of the
Sacrament, Sursum cord^.
used in our Liturgy: Lift up your hearts: 2. We must eat the Lamb hastily,
hastening unto Christ the true Passover; and not insist in these Sacraments of
ours, which are still but as shadows of good things to come; yet serving us
through this our strange Country, and speeding us into our own Canaan and
country, and that with all expedition; seeing that to be dissolved hence, and
to be with Christ, is best of all, Phil. 2. 23: 3. We must celebrate our
Passover with staves in our hands, that is, the doctrine of the Law and Gospel
held in our hearts, as a staff to defend our selves in the right track and
path of holy doctrine, and holy conversation; to repulse our adversaries that
come out against us, for it is the sword o^ the Spirit; and to lean upon, as a
staff, in our weakness and weariness. This staff must not lie by us in our
books; but be held in our hands and hearts, and be (not in our possession
only, but) in our daily use. He has no comfort of this Sacrament, that has
not this staff in his hand.

VI. As the Jews in eating the Passover must repeat and recite the memory of
that great deliverance out of Egypt by a mighty and miraculous power: so must
we in our Sacrament commemorate and remember our great deliverance from hell,
and that spiritual Pharaoh, wrought by the blood of our Paschall lamb. 1 Cor.
11. 26, so often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come. And therefore it is very fit the word and Sacrament
should go together, as the seal together with the deed and Indenture. Hence
those, that are so devoute at the Sacrament and neglect or despise the Word,
are mere hypocrites and ignorants; their folly is like his that makes much of
a seal, but tears the Indenture all to pieces, which only can convey his
inheritance unto him.

VII. As the Jews came together to eat the whole Lamb: Whole Christ must be
received.
so must we to receive whole Christ.

Quest. When do we receive whole Christ?

Answ. First when we reverently receive the signs appointed by Christ
according to his own institution. Secondly when we receive faithfully the
thing signified, which is Christ and all his merits.

I. For the former, Notes. 1 Popish abuses taxed.
1. as it had been a great sin for the Jews to divide the Lamb which God
commanded to be eaten whole: no less grievous a sin is it in Popery to
administer the bread without the cup; of which Christ has said expressly,
Drink ye all of this. 2. as the Lamb was appointed to no other use by Moses
but to be eaten: so was the bread and wine in the Sacrament ordained to no
other end by Christ but to be eat and drank: all other holy use of them out of
the action of the Sacrament is Idolatrous, superstitious, and unlawful. 3. as
it had been a grievous sin to reserve any of the lamb till the morning,
against so express a commandment appointing it to be wholly eaten: so
grievous a sin is it to reserve the consecrated host (as they foolishly call
it) either to box up, or to hang up, or to worship and adore it, or pray unto
it, or carry it in procession, or lift it up with both hands above the Priests
head, that it may be worshipped with divine and Idolatrous worship; or yet (if
it be possible) with more blasphemy to offer it upon an Altar, as an unbloody
sacrifice for the sins of the quick and dead, which abolisheth (at once) the
whole Priesthood of Christ. All which the Lord would prevent in this
constitution, that no part of the lamb must be reserved, but if any were left
it must be burnt with fire.

II. We eat the whole lamb, when with the signs we receive the thing
signified, which is Christ and all his merits. We must feed upon and digest
whole Christ; that is, be united so straightly and undividedly to Jesus Christ,
as the meat which is changed into the same substance with our bodies; and this
by the faith of our hearts, which so straightly knits us to Christ as a marriage
bond; and he becomes a perfect nourishment to us unto eternal life. Neither
could our Lord fitlier express this strait union, then by feeding and eating;
seeing there cannot be a straiter union in nature, then between the thing
nourishing and nourished.

Quest. What may I do thus to receive the whole lamb?

Answ. 1. Come hungry in sense of the want of faith, And how we may receive
whole Christ.
and desire of supply. 2. Labor to feel the sweetness of Christ; take heed
of despising this sweet Mannah. Let not the hunger of the Onyons, garlic, and
flesh pots of Egypt thrust down the desire of this Mannah which comes down
from heaven; to which the other Mannah was not half so sweet. 3. Think it not
enough to eat the flesh of Christ Sacramentally, if not spiritually. Conceive
what a fearful delusion it is to eat the Sacrament of the flesh of Christ in
the Supper, and not eat the flesh of Christ by the Sacrament: Thou have been
at the Supper of the Lord, but have not tasted of his Supper.

CHAP. XX.
The Pillar of Cloud and Fire, a type.
OF the ordinary Sacraments of the Jews, pointing at Christ, we have spoken:
Now of the extraordinary. Of these some are answerable to the Jews
circumcision and our Baptism; as 1. the Pillar of Cloud, 2. the red Sea: Some
to the Jews Passover and our Supper; as 1. Mannah from Heaven, Cloud and fire
types: ground.
2. water out of the Rock. The ground of this distinction we have in, 1 Cor.
10. 2, 3: where the Apostle leads us by the hand to the distinct consideration
of these Sacraments. First of the Pillar of Cloud and fire, under which the
Fathers of the old Testament were baptized. When the Lord in his wise
providence appointed to lead the children of Israel (for the space of forty
years) through a dry, uncouth, and terrible wilderness, himself undertook
to be their guide, and for their certain direction in their way, appointed
them this visible sign of his presence for their motion or station, by night
or by day, through all their pilgrimage: concerning this Cloud let us enquire
1. of the kind, 2. of the difference between it and other clouds, 3. of the
use of his cloudy Pillar, 4. how a type of Christ.

1. Quest. What kind of Cloud was this?

Answ. Not natural, What Cloud it was.
but supernatural and miraculous, yea one of the four great miracles that the
Lord continued all the while of their Journey, which was forty years. 4.
constant miracles to Israel in the wilderness.
Those four great miracles were. 1. the not swelling of their feet. Deuteronomy. 8.
4. 2. their apparrells not wearing, or not waxing old, Deuteronomy. 8. 4. 3. the
feeding of them with daily Mannah, ver. 3. and 16, and water out of a rock,
ver. 15, 4. this Pillar.

Quest. Was there any difference between this and other Clouds? How it differed
from other clouds.


Answ. Yes in five things, 1. the matter, 2. the fashion, 3. the motion, 4. the
properties, 5. the durance. 1. The matter of it was not of vapors as other
clouds, nor apt to engender rain, but framed by the Lord besides and above the
ordinary course of nature. 2. The fashion: It kept still the figure of a
Pillar, whereas other clouds continually alter the shape and figure every
moment. 3. The motion: other clouds are moved by the wind: this moved it
self, yea though the winds moved most strongly, it stood still. Besides that
the motion of it was certain, and imitable so as they might follow it, but so
was it never in any other cloud. 4. It had contrary properties, of light and of
darkness, being a Pillar of cloud and fire. 5. In durance. For one cloud to
continue firm and stable for forty years long must needs be miraculous,
whereas nothing is sooner dispersed then ordinary clouds by wind and weather.
In all which regards it is called the Cloud of the Lord, Nubes Iehovae.
Numb. 14. 14. Not that all clouds are not his, but because this was so after a
special and extraordinary manner.

Quest. What was the use of this cloudy Pillar?

Answ. Threefold, What was the use of it.
the first in respect of God, the second in respect of the Israelites, the
third in respect of their enemies, Numb. 14. 14.
Numb. 14. 14.

I. In respect of God; It was a sign and symbol of the presence of God and
Christ. For God often pleased to manifest his presence by the clouds: As when
he sets his bow in the cloud, a sign of his favor: God in a cloud appeared
to Moses, Exodus 19. 9. God appeared in the cloud upon the Oracle, Lev. 16. 2.
So Christ in the Mount was transfigured in a bright cloud: In his ascending he
was taken out of their sight in a cloud: And in his coming again to
judgment, he shall appear in the Clouds to judge the quick and dead.

2. In respect of the Israelites, 1. to show and direct them the way as a
faithful and constant guide through the wilderness, for when it moved they
must moove, when it stood they must stand. Psa. 78. 14, in the day he led them
with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire: which seems the chief
use of it, Exodus 13. 21. 2. to shine and lighten them in the way, so as they
might go by night as well as by day, so in Psa. 78. 14. he led them all night
long with a light of fire, noted also, Exodus 13. 21, 3. to cool and comfort
them (as a shadow) from the parching heat of the Sun: Psa. 105. 39, He spread
the cloud as a covering or canopy over them. To which the Prophet (Isa. 4. 5.)
alluding, calls it a covering cloud, which shadow was no small comfort in that
hot country, in that dry and parched desert, they still lying and living
abroad in it. 4. as a shield to defend them against their enemies, for the
cloud came between the host of Israel and the host of the Egyptians to
separate between them. And therefore it is called (Numb. 9. 19. the watch of
the Lord, actively, watching over their safety; passively, which they carefully
watched and attended.

3. In respect of enemies: It was darkness to the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 20.
For the Lord used two of his creatures against the Egyptians especially;
water, and the cloud, as means of execution of his justice upon his enemies:
As the clouds and fire shall be serviceable for the execution of his last and
general judgment at Christ's second appearing.

IV. Quest. Wherein was this cloudy pillar a type of How it was a type of
Christ.


Answ. In five respects; 1. as a Pillar, 2. of cloud, 3. of fire, 4. of cloud
and fire, 5. in the use of it.

I. As a Pillar it signified Christ; who as a Pillar is firm, stable,
straight, strong, and as a Pillar able to support his Church, and to bear up
all the living stones laid on this foundation.

II. As a Pillar of cloud, 1. as the cloud naturally engenders fruitful
raines and showers: so Christ properly, by the influence and rain of grace,
makes the field of the Church fresh, fruitful, flourishing; 2. as the cloud
mitigates the heat of the Sun: so Jesus Christ quenches and allayeth the
parching heat of his Fathers wrath, and is the covering of his Church in this
dry and parched wilderness; So as when the soul of a man is dried up and
faints within him through heat of his sin, then he refreshes it with the
sweet and comfortable doctrine of the Gospel (as with a sweet rain) the
distressed conscience. He it is, that speaks a word to the weary in due
season. 3. as the cloud covered Israel from the Egyptians fury: so Jesus
Christ defends his Church, 1. from the fiery darts and assaults of Satan's
temptations; 2. from the furious rage of our own lusts, and inflammation of
sin: 3. shelters it from the heat of the Sun of persecution, and from all
bodily ^oes that they cannot do what they will, but what he permits.

III. Christ was signified by the fiery part of the Pillar. For 1. as fire has
a quickening heat in it: so has Jesus Christ; who is the life of the world; but
especially of his Church and elect: 2. as fire has light: so Christ is the
true light of the world; whom whosoever believes, he needs no other light nor
knowledge to salvation, no more then Israel needed any light in the night but
this. All Gods people walk by this fiery Pillar and by no other, 3. as fire
purges and purifieth metals from dross: so does Jesus Christ purge his people
from all their sins; partly by the fire of his spirit within, Mat. 3. 11. and
perfectly by his blood which cleanses from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.

IV. As a pillar both of fire and cloud, it signified Christ in his 1. person.
2. actions. 1. In his person: Being a Pillar both of fire and cloud, it was
both light and darkness; signifying Christ Jesus, God and man; both shining in
the brightness of the glory of his deity, and at the same time clouded,
veiled, darkened, and obscured in a base and despicable humanity: in which to
the blind world, was no form nor beauty, Isa. 53. 2. And as both fire and
cloud make but one pillar, so God and man, one Christ. 2. In his actions. For
1. As the Pillar of fire and cloud, Christ both enlightens the Israel of God to
salvation, and is darkness, at the same time, to all Egyptians, that is, a
stumbling block and stone of offense to unbeleevers. 2. As the same pillar,
Christ both opens the way of the red sea to believers, giving the grace of
Baptism through the red sea of his blood: as also justly shuts obstinate
sinners from grace and favor; the means of which (being offered unto them)
they wilfully tread under foot, turning all the grace of Christ to their deeper
damnation. 3. As the same Pillar of cloud and fire, Christ is the guide of all
the Israel of God; whom we must follow in all our journey through our
wilderness, both in the rules of his holy doctrine, and also of his blessed
example. Therefore himself says (Mat. 11. 29.) follow me: as they were to
follow that cloud; for that was but a Type of this, leading us to our Canaan.
4. as that same Pillar of cloud and fire, Jesus Christ protecteth his Church
from all enemies: He steps between the Camps of Israelites and Egyptians,
becoming their sure defense, Psalm. 18. 1. 2. This Pillar shall never rest till
the dead bodies of the Egyptians and enemies become a spoil and spectacle to
his people.

V. In the infallible instruction of it, it typifyed Christ. For as the Lord
spoke to Moses out of the cloudy Pillar, when it descended on the Tabernacle,
and delivered his Oracles in it, Exodus 33. 9. so Jesus Christ alone is the
cloudy Pillar by whom the Lord delivers to us his whole counsel concerning our
happy passage through this our wilderness to that blessed Canaan, the happy
rest of all the Saints. And as they must hear and obey absolutely those
Oracles, Mat. 17. 5.
so we are commanded to hear him.

Application follows.

I. Is Christ the Pillar? Use 1. Comfort by Christ as our guide.
Here is comfort for the people of God; who shall want no good things, but this
Pillar of cloud and fire shall supply it. For,

1. The Cloud was a general guide for all and every particular of Gods people,
Isa. 4. 5. 6. The cloud was every where seen: and Christ is every where
present to be seen and found in his Church. Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20.
Ier. 51. 5. Israel has been no widow.

II. The Cloud was an unerring guide; because the Lord went in the Cloud: so
that (except the Lord could mislead them) they must needs go aright. Jesus
Christ is the way as well as the truth; follow him in the direction of his
word, in the motions of his spirit, agreeing thereto: in his blessed example
both in doing and suffering walk as he did: And as he passed by his Cross to
the Crown, so shall he lead thee through this wilderness to that Canaan and
rest, to which he has gone before to take thee in.

III. As the Cloud was a safe guide and a covering cloud, so is Jesus Christ
the vayl and cover of his Church. When the Pharaoh of hell pursues us at heels,
and is even ready to snatch us back into eternal slavery; now this Angel of
the Covenant interposeth himself to defend us, and steppeth between us and
dangers. This Cloud of Gods protection (seem it never so far off) is the
sure wall and defense of the Church, the strongest munition, and will not
suffer the Egyptian armies to come near the Israelites to hurt or destroy
them, but only to exercise them, and drive them more hastily to God for
safety, and to Canaan for rest. This is a sure comfort, when we know that all
the enemies of grace, Papists, apostates, recusants, drunkards, scorners and
Atheists reach at us to hurt and hinder us in our way, this cloud shall make
them further us.

IV. The Cloud was a powerful guide, strengthening Israel, weakening and
discomforting all the power of Egypt; powerfully and miraculously opening the
red sea for a passage to the one, and shutting it for the others perdition. Our
Lord JESUS is a potent guide, the Michael and Captain of Gods Armies, getting
himself a name upon Pharaoh and his forces, discomfiting and destroying all
adversary power of our salvation, perfectly conquering for us all the powers of
darkness, and triumphing upon all the external enemies that pursue his
people, and making them the dust of his footstool. Besides that, this cloud
powerfully opens the red sea, and makes a way for the Saints through a sea of
afflictions. Oh the sweet comfort hence, both in the view of the trouble of the
Church in general, beset with so many huge armies of Antichrist and his
adherents; as also in sense of our own particular trials! Both whole and
parts are under this powerful cloud.

V. The Cloud was a comfortable guide, a cooling covering Cloud: Jesus Christ
is the well, yea and sea of consolation: without whom is nothing but scorching
heat, which would burn up and consume the Church. But he cooles the fire of
his Fathers wrath for us, he cooles the fiery darts of Satan's temptations, and
quenches them in us; he refreshes and cheereth us in the sun of persecution
and afflictions which satan and his instruments kindle against us; he is our
only shadow for the heat, and a cover for the storm, and for the rain, Isa.
4. 6. Now therefore get to him by prayer, faith, and repentance.

VI. The Cloud was a patient and respective guide. It waited all their
necessities, it rested that they might rest, it moved slowly according to their
pace, it stayed for them till they had ground their Mannah, and baked it; till
they had eaten and refreshed themselves; till they had offered sacrifices, and
whatsoever was necessary to be done, it waited for them. Oh what a patient and
respective Lord have we, who not only waits on our necessities, but bears all
our needs and weaknesses on himself; not only bears with our infirmities,
but bears them on himself and helps them in us! He stretches his hands all
day long, waiting for our return: He knows our mould and weakness, and covers
it with his own strength and righteousness: He would be in all things like
us, that he might in all things help us.

VII. The Cloud was a constant guide. The Lord never took away his Pillar by
day, nor by night from before the people, Exodus 13. 22. not all their journey
till they came into Canaan. Jesus Christ is constant to his Church, never
leaves it without light and direction, without comfort and consolation, without
safety and protection. Nay he not only leads and covers them in this
wilderness, but never fayles them, no not in the land of their rest. That
cloud which now is like the cloud which Elias saw, like the bigness of an
hand, then shall cover, or rather fill the whole heavens.

II. Here is a ground of confidence and security in the greatest perils. Use.
2. Confidence and security by Christ.
What a marveilous thing is it that a Pillar of fire should sit upon the
Tabernacle, and not burn it? What a strange thing that a Pillar of fire must
cool the Israelites, and save them from fire? So shall all fires kindled, and
all extreme dangers threatened against the Church, tend to the saving and
comforting of it. For 1. God never kindles a fire to consume his Church, but
(as the pillar of fire) to enlighten it, and direct it to Canaan. 2. The Church
is that bush which burns with fire, but is not consumed; Exodus 3. 2. The
members of this Church are not chafe and stubble, but pure metal, the longer
in the fire the better tried, and the purer. 3. There is no Pillar of fire in
the Church without the pillar of cloud: God mingleth his corrections with
consolations; and in judgment remembers mercy. 4. Nature must run out of
her self to do homage to her Creator. Fire must cease to burn at his word,
Dan. 3. 27. The fire burnt only the bonds of the three children, but not their
bodies: it not only saves their lives, but sets them at liberty, being cast in
bound. 5. The power of God makes all the creatures serviceable to his Church;
the love of God to his Church makes them comfortable, and the presence of God
with his Church makes them profitable: as the presence of the Angel in the
bush: the presence of a fourth (like the Son of God) in the furnace, Dan 3.
and the Pillar of fire was a sign of the presence of God in it, who made a
pillar of dreadful and unmercifull fire a great mercy to his people, yea and
most beneficial. 6. The wisdom of God can put understanding into these
senseless creatures to distinguish between an Israelite and an Egyptian. The
fire shall give light to the Israelites, and deny it to the Egyptians. The sea
shall give way to Israel, but shut up the way to Egypt. The cloud shall hide,
cover, and comfort the Israelites, but deny it to the Egyptians. The fire
shall come out and destroy the Captains and their fifties, and send them to
hell, but a Chariot of fire shall hoyse Eliah to heaven. Make use of this
observation for the present; in the greatest dangers remembering that gracious
promise Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the fire I will be with thee, and
it shall not burn thee, no more then the Pillar did the Israelites Do the
enemies come out against us as strong as Pillars, as furious and fiery as ^ire
it self? Never was there so hot a Pillar of fire, but there was a cooling and
covering cloud as near us. The Cloud that makes the Red sea give way, can
conquer Canaanits too, and all the furious enemies that come out against us.
Were it not for this Cloud of Gods gracious protection, there were no standing
against the heat and rage of such fiery enemies. Lay up this meditation for
time to come: Time shall be when our Lord Jesus shall appear in flaming fire,
2 Thessalonians. 1: Heb. 10. 7. he comes with a violent fire: Psalm. 50. 3. a fire
shall devour before him. This shall burn up the studs of heaven and earth; and
now how shall any man be able to stand before these great burnings? Now know,
1. That that dreadful fire shall attend Christ the head as a servant, for the
final salvation of his members. 2. It shall be commanded to be comfortable
to the elect; as most dreadful to the wicked, driving them to their wits end;
even as this Pillar of fire was: And as the waters of the deluge, which (while
they drowned the world of the ungodly) lifted up the Arc, and saved that from
drowning.

III. Who they be that may expect to partake of all these comforts from this
Pillar. Use. 3. Notes of them that receive comfort by this Pillar.


Answ. The Cloud is not the same to all: But the same cloud that lightened
Israel, cast darkness on the Egyptians; so Christ is not the same to all, not
sweet, not comfortable to all: But to such as are,

1. Of mount Sion, Isai. 4. 5. true members of the Church, sons of the
Church, known by cleaving to the Assemblies. Upon Sion and the Assemblies
thereof shall be a cloud. In Sion shall be deliverance. And as the hills
compass Jerusalem, so does the Lords protection his people.

2. Such as be in the Lords ways, gotten out of the Egypt of their darkness
and earthlinesse, and moving still toward Canaan; for so did the Israelites:
So Psalm. 91. 11. they shall keep thee in all thy ways. All the while Israel
was in Egypt they had no Pillar of cloud and Fire, and when they came into
Canaan they had none, nor needed any; but while they were walking in the
wilderness in unknowen ways, in danger of enemies: We are without protection
while we are in the state of nature, not called out of our Egypt; and when
we shall come into our Canaan we shall need none, because we shall be set
quite beyond danger and enemies: But now in our moving toward heaven, in so
many dangerous ways, among so many mortal enemies, we need the Cloud, and
the Lord supplies our need.

3. Such as lift up their eyes to this Cloud and Pillar for direction. Had
Israel refused to move according to the motion of it, it would not have
sheltred and comforted, but revenged them: Such only shall obtain the mercy
of God in Christ, who obediently follow Christ, and submit themselves to his
direction. If thou waitest upon him for duty, thou may wait upon him for
mercy; for such only shall attain it, Gal 6. 16. Psalm. 121. 1. I will lift
mine eyes up to the mountains; and then, verse 6. the Sun shall not smite
th^e by day, nor the Moon by night: alluding to this place, in which the cloud
abates the heat of the Sun by day, and the fire the coldness of the Moon by
night.

4. Such as persevere and go on forward in grace. For therefore was the Pillar
light in the night to Israel, that they might go forward day and night: And
therefore was it a dark cloud to the Egyptians, that they might not hinder
the Israelites in their way. Gods favor and protection belongs to such as
desire to prosper and profit in grace, and get every day nearer their
happiness.

Object. But this seems to be the way to lose all peace and joy of our lives,
And how this comfort is to be esteemed.
seeing none are more assailed by Satan and wicked men, then godly men, sons
of the Church that walk in Gods ways, that take Gods directions, and desire
to proceed and persever in godliness; how then are all these promises
accomplished?

Answ. 1. All promises of temporal good things are made with exception of the
cross: this exception impeacheth not the promise. 2. It is a common condition
of good and bad to sustain many evils, and undergo many difficulties; but
with this difference, that the wicked have no Pillar to sustain them, no
cloud, no refuge or hiding place: but the godly has God for his refuge, his
Pillar, and Cloud. 3. The Pillar still stands over the Tabernacle, and saves
the Army of Israel: the whole Church is ever saved by Gods protection, though
some soldiers may fall in the battle; as Martyrs, who receive not always
corporal deliverance, to receive a better resurrection, 4. If this Pillar put
not off some evils, it ever supplies some greater good: If it deliver not from
death, it delivers by death: If our state seem not so good, it will turn it
to good, Romans 8. It led the Israelites to Marah, a place of bitterness; but
the next remove was to Elim, where were twelve fountains of water, Exodus 15.
23, 27. It suffers the Israelites to want meat in the wilderness, but to feed
them with Manna: If to want drink, it is to supply them by miracle; to refresh
their souls as well as bodies by water out of a rock.

IV. In the same Pillar of the Cloud, Use. 4. Mercy and justice met in this
type.
see justice and mercy met together and tempered. 1. Mercy to the Church and
believers; that now we behold Gods presence in a cloud. The brightness of his
goodness to us shines in this dark cloud, in which we see him as we are
able. His Majesty has attempered himself to our debility and weakness. For
such is our infirmity here below, that unless the glory of God be veiled and
covered, we can never be able to behold it: no more then the Priests could
stand before the brightness of the cloud that filled the Temple, 1. King. 8.
11. nor the Disciples abide the brightness of Christ, when a bright cloud
shadowed them in his transfiguration. Matt. 17. 5, 6.
For as no man can endure to see the Sun in his brightness and strength, but
in and through a cloud he may: so no man can behold the glorious Majesty of
God, and live. Hence has he pleased to let us behold him here not in his own
glory, but in his Christ; in whom his excellent Majesty is veiled and covered
with our humanity. This is his mercy, that we see now as we may, as in a
glass or mirror; preparing us to a farther mercy, then which no mercy goes
farther, namely to see him as we would, and face to face; when with our
frailty and corruption all clouds and vailes shall be removed. 2. His justice
against sinners; whose misery it is, that there is always a cloud between God
and them. A cloud of ignorance that hinders them from the knowledge of God and
holy things; they see no true light: A cloud of darkness and misery that
suffers them not to enjoy one spark of sound comfort or consolation: A thick
cloud of lusts and sins, which hinders the passage of their prayers. They may
truly use that speech of the Church, Lam. 3. 44. Thou have covered thy self
with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through. As this cloud was a
means of greatest mercy to Israel; so was it of extreme misery and destruction
to the Egyptians.

V. Is Christ this Pillar of Cloud and fire? Use. 5. Follow Christ as a guide.
Then we must follow Christ our guide. The Saints in earth are as Israel in
their pilgrimage marching out of Egypt into the promised land. God of his
mercy affords us as he did them, a comfortable cloud to lead us through to
Canaan. We must depend on this Pillar: For light of instruction against the
blindness of our minds: For light of consolation in sorrows and terrors of
heart, that we may say with the Church, Mic. 7. 8. When I shall sit in
darkness the Lord is my light: For spiritual heat and warmth; seeing this
Pillar only can kindle true love of God, true zeal for God and his glory,
fervency in prayer, and inflame us with all ardent desires after God. We must
follow this Pillar for safety, security, direction, etc.

Quest. How may we follow this Pillar? And how.


Sol. As the Israelites carefully followed the cloud, in this manner. 1.
Because the clould was placed on high, they must still look upwards: So must
we still look upwards, not fixing our eye on any other direction about us, or
beside us. We must not walk by examples of men never so great, never so wise,
never so rich, never so near us; but only so far as they follow this Cloud.
The Sun of the world, and the Son of the Church herein agree, that both of
them are set infinitely above our heads; that we should expect our direction
from above, not from below; from the heavens, not from the earth. 2. As the
Israelites contented themselves with that Pillar, as being sufficient: So must
we with the light from Christ our Pillar. They needed no artificial lights of
their own devising; the Pillar of fire was sufficient (although at midnight)
to enlighten them. The Sun at noone day was not more useful to them then
this Pillar at midnight: So Christ in the Scriptures is a most bright and
shining light; not (as the Papists say) obscure, dark, imperfect, unless there
be an addition of traditions, Fathers, and men's devises. As that cloud was no
natural direction: so we must not walk by direction of nature, dictate of
reason, or command of our own wills and senses. Follow this Pillar only, and
(as Goshen was light when all Egypt was darkness) thou shall have light when
all the world else sits in darkness, Ioh. 8. 12. But as for such as kindle
themselves a fire, or set up a Pillar to themselves, and walk in the light of
it, and in the sparks themselves have kindled; the Lord threatens what they may
expect from his hands; They shall lie down in sorrow, Isai. 50. 10. 3. As
Israel must watch this Pillar night and day, and frame their whole course unto
it for motion or station, for action or for rest: so must we to Christ (our
Pillar) in the Scripture. Blessed is the man that meditates in the Law of the
Lord night and day. And as they must give diligent heed both day and night to
be ready for their journey whenever the cloud should moove; and therefore are
said to keep the Lords watch, Number 9. 19. so must we always watch, and be in a
readiness; because we know not when the Master of the house will come, at even
or at midnight, at the cockcrowing or in the dawning, Mar. 13. 35. Remember for
conclusion; that blessed shall that servant be (and he only) whom his Master
(when he comes) finds well doing.

CHAP. XXI.
The Red Sea, a type.
THe second extraordinary Sacrament of the Old Testament, Red sea a type of
Christ.
poynting unto Jesus Christ, was the Red Sea; which being miraculously divided
by God, the Israelites (pursued by the Egyptians) passed thorough the midst of
it, Exodus 14. 22. Now for our profitable and fruitful beholding this great
work of God, we will consider it, 1. as a miracle in it self. 2. as a type
and signification of Christ. 3. as applyable to our selves in some profitable
observations.

I. In this great miracle are many miracles: Miracles in the miraculous
dividing of it.
As 1. That so vast a sea should be divided with the lifting up of a rod. For
the breadth of that Sea, where Israel went over, was (by computation of Ptolomy
and other Geographers) twelve or fifteen Germane miles, at least thirty six
of ours; so Chytraeus upon this place. 2. That the Lord should open a way,
Psalm. 106. 9.
and lead Israel through the deep, as in the wilderness; for their passage
was not over the Sea, but through it. Neither did they walk upon the waters as
upon the land, which had not been so much, for in cold countries it is
ordinary for men and cariages to pass upon the Ice and congealed water as upon
firm land: but they walked in the bottom of the Sea as on dry land. Who could
deny but it had been a work of omnipotency for the Lord to have made the sea
(on a sudden) a pavement for Israel (as hard as Crystal) to have walked
firm upon? but because every strong frost congeales the water according to
nature, that had been less glorious, more questionable. But he provides for
the clearness of his own glory by effecting a work above (yea against) the
whole frame of nature. 3. That the waters should stand as a folid wall on both
sides, which are naturally fluid, and seeing nothing is so hardly contained
within bounds as liquid waters, it was exceeding miraculous. And that the
bottom of the sea should on the sudden become firm and dry ground, (Exodus
14. 22) and even as an high way, was not the least of these miracles. 4. That
the same sea at the same time should be both calm and tempestuous: For the
mighty winds and tempests were so strong against the Egyptians that it brake
their Chariot wheels, and they could hardly moove or stir against it; yet
all the same time it was a peaceable calm to Israel; who were very near them.
5. The time of the standing of the waters on so vast an heap (whereon learned
men agree not) any way concluded, is most miraculous. Some think (as
Chytraeus) that for so many thousands, yea hundred thousands of men women and
children to walk a soft pace, and to drive their cattle so many miles, must
needs take them four or five days time, and then the waters to stand so long,
was admirable. Others think they went through in one night, (for the text
mentions but one night) and then was it no less miraculous to convey so much
people and cattle so much way in so small time. 6. That the same Sea at the
same time should be both a gulf and devourer; and yet a saver from devourers.
That the same sea at the same time should both retire back, and yet return to
its course, for the waters returned upon the Egyptians on the one side of the
sea, when Israel was not fully over on the other, as appears by comparing
ver. 26. with ver. 29. that the same sea at the same time should moove and
stand with such judgment and distinction, as not one Egyptian was saved, How
signified Christ.
ver. 28. not one Israelite drowned, ver. 30.

II. Now consider this great work of God as a signification and type of
Christ; which it must needs be as it is a Sacrament, which we must consider
both in the constitution, and in the consequents or effects of it, in all
directly poynting us to Jesus Christ hereby typified. In the first to the Cor.
10. 2, the Apostle says, that all the Fathers were baptized in the sea; whence
I gather three conclusions. In three conclusions.


I. Conclusion: That this was a Sacrament figuring our baptism, and that all
necessary institutions of a Sacrament concur in it: As 1. the author was God,
the Institutor both of the Covenant and seals, Exodus 14. 30. 2. the Minister
was Moses, ver. 31. 3. the Covenant sealed was Gods promise and word for their
deliverance, ver. 15. 4. the sign of the Covenant was Moses stretching of his
hand, both for the deviding of the sea, ver. 16, and the returning of it
again, ver. 27. 5. the thing signified was salvation by the Messiah, and all
spiritual and eternal benefits and deliverances procured by him sealed up in
this miracle. 6. the faith of the Israelites was the same hand with ours to
receive the same benefits, and things signified: ver. 31. they believed God:
Heb. 11. 29. by faith they passed through the red sea, etc*

II. Conclusion: There was not one of these actions in this temporal
deliverance, but it signified and sealed such actions to the believing
Israelites, as both confirmed their faith in the Covenant, and set forward
their salvation merited by the Messiah, and so still led them to Christ, As in
these examples. 1. God in leading his people to Canaan made them a safe way
through the sea: signifying to their faith that God offered them Jesus Christ
the promised Messiah, through the red sea of whose death and passion they
should find a sure and safe way to pass them through a full sea of troubles to
the true celestial Canaan, and by him as by a firm way to walk forward to
eternal life. 2. When they saw the same Jehovah to divide the sea into his
division (Iunius calls them cuttings off) and to drive away the raging waters
from overflowing them; Segmen^a.
this action signified to their faith that the son of God by his merit and
mediation would carry them through all difficulties and dangers as deep as the
bottom of the sea, unto eternal rest, and so rebuke the seas of their
sorrows, and drive back the raging waves of terrors and temptations that
threaten their destruction, that they shall safely and happily pass through
the sea as it were on dry land. 3. When they saw Jehovah the Son of God
present with them in the voyage, and that he made the sea return to his force
again, both to save themselves and to overthrow the Egyptians: It signified
to their faith the action of Christ freeing his elect from all spiritual
forces and armies pursuing them; as also by a mighty overthrow swallowing up
and devouring (in the bottomless sea of his wrath) all those that come out and
stand against them.

III. Conclusion. There is no Evangelicall blessing by Christ sealed to us by
baptism, which was not signified and sealed to them in the Red sea. So as
Christ was as truly represented to them as to us, though not so clearly; and
the truth and substance of his merits exhibited to them as to us, only in a
manner more obscure and clouded. Benefits sealed up by baptism
As in examples, 1. If the waters of Baptism seal up to believers that the
blood of Christ alone saves and defends the people of God from eternal
death and damnation: What could be more plainly signified by the waters of the
Red sea saving Israel from present death and destruction? 2. Baptism
signifies to us that by the blood of Christ (in which Red sea all believers
must be baptized) there is dying and a burial unto sin, and a rising unto
newness of life: What could be more plainly signified by the Baptism of the
fathers in the Red sea, who were (after a sort) buried in the waters, but after
raised to the shore, and restored to land and life? 3. By the benefit of
Baptism (in which the Red sea of Christ's blood is truly applied) our old man
and flesh is truly mortified, buried, and destroyed; but the new man is
quickened and repaired; and now new motions, desires, affections are stirred up
and preserved in the hearts of believers: what could be more expressly signified
to the Fathers by the overthrow of Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea, and
the escape of the Israelites safe and sound? 4. When they did see themselves
(by the benefit of the Red sea) freed from Pharaohs servitude: how easily might
they gather, that by the blood of Christ every believer of Jews and Gentiles
are freed from the slavery of hellish Pharaoh, and all his Armies of sins and
corruptions? And when they did see how the Egyptians (once dead and slain)
could hurt them no more, how could they but gather, that all the armies of
sin (once remitted and buried in the death of Christ) can no more rise up to
condemnation, then a drowned Egyptian to drown an Israelite?

I. To note the mighty power of God, Use 1. Observe the power of God.
who can still and over-master the mighty raging of the sea: which we see here
in that its water, dry land, sands, and shore observe the providence of God,
and serve for his peoples safety. Israel saw the mighty power of God herein,
Exo. 14. 31. Let us also behold the glory of God herein, and fear before him
as they did. Let not us be more senseless than the senseless creatures, but
hear his voice, run out of our own nature to observe his voice sounding in
the Scriptures and Ministry of the Gospel.

II. To see and consider the state of the Church and people of God. Use. 2. The
way to heaven filled with difficulties.
Canaan (whither they go) is a fine and fertile country, but the way is
asperous and dangerous. They are still as it were in the bottom of the sea:
enemies implacable at their heels in infinite numbers: seas of waters
dreadful to behold on both hands, yea rising over their heads as mountains
threatening to fall over them: and after a deep sea, a terrible wilderness
takes them, in which is no means for meat, drink, nor cloth. A man would
think, no man could deal so with his children: and yet Gods wisdom sees
this the fittest way to Canaan. And why.
He sees how, 1. Every small content glewes us to our Egypt. 2. What sluggs we
are in the way, farther then we are chased out. 3. How little we care for
dependence on himself, when we are full of natural comforts. 4. That Canaan
is so rich a land as is worthy all our labor and suffering.

Apply this note to awake thee out of thy ease and carnal slumber. If thy way
be so easy and pleasing to flesh, sure it leads not to Canaan, suspect it. The
Israelites going into Egypt, had no enemies nor troubles meeting them; but
going into Canaan, they had nothing else. Strait is the way that leads to life,
and all the way to heaven is strowed with crosses. Apply it also to secure thee
in thy troubles. Art thou in a deep danger or sorrow like the bottom of the
sea? It is no worse with thee then with the rest of the people of God. No
affliction overtakes thee, but the same has befalne the Saints in the world.
Hold on to Canaan, and all is safe: Canaan is worth all. Happy thou if thou
can get to Canaan, though thy passage be through the bottom of the sea.

III. To observe what a many comforts this great work of God will load us
withal, Use 3. Many comforts by this great work of God.
that are willing to carry them away. For,

I. The Lord in strange and unwonted dangers can work new and unwonted
remedies for his children. As we heard before that fire shall not burn them,
so here the sea (at his word of restraint) shall not drown them. He can make a
wall of water more strong for them than a wall of Adamant: yea himself
(according to their need) will be to them either a wall of fire or water.

II. What danger can prevail against the Church, if all these dangers on all
hands, above them, below them, before them, behind them at once, cannot sink
them? No, All the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. Every maine
affliction is like a maine Red sea which threatens to swallow us up, but it
shall in the issue only preserve the Church. What we have most cause to fear,
the Lord makes most helpful and sovereign. The very raging sea (rather then
they shall perish) shall open her lap as a tender mother to receive them from
the rage of Pharaoh and his pursuing army: Nay the land of Goshen shall not be
half so bountiful to them as these waters, which gave them freedom, victory,
and the spoils and riches remaining upon the dead bodies of their enemies.

III. How unweariably the Lord sets himself to overcome all difficulties for
his servants. What had it been to have passed the oppressors of Egypt, and to
have been swallowed up of the sea? Therefore he makes a new way, where never
any way lay before, in the bottom of the sea. Afterward he makes a dry and
barren wilderness comfortable to them; dryes up Jordan as strangely for their
passage; gives them a daily harvest of Mannah from heaven; breaks a rock to
give them water; and happily in time finisheth their long and tedious journey.
Even so the godly (going out of Egypt, departing from the kingdom of the
devil, and hastening out of the world toward heaven) come presently into a
deep sea; not pursued only by the fury of tyrants and enemies, but every
where threatened with dangers, wants, and death it self: yet the Lord breaks
for them one toil after another, and happily guides them through a deep sea
of miseries, and never leaves them till they recover the shore, and arrive
safely at the haven of salvation, where their songs shall be louder then their
cries were, and a mighty deliverance shall swallow up all their danger.

IV. Here is comfort against the fear of enemies. 1. Spiritual enemies. For
here we have both a confirmation and resemblance of the eternal delivery of
the Church from the tyranny of the hellish Pharaoh; which in spite of him is
led through a sea of tribulation every where ready to overwhelme it, into the
promised rest of everlasting life. Again we see here our sins also cast
into, and drowned in the bottom of the Red sea, Mic. 7. 19. These are the
strongest and fiercest enemies that pursued us to death; but these our furious
sins (as so many Egyptians) are drowned in the sea of Christ's blood, and
extinct in the waters of Baptism, Aug: Psalm. 113. 2. Temporal enemies. How
can the Egyptians hope to stand before Israel, to whom the waters give way so
strangely? The enemy shall find the same sea, a wall and a well, a safety and a
death. Let enemies look here as the heathen did, and let their hearts saint as
theirs, to see God make the sea a wall, a lane, yea a lap for his people. Let
them behold the ordinary work of God, who commonly joins the salvation of his
Church with the destruction of the enemies. So for Mordecaies advancement, Use
4. Duty of them that will enjoy these comforts.
and the Churches deliverance, Haman must be hanged, and his posterity
destroyed: as in a balance, if one scoale go up, down goes the other.

IV. The godly to partake of these comforts must learn, 1. To labor for
increase of faith: for by faith they passed through the Red sea, Heb. 11. 29.
So must thou get faith for thy vessel to pass thee through. Faith in trial
is a great victory; in the bottom of the sea, in deepest afflictions it is
most glorious. It is nothing to believe in prosperity: but in desperation to
believe, in the bottom of the sea to stand still, yea in the bottom of hell to
hope for heaven, there is faith. 2. To join to Gods people. Let not the
Egyptian think the way is made for him. Except thou go out with Israel
(as Exodus 12. 38.) the sea will know thee for an Egyptian, and cover thee. 3.
To get God their guide, and to follow him. Neither Noah upon the top of a world
of seas, nor Israel in the bottom of the sea shall miscarry, if God become the
Pilot. Follow thy guide, go on forward, fear not, rest in God for safety in
extreme danger, and thou art the fittest for his help and deliverance. See 2.
Chro. 20. 12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee.

CHAP. XXII.
Manna, a Type of Christ.
THere were among the Jews two extraordinary Sacraments which sealed up unto
believers their continual nourishment and preservation in grace by the free
Covenant of God in the Messiah. The former was Manna from heaven; the latter,
the water out of the rock: Both of them most lively setting forth Jesus Christ,
the true bread and water of life to ancient and present believers. In which
sense the Apostle (1 Cor. 10. 3. 4.) calls them spiritual meat, and
spiritual drink.

The Story of Manna is recorded, Manna a type of Christ.
Exodus 16. 14. The proper application of which is in Ioh. 6. 32. 48. where our
Savior shows that he is the true Manna, of which the other in the wilderness
was but a shadow and dark resemblance. Now for opening this type we shall
fruitfully consider two things. I. CHRIST prefigured by it; where we shall see
an admirable and pleasant correspondence of the type with the truth; and how
Christ was (not obscurely) preached even in this one shadow to old believers.
II. CHRIST far preferred before this figure, as became the truth to be set
above the type.

I. For the resemblance consider Manna Matters of resemblance.
1. in it self, in 1. Quality. 2. Quantity.
2 in the Jews, in their 1. Gathering. 2. Use.


Sect. I.
I. The qualities of Manna considered in it self were six, Six qualities of
Manna.
many of them miraculous.

1. The Manna came down from heaven. Dominus Jesus ipse conviva and convivium:
ipse comedens and qui comeditur. Ieron. Ep. ad Hedibiam.
God in heaven prepared this food to satisfy the Jews hunger: so Jesus Christ
is the true bread that came down from heaven, all other bread is from earth,
but Christ is from heaven; he has God for his Father, from whose bosom he is
sent into the wilderness of this world to satisfy the spiritual hunger of
his people. And as that was an admirable gift prepared by God for them; and
therefore they called it Manna: so nothing was more freely prepared and given
by God then Jesus Christ for the life of the world; he came without the worlds
seeking, without merit and deserving, yea or accepting; for he came to his
own, and his own received him not: And was not this miraculous above that,
that he which sent the Manna was the Manna which he sent?

^. The taste of Manna was sweet, and tasted like fresh oil, Numb. 11. 8. or
wafers baked with honey, Exodus 16. 31: So nothing is so sweet as Jesus Christ
to an afflicted and hungry heart, The sweet promises of grace are sweeter there
honey, Psalm. 19. 10. No fresh and sweet oil can so cherish the face, as they
do the heart which is able to apprehend the sweet consolations and joys of
the Spirit. And as Manna tasted alike to all tastes, and every whit of it was
sweet, and every mouth tasted the same sweetness, as it never was in any other
food in the world: So only Christ is the same to all that taste him, and every
whit of him is sweet, even his yoke, his Cross, and every mouth that tastes
him, can confess him so to be.

3. The figure of it was round, a figure of perfection: signifying Jesus Christ
without beginning or end, (...).
the first and the last, most simple and sincere, without any guilefull corner
or angle; most infinite, most perfect, and fit to contain all perfections of
grace, meet for the head of the Church.

4. The color was white, Exodus 16. 31: signifying the most holy and immaculate
purity of Jesus Christ in his nature, person, and actions: The holy One of God,
fairer then all the sons of men, Psalm. 45. 2.

5. The generality: It was common to all the Israelites of what state soever:
So Jesus Christ is the common Savior, to rich and poor, to master and
servant, bond and free, and to all believing in his Name without respect of
persons, Act. 10. 34. There is neither male nor female, but all are one in
Christ, Gal. 3. 28.

6. The continuance of it: This was all the while they were in the wilderness:
So Christ continues always with his Church, to the end of the world, Matt. 28.
20. But when they came into Canaan it ceased; for where ordinary bread was, was
no need of miraculous: So when we come to our Canaan; we shall gather no more
Manna by the means of the word and Sacraments; neither yet shall we lose our
Manna, but immediately enjoy Christ, and see him face to face, which the Apostle
calls an open face, 1. Cor. 13. 12.

Quantity of Manna, figurati^e in 4. things.


1. It was a small grain, as a little seed of Coriander, verse. 14. but full of
yeald, sweetness, and nourishment: So Jesus Christ was little and humble in
his own eyes, and in other men's eyes liker a worm then a man. Little in his
birth, in his life, in his death, in his followers. Uery weak in show and
appearance; but full of power, strength, and grace to sustain and uphold his
Church; full of nourishment, sweetness, and comfort to refresh his Church to
eternal life.

2. It was freely and abundantly given to Israel as the rain, and fell down
with the dew: So Jesus Christ is freely given to the Church, and in him
abundant grace and plentiful redemption. God never expressed such bounty, nor
ever opened the treasury of his rich grace in any thing so much as in giving
his Christ, who never comes any where without the sweet dewes of comfort, joy,
and happy graces which distill from him into every believing heart.

3. Manna fell every morning round about the camp, and no where else; and so
much every morning as was sufficient for six hundred thousand men besides
women and children: signifying that Jesus Christ is no where to be found
without the camp and bounds of the Church; and that of his fullness all
believers receive grace for grace; and that in Christ is sufficiency of merit
for all his Church; and there need no other supply for health and safety of
soul, but out of this heap.

4. It fell on the evening of the Sabbath in double quantity, because they must
not break the Sabbath in gathering any: signifying the double diligence that
we must use to get Christ while we are in this life, which is as the Even of
our eternal Sabbath; and the incessant labor after a farther degree of grace,
giving all diligence to make our election sure before we go hence; for when
that eternal rest comes there is no more gathering, but a ceasing from all
labor. And upon condition of our diligence and care here below, we shall have
supply enough of all grace without labor and gathering when Christ shall be
all in all to all Israel gathered unto him.

Sect. II.
Now we are to consider this miraculous food, both in the Jews gathering of
it, as also in their use of it.

I. In their gathering are three things; the place, Three things in the Jews
gathering.
the measure.

1. The place where: It was about the camp and tents of the Jews in the
wilderness: signifying that Christ the heavenly Manna is given to us in this
our wilderness, and while we are in this world we must procure him to our
selves, or never: And farther that his grace is rained down in the Church; and
no where else is saving grace ordinarily to be found. Only the Israel of God
enjoy Christ in the means; his abode is among the tents of shepherds.

2. The time of gathering is: 1. The week day; the six days, not the
Sabbath, for it came not on the Sabbath; but as knowing and distinguishing
times it would, as feed them, so teach them; namely to rest on the Sabbath day,
as it did: and signified that in that eternal Sabbath we shall enjoy Manna
without means; and shall eat our fill of that hidden Manna, laid up and
prepared for the Saints, Revel. 2. 17. 2. Every day in the week: to signify
that we must daily feed on Christ and his grace; and that we must daily renew
the care of the salvation and sustenance of our souls. 3. Every morning of
every day; early must they gather it, the first thing they did: To signify,
that we must embrace Christ speedily, while the means last and offer
themselves. Christ is worth our first care; and his commandment is, first to
seek the kingdom of God. The foolish virgins sought Oil and Manna too late.

3. The measure: 1. Every man has a measure out of the common heap:
signifying that Christ is the same treasury to poor and rich, small and great;
and every believer and Israelite has his portion and measure measured out unto
him, (for he must live by his own faith) and a severed measure of knowledge
and sanctification from others. Hab. 2. 4.
2. Every man has the same measure. There was one measure for all, a Gomer for
every person: So every Christian has his Gomer, and the same measure. For
although there is difference in the graces of sanctification (some being in the
higher forms of knowledge, some in lower; some of little faith, some of great
faith; some whose zeal is as a smoking flax, in some a bright flame) yet
justification by Christ is equal to all, and does not admit a more or a less.
Non suscipit magis and minus.
The youngling in grace is as truly and fully justified as the ancient
believer, though not so fully sanctified, 3. Every man has a full Gomer a full
measure: to signify that in Christ is no want, but we are complete in him,
Col. 2. 10. And as the gathering Israelite (though he gathered less then some
other) had his Gomer full: so he that has the weakest grace, and weakest
faith (if true and sound) shall attain the same salvation which the stronger
believer attaines. For the same precious faith attaines the same common
salvation.

Their use of it.
It must be ground and baked before it could be fit food for the Israelites:
signifying that Jesus Christ must first be ground and broken upon the Cross,
and pounded with passion before he could become a ^it food and Savior of his
Church. Every grain of Manna must be ground and broken: so must Christ be
broken and bruised in the wine press of Gods wrath. Every grain of Manna must
be baked in the Oven: so must Christ be parched and baked, yea and dried up
in the Oven of his Fathers displeasure. And this was extraordinary and above
nature in it, that one heat (namely of the Sun) melted it; another heat
(namely of fire) baked it; very strange, but significative of the same in
Christ. The heat of his love to mankind melted him, but the heat of his Fathers
wrath (as hot as fire) baked him, and fitted him for our spiritual food. 2.
The Manna being dressed must be eaten, that is, applied to their substance, and
digested for their nourishment: signifying Jesus Christ, who although (like the
Manna) he must be gathered in common, and must be received whole (as Manna
must be gathered whole) yet he must be eaten in several, that is, specially
applied to every believer for his food and strength; by which application he
becomes food in our hunger, and physic in our weak^^esse as the Manna was to
them, and other had they none. 3. They must use it all, and reserve none till
the morning; for if they did, it putrified, and worms grew in it, verse. 19.
20: To signify, that not the profession of Christ profits any thing without
faithful applying of him. Yea and as Manna reserved, putrified: so Christ
becomes a scandal and a rock of offense to the unbeleeving of the world, that
content themselves to heareof Christ and have the word among them, but apply it
not to their hearts and lives. The sweetest Manna becomes a rottenness and a
favor of death to carnal professors.

Quest. But why did the Lord cause the Manna daily to putrify, Why Manna
putrified, if reserved.
if kept?

Answ. 1. He will have them daily depend upon his hands and provision; that was
no time nor place to shift covetously for themselves, neither was there any
need, seeing every day supplied them with a new harvest. 2. To signify to
them, that man lived not by bread only, but by every word of God. Matt. 44.
How could they think that such corruptible food could preserve them, that it
self could not be preserved above a few hours but by Gods institution? 3.
That they might acknowledge God a free and extraordinary worker in all his
administration with them. For even this Manna (which kept an hour beyond a
day, suddenly rotted) if God command to keep it two days every week for his
worship sake, it shall be miraculously preserved sweet and savoury. Yea if for
a monument of his mercy he shall command to lay a sample of it in the Arc; it
shall last and be kept in the Holy of holies many ages, yea many hundreds of
years sweet and savoury as at first. And all this not without signification:
that although Jesus Christ was in his flesh and humane nature subject to
sorrow, death, and passion, yet even in that humanity (now glorified) he is set
in the Holy of holies (as the Manna in the golden pot) before the Lord for
ever, Exodus 16. 33. and abides for ever in the heavens for all eternity, not
subject to corruption any more, as that golden pot of Manna was.

Sect. III.
Christ infinitely better then Manna.
1. That Manna had no life in it self, but this has, Ioh. 5. 26. As the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself. Ioh. 6. 35. I am that bread of life. 2. That Manna not having life in
it self, cannot give to others what it self has not; it could only preserve
life given of God: But this can convey and give life to others, Ioh. 6. 33. The
bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the
world. 3. That Manna preserved only natural and temporal life, as other
bread: but this preserves spiritual and eternal life in the soul and inward
man. 4. That manna could not preserve this temporal life for ever, Ioh. 6. 49.
Your father did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead; nay it could not
keep them from hunger above one day to an end: But this bread once tasted
makes a man live for ever, he shall not die, verse. 50. yea he shall never
hunger more, verse. 35. 5. If a man were dead, that manna could not raise him
again to life* but this raises dead to life, as Lazarus; which all the food,
physic and means on earth cannot do, Job. 11. 25. He that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. 6. That manna did corrupt, it melted
daily when the Sun arose; it lasted not beyond a day* it continued not beyond
the wilderness; and that small portion which the Lord reserved in the Holy of
holies, perished and was lost after the captivity: But this manna is not
subject to corruption, but abides sweet and precious to every hungry heart;
nor subject to violence, but abides in the Holy of holies without all change or
fear of danger; nor only lasts in this journey through our wilderness, but
is the sweetest and most delicious in our Cannan; when he shall be food,
physic, raiment, delight, and all in all, to all the Saints and sons of God.

Sect. IV.
Now to application:
I. To note in God four things: Use in respect of God.
1. Patience and love. 2. Watchfulness and care. 3. Bountifulness and
benificence. 4. Wisdom and judgment. And all these to his Church, both
Jewish and Christian, and to all the Israel of God, Legal and Evangelicall.
Every one of these affords us special matter of instruction.

I. His grace and patience appears in the time of his giving both the typical
and the true manna from heaven. Gods patience and love, to be noted.
Then he pleased to give the manna to Israel, 1. When Israel had great need of
Gods help, and had no power to help themselves, when they were even ready to
starve: Even so when the Church was in extreme need of Christ, and altogether
helpless in herself, it pleased God to give his Son from heaven to save and
refresh her. Which the Apostle notes, Rom 5. 6. For Christ when we were yet of
no strength, at his time died for the ungodly. 2. Then God gave Israel manna,
when Israel (murmuring) had deserved nothing but wrath and vengeance; when they
could look for nothing but fire from heaven, he gives them food from heaven,
and such food as was Angels food, sweet as honey: Oh what a tender Nurse is the
Lord become to a froward people? he will still the frowardness of his first
borne rather with the breast then with the rod: Even so when by our hateful
sins of many sorts we could neither deserve nor expect any thing but revenge
from heaven, God sent his Son from heaven, the true manna and bread of life,
who has more sweetness in him then the honey comb; which one gift sweetneth
all blessings, which else had been so many curses. For what had the Israelites
deliverance, victory, lives been worth in the wilderness without food and
manna, which kept them in life and strength? Even so had all our outward
blessings been to us (without Jesus Christ) only a lingering death and misery.
Oh who would deal thus with his enemy, but he that has an Ocean of mercy?
Which the same Apostle (in the same Chapter ver. 8) leads us unto; where he
magnifieth and heightneth Gods love unto us; that, while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us, yea while we were yet enemies (ver. 10.) he sent us this
manna, by whom he reconciled himself unto us.

Let this consideration be of use: 1. To stir up in us a fervent love of God,
who loved us with a pitiful love when we were in so pitiful a case; And how
it should work in us.
as also with so seasonable love, when our extreme need urged us; yea with such
effectual love; as spared us the greatest gift of love, and the richest mercy
that heaven and earth can contain to relieve our want. 2. To labor to love
our enemies, as God did us being his enemies. For natural men and hypocrites
can love those that love them, Matt. 5. 45. but if we love them that hate us,
we shall be the sons of our heavenly Father. 3. To move us to cease from our
sins; for who would go on to provoke so good a God, that still prevents us
with love and mercy? And if he please to reserve love for us while we are yet
in our sins, and in love with them; how sweet will his love be, when we cease
to love them? How strong will it be, and how constant? For, does he not cast
us off when we are enemies, and deserve hatred, and will he ever cast off
those whom he thus loves? This love shall be stronger then death, for that
shall not quench it.

II. See the watchfulness and care of God over his Gods watchfulness and care
over his Church, to be noted.
and while the people of Israel slept, the Lord watched to spread a table for
them: because, 1. he that keeps Israel slumbreth not nor sleeps. The eye of
the Lord (says Basil) is without all sleep, ever watchful: 2. because he is
a tender father, and Israel is his son and first borne. A careful father is
waking for his child's good while it sleeps and takes no care: In like manner
has this watchful eye kept it self waking, from the beginning of the world
till this day. How did it watch over Abraham and all his believing posterity;
whilst he and we were all in the night of sin and death? And whilst we
were in a dead sleep, how carefully did he provide this heavenly manna, and
spread it about the tents of the Church in all ages? 1. In the promise of the
blessed seed. 2. In the types and shadows signifying and exhibiting Jesus
Christ. 3. In the holy Ministry of Prophets and Apostles, in which it was
plentifully showred. 4. In the spiritual worship of believers both in the old
and new Testament. 5. In the blessed incarnation and appearance of the truth it
self, who rose as a glorious sun of righteousness, but as it were at
midnight when the world lay in such palpable darkness as was thicker then the
darkness of Egypt: as manna fell in the night, and was readier for them
every morning then they were for it.

Apply this observation for thy particular comfort. Comfort thereby.
If thou be an Israelite, no night shall befall thee nor sleep in any night,
but this careful eye of God shall watch to supply thee. Instances. 1.
As in three instances. 1. The godly passing through this wilderness of this
world, although they be in Covenant with God (as Israel was) yet often are cast
into the night of sin, and in this night they often nod and slip into a
sounder sleep of sin sometimes then they think off: but then this eye
watches them, that they sleep not in death and so fall into extreme ruin.
For they being written on the palm of the Lords hand, being as a signet upon
his finger, as a jewel on his heart, and (which is nearer) as the apple of his
eye, he watches a season to waken them, to raise them, and erect them in faith
to watchfulness and salvation. 2. Many times the godly fall into the night of
affliction, and are cast into the dark of many deadly dangers which they
should never (by themselves) be wound out off. Now while they are thus
surprised with a dead and dangerous sleep, the Lord watches to prepare some
means of evasion, which they never dream off. How did the Lord watch over
Jonah while he slept under hatches not dreaming of so present a danger? Nay
when he seems dead and buried in the Whales belly (as in a grave of silence)
how miraculously did the Lord watch to bring him to dry land as sound and safe
as if he had been kept in a strong castle? How did the Lord watch Mordecai
while he slept, Hest. 6. 1. he slept, but the King shall not sleep till he
have advanced Mordecai? How did he watch over Peter (Act. 12. 7.) whilst he
slept so fast in the night as scarce an Angel could waken him, and brought him
through the sleepie watch? Our experience can tell us every morning how the
Lord keeps our houses, our selves without fear against robbers, fires,
dangers, in the night he makes us sleep in safety, and while we are helpless,
naked, senseless, becomes a wall of protection round about us. 3. In the night
of death he gives not over his watch, but watches the very bones of the
Saints, that in the morning of the resurrection they may mory fully enjoy
Christ the true Manna, and attain a full measure and gomer, and a perfect
satiety and fullness of this sweet bread of life. Psa. 17. 15. David calls it,
a satisfying with Gods Image, when he shall awake.

Sect. V.
III. See in this gift, Gods bounty toward his Church, to be noted.
Gods bountifulness and freeness to his Church in three things. 1. He offers
Israel Mannah without the asking, seeking, or buying; it costs them nothing but
gathering: even so he offers us salvation by Jesus Christ while we ask not
after him. He is found of them that seek him not. The first Adam runs away
from Gods presence: the second Adam runs after him to seek and recall him
out of his bushes. Now what desert or merit could there be in the first Adam
to be followed with grace in his flying from it? And if there be none in him;
how come we his posterity to more possibility to merit any thing but death,
more then he? No, here is no merit, no buying of Mannah, but only a faithful
and thankful acceptance of it. 2. He raines it down in abundance, his hand is
not short; he opened the windows of heaven, and rained down manna to eat,
Psalm. 78. 24. For 1. It is for the honor of God to be bountiful and rich in
mercies, and to power down his blessings upon his people. 2. Israel needed
daily abundance and store of mannah, which need he is careful to supply. But
oh what great goodness has God stored for them that love him! In his Son
Jesus Christ he has rayned down bread of life, the greatest arm and stream
that ever flowed from that Ocean. A mercy covering all the tents of believers.
A mercy that lets the true Mannah fall enough for a whole world of believers,
not on one Nation of Israel only, but on all the Nations of the world. For he
did not so then to any other Nation, but now to all. Nay in this mannah is a
mercy not only covering the earth, but a mountain of mercy reaching to heaven.
3. His hand is not weary, but every morning lets fall enough to feed and fill
so many hundred thousands of mouths and bellies: so the grace of God in Christ
is an unweariable grace. At he gave more mannah then all the Israelites were
able to gather: so he is more infinitely able to give, then all believers are
able to receive. Hence we may (with David) stir up our selves to bless the
Lord that lodeth us with blessings daily.

IV. The wisdom of God in administering his mercy to his Church. Gods wisdom
in ministering to his Church, to be noted.
1. In that he gives them Manna from heaven not from earth, they cannot now
expect an annual harvest of corn from the earth, but must expect every day an
heavenly shower to be fed by; because the Lord will not have them fix their
eyes and se^ces on earth, but know they were now to live of Gods allowance, and
for their whole means depend on his hand. Let it teach us Christians to lift
up our eyes and senses from earth and earthly desires, and affect that manna
which is from heaven; every day desire to be fed with some heavenly shower for
the nourishment of the soul, and preserving the life of grace in it. Let it
teach us to acknowledge the hand of our heavenly father in the gathering of the
mannah, and good things for our temporal life. He is the father of lights
from whom descends every good and perfect gift. The Israelite must look to
heaven for every morsel of bread that he puts in his mouth: and shall the
Christian (as the swine) eat up the mast, and never look up to the tree
whence it falls.

II. In that he gives them manna every day. He might have given them an
harvest of it once a year; or he might have rained it once a month; but he
gives it daily. Manna, why given daily.
To show 1. that he had undertaken for their daily maintenance, whose
continual supplies challenged the continual dependence upon his providence.
2. that they must be content with daily bread. 3. that it should be a part of
their calling and exercise in the wilderness, where other temporal business
had they none. Let us hence learn. 1. to acknowledge Gods wisdom; if he give
us earthly manna and means but from hand to mouth, he knows to supply it with
true manna. He allows us to pray but for daily bread; and if we have food and
raiment we must be content, 1 Timothy 6. 8. 2. to confine our cares within the
day, not so solicitous to lay up for many years, as the rich glutton. Care not
for to morrow, that is, inordinatly, distrustfully. 3. to take notice of our
daily need of the true mannah, whereof seeing God has given us daily means,
we must not erosse Gods wisdom to think the reading of Gods word once in a
year, or month, or week enough; but be daily gathering, and answering the
daily means afforded by Gods gracious wisdom, as did the Jews.

III. His wisdom is seen in that he gives them no manna on the Sabbath; Why
not on the Sabbath day.
but for the Sabbath a double portion on the day before. For 1. the Sabbath day
is not to seek temporal food and manna, but spiritual and eternal. 2. He
will not have his Sabbath and service interrupted, therefore he gives them a
double portion the day before. 3. He will not have them losers by being intent
in his service; but as a liberal paymaster, allows them as largely as any
other day.

Let this teach us, 1. to nourish the care of Gods worship above the care of
our life, and more intend the business of the soul then of the body. So our
Savior, first seek the kingdom of God, and then other things. 2. to become
more conscionable in the keeping of the Sabbath, not seeking this day after
earthly but heavenly things alone. For consider, 1. The Lords liberality in
giving thee (not a sixth day, but) six whole days wherein to gather earthly
manna; and will thou encroach his day too? 2. his liberality in giving thee
manna for the seventh day, blessing the labor of the six days, and thereby
binding thy hands from labor on the seventh.

IV. His wisdom is seen in giving to every man his Gomer; Measure thy
desires in natural things.
and every man has his measure. 1. to measure their desires by Gods measure.
2. that no man should have just cause of discontent; for he had a sufficient
measure for necessity, and God was not bound to provide for their wantonness.
3. that no man might envy another man's disproportion; seeing no man had want,
no man might have superfluity. Let us learn hence 1. To gather no more of this
earthly Manna then God would have us to gather.

Quest. How shall I know Gods measure for me?

Answ. 1. That which his blessing by good and warrantable means affords, How
to know Gods measure.
is his measure; and to transgress Gods word in seeking or getting wealth, is
to go beyond Gods measure. 2. Neither to lay up, nor to keep any of this manna
without or against God. Goods well gotten shall stand and prosper (as manna
gathered in the six days.) But gather this manna on the seventh day, or lay
up without and against Gods commandment, that is to say, that which thou
gettest falsely, or well gotten which thou should expend for Gods glory and
the charitable relief of the poor members of Jesus Christ, but do not, all
that shall rot and stink, as stolen manna did.

Sect. 6.
II. In respect of our selves also we learn sundry instructions from the
consideration of both the mannahs, Use in respect of our selves.
the typical and the true manna. These instructions concern 1. our estate. 2.
our duty.

1. Concerning our estate: Man of himself senseless of the things of Jesus
Christ.
To note how senseless and void of understanding every man is by nature in the
things of God and Jesus Christ, Exodus 16. 15. None of the Jews knew what the
manna was: No more does any man know by nature the things of the Spirit of God.
1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of God. If he
perceive them not in his understanding, much less can he receive them in his
affection. Tell the Jew of Christ, or let the Jew hear Christ himself
speaking of himself (the manna and bread of life) they conceive he is bread
for the belly, they must eat him up straight, Ioh. 6. 52. Tell Nicodemus of
the new birth, he can conceive no second nativity, but of going into his
mothers w^mbe again being old, Ioh. 3 4. Tell the Samaritan of the water of
life, she cannot conceive whence to have it, if not out of Jacobs well, which
he and his cattle drank, Ioh. 4. 12. Nay such is our palpable blindness in
spiritual things, as we cannot only not find them, but even offered unto us
(as the manna to them) we cannot apprehend them, nay we cannot but reject
them, as that woman of Samaria; Jesus Christ offers himself unto her, she
scorns him, and will not make nor meddle with him, Ioh. 4. 9.

The reason whereof is partly in the things themselves, Reason 1.
and partly in our selves. 1. The things are things of Gods spirit, and cannot
be reached or judged by any rule in nature. For the things of creation, the
heathen knew them in part from God as God, Romans 1. 19: But for the things of
Sanctification (as that God the Father by his Son made the world, or that God
the Son by his Spirit made a new world) here they are blind as moles. Nay
even in this part of knowledge, the natural man asks what engines or tools
could God get to rear such a frame, and will not believe it could be made with
a word, It will ask, of what prejacent matter, and will not believe that so
great a thing could be made of nothing: whereas we by faith understand, that
the world was framed by the word of God, Heb. 11. 3. How blind then must they
needs be in spiritual things, that are blind in things natural? 2. The reason
in our selves is that we are wedded to our own apprehensions, and not easily
led out of our conceits; as vessels hardly let go the savor of the first
liquor; we will measure all by the standard of natural reason, and by the
scantling of our own senses.

Apply this observation 1. To see our impotency, Application.
nay the contrariety of our nature to Gods grace. Where is our free will to
good? In what disposition stands darkness to entertain light, which fights
against it? But ye were darkness (says the Apostle) not dark or darkened,
Ephesians. 5. 8.
but darkness it self. Nay ye were dead in trespasses and sins (Ephesians. 2.
5.) not half dead (as the Samaritan) but whole dead. Now let all the Papists
in the world teach us, how a dead man can dispose and prepare himself to life.
And let us know how a privation of it self can regresse to an habit. 2. To see
what need we have of the Ministry to help us unto the true Manna. Moses
must tell the people (Exodus 16. 15.) This is the bread which the Lord has
given you to eat: So must the ministers of the Gospel acquaint all the Israel
of God with Christ (the true manna) by the word preached; and say, This is the
bread of life which came down from heaven, in whom aloneis full nourishment to
eternal life. Nothing is good to salvation, but by Gods revelation. If the
word preached do not teach thee Christ (the true manna) thou never know him
of thy self. Let us pity and pray for the lamentable blindness, not of
Popish recusants only, but of wilful and careless absenters of themselves
from the house of God; whose Judgment is just if they never come to a saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ. 3. Has Christ been made known to thee, that thou
have tasted the sweetness of him in the Gospel? As Christ said to Peter, so I
say to thee, Happy art thou, for flesh and blood has not revealed him to thee,
but the Father which is in heaven.

Sect 7.
2. Concerning our duty we learn sundry instructions, Our duties in respect of
this Manna.
which may be reduced to six heads.

I. To get in us an hunger and thirst after Jesus Christ; in whom alone is full
nourishment, Hunger and thirst for Christ.
and without Motives.
For 1. Only this hunger makes us value him, and see our need of him. It is
hunger that is the best sauce that makes manna sweet; and without hunger a full
belly despises an honey comb. It is hunger that makes the prodigal son
look toward home. 2. It is the note of a blessed man, to hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Mat. 5. 6. And this man will not rest till he be
satisfied. David was an happy man in such hungry desires, when he desired
after God, as the chased Heart after the waters. This thirst would eat out and
thrust out the thirst after the world; that dropsy thirst after gold and
silver, which is never satisfied: As also the thirst after the puddlewater of
earthly pleasures: And this thirst Take pains for him.
as Moses his rod consumed the rods of the sorcerers.

II. To go out of our tents, Motives.
and take pains to gather our manna daily, as Israel did theirs. For 1. Christ
enjoynes labor for this unperishing food, Ioh. 4. 14. and 2. Pet. 1. 10. give
all diligence to make your election sure. 2. It is worth much pains and cost
to procure Christ to our selves and others. In bodily famine how far will men
run and ride for corn? Jacob sends all his sons out of Canaan into Egypt
for food, Genesis 42. 2. 3. Idleness is every where blameworthy, especially in
matters of greatest importance. God might have rained manna into their laps or
mouths as well as about their tents, if he had pleased; but would not for the
trial of their diligence: besides he is well acquainted with our corruptions,
who think that worth nothing which costs us nothing. Give me leave to apply
this to many idle Christians among us, who have this sweet manna round about
their tents, but will not stir out of doors for it. If it rain not down
within their own tents, though it do round about, they will not stir out of
their tents: Like idle husbandmen that would have a harvest, but will not
stir out into the fields to plow, nor sow, nor reap, unless it grew at
their own doors, or in their own streets. Alas how lamentable and
unanswerable to God is our high unthankfulness; who with less labor then the
Jews may gather better food, and have as express a commandment as they;
gather every man of this manna according to his eating. But in stead of
gathering we ingratefully reject it, yea thrust it off with both hands, as the
Jews did, Act. 13. 46. Take heed in time, lest the doom come out against us,
as did against them: Because you have made your selves unworthy of eternal
life, we turn from you to the Gentiles.

III. As Israel, so must we daily and diligently observe the times and places
of gathering manna. 1. The place is the wilderness, not Canaan; and all the
while that they are in the wilderness they must gather manna: So we, so long
as we are in this world, must gather this true manna. Many seem to gather when
they be young, Observe times and places to meet with Christ.
But even the oldest man of the Israelites must gather if he would eat; he
must starve here that cease to gather. Many have gathered enough, know as
much as the best Preacher of them all, have strong faith, are sound Christians;
and so was the Church of Laodicea: But be it known to thee, thou can scarce
gather enough of this manna for the day; and he that sees his daily weakness
will conclude with me, that his faith, hope, love, knowledge, and all his
graces need daily repairing; and that he has got but a little of Christ, that
fears to get too much. Again, the place of seeking true manna is about the
tents of the Israelites; it is confined to the Camps of the true Church; where
two or three are gathered, there is Christ to be found: his parents found him
in the Temple. Therefore 1. it is no marvel if Christ be not to be met with
among Antichristian Synagogues. If men had learning to admiration, and above
the Angels, they should not find the truth of Christ but among the tents and
congregations of Christ. No marvel if an Egyptian miss of manna be he never
so learned. 2. Let us learn to wait in the Temple (as the ancient believers
Anna and Elizabeth) if we would meet with the consolation of Israel. 2. The
time and season of gathering manna was while it lay on the ground. We must
apprehend the season of grace, that is, while the Church has peace make use of
the peace of the Gospel; as the Churches did, Act. 9. 31. Little know we how
soon the sun of persecution may arise, and melt away our manna. But Christ
may make as pitiful a complaint over us, (and with weeping eyes) as that over
Jerusalem, O Jerusalem! Oh England! if in this thy day thou knew the time of
thy visitation! Oh how rich in grace had thou been by knowing this season!
Apply and feed on Christ.


IV. As Israel must bring home the manna, and bake, and grind it, and feed
upon it; for else what had it been better for them that manna had lain about
their tents in never so great abundance, had they not brought it home and
sustained their lives with it? so must every Christian specially apply to
himself Christ crucified, and by the faithful application of Christ and all
his merits become one with him, as the meat or bread we eat becomes one with
our bodies; thus will an hungry Christian do. An hungry man is not content
with only coming to a Cooks shop where meat is; it is not the sight, smell,
or handling of meat which contents him; he must eat and fill his belly: So it
is not a bare coming to the place of the word and Sacraments (which yet many
do not) to see, and hear, and taste; but thou must feed by faith, or starve
to death eternal. Heb. 4. 2. The word they heard was unprofitable, because not
mingled with faith.

Quest. How may I know if I apply Christ crucified to my self?

Answ. 1. The right application of Christ crucified, And how this may be.
is not to know that Christ was crucified; but when we are crucified with him,
Gal. 2. 19. as Elisha (2. Kings 4.) applied his eyes, face, and hands to the
dead child that it might quicken. 2. So much as thou truly beleevest, so much
thou eatest of Christ, says August: Look how much strength thou gettest by
the word, so much nourishment thou receivest from Christ. And so much as thou
refusest, contemnest, or neglectest that, so much thou refusest Christ himself.

Be never weary of this Manna.
and went out cheerfully to gather it, yea the Sabbath and all (which was a
prohibited time) so greedy were they of it: but within a little while (although
it retained the sweetness) they waxed weary of it. We must take heed of this
fickleness in goodness, which has ever bewrayed it self in most forward
people. At the first building of the Tabernacle men brought too much, but after
took it away as fast again. Ioh. 5. 35.
John was a burning and shining light, and they rejoiced in his light, but it
was but for a season: and few shining lights but find it so. The Galatians at
first received Paul as an Angel, but soon revolted from him. What flocking
and thronging was there after Christ's doctrine and miracles, that the kingdom
of God suffered violence, but soon they had enough of him, and in short time
did tumult as fast against him? The like was observed in our own land; at the
first falling of this manna, and beginnings of the Gospel: men were earnest,
glad, joyful, forward: then was a sweet time of the happy welcome of this
Manna; happy was he could get his Gomer first and fullest: But now what voices
hear we other then of the ungracious Israelites? Oh our souls are dried up
with this manna, here is nothing but manna: so much preaching, so many Sermons,
and it was better with the world in Egypt, before all this preaching! And
whereas our fathers would have ridden far to a Sermon, we, their lazy
offspring, will scarce step over our thresholds.

Let us consider here for our incitement, Motives.
1. how hard it is to begin well, but harder to hold out; and not holding out
we lose all our labor. 2. that manna is as sweet as ever, though we see not
our own need; which if we did see, we would be no more weary of Gods word
were it daily preached, then we are of our bread we daily eat.

VI. We must be so far from weariness, as that we Prize and magnify this Manna.
as the sweetest gift that ever God gave from heaven, and never forget so
miraculous a mercy. That Israel might not forget Gods extraordinary mercy in
this type, they must for ever keep a pot of Manna; which was preserved so long
as the Temple stood for many hundred years. And that we might not forget this
mercy in the true manna, he has and does for ever preserve his word preached;
and instituted Sacraments in which he perpetually holds this mercy before the
eyes of the Church. Let us raise monuments of Gods mercies to our selves, and
not forget lesser favors if we would not forfeit them: But such a mercy as
this is in Jesus Christ the true Manna, let it live in our hearts, in our
memories, senses, affections, actions, in walking worthy of it; for thus it
becomes the just to be thankful.

CHAP. XXIII.
Water out of the Rock, a type.
THe second extraordinary Sacrament sealing up to Israel their nourishment and
strength in the Covenant, Water out of the Rock, a type.
was the water out of the Rock. After the Lord had brought Israel through the
dangerous Sea, he brings them to Elim, a sweet and fruitful place, where were
twelve fountains of water, and seventy Palm trees, there they camped and
breathed, Exodus 15. 27. Not long after they must come into the dry desert of
Sin, where they want both bread and patience; for they murmr against God, and
exclaim against Moses and Aaron. At this time the Lord feeds their bellies,
and fills them with miracles of which Manna was full. Thence at Gods
commandment must they come unto Rephidim, Exodus 17. 1. Here have they bread
from heaven, but no water, Now contend they as fast with Moses for water as
before for bread. And as thirst is the more eager appetite, so it ineagers
their affections that Moses complains to God they are ready to kill him. God
sees their rebellion and puts it up; and instead of revenge of their horrible
obstinacy and ingratitude, satisfies their thirst as miraculously, as formerly
he had done their famine and hunger. The fact it self.
He commands Moses to take his rod and speak to the Rock, and then should
issue waters in abundance to satisfy all the Camp, both man and beasts; and
so he did, Exodus 17. 6.

Now we may not think that this fact concerned only Israel in the
wilderness, but even all the Church and Israel of God passing through the
wilderness of this world: The thing ours as well as theirs: reasons.
And that for these reasons. 1. The Apostle (1, Cor. 10. 4.) calls it a
spiritual rock, both for being miraculous in effects, and for being a type of
what was to come. Propter miraculosum effectum, and propter futuri signum.
Aquin.
It was both miraculous and significant, and therefore called spiritual. 2.
The same water which they drank, we also drink, as in the same Chap. and ver.
because in the holy Supper of the Lord, the matter of our spiritual drink is
the same with theirs, and that is the blood of Christ, resembled by theirs: The
difference is only in the manner of drinking. 3. Including this water of the
Rock, the Apostle says: they are all types to admonish us, and are written for
us, verse. 6. and 11. 4. Most plainly he affirms, verse. 4, and that Rock was
Christ; Non per substantiam, sed per significantiam.
not in substance but in signification, says Aquinas. Now we having as much
to do with Christ as they, we must farther enquire into this type. 1. To
parallel it with the truth by comparing them. 2. By applying it in some
fruitful observations to our selves.

The Rock was a type of Christ three ways. The Rock a type in three respects.
1. As it was a Rock, 2. As out of it issued water. 3. In the manner of
obtaining.

I. As a Rock, it elegantly typed out Jesus Christ, In nature: five
resemblances.


1. For the despicable appearance: The Rock is in appearance dry and barren,
the most unlikely thing in all the world to afford water; so as it was
incredible to Moses and Aaron themselves to fetch water out of a Rock. If God
had commanded them to have beaten fire out of a flinty rock it had not been so
unlikely; but to distill water out of a flint or rock must be miraculous: Even
so Jesus Christ was (for outward form and appearance in the world) most
unlikely of all men to afford any such waters of grace and salvation. Isai. 53.
2, 3. he was as a dry root, without form or beauty; as an hard, barren, and
despised rock, the most abject of men, the refuse of the world, a worm and no
man; of whom when the Prophets preached, they could find none almost that
would believe their report.

2. A Rock for exaltation and advancement. A Rock is a promontory lifted up
above the earth: Such a Rock was Christ advanced above the earth, yea and the
heavens; advanced above all men and creatures: 1. In holiness and purity: 2.
In power and authority: 3. In place and dignity. So Ioh. 3. 31, he that comes
from heaven is above all. His person is above all; for God has exalted him,
and given him a Name above al names, Phil. 2. 9. His work is above all that
men and Angels can comprehend in power and merit. His place is above all; the
head of the Church, eminent above all men and Angels.

3. A Rock for firmness and stability: He is the strength of Israel; on this
Rock (as on a sure and firm foundation) the whole Church is laid, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matt. 16. 18. Hence he is a Rock
of defense and safety to his chosen; and every wise man builds his house on
this Rock.

4. A Rock of scandal and offense to wicked men, Romans 9. 32. Not in himself
and his nature (for he is a precious corner stone) but accidentally and
passively, because men dash themselves against him; as many, at this day bark
(like dogs) against the wholesome doctrine of justification by Christ without
the works of the Law. Many loose and formal Gospellers scorn the baseness
and meannesse of Preachers and true professors of the Gospel, because their
darkness can abide no light to come near it. To all these and thousands more,
Christ is a rock of scandal by their own default.

5. A Rock for weight, and danger, and inayoidable judgment upon his
adversaries; which on whomsoever it falls, it crusheth him all to pieces, Matt.
21. 44. If any rise against it, they do but tire and tear themselves: but if
this Rock rise against any man, and fall upon him, it breaks him to powder.
Witness the greatest enemies of Jesus Christ which the world ever had, Herod,
Judas, Julian, Jews, Pilate; as unable to rise from under his revenge, as a man
pasht to pieces unable to rise from under a Rock.

II. It was a type of Christ, as it sent out water in In respect of the waters
issuing forth.
For so Jesus Christ is the only Rock that sends from himself all the sweet
waters of life for the salvation of his elect, otherwise ready to perish
eternally. For explanation whereof, mark

1. As from that Rock issued waters to wash and cleanse themselves and their
garments: Three things.
so from this Rock stream waters of ablution or washing; which serve to wash
away both the guilt of sin, and stain of sin. For the former; the precious
blood of Christ streaming out of his side is the only mundifying water in the
world, to wash the soul from the guilt of sin, and to scowre away all the
execration of sin from the sight of God, 1. Ioh. 1. 7. the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. For the latter; from the same side of
Christ our Rock issues water as well as blood, even the waters of
regeneration, called (Tit. 3. 5.) the washing of the new birth, by the Spirit
of grace and holiness, which daily cleanse the stain and filthiness of sin.
Of these waters read, Ioh. 7. 38. He that believes in me, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of water of life: This he spoke of the Spirit which he would
give.

2. As from that rock issued waters to cool and comfort Israel in their
weariness and wanderings: so from Jesus Christ do issue the waters of
refrigeration and comfort, to cool and refresh the dry and thirsty soul; to
allay the heat of a raging and accusing conscience; and to revive with new
strength the fainting soul in temptation or persecution. And therefore the
tried traveller and thirsty passenger is called to these waters, Mat. 11. 28,
Isa. 55. 1. For nothing but sound grace from Jesus Christ can quench the
tormenting thirst of an accusing or distressed conscience.

3. As from that rock streamed abundance of waters to make fruitful that
barren wilderness wheresoever they ran: so only from the true rock issue
plentiful waters of grace to make our dry and barren hearts fruitful in all
works of righteousness: Isa. 44. 3, 4, I will pour water upon the thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thy buds; and they shall grow as among the grass, and as
willowes by the rivers of waters. All this blessing of fruitfulness is from
the Rock. See Ephesians 1. 4.

In the manner of obtaining it.


1. The people might ask Moses water, 5. resemblances.
but Moses cannot give it. It is God must give it, and miraculously fetch it
out of a rock, which how it should be, Moses cannot conceive: So men may seek
justification, and to drink waters of salvation in themselves, either by
nature, as Pelagians, or by merit as Popish justiciaries do, either in the Law
of Moses as the Jews, or in Evangelical Counsels, as the fond votaries of the
Church of Rome: But no Jew can tell how to procure any water to himself,
neither can Moses give it. By the Law of Moses no man can be justified, nor by
any fond devises beyond the Law. But God of his grace has devised a way, and
poynted to us a rock of living waters, to supply unto us that which was
impossible to Moses Law because of our infirmity, Romans 8. 3.

2. The rock gives water but not till it be smitten, Exodus 17. 6. so Christ
the true rock must be smitten with passion, he must be smitten with the wrath
of his Father, and made a curse for us, before there can issue out of his side
that bloody stream by which the thirst of believers can be quenched. And as
the rock was smitten twice, and waters gushed out both times: so Christ was
twice smitten, first actually in himself, secondly virtually in the says of
believers of all ages, the faithful before him, believing in the rock that was
to be smitten and suffer death for sin, the faithful after him, believing
in the rock that was smitten, dead, and raised already.

3. It was the Rod in Moses hand that smites and breaks the rock: Even so it
was the Law given by Moses hand, and our transgression against it that breaks
the true Rock. Isa. 53. 5. Gal 3. 13. he was made a curse for us, and our
transgression of the Law was laid upon him that we might be freed from it. And
as this was the same Rod that smote the River to bring destruction on the
Egyptians and enemies of the Church: so this same Law and Rod of Moses brings
the curse and damnation upon all the enemies of God from whom it is not
remooved by Jesus Christ.

4. The rock was smitten, but it was not so much the striking on the rock, but
the Lords standing upon it that gets water for Israel, Exodus 17. 6. There was
no virtue in the stroke, but all depended on Gods commandment, and precept,
and presence: even so, it is not the death of Christ, nor the abundance of
price and merit of his blood, nor the striking on this rock before men's eyes in
the ministry of the word and Sacraments, that can bring one drop of true water
of comfort, but by the presence and word of Gods blessing. The efficacy of
grace depends not on any means or work wrought, but it is Gods word and
presence that does all in them.

Ob. Then we may give up the use of all means, and pray at home for grace.

Sol. Not so, for means must be used, Moses must speak to the rock. God
appoints no means in vain, but we must not insist and dwell in them, but
look beyond them to Gods blessing and success. Moses must use the Rod, though
a word without the rod might have done it: so we must use the means as being
tied to them (though God be not) but not stick in them, seeing, the abuse of
them may make them hurtful not helpefull. The people of Moses (the Jews)
struck this rock, pierced him with thorns and spears; saw with their eyes
the precious fountain opened in his side (a privilege in which they were
beyond all people of the earth) but partly ignorant what they did, partly
malicious treading this precious blood under foot, not attending not believing
the word: this real striking of this rock was unprofitable, yea and damnable
unto them.

followed the Israelites, 1. Noting the abundance of water not only for their
present supply, How the Rock followed the Jews.
but also for future: so in Christ and his blood is abundant and plentifuil
redemption and consolation. 1 Cor. 10. 7.
2. The rock following them, that is, following or satisfying their desires.
Petra conseque^te eos, 1, sequente, vel satisfaciente eorum voluntati. Aquin.
It followed them every where, where they desired; followed their necessities,
followed their desires: So Christ Jesus is to the faithful heart, all it can
desire. He follows them with all sweet and needful desires. He is above all
that heart can think; always present with us through our wilderness,
especially in most needful times. Veritatem seque^tem significante. Aquin.
3. It followed them, in signifying the truth which was to follow. It signified
plainly that Christ was to follow it as the truth the type; and so it followed
them with instruction and admonition: so Christ the true Rock follows the
Church with instruction. His whole life, Ministry, miracles, actions, passion,
and speeches was a real instruction. And now by his Ministry he follows us
with daily directions. 4. It followed them through the wilderness even unto
Canaan. All the dryness of that dry and barren wilderness could not dry it
up: So the waters of grace streaming from the Rock Jesus Christ, follow the
believing Israel of God through the wilderness of the world to the heavenly
Canaan. All the persecutions and parching heats and droughts in the world can
never dry it up. Let all the wilderness besides want water, in Isreal's camp
is enough. Where God begins with a man in sound and saving grace here, it will
carry him into the land of promise. True grace must end in glory.

Hence arise observations twofold. I. In respect of Uses in respect of God.
to confirm our faith in the assurance of his, 1. presence. 2. power. 3. mercy
to the Church.

I. His presence. Christ ever present with his Church.
He that before was present in the Pillar of the cloud and fire for their
safety, and in the manna for their sustenance; is now present in the Rock for
their satiety in their extreme thirst. The presence of Christ is all in all to
the Church; his presence is a present supply of all wants. His eye is always
present, for although it go over all the world, yet it is always fixed on the
Church. His ear is present, they cannot call to Moses for bread or water, but
he hears and supplies. His hand is ever present with and for his Church, and
is not shortened. Himself is ever present with his, in life in death, and
after; for good, for grace and glory.

Only keep thou these conditions. Our duty by virtue thereof.
1. Be with him, 2 Chr. 15. 2, that is, walk with him, as Henoch. 2. Keep in
thy ways, for so long he has promised his comfortable presence. 3. Rejoice in
his presence, in the presence of his spirit, in the signs and means of his
presence. And then fear not want, sickness, nor to walk in the midst of the
valley of the shadow of death, for God is with thee, Psa. 23. 4. He will also
prepare a table for thee in the sight of the adversary, ver. 5.

II. Here is a testimony of such mighty and miraculous power in God for his
people, An almighty power in Christ for his Church.
that even Moses himself staggered, and could scarce conceive a work of such
power from God. Here is a work of omnipotency in cleaving the hard rock,
Psalm. 78. 15. To show 1. That he is a free worker not tied to second causes;
but at his pleasure can hinder, alter, or change the power of nature, Psa. 115.
3. 2. That he can work by contraries, and out of most unlikely (yea contrary)
means, effect his own pleasure. Luk 1. 37, Is any thing impossible to God? 3.
That we should cast our eyes on this power. Psa. 62. 11, Once have I heard it,
yea twice; that power belongs to God.

And hence learn 1. Not to limit the holy one that made heaven and earth of
nothing. Our duty.
2. Faithfully to depend on this power when we see no means of safety or
supply, but all the means contrary. For the rock shall yield water rather
then thou shall want what he sees good for thee. 3. In thy fainting and
weariness, when thy weakness tells thee thou art not able to go on in this
wilderness for want of water of comfort and consolation, nay art hopeless in
thy self or any means thou can make; now hope above hope, Gods power is
sufficient in thy weakness; Sampson shall get both victory and water by a
jaw bone, the most unlikely thing in the world for either. And though this
power now works not miracles ordinarily; yet before thou that waitest on him
shall miscarrie, he will miraculously sustain thee.

III. Here is a testimony of Gods admirable mercry to his people. Gods mercy
to his people, admirable.
Israel deserved to be smitten for their murmuring and rebellion; but the rock
is smitten for them. The rock is not smitten for it self, but for Israel. In
stead of a revenging power which they might have expected, they find a gracious
power which they could not expect: Even so all ma^kinde was to be smitten by
the Law; but the Rock must be smitten for us. Our Rock suffered nothing for his
own sins (who was purer in his nature and actions then all the Angels of
God) but all the stroke he suffered was for the Israel of God, that they might
draw out of this wellhead waters of joy and abundant consolation. The mighty
power of God (which we had deserved to be turned all against us) is all turned
to the salvation of the Church, where mercy rejoices against judgment.

Thus of God.

From this Rock and water we are also to observe some our selves. Uses in
respect of our selves. See the fountain of grace opened.


I. We have here the accomplishment of that Prophecy, Zach 13. 1, A fountain
is opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin
and for uncleanness. Here we have Christ himself the true water out of the
Rock; who only refreshes dry and weary souls, and comfort the fainting
heart with the sweet promises flowing from the Gospel. And that we may see
the excellency and benefit of this fountain, we will a little compare this
Rock with the other, and set the truth above the type, to draw our eyes and
desires after it.

1. In that rock, Far better then that in the wilderness: 7. ways.
the rock was one thing, the water another: here Christ is both the rock and
water, both the giver, and water given. 2. That rock refreshed wicked men and
beasts: this is bestowed upon and comfort only believers. 3. That rock
refreshed bodies only: this both souls and bodies. That preserved natural
life: but this torrent preserves the supernatural life of grace; so as a leaf
withers not, nor falls from a tree of righteousness planted by this river of
water, Psa. 1. 3. 4. That rock might preserve and comfort the living, but could
not help a dead man: but this quickneth the dead soul with new and heavenly
life. 5. The waters of that rock quenched natural thirst: but this quenches
all unnatural. One drop of it tasted by Zacheus quenched all his unnatural
thirst after the world: and in Paul all the thirst of revenge and fury against
the Saints. 6. The rock gave water twice: this rock gives waters of comfort
always. The water of that rock followed them a great while, but at length were
dried up: but the waters of this rock are never dried up. The blood of CHRIST
is always running, and a fresh fountain never dry. 7 The Israelites drank of
that water, and were contented for a little while; but by and by did thirst
again: But he that drinks of this water shall never thirst again, Ioh. 4.
14. that is, miserably as they: however he shall desire it still, yet his very
desire is his happiness and saciety.

II. How we are to carry our selves to this rock and fountain, Do as Israel
at the Rock.
namely, as Israel to that rock.

1. The Israelites thirst and call for water, Thirst for Christ.
they see and feel their need and want: so we must feel our want of Christ,
and get a fervent desire after Christ and his graces, because only the thirsty
are called, Isa. 55. 1. and only they in want see the worth of the thing
wanting. Now we may not think that every wish after Christ is this thirst; for
the worst can wish a part in Christ: but this thirst and desire must have three
conditions:

1. It must be fervent and eager as Sampsons, Conditions.
Give me water, or I die. Iud. 15. 18. As the chased Heart pants after the
rivers of water, so does my soul after thee, Ps. 42. 1. 2. It must be
faithful. We must not thirst with repining and diffidence, as the Israelites,
but with faith and confidence: This draws virtue from Christ, According to thy
faith, be it to thee. 3. It must be constant. The Israelites thirst still till
they obtain their desire: so we must not content our selves with desire, or to
come where this water is and go without it; but we must never be content with
our estate (though it be never so well with us for the world) till we taste the
sweet comfort and strength of Christ and his merits. Continue ^^ll this thirst:
Rules.
To continue thy thirst, observe two rules. 1. So long as God has any grace to
give, or is not weary of giving, thou must not be weary of thirsting, begging,
asking. 2. So long as thou want any grace, or any measure of grace received,
thou must thirst still* Ever be desiring one good thing after another, and one
measure of grace after another, till thou be complete; and then shall thou
never give over this thirst while thou live here.

2. Israel thirsty runs to the rock: Have recourse to Christ.
so in thy thirst run thou to the rock. Do thou thirst for pardon of sin,
for grace of sanctification, for sense of Gods love, for assurance of eternal
life? come to this Rock for supply. Art thou ready to faint in thy soul for
want of grace and comfort, art thou ready to sink in sorrows, fears,
faintings, wants, dangers? run to this fountain which God has opened for
thee. Motives.
To move thee hereto, consider 1. the rock it self calls thee which art
thirsty (which that rock could not do) Ioh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink. 2. That to run any whither else, is to forsake the
fountain of living waters, and dig pits that will hold no water. Let Papists
run to the puddle waters of their own merits, or seek other Mediators or
Intercessors: say thou with the Apostles, Lord thou have the words of eternal
life, and whither should we go? Let others run to humane helps and remedies
in their sorrows; to cards, dice, merry company, let them run to devils and
witches, and make them their rock: Let thy heart say, The Lord is my Rock: and
if the word were not my comfort, I were sure to sink in my trouble. Quench thy
thirst and be satisfied.


3. Israel coming to the rock, did not only draw from thence, but drink
heartily: so we must not only come to the place where Christ is preached, but
we must believe in him, and specially apply to our selves the merit of his
death. For as drinking is a special application of water to the thirsty body,
so by believing in Christ we specially apply the waters of grace to the
refreshing of the soul. To believe is to drink this water, Ioh. 7. 38. with
Ioh. 4. 14. Nothing could quench Isreal's thirst (being bodily) but water: and
only faith quenches our spiritual thirst: And therefore (as they to Moses)
we must say to Christ, Lord, give us faith to quench our spiritual thirst.

Let these motives provoke us to drink these waters. Three motives.
1. As Israel was by drinking that water revived and refreshed, so only these
waters from Christ quicken us with new life, and cool the heat of raging and
accusing consciences. Every believer has true tranquillity of heart, and joys
of the holy Ghost within him; yea so plentifully do these waters of
consolation rise from the Rock, Romans 14. 17.
that he that drinks them is said to have the kingdom of God in him, which
stands in righteousness, peace, joy, etc. 2. What madness and folly is it to
lay about us so eagerly for this puddle water in comparison, and catching with
all greediness at the bitter-sweet comforts of this life, which prove poison
to the most; and neglect the sweet and pure streams of saving waters of grace
flowing from the true Rock JESUS CHRIST. We read what strife and contention
was among the Jews for wells of spring water; and now no man will lose a
dishfull of well water but he will know to whom: and shall we only not care
for the water of saving grace, which cost Christ so dear before he could open
the well of it for us? 3. When the woman of Samaria heard Christ say, that he
that drank of this water should thirst no more: Lord, faith she, give me this
water, that I may no more thirst, nor come hither to draw, Ioh. 4. 15. So let
it stir up our desires after it also, that we may get within the well that
springs up to eternal life.

3. What means may we use for the attaining of water out of this rock? Means
to get water out of this rock.


Answ. 1. Be an Israelite. That rock was smitten only for them: This rock is
laid in Sion, not in Egypt. No Egyptian, no Canaanite, no Romish Egyptian
that drinks of that Popish puddle, no profane worldlings taste of these
waters; swill and draffe is good enough for such swine. 2. Come to the place.
Israel must go out of their houses as well to fetch water out of the rock, as
to gather Manna. The place whence the rock sends water is the threshold of the
Sanctuary, Ezech. 47. If we will not stir out of our doors, we may justly
starve 3. Avoid letts and hindrances that damme up these waters: As,

1. Ignorance of their worth, Hindrances.
and of thy own need; Ioh. 4. 10. If thou knew the gift of God, thou
would have asked, etc. Good reason thou want it, who think it a thing
thou may best want. Many among us (like Tantalus) in the midst of water die
for thirst. 2. Hardness of heart, which keeps the soul dry and barren; and
abiding in the natural hardness of a rock, all the waters of this spiritual
rock are lost upon it. 3. A quenching and grieving of the spirit: this turns
the stream another way, that it finds another channel. Greeve not the spirit,
but grieve rather that thy self art so strait-necked a vessel. 4. Secure
neglect of means. A man that will be rich follows the means: so he that
means to be rich in grace: whereas he that means to die a beggar, casts up
all and makes holy day at his pleasure.

4. Provide 1. the bucket of faith to draw; Helps.
for the well is deep, and without this bucket thou gettest none, Ioh. 4. 11.
2. Find a fit vessel to put these waters in: As 1. a clean vessel of a pure
heart. Who would put Aquavitae or Balm water in a fusty and stinking bottle?
2. a whole vessel, that it leake not out again. This whole vessel is a whole
and sincere heart, but broken all to pieces. No vessel here can hold but a
broken and contrite heart. God fills the humble: the haughty and proud are sent
away empty.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Brazen Serpent, a Type.
THe History of the Brazen Serpent is in Numb. 21. 6, 7, 8. The brazen serpent
a type of christ.
where are two things. I. The disease. II, The remedy.

The disease is set down, The disease of Israel at this time.
1. in the occasion, ver. 5. 2. in the kind, by fiery Serpents sent by God to
sting them. 3. in the effect, many dyed. In all which Story we must not stick
in the letter or bark, but break through to the kernel and truth: The rather
because our Lord Jesus (an interpreter beyond all exception) brings us hereby
to himself; and to the consideration both of our disease, and of the remedy,
and the application of it. Ioh 3. 14. 15. As Moses lift up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift up: that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish but have eternal life, It will be now both pleasant and
profitable to look a little while upon the apt resemblance of the type with
the truth both in the disease and remedy: and first of the occasion of the
disease.

Sect. I.
I. The occasion of the disease was the peccant humor of ingratitude and
murmuring against the grace of God miraculously manifested in the wilderness.
The occasion of it.
Never had any people upon the face of the earth the like mercies from God, the
like experience of God. Never any fed and feasted with so many miracles as it
were in ordinary. They have water following them every where out of a rock.
They have read from heaven, delicate even to a miracle; but this Angels food is
too light, and no bread will serve them but from earth. God gave them abundance
of it for the gathering; he rained it most bountifully round about their tents:
but their unthankful souls loathe it, and tread it under foot. And therefore
rising up against God and tempting him they were destroyed of Serpents. 1. Cor.
10. 9.

Note here by the way 1. The Justice of God. Which leads to Gods justice.
He that brought Manna from heaven to feed them, for contempt of his grace now
brings serpents out of the earth to revenge and destroy them. Romans 2. 4. 5. The
despising of Gods bountifulness, treasureth up wrath. See the same Justice on
our selves. How lightly did we in our first parents regard that upheaped
measure of bounty and grace conferred by God in our Creation and innoceny? And
how justly were we stung to death by the old serpent for it? The unthankful
person is the greatest robber that is. 2. See the equity of this Justice on the
Israelites. And the equity of it.
They not contented to murmur against the Lord, set also upon Moses and Aaron
his servants, Why have ye brought us into the wilderness to die? Now their
punishment is answerable to their sin. They transgress in hot and fiery
tongues, and are punished by hot and fiery stings. Venomous words against God
and his servants are revenged by the mouths of poisoned and venomous serpents.
Do thou at thy peril sting God and his servants with bitter words, God will
have some serpent or other to sting thee. I am out of doubt that many great
plagues have lingered and do, amongst us in this land for the poisoned and
reviling speeches cast against God and his servants every where. We sting his
holy profession and servants incessantly, and he stings us with the scorpions
of his Judgments: And teaches, not to be weary of manna.
3. Beware of being weary of manna. Never did man complain of plenty of manna,
but was justly stung with want of it. Do thou complain without cause, and
thou shall have cause to complain. Israel that complains of too much manna,
shall shortly change their note and cry out of too many serpents.

II. The kind of the disease. The kind of it. Why serpents.
The Lord sent fiery serpents to sting them. Where 1. why serpents? 2. why
fiery? 3. why stinging?

1. This disease by serpents lively resembles our disease of soul, which is no
other then the fiery sting of the old serpent, which is the devil, Rev. 12. 9.
Our spiritual disease is hence noted to come from that old serpent at first.
The devil so termed, why.
Now satan is aptly compared to a serpent in five respects: First, because he
covered himself with a serpent, when he first stung and deceived mankind.
Secondly, he is more subtle then any serpent; crafty to insinuate and deceive,
2 Cor. 11. 3. 14. Thirdly, as a serpent dwells and lies among thorns, bushes,
briars, and feeds upon dust: so the devil reigns in the thickets and bushes
of worldly cares and lusts, and feeds upon worldlings exercising his chief
power against them. Fourthly, as a serpent casts out of his mouth venime and
poison: so the devil casts out nothing but virulent words against God and his
Saints, and spewes out after the Church a flood of poison to drown her. How
he blasphemed Job, how he is the accuser of the brethren, how of the head
Christ himself, the Scripture declares. Fifthly, as a serpent is cursed above
all beasts, so is the devil. The first cursed creature in the world was this
serpent and has ever since remained the cursed head of all cursed rebels and
wicked ones, to whose custody and condemnation they shall all be gathered in
the last day. Mat. 25. 41. go ye cursed, etc.

2. Why called fiery serpents? Why fiery serpents.
Answ. 1. From their color. Through abundance of poison they had a shining and
glistring skin, Why fiery serpents.
and they seemed as if they had been made of fire. A resemblance we have in
our snakes, that seem to shine and sparkle against the Sun. 2. From their
effect. For with their sting they infused such poison into the bodies of the
Israelites, as stirred up in them an outrageous heat and fire. Now these
diseases are most painful, and so tormentfull as if a wildfire were in the
bowels, feeding upon the bones, marrow, and members. 3. From their end. First
because they were appointed by God, and after a sort inflamed and kindled with
desire of revenge of the Lords wrongs; and they so fiercely assaulted the
Israelites, as if a raging and devouring fire had seized upon them, which no
way they could avoid. Secondly, that in their punishment they might be
admonished, both what a fearful fire of Gods wrath they had kindled by their
sin against themselves; as also that they had deserved a more fearful fire in
hell to seize upon their whole man everlastingly.

3. Why stinging serpents? Why stinging serpents.
Answ. To imply unto us. First, that sin is the sting of this old serpent;
even a poisoned sting that he has thrust into all mankind. But with this
difference; in that this poison is far more general, and the wounds
infinitely more mischievous then were those of the fiery serpents. For, 1. They
stung a few Israelites, but not all; but this serpent has stung all mankind,
none excepted. 2. They stung the bodies only; but these, souls and bodies
also. 3. They stung one part of the body; this serpent all parts, and whole
man. 4. They to a temporal death, this to an eternal.

Secondly, to imply that sin is the sting of a fiery serpent. 1. Set on fire
with wrath and cruelty, and desire to poison and destroy us, Temptations called
fiery darts, why.
Revel. 12. 17. 2. Setting on us with fiery darts. For so his temptations are
called (Ephesians. 6. 16.) for three reasons. 1. From the manner and custom of
soldiers in times past which cast poisoned darts, the poison of which inflamed
the wounded bodies, and made the wounds incurable. As now many out of desperate
malice poison their weapons and bullets to make sure with their enemy: So does
Satan by all means poison his darts to speed the Christians soul. 2. Because
as fiery darts they inflame and kindle in the heart all manner of burning lusts
and sins, one of them being but as a spark or firebrand to kindle another.
3. Because they leave for most part a cauterized and seared conscience behind
them, as if they were burnt with an hot iron, which makes the sinner stung
senseless of his wound. Whence is another miserable difference between the
stung Israelite, and the stung sinner. The former was always felt with grief
and pain: but this often not felt, and so more desperate.

The mortal effect of it.
And so the effect of sin is death in all. The stung Israelite had death in
his bosom, and no other could be expected: so the guilty sinner is stung to
death. In his nature is every man the son of death, and can expect nothing
but death every moment. And as the stung person in the wilderness had no
means in himself nor from others, to avoid either the serpent or death from
it, till God appointed them the brazen serpent: So the poor sinner was
destitute of all help in himself and others, till the Lord appointed Jesus
Christ the promised seed, to break the serpents head. There is given no name
else, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12.

First note hence, Observations
how deceitful are the pleasures of sin. It is as a sweet poison: Job 20.
12. sweet in the mouth, but poison in the bowels. What wise man would drink a
draught of poison for the sweet taste of it? Wicked men hold sin as a sweet
morsel: but sower sauce follows it.

Secondly, what little cause we have to love our sins: for that is to love
our own bane. Prove. 8. 35. He that sins against me, hurts his own
soul; and all that hate me, love death. No sin but the more pleasing, the
more poisoning; the more delicate, the more deadly. Sin never so much
disguised, never the less deadly.

Thirdly, that sinners are but dead men while they live, 1. Tim. 5. 6. An
Israelite stung was but a dead man: So although the reasonable soul in a
sinner makes him a man, yet the want of the Spirit of grace makes him a dead
man. Death waits upon sin as the wages on the work; and hell upon death that
comes before repentance.

Fourthly, A fool he is that makes a mock of sin. Who would play with a
deadly serpent, or make a jest of his own death? or drink up the poison of a
serpent in merriment? or cast darts and firebrands about him to burn himself
and others, and say, Am I not in sport? See Prove. 26. 18. and 10. 23. and 14.
9. Oh that we could discern our wounds, as sensibly as we are certainly
stung! It would make us run to God, and get Moses to go to God for us, and
pray that these serpents and painful wounds might be removed. If we saw death
as present and as ghastly in our sins as Israel did in their stinging, we would
hasten our repentance, and seek after means of cure.

Sect. II.
The remedy is, The remedy of that disease.
First prescribed, Number. 21. 8. Secondly applied, verse. 9. Thirdly in the same
verse is the effect: they recovered and lived. So then in the remedy are, I.
ordination, 2. application, 3. sanation, or cure.

1. The appointing has, God appoints the means of health to soul and body.
First the person appointing, which was God himself, who devised it and
prescribed it to Moses, for God will save only in his own means. So God
himself so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Ioh.
3. 16. This way of remedy and cure could be no devise of man nor Angel. For,
1. The Angels stand still admiring and amazed at it, 1. Pet. 1. 12. 2. Men
without a superior teacher cannot conceive it, 1. Cor. 2. 14. much less
invent it.

Secondly, the thing appointed, a serpent of brass, resembling Christ in the
matter and the form.

1. The matter was of brass, A brazen serpent, not golden: five reasons.
not gold, for five reasons. 1. God ties not himself to the excellency of
means, but by weak and unlikely means effects his great works: And therefore
that which had no power of cure in it self must cure and heal, that the work
may be known to be his and not the means. 2. The lower and baser the means
are, the better may the Israelites be led through them, and so beyond them. It
was not the will of God that they should rest in the brazen serpent, which had
no power of cure; but through it be led by faith unto the Messiah, who only
could cure them. 3. Though it was of brass, yet it was strong: and signified
Jesus Christ, how weak soever in men's eyes; yet was he, first the mighty and
strong God, secondly powerful and able to deliver his people, thirdly most
invincible and potent also against all his enemies, he is a wall of brass, and
his strength is as the strength of brass, Revel. 1. 15. 4. Being of brass as
it was strong so was it shining and bright: signifying Christ in respect of his
divine and eternal generation, truly shining and glorious. Ipsum (...)
gloriae Dei.
He was the brightness of his Father, Heb. 1. 3. the very brightness of the
glory of God; excelling all the Angels in heaven, in their clearest glory and
brightness, Revel. 1. 16. 5. As that serpent so shined that the Israelites
might look upon it, and their eyes not dazzled: so this great glory was so
veiled by his flesh and humility as we the Israel of God might behold it, yea
approach it, and fetch our salvation and happiness from it.

2. It resembled Christ in the form; Serpents form notes Christ: how.
for the form was of a serpent. First a serpent is of an hateful and
contemptible shape and appearance: so was Christ in his own habit, Isai. 53.
a despised man, a worm rather then a man; men saw no beauty in him, but hid
their eyes. Secondly, the serpent was accursed of God: So Christ lay under the
curse of sin for us, Gal. 3. 13. Thirdly, that was but like a serpent; in the
form of a serpent, not a serpent; it had only the shape not the life, sting,
nor poison of a serpent: So Jesus Christ was the similitude of sinful flesh,
but no sinner. No venim or poison of sin was found in him, neither in his
nature nor actions. Romans 8. 3. he was in the similitude of sinful flesh, (...)
as that of a serpent, but without all sting or spot of sin.

The third thing in the appointment is the end or use of the serpent. End and
use of it: what to us.
It must be lift up upon a perch that all Israel might see it. Which plainly
notes both the kind of death which Christ must suffer, as also the proper end
and virtue of it: as in these particulars. 1. Both must be lifted up: So
Christ's crucifying is called an exaltation from the earth, Ioh. 12. 32. 2. Both
must be exalted upon wood; the Pole a type of the Cross of Christ. 3. Both
among the Jews; out of the Church is no salvation. 4. Both to be looked upon;
one with the eye of the body, the other with the eye of faith. 5. Both to
recover health and life; one of body, the other of soul; one frees from
corporal death, the other from spiritual and eternal.

II. The applying of this remedy was nothing but Application of the remedy.
The means of application of the remedy was the eye of the Israelite: So the
instrument of applying the remedy by Jesus Christ, is the eye of faith, which
is the eye of the soul. So our Savior Christ himself expounds it (Ioh. 3.)
As the brazen Serpent was lift up; so shall the son of man, that whosoever
believes in him etc. That which Moses calls looking on the type, Christ calls
believing in himself the truth. Which if the Lord had not purposed to
express, he could as easily have remooved the Serpents, as appointed the
making of another; and as easily have healed them by his word, as by this
sign: but hereby affords them a double mercy and cure, one of the body by the
sign, another of their souls by the thing and truth thereby signified.

The saving effect.
and received present ease, with freedom from pain and poison: So the
believer looking on Christ by the eye of faith, has an heavenly life restored;
present ease from the pain of a guilty and accusing conscience; freedom from
the poison of sin both the guilt and stain of it.

But herein the truth is advanced above the type. By Christ far more
excellent.
1. That brazen Serpent had not power in it self to cure; this has power in
it self. 2. Whereas they were cured to dye again; believers attain a sound
cure, never to dye more, Ioh. 11. 26. 3. Whereas that did not always reta^^e
the virtue of curing, our brazen Serpent does ever retai^e power and virtue for
the salvation of believers, looking toward him, to the end of the world. 4.
Whereas this brazen Serpent, now a remedy against poison, was after turned to
poison the Israelites in Hezekiahs time; which made him stamp it to powder:
our brazen Serpent ever remains the sovereign and healing God; as
unchangeable in his goodness, as he is in his most holy and divine nature. 5.
That remained a great while, about seven hundred and threescore years, but
after was defaced and destroyed: Our brazen Serpent can never be defaced or
destroyed, but abides the Savior of sinners to all eternity.

Oh now what a sweet Sermon does this one type contain of the whole sum and
marrow of the Gospel? what a pregnant testimony and vaticinie is it alone of
the death and passion of Jesus Christ, as also of the virtue and merit of the
same? and consequently what a prop and stay of our faith? what a goade and
spur to drive us to Jesus Christ, in whose name alone we can be saved?

Sect. 3.
I. Note What weak, Observation 1. God helps his people by weak, unlikely, and
contrary means.
and contrary means the Lord uses, to effect great things for his Church, and
in his Church. Was there any sense or reason to be conceived in all this
counsel and ordinance of God in healing thus his people? 1. Could a Serpent of
brass, a shape only more heal then hurt them? 2. Could a dead Serpent
prevail against so many living and fiery Serpents? 3. Shall not this shape and
image of a Serpent be so much as touched or applied to the wound; but the sight
of it only a far off cure a mortal wound really inflicted? How
inconceivable is this to humane reason which perhaps would count it foolish and
ridiculous? But the Lord (though he might by many other more mighty and likely
means) will by no other means effect their deliverance. He that brought in
the Serpents could as easily have remooved them; if not that, yet he might have
hindered them from biting them; or he might powerfully of the same poison have
made a remedy: but he chooses most unlikely means.

Qu. Why does the Lord thus? And why he does so.


Answ. For three reasons. 1. He will have his people look for help at no
hand but his own, who uses in such means to help as whence no help can be
expected but only divine. Israel now sees that all the world cannot make a
dead serpent prevail against living serpents, but that God of all the world to
whom all creatures obey. 2. He will have his people hereby know and
acknowledge the power of his word. For it was not the Serpent as it was brass,
nor as it was lifted up, nor as it was beheld, that could heal them, but as
unto this sign was added, 1.Verbu^ Iussionis. 2.Verbu^ Promissionis.

the word, first of commandment, secondly of promise. By virtue of which word
the infected persons were cured. Psalm. 107. 20, he sent out his word and healed
them. Gods word alone can make a Serpent heal, and a dead serpent restore to
life. 3. He will show the mighty power of his arm, which has ever by weak
things confounded the mighty. See this in examples.

Noah from the deluge, one would have thought it fit to have reared him up a
mighty turret of iron or Adamant, Examples.
or founded him some invincible building upon some mighty rock to have
resisted the waters: But Noah must build himself a weak Arc of boords and a
little pitch, and that must floatal the time, and sustane all the waves and
billows without mast, stern, or Pilot, or any the like means to preserve it.

When God was by Joshua to demolish the mighty walls of Jericho, he bids him
not set against it huge engines or warlike Ramms and batteries to batter it
seven days together, but he must cast down the walls with looking on them,
and win the City by walking about it seven days; and only blow upon it with
Rams horns, but not lift an hand or Weapon against it. Josh. 6.

When God sends Gideon against an huge army of Midianites to overcome them, a
man would have thought he would have furnished them with armor of proof and
munition fit for the war, but he puts into their hands trumpets and pitchers
and lamps within the pitchers, and bids them not fight but only make a noise,
and so they conquer, Judge. 7. 17.

When God is to foil that mighty Giant Goliath, a warrior from his youth, who
alone (at the sight of him) made all Israel run away, 1 Samuel 17. 24; he
chooses not a man of war and prowess, but a poor shepherd, David, a boy as
Saul calls him, ver. 33. and he not armed with sword and spear as Goliath was,
but with a sling and a scrip and five stones; with which when he had
overthrown him, he borrowed his own sword to cut off his head.

These instances in stead of many may serve to show Gods ordinary custom and
delight to effect the greatest matters by weakest means, and to advance his
own power in weakness.

This doctrine may be fruitfully applied to our present times, Useful to us in
these times.
in which we see such tumults raised against the Church; such insolences of
the enemy, such hopes, yea and triumphs before victory. If God give his Church
a check, and his people receive a foil; oh how the enemy laughs, and boasts,
and blasphemes as if all were theirs! But let us raise our faith and confidence
in considering these grounds.

1. God can and does often work by unlikely and contrary means. Grounds for
faith in these troubles of the Churches.
When he was to multiply Abraham's seed as the stars of heaven, he begins his
promise with that precept; Abraham take thy son, thy only son, and slay
him in sacrifice. What seemed more diametrally or directly contrary to this
promise, yet hindered not but furthered it?

2. Gods word and promise for the present causes of the Church shall be
accomplished either with means or without them, yea against them. God has
determined, and in his word foretold the fall of Antichrist, and destruction of
Babylon: Isa. 60. 12, the kingdom that will not serve the Lord, shall be
destroyed, much more that Kingdom which is most opposite to the Lord, as this
is. More specially 2 These. 2. 8, whom the Lord shall consume and abolish: 1.
(...).
There is, both a consumption, and an extinction: 2. (...).
The former we have seen, the second as certainly remains in short time to
be done, Rev. 19. 20, 21, The beast and the false Prophet shall be taken, and
their flesh made meat for the fowls of the air. There is more strength in
this word of God, then in all Antichristian limbs and captains. All Babylons
Physicians shall not heal her, for great is the Lord who will destroy her. If
this be the time it shall forward apace; if deferred, not forgotten.

Kingdom of Antichrist, how fit for destruction.
1. contrary to Christ's whole Kingdom; 2. a Kingdom destinated to destruction
by God; 3. a Kingdom against which Christian Princes are called to sanctify
their swords, and to fire her, and to return double according to the whores
works; 4. a Kingdom in which every member is an high blasphemer, and ought to
dye, no eye pitying them; 5. a Kingdom, an infinite encroacher upon Christian
Kings and Kingdoms, and disturber of all their common and public peace, by
claims to all Crowns, scepters, laws, subjection: but God is with his cause,
and therefore it is strong enough.

4. The cause is not therefore at an end, because foiled; nor farther from
victory, because the party seems weaker, and the means incomparable, Judges
20, Israel had the better cause then Benjamin, and more number of soldiers,
and were prudent and expert in war as it appears by some stratagems set
against the enemy; yet was foiled and broken twice because although God had
been sought, yet not so seriously as was fit. If the Israel of God had sought
the Lord so seriously by fasting, prayer, and sound humiliation, the powers of
Antichrist could not prevail. But great are the sins of the Church, which
must be corrected; and God will be more earnestly sought to be found in so
great mercy. Again, Solomon observed that the race was not always to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor for their strength. Gedeons army
may be too many for God to give victory by: Means are to be used, not trusted
in; and whether they be likely or unlikely, God will save his Church, either
by them or without them. Therefore let the Church look back to that of Moses,
Exodus 14. 14, The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

Sect. IV.
II. Moses having a commandment shuts his own eye, Observation* 1. The eye of
faith must shut the eye of reason.
and makes a brazen Serpent; though he had no reason for it. And the people
having a word of commandment and promise; shut the eye of their reason, and
open the eyes of their faith, and by beholding this shape of a Serpent were
cured; and found life restored not by a thing having life, but by a dead thing.
Learn how the eye of faith must shut up the eye of our reason; and having a
word of God, look confidently upon it, be it never so unreasonable (...).
Without which 4. things cannot be obtained.
There be four things which a man sha^^ never attain, till the eye of his
faith close up the eye of his reason.

1. He shall never attain the true knowledge of divine things. Gods wisdom
has no greater enemy then humane wisdom not sanctified: 1. The true knowledge
of divine things.
No men hardlier nor seldomer converted then worldly wise men; as the
Scriptures, which say, not many wise, and experience shows daily. What wiser
men in the world then the Philosophers and Stoics of Athens? but when Paul
came to dispute among them of doctrine of religion, he was called ababler,
(...).
Act. 17. 18, what will this babbler say? and reasoning among them of the
resurrection, he was derided and mocked, ver. 32. Was not Festus a wise man,
and a prudent governor? and yet when Paul preached to him no other things then
Moses and the Prophets had foretold of these sufferings, death, and
resurrection, Festus tells him, too much learning had made him mad, Act. 26.
24. Ioh. 9. 6, Christ to cure a blind man tempered clay and spittle together,
and applied it to his eyes, and bids him go to Siloe: A remedy likelier to
put out a man's eyes then to recover sight. There was no reason in the earth of
the remedy, but only to try whether the blind man did constantly believe. Yet
if the blind man had not wholly resigned himself to Christ, and shut up his
own reason; had not he acknowledged Christ able to do what he would by what
he would; and to be the same God who at first put all senses into a piece of
clay, and now by a piece of clay would recover his sense, he had never seen,
but remained blind still.

So every natural man, borne as blind as he in spiritual things, till he
wholly submit himself, and subdue his reason to the means appointed, shall
never see any thing to salvation, but abide in natural blindness still. What
hope has he to be taught by the spirit, that must give laws to the Spirit of
God? or what a short metwand is natural reason to measure divine things by, 1
Cor. 1. 21, and 1 Cor. 2. 14? Why else did these Jews esteem the doctrine of
the Gospel scandal, but that, reason of flesh would not nor could behold life
and glory in such a base life and ignominious death as Christ's was: nor could
hold him the Messiah who was made a curse upon the Cross, as if he had been
crucified through infirmity? and this veil (as to them) remains at this day
unremooved. And why was Christ foolishness to the Grecian, but that reason
would not yield, that life should be fetched out of death, or salvation to be
sought in curse and malediction.

2. He that shuts not the eye of reason can never attain faith. 2. Faith: as
in six particulars.
There be six things which a man cannot believe, so long as he sticks to
natural reason.

First, he cannot believe the word of God, nor depend upon but scorn the
ordinances of God in the word preached, and Sacraments administered, which is
the visible word. Reason unrenewed cares not for this foolishness of
preaching, 1. Cor 1. 21. And to a carnal man the threatenings of God are like
Lots warning to his kinsmen; he was as one that mocked or jested. A promise to
a carnal heart, is as tastelesse as the white of an egg. The wiser men are,
the further off they are from believing in a crucified God, or conceiving that
by the foolishness of preaching God will save such as believe. Flesh and blood
reveileth nothing.

Secondly, he cannot believe the maine promises of God, which cannot be
comprehended but by the eye of faith, and not by that till the eye of reason
be shut up. God has promised his presence, favor and love with his children:
how can reason conceive the truth of this promise, seeing them in hunger,
thirst, wants; hearing them reviled, slandered, disgraced; observing them cast
out of companies, and societies as refuse and outsweeping; that were their
hopes here only, they were of all men most miserable? Reason will not be
persuaded that God can send us by hell to heaven, yet that is his promise.
Matt. 27. 46.
Humane reason will never pray, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? How
could Abraham have believed the promise of a son by Sarah, had he looked to
natural reason?

Thirdly, he cannot believe the maine Articles of faith, that has not resigned
up his reason. Example. Reason will not believe an happy resurrection, seeing
the body raked up in dust and corruption, but denies this Article. Reason
cannot conceive or believe an eternal life, because it sees it not given but
to dead men. It cannot apprehend how the Son of God should become the son of
man, or that this Son of man was borne of a virgin without man. And so of the
rest.

Fourthly, he cannot believe the miracles of Scripture for confirmation of Gods
truth and our faith. Natural reason cannot believe that the Sun ever stood
still, as in Gi^eah, much less went back ten degrees, as in Hezekiahs time, 2.
King. 20. 11. Or that fire should descend which naturally ascends, and feed
upon water contrary to nature, as at Elias prayer, 1. King. 18. 39. Or that
fire should rain down (as on Sodom) which is proper to water. Or that fire
should not burn the three children: Or that water should stand as a wall (as
in the Red sea, and in the river Jordan) whose property is to be fluid.

Fifthly, he cannot believe the work of creation, if he will believe reason;
the universal consent of which is, That of nothing, nothing can be made; and
not any thing (much less all things) out of nothing. To reason therefore it
will be incredible that there should be light before the Sun, or fruits
before any rain, as in the Creation. Heb. 11. 3. By faith we know (not by
reason) that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which
are seen were not made of things which do appear.

Sixthly, he cannot believe the great work of Redemption. For, natural reason
thinks it unreasonable, that the life of the Church can be fetched out of the
death of Christ. That a man can be justified by the imputed righteousness of
another, and yet there dwell so many sins in him. Reason will not believe
that one man can recover life by another death: no more then one man can live
by another soul, or be wise by another learning, or be cured and brought to
health by another disease.

3. So long as the eye of reason is open, a man shall never attain sound
obedience unto God. 3. Obedience which God will accept.
For much of that obedience required at our hands is clean against corrupt
nature: As the whole doctrine of repentance, of mortification, or watchful and
careful conversation, of restraining our selves in unlawful liberties, yea
and in lawful; all crosses reason. Had Abraham ever sacrificed his son, had
he consulted with reason? Had Paul ever joined to the disciples to preach that
doctrine which he had persecuted, had he consulted with flesh and blood, Gal.
1. 16? What other reason can be given that the word powerfully preached is so
generally fruitless, but that men think they have reason not to obey it, at
least not in all things? They see no reason to be so precise; nor is there any
wisdom to be so forward. Reason tells them they see few great men so strict,
and but a few despised men are so earnest.

4. He shall never attain heaven. 4. Heaven and the glory thereof.
1. Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; neither
does corruption inherit incorruption. By flesh and blood is meant the vitiate
and corrupt estate of man; or flesh and blood severed from the spirit and grace
of God; or the man unregenerate having only flesh and blood. So Matt. 16. 17.
Blessed art thou Simon Jonas, for flesh and blood has not reveiled it unto
thee, but my Father. So as here is not required an abolition of flesh and blood
in the being and substance of it, but an addition of new qualities. As in
Christ's transfiguration was not an extinction of his body, but an access of
incredible glory; without which change none can get to heaven. Ioh. 3. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. The Apostle
adds the reason, 1. Cor. 15. ^0. Gods kingdom is incorruptible; flesh and
blood in it self is corrupted, and so not capable of that kingdom. Therefore
to come to heaven thou must be changed in thy will, reason, wisdom and all.

Sect. V.
To apply this: Use. 1. Believe the word absolutely.


I. Labor to bring the eye of faith to the word: else shall we be ready to
reject holy doctrine (as absurd and impossible) as Nichodemus did the doctrine
of regeneration. Why else do most men live no other then a natural life, in
the midst of so many supernatural and divine means, but that their reason
resists the Spirits persuasions? Why are many wholesome doctrines daily
distasted and quarelled against by our witty men; but that they think they have
better reason to do as they do, then any that we can bring out of Gods book?
Why else do so many fall back to Popery and idolatry, but because they cast
off the teaching of the Spirit, and give themselves to another teacher agreeing
with natural corruption and reason? If a man were to be led only by reason,
and it were lawful to cast off religion, I would choose to be a Papist, by
which doctrine it is lawful to be every thing but a sound Christian. Therefore
though some Apostats are gone from us, we need not care how many such turn
Papists; for such were and are their graceless and lawless courses, that it
were pity they should be of any other religion then that which yields men so
much liberty.

II. Pray for that eyesalve wherewith to anoint our eyes that we may see, Use.
2. Pray for eyesalve: and what it is.
Revel. 3. 18. This eyesalve is nothing but the spirit of illumination, working
sound and saving knowledge in the mind, by which their natural darkness is
enlightened, as eyesalve sharpens and cleares the dim sight. This is proper to
the regenerate, that they have received the anointing, Use. 3. Captivate thy
own reason and wisdom.
which teaches them all things, that is, al needful things.

III. See what need we have to captivate our own wisdom and reason, being
one of the highest turrets and holds in us exalted against God, (...).
2. Cor. 10. 5. If this be not brought into subjection unto God, we can never
become his servants. The Apostle in the same verse shows what must be cast
down and captivated; his words are, Casting down reasonings, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. These reasonings and
cogitations (the froth of humane reason) must be resisted, yea removed. Thou
must become a fool, to be wise. As a full vessel cannot hold any more, and no
wise man will offer to power any thing into it, if he would not spill it: So
an heart filled with carnal wisdom, is an incapable vessel for the Lord to
power his wisdom into. He fills the empty vessel, and teaches the humble.

Obey without reasoning or disputing, though the commandment be never so
difficult, or seem unreasonable. Abraham left his own country, and went he
knew not whither at Gods commandment. One would have thought that this had been
folly in him, but that the Scripture acquits him, and says, he did it by
faith, Heb. 11. 8. And in a more difficult commandment he rose early to slay
his son, not reasoning the case with himself, nor with Sarah, nor his son,
nor his servants. The disciples when Christ bade them leave all and follow him,
did so presently.

Here let us consider: Motives.
1. How reasoning with flesh resists the commandment. 2. King. 5. 12. Naaman
being commanded to wash seven times in Jordan, grows angry, and falls into
comparison of the waters of Israel and Damascus; Are not Arbana and Pharphar,
better then all the waters in Israel, etc. But had not his servants been wiser
then he to persuade him to so small a thing, his reason had returned him
without his errand. The young man that came so hastily to Christ hearing a
commandment, go sell all, and give to the poor; went and consulted with
himself, but Christ hears no more of him. 2. To follow reason is to follow a
crooked rule. But admit it were straight, yet is it defective and too short for
mysteries above reason. And if it were straight, and large enough, yet it is a
party, and so unfit to be a Judge in cases between God and man. And therefore
there is no fit Judge in divine things but the word which stands equally
affected between God and man. Ridiculous instance of Popish obedience to
S^periou^s.
3. We read much of the blind obedience of Papists in their works to their
rules and Superiors, of things scarce credible, but that themselves have
published them in writing. One Masseus a Franciscan tumbled himself in the
dust and crawled like a child, because St. Francis said they could not be
converted unless they were as little children. Another of our Country called
Throkmorton, even in the Article of death, was so dutiful to his Superior, as
he would not die without his leave asked: as Everard a Papist writes in his
commendation. Another called Barcen (as Diego a great Jesuit relates) was so
humble and dutiful, that when the Devil appeared unto him; he ran to meet
him, and prayed him to sit down in his chair, because he was more worthy
then himself. The Jesuits are so formed to obedience by Ignatius his rules,
that whatsoever service they are set upon by their Superior (suppose it never
so mischievous) they must fly upon it without question asked. So as if one of
them were talking with an Angel, if his Superior call him, he must instantly
come away. Yea if the blessed Virgin vouchsafe her presence to one of the
brethren, if his Superior call him, he must presently break away from her and
obey him: as he writes to the brethren of Lusitania, and a thousand such. To
what end name I these follies, but by Popish and wicked superstition to
condemn our heaviness in Gods Commandments? They must shut their eyes of
reason and discretion to obey their Superiors: We must dispute all in our
obedience, which ought to be absolute. Their wicked commandments must not be
laid in any sca^es to be weighed: We will weigh all Gods Commandments in our
own false balances, and so they become too light, and unworthy of obedience.

4. There is not the most heretical doctrine or opinion that ever was, that
found not Patronage and protection in the corrupt reason of man. Man's reason,
the mother of he^esies.
Not to speak of damnable Arrians, or Nestorians, or mad Manichees; come to the
heresy that now reigns, and see the truth hereof in it.

Quest. Why has the leaven of Popery spread and sowred the whole lump of the
Christian world, Instance in the Papists.
and enlarged and fixed it self in all Countries for so many hundredth years;
that even in Countries above a hundredth years reformed it gets ground; and
neither severe Laws can master it, nor time cast it out?

Answ. Surely because it is a devise of humane reason, upholding humane reason,
and upheld by corrupt reason which first set it up. See it in parts, and in
whole.

First for the parts. Proved in parts
1. Seems it not good reason to choose, defend, and stick unto our forefathers
religion? for so the old Idolaters thought: Ier. 44. 17, they would still
sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, because their fathers did so. But Paul would
not consult with flesh and blood in matter of religion; nor Abraham with human
reason: This their reason also is as absurd in true reason, as if a son were
bound to put out his eyes because his father was blind; or never to enjoy
liberty, because his father was in prison or dyed in a dungeon. 2. The doctrine
of merit, and justification by works runs with nature, as (Luke 18. 18.) in
the young Pharisee, Master what good thing etc; for feign would it find some
goodness in it self to demerit God: Whereas the second Commandment says, God
shows mercy to thousands in them that love him, and keep his Commandments.
The Lords prayer also teaches us to pray for daily bread. A likely thing that
he can merit life eternal, that cannot merit a crumme of bread. 3. The
Intercession of Saints and worshipping Images stands only on the legs of
humane reason against divine wisdom. Carnal men would see their god, and
turn his glory into the similitude of a calfe, or other creature. And is it no
reason we should have Mediators? For why should every rude fellow thrust into
the Kings presence, and not first make way by some of his Court? But divine
wisdom says, there is but one Mediator, and that we must come to the King by
the Prince only; and it is high treason to come by any other. 4. Carnal
reason teaches that every man is full of doubting, and therefore no man can
certainly believe the remission of sins, or be assured of his own salvation.
But divine reason teaches us that this doubting destroys not faith, but
exercises it; and in our Creed we believe remission of sins, and eternal
life; which is more then to believe in general as devils do.

Secondly, And in the whole.
for the whole doctrine and religion of Popery how plausible is it to the
natural man? For, 1. What easier faith then to believe as the Church does, no
matter what; without any knowledge or faith of their own? How at one blow cut
they off all pains in getting assurance, holding or increasing of faith? 2.
What an easy principle is it, that to be ignorant is to be devout; and that it
is vain labor which is spent in the Scriptures; as Hosius says; and that
they are the books of Heretics, and they heretics that read them. What need
we be at any pains to read, study, and meditate in the book of God night and
day, as the Saints have done? How was the holy Ghost deceived, yea and holy men
who have studied in Gods Law night and day? 3. How pleasing is it to nature, to
deny it to be so corrupt as it is; to say, it is but half dead, and being a
little helped can keep the Law, and come out of Gods debt? whereas Ephesians. 2. 1.
and 5, what can a dead man do but rot? 4. How pleases it nature to offer
release from sin, from hell, from purgatory for money? Who would not whore,
swear, profane the Sabbath, resist Magistracy, riot etc. if for a little
money he may have license? What hypocrite would not give thousands of rams,
yea the first borne of his body for the sin of his soul, Mic. 6. 7? 5.
Whereas the word lays a continual care of keeping the heart and thoughts, how
does that doctrine please nature, that unlooseth it from this care, that
requires no pain to keep the heart, or to keep out the first motions of
sin: which, they say, is no sin? Which makes many sins venial in their
nature, put away with a light sigh, a knock on the breast, or an Ave Mary: that
a man may lie in sport, or officiously by equivocation, that to steal a small
thing is but a venial sin? Solomon says, a fool makes a mock of sin. To
conclude, that must be a natural and sensual religion, which any thing but
Gods word sets up, and holds up, but this is neither set up, nor held up by it,
for where Gods word comes, down goes Popery. It could never abide the breath
of Gods mouth which blasts and destroys it.

5. Where doctrine is truly taught and believed, Natural reason an enemy to
the power of godliness.
For else why do many Protestants walk after the lusts of their hearts, as
the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 3, but because they captivate the Commandment to their
own reason, and limit and confine the wisdom of God within the bounds of
their own carnal wisdom? 1. Our Gentry have reason to say, Instances. 1.
that the word in general is the rule of good life, but bring this rule close
home unto them to reform their fashions, to leave their strange apparel and
painting; their vain discourses, their idle complements, their gaming, their
service of pleasure, and unfruitful spending of their time: Oh now they have
reason to scorn and chafe against the rule and him that holds it before them.
What reason he should be so strict, less reason they should be as strict as
he? They know how to put on their clothes, how to behave themselves every
where; and are wiser then to follow such rules as would make them as despised
as himself is. Alas that the wisdom of God shall be a rule only for our
judgments; but reason must guide our practice! 2. Ordinary hearers think they
have reason to profess religion so far as they may thrive by it, and prosper
in the world; whose godliness is gain: To trust God so far as they see him
in some sort, else not: To favor religion and religious persons when times do;
else not. To avoid pernicious and dangerous sins which law revengeth, as
murder, adultery, theft; but not covetousness, not usury, not swearing, not
unclean lusts. Herod will not part with his Herodias. Ahab has no reason to
respect Micah when he prophecies evil to him. 3. Trades men, oppress, cosen,
lie, deceive, etc, because they have reason to make the best of their own.
What reason but they may serve a Customer upon the Sabbath, so they come to
Church? They have reason to slip all opportunities of grace all the week,
because they must walk diligently in their callings the six days. Thus
reason steps in, and thrusts aside the practice of that which men in judgment
hold not for good and necessary; and like Evah still longing after forbidden
fruit.

Thus of the second observation.

Sect. VI.
III. Seeing all of us in this wilderness are stung with the old Serpent,
Observation. 3. What is to be done, to be cured spiritually.
what are we to do to be cured? Answ. we are to do five things.

We must see our selves stung and wounded.
for so must the Israelite before he could be cured. We must feel the poison
and pain of sin; and First, that this poison has not seated it self in one
place, As with deadly poison: in 4. things.
but has crept and diffused it self through all our parts. For therefore it
is called venenum, quod per venas eat. And as the veins and blood run
through every part of the body, so sin through every part of the man.
Secondly, as poison never rests till it come to the heart, and there strikes
and corrupts the fountain of life: So our sin has mortally wounded our very
hearts, and strikes at the life of grace in the soul. Thirdly, as poison
inflames the party with an incredible thirst, having overcome natural
moisture, and eaten up the spirits: so sin in the soul works an utter
defect, and dryes up all waters of grace, and makes the sinner insatiable in
drinking up iniquity like water. Fourthly, as poison not prevented brings
speedy and certain death, but not without extreme pain and intolerable
torture: so the poison of sin unconquered brings certain and eternal death,
attended with horror of conscience, desperate fears, and torments most
exquisite. Thus must we labor to feel the sting of our sin in all parts far
more mortal then the most venomous stings of most direful Serpents.

2. When this people felt themselves stung so deadly, Moses for counsel: Come
for counsel, to spiritual physicians.
so must thou depend upon the Minister for direction as they upon Moses. Never
was man sensible of this sting, but he would run to the Ministers. Act. 2.
37, when they were pricked in their hearts, they said to Peter and the rest,
Men and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 16. 30, the poor Jailer being stung
and sensible of his pain came trembling and humbling himself to Paul and
Silas prisoners, saying, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? A conscience
truly wounded will seek to God, to his word and Ministers; for it knows that
God wounds and heals. The feet of him that brings good tidings are
beautiful to an humbled heart, even as an experienced Physician to a sick
party, who else were sure to be lost, for want of means. What marveile if a
soul truly sensible of his sting and pain can run to Gods Ministers; when
a counterfeit humiliation can make as hard hearted a King as Pharaoh run to
Moses and Aaron, and beg prayers of them?

A marveilous thing then that of so many thousands stung so deadly, so few are
sensible; that so few trouble Moses or the Ministers with questions concerning
their estates. Some stung and guilty consciences not supported by faith, in
touch of sin and sense of pain (like a Do shot with an arrow) run every
way but the right for ease. Some with Asa send to the Physician to purge away
melancholy. Some with Saul send for music, esteeming souls sickness but a
sottish lumpishnesse. Some run into the house of laughter and wicked
playhouses to see and hear the Lords Sampsons and worthies derided, not
without heinous blasphemy. Others fall a building with Cain, or set upon other
employments, perhaps it is but an idle fancy. Some run perhaps to the Witch
of Endor, in the mean time send away Paul, as Felix, or run against Moses
and his Ministers. But comfort can they have none but from God and his word:
had not thy word (says David) been my comfort, I had perished in my trouble.
All the Physicians in the world, all the Musicians and Magicians, put together,
nor any other means could help a stunge Israelite; he must come to Moses when
he had done all he could. All other bycomforts are worm eaten, and as cold
water to cure a dropsy, or as a cold draught to cure a poison. Some few there
are that come unto us, who, we are sure, had never sought to us more then
others, had they had so little sense of their sting as other have: as the
Israelites had never come at Moses, had they not been slung. Let them be
comforted in that they have gone the right way to fetch their comforts, which
is from God and his word, and not from carnal men or councels. The Lord in
mercy has brought them light out of darkness: for pity had it been they
had wanted the sting of affliction, that has driven them to God, and to his
word, and servants.

3. Coming to Moses, wherein do they employ Confess special sins.
what questions move they to him? Numb. 21. 7. Oh their sin troubles them,
which they confess in general, we have sinned; and in particular, we have
spoken against the Lord and against thee; and then pray him to help them in
removing the Serpents: So thou being stung, when thou come to Gods Ministers
wilt be conversant in fruitful and edifiable questions; thou must be free in
confession of such sins as are the likely cause of thy trouble; and intent
and busy how to be rid of the Serpents, and the sting and poison of thy
sins. Thou will be careful to know how to get ease of heart, and quietness
of conscience from the pain and sting of sin. So the converts Act. 2: and so
the Jailer, What shall I do to be saved?

The fault of many is when they have means of counsel and comfort present
with them, to waste their time in trifling and curious questions, and
impertinent to the cure of the sting of the Serpent. Questions which are like
Crafishes in which is more picking then meat. Questions merely idle, the
resolution of which helps them no whit to ease, or to heaven. An humbled heart
will not so lose his time, nor dwell in toys and unnecessaries to thrust out
things more profitable. A wise heart will not for a shadow forgo the
substance; but will be much in that question of the young man, Mr. what may I
do to inherit eternal life? what may I do to be saved? what may I do to be
rid of this Serpent, and of that; of this sin and of that? How may I do to
get mastery of my corruptions? In going to Gods Ministers let thy errand be
the same with the Israelites in their going to Moses; how to be rid of the
Serpents.

4. Moses directs them to the brazen Serpent erected Moses himself cannot
help them. Go wholly out of thy self, and all creatures.
Moses law cannot cure them; that rather sharpens the sting, and thrusts it
deeper into the flesh and spirit. He directs them to no merits or works of
their own to cure them; for their merits brought in those poisoned stings
among them; but he sends them quite out of themselves to Gods ordinance, which
was the brazen Serpent. Thou art never in the way of cure, till thou art sent
out of thy self; out of the Law and works of it, which now cannot justify;
till thou come to the Evangelicall brazen Serpent, there is no hope of cure.
As the Israelite could never be cured till he acknowledged the brazen Serpent
the only means: so no more can thou till thou acknowledge JESUS CHRIST the
only healing God; and that there is no other name in heaven or earth to be
saved by, but the name JESUS. Only Christ, I. Lambert.
only Christ, said that Martyr: for he only can give a perfect
righteousness: he only can cover our imperfection: he only being no sinner,
could conquer sin: he only by dying could conquer death: he only by entering
into the grave could sweeten it: he only by sustaining the sorrows of hell
could shut hell for all believers. Had Moses sent the Israelites any whither
but to the brazen Serpent, he had deluded them, and they had lost all their
labor.

Who now is so void of judgment that cannot discern whether our religion or
the Roman be the ancient and true religion of Moses and the people of God: If a
man stung with the serpent come to us for counsel and cure as they to Moses;
we send him (as Moses) out of himself to Christ only, the true brazen
Serpent. Our doctrine leads him out of himself, out of his own merits, out of
external works and ceremonies unto Christ who is our peace, and left his peace
unto believers; and by this means through Gods blessing the patient attaines
true tranquillity of mind, and inward peace of conscience: and rejoices with
an unspeakable and glorious joy for his recovery, as the Israelites did in
theirs. But let a man stung in conscience go to a Roman teacher, he leads him
any way but the right, any whither so not to Christ. In stead of Gods certain
direction in the words of the Prophets and Apostles, which testify of Christ
the only brazen serpent; they send him to unsound and uncertain speculations,
fables, traditions, equal (say they) to Scripture; and some of them say, far
better. In stead of Christ's satisfaction and merit, they send him home to his
own merits and satisfactions; by which (say they) he may apply the
satisfaction and merit of Christ. But in case he be so bad as he have no merits
of his own, the Church has a Treasury of other men's merits to dispense by
tail, so he will come to the price. So he may buy oil enough to fill his
lamp out of the Popes Exchequer or Burse, filled to the top with works of
supererogation. But if he make some scruple of this; least the wise virgins
have not enough for themselves and others; then they may have the sacrifice of
the Mass not to fail, but never apply that one and only sacrifice upon the
Cross it self. Now whether of us agree with Moses?

5. As the Israelite must look up to the Serpent lifted Look only unto
Christ. Two ways. 1. Ratione Ligni. 2. Ratione Regm gratiae gloriae.


This must thou do two ways. First on the wood of the Cross; secondly on the
throne of the Kingdom both of grace and glory. Behold Christ lifted up not in
his abasement only, but in his advancement. First, in the Kingdom of grace,
as he is lifted up in the word and Sacraments. In which Christ is mightily
declared the Son of God, and preached the Savior of the world: Gal. 3. 1,
among whom Christ was crucified. Secondly in his kingdom of glory raised from
the dead, ascended into heaven, and exalted at the right hand of God above all
principalities and powers; Phil. 2. 9, God has given him a name which is above
every name. Now the looking on Christ thus lifted up, is the act of faith, not
a bare intuition, sight, or vision, as to believe that Christ was thus exalted
on the Cross, and in his Kingdom; but it is apprehensive and applicatory, and
to believe in CHRIST crucified and glorified. This looking has three things in
it. 1. To believe that he was the Son of God and son of man; our Immanuel.
2. That he being so, was lift up for the salvation of believers. 3. That my
self assuredly trust and depend on him alone, as the only author, meritour,
and bestower of salvation. This is Evangelicall looking on the Serpent.

Now because this looking is the principal thing in the cure, we will
consider, 1. How this looking cures us. 2. How we know we are cured by our
looking. 3. Motives to stir us up still to look on our Serpent.

Sect: VII.
I. When the Israelite comes to Moses and asks, How this looking cures us.
Oh what shall I do to be saved from death, being so deadly stung? A full
answer to this question was, go look upon the brazen Serpent, thou shall be
whole. So if an humble soul (suppose the Jailer) shall come to the Minister as
Paul or Silas; By faith.
Sirs what may I do to be saved? the direct answer to this question is,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 16. 31.
and thou shall be saved: and, ye are saved by faith: and, Thy faith has made
thee whole.

Quest. But how does faith save us? And how by faith.


Answ. Not as it is an excellent grace, nor as any work of ours. We are not
saved and cured for believing, but by believing. 1. Because faith is the
condition of the Covenant, and of our cure; as looking was the condition of the
cure of the Israelite. For it was not the having of a Brazen Serpent, nor the
lifting it up could cure; but the Israelites looking upon it: so it is not the
hearing of Christ, nor the lifting of him up in the Ministry, nor knowledge of
his merits can save, unless they be received by faith. A potion never so
virtuous, is fruitless if not taken. As meat uneaten; so is Christ not
digested and applied by faith.

2. Faith cannot cure, considered simply in it self as a quality, or virtue,
or gift, or habit; but considered relatively with his object, which is Jesus
Christ, the Lord our righteousness; for faith is the eye of the soul. But as
it was not the eye of the Israelite, but the eye set upon the brazen serpent
that cured him: so here, faith upon his object cures, because only faith
draws virtue from Christ, as in the Syrophoenician who touched Christ and was
cured; but not by touching, but by believing. More plainly in this comparison.
As a jewel included in a ring enricheth a man or heals him; it is not the
ring does it but the jewel, and yet none have the jewel without the ring: So
Jesus Christ is the only jewel and antidote aginst the deadly poison of
sin. This jewel is included in the ring of faith. Now it is apparently
Christ the jewel that justifies, enricheth, cures; but we cannot have him
without the ring of faith which includes him. So as faith saves and
justifies us only as a means, suppose the hand of the soul to convey Christ
to us for justification, which no other grace can do. So not faith, but Christ
applied by faith, that saves and cures us.

3. As no Israelite could be cured but by his own sight of the Serpent; and
no man could be cured by another man's looking or seeing it: So must every just
man live by his own faith, Hab. 2. 4. No man can be saved by another faith,
or the faith of the Church, but by his own special faith, believing in
particular upon assured grounds the remission of his own sins.

II. By what marks may I know that I have looked

Answ. By four marks. Marks of one cured by looking to Christ.


1. If thine eye have been rightly affected; which will appear in four
particulars. Four qualities of the eye that looks to him.
First, if it be a discerning eye cleared to see in Jesus Christ two things;
the first his power, the second his will to cure. That he is able to help,
being the mighty God; and that he is willing to cure, being a compassionate
Savior, who himself was stung to death that he might have compassion on them
that are stung, Heb. 2. 18. Secondly, if it be a mournful eye. He that had
seen the Israelites running about the brazen serpent, should have seen many a
tear falling, and heard many a deep groan, and pitiful complaints of their
deadly pain and poison. Have thou come to Jesus Christ with sorrow in thy
heart, with tears in thy eyes, with lamentable groans and complaints of thy
misery by sin? this is to look upon him for cure. Zach. 12. 10. the members
of the Church shall behold him and mourn, as a man for his only son. Such
lookers on him, he looks upon and eases, Matt. 11. 28. Come unto me all
that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Thirdly, if it be a
wishing and craving eye; for there is affection as well as vision in the eye.
As the lame man that lay in Solomon's porch (Act. 3. 5.) wistly looked on Peter
and John, expecting to receive something from them: so no doubt did the
Israelites on the Serpent. And so must thou hold on waiting and expecting sound
cure from Christ, and take no denial till thou be fully cured; for so did the
Canaanitish woman prevail. Fourthly, if it be a faithful steadfast eye; a
believing eye carries cure from Christ. Christ was wont to ask some of his
patients that came for cure, if they did believe he could help: and in the
cure, According to thy faith be it unto thee: and after the cure; go thy way,
thy faith has made thee whole: and much more works he the cure of souls by
means of the parties faith, and not without it.

2. If the sting were gone, and the poison of the serpent abated, this was an
infallible sign that the Israelite was cured. Consider if the power and rage
of sin be removed, the guilt of it gone by justification; if the poison and
stain of it be abated and daily abolished, now art thou in the way of cure.
But if the poison remain, that sin lives in thee, prevails and reigns in
thee, and commands thee as formerly; thou have not yet looked on the serpent
for cure. Justification and sanctification are inseparable.

3. A ceasing of pain, and ease and comfort restored; which when the Israelite
felt, it was a sign he was cured: So if after sense of pain and grief of
spirit, thou have received sound peace of conscience, joy of the holy Ghost,
and comfort of a good estate in Christ, that thou art able upon good grounds to
challenge thy righteousness in Christ, and maintain thy self steadfastly
assured and cheared in Gods mercy, and the goodness of an excusing
conscience; thou have now looked upon Christ and Christ upon thee for perfect
cure.

4. When the sting with the pain was gone, the Israelite could go as strongly
and chearefully about his business as ever before; he had new life, new
strength, new motions, by which he might be sure he had looked upon the
serpent: So if thou can find so happy a change in thy soul, as new life, new
motions, new actions, new affections, and in a word, the whole renewed nature;
all these are the fruits and effects of thy faith, and faithful beholding of
Christ, and of his looking upon thee. Of this new obedience and renewed
strength of a Christian having lately spoken, I pass it over more briefly.

III. Motives to stir us up to this looking upon our Serpent, Motives to look
up to our Serpent.
are:

1. Nothing else can cure us but Christ. The Israelits had gold, silver, Manna
from heaven, water out of the Rock, yea the Arc, the Oracle; but none of all
these can help them, only the Serpent must cure them; no sight else can cure.
Thou may see gold, silver, lands, friends, plays, pleasures, nay could
thou see heaven it self without Christ, there were no help or cure in it. In
respect of this sight the Apostle counted all things loss and dung; and
desired to see and know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, and lifted
on the wood.

2. No not Christ himself can cure without this looking and faithful
beholding him: as the brazen serpent not looked on, healed not. The want of the
eye or sight disabled the Israelites from cure though the serpent were by them:
so the want of faith disableth God after a sort, and Christ himself from doing
a man any good. Mark. 6. Christ could do no great cure in Capernaum because of
their unbelief. Neither can any ordinance of God do him good that wants
faith: no more then this serpent ordained by God, could do a blind Israelite
good. If we should send a man to the word, it must be a word of faith must do
him good; that is, not only because it is a begetter of faith; but because it
must be mingled with faith, else it proves unprofitable, Heb. 4. 2. If to the
Sacraments; Romans 4. 11.
if he bring not faith, they are not to him the seals of faith, but as seals
set to blanks. If to prayer; it must be a prayer of faith that, is availeable,
Iam. 5, 15. If to good works, and good life; it must be a life of faith, led by
faith; for the just must live by his faith. If to the Church of God; he must
be of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.
else he shall be but as Judas among the Disciples. Faith must be every where
diffused, to walk by faith, live by faith, and die in faith, as the Saints in
former ages have done for our imitation.

3. We must hold on this expectation on our Serpent, as the Israelites did till
they were perfectly cured. And because we can never be perfectly cured in this
life, but only in part; we must still look up to Jesus the Author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2.
till we be fully and perfectly healed. Hence it is, that the Lord will never
have this Brazen Serpent taken down as the other was after a short time, but
has appointed the Ministry to lift him up, and hold him perpetually before
our eyes so long as we are here below, and enjoined us the constant use of it
all the while we are in this wilderness, which were needless if we had once
attained our perfect cure. This is a strong motive to hold our eyes fast fixed
upon Jesus Christ, till we come to enjoy him as he is; when all Ministry shall
cease, and the Lamb shall be all in all.

Sect. VIII.
From this so excellent a figure arises a bright Sun of light and comfort
for all the faithful. Use of comfort, in 5. particulars.


1. The Israelite that could look to the serpent, if his eye were never so
tender, weak, or dim, yet was cured. Thou that art the weakest believer, be
comforted, thy weak faith shall save thee, thy smoking flax shall not be
quenched, but cleared to farther brightness. Thy weak hand shall be able to
receive and hold the gift of righteousness and eternal life. It is not the
greatness of thy faith that saves thee, but the truth of it. Yet with this
caution. If it be true it will strive to increase. And, if there be so much
comfort in weak faith, how much is there in strong?

2. The Israelite stung never so often; if so often he did look on the
serpent, so often he was cured. Oh singular comfort! Thou that renewest thy
sins every day, and every day go over the same frailties, renew also thy
faith daily, and thy repentance, and thou art safe. That brazen serpent lost
his virtue of healing, but our Brazen Serpent never loses his. If thou sinnest
seventy times seven times, and so many times returnest by faith in Christ, and
say, It repents me: by this looking upon the brazen serpent all those wounds
shall be cured. Yet with this caution. That as he had been a madd Israelite,
who, because there was a serpent set up to cure him, would therefore run of
purpose among serpents to be stung by them: So is he no less wit^esse a
Christian, who therefore willingly makes his sin abound, because grace has
abounded. A madd man he is that will therefore break his head, or wound his
members, because he has a sovereign plaster by him.

3. The Israelites stung never so deadly, never so desperately, never so long
wounded, yet looking on the serpent were cured. If thy sins be as redd as
scarlet, and never so great: if in thy sense some one of them deserve a
thousand hells, and the guilt of it or them rings continually in the ears of
thy conscience, frighted with fears of hell and death; if thy sins be
festered and of long continuance: Now come to the Brazen Serpent. Never was any
Israelite that could look on the serpent, sent away uncured: But there is ten
thousand times more virtue in Jesus Christ, then in ten millions of brazen
serpents; only look on this Serpent by the eye of faith, turn from all thy
sins, and be saved.

4. The Israelites looking on the serpent brought present cure and ease, and
they went away rejoicing. If thou beleevest in Jesus Christ, thou art perfectly
cured. As Christ was wont to say to his patients, so I say to thee, Go in
peace, Thy faith has made thee whole. Only this grace can quiet the heart
distressed, and can keep it from sinking as once it did Peter, Mat. 14. 29. In
this is the beginning and accomplishment of thy happiness. The converted
Jailer went away rejoicing that he and his house believed, Act. 16. 34. Now if
one sight of faith in this our absence from Christ be so joyful a thing: what
shall the ^ight of fruition do in his presence?

5. The Israelites having once the brazen serpent, cared not for the fiery
serpents. They might sting them now, but not much hurt them; they might now
poison them, but not kill them: So the believer looking to the true Brazen
Serpent, may triumph over the old Serpent, and all the serpentine seed: and say
as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 15. 55. Oh sin where is thy sting? oh hell
where is thy victory? Nay, Thanks be to God, who has given us victory by our
Lord Jesus Christ. Great was the power of the Israelites looking upon that
serpent; for when the fiery serpents were present, it made them powerless, and
not hurtful. Greater is the power of faith in the Lord Jesus; which though our
sins in themselves are most venomous and poisonfull stings, and such as we
cannot be rid of them; yet it so blunts them, and makes them so powerless,
that they kill us not: Nay that they hurt us not: nay more, that they help us,
and make us better; more humble, more wise, more watchful. Thus our good God
(who out of the most infinite curse of Christ his Son on the Cross brought
forth to us the most infinite blessing which fills heaven and earth) does out
of our cursed sins bring forth his own glory, joined with our greatest good.
For which, as for all other his unspeakable mercies unto us, be praise given in
all Churches, and from henceforth to all eternities. Amen.

FINIS.

