GOOD HUSBAND AND A Good Wife: Laid open in a Sermon, Preached by Mr. THOMAS
TAILOR, Preacher of Gods Word in Aldermanbury LONDON: And published by JOHN
SEDGVVICKE.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM SHIFFARD and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, 1625.

(...) and board here. The best advise in this cause we have in the sacred
word of God; next unto that, in the pains of holy and godly men, who have both
gone before us, and are now, through Gods mercy, continued to us. In the number
of which, let me commend unto thee, the labors of this judicious and learned
Divine, the Author of this ensuing Sermon. God, by him, has given unto his
Church, many helps in points of Divinity; and especially, in regard of this
subject: his directions already, this now, and others shortly to be printed,
may serve for a Christian rule this way. I must confess, that it had been ere
this time printed, had not the humility and modesty of the Author hindered it:
Willing he is, and has been to do good by preaching, but I am sure, he
glories not with many, in voluntary printing of those things that are very
useful for the Church of God. Secondly, the expectation of an other Sermon,
which by importunity I obtained; the Copy whereof (as soon as it is corrected
by the Author himself, and returned to me, according to promise) you shall
have for your further direction, in the holy choice and godly usage of your
selves in this so honorable estate. The God of Grace guide your hearts that
read this, to the conscionable practice of it, that you may all bless God for
such worthy help, and help them with your prayers, who desire to further you
in the way to salvation.

Yours in the service of Christ, JOHN SEDGVVICKE.

A WEDDING SERMON.
LVKE 1. 6. And they were both just, and walked in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord without reproof.
AS JOHN himself was a forerunner of Christ in his person and office, so the
Evangelist S. Luke beginning his holy story, makes the conception of John,
forerun the story of the conception of Christ: between which two was not an
obscure correspondence. For first, both of them were predicted and promised by
an Angel, who described both their persons, both their offices, and gave them
both their names. Secondly, both their conceptions were miraculous by the
mighty power of God, transcending all the strength of nature. Thirdly, both of
them borne of unlikely persons, the one of a Virgin against nature, the other
of an old barren woman beyond nature. Fourthly, both of them were to be borne
after a new and unusual nativity: first that the strange conception of the
one, might be somewhat more credible by the other: and secondly, that both of
them might by all men be conceived to become most eminent persons, of
extraordinary spirit and service in the world, who after so extraordinary
manner came into the world. For so when John was borne, the neighbors asked.
What manner of child shall this be? verse 66.

Now our Evangelist stays a great while in the confirmation of John's
extraordinary conception and honorable birth for these reasons.

First, because his calling was to be extraordinary, he was to be a man sent
from God. Ioh. 1. 6. not called by man, but by God immediately.

Secondly, his office was to be a witness of the truth, and that all men
through him might believe. v. 7. And because the truth of a testimony
depends upon the worth of the witness: to add more authority to John's
testimony, he shows the person to be an extraordinary man, in holiness and
honor, and therefore most faithful, and worthy of all credit and highest
respect.

Thirdly, John was to be the first witness and public Preacher in the new
Testament, yea to be the forerunner and immediate servant of Christ. Hence is he
called John by the Angel: which word signifies favor or grace: first because
he was bestowed by Gods special grace on his parents, when they were old, and
by the course of nature could not expect him: secondly, because he was to be
the first Preacher of grace in the new Testament. Next therefore it was to
insist in the large and honorable mention of so near a servant to Christ:
seeing the more honorable the servant is, the more is the glory and eminency
of the master.

Fourthly, because the faith of the Church was to lean upon this testimony of
John: therefore is the Spirit of God more industrious to make his witness
certain, and leave it most infallible.

Now among other arguments of John's commendation, he is in the words read,
commended by the worthiness of his parentage. For first both his parents are
named, his father was Zachary, that is, one mindful of God: his mothers name
was Elizabeth, which signified God is my rest, and it appears they were not
unanswerable to their names. Secondly, both of them were of an holy stock and
progeny. He was of the order and stock of Aaron, and she was of the daughters
of Aaron: and so both of them were well descended. Thirdly, both of them were
as holy in their own persons, as in their parentage: For both of them were
just before God, and walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
without reproof.

Both of them were iust] First, neither of them was without infirmity, neither
of them without sin. Secondly, neither of them was legally just, which
requires whole conformity of the whole man, to the whole Law, and that in the
utmost perfection. Thirdly, neither of both were just, or justified by works,
and much less by meriting or desert. For why then was Zachary presently
struck dumb for his unbelief, verse 20. Or if that which the Rhemists on
this place were true: what did Zachary here in the Temple offering sacrifice,
first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: if he did so perfectly
fulfill the Law as they say?

How then were they both just? A. Both were just Euangelically. First by
imputation, to both of them was Christ's justice imputed: so as though both of
them labored under their personal infirmities, yet God for Christ's sake did
not impute their sins unto them. Secondly, by acceptance God did approve
them both for just and righteous persons, beholding them in the covenant of his
love: which accepts of impure and unworthy actions of his children as
righteous and just, and affords a large cover for their daily defects and
frailties. Thirdly, by inchoation, in that both of them being renewed by Gods
Spirit, endeavored to keep all the commandments of the Lord, and were
heartily grieved when they failed in their true endeavor. Fourthly, by the
Lords justification both were justified by God from hypocrisy and reigning
guile: What they did, they did before God, in truth, and unfeignedly as in his
sight, and by their fruits of faith both of them were justified before men:
who by their external righteousness saw that their faith was sound, and
themselves true believers. The Pharisees were righteous before men, but this is
opposed to all pharisaicall justice; they were both just before God.

Hence we note some observations. 1. As they were religious persons. 2. As they
were married persons.


The Lord approves and honors godliness every where: 1. Obser.
as in Zachary and Elizabeth, and teaches us by his own example, highly to
esteem of religious persons, and willingly and cheerfully to speak of their
graces.

To show our own loving affection to good persons and good things, 1. Reason.
for according to the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, the shop is
furnished out of the warehouse.

To encourage and promote grace in others whenever we see it, 2. Reason.
for praise of virtue increases it. Thirdly, to provoke our selves and others
to attain the like graces, both for kind and measure. Fourthly, P^al. 15 4.
to get a sure note of soundness in our selves, for it is a property of a
good man to honor them that fear the Lord, and a spark of the image and
resemblance of the Lord himself.

Note a difference of men's ways from Gods, 1 Use.
he commends nothing but his own grace: they every thing but this: men are
by men commended and applauded for their wealth and good husbandry, diligence
in their callings, and for their good hospitality and the like: but if the
Lord commend a man, he are he begins, as Neah. Thee Genes. 7. 1.
have I found righteous. And Genesis 18. 19.
Abraham not so much for his hospitality wherein he exceeded, but for
instructing his family. Women are by men commended for wealth, beauty,
parentage, education and such natural endowments. But if the Lord commend a
woman: it is the woman that fears the Lord that shall be praised: Prou. 31.
30.
and if Christ commend a woman, it shall not be Martha for her good houswifrie,
but Marie for choosing the better part.

Many sin against this rule, Luc. 10. 42. 2. Use.
who prize not nor speak of the graces of God conferred upon their brethren,
because either their hearts affect not grace, or because they envy it, or else
because they turn out this subject, by blazing the wants and frailties of
godly men, or else by furthering some blots, and casting some stain upon them.
Our Lord Jesus contrarily affected, and commended even shows of goodness in
the young man for example.

3. Others make piety and grace the buts to shoot all their venom and
poisoned arrows against, all their discourses run against persons fearing
God, and their godly practices, that if devils had tongues of their own, thus
would they employ them: but not having them of their own, they borrowed these
men's to this purpose. For Christ must be a butt and sign of contradiction
still, not in his own person only, but in his members also. But against whom
have thou blasphemed? Or whom has railing Rabsechie reviled? Or where shall
these arrows shot against heaven light, but upon the head of him that shot
them? Who ever advanced himself in blasphemy against the God of heaven and
prospered?

Now as they were married persons, because our present errand calls us to
this part, Doct.
we may learn. In that both these persons were just, and yet married, that
marriage hinders no man or woman: no nor the Ministers of God from being holy
and just before God and men. Zachary a Priest here in his office in the
Temple, in the action of sacrifice was a married man, and yet holy: which could
not be if the marriage of Ministers hindered their holiness. Elizabeth a
Priests wife, yet commended by the Spirit of God for an holy and just woman,
and therefore the wives of Ministers are set by God in the foremost rank of
Christ, holy, gracious and godly women.

To detest that diabolical doctrine and religion of Papists, Use.
which cannot be true, but this Scripture and many other must be false. In that
they hold, that first marriage is a being in the flesh, and an unclean thing.
For did God institute an unclean thing, and that in Paradise before any sin
and uncleanness was? Did Christ grace and honor an unclean thing by his
presence and first miracle? Is one of the Sacraments of their holy Church
become on the sudden so unclean a thing? Liars have great need of good
memories. Secondly, that holy ministry is as deadly a disease of marriage as
the foulest adultery, which only ought to dissolve marriage. Thirdly, which
opposes marriage to virginity as chafe to wheat, or as evil to good:
whereas Scripture opposes not marriage to virginity, as less good in it
self, but as more inconvenient by the corruption of persons, or persecution of
the times. Neither do they oppose virgins to married persons (Reu. 19. 9) but
to the filthy fornicators of that whore of Babylon. Fourthly, which disauoweth
marriage, but not lust, abandoneth Gods sacred ordinance according to nature,
but not burning concupiscence and unnatural filthiness, not to be named among
Saints, for it is one of their beastly and shameless constitutions: that their
Priesthood is not bound to put away an whore or Concubine, so it abjure a
lawful wife. Not to take any longer in this Sodomiticall sincke, we conclude
with our text. That marriage hinders neither inward holiness, nor the most
holy external duties neither private nor public.

Both were just: 2. Doct.
An happy conjunction it is when two godly persons meet in marriage, of whom
may be said: both of them are just, as Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca,
Priscilla and Aquila, Zachary and Elizabeth.

Here is an equal yoke when both are like minded and draw one way; 1. Reason.
both have their names written in the book of life; when both are of one tribe
and religion, as this couple was; when both worship the same true God; both
care for the things of God; both intend the one thing necessary; both are
decked with the same graces, and both are heirs of the same salvation; when
both are fit and mutual helps, marriage becomes a sweet yoke.

When both are just, 2. Reason.
the family will be a little Church of God, a place of Gods worship, presence,
delight, and blessing.

From such a conjunction is an expectation of a godly seed, 3. Reason.
and an hopeful posterity to be left behind us, to worship God in earth when
we are gone hence, as from this gracious couple, descends John a gracious
son, of nearest service to Jesus Christ.

Let all that are to enter into this estate, 1. Use.
consider what their first aim ought to be: not on finest houses and riches,
which are the inheritance of fathers, but a prudent wife which is the gift of
God, that is a special and most choice gift of his love: Seek first for
goodness, and for goods afterward, fail in this rule and thou shall buy gold
too dear.

All married couples must learn and labor, 2. Use.
to be both just, both religious, and fearing God Wives are as straightly bound
to be religious as husbands, both must labor for Gods approbation, both must
care to be spouses of Christ, both must strive to be in the covenant of grace,
both must be married to faith, love, godliness, and holiness, both must seek
to be rich, beautiful and glorious within, as the spouses of Jesus Christ.

3. All married persons must above all things, love, respect and cherish grace
one in another: ground not thy love upon beauty, riches, portion, youth, or
such failing foundations: but pitch it first in God and grace, and it will
hold. Let it begin at the soul, and thence show it self to the body. The man
and wife ought to seek the saving one of another soul, 1. Cor. 7. 5. Christ
the husband of his Church did all; suffered all, bestowed all his wisdom,
strength, riches, yea his precious blood for his spouse to sanctify and save
her: an vnfailing pattern for all spouses.

Where both are just, true grace will be valued at the highest rate one in
another; the one will hold the other worth so much as there is religion and the
fear of God. Between this beauty of soul, riches of mind, wealth of grace is
esteemed at an incomparable rate; and these entise and draw on heavenly,
spiritual, and lasting love. When both are just, grace will be cherished in
each more then good nature: grace is excited by each in the exercise of
spiritual duties; they pray with and for one another; they read, confer,
and counsel together; they edify one another on their holy faith, and this is
a strong cement of love. Where both are just, both praise God (as for inferior
endowments) so especially for the measure of grace received, and for that holy
religion to which they are married. Where God has given this blessing there is
wealth, beauty, love, and every sweet and needful comfort and contentment.

Before God from hence note this doctrine: Doct.
That those be indeed truly religious and righteous that are so before God:
that set themselves always before God, and in sincerity of heart know and
remember they have to do with God in all things. Iam. 1. 27. pure and undefiled
religion before God: the thing that true religion does, is, it binds God to
man, and man to God.

None can be just before God, Psalm. 143. 2. Romans Object.
3. 20. No flesh can be justified before the Lord.

1. That is, no man only flesh without Christ and his Spirit. Answ.


2. No man can personally and perfectly be justified, so as his person and
work can pass allowable in strict justice.

3. No flesh in his sight unless it be seen in the sight of Christ. But by
merciful acceptance the believer is justified and approved as just seen in
Christ 2. By sound resolution he sets himself under Gods eye, and in his
presence, as a witness of his righteous and godly course: and so seeks in
sincerity of heart to be approved of him in all things. And thus Zachery and
Elizabeth are said to be just in this place.

The reasons of this Doctrine are these.

Such a worshipper only the Lord requires, 1. Reason.
Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me and be upright. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that there were
such an heart in them, that they might fear me and keep all my commandments
always. Only such are accepted of him who are Jews within. Romans 2. Who
worship in Spirit and truth. Ioh. 4. for because he is the seer and searcher of
the hearts, he loves truth in the inward parts. Psalm. 51. And has pleasure in
uprightness. 1. Chron. 29. 17.

Here is a manifest distinction between godly men and evil: 2. Reason.
who have fair shows; and are smooth outwardly, can draw near with their
lips, but God is not in their thoughts, their hearts are removed from him. The
Pharisey can wash the outside of the cup and platter, and can do many things to
be seen of men. But the godly man sets himself in the eye of God, and does
things with the heart, not contenting himself to seem good, but to be so, nor
with a form of godliness without the power of it. This man shines from the
heart within, and is better in substance then in show. The goodness of this
man is not to the eye and outward; but inward from his heart before God.

All Evangelical obedience is chiefly in purpose of heart, 3. Reason.
in holy desires and hearty resolutions. The top of the believers perfection,
is not in perfection of action, but affection and in strife against
imperfection and truth of desires, as Acts 11. 23. When with full purpose of
heart we cleave unto the Lord. 1. Chronicles 18. 7. If Solomon shall endeavor
to keep the commandments, then shall his kingdom be established. This makes
works and persons acceptable and accounted perfect. This makes duties
comfortable, when men charge us with hypocrisy and sin^st^r ends, as David to
Micall: I did it before the Lord.

A day comes wherein the Lord will pronounce of every man as his heart shall
be before him: 4. Reason.
as here of Zachary and Elizabeth. In which he will unfold and turn out all
the windings and corners of men's hearts. If a peace of the heart or of
uprightness be wanting, he will miss it. As in many kings of Israel, who did
such and such good things but not with all their hearts. Then shall thou know
that all is naught without uprightness.

Now the notes of a man just and religious before God. Notes of a just man.
He brings his inner man still before God; Note 1.
as in his thoughts. intentions. desires.


1. He dares not suffer his thoughts too long absent from God, Psalm. 16. 8. I
have set the Lord ever in my sight. He is much and often in secret soliloquies
with God by prayer, by meditation.

Of the wicked man it is said, God is not in his thoughts. But a truly godly
man thinks on God by day and by night.

2. His intentions are not to get applause or credit of men: but to get grace,
both with God and in himself.

3. His desires are after God to prepare him a place in his heart, without whom
he cannot live, no more then without air. A soul destitute of desires after
God is a great plague. And for God he affects all goodness for goodness
sake, and for no other reward.

His actions are wrought in God for ordinary course. Note 2.
Ioh 3. 21. But he that does truth comes unto the light, that his deeds may
be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.

All his actions I say are wrought in God for ordinary course, both in 1. The
rise. 2. The rule. 3. The end.


1. In respect of the rise, which is the love of God. It is the love of God
constrains us to every good action, that is the rise and foundation. 2. Cor.
5. 12.

2. Of the rule which is the light of Gods word. All the Israel of God walk by
thus rule, Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God; this is the lantern to their
paths, Psalm. 119.

3. Of the end, which is either of Intention. or, Execution.

1. Of intention, 2. Cor. 5. 9.
which is Gods glory and contentment: our endeavor is at home, or from home to
be pleasing unto God in all things.

2. The end of execution. Grace goes through such and continues unto the end:
what is done of conscience is of continuance. A good heart is as careful to
persevere in good; as once to be good, knowing that God is best at last.

In respect of sin. 1. The religious heart admits not, Note 3.
nor commits any. Because he knows, all are before God. As Joseph, shall I
do this wickedness and sin against God. It strives against all sin in
this respect, Psalm. 94. 7. 8. Shall he that formed the eye and ear, shall not
he see and hear?

2. He seeks not to hide or to cherish any sin committed. But casts out
all by confession, because all is before God, Psalm. 51. Against thee, against
thee o Lord. I have done evil in thy sight.

3. He shameth more that his sin is before God: then if it were in all men's
eyes, and if all men should cry shame on him, he would not be abashed, as he is
with holy blushing, that his shame and sin lies uncovered before God.

4. He hates all evils as well as one, in one as in another: In friends as
well as foes, secret as open, but of all is most severe against his own sins
which lie closest to his own heart.

4. Holding himself ever in Gods presence, Note 4.
he is still like himself, and the same as God is, before whom he walks.

First, company corrupts him not. In all companies he is as if he were
alone, and alone as if he were in company, the same man among superiors and
inferiors.

Secondly, places change him not, he is the same in his own house that he is
in Gods house, Psalm. 10 1. 2. at home and abroad.

Thirdly, times altering alter him not: he is the same on the week day as on
the Sabbath: he knows he is ever before God who is ever the same.

Fourthly, no estate disturbeth him, but in all estates he is the same. In
prosperity, in adversity, whereas a wicked man can cry in his distress, and
the Hipocrite in his affliction: Hos. 6. last. Seek God diligently.

5. He is never so well contented as in those means in which God is pleased to
converse with men, Note 5.
in every ordinance of God he rejoices, as in a more solemn presence of his
grace. (Whereas the wicked wilfully excommunicate themselves:) and yet the
godly man is not contented with these without a longing desire of his blessed
presence of glory: to stand before him, to praise him, in immediate fruition
for all eternity.

And walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord without
reproof.] Now we come from the imputed righteousness to the inherent and
inchoat in these two godly persons; in whom we have a pattern set before us of
godly life.

Here is an eligant metaphor or comparison wherein godly life is called a
walking. Secondly, the way in which a godly man walks is the commandments
and ordinances of the Lord, and all of them. Thirdly, the manner of walking,
without reproof.

1. They walked. A Christian man is here a traveler and a passenger from one
place to another.

In which course is, 1. Motion. 2. Promotion. 3. Constancy.


First Moti^n, they stand not still, nor sit at ease, but move themselves and
stir themselves as a man while he walks.

Secondly Promotion, in going forward and profiting, else as good stand still
as not go forward: but here is a daily going nearer salvation, and nearer the
end of our way, a progress toward our country.

Thirdly, walking is a constant motion: They continued to walk in a godly
course, because their expectation was still before them.

He that stands at a stay in Christianity: Note.
or goes back in grace: he that gains not ground, and prospers not in
goodness: he that is not daily nearer heaven, walks not that way. Neither
will it serve that men set their tongues a walking and wishing, if their hands
be bound, or feet fettered with idleness or lusts. Therefore see in thy self.

First, that thy works be more at last then at the first. Secondly, let thy
profiting appear to others, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate on these things, give thy
self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Thirdly, let thy
whole aim be the ripening and perfecting thy grace, for this is to walk
toward heaven.
2. The way. In all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.

By co^mandemants are meant moral precepts. By ordinances the ceremonials
which then were in force.
They walked in all 1. by true endeavor and holy purpose.

Secondly, they severed not the commandments in the practice of their life: as
servants who will choose their work, and do what pleases themselves, and leave
undone what likes them not.

Thirdly, they made the whole word their rule: all of it being of the same
author, nature, power and necessity.

Fourthly, they walked in all: but not without some slips and slidings; as in
the fairest way a man may slip and yet keep his way and walk still.

They walked, Note 1.
first in moral precepts, and then in ceremonial: Christian wisdom taught
them; and must teach us, to do all duties, but the greatest with the greatest
and first care: first duties to God, and then to men. The first and great
commandment first: first the great things of the Law, and then Tyth Mint, and
Comin.

The application might be enlarged in many particulars, as to stir us up:

First seek to please God, 1. Use.
and then men.

First make all clean within, and then without.

First seek the kingdom of God, then other things.

First observe the morality of the Law: then the ceremony.

First get the power of godliness, and then the form, etc.

They sin, 2. Use.
that for ceremonies cast down substance of worship.

When Gods sacred ordinances must go down, rather then men's foolish inventions
not stand up.

They are perverse that neglecting sincerity of heart, says, and good
conscience, compose their lives to civility and devotion.

The way wherein the Saints must walk to heaven, Note. 2.
is the way of Gods commandments: for as a way does tend to some intended
place, so does the statutes of God tend to heavenly happiness: Hence is the
word called the way of God, Acts 13. 10. Paul speaking, to Elimas the sorcerer,
said, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord: the way of
peace, Luke 1, 97. of salvation, Act. 16. 17.

2. Whosoever are out of this way, and transgress this rule, are said to
wander and err, Psalm. 14. 3. They are all gone out of the way. And as a man
having lost his way, knows not where to find himself at last. So such as go
their own ways, and follow the lusts and sight of their eyes, little think
where they shall lodge when the night of their lives comes.

Labor to know this way; 1. Use. Ier. 6.
ask the way of those that know the country and the way to it better then thy
self: As the Iaylor asked: what shall I do to be saved: enquire the old and
ancient way, for thou neither know nor find it of thy self.

Secondly, labor to keep this way. A traveler must keep the high and beaten
way. But this is the way, the kings high way, pathed and trodden of all
travelers to heaven.

Our thoughts must not stray out of this way, Exodus 20. Thou shall not covet:
words must be held in this way, of every idle word we must give an account:
actions must be done in this way. What I command thee that do only, whether
great or small: the whole and parts; the smallest pinnes of the Tabernacle must
be according to the pattern in the Mount: Hence those many precepts; turn not
to the right hand or the left, for it is a right way.

Thirdly, join with those that walk in this way which is called the way of
men. It is a great encouragement in a strange way to go with good company.
Delight in men fearing God, in Saints excelling in virtue, Psalm. 16.
and with Jacob still pray God to go with thee in thy journey, who is a
faithful and sure guide.

Fourthly, walk uprightly, not halting in this way, and follow it where ever
it leads: uprightness looks not where multitudes go, but where it self
ought to go: nor what may be the issue, but which is the way. This way may
lead thee into many difficulties of disgraces, losses, crosses, etc. But as
Israel going through the wilderness, they must provide shoes on their feet,
so provide thou the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel, fencing thy self
with Christian resolution to follow where ever the Gospel leads thee.

A good and sincere heart strives to universal obedience: Note 3.
it will walk in all commandments and ordinances, as Zachary and Elizabeth,
Psalm. 119. 6. then shall I not be confounded when I have respect to all thy
commandments: I set all thy laws before me, and esteem all thy precepts
right: though he cannot do all, yet he must set all before him.

First, because a good heart so prizeth every part of the word, as that he will
gather up the very fragments of the law: he knows the perfection of it, that
as nothing need be added, so nothing ought to be detracted. Nothing else,
nothing less must be observed: it holds it not enough to serve and obey in
some things, but in all.

Secondly, a good heart knows that it self cannot be divided; the religious
heart is the whole heart, which makes no composition with Satan or sin. Sure
it is it; a small neglect of an inferior duty or sin, will make way and open
a door for greater: and a little deceit or guile; a small reserved and spared
sin, is as a little leaven, souring the whole lump, or as a little
Colloquintida poisoning all our virtues and obedience.

Thirdly, he knows the Law cannot be divided, for it is so united, that he
that breaks one, sins against all: A good heart therefore consents to
the whole Law, that it is good, just, and holy, and as a sovereign potion
prescribed must be taken all: else the whole operation is hindered, so also it
is here.

Fourthly, here is a difference between soundness and unsoundness, none are
so bad but are willing to obey in some commandments so far as they touch not
their pleasure, their profit, or credit. Herod will hear John gladly, till he
touch him in his Herodias, Judas and Dem^s will do many good duties, but will
not leave covetousness and worldliness. But soundness denies all ungodly
and worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 12. If not in act, yet in desire, disposition,
purpose of heart; and holds no duty so small as to be neglected and despised.

Think not as the most do, Use.
that thou have well acquitted thy self, if thou be only, no adulterer,
murderer, thief, periurd person, while thou dispensest with thy self in the
lower degrees of sin. Thou art no whoremonger; if conscience make thee none,
thou then wilt not be a wanton or unclean in thy speeches.

Thou are no murderer, but conscience makes thee not so, unless thou hate
and resist, rash anger, hatred, wrath, hasty and furious speeches.

Thou art no thief, and never stolest thy neighbors goods: but have thou not
been, or art thou not unjust: an usurer, a liar, and swearer to deceive? These
petty thefts show that conscience keeps thee not from greater thefts and
roberies.

Thou art no perjured person; nor swearest wounds, and blood, etc. but art thou
accustomed to petty oaths? If thou be a vain rash and idle swearer, thy
conscience keeps thee not from perjury. Nay a frequent swearer cannot but be
often perjured.

But do thou favor no sin, but make war upon all the cursed cananites
and lusts in thine own bosom? Here is some argument of soundness.

Examine the uprightness of thy heart by these notes. Notes of an upright
heart.


1. Do thou hate all ways of falsehood, and as desirous to forsake all thy
sin, as that God would forgive all thy sin?

2. Do thou give the Lord thy whole heart and man, not making a profession
to serve the Lord, and reserve some idol in thy soul?

3. Desire thou to do every part of Gods word, without either reservation or
exception, (not allowing thy self any liberty against any one Commandment,)
or expostulation or reasoning when the Lord expresses no reason: As Abraham in
going out of his country, and sacrificing his son. Resoluest thou on simple
obedience, in difficult, costly, dangerous duties? Here is the sound of a good
heart.

The manner of walking without reproof, Manner.
they walked not without fault, infirmity or sin; but without taint of crime
or infamy. Non dicit sine peccato: sed sine querela.
They could not be justly charged with gross sin or crime before men. As
their sincerity was approved before God: so was their conversation laudable,
and without just exception before men. The righteousness of their actions
testified to the righteousness of their persons.

The next care to the pleasing of God must be to walk innocently, Doct.
and inoffensiuely amongst men: so as none can challenge the Christian justly
of any crime, James 1. 27. religion undefiled before God, seeks to keep it
self unspotted of the world, Phil. 2. 17. walk blameless as lights.

It is impossible not to be blamed: Object.
Christ's innocence was traduced, and so is that of his servants.

Keep thy self unspotted, though thou can not keep off the spattering of
evil men: Answ.
let them not justly spot thee, though they will blame thee, be thou sure thou
be not blame worthy.

What more seemly for the babes in Christ then to be without maliciousness:
1. Reason.
or for the doves of Christ then innocence.

Secondly, what greater honor of godliness, then for to challenge the
adversary; as Samuel, whose ox or ass have I taken? which of you can accuse
me of crime? I can accuse my self of too much sin before God: but which of you
can accuse me justly, when Job can take the book of his adversary and carry
it as his crown?

Thirdly, what greater cut and conviction of the adversary, when he wants
nothing but matter against the servant of God? this choketh him, and stops
his mouth, whose malice cannot be stopped.

Fourthly, what greater gain to the truth and to our selves, when our
unblameable course, not only gives no offense, nor lays blocks to hinder
others from the profession: but may gain them to embrace the religion which is
so innocent, 1. Pet. 2. 12. Having your conversation honest amongst the
Gentiles, that whereas they speak evil of you as evil doers, they may by
your good works which they shall behold glorify God in the day of their
visitation.

And to our selves not only in avoiding the woe due to them by whom offenses
come: but the retaining of a clear conscience void of offenses toward God and
all men.

To provoke us to the care of walking without reproof; Use.
here we are to consider the cautions which we are to take in this case: and
secondly the means how we may walk without reproof.

The cautions are: first, never think to avoid reproof of wicked ones, but
let them have no cause, and then barking against the Sun they may see their
own madness.

Secondly, avoid not men's reproof by incurring Gods reproof; nor by omitting
any part of thy duty; nor committing any evil to please them. Let every man
please his neighbor in that which is good: and the least evils must not be
done for the attaining of the greatest good. Romans 3.

Thirdly, never care for that credit amongst men, which is severed from
religion, 3. Ioh. 12. Demetrius has a good report of all men, and of the truth
it self. Neither care for credit in the world; if thy graces be not witnessed
in the Churches 3. Ioh. 6. Let all the world reprove thee rather then the
godly, which have the spirit of discerning.

The means by which a man may walk without reproof are: Means of walking
unblameably.


First, join the care of a good name with a good conscience, Romans 12. 17.
Provide things honest in the sight of God and all men.

Secondly, labor for faith, Heb. 11. 2. by faith our fathers received a good
report: Faith as it purifieth the heart, so the life also.

Thirdly, get purity of mind, spirit, and thoughts, get natural corruption
cast out of thy soul; else it will break out into thy just reproof: curb
therefore thy natural lusts.

Fourthly, avoid all sin, not only apparent sins, but appearances of
evil, motes as well as beams, thy motes (being a Professor) become beams
quickly.

Fifthly, meddle not with other men's businesses: but diligently attend thy own,
but so as thou seek other men's good as well as thine own, 1. Corinthians. 10.
24.

Sixthly, be abundant in good works according to thy power, place, and
opportunity, Coloss. 1. 10. Works of righteousness and mercy commend a man
to men. Those virtues are amiable even in the eyes of wicked men. And just
dealing with abundance of good works brings a great deal of honor to
religion.

Now a word of application according to the occasion. Application to the Bride
groom.
First you my worthy friend and man of God. I assure my self your care and
aim was (before you gave me this text,) to make it your own rule: that of
your self, and the spouse whom you have chosen the words of this text might be
verified: They were both just before God: I need not say much to one
apprehensiue. But remember the counsel. Let him that is just be just still, be
still adding unto your piety, holiness, and religious courses: you have
managed grace and religion in your self, and solitariness till this day: Now
you must manage it in your other self, in whom you are thankfully to
acknowledge it, wisely to encourage it, carefully to increase it, and in case
she bring you thousands of money; yet hold this her worth, her wealth, her
chief stock and portion. You have in your single estate worthily taught
others as a man of knowledge, now you must dwell as a man of knowledge; for the
improuing of that stock of grace which is in common between you, that your
five tallents may be increased to ten; when our Lord shall call the servants to
their reckoning. You have this day taken upon you authority and headship, and
with that a double care: first how to use it, secondly how to keep it The way
well to use it, is to command and rule in the Lord: that all your commands may
carry a stamp of Gods impression upon them, then shall they prevail on the
conscience, and win obedience from the wife, when the power of both husbands is
united in them. As for keeping your authority you know the way, and so do not
many, it will not be kept by force of arms or violence: but by religious
example, and showing your self the best and most godly, yea the pattern of
piety to the rest of your family. Gods shining image will not easily be
contemned: for grace has an attractiue and adamantine nature to allure and
draw to it self whosoever can epsy it. Besides it cannot but be expected that
you who have more strength and knowledge, should express more grace: you have
now undertaken to love your wife, as Christ loved his spouse, do it as he did,
earnestly, wisely, liberally, and all to the end to help her to heaven,
covering and curing all her infirmities; this you will not fail to do, if you
remember, that not a daughter of men: but a daughter of Israel is committed to
your charge.

And to you whom God has this day joined to an husband: To the Bride.
Know that Elizabeth was just as well as Zachary: and holiness is here as
commendable in her as it was in him. Nay it was expected that Elizabeth should
shine in grace and godliness above ordinary women, because she was Zacharies
wife, the Priests wife, the wife of so holy a man. Grace and holiness decketh
and adorneth all women in all ranks; but especially Ministers wives, as wedded
to more then ordinary means, and must be more eminent in you, as wedded to one
(were he not present I would say) above many ordinary Ministers. Let your care
be that it fail not on your part, but that it may be truly affirmed. They are
both just before God Both pious, both wise, both modest, both holy. As your
husband must dwell with you as a man of knowledge: so must you with him as with
a man of knowledge. You are this day married to an head, whom you must obey in
all things which he commands in the Lord, that is, in whatsoever you cannot
prove to be sin: and this willingly, cheerfully, constantly. For thus does
the Church (whose daughter you are) perform obedience to her head and husband
Jesus Christ. The same grace will cause you to honor his person in your heart,
life, and whole behavior: esteeming of him as the Church does of Christ; the
chief of ten thousand. In one word it will make you do him good, and not evil
all your days. Oh what will not the favor and wisdom of God do, when both
married persons are thus just before God. It will set a work and quicken all
Gods graces bestowed on both. It will lead into the sight and observance of all
good duties mutual and personal. It will ease and lighten all crosses and
discontents. It will sweeten and sanctify all your society, company, and
comforts, Well, said Solomon, hold her, and she will uphold you. And now we
dismiss you with our humble prayer to God for his blessing and direction of
you both in this your new estate; that as you have both entered this day into
the covenant of God, so you may now covenant with your selves; that according
to this pattern held before you, you will both aim to be just before God; and
both walk in all Gods commandments, and ordinances (especially in this holy
and comfortable ordinance without reproof.


