THE BALANCE OF THE SANCTVARIE, SHOWING HOW WE MVST BEHAVE OUR SELVES When
we see and behold the people of God in misery and oppression under the
tyranny of their ENEMIES.

WRITTEN By WILLIAM TEELINCK, Minister of the Word of GOD at MIDLEBROVGH in
ZEALAND.

JEREMY 9. 12. Who is the wise man that may understand this, and who is he to
whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare for what the Land
perishes, and is brent up like a Wilderness, that no man passes through.
LONDON Printed by I. D. for WILLIAM SHEFFARD, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Star under St Peter's* Church in Corne-hill, and in Pope's Head Alley.
1621.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, as well the worth of this Work, as the respect that I deservedly
bear to the Author thereof, both for his singular piety, and other good
parts, has encouraged me to commend it to thy careful view, as that whereby
thou may reap no small spiritual profit, if the fault be not thine own.
The Doctrine contained in it is both sound and seasonable, being (as any
judicious eye will easily discern) exceedingly well fitted to the present
times. And Pro. 25. 11.
a word, says Solomon, spoken in due time, is as apples of gold, with pictures
of silver; both precious and pleasant* True it is, that some truth indeed is
never out of season; though more seasonable at some times then at other. But
yet as true it is, that Falsum ni^^^ dicere licet, at very aliquid tacere
aliquando est utile. Aug. ad Gal. c. 2. and de bon^ persever. * 16. and in
Psalm. 5. and Ambr. epist. 23. ex ^^^. 16. 12.
some truth also is at some times altogether unseasonable* To propound Gods
mercy to an obstinate sinner, or to aggravate his wrath to a poor dejected
penitent, were with those false Prophets, (who delivered yet nothing, it may
be, but truth mis-applied and mis-placed) Ezech. 13. 19, 22.
to make sad the heart of the humbled, whom God would have cheared, and to
strengthen the hand of the wicked, who ought rather to have been humbled; to
slay the souls of such as should not die, and to give life to such as should
not live. Esa. 22. 12, 13. (...) Sophocl. Mu^ca in luctu intempestiva narratio.
Sirac 22. 6. Et Sophod. Oedip. Tyra. (...) Apud. Plut. de ethic. vi^^. and
Sympos. (...). l. 1. c. 5.
Matter of mirth and delight, though (...) Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. l. 1. (...)
Menand. Bonum malum ^it tempore haud datum ^^, Eras^ tempestiva aliqua volupta,
nisit, nocet. H. St^ph. (...). Isocr. ad D^mon. Et data non apto tempore vina
nocem. Ovid. remed. l. 1.
good and honest otherwise, yet is as fish or flesh out of season, neither
wholesome nor wel-relished, when God calls for mourning by judgments either
incumbent or imminent. As also on the other side, (...). Greg. Naz. (...) l^m.
l. 1. Nehem 8. 9. Luke 15. 31.
mourning is no less unsauoury, because unseasonable, when it pleases God to
give just occasion of mirth. Mat. 9. 15. Man. 2. 19. 20.
The Children of the bride-chamber, says our Savior, ca^^^t fast so long as
the bridegroom is with them: But the time shall come when the bridegroom
shall be taken away from them, and then in those days shall they fast. (...)
Pind. Pyth. ode 19. (...). Man. Pal^^ol. ad fill praecept. 6.
Each thing therefore is mostpoo pleasant and most profitable, when it comes
in his due season and good things do then most good, when they are seasonably
administered Now if we shall but slightly cast our eyes on the ruefull and
lamentable face of Gods Church in most parts at this present, we may soon see
how seasonably this Discourse comes abroad. Wherein the Author thereof very
learnedly and religiously enstructeth us, how to judge aright of Gods
Judgments either on our selves or others, how to be affected with them, and
what use to make of them* ministering comfort unto, and confirming the hearts of
the afflicted and distressed; urging to compassion with them, and commiseration
of them, those that be yet free; and endeavoring by a due consideration of
Lament. 3. 37, 38. Esa. 45. 7. Amos 3. 6. 2 Samuel 12. 11. And 16. 10. Iud. 3. 8,
12. And 4. 2. 1 King 11. 14, 23.
Gods handy-Worke in all those events that befall both, either for good or
evil, to bring benefit unto both, as Et magis placandus Deus est in adversis,
and minus laedendus in secundis: placari quippe debe^ cum irascitur; laedi non
debet cum placatur. Adversa enim nobis per iracundiam Dei veniunt, secunda per
gratiam Sal^ian. de Provid. l. 6.
being provoked to a greater measure of sincere thankfulness by the one, and
pressed to a more serious renewing of their repentance, and reformation of life
and courses by the other. But I fear to do thee wrong, by detaining thee too
long, from that which thou shall here find far more fully and ^ffectually
discussed and discoursed o^, then I can easily relate unto thee. Much race,
only I doubt, the Treatise may have lost by change of its own native weed.
Few translations have the happiness to match their Originals. And each
Language has its peculiar forms and phrases, which in other Tongues can
hardly be so fitly or so pregnantly expressed. But what may this way be
wanting, the matter (as I hope it is) faithfully expressed may sufficiently
countervaile. Which respecting, I shall entreat thee to pardon and pass by
the defects that may be in the Translation (wherein what Work-mans hand was
used I know not) and so to read this religious Work intended for thy good,
that thou may not miss of the benefit by the Author therein intended. Which
the Lord grant both to thee and to all others that shall meet with it for his
mercies sake, Amen.

Thine in Christ Jesus, THO: GATAKER.

The Contents of the several Chapters handled in this Treatise.
Chapter 1. AN Introduction to the Discourse of the `Doctrine handled in the
Treatise. Page 1. Chapter 2. That the outward and external events of this life
happen and fall out almost, and in a manner alike both unto the godly and
ungodly. Page 4. Chapter 3. That Gods proceedings with and toward the Children
of men, cannot by man be comprehended. Page 6. Chapter 4. Why God so orders
his works, as we think, here in this world, that in a manner they follow of
necessity, and rules in such sort, that it is commonly and ordinarily found,
that man by his own wisdom or power, can neither add thereunto, nor diminish
any thing from them. Page 11. Chapter 5. That notwithstanding, that Gods works
done and wrought among the Children of men are so wonderful, and
incomprehensible, yet we may learn and find out many special things, and
reap much benefit, by his said works so wrought and done among them. Page 15.
Chapter 6. Showing diverse several things, which the Lord has opened unto us
in his word, touching his good pleasure and dealings with the Children of men
here on earth, necessary to put out of our minds all doubts concerning the
works of God, and to strengthen them in the contrary effects. Page 19. Chapter
7. That there is no cause at all, why men should make any doubt or question,
when they see many ungodly men here prosper in the world, and diverse godly men
live in poverty and adversity. Page 23. Chapter 8. That there is no cause why
men should be so much abashed, when they shall consider how the enemies of Gods
people, when they encounter in battle with the people of God, and have the
upper hand, and overthrow them. Page 27. Chapter 9. Further justification of
the aforesaid Doctrine, which the Lord shows us out of his word, touching his
proceedings with the Children of men, against the people of God in our Age.
Page 36. Chapter 10. That without contradiction it appears by the aforesaid
order of the works of God, done among the Children of men, that there shall be
an after-reckoning made, with all the Children of men in the world to come.
Page 43. Chapter 11. That not all outward prosperity is asigne, that the Lord
loves that man to whom he sends the same. Page 47. Chapter 12. That all
worldly crosses and tribulations are not a show or sign that God will refuse
that man to whom he sends them. Page 50. Chapter 13. That we cannot measure
the state of men, in regard of God, by wealth or poverty, by prosperity or
adversity, that befalls them in this world. Page 54. Chapter 14. That by all
that has been said and showed before, we must learn to live in the true
fear of God, and sincere holiness, and more and more practice the same. Page
65. Chapter 15. How we may profit by all the works of God which he does unto
us, and other men in this world. Page 69. Chapter 16. Of the distinct knowledge
of these things which God in his word (touching the government of this world)
has manifested unto us, being very fit and necessary for the drawing of
spiritual profit from the works of God wrought here among men. Page 72.
Chapter 17. Of the diligent observation of all Gods works, among the Children
of men, needful for the drawing of spiritual profit out of Gods works among
us. Page 76. Chapter 18. How we must compare that which God does in this world,
with that which he has set down in his Word, that we may draw some good fruit
from the works of God for our comfort. Page 79. Chapter 19. Of the sever all
fruits that spring from the searching into and finding out of Gods truth, and
certainty declared unto us, in his word, and in his works. Page 83. Chapter
20. The conclusion of all, wherein is showed, that we must only refer our
selves unto God, and not forsake a good cause, because it seems not to go
forward as we wish it should. Page 92.
THE BALANCE OF THE SANCTVARY, SHOWING HOW WE MVST BEHAVE OUR SELVES When we
see and behold the people of GOD in misery and oppression under the tyranny of
their ENEMIES.
CHAP. 1. An Introduction to the Discourse of the Doctrine handled in the
Treatise.
MAny men beholding the prosperity of the ungodly, and the enemies of the
Gospel, and perceiving with what violence and cruelty, they oppress those
that fight for and strive to defend the truth, are thereby more hardened, and
become crueller, even in the highest degree. And some of them thereupon take
occasion, with the fool, to say in their hearts, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
Making account that those who most trust and rely upon God, are least regarded
of God: others take occasion to murmur against God, because he rules not,
neither directs things here on earth, according to their wills and desires,
and with the Israelites, say in their hearts; The way of the Lord is not
equal, Ezech. 18. 25. And others there are who begin thereupon to suspect and
call in question, the truth of Gods word, yea, to forsake it, to reject it, and
to cleave unto lies; saying with Gedeon, though in another sense, If the Lord
be with us, why then is all this befallen us, Judge. 6. 13. Therein doing, and
yet they will be esteemed Christians, like certain blind Indians whereof we
read, who when at any time they are overthrown and destroyed by their enemies,
are wont to pray unto and call upon the Sun for pardon and forgiveness, and
to acknowledge the cause of their proceedings to be unjust.

And all this happens unto these blind men by the just judgment of God,
because they refuse to take pains, and to spend some time to read and look
into Gods book, which he himself has made, touching the proceedings and
course that he has determined to use and hold with the Children of men here on
earth. For if they had done so, they should soon see and know, That there is
not any thing done here in the world, nor that happneth unto the people of God,
which God himself has not foreshewed should come to pass, and which with his
own hand long before he set down in the several Register of those things
that are to fall out in the world, that when they come to pass, we might know
and understand that he had foretold it unto us, Deuteronomy. 31. 19. Iere. 16. 4.
Therefore in all such accidents and occasions we must with the Psalmist go
into the Sanctuary of God, Psalm. 73. 17. that in the true Balance of the
Sanctuary, which is Gods word, diligently pondering and examining all the
tribulations, troubles, and miseries that happen to Gods people, we may truly
judge and aright conceive thereof, and so we may continue sincere and without
offense till the day of Christ, Phillip. 1. 10. For it is written, Great peace
have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165.
And this in the Treatise following, we will endeavor so to declare, that
whosoever he be that reads and marketh the same with a true and upright
heart, he may surely and effectually find that to be true which the Prophet
witnesses, where he says, that the ways of the Lord are right, and the just
shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14. 9.

CHAP. II. That the outward and external events of this life happen and fall
out almost, and in a manner alike both unto the godly and ungodly.
SOLOMON says, all things come alike to all, there is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the
unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not, as is the
good so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an oath, Eccl.
9. 2. And to the same end where the Scripture in one place says, many sorrows
shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32. 10. in another place it says, many are the
afflictions of the righteous, Psalm. 34. 19. This Job alleged to his friends,
who therewith concluded upon and by the miseries and troubles that had happened
unto him, that he was hated of God; Arguing that we cannot truly judge of the
good will and favor of God toward men here on earth, nor yet of their state
in regard of God, by that which happens unto them in this transitory world,
because that the Lord as Elihu acknowledges, gives no account of any of his
matters, Job 33. 13. and deals most wonderfully with the children of men,
sometime in one manner, sometime in another, observing no certain method: and
yet does all things righteously; yet as it is testified unto us that it fares
with the righteous even as with the wicked, and with the sinner as the godly
man: so it is not to be understood, as if every godly, and every ungodly man
should have always one and the same portion and state of weal and woe here
in this world; for that many godly men here on earth are subject to great
afflictions, and many godless men live in abundance of pleasures; and so on
the contrary: But the meaning thereof is this, that weal and woe shall not
only be incident to the wicked crew, or unto the little number of the godly,
but that prosperity and adversity, may both of them be fonnd to happen, and
to be given, both unto the ungodly wheresoever they be, and the like again to
the righteous, wheresoever they remain: which both the word of God, and
experience teaches us to be true: for in the word of God, do we not find a
righteous Abraham, and an ungodly Nabal, and both of them were rich; A
righteous Lazarus, and an ungodly sort of men, Job 30. 1. 2. 3. 4. that were
poor, yea beggars. Again, are we not taught this by experience? go into the
tents of Sem, look into the houses of the righteous; there you shall find
some in prosperity, and some in adversity: one house rich, another miserable.
Go into the tents of Kedar, look into the houses of the ungodly, and you
shall find them in the like manner. All these things the Lord does according
to his free will and mighty power, and deals with the children of men,
according to the absolute, unlimited, and sovereign pleasure of his will.

CHAP. III. That Gods proceedings with and toward the children of men, cannot
by man be comprehended.
THus then it appears, that the ways of God are unsearchable. For who can
judge of and imagine the reason, or cause why God sends trouble, adversity,
poverty, and misery unto one righteous man, that fears God, shunneth evil,
and lives as uprightly as any other of his estate and degree can or may do;
and on the contrary exalts and raises another righteous man to great wealth
that is not altogether such a one in all degrees as the former? On the other
side, who can enter into Gods counsel, to know why God sends great trouble
and misery to one ungodly man that is not wickeder then his neighbor: and on
the contrary, gives another ungodly person, that in no sort is any thing
better then the other; great wealth, happy state on earth, and all prosperity?
Nor are we to wonder, when we shall behold that which oftentimes we see to
happen here upon earth: That on the one side, a righteous man that is zealous
of Gods honor, fights for the defense of Gods cause, and seeks to advance
and further the same, is many times so much crossed and ouerth warted in his
proceedings, that it seems that both heaven and earth are bent against him,
and is in such perplexity, that he knows not which way to wind or turn
himself, as David was when the town of Ziglag was spoiled, and his own
people conspired against him, 1. Sam. 30. 6. On the other side, that an ungodly
man, that indureth no manner of adversity, is an utter enemy unto God, and
seeks by all the means that the can, utterly to extirpate and root out the
memory of his most holy name out of the earth, and yet is oftentimes so much
helped and seconded in his wickedness, that heaven and earth and all things
therein seem to hold with him, and he brings his affairs unto so happy
and prosperous an end, that he is a terror and fear to the miserable and
small troops of the righteous. Who can tell or find out the true ground of
these ways of God? See we not that God many times calls a righteous man out
of this world in the flower of his youth, concerning whom in all men's
judgments it had better, and it might have been wished, that he might still
have continued, and lived longer here on earth, being one that did so much good
in his own house, in the place wherein he dwelt, and in his calling wherein
he lived: and on the contrary, suffers an ungodly man to live long and many
years here in the world, being an unprofitable member, that fares like a
roaring Lion and a ravening Bear among his housh^^d, spending and consuming
all that he has or can come by, wronging his wife and children, defiling the
place where he lives with scandalous and wicked actions, and which is more,
leading many others with him into destruction, and by his long life withholding
and keeping others out of some necessary places of service, who, were they
employed in the same would do much good: Who can declare or truly imagine the
ground of this proceeding? Does it not oftentimes fall out, that an ungodly man
is stricken with an apoplexy while he is busy about his wicked actions in
some one kind or other? and also that a righteous person is stricken by the
hand of God, while he labors about the furtherance and advancement of Gods
glory and is only careful thereof? That the Lord strikes an ungodly Arrius,
causing his bowels to burst, and his guts to fall out of his belly, as he
sits upon the stool to ease himself, and so dies; and that the same God
brings a righteous man his adversary to the like death: who would not be
abasht thereat, to consider of such incomprehensible ways and works of God?
And when men shall observe and weigh with themselves, in what manner of
opposite condition, they see and behold both the godly and ungodly, they must
needs, and cannot choose, but acknowledge and confess that the Lord works
most wonderfully and vnsearchably therein.

There are two godly men of one state and quality, that both live in great
prosperity and wealth, and two other godly men, that both live in great
trouble, penury, and misery: also there are two ungodly men of one calling
and condition, that both live in great wealth and worldly happiness; and two
other unrighteous men, that are unhappy and endure great misery. And there are
two godly men of one calling, whereof the one prospers in all his affairs,
the other is crossed and troubled. There are two ungodly men of one condition,
whereof the one is crossed in his affairs, the other prospers. There is a
godly and an ungodly man, who although they be both of one calling in worldly
affairs; but yet differ much in their lives and conuersations touching Gods
service, that both live in great prosperity: And there is a godly and an
ungodly man, of one condition for worldly matters, that both are crossed and
endure much trouble and adversity. There is a godly and an ungodly man, of one
state and condition, whereof the godly man has prosperity, and the ungodly
man adversity: And again, there is an other godly man and an ungodly man of
one calling in the world, whereof the godly man has much adversity and many
crosses, and the ungodly man great prosperity. What profoundnesse of Gods
works are these? what wonderful ways of God are these? Many men pass these
things slightly over; but those that have understanding, and know the word of
God, marking and beholding these things daily to come to pass in the world,
thereby note how wonderfully the Lord works in things that happen unto the
children of men. Who can enter into the depth of these ways of the Lord? who
can tell the reason thereof?

In all respects then, the works of God are wonderful to the children of men,
and wholly unsearchable. He has his ways in the Seas, Psalm. 77. 19. And his
footsteps are not known, and his ways past finding out: There is no wisdom
nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord, Prou. 21. 30. Our goodness
extends not to him, Psalm. 16. 2. Neither can our wickedness hurt him, Job.
35. 6. 7. 8. Therefore it fares so with the works of God, that whatsoever God
does, it shall be for ever, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from
it, Eccles. 3. 14; in such manner as experience teaches, that although those
that are most diligent and careful in their affairs, go forward therewith,
yet many times, even the most diligent and careful men fail and are crossed in
their proceedings: so that we may well say with Solomon; I returned and saw
under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to them all,
Eccles. 9. 11. And therefore consider we the time and the chance, which God
the Lord has only reserved to himself, Acts 1. 7. so that it depends
wholly on him.



CHAP. IIII. Why God so orders his works, as we think, here in this world
that in a manner they follow of necessity, and rules in such sort, that it is
commonly and ordinarily found, that man by his own wisdom or power, can
deither add thereunto, nor diminish any thing from them.
SOLOMON expressly sets down unto us, that God so orders his works and
heavenly providence, to the end that men should fear him. Whatsoever God does,
it shall be for ever, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it,
and God does it that men should fear him, Eccles. 3. 14. That is, that men
should not forsake him nor despise his works, neither yet cleave unto, nor
depend upon any man, but only upon God; That the wise man may not glory in his
wisdom, nor the mighty man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches;
but that he that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows
that God is the Lord, which exercises loving kindness, judgment, and
righteousness on earth, Jeremy 9. 23. 24.

By that which before has been said, touching the admirable and strange works
of GOD, wrought and brought to pass among the children of men: We are taught,
first, not to trust upon* or unto our own wisdom, diligence, beauty,
strength, friends; riches, nor any other terrestrial thing whatsoever it may
be, which yet are many times esteemed to be fit and necessary for the
bringing of worldly matters to pass, and to further our proiects: but only to
fear the Lord our God, and to remember that he holds a greater hand over
us, then all those things do, Eccles. 5. 8. Secondly, before and above all
things to attend to his good will and pleasure, touching the event thereof, as
much as in us lies, and as much as possibly we may, in all the means and
ways which God sets before us, and which he will have the children of men
to use, and whereby also he commonly uses to prosper their actions, and to
bless them. And herein we must the rather be specially careful, for that the
perverse children of men, who by nature are wickedly bent, use to draw another
conclusion from this point of doctrine, that all things do in such manner
depend on God, for they conclude not from therice, that therefore above all
things they must only depend upon the Lord their God; but on the contrary,
that they need not therefore refrain from evil doing, but that they may still
follow after their own lusts, and take their pleasures as long as they can:
They take likewise further occasion thereby, to walk most carelessly and
dissolutely here on earth, with more greediness to commit sin and
wickedness, and desperately to enter into all kind of mischief; reasoning
thus with themselves, and saying, How can I help it, seeing all depends upon
God? my resolution is therefore to lay hold on the time, and to take my
pleasure while I may. Whereas on the contrary, they ought rather to learn much
more to fear the Lord, and call to mind and say, that, seeing all depends on
God, hew much ought I to fear that God who only can do good or evil unto me.
Yea, so would they both think and do, if they believed, that this wonderful
God, is also a good God. But doing other-wayes they show thereby, that they
sollow the nature and steps of the Devil that expects no good from the hands
of God.

This conceit of the ungodly must be clean banished from us; and we must
remember that all things depend upon God, and therefore so use the means, that
before and above all things we seek and labor to have God on our side in
every thing that we do. We must also fear him in such manner, that we must
hold and esteem all that God does to be good, right, and well done, although
we cannot see nor perceive the cause or the reason of his actions. A Child
sees his Father do many things in the house whereof he cannot conceive the
reason, and yet nevertheless he reapeth benefit, and fares the better
thereby; So must we also (...) and often times think with our selves, tha^
Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our ways hi^ w^^es; for as the heavens
are higher then the earth* so his ways are higher then ours, and his thoughts
then our thoughts, Esa. 55. 8. 9. And consequently, that although Gods ways
unto fleshly men seem not to be right; yet we must not with the Israelites
say, the way of the Lord is not equal, Ezech. 18. 25. Nay, although God suffer
the ungodly to live in great wealth, prosperity, and pleasure, here in this
world, and on the contrary makes the godly to turn his back upon the enemy,
letting them that hate them spoil them, giving them like sheep appointed for
meat, and scatters them among the Heathen, sells them for nothing, and
does not increase his wealth by their price, makes them a reproach to their
neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them that are about them, makes them a
byword among the Heathen, a shaking of the head among the people, so that
their confusion is continually before them, and the shame of their faces does
cover them, for the voices of those that reproach and blaspheme them, by reason
of the enemy and revenger, Psalm. 44. 10. etc. Yet we must think well of the
ways of God, and must not murmur against him, nor say, that he has wrought
iniquity, Job 36. 23. Neither must we by any means think or conceive, That
God should do wickedness, or that he should commit iniquity, Job 34. 10. or
that the Judge of all the earth should not judge right, Genesis 18. 25. or that
the wise God that gives the labourer wisdom to plow his Land, thereby to
reap a good harvest thereof, should himself use no wisdom in the framing of
his Children, to make them fruitful, Esa. 28. 23. 24. etc; But on the
contrary, although we cannot conceive the depth of the wonderful ways of God
toward the sons of men, yet we must hold this for a general rule, that all
the works of God are done in truth and righteousness, Psalm. 1^1. 8. and that
our God is the rock, his work is perfect; that all his ways are Judgment; a
God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right he is; and that they have
corrupted themselves, and it is a blot to them that they are not his Children,
but are a perverse and crooked generation, that turn away from him for any
cause whatsoever, a foolish and unwise, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 5. and therefore when any
such difficulties enter into our minds, if we will conceive aright thereof, we
must not forget the Lord, nor deal falsely in his covenant, we must not turn
our hearts from him, nor our stepps from his ways, Psalm. 44. 17. 18. And in all
these actions and proceedings how strange and wonderful soever they seem unto
us, we must be dumb and not open our mouth, because it is God that does it,
Psalm. 39. 10.

CHAP. V. That notwithstanding, that Gods works done and wrought among the
Children of men are so wonderful, and incomprehensible, yet we may learn and
find out many special things, and reap much benefit, by his said works so
wrought and done among them.
AS it is a most godly and holy thing, and very commendable, for men in all
accidents that happen here on earth among the Children of men, to note the
finger of God to be therein, and to ascribe the same to Gods powerful
providence; so we must not slightly refuse or neglect, to consider what God the
Lord in his wonderful wisdom has secretly purposed and intended by this or
that course, cross, or calamity, that he brings in sundry wise upon his
chosen people, seeing experience teaches us, that the several things that
happen unto us during our lives many times produce strange, and far other
effects, then men expect from them. It seemed that our case once would have
gone but hardly, and would have been but sorily supported or countenanced,
when as long since, he on whom we then much relied, and under whose
protection we hoped to rest quietly, by a wicked blow was taken from us; And
yet nevertheless, since that time it has gone with us better and better. We
were likewise once persuaded, that when such or such of our friends should grow
stronger, that our affairs would then have better success, and go more
prosperously forward, and yet secretly it fell out otherwise.

This might move some men to conceive and say, that seeing it is so with the
works of God that are wrought among the Children of men, that his ways and
his proceedings are so strange and unsearchable, how can we then out of Gods
works learn any certain or special thing, touching and concerning our own
states, and our duties toward God in his works, whereunto notwithstanding,
we are so earnestly, and oftentimes exhorted, and incited in the holy
Scriptures, Psalm. 92. 6. 7. Esa. 28. 23. 24. Hos. 14. Psalm. 107. Especially,
seeing it falls alike with the godly and ungodly man, in all their worldly
proceedings, wherein oftentimes so unexpected things happen and fall out, how
can we take occasion thereby to praise and glorify the Lord, or to humble our
selves before him, in regard of his extraordinary works, as if he had done some
special thing for us, when as we fare no better then other men commonly do,
and it is yet uncertain what will further proceed thereof?

I answer, although instantly by Gods ordinary or extraordinary works we
cannot conceive Gods favor and affection toward men, nor man's state in
regard of God, thereby to take occasion, specially, for the same to praise the
Lord our God, and to seek after him; notwithstanding when we once well know
and perceive man's state in regard of God, and our own or any other men's
special state in that kind, we may by the ordinary works of God here done
amongst men, learn and conceive many good things; as for example, when we know
a man to be one that truly fears God, and yet see that notwithstanding many
crosses and troubles befall him, and happen to him in this life, we may thereby
learn, That God the righteous Judge of all the world, finds cause and matter
enough, when it pleases him, To try the best men that live here on earth, by
laying great tribulations upon them, and by many miseries to prove their
patience, Job 4 Whereby also we are further admonished, That although we are
commanded to live holily, and as much as in us lies to seek to do the same,
yet that we must not persuade our selves, that all things therefore here on
earth shall fall out well and prosperously with us according to our desires;
but rather must make our account that nevertheless many tribulations and
crosses may fall upon us here in this world, and thereupon prepare and arm our
selves patiently to endure them. But that we may the better perceive and
understand how to reap much profit by Gods works done among the Children of
men, we must know that although they are things that are unsearchable by men,
to conceive why God deals so diversely with one ungodly man, in respect of
another ungodly man, that is like unto him, that the one fares clean contrary
to the other, as for example, giving the one ungodly man much wealth and
prosperity, and laying much adversity, and many plagues upon the other, as
also why God imposes as much, and the very same on a righteous man, that he
does on an ungodly man, and makes no difference in outward show between them
therein, giving both the one and the other, either wealth or poverty at his
good will and pleasure, yet we may by the word of God find out and know, why
God does so unto them, or to any other man that is godly or ungodly; For the
Lord our God, that is a wise God, has opened many things unto us in his Word,
concerning his will and dealings with the Children of men, which if we mark
and well consider the same, we shall learn many things touching the ordinary
workings of God among men; whereof in the next Chapter I will make a further
declaration out of the same Word.

CHAP. VI. Showing diverse several things, which the Lord has opened unto us
in his Word, touching his good pleasure and dealings with the Children of men
here on earth, necessary to put out of our minds all doubts concerning the
works of God, and to strengthen them in the contrary effects.
FIrst, and before all other things, God in his word opens unto us, That he
loves men freely as they are men, Titus 3. 4. Which he witnesses, that he
does by being the Savior of all men, 1 Tym. 4. 10. Therefore also the Psalmist
witnesses, that God preserves both man and beast, Psalm. 36. 6. And Jesus
Christ himself says, that God makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on
the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust, Math. 5. 45. When
we see therefore that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 18. we may thereupon
certainly conclude, That there is something wanting in men, and that for many
causes man deserves punishment for sin, which God disliketh, Romans 3. 23. and
thereby we may further learn, that sin is the mother of all miseries, and
that there is nothing in the world which we should with more care and caution,
hate, shun, and abhor, then sin, as the only thing that moves our Creator
to dislike of us, and makes all us that are his creatures abominable in his
sight.

Secondly, God in his word shows us, that he has a care of those that fear
him, and of such as are godly; and seeks to do them good, but how any of us
are made godly and righteous, all of us by nature being wicked and lost sheep,
Romans 4. 3. Ephesians. 2. 5. Is not at this time to be spoken of; and on the
contrary, that he hates the ungodly, and powers out his wrath and
indignation upon them. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are open to their cry; The face of the Lord is against them that do
evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth, Psalm. 34. 15. 16.
which he says he will do when he thinks good, when the days of visitation,
and of recompense are come, Hos. 9. 7. Exodus 32. 34. Then he will wretchedly
destroy those wicked men, Mat. 21. 41. And on the contrary, when the righteous
call, the Lord hears and delivers them out of all their trouble, Psalm. 18.
27. Thereby understanding, that he delivers them, by taking them like a wise
workman, out of the furnace of adversity, when they are sufficiently purified
and cleansed; That is, in the time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

From whence it follows without contradiction, in regard that God is so
diuersely affected toward the godly and ungodly man, that in that respect,
when he sends one and the like prosperity and adversity, both on the godly
and ungodly, he does it not for one self same intent, nor to one end. That
which God himself witnesses unto us, on the one side, that whatsoever
tribulation or misery he sends to the godly man, it is for his good and
great benefit, yea even the crosses themselves are so; for God inlighteneth
their darkness, Psalm. 18. 28* and so it falls out, That all things work
for the best to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. So that the troubles of the
godly, are unto them as an entry into life everlasting, an earnest penny, and
as it were the first fruits of heavenly joys, Psalm. 23. 6. As also the
crosses of the godly, are unto them as a precious medicine to heal their
souls, and a true means to prepare the way for them to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, Acts 14. 22. And in this manner all things are a blessing
to the godly; For godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promises
of this life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8.

On the other side, whatsoever the ungodly endure, it is altogether a curse
unto them, for God carseth their blessings, Matt. 2. 2. So that whether it be
prosperity or adversity, it happens unto them, it falls out amiss with
them: for all things are unclean unto them; because their minds and
consciences are unclean, Tit. 1. 14 Deuteronomy. 8. 15. The adversity then of the
ungodly is a feeling of, and a preparatiue to everlasting condemnation, an
earnest penny, and the first fruits of the pains of hell, Iud. 5. 7. and their
prosperity is like a poisoned drink unto them, for by their wickedness, the
more they abuse their prosperity, the more they spoil their own souls, and
so it become a powerful means to carry them unto hell, and to the kingdom
of darkness, Apcc. 18. 7. This God opens unto us plainly in his word,
whereby we may openly learn and understand that the state of the ungodly,
whether it be adversity or prosperity, is altogether miserable; and on the
contrary, that the adversity or prosperity of the godly, is a happiness unto
them. For it is most certain, that if the ungodly man does not in time repent
and amend his life, at the last he shall be sure of after condemnation, and
the godly man of everlasting joy and felicity, as we have a manifest example
thereof in the state of the rich man, and of poor Lazarus, Luke 16. 19. And
who sees not, that the rich man for all his wealth and worldly prosperity,
was an accursed wretch, and that poor Lazarus in his greatest misery was
happy and blessed? what man is he, that would not rather choose, looking into
the end of them both, to live in this world in the state of poor Lazarus, then
in that of the rich glutton?

So you see, that from these different affections of God, both unto the godly
and the ungodly, which he has showed unto us in his word, and by their last
ends which thereupon ensue, the grounds of the hope and comfort that the godly
have and receive in the midst of their adversity and troubles: And the grounds
of the fears and miseries, which the ungodly are like to fall unto, whiles
they possess worldly prosperity and pleasure. But hearken yet further, what
the Lord himself says unto his servants and messengers touching them both:
Say unto the righteous that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings: Woe unto the wicked it shall be ill with him, for the
reward of his hands shall be given him, Esa. 3. 10. 11. Now if we consider
this well, and take good heed, and earnestly mark the end, both of the godly
and of the ungodly, we shall be thoroughly persuaded, from the doubtful
conceit that we have in our minds, touching the works of God done here upon
earth among men, when we oftentimes behold and see the ungodly to prosper so
much in this world, and the godly live in poverty and adversity, which for
that it is a matter of great importance, in the next Chapter I will more at
large open the same unto you.

CHAP. VII. That there is no cause at all, why men should make any doubt or
question, when they see many ungodly men here prosper in the world, and diverse
godly men live in poverty and adversity.
THere are two special reasons, that move men to become careless and
licentious here in the world, when they see and behold how it fares, both with
the godly and ungodly in this world. The first is, that many times they see,
that those that fear God are in great misery and calamity, and the ungodly
prosper and abound in wealth. This many men cannot brook, while they are
persuaded, that it stands not with the great Majesty of the Godhead, and
the Justice of God to deal in such manner; and the reason is, because they
look upon nothing but the outward show, and consider not the end for which God
does it; for if in the lest degree they did but think and remember, that God
means well to the godly, and that their oppressions are wholesome medicines
for their souls, the better to prepare them for the life to come: And on the
contrary, that the prosperity of the ungodly is like the Quale^ to the
children of Israel, that died while they were in their mouths, then they would
presently see and perceive that they have no cause to doubt of, or to
misconster and stumble at the works of God. For to speak the truth, who is he
that will longer stumble at, or think it strange to see, that God loses and
slacketh the bridle to the children of the world, but tu^^reth, holds in,
restrains instantly, and suffers not his children to have their wills, when
he remembers that the Lord does it to his children, to the end that they may
become the more spiritual and better prepared for the kingdom of heaven: do
we not the like in matters of less importance, continually in our houses to
our children, we suffer our dogs that we^ breed in our houses, to run at
liberty loose and untied, and have no regard what they do, nor how it fares
with them, but is it not our manner to look narrowly to our children, to keep
them short, to teach and instruct them; and why do we so, but only to bring
them up to all virtuous actions, and for their better preferment. So that it is
to a special end, that we have so great a care of our children, which in no
wise we do intend to our dogs, but let them run where they list.

The word of God therefore advises us, to cast off all doubts and fears
touching the works of God, and to rid us thereof, wills us not to look
only upon the outward end of the children of men, and to consider of nothing
else, but the course of this present world, even as the state of the rich
glutton, and of poor Lazarus, is set down and declared unto us by Jesus
Christ himself, Luke 16. So the Apostle Saint Paul warns us, saying;
Remember those that have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word
of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation, Heb. 13.
7. And to the same end Saint James says, Behold we count them happy which
endure; you have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord; for the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy, James 5. 11.

Touching the prosperity of the ungodly, who would be grieved thereat, when we
mark and think upon their ends; they stand upon slipperie ground and soon
fall down: and then comes in the hard and heavy reckonings which they must
make at the latter day, see the 49. Psalm; What is he that grudgeth at the
good that men do to those that are condemned to die, or at the friendship that
is showed unto them by some, when they are led to execution to be broken on
wheels? or who would not choose to pass thorough a troublesome and durtie way,
to enjoy a great inheritance, then thorough a fair and pleasant way to go to
execution? do not many honest householders, dislike of swaggering companions,
that daily and hourly haunt the best Innes and Tauernes in the City, and
consume their wealth in banquet after banquet, as long as their credits last? and
do they not think them men of little wisdom or consideration? and is it not
found to be so when they make up their reckonings at home in their houses? So
it stands with the prosperity of the ungodly many times here in this world,
they have great wealth and abundance: but they spend upon their own stocks,
and a hard reckoning follows after it: whereas on the contrary godly men,
that in this world are kept short and spend upon their fathers purse, whether
it be superfluously or otherwise, as their father thinks it good, have no
fear of an after reckoning, all is freely forgiven them: Thus their ends
differ much one from another. This when the Psalmist considered, although
before touching this point of the works of God, how the ungodly prosper, and
the godly live poor and miserably, he was somewhat troubled, and muttred
thereat, yet at last he was persuaded, as he himself witnesses, saying;
When I thought to know this it was too painful for me, until I went into
the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end, Psalm. 73. 16. 17.

CHAP. VIII. That there is no cause why men should be so much abashed, when
they shall consider how the enemies of Gods people, when they encounter in
battle with the people of GOD, and have the upper hand and overthrow them.
YET this is not all, that which causes greatest dislike in the hearts of many
men, touching the works of God done among the sons of men; the chiefest
reason consists herein, that men oftentimes see and behold, that not only
many ungodly men live in great prosperity, and many righteous men in great
misery, but that men see and observe that the ungodly oftentimes oppress the
godly, and that when Gods people and their enemies, encounter in battle and
fight together, many times their enemies have the victory and overcome them.
This is the point that produces greatest difficulty, and many men cannot be
resolved, how it should come to pass that the servants of the most high God,
that have his cause in hand, that are jealous of his glory, and fight for his
truth, should be overcome by those that are Gods enemies, that Gods cause
should turn the back, and falsehood and deceit have the upper hand; this by
many men cannot be conceived nor considered as it should be, for that as
things are brought to pass, they see nothing but contrary effects. The ungodly
are hardened in their ungodliness, and the godly weep and mourn, all things
are worse and worse, and the name of the Lord by this means slandred, and
evil spoken of, and his truth blamed.

I answer, we must needs confess and acknowledge, that these are most
profound ways of God, but the Lord also in his holy word has given us to
understand, what the meaning is of these his most wonderful works, and
tells us that he has reason so to do, both in respect of the godly, and the
ungodly, and of his people, and their enemies; and first gives us to
understand, that in these occurrents he is patient, and long suffering, Luke
18. 7. That he is not so hasty as we are, Psalm. 116. 11. He can endure that
his cause, and his peoples cause should sometime be hindered, and that the
ungodly should domineire, as if Baal or As^aroth, and not the God of Israel
ruled and governed the world, and teaches us further that he suffers it so
to be, thereby the more to advance his honor, when he once begins so to rise
up, that his enemies are driven back, and that he lifts up again the heads
of his people, which before were dejected and cast down. Thus he witnesses,
that for the same cause he suffers his people of Israel to be humbled, that
afterward he might advance them, and that so all the world might see that it
was neither their policy, wisdom, nor power, but his blessings that had
releiued, and raised them up, Deuteronomy, 8. 9.

Here what the Lord to this end says by the Prophet; The earth mourns and
languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down, Sharon is like a wilderness,
and Basan and Carmell shake off their fruits; now will I rise says the Lord,
seeing my people are so much confounded, and every man thinks, that they are
wholly overthrown, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self, Esa. 33.
9. 10. I have a long time houlden my peace, says he, I have been still and
refrayned my self, now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and
devour at once, Esa. 42. 14. the enemies of my people. This is Gods purpose
when he suffers his people for a time to be ouer-run and mastred by their
enemies: which if we consider well, we will no longer be abashed thereat, nor
stumble at Gods works, though things go never so cross for a time with Gods
own people, and that the enemies of the Gospel thereby seem to grow strong.

When we read of the prosperity of Hammon the cruel and sworn enemy of Gods
people, and understand that he proceeded so far, that all the people of
Israel were judged to die, and that he being their greatest and bitterest
enemy, had the execution thereof committed to him, would not men thereby
conclude, looking upon the outward untoward proceedings, that the Lord had
abandoned and forsaken his people of Israel; yet we know in the end, that the
higher that Hammon the enemy of Gods people did clime, the nearer the
destruction of the Children of Israel seemed to be, and the more the enemies
of Gods people being disappointed of their purposes were confounded, the more
honor the Lord did then reap unto himself, by the deliverance of his people.
So wonderful is God the Lord in his works: whereby it appears, that even
then when he suffers the cause of his people in a manner to fall unto the
ground, he still houldeth the rudder in his hand, and has an eye on them, and
a care that they shall not altogether be overthrown.

And so all the misunderstanding, wrong judging, mis-construing and stumblings
at Gods works consists herein, that we only look upon exterior things, and
never remember to go into the Sanctuary of God, to look into the end of his
ways, and what his secret meaning is therein. Mark what I say. Queen Ester
that was a great friend to the people of God, and sought what means she could
to deliver the people of Israel from that danger, and to bring Hammon to
confusion, what course did she take. She invited the King and Hammon with him
to be her guests, she received and entertained him friendly, and Hammon could
perceive no other but that he was very welcome to the Queen, and boasted
thereof to his friends; And yet that was not enough, Hester bad him to be her
guest the second time, and showed him a fair countenance from time to time.
Now what might the Jews that knew not Queen Hesters meaning, have conceived
and judged hereof? might not they have thought, that Hester also consented with
Hammon to help to root out and confound the Jews? But the meaning was clean
contrary: she sought to bring Hammon to confusion, and to deliver the Jews
from death; the issue thereof shows it plainly, Hest. 5. 7.

Thus the Lord our God many times works with the enemies of his people, he
seems for a while to draw them on, and to leave his own people, to make them
the more confounded and ashamed, when unexpectedly he overthrows them, and
delivers his people from them. Touching these ways of God therefore we must
attend Gods pleasure, and in the mean time patiently expect his leisure. And
this God declares unto us in his Word touching his strange workings aforesaid,
which to men seem so offensive, yea, which is more, our good God shows us
yet more special and waightier causes, wherefore at sometimes he suffers his
own people to be oppressed by their enemies, and lets them fall into great
miseries and troubles, whereof some conceive, the enemies of Gods people,
others Gods people themselves. Touching his own people, sometimes he suffers
them to fall into the hands of their enemies, and by that means ladeth them
with a heavy yoke; because they did not endeavor themselves wisely, and as it
became them, to bear his Fatherly yoke on their necks. Hear what the Lord to
that end says to his people: Because that thou seruest not the Lord thy God
with ioyfulnesse, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all
things; therefore shall thou serve thine enemies, which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all
things, and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, and all this the Lord
does, as he himself also witnesses, that his people might know what
difference there is between serving of him, and serving the Kingdoms of his
enemies, 2 Chro. 12. 8. Therefore for that his people by the subtlety of
Satan, the temptations of the world, imbecilitie and carelessness sometimes
esteem not of the sweet yoke of Christ, and calm running water of Shilo as
they should do, the Lord lays a heavy yoke upon them, and brings them
into deep, and many waters of oppression; wherein what strange thing does the
Lord? What does he I say, that should move men in any manner to dislike? When
we use to do the same (and think and persuade our selves that we do wisely)
with our own Children; that sometimes we put to hard Schoole-maisters, and
cruel teachers for a time, that they might learn and know how easy a yoke
they bear on their shoulders in their Fathers houses, which yet when we do,
it is out of mere love, and for the good and profit of our Children.

On the other side, touching the enemies of Gods people, although then they
seem specially to be happy and blessed, when in that manner they get the
upper hand of Gods people, and devour them like bread; yet the truth is, that
no greater plague can happen unto them, then when they are permitted to
oppress and wrong the people of God, and to wash their hands in their blood;
which the Lord in his great wrath sometimes permits to be done, when he
determines to suffer them to fill up the measure of their wickedness, and to
hasten their Judgment, and utter destruction. Even then when they overcome and
spoil the people of God, and lead them Captives away with them as a prey, They
do nothing else but in a manner heap up a great deal of wood, stubble, and
straw, with coals of fire under them, which at the last burns them all up. For
so the Lord himself witnesses, saying; In that day will I make the
wilderness of Judah like a harth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of
fire in a bundle of straw, Zach. 12. 6. And again, And in that day will I make
Jerusalem a burthensom stone for all people; all that burden themselves with
it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against it, Zach. 12. 3. Hearken what the Lord in this respect again
and again commands, and oftentimes wills his Prophets to show to the
world: Thou Son of man says he, Prophecy to the mountains of Israel, and
say; Ye Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord; Thus says the Lord;
Because the enemy had said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are
ours in possession, Therefore prophecy and say; Thus says the Lord God;
Because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that
you might be a possession unto the residue of the Heathen, and ye are taken up
in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people, Therefore ye
Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God; Thus says the Lord God
to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, to the
desolate wastes, and to the Cities that are forsaken, which are become a prey
and derision to the residue of the Heathen, that are round about. Therefore
thus says the Lord, surely in the zeal of my jealousy I have spoken against
the residue of the heathen, and against all Idumea, which have appointed my
Land into their possessions, with the joy of all their heart, with dispitefull
minds, to cast it out for a prey, Prophecy therefore concerning the Land of
Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, and to the rivers, and
to the valleys; Thus says the Lord God, Behold I have spoken in my jealousy,
and in my fury, because you have borne the shame of the heathen, therefore thus
says the Lord God, I have lifted up mine hand, surely the heathen that are
about you they shall bear their shame. But ye O Mountains of Israel, you
shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel,
for they are at hand to come, Ezech. 36. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. And for that
the Lord intends to deal in this manner with his own people, and with their
enemies when they overcome and oppress them; he pronounces a woe unto
Assyria, by the Prophet Esaias; and that for this cause, because they were to
ouer-run and oppress the people of Israel for a time, like dirt in the
street; saying, O Assyrians the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and
against the people of my wrath, (where he understands his own people, that
because of their sins had a long time sore offended him) I will give him a
charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like
the mire in the streets, Esa: 10. 5. 6. To this end also the Lord witnesses,
that he delayed to take revenge for the blood of his Children, until more of
them were slain for his truth sake, that at one time he might visit the
enemies of his truth in their own houses and make a just reckoning with them,
Apo. 6. 9 10. 11. Whereby it is manifestly to be seen, That the Lord suffers
the enemies of the truth sometimes to have the upper hand, because that already
by reason of their great sins and offenses committed against him, they have
in such manner offended him, that in his wrath he thinks it fit to slack the
bridle unto them, and to suffer them to proceed from bad actions to worse, for
their heavier judgment and condemnation.

This also must be understood and conceived in matters of less moment, wherein
the Children of the world without reason and lawful ground, get the upper hand
over the Children of God, as when they meet together in battle in the field,
or in any town, or in prayer, or at a marriage, or such like, and there are
slain, murdered or spoiled, and in all other such like occurrents. And thus
the Lord finds occasion both in regard of his own people, and of their
enemies, now and then to make his people the foot and not the head, that he
suffers them to lie under feet, and the enemies of the truth to tread upon
them; which whosoever well waigheth and considers with an understanding
heart, he shall soon perceive and see, that there is no cause of doubt to be
made, or scandal to be found in these works of the Lord.

CHAP. IX. Further Justification of the aforesaid Doctrine, which the Lord
shows us out of his word, touching his proceedings with the Children of men,
against the people of God in our age.
THat we may further Justify this point touching Gods proceeding with his
people, and their enemies, and discuss the difficulties and troubles which in
these times are in diverse places brought upon Gods people by their enemies, we
must after the like manner, with due respect speak generally, both of the
proceedings of the people of God, and of their enemies.

That the light of the Gospel has long time shone most clearly in this age,
as those that know any thing as they ought to do, can tell; and that the same
has been slightly regarded, both by friends and foes, all those plainly
see it, that have received any light at all from the Lord our God. Many both
great and small, both mighty Potentates and mean men, long since and
oftentimes, with all their mights, have strouen against the same, and sought
utterly to dam and smother it up, by all the means they could; esteeming that
to be a false light, which is only able to lead and guide them to the way of
salvation. Others, that in some sort had a liking thereunto, have made no great
account nor estimation thereof, but have suffered it in such sort to shine, and
so served their turns therewith, that they were content to live where it was,
and sometimes to come where it shoane, without making any reckoning to accept,
or, to make profession thereof. And amongst those that proceeded so far, that
they have accepted thereof as a rule of their faith, and an order of living
well; there are many found that have no care orderly, and as they ought to do,
to walk in the light thereof: so that on this side also many lamentable
offenses have been ministered, and doubts been raised to cause controversies
and errors.

This the Lord God, the Father of lights has seen and beheld from the highest
heavens, the place of his holy habitation; and it grieved him much to see and
perceive, such great unthankfulness and ingratitude for so excellent a gift,
then the which (next unto salvation it self) no better has been given by God
unto the children of men: For which cause he has suffered the unthankful
world, and that would not accept the love of the truth, to fall into strong
delusions and great doubts, whereby they took occasion, to cleave unto and
believe lies. So that in this our age, we have seen in the reformed countries
of the world, many great and very dangerous disputations to arise, and
controversies to grow touching religion: whereby many men, that look no
further then upon the outward show and face thereof, were so much amazed and
abashed thereat, that they began more and more to dislike it, and to leave it:
These are deep ways of God, which therefore ought to have moved all
Christian hearts to search into the intent and meaning of God; and withal to
take occasion to shake off the aforesaid unsavory ingratitude, and to bend
their minds unto a more wholesome course of obedience. But this has been
practiced by very few, and at this day is yet too much neglected.

For which cause the wrath of God has been more and more kindled, and his out
stretched arm has not holden back; but in his anger he is gone forth, and
has suffered the ungodly world that hardens it self, to fall into more
hardness and delusion; as every man knows how much the blind world now
hardneth and imboldneth it self, each one in his errors, upon occasion of the
present troubles that daily happen to the people of God in these days: for the
enemies of the Gospel, thereby take occasion to think and persuade themselves,
that they have done great and good services unto God and yet do, when they
persecute and seek to root out the protectours and professors of the truth,
and those that have halted between both, think themselves happy that they
(as many others) have not thrown their lot into the lap of those whose chance
they thought might alter and change. Thus the Lord as he has threatened,
lets it reign snares, fire, and brimstone, and a horrible tempest upon the
ungodly, Psalm. 11. 6. wherein they shall be taken and spoil themselves. For in
all these things, those wretched men do not once remember, that when to
fulfill their own pleasures they do so, they judge unjustly of Gods truth,
and thereby offend against the generation of his Children, Psalm. 73. 15. How
oftentimes was Israel troubled and vexed with contentions and wars amongst
themselves, yea and overrun also by the Philistines and other enemies?
whereas notwithstanding, the Israelites were the only people of God, and only
had the light of salvation among them: What invasions and incursions have the
cruel Heathen diverse times made upon the Christians? and yet we know that the
Christians, and not the Heathens have the truth on their side.

But these things the Lord sometimes suffers, to fall upon and come against
his own people, to cleanse them, to try their faiths, and to the end that
those that remain obstinate might have that which they have deserved. 1. Corinthians. 11. 19. Matthew. 18. 7. And thus it falls out that such miserable men,
that glory and take most delight, to behold the troubles and persecutions of
Gods people, that boast off and persevere in their enmity and perverse
proceedings, are those certainly that are most plagued thereby; for that by
such means they are hardened in their errors and delusions, which lead them
into perdition. Can greater plagues then these be any ways be thought on?
and all this also is just and righteous with God, that those that received not
the love of the truth, that they might be saved, might fall into strong
delusions and believe lies, 2. These. 2. 10. 11. And that those that are the
causes of reuolting and doubts raised, and sometimes strongly mainetaine them,
should have the same measure met unto them, and thereby fall into perdition.

Thus it fares with them (by the wonderful providence of God) as the Psalmist
says; As they loved cursing (for they delighted in error) so let it come unto
them, Psalm. 109. 17. Besides all the curses that yet hang over their heads,
for the oppression, shame, disgrace, and wrongs by them done unto the children
of God in their troubles and adversities: for it is most true and certain,
that although the Lord God suffer his people for a while to be oppressed by
their enemies, when he has once finished all his works upon Mount Sion, and
sufficiently punished his people, he will go to visit their enemies in their
own houses, and cast the rod of his anger into the fire, Esa. 10. 12. Behold
how excellently the Psalmist sets this forth, saying, When God heard this
(that is, that his children many times rebelled against him,) he was wrath and
greatly abhorred Israel; so that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent
that he had placed among men, and delivered his strength into captivity, and
his glory into the enemies hand, he gave his people over also unto the sword,
and was wrath with his inheritance. The fire consumed their young men, and
their maidens was not given to marriage, their Priests fell by the sword, and
their widows made no lamentation. Thus far it went on Gods enemies side, as
we read, 1. Sam. 4. but mark what follows: Then the Lord awaked as one out
of sleep, and like a mighty man that shoots by reason of wine: and he smote
the enemies in the hinder parts, he put them to a perpetual reproach, Psalm
75. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. which also we read in the first of Samuel
the fifth, This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
righteousness is of me, says the Lord, Esa. 54. 17. That the Lord God in his
time shall recompense tribulation to those that trouble them, and give rest to
those that are troubled, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 67. even in the time of need, Heb. 4* 16.
And thus it appears always, that although the Lord seems to have forsaken
his people for a while, and to hold with their enemies, yet in truth, and
certainty this stands firmly, That God will not cast away righteous man,
neither will he help the evil doers, Job 8. 20. how much soever he seems
to stand against his own people, and to strengthen the hand of the ungodly.

These are the wonderful ways of our God and this is the certainty of his
works done among the children of men, which moved the Psalmist, that had a
spiritual eye in some measure, to look into the ways of God, and to set
down the truth thereof, to break out into this speech and say; O Lord how
great are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep, a brutish man knows
not, neither does a fool understand this, Psalm. 92. 5. 6.

Thus we may see, that although the works of God, done among the children of
men, for the most part are hidden from us, and incomprehensible, yet that which
our good God has openly made known unto us in his word, instructs and
inableth us with special profit, fruit, and comfort, to mark and look into
the works of God. It remains then, that we set down and further speak of
certain notable fruits that grow out of that which we have before set down;
which we will do in the Chapter following. ()

CHAP. X. That without contradiction it appears by the aforesaia order of the
works of God, done among the children of men, that there shall be an after
reckoning made, with all the children of men in the world to come.
SEEING, that it is evidently known, that God the Lord is a righteous Judge;
For the works of man shall be rendered unto him, and he will cause every man
to find according to his ways, Job 34. 11. and that it is always found, that
the Lord in this world makes no even reckoning with the children of men, when
he suffers a godly man all his life time to live in great trouble and
adversity, and to dye therein; and sends great riches and joy to an ungodly
man all his life long; and they have no crosses, but their strength is firm,
Psalm. 17. 14. and Psalm* 73. 4. And also by experience in the common course of
the world, it is found that many of the dear children of God, are persecuted
and euilly dealt withal, only because they take Gods cause in hand, are
jealous of God honor, seek the spreading abroad of the Gospel, and the
prosperity of his people, and that it oftentimes fares so with them, that
they are oppressed and lose their lives: therefore, as it happens also to
many other Martyrs of God, and faithful witnesses of his truth, Apoc. 2. 13.
we must of necessity therefore hence conclude, That God for certain will
make an after reckoning in the world to come, for it can by no means stand
with the righteousness and goodness of our God, that he should endure or
suffer his own children, and his faithful servants, who for the fulfilling of
his will, did not refuse to yield their lives into the enemies hands and to
dye, and that for his cause were shamefully handled, cursed, abased, and
slain, should not be revenged, Luke 18. 7. 8. Apocal. 6. 9. 10. 11. Could a
just and an upright Prince endure that his trusty servants and officers,
should be assailed, persecuted, and slain by his subjects, because they seek
to mainetaine and uphold his lawful commandments, and to see them executed,
without taking their causes in hand, revenging their blood, and punishing the
offenders as they had deserved? Much less, will the Lord suffer the hard
dealing with, and handling of his children that are slain and murdered in
this world, to go unrevenged.

Therefore, if there were no other reasons then that only, for which God
should make a common reckoning with the children of men at the latter day, yet
were this cause enough for it. So the Apostle sets down the necessity of
the last day of judgment, to consist upon this; That the godly are here
oftentimes so cruelly oppressed by the ungodly, and says to the Thessalonians,
that it is a manifest token of the righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer, seeing it is
a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 6. 7. Then also
it shall be made manifest, though it be never so much forgotten here in the
world, and how little regard or knowledge soever seems to be taken of the
godly, and those that are righteous, That God harkened, and heard it, and a
book of remembrance was laid before him, for them that feared the Lord, and
thought upon his name, and accordingly it shall then also be known, what
difference there is between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves the Lord, and him that serves him not, Mala. 3. 16. 17. 18. Herewith
the godly also must comfort themselves, as the Prophet also witnesses; and
take heed, that they partake not with the ungodly, of whom Solomon says,
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccl: 8. 11. But
they must rather, seeing God here in this world permits things to pass in
such manner, be thereby more certainly assured, that hereafter there shall
come a great day of judgment, wherein all things shall be made right, and set
straight, and every one shall be rewarded according as he has done, whether
it be good or evil, Act. 3. 21. and 2 Cor. 5. 10. And accordingly the more
crossely and confusedly we see things done and executed here in this world, the
more must we learn to make reckoning of the great day of Judgment, make full
account thereof, and prepare our selves for it, holding for certain, as
Solomon also in the aforesaid place witnesses, That though a sinner do evil
an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know, it shall be
well (not with the ungodly, but) with them that fear God, which fear before
him, Eccl. 8. 12.

This therefore should move all the godly to long for the last day, and the
coming of the Lord, when we shall not only be revenged for all their hard
speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15: And all
instruments that are formed against us shall not prosper, Esa. 54. 17. But
besides that all the parts and pieces of that great work of the providence of
God over the things of this world, that here are so confusedly cast together
upon a heap, shall be seen to be laid very orderly, by the wise and powerful
hand of our God, and from them we shall see a most notable piece of work to
be framed and brought forth, wherein the ungodly with their wicked works,
shall serve as shadows, Eccl: 8. 13. to set more beauty and luster upon the
great glory of the Children of God, who shall then glister like the Sun. Mat.
13. 34.

As also the godly are to expect the same for this cause, that howsoever they
cannot here conceive why this or that thing comes so to pass, yet they may
assure themselves, when the Lord shall come to Judgment, to make all straight,
and to be glorified in his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. He will then bring forth
so glorious a piece of work, and show it unto us, that we shall always
rejoice therein, and praise and glorify our God for the same world without end.

CHAP. XI. That not all outward prosperity is a sign, that the Lord loves
that man to whom he sends the same.
Since by all that which is said before it manifestly appears, that God many
times sends great wealth and prosperity to the ungodly, it is evident and
not to be contradicted, that not all wealth and prosperity is a sign or token
that God favors that man to whom he gives it, for the Lord our wonderful
God gives in his wrath and anger to some men that which they wish and desire;
as he gave Quails to the Children of Israel at their desire, but they dyed
while they were eating of them, Numb. 11. Many a man has earnestly desired,
and also obtained that which in the end was his overthrow. So that it is most
certain, that the wealth and prosperity of the ungodly is nothing else, but
as it were a pasturing of Beasts for the day of slaughter. This God taught
Jeremy, when touching the prosperity of the ungodly he looked into and
searched the ways of God; Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee,
yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments. Wherefore does the way of the
wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very trecherously?
Thou have planted them, yea, they have taken root, they grow, yea, they bring
forth fruit, thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. But
thou O Lord know me, thou have seen me and tried mine heart toward thee.
Put them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of
slaughter, Iere. 12. 1. 2. 3. This is the cause why those that prosper in this
world rejoice, though they are ungodly, they glory in themselves because all
things go well with them, and are persuaded, that it shall always be so with
them, yea, and that God favors and likes them, which notwithstanding is not
so. The Lord often times in this life gives great wealth and prosperity, and
whatsoever they wish or desire, unto those, to whom after this life he will
give hell and utter damnation for their reward: Gods ways in these things are
not like the ways of men: to those that men hate and cannot abide, they wish
no good, no not so much as may continue the twinkling of an eye. But it is not
so with our God, he endures the vessels of wrath with great patience, and
bears long with the ungodly, to see if they will once repent and turn from
their wicked ways, and fear that good God, from whom they have received so
many good things, which if they do not, but ^^^ll continue in their wickedness,
Then undoubtedly, such is the case of the ungodly, that the more wealth and
prosperity they have in this world, the more hated and accursed of God they
are. For this is most certain, that there can come no greater plague in the
world then this to the Children of men, when doing evil it falls out well,
as they imagine with them: for thereby they imbolden themselves in their wicked
ways, and take such a course that they shun no wickedness, and then that
draws more unto them, which the Psalmist says, When the wicked spring like
the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they
shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 7. Therefore the Prophet cries out
against the Children of this world, in this manner; saying, O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end,
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Rejoice not then, you Children of the world, because you flourish
and prosper here, for behold and see that it stands thus with you, as long as
you fear not the Lord, for you can find nothing to make for you out of any
place in the word of God, but that Gods intent and meaning is, to feed you in
this fatt pasture for the day of slaughter, Ier. 12. 3. And that in this world
he will bring that upon you which you deserve; as it happened to Absolon,
Hammon, and others. This is most certain, you stand upon slipperie ground, and
God that judges you is strong, and in the twinkling of an eye can throw you
down. God, I say, whom you fear not (and therefore is against you) comes to
Judgment as a thief in the night. Therefore look before hand, that you stand
upon your guard; turn speedily unto him, and repent, least with the covetous
rich man, for a short and transicorie worldly life you be soon carried away
from hence into everlasting pain and damnation.

CHAP. XII. That all worldly crosses and tribulations are not a show or sign
that God will refuse that man to whom he sends them.
SEeing that by the reasons and proofs aforesaid it is clear and evident,
that God also suffers crosses and tribulations, to fall upon the most godly
men that are here in this world, it appears thereby also without
contradiction, that all tribulations and troubles are not a cross of God,
neither an argument, that God will overthrow, and at once consume us, when he
lays tribulations upon us; but on the contrary, God sometimes suffers his
own loving and dearest children, whom he likes well, and approves of, to
fall into great miseries and calamities sometimes. So wonderful is God in his
works to mankind; those that he loves, and most certainly determines to
give unto them the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting joy, yet them gives he
often into their enemies hands, Ier. 12. 7. For so he witnesses unto us in his
word. And he is wont to Chasten as many as he loves, Apo: 3. 19. For whom the
Lordloueth he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives, Heb 12.
6. Yea, because he loves them, and because he likes them, therefore he
instructs and chastneth them the more: hearken what he says to that purpose
to the Children of Israel, his darlings; You only have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities,
Amos 3. 2. He will come to visit you at home, to make you better, that you may
not perish with the wicked world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.

This might abashe those that are so plagued, and yet are happy, who otherwise
in their weakness many times when crosses fall upon them are wont to say as
Sion said in her grief, The Lord has for saken me, and my God has forgotten
me, Esa. 49. 14. But what says Gods answer? Can a woman forget her sucking
Child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? though
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me, thy Children
shall make have, thy destroyers, and they that make thee wast shall go forth
of thee. I ift up thy eyes round about, and behold, all these gather themselves
together, and come to thee, as I live says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth
thee with them all as with a raiment, and bi^^ them on thee as a bride does;
for thy wast and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction shall
even now be too narrow, by reason of the Inhabitants, and they that swallowed
thee up shall be far away, Esa. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

Therefore all you godly people, that are in any trouble or adversity,
remember this, and persuade your selves hereof, that Gods heart, Gods love, and
Gods favor is not with-drawne from you, although it appears, that your
outward state is changed; the Lord loves you now as well as he did when you
were in your greatest prosperity. God loved David as well when he was in
trouble, and hunted up and down like a hound, as he did, when he sat upon his
Princely throne. Yea, Gods fatherly heart (if I may so speak with reverence)
is then more friendly unto you, when your state is most cross and feeble-some,
as we see that a loving mother is much more moved to pity and compassion,
to seek relief for her Child, when it is sick then when it is whole and
sound. This did Job believe, and therewith comforted himself, and boldly said
unto God, that then showed so strange a countenance toward him (as Joseph did
seem to show a strange countenance toward his brethren, as if he would have
punished them, and yet meant it not, Gen: 42. 7.) and these things have thou
hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee, Job 10. 13. and therefore
concludes, and says; Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.
So the Lord also himself witnesses, that he does not willingly suffer his
people to fall into any trouble, but is moved thereunto, that he may do them
good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Upon this ground did David also comfort
himself in all his troubles, and said to his afflicted soul; Why art thou
cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God, Psa. 42. 11. Yea, at the last it shall for certain go well with the
godly; and to that end hear what the Psalmist says, Mark the perfect and
behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. But the transgressors
shall be destroyed together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off. But the
salvation of the righteous is of the Lord; he is their strength in the time of
trouble. And the Lord shall help them and deliver them; he shall deliver them
from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him, Psalm 37. 37. 38.
39. 40. And although the godly here in this world endure tribulation and
anguish with Lazarus, yet they shall receive the more comfort, Luke 16. 25. All
tears shall be then wipt away from their eyes, Apoc. 7. 17. and everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away Esaias 53. 10. and 51. 11. Therefore, let the
godly comfort themselves with these words, in all their sorrows and troubles.
()

CHAP. XIII. That we cannot measure the state of men, in regard of God, by
wealth or poverty, by prosperity, or adversity, that befalls them in this
world.
BY all that has been said and showed before, it plainly appears, that in
this world it fares (for the most part) alike, both with the godly and
ungodly: from whence it follows undoubtedly, and cannot be denied; that we
cannot measure the state of men, in regard of God, by that which happens unto
them here on earth. Jobs friends may imagine, because he was so sore plagued,
that certainly he was a very wicked man, and hated of God. And men by nature
are much addicted by outward appearance, to judge of the state of a man in
regard of GOD, look touching this, Acts 28. 4. 5. 6. Luke 13. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 29.
19. 20. And mark we how contrarily the blind Idolaters being of this opinion,
judged of their state to Godward in Ieremies days. But we will certainly
(say they) do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouths, to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her as
we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of
Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then we had plenty of victuals, and
were well, and saw no evil: But since we (...) off to burn incense to the
Queen of heaven, and (...) drink offerings out unto her, we have wanted all
things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by famine, Ier. 44. 17. 18.
But Christians must neither do nor think so, else they shall often by
occasion of such actions, M^ke the hearts of the righteous sad, whom the Lord
has not made sad, and strengthen the hands of the wicked, Ezechiel 13. 22.
Since that we have now sufficiently showed, that the Lord oftentimes in his
anger sends men prosperity, and in his favor adversity. Must we, may some
say, make no account at all of that which happens unto the children of men
here in this world be it prosperity or adversity, but pass it over as it is,
I answer; no, we must have a due respect and regard to that which befalls
men, and mark what prosperity or adversity happens unto them, and how it
fares both with them and us; yet not to this end, by the exterior accurrents
of this life, to judge what the state of man is toward God: but on the
contrary, by the adversity or prosperity of men, to know what we are to
conceive of the work of God wrought amongst men, and by the knowledge of the
several accidents of prosperity or adversity, that happen unto the children
of men, in what manner soever they be laid upon them, or received by them,
learn to know Gods affection, intent, purpose, and special mark whereat he
aymeth in sending prosperity or adversity: As for example, some great cross
and tribulation befalls a godly man, by which yet we must not judge that he
himself, or his cause is bad, but that the same trouble which happens unto
him, is sent for a further trial and purging of him. 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7.
Tribulation also falls upon an ungodly man, that therein hardens his heart
toward Gods punishments: hereupon we must conclude, that the trouble that
falls upon such a man (as far as we can judge) is as it were a consuming
fire, and smoke of the eternal fire, 1. Sam. 2. 25. and Chapter 4. Again,
some godly man has much joy and prosperity; this when we behold, we must
conceive that it is a blessing that God bestows upon him, to encourage him
the more to go forward in the way of godliness, Psalm 1 18. and some other
man that is ungodly, has great wealth and much pleasure, and yet he is rather
worse and more wicked then he was before, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Whereupon we may
conclude, that his prosperity (as far as we can conjecture) is a means of
fatting him for the day of slaughter, Ier. 12. 3.

In like manner, when the people of God sometimes forget themselves, touching
their proceedings in their good course of religion; by means whereof, many
times they do not follow the same so earnestly as they should, and is
convenient to be done, and that as they march in battle against their
enemies, they are not wary, according to the counsel of the Lord, to keep
themselves from every wicked thing, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. it happens that God, who is
more specially jealous over his people, and is wont to visit their offenses
home in their houses, Amos 3. 2. For that cause, many times suffers them to
be overthrown in a cause which otherwise is good; as it happened twice to the
children of Israel, fighting against the Beniamites, Judge. 20. Now when any
such thing happens, the people of God upon that occasion must not doubt of,
or call their religion into question, but they must look into their own
proceedings in that action touching the defense of their religion in a good
cause, and thereby take occasion to inquire, what thing either in general or
particular, has been done among them in their proceedings, that might
displease God; in regard whereof he has so crossed them, and having found it
out, humble themselves before God, and amend their faults. And if in that case,
they cannot find any thing, which they may conceive to be the cause of their
overthrow, then they must ascribe the same unto Gods wonderful providence,
which is not to be comprehended by us, but must by every man, with all
humility and submission be accepted and well thought of, Job 13. 23. 24. Job
24.

Thus the word of God teaches us, how to judge of those tribulations and that
prosperity that befalls the sons of men, which if some worldly wise men
would look well into, they would not so unadvisedly scoff at the actions of
Gods children; who, when they have had a glorious victory over their enemies,
thereupon conclude, not that their cause was good (which the other in their
wrong judgment doubt of) but that God has graciously helped them in their
good cause; and having received any overthrow, thence conclude; that the Lord
for their sins, thereby humbles them, and that by such hard blows he would
awake and rouse them up: not to make them imagine that their good cause is bad,
but to move them to amend their sinful lives, that they may not thereby
hinder their good cause, and to cause them in all occurrents to depend upon the
truth, and when they prosper, to give God the Lord the honor and glory, and
when they are overthrown and punished, to ascribe the fault thereof to
themselves: this, I say, no worldling would scoff at, as they unadvisedly do,
if they had learned this infallible truth of God. Which nevertheless is true,
that is, that by the knowledge of the several chances, that happen unto the
children of men, we must measure the meaning and intent of God, in sending
prosperity and adversity unto men: for it is true, that Gods children, as we
find in the holy word of God, always praised the Lord, when they had the
victory over their enemies, as David says; Lord, I know that thou love me,
in that thou have not delivered me into the hands of mine enemies; nor given
them occasion to triumph over me. Psalm. 41. 11. And again, humbled themselves
for their sins, when they were overthrown, Lament. 3. 39. not once in regard
thereof making any doubt of their religion, or imagining that Idolatry had
justly gotten the upper hand, against the true service of God. Besides this, we
must further know, that the things of this world have not their issue and
effect, always according to their own nature and properties, but as the Lord
(who rules them all) pleases to order them. By means whereof it falls out,
that adversity (which of it self is hurtful) yet procures great good to the
godly, and that prosperity (which of it self is pleasing) does yet bring
great hurt to the ungodly. And hereby it comes to pass, that all things
work together for the good of them that fear God, Romans 8. 28. And on the
other side, that all things work together for the worst to them that hate God;
in regard that their minds and consciences also are unclean and accursed,
Tit. 1. 15. Let an ungodly man be advanced, and set above all his other
neighbors; he will become proud and insolent, and ouer-throw himself thereby*
Again, let a godly man have any tribulation befall him; he will humble
himself and become better thereby; and so to the pure all things are pure, but
unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure, or profitable, Tit. 1. 15. And
this proceeds from hence, that the godly on the one side, are a godly plant,
and a heavenly branch, having so great and admirable a power in it, that the
man that is godly is so framed by Gods grace, that whatsoever happens unto him,
or is laid upon him, how troublesome, adverse, hurtful, or mischievous soever
it be of it self by nature, is turned to the best unto him, and to his good
and prosperity; for, Godliness is profitable to all things, having promises
of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. And on the
other side, the ungodly being a plant of he Devil, and a branch of hell, has
so venomous a stalk, and so poysonfull a nature, that the man who is rooted
therein, and will not be brought to leave and abandon it, but still keeps it
by him, it is certain, that whatsoever happens unto him, how good,
profitable, and beneficial soever it be by nature it turns to his hurt and
destruction, in such manner, that even the pleasing and sweet savor thereof,
is contrary unto him, and is with him the savor of death unto death. And
whereas the godly, savor life everlasting in Christ, and eternal salvation:
The ungodly savor nothing but death in Christ, and everlasting condemnation,
2. Cor. 2 16.

Hence it evidently appears, that by outward things which happen unto men,
we must not by any means measure, nor judge their state to Godward at the
first dash; but on the contrary by their state to God-wardes judge, what we are
to conceive of the outward things that happen unto, and fall upon them.

By this that has been said, may many men learn to reform their erroneous
opinions: and not those only of whom we spoke in the eleventh Chapter, who are
wont to take occasion by their outward prosperity, to boast themselves of
their actions, and are persuaded that both they and their actions please God
well, because outwardly they have wealth and prosperity, whereas they should
not judge their state in regard of God, by their outward prosperity, but their
prosperity by their state.

But others also, that are persuaded and imagine that all men, when soever any
trouble or adversity falls on them, and that they are many ways molested,
as stricken sick on their beds, or troubled by their enemies, are wont
thereupon to flatter, and sooth up themselves, and to grow thereby into some
good persuasion, that hereafter they shall fare the better for the same,
because they have endured so much here in this world, and that it be certainly
concluded thence, that they are Gods Children, and that God loves them well,
because they are troubled, and much tribulation here befall them. But this is
no certain token that God likes well of us, because he sends us trouble and
adversity, for he does the same to the ungodly, as we have already
declared. And therefore we must not by outward things, which happen unto men,
either our selves or others, judge or censure our own or their state to
Godward; but on the contrary, by our state to Godward, we must judge the
state of such outward things, whether they be sent unto us as signs of Gods
grace, or of his wrath.

It behooves all those then whom God suffers to fall into any tribulation,
or misery, to be certainly persuaded, that by the same (as the godly use to
do) they ought to become better and better, and to be purged and cleansed,
that doing so they may be certainly persuaded in their consciences, that they
are punished by God in love. To which purpose our hearty wish and prayer unto
God is, that all those that bear the name of Gods people, would take occasion
by the visitation which the Lord God sends upon his people in these our
days, to weigh well, and consider seriously their own present estate, and to
look diligently into themselves, that they might find out their own sins
and misdeedes, for it is most certain, that no man can have any true comfort
from the ground of Gods word in any tribulation, that falls upon the people
of God, but he who finds himself to be thereby so affected, that he does not
only grieve for the common misery of Jerusalem, but is also stirred up to
amend his own life in whatsoever he finds amiss in himself, for so it is
written, that we shall then know, and be certainly persuaded, that God
punishes us out of his love, when by the punishments of God we become better,
and more zealous toward him. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, be
zealous therefore and repent, Apoc: 3. 19. And this we must be so much the
more persuaded of, for that although the Lord uses so to deal with his
people, that he sends them some relief, and in part eases them of their
troubles, when they are fallne into them, and in them call upon him; yet that
his arm is still stretched forth, and his wrath is not assuaged, until his
people put away from them, and clean cast off that which displeases and
disliketh him, and for which he does visit them. Which with all our hearts
we wish might by every one be well and earnestly thought upon. It is not to
be doubted, but that all the troubles which in our times have fallne upon the
people of God, have had their beginning from hence, that we have not so
thankefully (as we ought to have done) received the holy Gospel, and the truth
of Gods word. For we have many times begun to neglect the light of Gods truth,
which has grieved the Lord, and for the same he has visited us at home, which
we have also in part begun to observe and acknowledge, and have thereupon made
a show as if we would amend and reform it, and have humbled our selves before
God with fasting and prayer, making diverse fair shows and promises, as if we
meant to become better and better, and to earry our selves with more obedient
hearts toward God then formerly we had done. Whereupon the Lord our God, who
is good and long-suffring toward us, has again begun to bless us, done
great things for us, and according to our hearts desire filled us with great
hope and expectation, that he would more and more lift up our heads, and give
us many good things. But in all these things we do not once remember, or
think on our promises and vows that we made so solemnly unto him, both in
the beginning of our troubles, and now also in these latter days, while we
were in trouble and necessity, Psalm. 68. 14. For what I pray you has since
that time been amended? Who has since begun to be more zealous for the honor
of God? Who has begun to put forth his hand for reformation of the notable
abuses that are common amongst us, which every man notes, which every man
complains of, which every man disliketh, and yet no man amendeth? and yet we
made promise and vowed unto God every man for his particular, to look unto it.
Now while the days of our fasting and humiliation lasted, and brought such
solemn power and promises with them, by means of those promises and vows,
for a time we procured the threatening hand of God to hold up, and a beginning
of such great matters appeared. But since that we have not performed those
promises made unto God, neither have come any thing near unto the performance
of them, as at this day it appears, what wonder is it now, when we are not
true of our word; when we suffer all things to run at six and seuens, and as
they will, and do not as we should, begin to pay our vows and promises unto
the most high God, and every man to amend that which is amiss with him, from
the particular house-houlder, and so upward to those of highest degree: what
wonder, I say, now is it, that God has begun to lift up his threatening hand
again, and that he suffers us to fail of that we hoped and expected, and
sends unto us hard messages, that may again warn us in Gods name to pay our
vows, and keep our promises with God, or that else he will execute his
Judgment upon us, and thrust us out of all that we have, as one that is our
creditor, and with long patience has borne with us, whom we have still paid
with fair words, but have not once been moved in our hearts to find the
means to keep our promises, and to move ^^m to mercies, whereon
notwithstanding our sa^etie, and welfare specially consists, yea, wholly
depends?

Therefore once again I say and wish with all my heart, that this may be well
and carefully looked into, for it stands us upon and imports us much. And if
that we shall be serious and earnest therein, then all the aforesaid
prosperities of the Children of God will powerfully ouer-shadow us; and we
shall always find that the Lord is with us, and that it is all in vain for
our enemies to seek to destroy us; for, If the Lord be with us, who can hurt
or harm us? Romans 8. 31. Psalm. 27. 1, 2.

CHAP. XIIII. That by all that has been said and showed before, we must
learn to live in the true fear of God, and sincere holiness, and more and
more practice the same.
SEeing the case then so stands, as most evidently appears, that whatsoever
men do, whether they live holily and godlily, or wickedly, and irreligiously,
yet it avails them nothing in this respect, to wit, that they cannot thereby
wholly free and deliver themselves from all troubles and adversities of this
life, nor yet bereave themselves utterly of all outward wealth and prosperity,
but that the same things may happen unto them whither they live godly or
wickedly, and that also it further stands so with men that if they live godly
both their prosperity and adversity are blessings unto them, and on the
contrary, that if they live wickedly, as well their prosperity as their
adversity is a curse unto them; and that to either of them in so high a
measure and degree, that the prosperity and adversity of the godly are either
of them a furtherance unto them to everlasting salvation, and as it were, a
pawn, that hereafter both here and for ever it shall go well with them Psalm.
23. Phillip. 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians 1. 5. 6. 7. Whereas unto the ungodly, both their
prosperity and adversity are a means to further their eternal damnation,
and as it were, a pawn and assurance unto them, that hereafter both here and
eternally it shall go euilly, and hard with them, Leuit. 26. Luke 16. 19.
Apoc. 18. 7. We must learn therefore, and be admonished hereby, if we have not
made a covenant with hell, and given our selves over to the Devil, to forsake
and abandon wickedness, which is so much accursed, and so damnable; and on the
contrary to cleave unto godliness, which is so happy, and so much blessed;
and in this regard should we in this manner argue and reason with our selves;

I know very well that a godly course of life and conversation, is much better
then a loose ungodly, and wicked course, as yet I have so much fear of God in
me, and if I can in any sort effect that which I desire by good and honest
means, I rather desire so to live, then to follow lewd, wicked, and ungodly
courses, and to use wicked, wrong, and evil practices to obtain only some
profit, pleasure, credit, furtherance, and benefit, which thereby I hope to
get. But now I am taught, that in respect of the outward things of this life,
it fares almost alike both with the godly and ungodly, therefore I may much
better attain unto an upright life by the way of godliness, then by the way
of ungodliness. And withal, if I consider it well, I cannot but remember,
that to the godly, both prosperity and adversity are blessings; and on the
contrary, that to the ungodly, both prosperity and adversity are curses, for
that there is an after-reckoning to be made in the world to come, wherein
every one shall be rewarded according to that which he has done, whether it
be good or evil, and after that follows the eternal Judgment, whereby the
ungodly are disposed of, and presently sent down to the bottom of hell, where
there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, world without end; and on
the contrary, the godly are taken up into heaven, where all joy abounds, and
happy life eternal is obtained for them by our Savior Jesus Christ. And if
in any wise I should doubt of these things to come, yet the same are of so
great weight and consequence, that it behooves every man earnestly to think
on them, and to have a care to make sure work thereof, seeing that wisdom
teaches us, not to prepare only for difficult inconveniences, which we know
certainly will come, but to be careful also to prevent such as may come upon
us* and the rather cause to seek to attain unto these outward things that I
desire by godly means, for that by following godliness in true faith, without
fear of any adversity, my meat will not be less sauory, nor my sleep less
sweet, yea, all my actions will thereby bring and procure more fruit and
comfort unto me; and how much more, since that then I shall live without fear
of death and hell, and in an assured hope of heaven, and eternal salvation? In
regard hereof therefore I am fully determined to leave and aband on all
ungodliness, and to follow godliness, and to deny my self, and to give my
mind wholly to serve the Lord my God, and no longer to fulfill the desires of
the flesh, whereon so many miseries do depend, but to follow the will of God,
(which only is good) during my mortal days, that hereafter I may always
live eternally in heaven. In this manner, or the like by thinking upon the
things before declared, should we set our hearts upon the way of godliness and
the fear of God, and so cast our lot into the lap of the godly, knowing that
without doubt it shall go well with such men. And to the end that we may be
enduced and enabled the more diligently to follow godliness, by means of Gods
works done here unto us and others, which he brings to pass in this world,
we will endeavor further to declare and show how, and in what manner we must
prepare our selves, to know, learn, and reap some good out of Gods works,
for the furtherance of the fear of God and godliness in us, and what special
fruits we may reap thereby.

CHAP. XV. How we may profit by all the works of God which he does unto us,
and other men in this world.
THat we may reap good and convenient fruit here on earth, by the works of
God done among men, we must by that which happens unto us, as also to
others, yea and out of all things that are done in the world, and which are
known unto us; diligently consider, and be thereof thoroughly persuaded, how
true every word and syllable of Gods holy word is, how firmly and certainly
it is fulfilled, and how constantly and peremptorily that daily proceeds and
falls out in this world, which he says in his word, that he will bring to
pass: that in all things, and at all times we may say with the Church of God;
As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, in the
City of our God, God will establish it for ever, Selah, Psalm. 48. 8. And with
Solomon speaking to the Lord; That which thou have promised to him, and spakest
with thy mouth to thy servant David, my father, and have fulfilled it with thy
hand, as it is this day, 2. Chron. 6. 15.

And to the end that this may be thus effected to our comfort and benefit, we
must endeavor our selves in the whole course of our lives, narrowly and
earnestly to mark and consider whatsoever falls out, of any weighty
consideration, that we here see done, or suffer in this life, be it temporal,
or spiritual, and whatsoever is against us that is done in the world, and
comes to our knowledge, and compare them with that which God has made
manifest in his word, and protested that he (...), bring to pass, or effect;
and accordingly n^t^ and consider seriously and undoubtedly, that what soever
God has foreshewed in his word, he daily brings to pass in his works.

To this purpose, God has given us a living soul, and has taught us more
then the beasts of the earth, and made us wiser then the fowls of heaven, Job
35. 11. to this end he has set us upon the stage of the world, that we might
plainly see and mark (for our comfort and consolation) the ways of the
children of men here upon earth, together with the several events, that
proceed and spring from thence by Gods heavenly providence. Unreasonable beasts
that live here among us, as Dogs and Catts, see what is done in the world, and
see it with as clear eyes, and many times better and plainlier then men do.
If man then do not endeavor himself (with the inward eyes of his
understanding) not only to see and mark what is done, or what passes in the
world, but which is more, to mark the finger of God to be therein, and
thereby to learn the truth and constancy of God, such a man differs not much
from a beast or an unreasonable creature, Psalm. 49. 21. Psalm. 32-11. in regard
of spiritual life, whereon the difference between the one and the other wholly
depends, yea he is therein, worse then an unreasonable beast, for heavy
plagues hang over the heads of such careless and brutish persons as have no
regard unto the works of the Lord. Hear what the Psalmist says; because
they regard not the works of the Lord nor the operation of his hands: he
shall destroy them and not build them up: Psalm. 28. 5. which in truth is a most
fearful threatening and shows that God esteems and holds such careless
men to be most wicked: To which purpose also Solomon says: Wicked men regard
not that which is right, but those that fear the Lord mark all things: Pro.
20. 5. For this cause we are often times warned and advised to this diligent
marking in holy Scripture, Seek you out of the book of the Lord and read,
noe of these shall fail, none shall miss her mate, for his mouth it has
commanded, and his spirit it has gathered them together: Esaias 34. 16. Iosu.
23. 14. this also Jobs friends and Job himself also marked diligently, in the
whole course of their lives, as in the whole book of Job it is sufficiently
declared; And all the misunderstanding that they had among themselves, touching
Gods works partly consisted herein, that they understood not the word of God
so plainly as we do, and partly also by reason of the extraordinary strange
and unaccustomed dealing of GOD with JOB, which he as then for a time laid
upon him, for a warning comfort and strengthening of all his people as long as
the world should endure, as also to that end he causes it to be written, Ier.
4. 13. Now from hence also it further appears, that to the end we may truly
to our comfort, and with some fruit consider of all the works of* God wrought
among the children of men, there are 4. things specially, and very necessarily
to be observed. First, some distinct knowledge of Gods proceedings manifested
unto us in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, a diligent marking of all Gods
works, wrought here among the children of men. Thirdly a comparing of that
which he does in this world, with that which he witnesses in his word.
Fourthly a constant noting of the several fruits, that spring from the
finding out of the truth of God opened unto us in his word and works. And of
all these 4. in the chapters ensuing, we will speak some what more at large.

CHAP. XVI. Of the distinct knowledge of these things which God in his word
(touching the government of this world) has manifested unto us, being very
fit and necessary for the drawing of spiritual profitt from works of God
wrought here among men.
THat the certain knowledge of the will of God opened unto us in the holy
Scriptures touching the government of the world, is necessarily to be had, that
we may reap profit by the works of God done among the children of men, it is
manifest, for how can any man else know and understand whether that which
happens in the world, agrees with that which God has written in his word?
Since it must needs be that if a man do not use to read Gods word, nor know
what God therein sets down unto us, they must of force err when they take*
upon them to judge of Gods works, and to them it may be said, as Christ said
to the Saduces, You err not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29. For this
cause as many learned men, that are well read in the letter of the holy
Scriptures, yet many times can not well judge of the actions and proceedings of
men, because they have not used to compare that which God has spoken in his
word, with that which daily by his hand he brings to pass in the
government of the world, so it is certain that those that are not accustomed
to read and peruse the holy Scriptures, and therefore know them not, can not
with any spiritual understanding or profit, mark Gods works here on earth
among the sons of men.

It is necessary therefore for every one, that will discharge and unburden his
conscience therein, to be conversant in the holy Scriptures. And it is a most
notorious in gratitude, unthankfulness, and a damnable careless sloth, among
great and small, young and old, that seeing God our great God (the maker of the
whole world) that sets up and puileth down Kings. Dan. 2. 12. has
vouchsafed as it were with his own hand to write a book for us, touching the
order that he does, and will hold and observe in the governing of this world,
that thereby we might certainly and sufficiently know his meaning and order
our ways, and by the light of the same book, might be helped well and wisely
to judge of all Gods works touching the government of the world for our
comfort and consolation, Romans 15. 4. that we miserable poor and wicked
children of men, that many times are so curious to search into and to read the
Histories and Iournals of mortal men's actions, that scarce have traveled
through any small part of the world, and that would esteem it a great honor
and favor, and would with all thankefullnes embrace and run after it, If we
might be permitted to enter into the study of a great potentate of this
world, to read Arcana Imperij the order that he holds in his government,
that yet I say, we poor simple wretches are found to be so slow and careless
of the looking into Gods book, whereas notwithstanding the same book so
highly, both in general and particular specially concerns us, being that
which sets down unto us, the state of our everlasting salvation, or
condemnation, and how we must here on earth behave our selves under the
government of our God, that hereafter in the world to come, we may always
and for euerliue with him in heaven, John 3. 39. This in truth is an
unreasonable ingratitude, and a most woeful and damnable contempt.

Therefore if hitherto we have been slow and careless of making diligent
search into the Bible, which is the Book that God himself, that made us all,
has made; let us with all speed amend that fault all of us* even from the
highest to the lowest. For Kings and Princes themselves, how great soever their
affairs here in this world are, must not neglect this Book of God the King of
Kings, to read it diligently all the days of their lives, as in Gods behalf,
in his own book it is expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19.

Now concerning the spiritual order of Gods works wrought among the Children
of men, as is opened and manifested unto us in Gods Word, by diligent search it
must be more and more learned and found out* and to that end the exposition
made in the whole Discourse of this Treatise, will be helpful, and give men
some light how they from henceforth may judge and discern of the order of Gods
works, wrought among the Children of men, and be more and more comforted
therein.

CHAP. XVII. Of the diligent observation of all Gods works, among the Children
of men, needful for the drawing of spiritual profit out of Gods works among
us.
THe second thing that is needful and requisite hereunto, that out of Gods
works done among the Children of men, we may more and more learn the fear of
God and godliness, is that we should narrowly mark and consider of all such
his works. If any man though well seen and learned in that which God himself
witnesses unto us in his word, that he intends to do among the Children of
men touching the governing of the world, should withdraw himself, like an
Hermit into some solitary place of this world, where he ^ould see no man, nor
have the company of any, or should shut himself up whole days, weeks, and
months in his study, still poaring upon his Books, or if he were so
continually taken up with the cares of this world, that with blind eyes he
should look into that which is done and happens in the world among the sons
of men, such a man notwithstanding all the knowledge that he could have of Gods
word, could draw no fruit, nor comfort, out of the works of God done among the
Children of men.

It is necessary therefore, for men narrowly to mark what is done, and happens
in the place where they dwell and abide, as namely, how it fares with the good
and the bad, as well in general as in particular, when they are sound in the
way of righteousness or wickedness, as they are in prosperity or adversity,
how both the one and the other behave themselves therein, and how they live,
what they do, what their vprising, going forth, and proceedings are; all this
men must warily and narrowly note, in the places where they live; as also, the
condition, conversation, employments, blessings, punishments, sicknesses,
diseases, death and ends of the Children of men, and consider thereof; for
there is no working, no proceeding, nor any thing that is done in this life
touching prosperity or adversity, from the which a Christian man, like a Be,
may not draw some good fruit. That man therefore that has any judgment, must
note and mark all things in such manner, that from day to day he may be more
and more instructed, and become wiser: and to that end the Psalmist says, That
it is a wise man's work to make all these things, that he may understand the
loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43. And Solomon shows us that it was
his practice to consider all things, even unto the field of the slothful, and
to that end says; I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of
the man void of understanding, and lo, it was all grown over with thorns,
and nettles had covered the face thereof; and the stone wall thereof was broken
down: then I saw and considered it well, I looked upon it, and received
instruction, Pro. 24. 30. 31. 32. But especially, it concerns a Christian,
narrowly to note and mark Gods proceedings, and dealings with and concerning
himself, and how it fares with him in the course of his life, whether he
follows Gods will and Commandments, or is careless thereof. And we must
every one of us particularly consider, how joyful and good a thing it is, to
behold a child of God haunt Gods house, to be released and freed from the
dullness of his perverse nature, and from the government of sin and Satan,
to be shrouded under Gods wings, and to have him for his protection and
defense, and how graciously he then deals with us when we so do, preserves
us from a thousand burdens of heavy and grievous sins, whereunto otherwise
we were wholly addicted, and would easily have fallen into, how comfortably he
makes us to grow up and increase in knowledge and grace for the more assurance
of his favor toward us, and of our eternal salvation. And we must yet
narrowly and specially mark and consider on the one side, What blessing, what
comfort, and what peace we have found for our souls in all occurrents of
prosperity or adversity, as long as we served God, and that our hearts were
not turned back, neither did our stepps decline from his way, Psalm. 44. 18.
Ier. 6. 16. And on the other side, into what troubles, griefs, perplexities,
disquietnesse of Conscience, distrust, and fears we have fallen, when by any
temptations, we fell from the Lord our God, and how after our fall when we
truly considered the same, and humbled our selves before the Lord our God, and
again turned unto him with true repentance, with all our hearts, and a true
desire to serve him, we were again by him received into grace, and restored
into our former blessed, and comfortable state, as the same is at large notably
set down unto us in the story of the prodigal child.

Thus every one of us must particularly enter into the Closet of his own
Conscience, and well and narrowly mark in what proceedings we have been best
furthered and thrust forward to a spiritual life, which is the special mark
that we should aim at, and what comfort we have thereby received and therein
found for our souls, that we may with the Church of God say, when we have
forsaken our God and gone astray, I will go and return to my first husband
again: for then it was better with me then now, Hos. 2. 7.

CHAP. XVIII. How we must compare that which God does in this world with that
which he has set down in his word, that we may draw some good fruit from the
works of God for our comfort
THe third thing that is needful hereunto, that out of the works of GOD done
among the Children of men, we may know the truth of God set down in his word
for our comfort and consolation is, that we collect and gather together
whatsoever by diligent searching into the word of God; and narrowly marking of
Gods works, touching Gods proceedings and dealings with the sons of men, we
have learned, that by comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, by
means thereof we may duly and clearly begin to perceive and understand the
truth and certainty of Gods word, and how that heaven and earth shall sooner
pass away then one tittle of Gods word shall fail; so that we may be able to
say being helped by the aforesaid observation. That this was done in England,
this in France, this in Germany, this in our Country, in our town, in our
village, in our house, according to that which the Lord witnesses in this or
that place of his Book, that it should fall out so and in such manner,
although in men's opinions it was otherwise expected to be done. Now further,
that we may bring these things the better about, and thereby to reap that
profit and fruit, which we desire to do by these things that are done and
happen here in this world, we must specially add these two things thereunto.

First, and before all that we accustom our selves in all things that happen
to fall out, and come to our knowledge, to note the finger of our God to be
therein, and withal hold this for certain, and most true, that as in all
things that we see and behold men to do, not the body of man works only,
but the soul especially which we see not, so that likewise the Lord our God,
which governs all things by his mighty Word, has his finger secretly in all
things that are done, much more then Ioab had his hand in the business of the
woman of Tekoa, 2 Samuel 14. though in an holy manner, and that altogether
incomprehensible, whereby he always works well, and produces much good,
even by means of the wickedst instruments in the world, by ungodly Assure, that
is, the rod of his anger, and by the Devil himself, whom he uses often
times to plague his people by, Esa. 10. 5. 6. and 1 Chronicles. 22. 20. So that we
must endeavor to bring our selves to see the working of Gods finger to be
always in every thing that is done in the world, and to think and persuade
our selves, that it is the Lord our God that has done this, thus and in this
manner, either by furthering, or by hindering the same in this or that manner,
and causing or suffering it to fall out the one way or the other. And
accordingly whatsoever happens to cross the proceedings of Gods children,
learn always to say unto our souls, behold, this our God has done, or
permitted to be done. This the ungodly use not to do: they do not once mark
the finger of God in any thing that happens unto the Children of men; but their
manner is, to ascribe it to the lowest and nearest causes, and to depend wholly
thereupon, looking no higher, nor further then the gates of the Town wherein
they dwell, unless it be a thing that is unaccustomed, and such as does not
usually fall out; and then it may be they will suppose, that it proceeds from
God, as the sorcerers of Egypt, marked the finger of God to be in the lice that
Moses brought upon the Egyptians, because they could conceive no natural cause
whereby it might be effected, Exodus 8. 17. 18. 19. but such as are godly and
know Gods word, note the finger of God in all things, as that which is most
necessary to be considered, they thereby may observe the works of God, to
fall out according to his word, and may draw and reap convenient fruits from
the same.

Secondly, that we accustom our selves when any thing worth the noting falls
out in the course of our lives, that is, against our selves, or others, whether
they be particular persons, or whole Nations, to quicken our wits thereby,
and to stir up our memories, to call to mind and remember, whether there be
no one place of Scripture, that witnesses something touching the same, whereby
it is foretold, or whereunto it may be likened: as for example, we see a man
run up and down about his worldly affairs upon the Sabbath day, and when he
has done, we see all that he did was in vain; hear should we remember, what
is said unto us, Exodus 16. 27. to wit, And it came to pass that there went
some of the people on the Sabbath day (which was the rest of the Lord) for to
gather Manna, and they found none. This was the practice of Christ's Disciples,
and God gave them understanding thereby: see Ioh. 2. 16. 17. 22. and Ioh. 11.
16.

Now to find convenient places of Scripture, touching these things that may
be compared with that that happens in the world, we must in that that is done
diligently consider what the special causes were why those things fell out and
came so to pass as they did, as namely, why such and such things happened so
well or so ill; and wherein they find themselves to have a part in the
gracious promises of the Lord, and the Lord has promised such good to come to
them, as they then find, or wherein they feel and know themselves culpable of
the threatenings of God, whereby things have so happened unto them as they have
fallen out. And if we can find no certain special cause thereof, but the
contrary rather, then we must, as in Jobs case, ascribe the event to the mighty
power of God, and accordingly behave our selves therein.

CHAP. XIX. Of the several fruits that spring from the searching into and
finding out of Gods truth, and certainty declared unto us, in his word, and in
his works.
THe fourth and the last of the four necessary points required hereunto, that
by the works of God done among the sons of men, we may be enduced to lay
more hold upon the fear of God, and godliness is, that we diligently note
and consider the several fruits that are hereby reaped, and which by finding
out Gods truth, and the certainty thereof, are declared unto us in his Word,
which must be earnestly and well considered of, because this is the end,
scope, and special mark whereunto all tends, that has formerly been
delivered.

Now the fruits that spring from the aforesaid considerations are notable,
both many and great, whereof some (that we may orderly place them in certain
ranckes) concern the holy Scriptures themselves; by the light whereof we may
be able to prove and to justify all the aforesaid arguments and declarations,
other some concern Gods works, and a third sort our obedience, which we are
to yield and show unto the word of God and the holy Scriptures. Touching the
first sort of fruits concerning the holy Scriptures they are three.

For in the first place, we learn out of the aforesaid considerations, the
truth of the holy Scriptures, that the same is most certain and immutable, and
that it shall never fail in any one tittle thereof, therein contained.

And hereby are we confirmed and assured in our consciences, as by experience
we find, that what soever the Lord has spoken, by his own mouth in his word,
that with his hand he effects and brings the same to pass in governing of
the world. Now this is a most notable fruit; for until such time as that we
do dewly and truly mark how true Gods word is, and how truly God performs
and brings that to pass continually in the governing of the world, which in
his word he has promised and threatened to do, we shall never esteem of
fear, nor submit our selves unto Gods word, and on the contrary, when by our
own dilligent observation, we find out and are persuaded of the truth and
certainty of Gods word, we are thereby at all times led and induced to the
love of Gods word, and encouraged to believe it, and to esteem well thereof,
John 2. 12. It is said that the word of God, is quick and powerful and
sharper then any two edged sword. Heb. 4 12. Now no man does easily believe
this, but he that by fear of the word of God is moved thereunto in his heart,
Acts 2. 37. and 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. and he that is so affected, doubts no
more thereof, then he does that the Sun is bright and clear; and he that
has this feeling of the word, working in his soul, has undoubtedly already
made a good entrance into the way to Gods kingdom, for this is most certain
and sure, that all the sins and misdemeanors which those men commit that
withstand the written word which is the lively truth of God, proceed from
this, that they do not believe that the same word is so true and certain as it
is.

The second fruit is, that we learn by the aforesaid declarations, the
abundant largeness and copiousnes of the holy Scriptures, psalm. 119. 96. It is
not to be spoken (if we would apply our minds earnestly and as we ought to
find out places in the Scriptures, that may be applied to those things that
happen and are done in this world) what a rich mine of gold we should find the
Scriptures to be, and should hardly, after we had once conuersed therein,
fail of some one fit place or other therein that might be applied to all the
things that while we live we should have need of, or are to be done by us,
2. Tim. 3. 16. which if the Papists had done, they would soon have perceived
and known that there was no need nor necessity, to find out and invent many
new Laws and Rules for the ordering of men's lives, thereby to bring men to
salvation, as they have done, whereby the holy Scriptures are by them brought
into contempt, and in a manner abandoned and thrust wholly out of use.

The third is, that we are by the aforesaid considerations helped and better
furthered in the understanding of the holy Scriptures. It is not to be
expressed nor spoken how the earnest and serious marking of Gods proceedings
with the children of men, and with our own souls, gives a singular great
light to the true understanding of many places of holy Scriptures, whereof
otherwise, those that have no experience nor knowledge of things touching and
concerning a spiritual life, can never conceive any thing, as may appear in
many places of the Psalms, which otherwise cannot so well be conceived how
they hang and depend one upon another; we can truly witness, that sometimes
from the mouths of simple plain men, we have received a very fit and
convenient sense and interpretation of some places, which otherwise were very
intricare, which they by their own observations have learned and found out, to
be so and in such manner understood: and it falls out often times that upon
occasion of that which we have heard and seen to happen among men, we were
advertised, and have been taught the meaning of diverse places of Scriptures,
which touched upon such occasions, and whereof before we could not find out
the true meaning. This is expressly taught in the proceedings of Christ's
Disciples, of whom it is said, that notwithstanding that Christ spoke plainly
of his death and resurrection, yet that they could not understand it, nor diue
into the depth thereof, Luke 18. 33. 34. but that afterward by observing the
event of things, they understood it, Ioh. 2. 22. And thus a godly heart that is
wont to look into Gods works, becomes an Interpretor to it self of many
places of holy Scriptures.

Touching the second sort of Benefits concerning Gods works, we reap hence
this special fruit, in that we learn by the declaration aforesaid, not to
become so perverse, nor resolute concerning many things and actions that are
done and happen in the world, whereas many simple men, that have not busied
their brains about looking into the word of God, nor in marking of the course
of Gods works, become obstinate thereby, and grow careless and slack to
regard the spiritual life, in regard of the prosperity of the ungodly, and
the adversity of the godly, which at the first they could not understand, nor
conceive; and therefore gave a wrong interpretation of them, because they
entered not into the sanctuary of the Lord, which now is his word, for when we
wholly rely upon the word of God in all worldly accidents, we attain unto the
right understanding of things that belong unto God, and are not thereby
hardened, but rather instructed and made better; psalm. 92. 6. 7. psalm. 73. Job.
17. 8. 9.

Touching the third sort of fruits concerning the manner of our obedience,
which according unto the word of God, we owe unto him, there are three
fruits. In the first place we are by the aforesaid declaration, instructed to
discern our own and other men's ouersights, and are thereby advertised both how
sin on the one side, by carelessness of living, the pleasures of the world
and all manner of wicked actions does oftentimes procure diverse inconveniences
and perplexeties, unto those that are adicted thereunto, and in all occurrents,
makes their prosperity a cursed unto them, which puts us in great fear and
doubt to enter into that way, that is so full of danger and so troublesome as
that we our selves by our own experience can say unto our souls; Oh my soul
enter not into this way, I have seen many fall therein I my self have often
been hardly besied therein, and so long as we will go into this way, our
prosperity will become a curse unto us, and be a means to overthrow us, and
if we can say thus much by our own experience to our souls, it will be a
powfull means to divert us from the way of the ungodly, and again on the
other side, when by the aforesaid declaration, we find and see that the fear
of God, constancy, righteousness, good works and godliness, for certain
have the promises of this life and the life to come, yea and that those that
are endued therewith, have great peace of conscience, and are preserved from
many mischances whereinto wickedness and sin draw men, and that in all
dangers and perplexities they are comforted and imboldened, we can not but be
thereby strongly provoked and effectually drawn to the practice of godliness, so
that we can say unto our souls, Surely this is a good way, it has been
prosperous unto the end, to all those that followed it, and all those that
enter into it shall endure unto the end: Heb. 13. 7. and if any adversity or
tribulation happens unto us, yet we shall be of good comfort and imboldned:
for God will then be with us, his Rod and his Staff shall comfort us, Psalm. 23
4. 5.

The second is, that we are also by the aforesaid considerations made very
provident, learned, and wise, for that by those things that are past, and
which we have well considered of and beheld how they were done, we learn to
know and find out what will follow upon, and proceed from such and such the
like actions, and what good or evil we are to expect, if we do such and such
things, and so we obtain the gift of Approbation, Phil. 1. 9. and become wise
as the children of Israel were (to counsel our selves and others what at
other times is best to be done, or not to be done. 1. Chro. 12. 33. as for
example, we have in former times found that upon Mass days and other
Papisticall feast days, much hurt has been done, by drunkenness, fighting,
quarelling, and other mildemeanors, which for the time to come we thereby
learn to be wary of, and are warned to shun them upon other mass days,
and to withdraw our selves and others from them, we are also taught, that the
healths which are drunk in sign o^ love, have caused much trouble at feasts
and banquets, and induced great inconveniences, and therefore we learn to
shun them, and as horn Beasts, to banish them out of our feasts, Exodus 21.
28. 29. 30. And thus by means of the aforesaid declarations (Gods grace
helping us) we learn how to guide and carry ourselves in these wicked and
dangerous days, that are so full of inducements, stopps, stumbling blocks,
and offenses, holily and safely into the way of peace, and thereby daily fit and
further ourselves in our journey toward Gods kingdom in heaven, the place
that we aspire unto.

The third is, that we are likewise by the aforesaid considerations made
always prompt and ready in all the things aforesaid, and in all other things
that belong to a spiritual life, and the service of the most high God, to
direct our selves, and to go forward therein with all boldness, confidence,
and spiritual strength. For touching boldness, and courage, when by
experience with David we have found, that Gods word and works agree so well
together, strengthen so much one the other, and keep so friendly and fast the
one to the other, We are not afraid to speak thereof before Kings and Princes
when need requires, Psalm. 119. 46. Yea, then with all boldness we will
uphold, defend, and advance Gods cause, being well assured, that maintaining
the same we shall not be ashamed thereby. Secondly, we shall also do it with
confidence of heart, not as those that hear of it only by report, but that by
our own experience and good knowledge speak and further that which we do.
The Apostle witnesses, that being confident in the fear of the Lord, he
moved many to the like confidence, 2 Cor. 1. 10. And it is strange to consider,
how certainly they have spoken of heaven, of hell, of the comfort of the holy
Ghost, of guiltiness of Conscience, of the joy of the godly, and of the
hellish lives of the ungodly, that have noted and marked such things, and have
found them true by experience in themselves, or in others: lastly, we shall
also do all this with strength, and that not in this regard only, because
doing it with boldness and confidence, we shall thereby the more forciblie
work upon men's minds; but further also in that being helped by the aforesaid
experience, we shall be able the more fitly to apply the places of holy Scripture
to the understanding of those we shall have occasion to deal with, whereby
they may the better perceive and know, that God speaks by us, and may thereby
be moved to fall down on their knees, and honor God, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.

CHAP. XX. The conclusion of all, wherein is showed, that we must only refer
our selves unto God, and not forsake a good cause, because it seems, not to
go forward as we wish it should.
BY all that has formerly been said, we may also learn to be contented with
that condition, state, and manner of life, whether it be prosperous or not
prosperous (or whatsoever it be) that the Lord shall be pleased to allot unto
us, and to expect a good end and issue thereof. For by that which we have
before showed, we may plainly see and perceive that we are not wise enough
to rule and govern our selves, that we have not earnestly sought the same,
but refused it, which we now wish that we had obtained, yea, that often times
with might and maine we have sought to put that from us which afterward we
have found to be very needful and necessary for us, and might have done us
much good, and that the Lord our God has always much better directed our
cause, then we could either devise, or had power to conceive, yea, and that in
our greatest troubles a blessing has been cast thereupon, and that we have
been so careless and heedles thereof, that it was our own faults that we
perceived it no sooner, but rather that our hearts for a time have in a manner
been overcome with grief and heaviness.

Again, thus may we be also comforted in all tribulations, and adversities,
when by our own experience our souls are able to set before themselves the
gracious care which our Lord God has always had of those that are his people,
in all their necessities, and although matters seem to be prolonged, and our
deliverance to be delayed, yet we must not doubt thereof, for we have learned
by the former considerations, that the Lord is wont oftentimes to go round
about, and to fetch matters a far off, in the comforting and helping of his
people, that so he may have the more honor, and may minister more cause of
comfort to his Children, when unexpectedly he helps them, and by one means
or other unlooked for, procures their deliverance, as it evidently appeared in
the Children of Isreal's cause in Hammons time, as also in Joseph's, David's, and
others causes, whom he intended to exalt; and yet daily in many accidents that
befall Gods children in this age, yea, and in our own affairs, for how often
have we also before this time been laid in the mire to the very knees and
ell-bowes, and trod under feet by proud persons, and yet at the last has the
Lord lifted up our heads, and has made us a free people, as at this day it
appears; So that in this respect when it seems to go against us, we may
speak of the Lord our God, unto our souls, as Naomi said to Ruth of Boaz, Sit
still my daughter until thou know how the matter will fall out, for the Lord
will not be at rest until he have brought it to a good end, Ruth 3. 18. And we
must learn with all patience and quietness of mind to commend all our
affairs to God, as we see that the Lord Jesus Christ did, who in the greatest
dangers, and those that seemed to be most prejudicial to Gods cause, was still
and quiet, and committed the matter unto God, that judges righteously, as when
he was told that Herod the King had cut of the head of John his forerunner, a
cruel deed, and such a one as seemeed to be very prejudicial to Gods cause,
he put it up peaceably, suffered it to go on, took care for himself and his
Disciples, and the better to secure them, and to get out of cruel Herod's
hands, went apart into another place, but proceeded still in his vocation, and
the work which his heavenly Father had appointed him to do.

And thus being helped by the consideration aforesaid, and the experience
which thereby we have reaped, to the comfort and consolation of our hearts in
all troubles and oppressions, we may always be assured of this, that all the
troubles that be fall the children of God, is unto them as the trouble of
Joseph, as the holy Scripture calls it, that is, such manner of trouble as
whereby great joy prosperity and great promotion is laid up in store for them.
For we know all right well, that all the miseries and troubles that fell upon
Joseph, all the misfortunes and tribulations that for a time happened unto him,
the hatred of his brethren against him, their selling of him, his bondage, his
false accusation, of adultery by Potiphers wife imposed on him, and his
wrongful imprisonment that followed there upon, that all these things did
altogether work for and procure Joseph's good, Romans 8. 28. and did altogether
strengthen him, and was a great furtherance of his promotion and advancement,
as we may read in Genesis 37. 39 40. 41. 42. And of the like nature are all the
troubles and mis*fortunes, which Gods people and his Church endure for a time,
which in the end therefore shall turn to their good, and are nothing mean
while, but as a preparatiue to their future advancement. And therefore are the
troubles of Gods Church and children, their cruel persecutions, their great
overthrows, the death of Martyrs, and what soever else seems most of all to
cross them, by the Prophet termed in a special manner the troubles of Joseph,
Amos 6. 6.

This we must seriously think upon, and with long suffering and patience bend
our selves and abide, and in all our adversities assure our selves, that when
the Lord has done all his works upon Mount Sion and among his people, he
will then rise up, and lift up his peoples heads again, in the fit time of
their need, as he did with Joseph when the time of his aduanceme^t was come,
and strike their enemies in the hinder parts, and lay a perpetual shame upon
them: Furthermore this may teach and instruct us, that what troubles soever
fall upon the people of God, we must not doubt of their good cause and
religion, nor abandon a good matter, and withdraw our hands from it, because
it proceeds not well at the first, but remembering that the Lord our Lord has
not eyes of flesh, nor sees as men do, Job 10. 4. we must thereupon
conclude, that the Lord suffers such troubles to fall upon us* thereby to
prove us, and to see whether we will cleave unto him, and hold with his
people, not only when they are in wealth and prosperity, but then also when
they are in trouble and adversity, and withal part with and impart to them of
our means, as much as conveniently we may, for the easing and helping of the
poor oppressed Saints and servants of God: and such as have no means to do
it, must earnestly endeavor by their prayers unto God, beseeching him to aid
his people, and to fight for them, when they are in distress, praying in the
Spirit, as Gods people do, when they have no other means, and saying to the
Lord with them* Remember this, that the enemies have reproched thee O Lord, and
that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name. O deliver not the soul of
thy turtle Dove, unto the multitude of the wicked, forget not the congregation
of thy poor for ever, have respect to the Covenant, for the dark places of
the earth are full of the inhabitations of cruelty. O let not the oppressed
return ashamed; let the poor and needy praise thy name; arise O God, plead
thy own cause, remember how the foolish man reprocheth thee daily; forget not
the voice of thy enemies; the tumult of those that rise up against thee
increases continually, Psalm. 74. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.

But those that have better means must employ all their means to that end, as
those godly Princes OBEDIAH and NEHEMIAH; and as all the Judges of ISRAEL did,
who took the cause of GODS people in hand when it was in greatest distress,
and by GODS blessing brought it to a happy end, to their own praise, and the
peoples comfort: for which their names also shall be blessed to the worlds
end.

Whereas on the contrary, a fearful threatening is denounced against EDOM,
Isreal's brother, even that he should be rooted out, For his violence against
his brother Jacob. And observe I pray you what this his violence was, at such
time, says the Lord, as thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the
strangers carried away captive his Forces; and forreners entered into his gates,
and cast Bolts upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. And let every man
mark this last sentence concerning the manner of his ruin and rooting out,
and think well thereupon; Therefore shall shame cover thee, and thou shall be
cut off for ever, Obadiah, verses 10. and 11. And no marvel: For Meros was
cursed, not because it help the enemies of GOD, but only because it did not
aid GODS people; Curse ye Meros, says the Angel of the Lord; Curse ye
bitterly the enhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Judges the 5. Chapter* and
the 23. verse. Ruben also the eldest of the Children of Jacob, from whom most
help was expected, was gently admonished, and that for withdrawing himself;
saying, Why abodest thou among the Sheepe-foulds, to hear the bleatings of the
Flocks, for the divisions of RVBEN there were great thoughts of heart, Judges
the 5. Chapter, and verse 14.

To conclude, Let all godly hearted men therefore in the need and necessity
of Gods people, think seriously upon the Commandment of the LORD, which he
gives when his people are in trouble; saying, The Inhabitants of the Land of
TEMAN brought water to him that was thirsty; they prevented with Bread him
that fled. For they fled from the sword, from the drawn sword, and from the
bent Bow, and from the grieuousnesse of war, ESAIAS 21. 14. 15.

And having ripely waighed and considered all things, follow MOSES the Prince
of ISRAEL; Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 25. 26.

Yea, this will all those do that have the eye of Faith with MOSES; For he had
respect unto the recompense of the reward, which by Grace is prepared for all
those, that following GODS counsel, come to help his people in their need,
and rightly judge of their afflictions; For so it is written, Blessed is he
that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble.
Psalm. 41. 1.

FINIS.

