THE Recantations as they were severally pronounced by VVylliam Tedder and
Anthony Tyrrell: (sometime two Seminary Priests of the English College in
Rome, and now by the great mercy of almighty God converted, unto the
profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ) at Paul's Cross, the day and year
as is mentioned in their several Tytles of their Recantations.

With an Epistle dedicatorie unto her Majesty, and their several Praefaces
unto the Reader, containing the causes that moved them to the same.

NOSCE TE IPSVM. NE QVID NIMIS. LOVE AND LYVE

printer's device of John Charlewood

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlewood and William Brom. Anno Domini.
M.D.LXXXVIII.

portrait of Queen Elizabeth

DIua potens cuius decantant Sydera lauds,
Quae tibi dante Deo regia s^eptra tenes.
Pro te pugnantem crudelis sensit Hiberus,
Quique domi voluit te spoliare, Deum.
Sceptra tibi se^ firma mane^t, et firma manebu^t,
Es quoniam f^lix te protegente Deo.
To the most noble, virtuous, and gracious Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of
God, Queen of England, France and Irelande, defendresse of the faith. etc.
Your Majesty's two late converted Subjects (from Papisme, unto the profession
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ) Wylliam Tedder and Anthony Tyrrell, wysh long
health and a most prosperous reign, and finally the eternal health of body
and soul with Jesus Christ in the world to come.
NExt unto the infinite mercy of almighty God (most gracious Sovereign) we
have to thank your Majesty that we live, not only this short and
transitory life, which is but a passage unto death: but so to live, that we
may die to live for evermore. For what other assurance have we of eternal
life, but to die in the true faith of Jesus Christ: of the which, whosoever
makes wrack, it cannot be but he must perrish everlastingly. How
miserably we have been tossed on the sourges of schisms and deuisions, how
sore we have been overwhelmed with the waves of heresies, and overflowed with
the floods of Idolatry and superstition, how unnaturally we have been
carried away from our dutiful allegiance, and how miraculously we have been
brought home again: your Ma. in viewing this short discourse that follows,
in part may understand. And since it has pleased God to convert us unto his
truth, and your highness to pardon our offenses and trecheries passed, we can
not doubt, but behauing our selves like true and perfect paenitents unto
almighty God, and dutiful Subjects unto your highness: You will vouchsafe to
protect us for the time to come, against all our enemies and adversaries
whomsoever. Jn hope whereof, we have presumed to present your Majesty (as a
New years gift) the first fruits of our repentance, beseeching God so to
endue us with the gift of perseueraunce, that we may fructify better for the
time to come. And thus being loath to offend your Majesty with many words,
most humbly craving pardon for this that we have done, we end with our
humble and hearty prayers, that your Majesty may long live and reign over us,
to the setting forth and aduauncing of Gods most holy word, comfort and
consolation of all good Christians, and confusion of Antechrist and all his
adhaerents, whereunto unfeignedly we say Amen.

Your highness most humble and daily Orators. William Tedder. Anthony Tyrrell.


THE Recantation made at Paul's Cross, by William Tedder Seminary Priest, the
first of December, Anno. 1588.

PSALM. 118. Impulsus euersus sum vt caderem, et Dominus suscepit me. I was
sore shaken that I was like to fall, but the Lord has vpholden me. Whereunto
is adjoined: The recantation or abiuration of Anthony Tyrell, (sometime
Priest of the English College in Rome,) pronounced by himself at Paul's
Cross the next Sunday following, in the same year.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlewoode, and VVylliam Brom. Anno. Dom. 1588.

To the Christian Reader.
BEfore you come to the reading of this my recantation, J thought good to
advertise you, first of the cause that moned me to publishe it in print, which
is the satisfaction of all my Countrymen. First, of them that were present at
the pronouncing of the same, for though they did hear me speak in that place
where I did utter it, yet heard they not all that here is set down, for the
shortness of time caused me to omit that which I did. Secondly, I have added
something more then was in that copy: such are most of the authorities noted
in the margent, out of the Scriptures, and certain verses, which here I have
put down. Thirdly, I thought it not sufficient to have pronounced it in one
place: I know it had been sufficient for the assembly there present: But, my
desire is, that all her Majesty's Subjects whersoeuer, though they heard me
not, should have if it please them, a copy of my Recantation in their hands.
First to peruse for their satisfaction. Secondly to praise God for mine
effectual conversion.

I am now to entreat the Christian Reader, not to consider so much the style
wherein I have written it, as the affection wherewith I did write it: and when
you have seen the same, I beseech you to pray God to continue me in that good
work, which his majesty has begun very graciously in me.

Your hearty welwiller William Tedder.

The Recantation of William Tedder Seminary Priest, pronounced by himself at
Paul's Cross, the first of December. Anno. 1588.
ALthough even from my childehoode in a manner, I have been noseled up in the
faith or rather error of the Church of Rome, (both my Parents being
vehemently addicted to ye same) Yet my fault was so much the greater, because I
did not only obstinatlie, but also in a manner desperately persist in that
Sinagogue against mine own conscience. For I was always distracted in mind
with doubts of the greatest points of that Religion. As of the Pope his
authority. The doctrine of transubstantiation. The presumption of freewill.
The fancy of purgatory. The derogatorie sacrifice of the Mass, and such like.
In the which opinions I waded so far, that if the help of the Lord GOD had not
been at hand, it had been to mine utter ruin and confusion.

But seeing it has pleased God to call me back again, I will say as David
said: Psalm. 94.
If the Lord had not helped me, it had not failed but my soul had been put to
silence. Again, I was in greater fault, for though I thought they could
prove these Articles by authority of Counselles and Fathers, and as they
bear men in hand by good reasons, yet could I find not so much as the ground
of one word for them in the holy Scriptures. And thus being overwhelmed with
so great waters, Psalm. 69.
I was constrained to say with the Prophet: I stick fast in the deep mire
where no ground is, I am come into deep waters so that the floods run over
me.

Three causes there were which kept me so long in mine obstinancie and errors,
which being compared with the cause of my returning again, are of no force at
all, because they were foolish and of men: the other, was only of God, whose
thoughts are not as the thoughts of men.

The first of these causes which turned me so far from the way, was the
great delight that I had in the study of Natural Philosophy. And in this
point I was persuaded, that I should more profit in the parts beyond the
Seas, then here at home in mine own native Country, and therefore, partly by
the instigation of my Father, and partly for the desire that I had to see
foreign Countries, and most of all for the love that I bare unto ye study of
Philosophy, I repaired unto the Countries beyond the Seas, little considering
the dangers that might ensue thereof, as the displeasure of God, the
displeasure of my gracious Prince, and the offense of all my Countrymen.

The second cause, was the fear of worldly shame and te^porall discredit, for
I feared that then, which I find now to be true: which is, that they which
were once my friends, would become my mortal enemies, which by experience I
know. I did not consider then, Luke 12.
or else I cared not for that sentence of our Savior: Every one that confesses
me before men, the son of man shall confess him before the Angels of God.
And he that denies me before men, he also shall be denied before the Angels
of GOD. This was the cause that made me to take a preposterous way, turning
all things to mine own credit, when I should have turned them to the glory of
almighty God, Matt. 6,
for our Savior says: First seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness of
the same, and all other things shall be given unto you. Thus thinking to get
credit by mine obstinacy, I did loose the favor of God, the love of my
Sovereign ye Queens most excellent Majesty, and the good will of all true
subjects, which I hope to recover again, by this my free Recantation, and my
further conversation from henceforth in my Country.

The third cause, was the tickling of vain glory, and this cause I am sure
does detain most of the contrary side in their perverse obstinacy, howsoever
they brag that they seek nothing by their dealings but the glory of God.
For, I was not moved a little to submitt my self to her Majesty's mercy, and
to embrace the knowledge of the true faith, seeing the wicked counsel and
deuillish devises of the Pope and his Children, against the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and our most dear Country. Which counsels I thought they
would never have put in execution. But when I saw that great practice come to
pass, I mean ye invasion of this Land, God so moving me (as hereafter I
will manifest) I thought utterly to forsake them, although couertlye for vain
gloryes sake I continued a while amongst them. I thought it then a goodly
thing, and worthy of commendation for me, to defend an evil cause by
probable reasons. Yet I knew it was an hard thing for Anaxagoras to prove that
Snow was black, or yncke white, 1. Cor. 1.
and for me to prove light to be darkness, or darkness to be light. For it is
written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and cast away the
understanding of the prudent.

But now, seeing it has pleased almighty God, to call me to the knowledge of
his truth, 2. Cor. 1^
in detestation of this vain glory, I will say with the Apostle: Si gloriari
oportet, quae infirmitatis meae sunt gloriabo^, that is, If I must needs
boast, I will boast in mine infyrmitie. 2. Cor. 12
And again, Libenter gloriabor in infirmitatibus meis, vt inhabitet in me
virtus Christi: that is, I will gladly boast in mine infirmities, that the
power of Christ may dwell within me. Thus have I breefely declared the causes
which drove me out of the way, and caused me to delight in vanities, and
follow lies so long, Psalm. 4.
that if Gods grace had not been, I had been cleene cast away. But, now I
say again, Impulsus euersus sum vt caderem et dominus suscepit me, Psalm. 118
I was sore shaken that I was like to fall, but the Lord has vpholden me.

But here you will ask me the cause of so sudden a change: I answer,
that I know no other but the grace of almighty GOD, the which works when
and as it pleases him. This grace have I often refused for the causes before
alleged: me thought I heard him say unto me daily, Ecce sto ad ostium et
pulso, Apo. 3.
Behold I stand knocking at thy doors. Yet was I not ashamed to thrust him out,
and to let in his adversary the devil. I heard him cry within me, Cant. 5.
Aperi mihi soror mea, amica mea, Columba mea, immaculata mea, caput meum
plenum est rore, et cincinni mei guttis noctium: Open unto me my sister, my
friend, my Dove, my unspotted, my head is full of dew, and my locks with the
drops of the night. I heard him give me these loving titles, but I refused
him and gave him this answer: Ibidem.
Expoliani me tunica mea, quomodo induar illa? Laui pedes meos quomodo
coinquinabo illos? I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on again? I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them again? Thus continued I, until
he by his grace so sweetly and forcibly prevented me, that whether I would or
not, at length he compelled my revellious will to obey. So that I which once
did so little account of the true and ancient faith, that I counted it for an
heresy: now I see evidently, that without the same there is no way to
salvation.

Therefore, if ever you pitied any man's case, I beseeth you have compassyon
upon mine, considering that it is a thing incident to ma^s nature to err and
to sin, but to continue and persist in it, is the part of the devil. I
freely do confess and acknowledge that I have sinned against God, my Prince,
Genesis 6.
and my Country, as a man whose nature is prone, and the thoughts of whose
heart is always bent to mischief, I persisted in mine errors a long time, as
one that followed the suggestions of the Serpent, rather then the inspirations
of the spirit of God. But by his motion, I am returned again to the sheepfold
of Christ. Wherefore I request you all, for the tender mercies of God, that you
would receive me that return again, following the steps of our Savior: Luke
15
who disdained not to receive Publicans and sinners: who left 99. sheep in the
wilderness and went to seek one that was lost. I have been like the prodigal
Son, which loosely and want only spent his portion in riot and lust, and was
compelled to eat such meat as the Hogs did. All this have I done, I have
spent that Talent which God gave me, in maintaining the harlot of Babylon, in
upholding the chair of pestilence, I mean the Church of Rome, I have fed my
self with the swill and dregs of men's inventions and traditions, forsaking the
fountain and food of Gods word. All this I have done: but at the last
being by hunger compelled, I cried out with that prodigal child, saying:
Pater peccaui in caelum et coram te, Luke 15
iam non sum dignus vocari filius tuus: Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, I am not worthy to be called any more thy Son. This confession
moved his Father to compassion, who lovingly embraced him, received him
willingly, and cherished him tenderly. So I desire you not to refuse me,
though I come late home, receive me again, and have compassion. For our
Savior Christ says, Matt. 5.
Beati misericordes quoniam ipsi misericordiam consequentur, Blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain mercy. And truly to have compassion is a
thing wherein a man does follow the example of almighty GOD, for Christ
himself does say, Luke. 6
Estote misericordes sicut pater vester misericors est, Be you merciful as
your Father is merciful. Receive me I beseech you which was a fugitive, as one
that repents, as one that desires rather to be an abject in Gods house,
Psalm. 84.
then to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners. His name therefore who has so
mercifully called me, be blessed for evermore.

But now I will come to the purpose, that is, to recant and renounce such
errors, as heretofore I have maintained, desiring God, that as it has
pleased his heavenly goodness to give me the grace to forsake them, so it would
also please him, to give me the gift of perseverance to continue, that I may no
more fall into them again.

You know it is the nature of the Serpent, to keep his head whole though he
put his body in danger for the defense of the same: but, if a man once bruise
his head, he can no longer endure against him but he must of necessity die.
And I can no better compare the huge and weldie mass of Papistrie to any
thing, then unto a Serpent, therefore in renouncing of it I will begin with the
head.

The first Article of the Pope.
The Papists do think, and I did think the same, that the Pope was Christ his
Vicar, and supreme head of the universal Church here upon the earth
militant. This Article being mightily vpholden, and stoutly defended, they
think none other of their Bulwarks can be shaken. They think also that he
has such a prerogative, that he cannot err, whereof ryseth this presumption
in deposing of Princes, degradation of Bishops, excomunication of all sorts of
people without respect, and of most light occasion.

Hereof he presumes to prescribe Laws to the whole Church, the which
forsooth without his dyspensation must be inviolable, Sub pena
excommunicationis. And whosoever does break them, if it be Emperor, King,
Queen, or what Prince soever, he must be deposed, such wickedness has he
practiced against the Queens most excellent Majesty, to his utter shame and
confusion, that the Proverb may be fulfilled, God sends a shrewde Cow
short horns. But his holiness, if it please you, is not contented with this:
he chalengeth to himself so great a prerogative, that he will make and
deface Articles of the Faith at his own will and pleasure. Gratian.
Quia Dominus Deus noster Papa. Hereof it arises, that in that Synagogue,
scarce any of the Lay people can tell what they believe: for being asked a
reason of their faith, they say nothing else, but thus believes ye Church,
thus says the Pope. Whereas in deed, the reason of our Faith should be taken
from the word of God, for as the Psalmist says: Omnis homo mendax, Psalm. 116
Every man is a liar. And therefore it shall suffice me that the Pope is a man,
and consequently a liar, and may not only err, but also has already erred,
which if I desired not to be brief I would prove, unless by this his supreme
usurped authority he be deified or made a God, which thing to confess is not
only impudency but also intolerable blasphemy. I therefore do here
utterly detest, abjure, and renounce him, with all his excommunications,
interdictions, suspentions, degradations, depositions, irregularities and a
thousand such like trifling thunderbolts. I pronounce also his doctrine, not to
be according to ye holy Scripture, but contrary unto it, and therefore I do
freely and joyfully recant it, thanking GOD that it has pleased his di^^ne
Majesty to deliver me from the slavery of that Tyrant, desiring him also that
I may not fall into his subjection again.

2 Of the Mass.
Next unto this is their blasphemous doctrine of their Propitiatory sacrifice,
which they call the sacrifice of the Mass. This Mass I once did devoutly
think upon, heard with great attention, and with great reverence I did
celebrate, only because I thought it was indeed a sacrifice, propitiatory
both for the living and the dead: when as the Scripture plainly testifies,
1. Pet. 4.
that Christus semel pro peccatis nostris mortuus est, iustus pro iniustis, vt
nos offecret Deo, mortificatos quidem carne, viuificatos autem spiritu. Christ
once died for our sins, the just for them that were unjust, that he might
offer us up to God, mortified in flesh, but quickened in spirit. Hitherto also
does all the Epistle to the Hebrews tend. It was also commanded the High
Priest in the old Law, that he should enter into Sancta Sanctorum but once
in the year, which similitude the Apostle, in the same Epistle, applies unto
ye only sacrifice which Christ offered for our sins upon the Cross. The which
because he has once done, I think it unlawful to have any more propitiatory
Sacrifices then that one of our Savior Christ. And therefore that which they
call the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, I think it rather to be a
derogatorie blasphemy to the passion of Jesus Christ. And for that cause I
deny that either it is a Sacrifice, or auailable for the living, much less
for the dead I do also from henceforth utterly denounce it to be wicked, and an
Idol.

Transubstantiation, 3 Of transubstantiation, and real presence.
a term invented in the Laterane Counsel, under Pope Innocentius the third
of that name, to establish an other error as gross as it self, that is to
say: The Real presence of Christ his body in the Sacrament (as they call it)
of the Altar: is contrary not only to Faith, but also to natural reason.
For the holy Scripture teaches us, that Christ is ascended into heaven, Mar.
16.
and sits at the right hand of God. And also that it was thought convenient
that heaven should contain him, Act. 3.
not according to his divinity, which is incomprehensible, but according to
his humane nature which is circumscriptible, or to be contained in one place,
for he took not only the body of man upon him, but also the passions of a
natural body, and therefore has his proper place. But if they will needs
have him present in many places at once, they must also deny yt he has a
body, and consent to the Eutichian heresey, and say there was a commission of
the divine and human nature, which Athanasius in his Creed denies,
Athanasius in Symbolo.
saying: Neque commistionem passus, neque diuisionem, neither suffering mixture
nor division. Yet of this matter was I never so fully persuaded, but that still
I had some doubt of it. And now I renounce it, craving pardon of God, for
defending that which I always doubted of.

The number of the Sacraments in the Church, 4 Number of Sacraments.
I acknowledge is no more then two, that is to wit, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and these two I find to be instituted by Christ himself in the holy
Gospel. The other five which they add, which are, Confirmation, Penance,
Extreme unction, Order, and Matrimony. Because I know not where to find them,
neither by the institution of Christ, nor in the Gospel or New Testament, I
count them not for Sacraments: for I think none to have authority to make
Sacraments but God only, and therefore those two I think to be Sacraments and
none other.

5 Prayer to Saints.
They make a great striving and struggling to maintain Prayer, and invocation to
the Saints departed, thinking the mediation of our Lord and Advocate Jesus
Christ insufficient for us: This invocation, I did think being in that
Sinagogue, to be a necessary and a convenient thing, although for the same I
could find no ground in the word of GOD. Yet one thing in the same, being as
I thought then an abuse, I knew not how to excuse: and that was the
invocation of diverse Saints for diverse purposes. As, one against the plague, as
S. Sebastian. An other against the tootheake, as S. Appolonia. Another against
the falling sickness, as S. Christopher, and diverse other. As though almighty
God could not hear us but by the help of these Saints. And thus in calling
upon them, we derogate from the glory of almighty God. But they say, they
desire them but to pray for them, and ask no other grace at their hands. Then
would I gladly know of them why they use these verses in their office of S.
Peter ad vincula.

Solue iubente deo terrarum Petre cathenas,
Qui facis vt pateant caelestia regna beatis.
In English thus, O Peter loose as God commands, from us the earthly chain,
The which to blessed me^ do make, the gate of heaven plain.


And in a Hymn of the same.

Iam bone pastor Petre clemens accipe,
Vota precantum et peccati vincula,
Resolve tibi potestate tradita,
Qua cunctis caelum verb claudis aperis.
In English thus.

Now sheepeheard good, o Peter mild receive,
The vows with prayer which we yield to thee:
By that same power which God to thee did give,
Which make the skies be shut, and wide to be.
One thing I marvel at, that as yet the adversaries being in controversy,
whether the Saints do see God or not, and yet granting that Saints cannot
hear the prayers of the living but by the sight of God, why so obstinatly they
defend this point? And now, whereas before I counted it necessary and
convenient, I count it vain, and superfluous, and take it for an error.

Again, prayer for the dead, 6 Prayer for the dead
is a point of great Religion amongst them: which Article they ground upon an
other no less absurd then it self, and that is Purgatory, which Purgatory
I see not vow they can defend by Scripture, though they seem contentiously
to wrest certain places of the Scripture, from the true meaning of the same
unto their own meaning, and all to defend this gross error of theirs. For
they say that those souls that depart out of this life with any venial
sin, or else with the Relics of mortal sin: must needs be purged after
this life before they can came to Heaven.

This is a gross error and is taken out of the Poet Virgil, for in that place
where he brings Anchises, to enstruct his Son Aeneas of their state in
hell, he speaks on the sort.

Quin et supremo cum lumine vita reliquit
Non tamen omne malum miseris, Aeneid. 6.
nec funditus omnes
Corporea excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est,
Multa diu concreta modis violescere miris.
Ergo excutentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplina expendunt, alia pautuntur inanes,
Suspensae ad uentos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eli^itur ^^^bis, aut exuritur igni,
Quisque suos patimur manes, exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium et pauci laeta arua tenemus.
In English thus.

And also when the pleasant life is gone with gladsome light,
Yet every mischief from those souls is not departed quite,
Nor plague of body yet is gone, and so it needful is,
That many things should them desteine which once have been amiss.
Therefore they suffer punishment, and for offenses past,
They have their meed, of blustering winds, some feel the bitter blast
And some in botto^ of a gulf do wash their faults away,
And some with flames of scorching fire, for passed sins do pay,
Each one of us his pain does feel, and then exempt from pain,
We walk about these pleasant fields a very little train.
This Article therefore with the rest, is superstitious, vain and ridiculous.

7. Works of Supererogation,
Works of supererogation as they call them, are so vain and foolish, that I
marvel that wysemen at any time will confess any such to be. For the holy
Scripture says, that when we have done all that we can, we must call our
selves unprofitable servant. Truly for my part, I know not why they should
so bind God unto our works, that if we do them, he cannot choose but save us.
For all that we can do comes from God, and we are bound to follow, and
accept of the good inspirations of him. But this word Supererogation, does
signify that the work which we do, is more then we are bound to do, which
takes away the grace of God as the Pelagean does, and fortifieth our
freewill so much, as though it had never been lost. But truly I think and
believe our Freewill to be so wounded, that not only it is not able to do
more the^ we ought, but also it can not perform ye which we ought to do. Let
them of the adversary part contend and wrangle never so much to the contrary.
The ground of this their ungrounded doctrine, Luke 10.
is taken out of the Parable of the Samaritane, which took compassion upon
him, who discending from Jerusalem to Jericho, was wounded by Thieves. For
paying the Host of the house for his charges, he told him that whatsoever he
laid out more the^ he had given him, at his return he would pay him again. Yet
consider they not, that in that Parable our Savior exhorts us to mutual
love and neighbourly charity, and that every man is bound to do good unto
his neighbor in time of need.

They deny that faith is sufficient to justify us in Gods sight, without our
own merits, 8 Good works.
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans, and
Galathians. For good works are indeed required at our hands, not as the
cause, but as the effect of our justification. And for this cause works are
required at our hands, to be a testimony of our Faith, and a cause that other
men may give the glory unto God: for our Savior says, Math. 5.
Sic luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, vt videant opera vestra bona et
glorificent Patrem vestrum qui est in caelis. So let your light shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. Then is it consequent, that our justification comes no ways of our
selves, but only by faith in Christ Jesus.

After this follows a most ridiculous doctrine, 9 Indulgences and pardons.
of the Popes Indulgences and pardons, wherein he does most insolently
arrogate to himself, the dispensations of Christ his passion, applying that to
the forgiveness of sins, the form of which has an arrogant kind of speech, as
thus. If a man fast one Friday with bread and water, he shall have plenarie
indulgence, and if he fast so on another day, his pardon shall be limited for
certain years, as 10000. etc. or some such like, or else a pena et culpa. I
always thought these trifles vain, but now I see the blasphemy of them. For
it is scant possible to get these great Indulgences, but by wearing a pair of
Beads, or a Grain, Medall, Crucifixe, Picture, Agnus Dei, or such like
tromperie. It would be too tedious to set down the manifold kinds of these
Indulgences, which al tend to one end, that is, to the lessening of the virtue
of Christ his passion.

10 Images. Exo. 20.
The second commandment plainly forbids us to make or to have any graven
Image, or ye likeness of any thing to worship it. But the adversary
excommunicateth them that deny the necessity of Images in Churches, as it is
to be seen in diverse of their Counsels. For say they, it is lawful, not only
to retain them, but also to worship the^. The which if it be not against the
second commandment, let them look unto it, I for mine own part do see it,
and am ashamed that ever I was so blockish, as to think a block or a stone to
be necessary or godly, I thought it so once, but now I cannot be so
persuaded. For he that has any reason in him to discourse, or sense to
perceive, cannot be so void of reason, or so senseless as to exhibit honor or
reverence to a senclesse Image, when the same Image, if it had sense, would not
only refuse that worship, but also would willingly fall down to worship or
adore the workman that made it.

11 Communion in both kinds
They hold and defend that the Lay people may not receive ye Communion under
both kinds, which doctrine is repugnant to ye institution of Christ. For he
said unto the^ that were present with him at his last Supper, Take and eat,
and drink ye all of this. For though the adversary say, that the Lay people
have not the privilege to receive the Cup, because the Apostles who only were
present at that supper were Priests, and not Lay men: it holds not, for by
the same reason, a man may also bar the Lay people from receiving of either
kind, for ye Apostles were Priests, and only present at the Supper, ergo it is
unlawful for any to be pertaker of that Supper but only Priests. And yet
Christ himself in another place says, Ioh. 6.
Unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you.
And these words he spoke not only to the Apostles, but Turbis Iudeorum, to the
company of the Jews, and therefore I count their dealings injurious to the
people, their doctrine blasphemous, and their proof to no purpose.

Finally, all such Articles, 12 Diverse other Articles.
which are repugnaunt to the word of God: I utterly refuse, as in special, the
Service in an unknown tongue, the prohibition of the reading of Scriptures to
the Lay people, the forbidding of the translation of the same into a vulgar
tongue, Pylgrimages, Vows, and to conclude, all such Articles, as are
contrary to the Articles of Religion, set down by public authority, I do
utterly renounce and abjure: and on the other side, I do willingly, and
without compulsion, and gladly with reverence, receive, embrace, and freely
profess, the said Articles set forth by public authority, as doctrine
without superstition, and most agreeable to the word of God.

Thus have I generally recanted mine errors in matters of Religion, and now,
will I accuse my self and my dealings, touching my disobedience toward my
Sovereign the Queens most excellent Majesty. I have most stubbornly and
wilfullye transgressed her Majesty's Laws. Knowing first the offense of going
beyond the Seas, and yet caring not for that, I proceeded further, and
willingly was priested at Rome. Thirdly, maliciously I came into my Country,
with a will to seduce her Ma. Subjects from the true and sincere Religion, and
make the^ subjects to that tyranny, unto the which I was my self subject. Then
being banished, I returned again into my Country, with the same intent that I
came in first, and for these great faults of mine I am most heartily sorry,
and in the bowels of Gods infinite mercy, I desire all them, that any ways by
my means have been deceived, and do now repent, to forgive me. Likewise
those that have not as yet their hearts moved by my example, to forsake their
errors and amend their opinions.

Thus first of all I ask forgiveness of almighty God, whom like a most
ungrateful and wilful wretch, I have most grievously offended. First, in
abusing his gifts, which of his fatherly goodness he had bestowed upon me.
Secondly, in refusing and rejecting his holy inspirations. And lastly, by
provoking others to offend by my example. And all this have I done, not like
unto them, unto whom our Savior promises a milder judgment in the latter day:
but like unto them of whom S. Paul speaks: Romans 1.
Which when they knew God, did not honor him as GOD was to be honored, and
therefore my damnation had been the greater if I had persisted. But seeing that
it has pleased him, which has preserved me from my Mothers, womb to call
me to his wonderful light, I desire you all that are here present, to give
him thanks for the same: for there is more joy in heaven before the Angels of
God, Luke 15.
for the conversion of one sinner, then for 99. just persons which need no
repentance. Desiring also his divine Majesty, that he would not remember mine
old wickedness and folly: Psalm. 143
for if he would enter into judgment with his Servants, there should none be
justified in his sight. But that he would think on the passion of our Savior
Jesus Christ, by the which he has most mercifully redeemed me, desiring him
also, that it has pleased his divine Majesty, to call me to the light of his
truth: so it would please him to bring al them which now do live in blindness,
to the same. Secondly, with humble heart I ask forgiveness of the Queens
Majesty, most humbly submitting my self to the mercy of so godly a Prince,
whom when she called her Subjects to their duty and obedience, not by
severity and rigor of the Law, but like a pitiful mother, by mercy: I have
not only not heard her, but also, (with sorrow I speak it) I have contemned
and set light by.

Lastly, I ask forgiveness of you that be here present, in whom I think that
I see all my Countrymen present: desiring you to forgive all such offenses, as
I have committed against GOD, the Queens Majesty, and against you.

God save the Queen.
THE Recantation or abiuration of Anthony Tyrrell: (sometime Priest of the
English College in Rome, but now by the great mercy of God converted, and
become a true professor of his word.) Pronounced by himself at Paul's Cross,
after the Sermon made by M. Pownoll Preacher: the eight of December. 1588.

IERE. 31. verse, 19. Postquam conuertisti me, egi paenitentiam: et postquam
ostendisti mihi percussi faemur meum. After thou had converted me (O Lord)
I did repent: and after that thou had showed me the gravity of my sin, I
stroke my thygh for shame. Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Charlewoode and VVylliam Brom. 1588.

To the Christian Reader.
MY Recantation made at Paul's Cross the day and year above written, is now
published. I thought it expedient (good Christian Reader) to set out together
withal, this short discourse by way of Praeface, for these respects which
follow. First, that I might make a supply of such necessary points, which at
the time of making my Recantation, (having but half an hour allowed me) I was
enforced to omit. Secondly, that every good man, unto whom the view of my
recantation shall come, might thorowlie be satisfied of my unfeigned meaning in
the performance of this action: the which as it concerns the everlasting
health or detriment of my soul, so of all other me^ I were most miserable and
wretched, if I should any ways be infected with hypocrisy or dissimulation.
Thirdly, that I might the better stop the slanderous reports of the
adversary whom I have forsaken, whose pens and speeches (I am sure) will now
be so much the more vehement and sharp against me, by how much I am
miraculously escaped and delivered from them, who no doubt will seek to obscure
the glory of God in this his wonderful and provident work, and to defame me
for the furtheraunce of their own cause, all that they can.

These respects moved me to add something more for the perfectyng of the
thing, that neither that which I had purposed to have spoken, might be vnsayd,
the Reader better satisfied, and the adversary overthrown.

As concerning the first point, whereas I could not in so small a portion of
time, set down the causes that moved me first to forsake the Pope, to
suspecte his religion, to make my vnsayned submissio^ unto her Majesty,
together with the causes that brought me back again: what the shortness of time
then forced me to omit, here now I have supplied by my pen.

The first and principal thing that moved me to forsake the Pope, and to
contemn his religion, (next unto the great mercy and providence of almighty
God) was his notorious trecheries and ungodly practices, against our most
gracious Queen and Sovereign: unto the happy consideration whereof I came
not, until such time as it pleased God to stop me of my course, (which was in
raunging up and down her Majesty's Realm, in sowing the seed not only of
false doctrine, but also of sedition and rebellion) and bringing me into prison
for as it is written, Tribulatio dat intellectum, Tribulation gives
understanding: and finding my self within the danger of her Majesty's laws: I
began better to consider the cause and quarrel that I had taken in hand,
remembering that saying of Cyprian: Non* paena sed causa facit martyrem, that is
Not the pain but the cause makes a Martyr. I found that my cause did more
concern the Pope then any Religion, and that rather I was to be convicted for
matter of high Treason, then to be persecuted with any extremity for matter of
mere conscience: For that all the world knows, that her Majesty never did
put any to death for matter of mere conscience or Religion.

In the consideration of my cause, which cheefely was for the defense of the
Pope: I remembered how Pius the 5. had excommunicated her Ma. and removed so
many of her subjects from their dutiful and natural obedience, as stood
persuaded of the authority of his accurssed censure: the which (to speak truly)
my conscience always detested, and hardly could my stomach be brought to
dygest such an unsavory pill, until such time as by false persuasion, I was
co^taminate altogether. Being therefore (as I said) brought by the providence
of God into prison: I came into this happy consideration, that the defending
of the Pope his quarrel: would rather make me a Traitor then a Martyr, and
that my cause would sooner prove high Treason, then true Religion. For
remembering the cause and effect of the Pope his exco^municating of her
Majesty: I found it was nothing else, but to disposesse her of her Crown and
Royalty, and that Doctor Moorton, a man of little learning, and less
Divinity, after that he ca^e into England to publish the same, who traveling
all the North parts: gave authority generally unto all the Priests, to
persuade her Ma. Subjects, as well in foro conscientiae, as in foro exteriori,
(as they term it) to withdraw their natural obedience from their Prince,
and to prepare them selves for rebellion. What effect this Excommunication
wrought: the sequel declared by the Northen rebellion. I remembered also, that
Pope Gregory that succeeded him: dealt a great deal more subtly, and more
dangerously then his predecessor, for whereas Pope Pius had excommunicated her
Ma. openly: Gregory the 13. dispensed with all Papists, that it might be
lawful outwardly to profess obedience, and to acknowledge her Ma. their
lawful Queen and Sovereign: and yet inwardly to retain a traitorous mind,
and to practice all the tretcheries against her that they can. Examples of this
matter I need not produce: the actions and confessions of such as have been
executed for their treasons, can well witness. I considered more over, the
sending of Saunders into Ireland, with a company of strangers for an inuasio^,
and how that Stukeley had been employed to the same purpose, had he not been
as false to the Pope, as he was to his Sovereign. These and the like
considerations, at what time I was first committed prisoner into the Counter,
made me to suspect mine own cause, and quarrel that I had taken in hand, and
God assisting me with his grace, I humbled my self, and did write a Letter of
submission unto an honorable Counselor of this Realm, unto whom I dyscouered
my knowledge of such vile and horrible practices, as I did know to be intended
against her Ma. and the state. I dislyked the Pope and his Religson, that
noseled men up in such abhominanable treasons, and desired to be better
enstructed in matters of faith and salvation, and that I might come unto a more
true and godly profession, then before I was brought up in. My petition was
favorably accepted, I was not only pardoned mine offenses: but I was also
restored into grace and favor: And this was the first time.

Thus having declared the first and principal cause, that moved me to forsake
the Pope and to exchange my religion: I shall in a word or two set down the
causes that made me to fall back again, the which (next unto the providence
of almighty God, that so had appointed it) was, as I breefly repeated in my
recantation, my corrupt affection: For having all the days of my life been
trained up among Papists, enstructed in their Schools, and hearing
continuallye their Sermons, reading their Books, and giving my mind little or
nothing unto the study of holy Scriptures, refusing always either to hear or
to read any thing that might contrary my first conceived opinion, and having
all my friends and acquaintance of the Papists part, thinking that I should
be left desolate and naked when I were departed from them, and having more
regard unto the shame and obloquie of the world, for altering my religion, then
unto the testimony of a good conscience for my godly and well doing, and not
being so thankful unto almighty God for so great a benefit received, as I
ought, or so careful to preserve my self from the danger of falling into the
like offense again, not having my soul thorowlye cleansed from the dregs of
corrupt affection: And falling into the company of such, as I could not be
but greatly endangered by them, partly by persuasion, and partly by flattery,
partlye by fair promises, and partly by entreaty: I was at the length so
bewitched, as (forgetting my duty unto God, my allegiance unto my Prince, and
love unto my Country) I condiscended to return unto the Pope again, and
then God withdrawing from me his grace: I was not so well minded before, as I
became naught and corrupt afterward, nor did not so well acknowledge a truth,
show a repentance, and make a submission: as I endeavored afterward to heap
lie upon lie, in slaundering of my self, in defending the Pope, and in
undoing of all the good which before I had done. In the which mind, after
that I had framed an Epistle unto her Ma. for to excuse the Pope, his Seminary
Priests, and to father slanders on my self and other men, and had written an
Apology and other Libels to that effect, I was speedily conuaied out of the
Realm, thinking first to have travailed to Rheames, and afterward to Rome.
And directing first my course into Scotland, (for that I feared to find any
secure passage at any English Port) I came to Leeth of purpose, there to take
shypping for France, but finding no passage ready, I took the next
opportunity offered me in a Flie-boate to Hamborough, in the which after I
had sailed five or six days, and coming near unto land, behold, there
happened such a sudden tempest and storm, that neither Master Mariner, or
passenger, thought ever that he should have escaped drowning. I seeing the
immine^t perrill and danger, I called to memory the dysobedient fact of Jonas,
who being commanded of God to go unto Nin^uie, transported himself toward
Tharsis: who with the like tempest was punished of almighty GOD for his
transgression; I applied the example unto my self, I thought I had greeuouslie
offended in forsaking my Country, and falsifying my faith unto GOD and my
Prince I vowed, that if it would please God to deliver me from that present
danger, and to save the whole company that they might not perrish for me, I
would desist my purposed journey, and return again into England with what
perril soever. To be short, it pleased God to hear my petition we came safe
to Hamborough, where after I had remained awhile, I repaired unto her Ma.
Comissioners that were come thither, who can bear witness of my repentance.
Not long after, I came back of mine own accord into England, and submitted my
self unto her Majesty's mercy. Her highness graciously pardoned mine offense,
and so was I restored unto grace again, and this was the second time.

Good Lord, what should be the cause of my fall again? O altitudo diuitiarum
sapientiae et scientiae Dei. O wonderful depth of Gods profounde Justice and
judgments. My time was not yet come that I was to be called effectually,
something yet remained that God would have perfected and done, for the further
advancement of his glory, for the which he permitted me to fall more
miserably the^ before I had done. And like as Peter became worse and worse in
the denying of his Master, and never repented him until Christ looked back
upon him again: even so became I worse then ever before I had been, and was
past all hope almost of repentance, had not Christ looked back upon me in
the very last moment of time: for being fallen into the peruersitie of my
former opinion, neither fear of death, shame of the world, long imprisonment,
could once alter me, but if I had been called unto my trial any time within
half a year after, I had I think, died as obstinatlie as any before me had
done. How it pleased God at the last to convert me, I have set down in my
recantation, I need not here report it again, and thus much I thought good
to make a supply of that, which if time had permitted me, should have been
delivered at such time as I made my public recantation: the which once I had
thought altogether to have concealed, but that I remembered, that Secretum Regis
abscondere, bonum est, opera autem Dei reuelare, honorificum: that is, To
conceal the secret of the King, is a good thing, but to manifest the
wonderful works of almighty God, is a most honorable thing. Now come I to
the second cause, to give thee (Gentle Reader) a fuller satisfaction, that my
former recantation has been done without all hypocrisy or dyssimulation.

As my recantation was public, and before an honorable, worshipful, and
worthy assembly, so I hope that their hearts were so moved, that most of them
we^e inclined unto pity and compassion, howbeit, such as heard me not, and
shall only peruse this dombe Letter. I know not how they may stand
persuaded of my true and faithful meaning, and the more hardly they may be
incensed against me, when perhaps they shall hear of my former Lybelles and
Letters written in the defense of the Pope, and all Seminary Priests, at such
time as I was returned unto the Pope again; that having written so veheme^tlie
in their behalf, in reproof of my self and mine own confessions, with
protestations that all that I had done, was but in deep hypocrisy and
dyssimulation: and now affirming the cleene contrary, may yet suspect me of
double dealing, and stand in doubt what to believe. For if I did say true
then, I must dissemble now: and if I say true now, I could not but write
falshoode then. For thy better satisfaction in this point (good Christian
Reader) least thy good opinion of me might be carried away by the fraudulent
practice of the enemy again, I have set down the true causes that moved me
first to reject the Pope, hoping that they be such, as no honest or good man
may deny them: which being found to be true in the sight and knowledge of
every man, I leave it then for the indifferent Reader to judge, whether I had
just cause to forsake the Pope as I did, and whether I have written any
slander against him. His doings being far worse then that I have already
spoken, and whether I had good cause to suspect his religion, since that our
Savior says, That every Tree is known by his fruit, and the fruits that
the Pope yields, being nothing else but horrible practices and Treasons, I
see not but that the Tree (as I said in my recantation) together with the body
and branches, is to be hewn down.

As for my Lybels and writings that I have penned and made in his defense, the
more they rome with protestations, the more a wise man has cause to suspect
them; for surely they come all from that foul spirit which first was thrown
out, and being returned again, he brought seven worse then him self to hold
more sure possession. But consider (good Christian Reader) the wonderful power
and mercy of almighty GOD, in this one only thing. Had I been assured that I
had settled my former faith and Religion upon a stable ground, had not my
conscience cried out against me, at what time the finger of GOD did
effectually touch me, would I (think you) after that I had wilfully
forsaken the favors and mercies of my Prince, the liberty of my Country, the
possibility of preferments, and after I had so desperately committed my self
unto the open shame and obloquie of the world, to the danger of death, and in
the extreamitie of sickness when I could hope for no life, have repented me of
that which I had done, and make such a ditection of my fault, and such a
public recantation as I have done, verily I think no wise or reasonable
man would ever think it; and therefore, if this be not a sufficient and a
strong argument to prove my unfeigned repentance, I can but cry with the
Prophet, Iudica me Deus, er discern causam meam, Judge me O Lord, and
dyscerne my cause. I can but refer the matter unto thee heavenly Judge, that
in the latter day must judge me and all man kind: and thus much touching the
fulness of satisfaction.

Now lastly I thought good to set out this Praeface for to encounter the
enemy, who as I hear, has published in Print my former Lybels, subscrybed
with mine own hand, for the which I give by these presents all the world to
understand, that whatsoever I have written heretofore in the defense of the
Pope, it has been in the time of my seduction, in the zeal of Papistrie, and
therefore those wrytings are not to be regarded of any wise or godly person.
And truly the Papists have deceived themselves in the publishing of those
Pamphlets: for, if Charity could not have persuaded the^ to conceal them, me
thinks that policy should, for they do but minister matter unto me to
answer them, wherein I shall be constrained to lay open their nakedness, which
otherwise I thought to have covered, and they heap more coals on their own
heads then they be aware of. I say no more at this time, until I understand
further what they have done. And thus having absolved so much as I thought
necessary to ad by way of Praeface, I do refer thee (gentle Reader) unto
the Recantation it self, craving pardon if I have troubled thee over long.
From my chamber at S. Katherins the 31. of December. Anno. Domi. 1588.

Your paenitent Countryman and wel-willer in the Lord, Anthony Tyrrell.

The recantation or abiuration of Anthony Tyrrell: etc.
COnsidering the notorious and outrageous trespass, after so many merciful
remissions, that not many months passed, I publicly committed at this place
(right honorable, worshipful, and well-beloved) in the dispersing of certain
infamous Lybels, to the great dishonor of almighty GOD, contempt of true
Religion, displeasure of my Prince, scandal and offense unto all good and
godly Christians, rejoicing of Gods enemies, and mine own eternal rebuke and
infamy: I was a fearde least that my name for ever had been blotted out of
the Book of life, and that no place had been left me in this world for true
repentance.

But behold, such has been the effect, as I hope, of some men's good prayers,
such has been the great favor showed me, in the tolleration of my leude and
heinous fact, such has been the exceeding clemency of my gracious Prince and
Sovereign: but above all, such has been the infinite mercy of almighty GOD,
in the renewing and perfecting this act of my conversion, that I do not only
inwardly feel an assured hope of Gods everlasting pardon and forgiveness, but
outwardly also, I seem to see a most comfortable resemblaunce that all you,
which have had just cause to hate and contemn me, will yet be moved with
compassion.

May it please you therefore to understand, that I am come hither (as GOD is
my witness) not of any compulsion, or for fear of any temporal punishment, or
hope of worldly preferment: much less induced thereunto by any false
hypocrisy or dissimulation, but only the free mercy of almighty GOD so
moving me to confess my fault, to crave forgiveness, to renounce those errors
that I have holden and mayntained from my childhoode, of the Sinaguoge of
Satan (I mean of the Church of Rome) and to reunite my self unto the
ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, whereof this Church of
England is a part, being purged and reformed of all herisie, Idolatry, and
superstition.

But, least you should marvel by what wylfull folly I was seduced, or
rather by what madness I was moved to fall into that Apostacy, having twice
before renounced the Pope, that I would so impudentlie return unto him
again: To yield you some satis-faction in that point, these may be also to
let you understand, that the cheifest cause, as near as I can conjecture,
was the wonderful providence of almighty GOD, who suffered me to fall into ye
profound depth of all iniquity, that the bottomless depth of my extreme
misery, might call and cry for succor and help unto the bottomless depth of
Gods infinite mercy, and that out of that huge heap and mass of sin, shame
and confusion, wherein most miserably I had enwrapped my self, he might pick
out matter for to set forth the honor and glory of his holy name. For such is
the goodness of almighty God, that he suffers no evil so great to be
committed, but that he works out some great goodness of the same, either in
showing his just judgment and justice in the punishing of sin, or his
exceeding mercy and clemency in the pardoning of sin, or his omnipotent
power, that he alone out of such evil causes, is able to produce these notable
and good effects.

Perhaps also he would that I should be an example unto other men of his
justice and of his mercy: of his justice, that no man presume of his own
power and strength, least that he fall as miserably as I have done: of his
mercy, that no man despair, be his offenses never so grievous and many, for
were he drowned and dead in sin, GOD is able to revive him again (as he
has done me) whose name be praised for evermore.

Let me yet if you please, add another cause which more properly concerns
my self, which was mine own perverse and corrupt affection. For being by the
great mercy of almighty God, safely brought out of Sodom, and that mine eyes
were opened, and that I did behold and see the many deformities of ye Church
of Rome, yet corrupt affection, brought me to give ear unto false persuasion,
and false persuasion made me most miserably with Lots wife to look back
again. For having been brought up all the days of my life in Papistrie, and
trained in the Schools of the Papists, whereby my knowledge was greatly
perverted with the grounds of their Religion, it could not be, but that I must
needs be infected with a great contagion, and according unto the saying of
the Poet: Quo semel est imbuta recens, Horat.
seruabit odorem testa diu: With what liquor a new vessel first is seasoned,
of the same it will have a taste a long time after. So, my vessel, having in
mine infancy even to these late years, been filled with no other liquor then
that I had drunk out of the Church of Rome. I was the more easily corrupted
when I did fall into the company of Papists again. And not being so
thankful unto almighty GOD for the benefit of his grace as I should, nor so
careful to conserve my self from the danger of sin: out of one sin GOD
suffered me to fall into another, insomuch as peccatum for ye most part est
causa et paena alterius peccati: one sin is the cause and punishment of
another: and being fallen into an extreme obstinacy, with what furious
madness I came hither unto the Cross, it is not unknown, how here I behaved
my self, there were many eye witnesses, from hence I was carried unto Newgate,
where I gloried in that I had done, from thence unto the Counter in
Woodstreet, where I remained twenty four weeks close prisoner in that
obstinacy, that no persuasion or good entreatie could convert me: in so much
as if in all that time I had been called unto my trial, as many of my
quality and condition have been, I think verily that I had ended my life as
obstinatlie as any of them.

Sed nouit Dominus qui sunt eius, GOD knows who are his chosen, and whom God
has determined to save, no man can take from him.

Behold, I was during the time of mine imprysonment, visited by ye hand of God
with an extreme sickness, I languished of the infirmity unto the very death:
for, so many as did behold me in my great malady, thought that I should
never have escaped with life: at that time, I had all the consolations and
comforts that Papists could yield me, and some that shall be nameles, comforted
me with the Popes pardons and Indulgences, saying: that I was a happy man, and
that my name should be memorable among the Papists when I were dead and gone.

But all these consolations at that time, could nothing at all comfort me: I
remembered what was written, Maledictus homo qui confidit in homine, Cursed is
he that puts his trust in man, and has not his confidence in God alone. It
pleased ye Lord to touch me with remorse, I lifted up my soul unto Jesus
Christ the Savior of mankind: I cried with the Prophet David, Peccaui: and
behold, Transtulit Dominus peccatum meum, God has pardoned and forgiven me my
sin: and therefore I may very well conclude with the Prophet, and say: A
Domino factum est istud, et est mirabile in oculis nostris, This is the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

Thus have you heard a brief confession of my fault, the causes of my fall,
and the wonderful mercy of almighty God in raising me up again. May it
please you with the like patience, to favor me in hearing of the rest, and I
shall dispatch it with all the brevity that I can.

And first of all as touching mine errors that I have to renownce. I must
confess that I did never hold any in particular, but those general grounds
of false doctrine which all Papists for the most part do hold, which for
that they are many and almost innumerable, I know not better where I may
begin then by setting the Axe unto the root of ye Tree, that every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit, together with the body and branches may be
hewn down.

The Tree of all iniquity is the Pope, the root from whence springs all
false doctrine, heresy and sedition, is his usurped Primacie. For, whilst he
may govern like a God upon earth, he forgets that there is any God in
heaven. His pride in this ^oint is too intolerable, for he clymeth with
Lucifer above the Heavens, insomuch as the saying of the Prophet Esaias may very
well be applied unto him, which although it be meant of Nabuchodonozor, yet is
it not improperly applied unto this his Cosen German, the words are these:
Ascendam super altitudinem nubium, et similis ero altissimo: I will ascend
above the height of the Clouds, and I will be like unto the most highest. Who
ascends above the Clouds if not the Pope, who extends his authority above
the Heavens? Does not he alone canonize Saints? Does not he alone make
Martyrs, be they never so rank and wicked Traitors? He makes himself
coequall with GOD, in forgiving and pardoning of sin, he alone has power
and authority to censure the holy Scriptures, for they are not Canonical
without his making: they may have no other interpretation but of his allowing.
His Decrees, Definitions, Traditions and Ceremonies, are of equal credit with
the holy Scripture, for we are bound to believe them upon pain of damnation,
as well as the other. He alone has the keeping of the Churches Treasure,
which, as they say, consists of the merits of Christ and of his Saints:
wherein he commits an horrible blasphemy, to make the Saints coparteners
with Christ in the act of our Redemption. What shall need many words, he is
the contayner of all truth, he cannot err, so that the resolution of the
Papists faith does depend upon the Pope alone. If any Papist do object and
say, that I say untruely, for that they ground their Faith upon the
definition of the Church, I would but ask them what Church they mean, surely
they mean not the universal Church of Christ, but the particular Church of
Rome (if that may be called a Church that is infected with so great a
contagion) and who I pray you is the Governor and Ruler of ye Church but the
Pope alone? As for the General Counsels whereof they brag so much, it is a
most vain and frivolous thing. For no Counsel can be called without the Popes
sommoning, and no Counsel can be of authority without his confirming: so that
the full resolution of any doubt in doctrine depends upon the Pope alone, be
he never so unlearned, never so wicked a man.

O unhappy Church that rests upon such a one. From hence proceeded all my
errors in doctrine whatsoever: for, whilst I grounded my faith upon the
authority of the Pope, I had small regard or none at all unto the holy
Scripture, I cared not although I wanted proves for my doctrine out of the
word of GOD, it was sufficient that I could say thus it is set down by the
Pope, thus we must believe: and therefore the Popes Divinity may well be
called positive, for it is set down after his own fashyon. From hence,
proceeded my error of ye Mass, that it was a sacrifice propitiatory for the
quick and the dead. From hence, my error of transubstantiation, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper was to he administered unto the Lay people under
one kind, That the public service of the Church was to be celebrat in an
unknown tongue. That there were five Sacraments more then ever Christ did
institute. From hence, proceeced my doctrine of Purgatory, Pardons, Prayer for
the dead and satis-factitions. From hence, invocation of Saints, worshipping of
Images, and Pylgrimages did proceed, with many other absurdities too long
here to repeat. Let it suffice, I beseech you, that in one word I renownce
the Pope and all his doctrine, who for that he has mounted so high with the
King of Babylon, it cannot be but that the like pride will have the like like
fall, and therefore I will recyte but his fall, and there I will leave him. It
follows in the Prophet, Veruntamen ad infernum detraheris, in profundum laci,
Notwithstanding, thou shall be drawn down to hell unto the bottom of the
Lake: from the which good Lord deliver me and all good men. And thus much of
my errors that I do renounce.

Having by Gods providence emptied my vessel of this unsavory liquor, may it
please you in a word to understand, what liquor I have received in, (for as the
Philosopher says: Non est vacu^m in rerum natura,) The liquor therefore that I
have received surely is no other, then that which I have drawn out of the pure
Fountain of Gods most holy word. And I believe that all things necessary for
man's salvation, are sufficiently contained in Gods most holy word, and that no
man is bound to believe as an Article of his Faith, any other doctrine then is
expressed in holy Scripture, or by necessary consequence may be deduced out of
the same. And because I would not seem to be carried from hence forth with
any particular spyrite, I do firmly assent unto all those Articles of
Religion which have been set down by the common consent of the learned
Clergy of this Realm, unto the which, for that I do find them in all points
agreeable unto Gods most holy word, I have most willingly subscribed, and
shall defend them God wylling, against all the adversaries whomsoever. And thus
much as touching my present belief of doctrine.

Now lastly it remains, that I do ask particular and public forgiveness
according to the persons against whom, and according to the quallitie of the
offense wherein I have offended. And here I must confess to the greater honor
of almighty God, that I have had many and vehement temptations to hinder me
from this action of repentance, but the temptations being but worldly and
fleshly, with the sword of Gods spirit I have cut them a sunder unto nothing,
and against the shame of the world I have learned to say, Melius est confundi
in hoc saeculo, quam in futuro, Better it is to be confounded in this world,
then in the world to come. And against pride and haughtines of mind, (the
which temptations did much molest me) I have learned to say with Augustine,
Melior est in malis factis humilis confessio, quam in bonis, superba gloriatio,
Better it is when a man has done evil, humbly to confess his fault, then
proudly to vaunt of any good deed. And rather I had with the penitent Publican
confess my self an open sinner, then with the proud Pharisey to prove my
self a liar.

I do therefore in all humility prostrate my self first before the mercy
seat of the omnipotent Majesty, craving pardon and forgiveness from the bottom
of my heart for my many sins and offenses. Secondly, of the Queens most
excellent Majesty, my gracious Lady and dread Sovereign, whose great mercy
and clemency toward me, I have overmuch abused. First, by living fifteen
years beyond the Seas among her Majesty's professed enemies, and four years
having been of the Roman Seminary, from whence I was sent by the Pope and
the Jesuits into this her Majesty's Realm. Eight years I have conuersed and
raunged up and down within her Majesty's Dominions as a Seminary priest,
(except some small time that I had been in prison) to sow the seed of
sedition and of false doctrine, and to gain as many of her Majesty's Subjects
unto the Pope as I could. Yet must I protest that I could never in my life be
induced to consent unto any treacherous practice against her Majesty's person,
and that always it grieved me, when I did hear her Majesty mistermed, or
irreverently spoken of at any time. I must confess that I was privy unto a
great part of the Treason of Ballard and Babyngton, and I discovered my
knowledge thereof unto an honorable Counselor of this Realm: but, after that
I was fallen unto the Pope again, for the saving of his credit and his
Seminary Priests, I denied all again, and therefore I do crave of her
Majesty pardon and forgiveness again and again.

Thirdly, I ask forgiveness of the right reverend Father in God, my Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his grace, for that I have abused his fatherly
goodness with deep dyssimulation.

Fourthlie, I most humbly crave pardon and forgiveness of ye right honorable my
especial good Lord, the Lord high Treasurer of England, whose godly
expectation of me, by my sinister and leude dealinges I have overmuch abused,
and yet his honor always recompensed mine evil with good again.

Fifthly, I crave pardon and forgiveness of this honorable, worshipful, and
worthy assembly. Finally, of all the world, and especially of all my dear
and loving Countrymen, and those whom I have any manner of ways deceived
with any corrupt or perverse doctrine, praying GOD to convert them as he has
converted me, that I with them, and they with me, may live together in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Most humbly beseeching you, right honorable, worshipful
and the rest, to open the bowels of your compassyon to me, and that you would
not so much respect what mannner of man I have been, as to consider what now
by the grace of GOD I am, and by the same grace shall so continue.

If it may please you to vouchsafe me this my first petition, that ever I
requested at your hands in this public manner, I shall be so careful by Gods
grace to conserve so great a benefit, as I hope never to trouble you in the
like again.

It pleased GOD the last Sunday, to rejoice your hearts at the conversion of a
sinner, which joy that then was made, did represent the joy in Heaven. I hope
that he shall rejoice your hearts again to day, and I pray God you may so
rejoice your hearts every day, until we come unto that complete and perfect
joy, where we may joy for ever, and say, Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus,
exultemus et laetemur in ea, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be merry therein. God that has enclyned my heart unto
repentance, I hope will also incline your hearts to yield forgiveness. To his
Majesty, being three persons in Trinity and one in unity, be all honor,
praise, glory and dominion, both now and evermore. Amen.

God save the Queen.
Haec omnia superscripta vere et non ficte, ex animo et cord fuisse dicta,
testis est mihi Deus: manuque propria sunt exarata. Anthonius Tyrrell.


