TAILORS FAREVVELL, TO THE TOVVER BOTTLES.

Printed at Dort. 1622.

The Argument.
About Three hundred and Twenty years since, or thereabouts, (I think in the
Reign of King Richard the Second) there was a gift given to the Tower, or to
the Lieutenants thereof, for the (...) then and for ever being, which gift was
Two black leather Bottles, or Bombards of Wine, from every Ship that brought
Wine into the River of Thames; the which has so continued until this day, but
the Merchants finding themselves agreeued lately because they thought the
Bottles were made bigger then they were formerly wont to be, did wage Law with
the Leiutenant (Sir Geruis Helwis by Name) in which Suit the Lieutenant had
been overthrown, but for such Witnesses as I found that know his Righ^ for a
long time in their own knowledge. But I having had the Gathering of these
Wines for many years, was at last Discarde^ from my place because I would not
Buy it, which because it wa^ never bought or sold before, I would not or durst
not venture upon so dishonest a nouelty, it being sold indeed at so high a
Rate, tha^ who so bought it must pay thrice the value for it: whereupon ^ took
occa^sion to take leave of the Bottles in this following Poem, i^ which the
Reader must be very melancholy, if the reading thereon (...) not make him very
merry.

JOHN TAILOR.

TAILORS Farewell, to the Tower-Bottles.
BY your leave Gentlemen, I Will make some sport,
Although I venture half a hanging for it:
But yet I will no peace or ma^ners break
For I to none but Leather-bottles speak.
No Anger spurs me forward, or despite
In smooth plain Verse I talk of wrong and Right.
The Looser may speak, when the Winner wins,
And madly merrily my Muse begins.
Mad Bedlam Tom, assist me in thy Rags,
Lend me thy Army of foul Feinds and Hags:
Hobgoblins, Elues, fair Fayries, and foul Furies,
Let me have twelve Groce of Infernal Iuries,
With Robin Goodfellow, and bloody Bone
Assist my merry Muse, all, every one.
I will not call to the The 9. Muses
Pegassian Nine,
In this they shall not aid me in a Line:
Their favors I Will reserve, till fitter time,
To grace some better business with my Rhyme,
Plain homespun stuff shall now proceed from me,
Much like unto the Picture of The picture of 2. fools, and the third looking
on, I do ficly compare with the two black Bottles and my self.
we Three.
And now I talk of three, just three we are,
Two false black Bottles, and my self at jarre,
And Reader when you read our cause of strife,
You Will laugh or else lie down, He lay my life,
But as Remembrance lamely can rehearse,
In sport I Will rip the matter up in Verse.
Yet first, here down I think it fit to set
By what means first, I with those Bottles met.
Then stroke your Beards my Masters, and give care,
I was a Waterman twice Four long year,
And lived in a Contented happy state,
Then turned the whirling wheel of fickle Fate,
From Water unto Wine: Sir William Waad
Did freely, and for nothing turn my trade.
Ten years almost the place I did Retain,
And I filled the 2 bottles, being in quantity 6. Gallons from every Ship that
brought Wines up the River of Thames.
gleaned Great Bacchus blood from France and Spain,
Few Ships my visitation did escape,
That brought the sprightfull liquor of the Grape:
My Bottles and my self did often agree,
Full to the Top, all merry came We three.
Yet always 'twas my chance in Bacchus spite,
To come into the Tower vnfox'd upright.
But as men's thoughts a world of ways do range,
So as Lieutenants changed, did Customs The Wines had bin continually brought
into the Leiutenants seller of the Tower for the space of 3^6 years, and never
sold till now of late within this 4. or five years.
change:
The Ancient use, used many years before,
Was fold, unto the highest Rate and more,
At such a price, which whosoever did give,
Must play the Thief, or could not save and live.
Which to my loss, I manifestly found
I am well sure it cost me Thirty pound
For One year, but before the next year come,
'Twas almost mounted to a double It was sold at these hard Rates by another
Leiutenant, (an honest religious Gentleman, and a good housekeeper) by the
persuasions of some of his double diligent Servants.
sum:
Then I, in scorn, Contempt, and vile disgrace,
Discarded was, and thrust quite from my place,
There Bacchus almost cast me in the mire,
And I from Wine to Water did retire.
But when the blind misiudging world did see,
The strange unlooked for parting of us Three,
To hear but how the multitude did judge,
How they did mutter, mumble, prate and grudge,
That for some Against all the world I oppose my self in this point, but yet I
purpose to confess more then any can accuse me of.
faults I surely had committed,
I, in disgrace thus from my place was quitted.
These Imputations grieved me to the heart,
(For they were causlesse, and without desert)
And therefore though no man above the Ground
That knew the Bottles, would give Twenty Except he were a fool or a mad man.
pound
Rather than I would branded be with shame,
And bear the burden of desertles blame,
To be an Owl, contemptuously bewondred,
I would give I did hear that the leiutenant was to leave his place, which
made me bargain with him at any price, in hope that he would not stay the full
Receiving, which fell out as I wished it.
Threescore, fourscore, or a hundred.
For I did vow, although I were undone,
I would redeem my Credit ouerrunne,
And it is much better in a Iayle to Rot,
To suffer begg'ry, slavery, or what not,
Then to be blasted with that wrong of wrongs,
Which is the poison of Backbiting tongues.
Hoysted aloft unto this mounting tax,
Bound fast in Bonds in Parchment and with wax,
Time galloped, and brought on the payment day,
And for three Months, I Eighteen pounds did pay.
Then I confess, I played the Thief in grain,
And for one Bottle, commonly stole twain.
But who so buys the place, and means to thrive,
Must many times for One take four or five.
For this I will maintain and verify,
It is an Office no true man can buy.
And by that Reason, sure I should say well,
It is unfit for any man to sell:
For 'till at such an extreme Rate I bought,
To filch or steal, I scarcely had a thought.
And I dare make a vow before God and men,
I never played the Thief so much as then.
But at the last my friendly stars agreed,
That from my heavy bonds I should be That Lieutenant left his place, by which
I was eased of my hard paime^ts.
freed:
Which if I ever come into again,
Let hanging be the Guerdon for my pain.
Then the By this Lieutenant that now is.
old Custom did again begin,
And to the Tower I brought the Bottles in,
For which for serving more then half a year,
I (with much love) had Wages and good Cheer,
'Till one A desperate Clothworker that did hunger and thirst to undo him
self.
most valiant, ignorantly stout,
Did buy, and ouer-buy, and buy me out.
Thus like Times Footeball was I often tossed
In Dock out Nettle, up down, blessed and crossed,
Out-fac'd and faced, graced and again disgraced,
And as blind Fortune pleased, displaced or placed.
And thus, for ought my Augury is a kind of Sooth saying, by the flight of
birds.
Augurie can see
Diuorc'd and parted ever are we Three.
Old Nabaoth, my case is much worse then thine,
Thou but thy Vineyard lost, I lost the Wine:
Two witnesses (for bribes) thee false accused,
(Perhaps) some prating Knaves has me abused:
Yet thy wrong's more then mine, the Reason why,
For thou wast Nabaoth was stoned to death, so am not I.
stoned to death, so am not I.
But as the dogs did eat the flesh and gore
Of Iezabell, that Royal painted Whore,
So may the Gallows eat some friends of mine,
That first strived to remove me from the Wine.
This may by some misfortune, be their lot,
Although that any way I wish it not*
But farewell Bottles, never to return,
Weep you in Sack, whilst I in Ale will mourn;
Yet though you have no reason, wit, or sense,
I Will senseless chide you for your vile offense,
That from your foster father me, would slide
To dwell with Ignorance, My Bottles do deserve a little reproof.
a blinde-fold guide,
For who in Britain knew (but I) to use you,
And who but I knew how but to abuse you;
My speech to you, no Action sure can bear,
From Scandala magnatum I am clear.
When Vpland Tradesmen thus dares take in hand
A watery buis'nesse, they not understand:
It did presage things would turn topsie turuie,
And the conclusion of it would be scuruie.
But leaving him unto the course of Fate,
Bottles let you and I a while debate,
Call your extrauagant wild humors home,
And think but whom you are departed from;
I that for your sakes have given stabs and stripes*
To give you suck from Hogsheads and from Pipes,
I that with pains and care you long have ^urst,
Often filled you with the best, and left the worst.
And to maintain you full would often pierce
The best of Butts, a Puncheon, or a ^ierce,
Whilst Pipes and Sackbuts were the Instruments
That I played on, to fill your full contents.
With Bastart, Sack, with Allegant, and Rhenish,
Your hungry mawes I often did replenish,
With Malmesie, Muskadell, and Corcica,
With White, Red, Clarret, and Liatica,
With Hollocke, Sherant, Malliga, Canara,
I stuffed your sides up with a sursarara,
That though the world was hard, my care was still,
To search and labor you might have your fill.
That when my Master did or Sup or Dine,
He had his choice of This was a credit to the Kings Castle and to the
Lieutenant thereof.
Fifteen sorts of Wine.
And as good Wines they were, I dare be bold,
As any Seller in this Land did hold.
Thus from these Bottles I made honor spring,
Befitting for the Castle of a King.
This Royalty, my labor did maintain,
When I had meat and wages for my pain.
Ungrateful Bottles, take it not amiss
That I, of your unkindness tell you this,
Sure if you could speak, you would say in brief,
Your greatest want, was still my greatest grief.
Did I not often in my bosom hug you,
And in mine arms would (like a Father) lugge you,
Have I not run through Tempests, gusts and storms,
And met with danger in strange various forms,
All times and Tides, with, and against the stream,
Your welfare ever was my labors Theme.
Sleet, Rain, hayle, wind, or Winters frosty chaps,
Jove's Lightning, or his dreadful Thunderclaps,
When all the Elements in one Conspire,
Sad Earth, sharp Air, rough Water, flashing Fire,
Have warred on one another, as if all
This world of nothing, would to nothing fall.
When showring hayleshot, from the storming heaven
Nor blustering Gusts by Eol's belching driven,
Could hold me back, then often I searched and sought,
And found, and unto you the purchase brought.
All weathers, fair, foul, Sunshine, wet and dry,
I trauail'd still your paunches to supply.
Often have I fought, and swagger'd in your Right,
And filled you still by either slight or might.
And in th'Exchequor I stood for your Cause,
Else had you bin confounded by the Laws.
I did produce such I found and brought 3. witnesses that knew, and took their
Oaths for the quantities of the Bottles for 50. years.
witnesses, which crossed
The Merchants suit, else you had quite bin lost,
And (but for me) apparently it is known,
You had bin Kicksie winsie overthrown,
And for my service, and my much pains taken,
I am cashiered, abandoned, and forsaken.
I knew it well, and said, and swore it too,
That he that bought you would himself undo,
And I was promised, that when he gave over,
That I should fill you, as I did before,
For which Four years with patience I did stay,
Expecting he would break, or run away,
Which though it be fallen out as I expected,
Yet nerethelesse my service is rejected.
Let men judge if I have not cause to write
Against my Fortune, and the worlds despite,
That in my prime of strength, so long a 14. years.
space,
I toiled and drudg'd, in such a gainelesse place,
Whereas the best part of my life I spent,
And (to my power) gave every man content,
In all which time which I did then remain,
I gave no man occasion to complain,
For unto all that know me I appeal,
To speak if well or ill I used to deal,
Or if there be the least abuse in me,
For which I thus from you should sundred be.
For though my profit by you was but small,
Yet sure my Gain was love in general
And that I do not lie, not speak amiss,
I can bring hundreds that can witness this,
Yet for all this I ever am put off,
And made a scorn, a by word and a scoff.
It must some Villains information be,
That has maliciously abused me,
But if I knew the misinforming else,
I would write lines should make him hang himself.
Be he a Great man that does use me ill,
(That makes his will his Law, and Law his will)
I hold a Poor man may that Great man tell,
How that in doing ill, he does not well.
But Bottles black, once more have at your breech,
For unto you I only bend my speech
Full fourteen times had Sols illustrious Rays,
Ran through the Zodiac, when I spent my days
To conserve, reserve, preserve and deserve
Your loves, when you with wants were like to starve.
A Groce of Moons, and twice 12. months besides,
I have attended you all times and tides.
If I gained Twelue-pence by you all that time,
May I to Tyburne for promotion Climb,
For though the blind world understand it not,
I know there is nothing by you can be got,
Except a drunken pate, a scuruy word,
And now and then be tumbled ouer-boord,
And though these mischiefs I have kept me fro,
No other Bottleman could e're do so.
It Is known you have bin stabbed, thrown in the Thames,
And he that filled you beaten, with exclaimes,
By Merchants, who have much abused bin
Which Exigents, I never brought you in,
But I with peace and quietness got more,
Then any brabling e're could do before.
The VVarders knows, each Bottleman (but I)
Had always a cracked crown, or a black eye,
Often beaten like a Dog, with a scratched face,
Turned empty beaten back with vile disgrace.
These injuries my self did bring in quiet,
And still with peace I filled you free from Riot.
My labors have bin dedicate to you,
And you have dealt with me, as with a Jew,
For unto thousand witnesses it is known,
I did esteem your welfare as mine own.
But an objection from my words may run,
That seeing nothing by you may be won,
Why I do keep this deal of do about you
When as I say, I can live best without you.
I answer, though no profit you do bring,
Yet there is many a profitable thing,
Which I of This course never came into my mind in 14. years, whilst I kept
the place.
Mariners might often buy,
Which unto me would yield commodity.
And I expected when the Time should be,
That I should fill you, as 'twas promised me,
Whereby some other profit might be got,
Which I in former times remembered not,
All which could do the Custom house A jarre of Olives, or Oil, a few
Potatoes, Oranges Lemmons, and diverse other things, which a man may buy, get,
and save by.
no wrong,
Which to repeat here would be ouer-long.
But I was slighted, with most vile disgrace,
And one that was my Prentise placed in The fellow was ever a true man to me,
and I envy not his happiness, but yet I have very foul play offered (...)
place.
But holla holla Muse, come back come back,
I speak to none but you, you Bottles black.
You that are now turned Monsters, most ingrate,
Where you have cause to love most, most to hate,
You that are of good manners quite deprived,
Worse then the They are made of a beasts hide.
Beast from whence you are derived,
If you be good for nothing but what is naught,
Then sure you have bin better fed then taught:
Besides the world will tax me, and say still
The fault was mine that nurtured you so ill.
Persisting thus, in your injurious wrong,
It shows you are drunk with being Empty long.
Long fasting sure has made you weak and dull,
For you are steddiest when you are most full.
Me thinks I hear you say the fault's not yours,
You are commanded, by Superior powers,
But if the choice were yours, you had much rather
That I, then any one the Wines should gather.
Alas poor fools, I see your force is weak,
Complain you cannot, wanting power to speak:
If you had speech, it may be you would tell,
How with you and the Merchants I dealt well,
But it is no matter, though you silent be,
My fourteen years long service speaks for me.
And for the Merchants still my friends did prove,
I Will tell them somewhat to requite their Love.
First let their wisdoms but collect and sum,
How many Ships with Wine do yearly come,
And they will find that all these Bottles shall
Not fill At ^. gallons from a Ship, and from some but 1. gallon and a half, I
account 30. Ships allowance is the quantity of 1. Hogshead, whereby it may be
easily found in the Customhouse if I speak true or not.
nine Hogsheads, at the most of all,
Then he that for them Three Tonne dares to give,
The case is plain, he must or beg or theeue.
I do not say that you have bin abusde,
But you may partly guess how you were used.
Indeed Now I speak of the Bottles again.
I think we never so soon had parted,
Had friendly outsides bin but friendly hearted,
The sweet bayte Couers the deceiving hooks,
And false hearts can put on good words and looks.
All is not Gold the Proverb says that glisters,
And I could wish their Tongues were full of blisters,
That with their flattering diligence most double,
Themselves, and you, and I, thus much did trouble.
For misinforming paltry Knaves must be
The Instruments of such indignity.
But as the fairest Garden has some weeds,
And amongst the cleanest flock some scab'd sheep breeds.
Or as the Ta^e amongst the Wheat does grow
Good only for what is ill yet makes a show.
So there is no Great house fixed on the ground,
But Clawbacke Sichophants may there be found,
For it is a Maxim held in every Nation,
Great men are waited on by Adulation.
No doubt but some does to the Court resort,
And sure the Tower must imitate the Court*
As Caesar's Palace may (perhaps) have many,
So Caesar's Castle cannot say not any.
I have found some that with each wind would move
With hearts all hatred, and with tongues all Love,
Who with Hats moved, would take me by the Fist
With Complements of honest Jack how is it?
I Am glad to see thee well with all my heart,
Long have I longed to drink with thee a quart,
I have believed this Dross had bin pure Gold,
When presently I have bin bought and sold
Behind my back (for no desert or Cause)
By those that kindly Cap'd and kissed their (...)
For one of them (an ancient Reverend Scribe)
Received Forty shillings for a bribe,
On purpose so to bring the case about
To put another in, and thrust me out.
Long was the time this business was a brewing,
Until fit opportunity accruing,
I was displaced, yet spite the bribed Sharke,
The man that gave the bribe did miss the mark.
O Bottles Bottles, Bottles, Bottles, Bottles,
Platoes divine works, nor great Aristotle's,
Did never make mention that a gift so Royal,
was ever bought and sold, like slaves disloyal.
For since King Richard, second of that Name,
(I think) your high Prerogative you Claim:
And this much here to write I dare be bold
You are a gift, not given to be sold,
For sense or Reason never would allow
That you should e're be bought and sold till now.
Philosophers with all their Documents,
Nor aged Time with Antique monuments,
Did ever mention such untoward Elues,
That did more idely cast away themselves.
To such low Ebb your baseness now does shrink,
Whereas you yearly did make Thousands drink.
The hateful Title now to you is left,
You Are Instruments of begg'ry and of Theft.
But when I filled you (I dare boldly swear)
From all these imputations you were clear,
Against which I dare, dare, who dare or can,
To answer him and meet him man to man,
Truth arms me, with the which I will hold Bias,
Against the shocke of any false Golias.
Bottles you have not wanted of your fill,
Since you have left me, by your heedlesse will,
You scarce have tasted penury or want,
(For cunning Thieves are seldom ignorant)
Yet many times you have been filled with trash,
Scarce good enough your dirty skins to wash.
All this I know, and this I did divine,
But all is one, Draffe is good enough for Swine.
I do not here inueigh, or yet Envy
The places profit, none can come hereby,
And in my hand it lies (if so I please)
To spoil it, and not make it worth a Pease.
And to the world I Will cause it to appear,
Who e're gives for you Twenty pounds a year.
Must from the Merchants pilfer Fourscore more,
Or else he cannot live, and pay the score.
And to close up this point, I say in brief,
Who buys it is a Beggar, or a Thief,
Or else a Fool, or to make all agree,
He may be Fool, Thief, Beggar, all the Three.
So you false Bottles, to you both adieu,
The Thames for me, not a Denier for you.
FINIS.

