THE Unnatural Father: OR, The cruel Murder committed by JOHN ROWSE of the
Town of Ewell, ten miles from London, in the County of Surry, upon two of his
own Children. With his Prayer and Repentance in Prison, his Arraignment and
Judgment at the Sessions, and his Execution for the said fact at Croydon, on
Monday the second of July. 1621.



London printed for I. T. and H. G. 1621.

THE VNNATVRALL FATHER.
AS a chain consists of diverse linkes, and every link depends and is inyoak'd
upon one another: Even so our sins, being the Chain wherewith Satan does
bind and manacle us, are so knit, twisted, and sodered together, that without
our firm faith ascending, and Gods grace descending, we can never be freed
from those infernal fetters; for Sloth is linked with Drunkenness, Drunkenness
with Fornication and Adultery, and Adultery with Murder, and so of all the rest
of the temptations, suggestions and actions, wherewith miserable men and women
are ensnared, and led captive into perpetual perdition, except the mercy of
our gracious God be our defense and safeguard.

For a lamentable example of the Devils malice, and man's misery, this party, of
whom I treat at this time, was a wretch, not to be matched, a fellow not be
fellowed, and one that scarce has an equal, for matchless misery, and
unnatural Murder. But to the matter.

This John Rowse being a Fishmonger in London, gave over his trade, and lived
altogether in the Town of Ewell, near Nonesuch, in the County of Surry, ten
miles from London, where he had Land of his own for himself and his heirs
for ever to the value of fifty pounds a year, with which he lived in good and
honest fashion, being well reputed of all his neighbors, and in good
estimation with Gentlemen and others that dwelt in the adjoining Villages.

Until at the last he married a very honest and comely woman, with whom he
lived quietly and in good fashion some six months, till the Devil sent an
instrument of his, to disturb their Matrimonial happiness: for they wanting
a Maidseruant, did entertain into their house a Wench, whose name was Jane
Bl^ndell, who in short time was better acquainted with her Masters bed then
honesty required, which in time was found out and known by her Mistress, and
brake the peace, in such sort, between the said Rowse and his Wife, that in
the end, after two years continuance, it brake the poor woman's heart, that
she dyed and left her Husband a widdower, where he and his Whore were the more
free to use their cursed contentments, and ungodly embracements.

Yet that estate of being unmarried was displeasing to him, so that he took to
wife another woman, who for her outward feature, and inward qualities was every
way fit for a very honest man, although it were her hard fortune to match
otherwise.

With this last Wife of his he lived much discontented, by reason of his
keeping his lewd Tr^ll in his house, so that by his daily Riot, excessive
drinking, and unproportionable spending, his estate began to be much
impouerished, much of his Land morgag'd and forfeited, himself above two
hundred pounds indebted, and in process of time to be (as a lewd liver) of all
his honest neighbors rejected and contemned.

His estate and credit being almost past recovery wasted and impaired, he
forsook his Wife, came up to London with his Wench, where he fell in new
league with a corrupted friend; who (as he said) did most courteously coozen
him of all that ever he had, and whom at this time I forbear to name; because
it was John Rowse his request before his execution, that he should not be named
in any Book or Ballad, but yet upon a Dye his name may be picked out betwixt a
sink and a trey. This false friend of his (as he said) did persuade him to
leave his Wife for altogether, and did lodge and board him and his paramore
certain weeks in his house, and afterward caused him and her to be lodged
(having changed his name) as Man and Wife in an honest man's house near
Bishopsgate, at Beuis Marks, where they continued so long, till his money was
gone, (as indeed he never had much, but now and then small petty sums from
his secret friend aforesaid) and he being fearful to be smoked out by his
Creditors, was counseled to leave his Country, and depart for Ireland; and
before his going ouer-Sea, his friend wrought so, that all his Land was made
over in trust to him, and Bonds, Covenants, and Leases made, as fully bought
and sold for a sum of two hundred and threescore pounds; of all which money
the said Rowse did take the Sacrament and his death, that he never did receive
one penny, but he said that now and then he had five or ten shillings at a
time from his said friend, and never above twenty shillings, and that all that
ever he had of him, being summed together, was not above three and twenty
pounds, the which moneys his friend did pay himself out of his Rents. But some
more friend to him, then he was to himself, did doubt that he was cheated of
his Land: whereupon (to make all sure) he said that his false friend did so
far prevail with him, that he the said Rowse took an Oath in the open
Court at Westminster Hall, that he had lawfully sold his Land, and had
received the sum abouesaid, in full satisfaction and payment, and his said
friend did vow and protest many times unto him, with such oaths and vehement
curses, that he never would deceive his trust, but that at any time when he
would command all those forged Bonds and Leases, that he would surrender them
unto him, and that he should never be damnifide by them or him, to the value
of one halfe-penny. Upon which protestations (he said) he was enticed to undo
himself out of all his earthly possessions, and by a false oath to make hazard
of his inheritance in Heaven.

In Ireland he stayed not long, but came over again, and was by his friend
persuaded to go into the Low Countries: which he did, never minding his Wife
and two small Children which he had by her, having likewise a brace of bastards
by his Whore (as some say) but he said that but one of them was of his
begetting. But he, after some stay in Holland, saw that he could not fadge
there, according to his desire, and withal, suspecting that he was cheated of
his Land, and above all, much perplexed in his Conscience for the false oath
that he had taken, pondering his miserable estate, and ruing his unkindness to
his Wife, and unnatural dealing to his Children, thinking with himself what
course were best to take to help himself out of so many miseries which did
incompasse him, he came over again into England to his too dear friend,
demanding of him his Bonds and Leas^s of his Land which he had put him in
trust withal. But then his friend did manifest himself what he was, and told
him plainly, that he had no writings, not any Land of his, but what he had
dearly bought and paid for. All which ( Rowse replied unto him) was false, as
his own Conscience knew. Then said the other, have I not here in my custody
your hand and Seal to confirm my lawful possession of your Land? and
moreover have I not a Record of an Oath in open Court, which you took
concerning the truth of all our bargain? And seeing that I have all these
especial points of the Law, as an Oath, Indentures, and a sure possession,
take what course you will, for I am resolved to hold what I have.

These (or the like) words, in effect passed betwixt Rowse and his Friend
(Trusty Roger) which entering at his ears, pierced his heart like Daggers; and
being out of money and Credit, a man much infamous for his bad life, indebted
beyond all possible means of payment; a perjured wretch to coozen himself,
having no place or means to feed or lodge, and fearful of being arrested,
having so much abused his Wife, and so little regarded his Children, being now
brought to the pits brim of desperation, not knowing amongst these calamities
which way to turn himself, he resolved at last to go home to Ewell again
to his much wronged Wife, for his last refuge in extremity.

The poor Woman received him with joy, and his Children with all gladness
welcomed home the prodigal Father, with whom he remained in much
coffeehouse and perplexity of mind: the Devil still tempting him (...)
mischief and despair; putting him in mind of his (...) better estate,
comparing pleasures past with present miseries, and he re^oluing that he had
been a man in that Town had been a Gentleman's companion, of good Reputation
and Calling, that he had Friends, Lands, Money, Apparel, and Credit, with
means sufficient to have left for the maintenance of his Family, and that now
he had nothing left him but poverty and beggary, and that his two Children were
like to be left to go from door to door for their living.

Being thus tormented and tossed with restless imaginations; he seeing daily to
his further grief, the poor case of his children, and fearing that worse
would befall them hereafter, he resolved to work some means to take away
their languishing lives, by a speedy and untimely death, the which practice of
his (by the Devils instigation and assistance) he effected as follows.

To be sure that no body should stop or prevent his devilish enterprise; he
sent his Wife to London in a frivolous errand, for a riding Coat: and she
being gone somewhat timely, and too soon in the morning, both her Children
being in bed and fast asleep, being two very pretty Girls, one of the age of
six years, and the other four years old, none being in the house but
themselves, their unfortunate Father, and his ghostly Counselor, the doors
being fast locked, he having an excellent Spring of water in the Seller of his
house (which, to a good mind that would have employed it well, would have
been a blessing: for the water is of that Christaline purity, and cleerenesse,
that Queen Elizabeth of famous memory would daily send for it for her own use)
in which he purposed to drown his poor innocent children sleeping: for he
going into the Chamber where they lay, took the youngest of (...) named
Elizabeth forth of her bed, and carried her (...) the Stayres into his Seller,
and there put her in the Spring of Water, holding down her head under that
pure Element with his hands, till at last the poor harmless soul and body
parted one from another.

Which first Act of this his inhumane Tragedy being ended, he carried the dead
corpse up three pair of stayres, and laying it down on the floor, left it,
and went down into the Chamber where his other Daughter, named Marry, was in
bed; being newly awaked, and seeing her father, demanded of him where her
Sister was? To whom he made answer that he would bring her where she was. So
taking her in his arms, he carried her down toward the Seller: and as he
was on the Seller stayres, she asked him what he would do, and whither he
would carry her? Fear nothing, my Child (quoth he) I will bring thee up
again presently: and being come to the Spring, as before he had done with the
other, so he performed his last vnfatherly deed upon her, and to be as good as
his word, carried her up the stayres and laid her by her sister; that done, he
laid them out, and covered them both with a sheet, walking up and down his
house, weeping and lamenting his own misery, and his friends treachery, that
was the maine ground of all his misfortunes, and the death of his Children: and
though there was time and opportunity enough for him to fly, and to seek for
safety; yet the burden and guilt of his conscience was so heavy to him, and
his desperate case was so extreme, that he never offered to depart; but as a
man weary of his life, would, and did stay, till such time as he was
apprehended and sent to Prison, where he lay till he was rewarded with a just
deserved death.

What his other intents were, after he had drowned his Children, is
uncertain; for he drew his sword and laid it naked on a Table, and after, he
gate a poor woman down into the Seller, and in the same place where the two
Infants lost their lives, he did help the woman to wring a Bucke of his
clothes, and then he requested her to help to convey his goods out of his
house; for he said that he feared that the Sheriff of Surry would come and
seize upon all. But the woman not thinking of any of the harm that was done,
imagined that he had meant that his goods would be seized for debt, and not for
murder.

But to return to the miserable Mother of the murdered Children, she said
that her heart throbbed all day, as fore-boading some heavy mischance to come:
and having done her business that she came about to London, as soon as she
came home, she asked for her Children, to whom her Husband answered that they
were at a neighbors house in the Town. Then said she, I will go thither to
fetch them home. No quoth he, I will go my self presently for them. The^ said
his wife, let the poor woman that is here go and bring them home. But at
last she saw such delay was used, she was going her self; then her Husband
told her that he had sent them to a Kinsmans of his at a Village called
Sutton, four miles from Ewell, and that he had provided well for them, and
prayed* her to be contented and fear nothing, for they were well. These double
tales of his, made her to doubt somewhat was amiss: therefore she entreated
him for Gods sake to tell her truly where they were. Whereupon he said, If you
will needs know where they are, go but up the stairs into such a Chamber, and
there you shall find them. But in what a lamentable perplexity of mind the
poor woman was when she perceived how and which way they lost their lives,
any Christian that has an heart of flesh may imagine. Presently the Constable
was sent for, who took him into his custody, who amongst other talk, demanded
of him why and how he could commit so unnatural a fact, as to murder his
Children? To whom he answered, that he did it, because he was not able to keep
them, and that he was loath they should go about the Town a begging: and
moreover, that they were his own, and being so, that he might do what he
would with them, and that they had their lives from him, and therefore he had
taken their lives from them, and was contented to lose his life for them: for
he was sure that their miseries were past, and for his part, he had an assured
hope to go to them, though they could not come to him.

So being had before a Justice, his Examination was very brief; for he confessed
all the whole circumstances of the matter freely; so that he was sent to the
common Prison of Surry, called the White Lion, where he remained fourteen or
fifteen weeks a wonderful penitent Prisoner, never, or very seldom, being
without a Bible or some other good book meditating upon; and whon any one did
but mention his Children, he would fetch a deep sigh, and weep, desiring every
one to pray for him and upon his own earnest request, he was praide for at
Paul's Cross, and at most of the Churches in London, and at many in the
Country, and at the Sessions holden at Croydon, the latter end of June last, he
made such free confession at the Bar, declaring the manner of his life, his
odious Drinking, his abominable Whoring, his cruel Murder, and the false
dealing of his deceitful friend, which was the cause of his final wrack:
with which Relations of his pronounced, with such vehemence and protestations,
he moved all that heard him to commiseration and pity.

So, according to Law and Justice, he was there condemned and judged (for the
murdering of his two Children) to be hanged; which Judgment was executed on
him at the common Gallows at Croydon, on Monday the second day of June, 1621.
where he dyed with great penitency and remorce of Conscience.

This was the lamentable end of John Rowse, a man of the age of fifty years,
and one that might have lived and dyed in better fashion, if he had laid hold
on the grace of heaven, and craved Gods protection and fatherly assistance: but
of all that herein is declared, this one thing which I now declare, is most
lamentable and remarkable; which is, that Ewell being a Market Town, not much
above ten miles from London, in a Christian Kingdom, and such a Kingdom,
where the all-sauing Word of the everliving God is most diligently, sincerely,
and plentifully preached; and yet amidst this diligence, as it were in the
Circle or Center of this sincerity, and in the flood of this plenty, the Town
of Ewell has neither Preacher nor Pastor: for although the Parsonage be able
to maintain a sufficient Preacher, yet the living being in a Lay-mans hand,
is rented out to another for a great sum, and yet no Preacher maintained there.
Now the chief Landlord out of his portion, does allow but seven pounds yearly
for a Reader, and the other that does hyre the Parsonage at a great Rent, does
give the said Reader four pound the year more out of his means and
courtesy: and by this means the Town is served with a poor old man that is
half blind, and by reason of his age can scarcely read: for all the world
knows, that so small a stipend cannot find a good Preacher Books, and very
hardly bread to live on; so that the poor souls dwelling there, are in danger
of famishing, for want of a good Preacher to break the Bread of Life unto
them: for a Sermon amongst them, is as rare as warm weather in December, or Ice
in July: both which I have seen in England, though but seldom.

And as the Wolf is most bold with the Sheep, when there is either no
Shepherd, or an impotent insufficient one, so the Devil (perhaps) took his
advantage of this wretched man, seeing he was so badly guarded, and so weakly
guided to withstand his force and malice: for where God is least known and
called upon, there Satan has most power and domination. But howsoever, I wish
with all my heart, that that Town and many more were better provided then they
are, and then such numbers of souls would not be in hazard to perish; nor so
many sufficient scholars that can preach and teach well, live in penury
through want of maintenance. I could run further upon this point, but that I
do shortly purpose to touch it more to the quick in another Book.

By this man's fall, we may see an example of Gods Justice against Drunkenness,
Whoredom, and Murder; the Devil being the first Author, who was a Murderer
from the beginning: who filled Cain with Envy, that he murdered his brother
Abel: who tempted David first to Adultery, and afterward to Murder; who
provoked Herod to cause the blessed Servant of God John Baptist to lose his
head, because he told him it was not lawful for him to marry his brother
Philips Wife; and who was the prouoker of the aforesaid Herod to murder all
the innocent male children in his Kingdom. And let us but mark and consider
the plagues and punishments that God has inflicted upon Murderers, Adulterers,
and Incestuous persons: First, Cain, although by his birth he was the first
man that ever was borne, a Prince by his birth, and heir apparent to all the
world; yet for the Murder by him committed on his brother, he was the first
Vagabond and Runnagate on the face of the earth, almost fearful of his own
shadow: and after he had lived along time terrifide in Conscience, was
himself slain (as is supposed) by Lamech. Simeon and Leu^ the sons of Jacob
were accursed of their Father for the slaughter of the Sichemites; Ioab the
Captain of David's Host, was slain for the murdering of Abner; David
himself, for the death of Vrias, and the Adultery committed with Bethsheba,
was continually plagued and vexed with the Sword of War, with the Rebellion
of his own sons, and with the untimely deaths of Amnon, and Abs^lon. Baanah
and R^chab, for the slaying of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, they were both by
David's commandment put to death, who had both their hands and feet cut off,
and were afterward hanged over the Poole in Hebron: Samuel 2. 4. The examples
are infinite out of divine and humane Histories, that God did never suffer
Murder to go unrewarded: and this miserable man, of whom I have here related,
is a most manifest spectacle of Gods revenging vengeance, for that crying and
heinous sin.

As concerning Lust and Incontinency, it is a short pleasure, bought with long
pain, a hunnied poison, a Gul^^^ of Shame, a Pickpurse, a breeder of Diseases,
a gall to the Conscience, a corrosiue to the heart, turning man's wit into
foolish madness, the bodies bane, and the souls perdition: it is excessive in
youth, and odious in age; besides, God himself does denounce most fearful
threats against Fornicators and Adulterers, as the Apostle says, that
Whoremongers and Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1. Cor.
6. 9. And God himself says, that he will be a swift witness against
Adulterers, Mal. 3. 5. And the Wise man says, that because of the whorish
woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread, and a woman will hunt for the
precious life of a man: For, says he, can a man take fire in his bosom, and
his clothes not be burnt? or can a man go upon hot Coals, and his feet not
be burnt? So he that goes in to his neighbors Wife, shall not be innocent,
Prou. 6. 27, 28, 29. Abimelech, one of the sons of Gedeon, murdered
threescore and ten of his Brethren; and in reward thereof (by the just
Judgment of God) a woman with a piece of a Millstone beat out his brains,
after he had usurped the Kingdom three years, Judges the 9. Our English
Chronicles make mention, that Roger Mortimer, Lord Baron of Wallingford,
murdered his Master King Edward the second, and caused the Kings Uncle, Edmund
Earl of Kent, causelessely to be beheaded: but Gods Justice ouertooke him at
last, so that for the said Murders he was shamefully executed. Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester was murdered in the Abbey of Bury by William de la Poole Duke of
Suffolk, who afterward was beheaded himself on the Sea by a Pyrat. Arden of
Feuersham, and Page of Plimmouth, both their Murders are fresh in memory, and
the fearful ends of their Wives and their Ayders in those bloody actions will
never be forgotten.

It is too manifestly known, what a number of Stepmothers and Strumpets have
most inhumanely murdered their Children, and for the same have most deservedly
been executed. But in the memory of man (nor scarcely in any History) it is not
to be found, that a Father did ever take two Innocent Children out of their
beds, and with weeping tears of pitiless pity, and unmerciful mercy, to
drown them, showing such compassionate cruelty, and sorrowful sighing
remorcelesse remorce in that most vnfatherly and unnatural deed.

All which may be attributed to the malice of the Devil, whose will and
endeavor is that none should be saved, who lays out his traps and snares,
intangling some with Lust, some with Covetousness, some with Ambition,
Drunkenness, Envy, Murder, Sloth, or any Vice whereto he sees a man or a
woman inclined most unto, as he did by this wretched man, lulling him, as it
were, in the cradle of sensuality, and ungodly delight, until such time as all
his means, Reputation, and Credit was gone, and nothing left him but misery
and reproach. Then he leads him along through doubts and fears, to have no
hope in Gods Providence, persuading his Conscience that his sins were
unpardonable, and his Estate and Credit unrecoverable.

With these suggestions, he led him on to despair, and in desperation to kill
his Children, and make shipwreck of his own Soul, in which the diligence of
the Devil appears, that he labors and travels incessantly: and as Saint
Bernard says, in the last day shall rise in condemnation against us, because
he has ever been more diligent to destroy souls, then we have been to save
them. And for a Conclusion, let us beseech God of his infinite mercy to defend
us from all the subtle temptations of Satan.

JOHN ROVVSE his Prayer for pardon of his lewd life, which he used to pray in
the time of his imprisonment.
GOD of my Soul and Body, have mercy upon me: the one I have cast away by my
Folly, and the other is likely to perish in thy Fury, unless in thy great
mercy thou save it. My Sins are deep Seas to drown me; I am swallowed up
in the bottomless Gulf of my own transgressions. With Cain I have been a
Murderer, and with Judas a Betrayer of the Innocent. My body is a Slave to
Satan, and my wretched Soul is devoured up by Hell. Black have been my
thoughts, and blacker are my deeds. I have been the Devils instrument, and am
now become the scorn of men; a Serpent upon earth, and an Outcast from Heaven.
What therefore can become of me (miserable Caitiffe?) if I look up to my
Redeemer, to him I am an Arch Traitor, if upon Earth, it is drowned with Blood
of my shedding, if into Hell, there I see my Conscience, burning in the
Brimstone Lake. God of my Soul and Body have mercy therefore upon me: Save
me, O save me, or else I perish for ever: I dye for ever in the world to
come, unless (sweet Lord) thou catchest my repentant Soul in thine Arms; O
save me, save me, save me.

JOHN ROVVSE of Ewell his own Arraignment, Confession, Condemnation, and
Judgment of himself, whilst he lay Prisoner in the White Lion, for drowning
of his two Children.
I Am arraigned at the black dreadful Bar,
Where Sins (so red as Scarlet) Judges are;
All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
Whose Story will affright succeeding Times,
As (now) they drive the present into wonder,
Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder.
If any asks what Evidence comes in?
O'Tis my Conscience, which has ever bin
A thousand witnesses: and now it tells
A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hels.
The Jury are my Thoughts (upright in this,)
They sentence me to death for doing amiss:
Examinations more there need not then,
Than what is confessed here both to God and Men.
The Crier of the Court is my black Shame,
Which when it calls my Jury, does proclaim
Unless (as they are summoned) they appear,
To give true Verdict of the Prisoner,
They shall have heau (...) set,
Such, as may (...) uens debt.
About me round sit Innocence and Truth,
As Clerks to this high Court; and little Ruth
From Peoples eyes is cast upon my face,
Because my facts are barbarous, damned, and base.
The Officers that 'bout me (thick) are placed,
To guard me to my death, (when I am cast)
Are the black stings my speckled soul now feels,
Which like to Furies dog me, close at heels.
The Hangman, that attends me is Despair,
And gnawing worms my Fellow Prisoners are.
His Indictment for Murder of his Children.
THe first who (at this Sessions) loud does call me,
Is Murder, whose grim visage does appall me,
His eyes are fires, his voice rough winds out-rores,
And on my head the Divine Vengeance scores:
So fast and fearfully I sink to ground,
And wish I were in twenty Oceans drowned.
He says I have a bloody Villain bin,
And (to prove this) ripe Evidence steps in,
Brow'd like my self: Justice so brings about,
That black sins still hunt one another out:
It Is like a rotten frame ready to fall,
For one maine Post being shaken, pulls down all.
To this Indictment, (holding up my hand,)
Fettered with Terrors more then Irons stand,
And being asked what to the Bill I say,
Guilty I cry. O dreadful Sessions day!
His Judgment.
FOr these thick Stygian streams in which thou have swom,
Thy guilt has on thee laid this bitter doom;
Thy loathed life on a Tree of shame must take
A leave compeld by Law, e're old age make
Her signed Passe-port ready. Thy offense
No longer can for days on earth dispense.
Time blot thy name out of this bloody roll,
And so the Lord have mercy on my Soul.
His speech what he could say for himself.
OWretched Caytiffe! what perswasiue breath
Can call back this just Sentence of quick death?
I beg no boon, but mercy at Gods hands,
(The King of Kings, the Sovereign that commands
Both Soul and Body) O let him forgive
My Treason to his Throne, and whilst I live,
Iebbits and Racks shall torture limme by limme,
Through worlds of Deaths I Will break to fly to him.
My Birthday gave not to my Mothers womb,
More ease, then this shall joys, when e're it come.
My body mould to earth, sins sink to Hell,
My penitent Soul win Heaven, vain world farewell.
FINIS.

