Archen apanton kai telos poiei theon A COMMENTARY UPON THE EPISTLE of S. PAUL
written to TITUS. Preached in Cambridge by THOMAS TAILOR, and now published for
the further use of the Church of God. With three short Tables in the end for
the easier finding of 1. Doctrines, 2. Observations, 3. Questions contained in
the same.

Ephesians. 4.7. Unto every one of us is gi(...) ^^cording to t^^ measure of the gift
of Christ.

Printed for L. GREEN. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT LORD RICH, Baron of Leez: Grace and peace from
the Father, Prince, and Spirit of peace: Amen.
RIght Honorable, worthy is that saying of Solomon, Cant. 2.2. Like as the
lilly among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters. By the lilly is
meant the Church, and the true members of it: so called, 1. Because they are
planted by the good husbandman in the field of the Church, watered with the
dewes of heaven, hedged and preserved by his continual care. 2. They are
beautiful, for Solomon in all his royalty is not clothed like one of the
lillies of this field, who are covered with the roabe of Christ's
righteousness, who is the true Solomon. 3. They are fragrant for their smell:
The smell of their garments, (that is, Cant. 4.11.
the graces of God, which deck and adorn their souls, as a costly and comely
garment does the body) are like the smell of Lebanon: which in the spring by
reason of the Cedars, and other sweet trees, gave a most sweet sent: even so
these graces in Gods children smell sweet, that is, are in much acceptance,
and delightful to God and good men. By thorns are meant wicked men,
hypocrites, heretics, tyrants, open and flagitious sinners, scandalous in
doctrine, and life: so called, 1. because although the earth be a natural
mother to them, as a stepmother to the lillies; yet Satan the malicious man
busieth himself in the incessant sowing and setting of them. 2. They would for
ever choke and keep under the lilly, if the hand of God were not ever with
it to preserve it. 3. They are dangerous to meddle withal, except a man be
well fenced: hardly can a man carry coals in his skirt, and not be scorcht;
and as hardly run into wicked company, and not be hurt. So is my love: the
faithful spouse of Christ is his love. So called because, 1. he makes her
lovely: 2. accounts her so: 3. works a reciprocal love in her heart
toward him: 4. desires mutual conjunction with her, and effects it: 5. his
love being liberal, he gives her himself, and with himself, all things
which pertain to life and godliness: even grace here, and glory hereafter.
Among the daughters: not virgins, as Cap. 1.2. who make up this love of Christ;
but all other assemblies in the world, which profess themselves daughters, by
challenging the Catholic Church for their mother, and yet indeed cleave unto
it but in outward profession onley.

From this place I gather two conclusions. First, what is the estate of the
Church in respect of it self, it being as a lilly among thorns. Secondly,
what it is in respect of God, so is his love among the daughters: The former
shows, that the condition of the purest Church upon earth, is to be beset
with dangerous and noisome thorns, hurtful and graceless men, who prick and
annoie the lillies in their goods, names, liberties, and lives. For when there
were but two persons borne in the world; one was a lilly, and the other a
thorn, which trod down the lilly. Cain drew his brother into the field and
slew him. Afterward, when one would have thought that all the thorns had bin
destroyed by the flood brought upon the world to this purpose, yet was there a
Cham left, of whom quickly sprowted that cursed race of the Cananites, who
were ever pricks in the sides, and thorns in the eyes of Gods people. It is no
new thing for Jacob to be ouertopped by an Esau: nor for Joseph to be pricked
and molested both at home and abroad: neither his fathers house, nor his
fathers eye can safeguard him. Nay, the fairest lilly that ever saw the sun,
was most beset with thorns that ever was: all his innocence, wisdom,
meekness, purity, and love, could not keep them off him; but they pricked
him to the heart, and wounded him to the death, even the shameful and
ignominious death of the cross. How was this lilly beset with thorns in
Egypt, in the wilderness, in Babylon, in Judea, when Christ sent his Disciples
out as sheep among wolves? how in the ten persecutions? how at this day? and
so shall it be till the great day, in which all the thorns shall be cast into
the fire. And no wonder, thorns do but their nature, which are good for
nothing but to prick and to burn. It stands therefore the lillies in hand,
to be so much the more careful to fence themselves against their molestation.
And this shall they do by observing these four rules. 1. Because the thorns
hinder the rooting of the lillies, these must double their diligence in the
rooting of themselves in the grounds of true religion: for this yields hope
of rising, stablishing, and continuance in the faith. 2. Because thorns seek
to keep the sun from the lillies, and hinder the comfortable heat and light
of the word from them: these must so much the more carefully frequent the
places where the light of wholesome, pure, and comfortable doctrine does more
brightly displaie it self. 3. Because thorns seek to prick the lillies in
their names and profession: these must more circumspectly fence themselves,
with innocence and godly conversation, and in nothing, in no part lie open
unto them. 4. Because the lilly is a weak plant to defend it self from the
stiffnesse of the thorn, it must fortify it self partly with comfort in the
presence, care, and love of God the husbandman who is ever in his field; and
partly with the prayer of faith, that he would be pleased still to look unto
it, to raise up Pastors and teachers according to his own heart to water,
cherish, and preserve it: especially in these last days, wherein the field is
ouergrowne with scandalls, Apostacies, trials and reproaches, wherewith the
lillies are daily scratched, torn, and in great ieopardie.

The second conclusion is, that the Lord makes a precious account of every
faithful soul, and prefers it above the wicked, so far as a lilly is
for the beauty and sweetness of it, to be esteemed above all the thorns with
which it can be beset. And indeed believers are the most precious of men, the
most noble persons of the earth, descended of the blood of Christ, near unto
God, and next attendants to the king of glory: advanced above all the rest by
the special grace of free election, of justification, of sanctification, and
adoption. And who can deny seeing these are Gods peculiar, an hallowed thing,
a chosen people, the Lords first fruits, his remnant called out of all nations
and kinreds, the sons and daughters of God, brethren of Christ, and heirs
apparent to the crown of heaven; but that they are highly advanced as the
choice of God, and Gods delight above all the people of the earth? And hence
follows it, that whosoever would be in this price and reckoning with God,
must be sure he be a lilly; which he shall know by these three notes. 1. If he
be planted in the garden of God, and be a true member of the Church, not tied
to it as a scion to a tree by a thread of outward profession, but by soundnes
of faith, and love; the former of which sets into the head, and the latter
unites to the members. Secondly, if he have the beauty of a lilly upon him,
1. in the sight of God, by the righteousness of Christ justifying and covering
him. 2. in his own eyes, by the sanctification of the spirit daily washing the
conscience from dead works. 3. in the sight of other men, by an innocent life
and godly conversation. Thirdly, if every where he leave a sweet smell behind
him, that the places where ever he go savor of the graces of God laid up in
his heart: by bewraying the humility, faith, love, patience, hope, sobriety,
and the like. A lilly can leave no stink behind it any where, as many in
their meetings, whose speeches are, if not hurtful, yet unsavory and
unfruitful.

These things I write not, as taking upon me to teach your H. who wants not
choice men and means to bring you forward both in the understanding of pure
doctrine, and in the institution of holy life. But 1. to put your H. in mind
how highly the Lord has honored you both in his own eyes, as also in the
eyes of his children. The former, in that unto outward greatness (which is as a
rich legacy given by God both to good and bad) he has vouchsafed to add the
chief good, and made your H. RICH indeed by disposing unto you the
inheritance of his children: which is apparent, in that by a sound profession
of the truth, he has planted you in his own ground or garden; in that he has
set the beauty of a lilly upon you; and has graced you with a sweet smell of
many precious graces, which every where you leave behind you. The latter, both
in that he has put in your heart a special care of fencing your self by
religious and innocent walking; whereby you have adorned your holy profession,
in not laying your self in any part open to the envious scratching of thorns:
As also has expressly engraven this part of his image upon you, to esteem
his children as lillies among thorns; whereby a good evidence is ministered to
your own heart, that you are translated from death to life. 2. That I might
stir up your H. as you have cause to rejoice in, and set your heart upon this
purchase which is the portion but of a few, to esteem it, as it is, your
truest honor and nobility; your vnperishing riches and treasure: whereas all
earthly glory, and greatness, worldly wealth and abundance, abstracted from
this, neither are your own, neither if they were, can they make you happy: It
was an excellent speech of that noble Emperor Theodosius, Magis fe gaudere
quod me^brum Ecclesiae Dei esset, quam caput Imperij.
of whom Augustine writes that he was wont to say, that he accounted it more
honor that he was a member of the Church, then the head of the Empire. 3.
That I might add one incitement and provocation to proceed (as you have begun
happily) in the love and practice of true piety: wherein whilst you profit and
increase, you provide a good stock for the time of need. Let your H. give me
leave to encourage you to go on in ennobling nobility it self, by being
inferior to few of your honorable rank, Nec iam far potest Caesarve
priorem Pompeiusve parem. Lucan.

Humilitas virtus Christianorum, prima* secunda, tertia. August.


as in your outward estate, so in the beautiful gifts and ornaments of your
mind: such as are humility, humanity, a lowly and lovely carriage. Let Caesar
and Pompey, and other gallants strive to be superiors in pomp and envied
greatness: it is your honor to have learned that humility is the first,
second, and third staire of Christian nobility. Go on in the strength of the
Lord, to continue a singular ornament, and muniment of the common wealth, which
is not made by any thing more outwardly happy, then in Godly Magistracy, and
nobility. Go on in showing your self a careful patron of the Church of God,
in making free and vncorrupt choice of such Pastors, as whose holy doctrine and
life, Quibus studio est (...).
are the counterpaine one of the other: in which godly care your H. has
worthily carried the palm. These were the chief motives, which drew on this
my presumption to dedicate this labor unto your H. although I wa^ted not some
more private respects also to force me thereunto: namely, that I might give some
public testimony of my love of your virtues; some appobation of my christian
duty, and some signification of my thankful mind (as for other favors so
also) for your Honors Christian and constant love of that worthy and virtuous
Lady the Lady Russell, whom I could not but affoard an honorable mention in
this dedication, which I must needs confess, had been her right if God had
seen good to have added unto her days. Accept I humbly beseech your H. the
mind of the offerer; accept also the book offered, if not for the author of the
commentary, yet for the author of the text, and the argument which is worthy
your H. name and respect. I doubt not but your H. shall redeem many vacant
hours in reading over many of the treatises therein contained. And thus
craving pardon for my boldness, I commend your H. to the grace of God, who
protract your days and years, according to the large graces bestowed upon
you; and prosper and finish the good work he has begun, by adding that
which is* yet lacking to your faith and graces, till he have fitted you unto,
and filled you with glory and immortality. Amen.

From my house at Watford. March 16. 1612. Your H. in all duty to be
commanded, THOMAS TAILOR.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader, Grace and peace, with all other blessings
accompanying salvation.
THe whole Scripture is the rich treasury of the great King of glory, wherein
not one kind of precious stone or metal is laid up, or in one room, but in
sundry drawers as in sundry caskets, many several pearls and precious
things are reserved, Scriptura commune promptuarium bonorum documentoru^.
Basil. mag. in 1. Psalm.
and safely laid up for the use of the Church of God. In one place lies the
sum of holy doctrine, another holds the precepts of godly life. In one
corner is the refutation of adulterate and erroneous doctrine; In another the
reprehension of impure and scandalous life. And as all the parts of
Christianity are distinct one from another, so lie they hear or there in
these rich coffers distinct, so as every Christian may draw out instruction,
direction, and consolation according to his own necessity. This Epistle
breathed from the same spirit, and bearing the same superscription with all the
rest, herein disagreeth not from them; Epitome Paulinarum epistolarum.
but as by the learned it is called an Abridgment of all Paul's Epistles: so is
it fraught with such variety of precepts sitted to all sorts, sexs, ages, and
conditions of men, as whatsoever he has in all his Epistles more largely
handled, the same he seems to have summarily reduced into this one: wherein
as in a map or model he would deliver his whole spirit, style, and
understanding in the doctrine of salvation: And which he would leave to the
Church as a manual or compendious sum of all Christian religion, to the end
that Christians being hence instructed in the matter of faith and manners,
might he made not only wise to salvation, but profitable and fit for the place
which God has in any of the societies of 1. Church, 2. Commonwealth, 3.
Family assigned them unto. For if in any he enlarge the doctrine of man's
misery by sin, or magnify the doctrine of the Gospel and man's diliuerance
from sin: If in any he clear the doctrine of free justification of faith
alone, or enforce the doctrine of good works the fruits of that faith: If in
any he largely propound either such duties as belong to public persons, as
namely, the Magistrates, and Ministers, or such offices as are fitted to the
several conditions of private men. If in any he provoke to the practice of
Christian courtesy and kindness: or else (if need require) of Christian
severity and sharpness: surely in this Epistle he does with such admirable
plainnes and shortness all these, as no other, nor all the other show him a
more skillfull workman then this does. But accounting it folly to paint a
pearl, I will rather now give some taste and reason of that I have done: as
also remove some scruples which may otherwise perhaps be moved against it.

Gold lies not upon the face, but in the bowels of the earth, and the richer
any mineral is, the more industrious has nature been to laid it up in the
deepest veins. Prou. 3.15.
Even so considering that the price of the wisdom of God cannot be found, to
which the purest gold of Ophir, nor all pearls are to be compared: we may not
think that the Lord is so prodigal of it, or careless as to leave it abroad
for every stranger that passes by to take up with an idle hand; or to trample
under his wandering feet: but that he has disposed it as men do their
treasures which they hide and lock in their surest coffers, and that under
their eye. And were it not so; needlessly should we be commanded to seek for
her as for silver, and search for her as for treasures: Prou. 2.4.
upon which condition only it is couenanted that we shall understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. For howsoever we may not ascribe
darkness and obscurity unto the Scriptures, unless we will say, that the
Lord has spoken something which he would not have understood; Deus noluit
taceri quod voluit scribi. August.
and also falsify that of the Apostle, who compares the word of the Prophets
(which of all parts of the Scriptures are the darkest) to a light shining in a
dark place: yet the wisdom of God would have (not all but) some places more
difficult to our dark understanding: not only for the dazeling of the eyes of
the worst, who never care to know or comprehend any of these mysteries: but
that the best also might 1. see their own dullness of conceit in heavenly
things: so to keep them low in their own eyes, as who cannot attain such an
high knowledge of themselves. 2. be stirred up to more diligent study,
reading, hearing, meditation and prayer, that by this continual exercise in
the word* they may profit, and proceed in the knowledge of God, and in the
understanding of these mysteries, which are admirable to the Angels themselves.
3. make so much the more both of the word and the ministry of it: the Lord
foresaw, that the things that are easy we easily contemn, and that things
lightly come by are lightly set by. That any part of this book is clasped and
sealed, it is in regard of our natural blindness, who cannot behold the
brightness of the sun of righteousness shining in the Scriptures. Isa. 29.11.
Dan. 12.


But that this natural corruption might not reign in the elect for their
hurt, the Lord Jesus has left to his Church the gift of interpretation, which
is as the key to open this closet of God: and has stirred up faithful men
from time to time endued by his spirit, who in attentive and diligent reading
of the Scriptures by the help of 1. Arts, as Grammar, Rhetorike, Logic,
Philosophy, etc. 2. knowledge of the proprieties of words and phrases of the
tongues wherein they were written. 3. comparing of Scriptures with themselves,
antecedents with consequents, obscure places with plainer: and figurative
speeches with more proper. 4. soundness of judgment in the agreement and
analogy of faith. 5. diligent observation of predictions with their
accomplishments, of types with their truth, and of the history of the Church
which it self is a commentary of Scripture, have been themselves enabled to
understand: as also partly by lively voice in the Ministry, and partly by
their learned monuments and writings, to make the people of God understand even
the darkest mysteries contained in them, so far as is necessary for the
salvation of believers. Whose labors and writings to contemn, sauoreth of a
proud Anabaptisticall spirit, who while they complain of so many comme^taries,
despise the gifts of God, who by his servants he communicates to his Church,
and so are justly left of God in the ignorance of the Scriptures: or else in
the gross and ridiculous perverting of them. Well said that noble Eunuch, How
can I understand without an interpreter? Act. 8.
what was Moses but an interpreter of the law? what were the Prophets but
interpreters of Moses? what was Christ but an interpreter of the Prophets? what
were the Apostles but interpreters of Christ? what are all Pastors and teachers
wherewith Christ has ever furnished his Church since he ascended into heaven,
but interpreters of the Apostles? Well knew the Son of God commanding it, and
his Apostles commending it, Ioh. 5.39.
how behoouefull it was for the edification of the Church, by interpretation of
the Scriptures, 1. These. 5.19.
to draw out both the true sense, and the true use of them (which are the two
proper parts of interpretation) seeing so many things are to us hard to
understand, and things which for their sense are easiest, cannot so easily of
every one be applied to their proper use without this help. This is that
edifying gift which the Apostle so highly advances, 1. Cor. 14.3, 4. He that
prophesies speaks unto men to edifying, to exhortation, and to comfort: and,
he that prophesies edifieth the Church. This is that which the ancient
Fathers since the Apostles have fruitfuly labored in, as appears by their
learned Sermons preached and written. This is that which the faithful Pastors
in all ages (especially of later days since the clear light of the Gospel was
restored) have so industriously and happily employed themselves in; as there is
almost no place in the Scriptures so hard, whether matter of History of things
past, or prophecy of some things yet to come, unto which they have not
endeavored to bring some perspicuity and clearnes: as witness all the worthy
Commentaries extant, which have more opened the Scriptures within this last
hundredth years, then in a whole thousand and some hundreths before.

Now setting before me the singular good accrewing hereby unto the Church
sundry ways, I thought that my self could not more profitably be spent the^
in this service of the Church; nor more acceptably lay out my Masters talent
then in adorning this worthy Epistle, which has not been by any before me so
largely handled as here thou have it. In the opening of which I have examined
the nature of the words; cast every branch into his proper place by an easy
and familiar method; sifted out the true sense which might best stand with
antecedents* consequents, parallel places, and analogy of faith: conferred
with the best interpreters, consulted in matters questionable with the ancient
Fathers, raised natural doctrines, and applied them to their several uses of
instruction, reprehension, consolation, or confutation. In some whereof
howsoever I aimed at the necessity and occasions of mine own auditorie, yet
generally I have presented general instructions; and all this in that plain
style wherein it was delivered; both then and now, more aiming at soundness of
matter then sounding of words, and more intending to persuade the hearts then
to please the ears of men.

If it be here objected that this Epistle concerns but one person, and one
more general might have been more profitably and fitly chosen. I answer, That
1. my choice was fitted to my auditorie, wherein were as many young Titusses to
be instituted to the service of the Church, as ordinary Christians to be
instructed in the duties of a religious life. 2. This Epistle was not so much
written for Titus, as for the whole Church, and therefore he is commanded to
teach these things publicly, cap. 2.15.
as things of special use for all the people of God: and in all probability
this Epistle was openly read by Titus to the whole congregation, whom in the
end he saluteth in these words, Grace be (not with thee, but) with you all. 3.
We have not only the spirit of God recording it among other holy writings to
the whole Church, but sundry gracious Pastors have been delighted to be
conversant in it: as M. Calvin acknowledges of himself to M. Farrell and
Virell, Per breve^ scribit epistolam vt vel ex ea Titi perdiscamus virtutem;
virum enim tantum vt confirmaret ha^dquaquam longiori opus erat oratione sed
hunc vt paucis admon^r^^. Athan. in prologo. A^^tius.
who was of them left at Geneva to finish what they had begun, as Titus was
of Paul in this Church of Creta. If it be further alleged, that I have been
larger by much then I needed: I answer, 1. I wish such to remember what
Athanasius has in way of apology for the shortness of this Epistle, and it
will fitly serve to excuse my prolixitie: Titus, says he, was a man of great
apprehension, and therefore the Apostle composeth whole lessons in every line:
and I may say more, if not in every word, in the most of them, every one
almost being a several and entire text. 2. I confess I want that dexterity
which some of the learned writing on this Epistle profess, namely, to get
through the interpreting of such a material Epistle in one month: neither did
I think it the part of a faithful expositor, either wholly to neglect things
pertinent, though they seem smaller, or altogether to avoid treatises which
might prove more laborious. 3. Seeing corruption of manners is the rifest
grief of our days, I cannot be justly blamed if I have more enlarged my self
in bending my greatest forces against this most dangerous disease: and yet my
hope is that my Reader shall not justly challenge me with multiplication of
matterles words, who have labored to thrust much variety of matter into as
few words as possibly I could. If it be further objected, that there is no
great need of writing books in this age, which rather surfetteth of them then
otherwise. Although this no more concerns me then others, whose labors merit
better respect then they meet with, yet I answer, that 1. painful Ministers
complain not of any surfeit of sound Commentaries of the Scriptures, especially
of some books (whereof this is one) but rather have cause to wish more helps
of this kind then they have, as my self did when I first attempted this
Epistle. 2. be it granted that the learned have many good helps, yet
ordinary Christians complain of want of sauourie commentaries in our own
tongue, who are in their godly desires to be respected. 3. he that observes
how thick Popish books are sent in amongst us, and what armies of Popish
Priests and Jesuits are without intermission dismissed to the seducing of our
simple people from their loyalty to God and their sovereign; cannot with any
conscience prosecute any such allegation. 4. besides the instance of many godly
friends, my own present condition helped forward this labor: for being
hindered in my course of ministry, how could I better spend my silent time,
then by casting such a mite as this into the public treasury of the Church.
Mihi quidem huius operis Commentarij non ad ostentationem scribuntur: sed ad
commemorationem senectae and ad oblivionis remedium, quo sit mihi adumbratio
rerum magnificarum, diuinorumque verborum quae audire m^rui a sanctis vi^is and
beatis. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 10.
As for other sinister or selfe-respects in writing, God and mine own
conscience shall free me, in the presence of both which I profess with Clemens
Alexandrinus, that not ostentation or the vain wind of men set me forward,
but cheifely the desire of doing some duty whereby I might further my own
reckoning in the day of account, and help some others also forward in the same
work. Wherein if I may know my labor fruitful and acceptable to Gods
children, I shall not be discouraged to go on in some other endeauours as the
Lord shall affoard me strength and life.

And now Christian Reader before I dismiss thee, I would commend unto thy
practice these few rules in the reading of this and all other Ecclesiastical
expositions.

1. Observe diligently the difference between the Scriptures which are the
primarie truth revealed, Scriptura prima veritas reuelata.
and other men's writings which are but secondarie. The Scriptures are to be
read and received as such which cannot err, or speak any thing contrary to
the truth, or to themselves, though we understand it not: but all other men's
writings, readings, sermons, expositions, and determinations (suppose of whole
Churches and Councels) must only be received so far as they agree with the
Scriptures, which are the rule to which all other divine writings must be laid,
and the touchstone by which they must be tried.

2. Read godly expositions, not to be turned from the reading of the Scriptures
or from preaching* but to understand better both what thou read in Gods
book, and hear from Gods mouth.

3. Being persuaded that no man by his own quickness or apprehension can
find out the true sense and use of the Scriptures; bring prayer with thee,
Psalm. 119.18. Iam. 1.5.
that God would be pleased to open thine eyes to see the wonderful things of
the law. If any man want wisdom he must ask it of God: The foot of David's
song was, Teach me thy statutes: Thus shall thou be taught of God, and not
only by the ministry of man.

4. Seeing the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and his secret is
with them that fear him; bring a teacheable, and an humble heart, turned to
God, loving his truth, desirous and industrious to obey that part of his will
already revealed unto thee: for he teaches the humble in his way: and, if any
man will do his will, he shall know whether the doctrine be from God or no.
Ioh. 7.17.


5. In thy reading let not thine end be to seek out and find out curiosities
and subtilties; but to find and meet with Christ: desirous to know nothing
but Christ and him crucified, which is the scope of all the Scriptures, as also
of the gift of interpretation of them.

6. Read not by halues, but go through the author thou have made choice of
once and again: nor idly, but with attention, as painfully digging for the
treasure: nor carelessly, but with dilgence trying these mettalls, unless thou
would take copper washed over for gold.

Lastly, bring all thy reading into use and practice, meditate of it often by
thy self, and cheerfully communicate it to others: for by using and laying
out thy talent thou encreasest it and know that not they which read, hear, or
speak much are blessed, but those which do it. Thus come furnished to the
reading of this or any other godly book, and I assure thee thou shall not
loose thy labor, but shall so redeem thy time, as that thou shall be able to
give a good and comfortable account of it in the day of thy reckoning. If thou
meetest with any doubtful things, help me with thy best construction: If with
any escapes, help me with thy best counsel: If with any help hereby in thy
holy course, praise God, and help me with thy prayers.

The unworthy servant of God and of thy faith, THOMAS TAILOR.

A COMMENTARY upon the Epistle of Saint PAUL to TITUS.
The occasion of the Epistle.
HE has little acquaintance with the writings of the Apostles, who out of
themselves cannot attain unto the occasion of their penning: but not to wast
time in the particular Arguments of each several Epistle, they have all one
common and general occasion, which was this: So soon as the Apostles had
planted any Church of God, by sowing the good seed of the word, fetched out of
Gods own garners in the field of the world; the malicious man sent his
servants to sow tares in the same field, which sprouted up suddenly into the
blade and ear, to the choking of the good husbandmans good seed. Hence was it
that (least Gods husbandry should utterly miscarie) the Apostles were put to
new trauells: who having upon them the care of all the Churches which they had
founded; and seeing Satan's subtilties incessantly breaking out in his seducing
instruments, teachers of lies, and false Apostles, to the annoyance of the
Church; were constrained with a second hand to stablish their first work, and
with no less labor to uphold and repair that house and building of God,
which like good master builders they had formerly reared and erected. This
truth is evident, not only in other Churches planted by this our Apostle, the
Doctor of the Gentiles, as by his several Epistles is clearly gathered; but
also in this Church, planted by himself in the I Will of Creta, Romans 16.17. 1.
Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 10. Gal. 1.6. Ephesians. 4.14. Phil. 3.2. Coloss. 2 4 8. ^. Thessalonians.
2.2.
now called Candy: for Satan's rage contains not it self in the continent,
nor contemns a conquest against the Church in such a small Island as this is.
And therefore no sooner was Paul departed hence (although he left Titus behind
him to further the work) but Satan thrusts in corrupt teachers, some
erroneous in doctrine, others in life, scandalous; both of them exceeding
infectious: some of them seeking the overthrow of the doctrine, others of the
government of the Church established: others would for the honor of the
servant, despise the Son, by joining Moses and Christ together: all of them
disioyned the profession and practice of piety; and by this means perverted
many, and drew them into their own destruction. Our Apostle therefore wrote
this Epistle to Titus, 1. that he might authorize and back him in his
Ministry against such as might otherwise carry themselves contemptuously
toward him. 2. That he might direct him in redressing and repressing such
disorders as began to prevail: for which end he both describes what manner
of persons he should place Teachers over the congregations; as also what
doctrine he would have him particularly apply to every degree and condition of
men; that by the sufficiency of the former, the false teachers might be
foiled, and by the evidence of the latter all sorts of men might be sensed, and
out of danger of corruption by them. 3. Because Titus was young (as it
seems) he teaches him how to carry his whole doctrine, how to order his
life, how to deal with the tractable, how also with obstinate offenders, who
studied rather parts, and ^ow to be contentious, then how to content themselves
with the simple truth: and so shuts the Epistle with some personal matters,
and the Apostolical salutation.

The parts of the Epistle.
This Epistle contains three parts: 1. The salutation, in the 4. first
verses. 2. The narration, or proposition of the matter of it: from the 5. verse
of the 1. Chapter, unto the end of the 11. of the 3. chap. 3. The Conclusion;
containing some private business enjoined Titus: and the ordinary salutation
of the Apostle.


CHAP. I.
1 PAul a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the
faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which is according
unto godliness,

2 Unto the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has promised
before the world began:

3 But has made his word manifest in due time through the preaching, which is
committed unto me, according to the commandment of God our Savior:

4 To Titus my natural son according to the common faith; Grace, mercy, and
peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior:


IN these four verses containing the salutation, which is the exordium, or
first part of the Epistle, we have two things to consider: 1. The persons, 1.
saluting: 2. saluted. 2. The form of the salutation it self.


The person saluting, is described, 1. by his name, Paul. 2. by his office: 1.
more general, a servant of God: 2. more special, and an Apostle of Jesus
Christ: which is further enlarged by the end of it, namely, either to preach
the faith of Gods Elect (as the Geneva translation has it) or rather hereby to
bring the Elect unto the faith; according to the faith of Gods Elect: upon
which occasion he enters into a large and notable description of this faith,
and thereby proceeds in amplifying the dignity of his calling; as we shall
see in the several parts when we come unto them.

Paul] In this name, two questions come to be resolved. 1. How the Apostle came
by this name, seeing he was a Jew, and on the eight day, being circumcised
according to the law, was named Saul, after the Jewish manner, and not Paul?
Ans. Not to stand upon the opinions of some, who think he was called by both
these names, Orig. in praesa^. epist. ad Romans
because he was both a Jew by birth, and a Gentile by his freedom in Rome:
neither of such, as think he was thus called, because he converted Sergius
Paulus the Proconsul unto the Christian faith: for we read that he was thus
called before we read of the others conversion, Act. 13.9. neither of that
father who thought he was called Paulus, August. lib. 8. confess. cap. 4.
quasi parvulus Christi, upon his conversion: for he was called Saul a long
time after his conversion. But the simple and received truth is this, That
being called to Apostleship, Act 9.15. 1. Tim. 2.7.
and ordained to be the teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity, he was
presently to give over his Apostleship among the Hebrews: and withal he
gives over the use of the Hebrew name, whereby he was formerly known unto
them: and undertaking his office among the Gentiles, he also takes up this
name, more familiar unto them, whereby he would give them to know, that he was
now appropriated and after a sort, dedicated unto the service of their faith.
And this truth seems to be grounded in Act. 13. for before he and Barnabas
were separated unto this work of the Lord, he was ever called Saul, but after
this time never.

Here we may observe two considerations. 1. That it is and may be lawful
sometimes for a man to change his name; else had it not been lawful in Paul,
nor Peter, who was before called Bar-jona: nor Solomon, who was first called
Iedidiah. Not here to speak of the Lords own changing of names, as in
Abraham, Sarai, Israel, wherein the Lord in some new names would hide some new
mysteries, according to the new occasions offered: yet here, these caueats must
be diligently observed. 1. it may not be done to the hurt or offense of any man
(as in nicknames taken up in scoff or for reproach of our selves or others)
but to the good of men. 3. rules in changing men's names.
2. it may not be done to the hiding or covering of any sin; as many fellons,
and Jesuitical fugitives use it. 3. some good end must ever be propounded in
it, wherein God may be more glorified, and men edified. Thus have sundry godly
men changed their names in their writings, to prevent prejudicial thoughts
taken up against their persons, that the truth might more prosperously spread
it self.

2. Note hence, that such names are to be given to children, as may put them in
mind of some good duty: as Paul could never hear, or remember his new name,
but also be put in mind of his new office, and duty which he was to perform
among the Gentiles. And so much as may be, these names must be given in the
natural language: thus the Hebrews give fit names in Hebrew: the Greeks in
Greek, as Timothy: There was a disciple named Timotheus, Act. 16.1.
his mother was a Iewesse, but his father a Grecian: which last words seem to
include the reason of his name: Romans 16.22, 23. Folly to give heathenish names
to them whom we desire to be godly.
the Latins in Latin; as Tertius who wrote the Epistle to the Romans: and
Quartus a brother: which reprooueth many men, who are either too curious, or
too careless in imposing the names of their children. The former being in the
excess, give names above the nature of men, some drawing too near the Deity
it self, as Emmanuel, and the Jesuits; some of Angels, as Gabriel, Michael,
etc. some of virtues, as Grace, Faith, Mercy, Patience, etc. The latter being
in defect, Quiddam Christiani delectantur nominibus Hectoris, A chilli^,
Hannibalis, ad^o ipsis placet Gentilism^s. Polan. in cap. 1. Dan.
give the names of heathen men, as though they would have them prove so;
sometimes of things far below the nature of men, as of beasts, trees, etc.
then whom sometimes by Gods just judgment they prove not more sensible:
whereas the name should not only be fitted unto the nature, but also carry
some fit lesson and instruction in it.

The second question is, Why this name is here prefixed? Ans. There be three
especial uses of setting men's names unto divine writings. 1. to show that men
were called of God unto that work. 2. that they were ready to justify and
stand to that they had written. 3. to prevent the mischief of forging
writings, and fathering them upon men which never wrote them. Which regards
moved Paul in all his Epistles to observe two things: 1. in the beginning of
each, to prefixe his name: as in all his 13. Epistles. 2. in the end of each
Epistle, he added the Apostolical salutation, as himself witnesses, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17. The salutation of me Paul with my own hand, which is the token in
every Epistle. Coloss. 4.18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul. And both
these, partly to show his calling which was so strange and extraordinary to be
from God, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ: as also that he might justify the truth he wrote, Romans 1.16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: As in the last place to prevent that mischief
which was even then invented, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. Be not suddenly moved, nor
troubled by spirit, by word, or letter, as though it were from us: he would not
therefore have any go under his name, which had not his name at it. Hence
learn,

1. That in the former respects it is convenient that a man's name should be set
to his writings, which he commends to the use of the Church: after the
example of Paul, Cases in which a man may forbear to set his name to his
writing.
who did not (as many now a days) for his names sake set himself on writing;
but for his writings sake set to his name: yet so, as there be cases when it
shall be neither necessary nor wise to affixe the name of the author. The
principal of them be three. 1. When the name shall bring neither credit to the
truth, nor him. And this is thought to be the cause, why (not to insist in
other Scriptures, as many of the Psalms, books of Chronicles, etc. the
authors of which the spirit of God has not discovered) the Epistle to the
Hebrews (generally by the learned thought to be Paul's) wants both the name,
Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 3. Iun. par. praesat. c. 2. ad Hebr.
superscription, and subscription, which all his other Epistles have: This
reason is given both by Clemens Alex. and Athan. dial. de Trinit. See also
Nicephor. lib. 2. hist. eccl. cap. 26.
not because he was the Doctor of the Gentiles, and so was out of his way in
writing to the Jews, but because he knew his person and name to be
merueilously hated at Jerusalem; and that he was grown into great contempt
among the enemies of the Gospel from whom he had separated: whose fury he
gave place unto, and would not excite by adding his name, being desirous that
they should entertain the naked truth for it self. And howsoever it is a
vain thing to be peremptory in defining it to be Paul's; yet is it more vain
to conclude it none of his, because it wants his name; for by the same reason,
it having no bodies name, they might conclude it to be no bodies: nay, rather
upon this occasion, wanting his name, it is liker to be his.

2. From Paul's example every Christian man may learn to be ready to give his
name to the Gospel, and like a child of wisdom by a bold profession, to
justify it upon every just occasion: many are too indifferent herein, and loath
to be known disciples of Christ: the shame it is of many professors in such a
sunneshine day as this, to cast themselves with Nicodemus into the night.

A servant of God] This is a title which all the Apostles delight in; for thus
also Peter, James, Jude, in the beginning of their Epistles, styled themselves:
which is not to be understood in a general sense, as Reu. 7.3. for thus not
only they, but all Christians, nay more, all creatures (even the worst) are
some way serviceable unto God in executing his will: but it here specially
respects that office and function to which they were set a part, expressed
more particularly in the next words, and an Apostle.

To be a servant of God is the greatest honor.
Doctr. This being the first title whereby the Apostle would get himself
authority, teaches, That the very name of a servant of God, is full of honor
and authority. The Apostle comparing the glory of Christ with the glory of
the Angels, Heb. 1.14. advances them as far as possibly he can, that Christ
his glory being so much more excellent then theirs there described, might be
most highly exalted; and yet the highest ascent of their honor which he can
rise unto is, to title them ministering spirits, standing about God: from which
service they are honored with glorious names, of thrones, dominations, powers,
Rulers, principallities: and although the Scriptures most usually under this
title express the low and humble condition of Christ, Philip. 2.7.
who took on him the form of a servant; yet also thereby the Lord would
sometime signify his great glory: as Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant. I will
lea^e upon him: mine elect in whom my soul delights. The Apostle Paul when
he would provoke himself to magnify the free mercy of God toward himself,
makes this the ground of his glory and rejoicing, that God had counted him
faithful, and put him in his service. 1. Tim. 1.12.


Use 1. This serves to teach ministers their duty, Ministers are admitted into
Gods presence chamber, and counsel table.
that seeing the Lord has so highly honored them, as to draw them so near
unto himself, as it were admitting them into his presence chamber, yea and
unto his council table; they are in way of thankfulness more straightly
bound to two maine duties, 1. diligence. 2. thankfulness. First diligence, in
wholly giving up themselves and strength in the dispatching of their masters
business, whose now wholly they are: their ear is boared never to depart from
him; so as now they may not seek or serve themselves, but take themselves to
be (as the civil law calls servants) (...), such as sustain no person, but
are become dependances and adjuncts, yea indeed reasonable instruments in the
hand of their master. If motives would stir up our diligence unto the work
of God, we want not a multitude: as, Reasons to stir up their diligence in
this high service. 1. Tim. 4.6. Matthew. 24.46. Matthew. 25.30.
1. this master has most absolute power of life and death over his servants.
2. his eye is ever over them, which provoke even eie-pleasers to quickness.
3. the fruit of diligence is the saving of our selves and others. 4. blessed
shall that servant be whom the master shall find so doing. 5. without this
thou shall become the unprofitable servant, that shall be bound hand and foot,
and cast into hell: the service is difficult, as being an harvest, an
husbandry, a building, a planting; all which require laborers, and painful
workmen: it is the diligent hand that brings these works to a commendable
pass: nay more it is a sighting with spiritual weapons, against mighty and
malicious enemies, and requires quickness and courage. This business needs
not whole armies of such soldiers as we read of, 1. Sam. 17.24. who ran
away when they saw Goliath a far off: one poor and contemptible David, who
is as good as his word, when he says, Thy servant will go and fight with the
Philistim, v. 32. brings the business more happily forward, then a nation of
the former: Matthew. 25.26.
in whom we see the picture of the evil and slothful servant, whose end the
Evangelist records to be fearful.

The second duty is faithfulness. 1. Cor. 4.2. And to faithfulness.
It is required of every dispenser that he be found faithful: and this
faithfulness must appear, 1. in gaining disciples not to himself, but unto
Christ: John was a faithful servant to he must increase, and I must decrease:
and Paul, I seek not yours, Ioh. 3.30.
but you: but this was to present them as virgins unto Christ. The law of
equity concludes, that whatsoever the servant gains, should become the
masters. But the world is full of unfaithful servants, who when they should
come in their Masters name, come in their own: Gehezi runs after Naaman for
talents of gold, 2. King. 5.22.
and change of raiment, and says, his 2. In seeking to please and approve
himself unto his master, and not to other men. Thus was Moses faithful, but
as a servant in all the house of God: Numb. 12.7.
nay Christ himself is herein preferred, Heb. 3.2. that he was faithful to
him that appointed him. But wherein was this faithfulness seen? In Moses, in
that he did all things according to the pattern in the Mount: In Christ, in
that his doctrine was not his, but his fathers: neither did he any thing of
himself, but all that his father taught him that spoke he, Ioh. 7.16. and 8.28.
and all that he saw the father do, that did he. This same was the
faithfulness of the Apostles also: who preached only what they had heard and
seen of Christ, and delivered only what they had received: 1. Ioh. 1.1.3. 1.
Cor. 11.23.
and this must be the faithfulness of us their successors, the believing
masters. 1. Tim. 6.2.
And lastly, because our master 1. King. 16.10.
as Zimri was unto Elah,) in teaching doctrines and precepts tending to the
advancing of their own estate, the enriching of that seat, the decking of
that whore of Babylon, the pulling down of the kingdom of Christ, and the
trampling of his testament under feet: for when the Decrees, Canons, and
Councels of men, must iustle out the counsels of God: the additions and
traditions of men must be (as by their doctrine) believed and received as the
written word of God; how can Christ be acknowledged the only Lord and husband
of his Church? But also pity it is that even of Protestant ministers, not a
few may be charged with Demas his sin, in embracing this present world:
which if any do, 2. Tim. 4.10. 2. King. 8.15.
needs must they become as faithful unto Christ, as Hazael was to Benhadad:
for it goes not alone, but the forsaking of the truth is the next, an
inseparable companion of it.

Comfort for Ministers in this service.
Use. 2. This doctrine ministers comfort unto those, that are faithful in
their ministry, whom, howsoever the world esteems of them, their Lord
highly respects, admits them into his privy Counsels, and imployeth pry
into.

servant of God, was bold to pray for safety: hence are ministers called
stars in the right hand of Christ, not only because he disposes of them
here and there according as he pleases, Reu. 1.16.
but also to note their safety and security; for he always keeps them even
within his right hand.

3. This master whom they serve, will revenge all their wrongs, no Hanun. 2.
Sam. 10.7.


4. He becomes their paymaster, and of him they receive their wages; Israel be
not gathered, Isay 49.5.
but are a sweet savor unto God even in those that perish.

3. Use. Teaches people how to esteem of their Ministers: namely, People
account of this service as honorable.
as the servants of God; and consequently of their Ministry as the message of
God. Which if it be, Moses must not be murmured at when he speaks freely and
roughly: and if Micha resolve of faithfulness, saying, as the Lord lives,
what soever the Lord says, be it good or evil, 1. Kin. 22.14.27.
that will I speak: why should he be hated, and fed with bread and water of
affliction? Is it not a reasonable plea and full of pacification in Civil
messages? I pray you be not angry with me, I am but a servant. Yet when
Jeremy shall say, of a truth the Lord has sent me, Ier. 26.15.
his feet shall nevertheless be fastened in the stocks. Nay this consideration
should not only bind men to peace, from touching and doing the Lords Prophets
harm: but also urge them to have them in exceeding honor, at least for the
works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. 1. Cor. 3.9.
which is the Lords, who therefore acknowledges them co-workers with himself.

4. Use. Let every private Christian account it also his honor, Let none be a
shamed of this service.
that the Lord vouchsafes him to become his servant; and hereby harden thy
self against the scorns, and derisions of mocking Michals, who seek to
disgrace thy sincerity. If the ungodly of the world would turn thy glory
into shame, even as thou would have the Son of man not to be ashamed of
thee in his kingdom; be not thou ashamed to profess thy self his servant,
which is thy glory: let none take this crown from thy head; thou seruest not
such a Master as thou need be ashamed of.

And an Apostle of Jesus Christ] Now the Apostle descends from the general
to this special service, which was the highest Ministry in the Church; and
shows that his employment was in the most serious business of the Church, next
under Christ, who had furnished him with an embassage for the reconciling of
men unto God; and that not as an ordinary Minister, but 1. as an Apostle: 2.
an Apostle of Jesus Christ.

1. That he was an Apostle, Three privileges of an Apostle.
appears by three properties agreeable only unto Apostles. First, he was
immediately called by Christ's own mouth, Act. 9.5.6. I am Jesus, arise: for
this was the Apostles prerogative, to see Christ's face, and be called by
himself immediately, and not (as this day) mediatly by the Church. Thus Paul
proves himself an Apostle, 1. Cor. 9.1.
Am not I an Apostle? have I not seen Christ? namely, though not while he was
in the flesh, and in his base estate, as Peter, and the other Apostles; yet by
revelation, and being now glorified; which was of his far more special
grace: once in the way to Damascus, Act. 9.17. and another time in the Temple
he saw Christ appearing to him, Act. 22.18.
wishing him to make have out of the City. Secondly, as he received his
calling, so likewise his doctrine immediately from Christ, as the other
Apostles did. True it is that being brought up at Tarsus, he was first
instructed in humane literature and knowledge, Act. 22 3.
that he was able upon occasion to cite the testimonies of sundry Heathen
Poets; and after that he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a Doctor
learned in the law, in which he profited so much as he became unreprovable,
and lived according to the perfect manner of the law of the Fathers; and he
spoke with tongues more then all the Apostles. Notwithstanding all this, when
he comes to learn the Gospel, Galat. 1.1.
he had it not from man, nor by man, but immediately by Christ from heaven. This
knowledge was too high for him to hammer out by his own study, God himself
showed it him by revelation. Ephesians. Thirdly, he was not now tied to any one
certain place, but was called to carry the name of Christ among the Gentiles:
Act. 9.15.
and to confirm this, we read more of Paul's travels then of all the Apostles
besides put together: his commission to Damascus was not half so large and
general, as this he has now received.

2. He calls himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ. 1. Because he was called,
furnished, and sent by Christ. 2. Because he was now to teach Christ; not the
letter of the law any longer, but the doctrine of the Gospel; neither
righteousness by the Pharisaicall observation of the law, but by the faith of
the Son of God.

Doctr. The Apostle by joining these two together, a servant and Apostle,
Chiefest offices in the Church are for service.
teaches us, that the chiefest offices in the Church are for the service of
it. Was there any office above the Apostles in the Church? and yet they
preached the Lord Jesus, and themselves servants for his sake. Nay our Lord
Jesus himself although he was the head, 2. Cor. 4.5.
and husband of his Church, yet he came not into the world to be served, but to
minister and serve.

Use. Ministers must never conceive of their calling, but also of this service,
which is not accomplished but by service: thus shall they be answerable to
Peter's exhortation, 1. Pet. 3.3. to feed the flock of God depending upon them,
not by constraint, but willingly; not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as
examples to the flock.

2. Would thou know what ambition Christ has permitted unto his Ministers?
it is even this, that he that would be chief of all, should become servant of
all* not as that man of sin, the son of perdition, Matthew. 20.25.
who while he calls himself the servant of all the servants of God, exalts
himself not only above all his brethren, but above all that is called God
also: but to be indeed the servant of the least, and weakest member of the
Church, furthering by all his endeavor the saluations of men. If any then be
of the spirit of Zebedeus his sons, Mark. 20.37.
that desire to sit at the right and left hand of Christ in this his kingdom,
here is the most compendious way to rise to his thoughts: let him painefully
serve the Church, as a good steward let him dispense the food to the family in
due season: thus he shall get next unto Christ: the most faithful servant of
the Church, Matthew. 25.21.
becomes the greatest ruler in it.

According to the faith of Gods elect. Dixit se creatu^ Apostolum vt electione
digni creder^nt, and pietatis ac religionis veritatem agnoscerent. Theodoret.
in hunc locum.
] Here the Apostle expresses the end of his calling to Apostleship, namely to
this purpose, to bring the elect of God unto the faith, or produce faith in the
elect: the preposition (...) put for (...), which above other expositions I
receive, because the same Apostle leads unto it, 2. Tim. 1.1. Paul an
Apostle, (...), according to the promise of life, that is, to declare the life
promised in Christ.

It is true in this inscription (if in any other) which Beza observes of all
Paul's inscriptions, that in some one word or other he uses to co^prise the
whole scope of the Epistle, yea the whole sum of the Gospel* but in this, in
many words, yea many verses, he enlarges that which in others he breifely
contracteth and therefore as he wishes not to pass over the inscriptions too
lightly (as which contain matter sufficient ^o oppose against all seducers) so
may we not without great oversight, and hindrance of our own edification pass
over the diligent inquisition of such multiplicitie and excellency of matter,
as is infolded in this and the two verses following; which contain (as we may
well term it) rather a large description of the Catholic faith of all
Christians, then a breife inscription of a private letter passing between two
friends. These words which set open the gate to pass us into such a fai^e
field, contain three conclusions to be opened.

1. That God has some (...) are elect and chosen, and others are not. 2. That
these elect have a special faith, distinct by themselves. 3. That this
peculiar faith is wrought in them by the Ministry of the word.
For the first: Men may be called the elect of God three ways. Men may be
called elect of God 3. ways.
^. In temporal function or Ministry to which the Lord has designed them:
Job. 6.70. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you 2. In regard of that
actual election and choice of some people and nations above other, unto the
true means of life and salvation, so to become the people of Gods election.
And thus although all Israel was not chosen to life eternal, yet in regard of
the means they were called an elect people. And thus whosoever give their
names to Christ, and are set into him by Baptism, 1. Pet. 2.9.
may be called elect in this more general eternal election of God, which is
according to grace; whereby of his good pleasure he chooses from all
eternity, out of all sorts of men, some to the certain fruition and
fellowship of life eternal, and salvation by Christ. These elect of God are
here meant; the number of which is comparatively small, for many are called but
few chosen, Matthew. 7.13.
a little flock, and a few that have found the narrow way. These few, I say,
are chosen, 1. from all eternity, for no new thing can fall into the
prescience, and will of God. 2. they are chosen of his good pleasure, even
before they have done good or evil. 3. and they are chosen to the certain
fruition of life eternal, as being immutably elected. For although many of
both the former sorts might fall away, and manifest their reprobation, as
Judas, and such as the Apostle John speaks off, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; yet this is the privilege of
this election, that it is the firm purpose of God to save, and have mercy.
Object. It will be here alleged, that seeing there is not acceptance of
persons with God, Romans 2.11. he cannot more accept one to salvation then
another; or if he do, how shall it not be most unequal, that those who are
equal, should not be equally dealt withal? Ans. The word (...), translated
person, signifies not the substance of a man, or the man himself, but some
outward circumstance belonging unto him; as his outward quality, appearance,
or condition, which being objected to our eyes, may make a man less or more
respected: such as are honor, wealth, parentage, learning, authority: which
when they bring men into account, then is the face or outward appearance of a
man accepted. And thus the Lord accepts not, nor rejects any man, for any
adherent quality which can commend him above another: for he accepts not the
persons of Princes, Job. 34.19.
nor regards the rich more then the poor, seeing they are both the work of
his hands: but freely in his Christ chooses such as are good in his sight, the
rest being rejected. As for such as allege unequal dealing in God toward
such as are equally corrupted, and lie all alike in the same mass; there
being no more matter of salvation in such as are chosen, then those who are
rejected: all this paueth no way to a dependent election or reprobation, which
hangs upon some outward thing without the most absolute will of God; much
less makes the straight ways of God unequal. For may not he do with his
own as he will? who art thou that dare dispute with God? that presumest to
prescribe laws to thy Maker; Romans 9.19, 20.
that he should deal with one man thus, or with another otherwise? or who has
spoiled him of his sovereignty over his creatures? Romans 11.33.
If thou can not sound this depth of the riches of this wisdom and
knowledge of God, acknowledge then how unsearchable are his judgments, and
how his ways are past finding out. Cauil not at what thou can not conceive,
but admire it.

Use. This first conclusion teaches us, 1. To make sure our own election, and
show our selves unto others to be of this small number: namely, by holy and
unblameable walking, Ephesians. 1.4. 2. Pet. 1.4 10. 2. Tim. 2.21.
by daily flying the corruption that is in the world through lust; by the daily
washing and purging our selves from our old sins; and by the study of
righteousness, becoming vessels of honor, prepared unto every good work.

2. It confirms us against the scandal which is common in the world, wherein
most men believe not, most men repent not, nay scorn them that do: at which
we may not stumble, seeing that some, yea the most are refused: there must be
in every corner such as are blinded unto destruction. It is the Fathers good
pleasure to reveal the things of the kingdom to ^ few babes, but to hide them
from the most of the wise and prudent of the world. A few are given unto the
Son, and brought in due season unto the faith, 2. Cor. 4.4.
and many more are delivered up unto Satan to have the eyes of their minds
further blinded, that so they might justly perish in their infidelity.

3. Hence we must bless God who has chosen us, that he might put a difference
between us and others; whereas he found no such difference in us, who were the
children of wrath as well as others: he chose us (not when we were, but) that
we might be holy and unblameable, Ephesians. 1.4. that from the first to last, in
our salvation all the glory might be his: yea that our joy might be more full,
and our glorying in God more firm and cheerful, he has made it known unto
us, that being elected, we are sure of our happiness: Ioh. 20.28.
for nothing shall be able to pluck us out of his hands.

The second conclusion is, that the elect have a faith by themselves, being
here called the faith of Gods elect: where by faith is not meant the doctrine
of faith, as Jude 3. Contend for the faith once given: and 1. Tim. 1.19. but
rather the gift of faith, whereby we understand, and embrace that doctrine:
neither is every gift of faith here meant. For there is 1. an historical
faith, standing in an assent and acknowledgement of the truth of things
written, and taught. 2. There is also an hypocritical faith, which passes the
former in two degrees. First, in that with knowledge and assent is joined such
a profession of the truth, as shall carry a great show and form of
godliness. Secondly, a kind of gladness and glorying in that knowledge: for
it is ascribed to some, who in temptation shall fall away, Matthew. 13.20.
to receive the word with joy. To both which may be joined sometimes a gift of
prophecy, sometimes of working miracles: as some in the last day shall say,
Lord have we not prophesied, and cast out devils in thy name, Matthew. 7 22.
and yet they shall be unknown of Christ. Neither of these is the faith of the
elect here mentioned: The true difference of saving faith of the elect from all
other.
but a third kind called saving faith, the inheritance of which is the
propriety of the elect: for the just man only lives by this faith: which in
excellency passes both the former in three worthy properties. 1. In that here
with the act of understanding and assent unto the truth, there goes such a
disposition and affection of the heart, as apprehends, and applies unto it
the promise of grace unto salvation; causing a man to rejoice in God, framing
him unto the fear of God, and to the waiting through hope, for the
accomplishment of the promise of life. 2. In that whereas both the former are
dead, and not raising unto a new life in Christ, what shows soever be made for
the time, the sun of persecution rises and all such moisture is dried up:
This is a lively and quickening grace, reaching into the heart Christ and his
merits, who is the life of the soul, and the moouer of it to all godly
actions, not suffering the believer to be either idle or unfruitful in the
work of the Lord. 3. Whereas both the former are but temporary, this is
perpetual and lasting: the other rising upon temporary causes and reasons,
can last only for a time, as when men for the pleasure of knowledge, or the
name of it, by industry attain a great measure of understanding in divine
things; or when, for note and glory, or commodity, true, or apparent, men
profess the Gospel: let but these grounds fail a little, or persecution
approach, they lay the key under the door, give up house, and bid farewell to
all profession. Thus many of Christ's Disciples, Ioh. 6.66.
who thought they had truly believed in him, and that many months: ^hen they
heard him speak of the eating of his flesh, and drinking his blood, went
back, and walked with him no more. But the matter is here far otherwise:
seeing this faith of the elect has the promise made good to it, Matthew. 16.18.
that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it.

Use. This conclusion teaches us, 1. That true faith is an infallible mark of
election, Contra Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 15.16.
assuring the believer as certainly of his salvation, as if he were already
gathered up to his fathers: or as if he had a special revelation. For besides
that here it is a grace impropriate to the elect, the Son of God teaches it,
Ioh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me: that is, all
those whom the Father chooses to salvation he gives to the Son to save: for
election is founded in Christ: and those who are thus given unto the Son by
the Father, come unto the Son, that is, believe in him: for so the 35. verse
confounds them, He that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst. So as those that believe, are given to the
Son to salvation. The same teaches the Evangelist, Act. 13.48. As many as
were ordained to life, believed: and 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. the Apostle makes
sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of truth, two infallible notes of
election. All that can be here of moment objected is, Object.
that a man cannot know certainly that he has faith. But that is false: Sol.
for Paul 2. Cor. 13.5. willing the Corinthians to examine and prove
themselves, whether they were in the faith or no, and whether Christ be in them
or no: takes it for granted, that a man may know that he has faith, and that
Christ is in him: for else were his exhortation idle.

Quest. But how may a man know that he has this faith, that so the believer
may rise up to the assurance of his election?

Ans. There be diverse notes and companions of it, Four notes whereby the
truth of faith is discerned.
more easily discerned then it self is: as first, It purifieth the heart, Act.
15.19. and will not suffer it to be taken up with unclean thoughts, or
unlawful lusts: it orders the affections and cu^beth them, as with bit and
bridle, and bends good treasure of his heart, cannot but send out good
speeches. Secondly, Luke 6.45.
from the works of love, a man may conclude he has faith, Gal. 5.6. faith;
first to God, then to man for Gods sake: for it has respect both to him that
begat, and him that is begotten. Thirdly, it is cries in the hearts of Gods
children, abba, father. Fourthly, Romans 8 15.
it has a lively hope accompanying it, it causes watchfulness, and waiting
for, yea, and rejoicing in we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.

Secondly, we may hence gather a cause, why some believe, some believe not: it
is not because some will, and some will not, whatsoever freewill-men
presumptuously avouch: the Holy Ghost tells us, Romans 9.16.
it is not in the willer, nor in the runner, but therefore men come to the
faith, because they are elected, Act. 13.48. And why did not the Jews believe
the heavenly doctrine of Christ himself? the reason is given, Ioh. 10.26. Ye
believe not, because ye are not my sheep: most true is it here, the elect have
obtained (saving faith) the rest are hardened; Romans 11.7.

The third conclusion is, that this peculiar faith of the elect is ordinarily
wrought in them, Faith ordinarily wrought in the ministry of the word
preached.
by the ministry of the word; this being noted here, that the end of the
ministry is to bring the elect unto the faith, Job. 33.23. If there be a
messenger, or interpreter, one of a thousand to declare to man his
righteousness: now this righteousness is no other then the righteousness of
faith: for this end were the Apostles called, furnished, and sent out into the
world, to teach men faith on the Son of God, as appears in their
commission, Mar. 16.16. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved: to this purpose is
it that Paul affirms of the great mystery of Godliness, that it must first
be preached unto the Gentiles, and then believed on in the world. 1. Tim. 3.16.


Use. 1. If this be the principal end of the ministry, let ministers herein
employ their first and principal pains, to bring men unto the faith; wherein
they shall imitate our Apostle, not only here, but in his other Epistles; who
first deals in the causes and means of salvation, and then instructs in
Christian manners; as one whom the wisdom of God had taught, that if the
inside be not first made clean, and the heart purified by faith, whatsoever
actions can proceed from men, be they never so glorious, yet indeed they are
no better then glistering sins: he has the right way of teaching in the
school of Christ, that first lays for his ground faith in Christ, and then
builds thereon, all his precepts of Christian Philosophy.

2. The Minister ought to propound before him, Gods end in performance of every
ministerial duty, and that is by enlighting, converting, confirming,
comforting, to bring and stablish men in the faith. Which justly reprehendeth
such, as (forgetting themselves, their duty and people) out of the pride of
their hearts, busy themselves in finding out obscure and dark mysteries,
tying hard knots to untie them again: not much unlike the dog which refuses
soft meat to gnaw upon bones, and all this to get the praise of nimble heads,
and sharp wits: whereas the true glory of a Minister, is the number of those
that are begotten to the faith: who are gathered by the plain evidence of the
word, in the words, not which man's wisdom, but which Gods spirit teaches.

3. The Lord having set out the ministry for this use, let every hearer
acknowledge herein Gods ordinance, and yield themselves with all submission
unto the ministry, and the word there preached; that thereby they may have
faith wrought in their hearts. God will have men taught on earth, and not from
heaven: by man, not Angels or dead men: let this means be despised, nothing in
heaven or earth can do thee good: fast, pray, afflict thy soul, forget not to
distribute, do all the good thou can; but yet all this while despise the
word offered, and thou have forsaken thine own mercy; nay more, come to the
ministry, hear the word read, preached, join in the prayers and Sacraments
of the Church, if thou come without the submission of thy heart, whereby
thou art become as prepared ground, to cover the seed unto increase, all is in
vain: for what is Paul? what is Apollos? what is the minister (be he never so
choice and excellent) except he be the Minister of thy faith? 1. Cor. 3.5.
and so what is the ministry to thee, if it be not the ministry of thy
faith?

4. Every man may hence examine himself, whether in the use of the ministry,
he find saving faith, begotten and wrought in his heart; and by examination,
some may find their understandings more enlightened, their judgments more
settled, their practice in some things reformed: but a very few shall find
Christ apprehended, and rested in unto salvation, seeing so few there are that
live by faith in the Son of God: for of all the sins that the spirit may
and shall rebuke the world of, this is the chief, because they believe not in
Christ. Ioh. 16.9.
Howsoever many are in some things bettered by the ministry, yet very few
have attained this principal end of it, which is to put men in possession of
true faith, and by it of salvation.

And the knowledge of the truth which is according to Godlinesse] The Apostle
being called to beget faith in the elect, magnifieth and extolleth this his
calling from the difficulty of the work: for it is not to bring forth by his
travel any blind persuasion of faith, which (being too natural to men, would
rise of it self fast enough, without any such manuring: but such a faith as is
peculiar to the elect, as before we heard. In the which, least men should be
deceived, as easily and willingly the most be, he takes pains to set down
the whole nature of it in particular. And first, here we have the ground of
faith, which is knowledge: and because the truth of faith cannot find footing
upon follies, or fancies, nay, nor upon every profitable knowledge, he teaches
what kind of knowledge he speaks of, and that is the knowledge of the truth,
that is, of the Gospel, being a word of truth, yea, truth it self; so called
by way of excellency or eminency, as though no other truth deserved that
name: (...).
or because this carries the only undoubted truth with it. And further,
because many think all cocksure, and that they cannot fail of faith if they
be able to discourse of this truth: he teaches us, that it is not every
knowledge of the truth he means; but such a one as is according to
godliness, that is, such as frames the heart of the possessor to true
Godliness.

Whence naturally arise these three conclusions: First, that the doctrine of
the Gospel is the truth it self. Secondly, that the knowledge of this truth
is the ground of faith. Thirdly, that where it is aright, it frames the heart
to Godliness.


First, the doctrine of the Gospel is truth it self. 1. because the author of
it is truth it self, and cannot lie: it being a part of his word, who can
neither deceive, nor be deceived. 2. because the penmen of it were inspired by
the holy Ghost, and spoke, and writ as they were moved by him, 2. Pet. 1.21.
The Gospel called Truth, for 3 reasons.
who is called the spirit of truth, Ioh. 14.17. 3. because it is a doctrine of
Christ, and aymeth at him who is the the truth principally, as well as the way
of our salvation: Whence it is, that the Apostles often style it by the word of
truth, as, Ephesians. 1.13. After ye heard the word of truth, even the Gospel of your
salvation: and, Coloss. 1.5. For the hopes sake whereof ye have heard before by
the word of truth, which is the Gospel. True it is, that the Law is a true
word, without all error; but yet never thus called: For the moral law will not
now affoard such a truth, as by which a sinner can be justified in the sight of
God: and the ceremonial law, although it do acknowledge such a truth, yet was
it a far off, and in types, and not in the truth: but the Gospel only is
such a truth, as whereby we are raised to salvation.

Use. 1. Ministers must rightly devide this word of truth, as such who would be
approved of Christ, both the author and subject of it: for the more notable
the subject is, the more care must there be in handling it. 1. Pet. ^.^^.
Which the Apostle Peter teaches, If any man speak, let him speak as the
word of God. The word of truth would be truly dealt with, purely preached,
wisely applied, and so faithfully dispensed, as that both God, and good men,
and a man's own conscience, may approve his work.

2. This word so purely handled shall every soul find to be truth it self,
so as believers shall not fail of the salvation published in it: and
unbelievers shall as surely meet with condemnation, seeing hereby they are
condemned already.

3. Not to have this truth seated in our hearts, is a fearful case; for it
argues a man to be given up to error and delusion. 2. To doubt of any part of
it, is to give a lie to all the rest. 3. To seek for salvation out of it, or
besides it, (as the blinded Papist does) is to cleave to folly and falsehood.
4. To despise this truth, is to contemn great salvation: for if to despise
Moses law brings death without mercy; Heb. 10.28.
how much more sorer punishment is he worthy of which treads under foot the
Son of God? 5. But to fight against this truth is most woeful, for it is
strongest and will prevail: never man lifted against the truth, but he found
it too heavy for him: never man spurned against it, but to the bruising of
himself.

Secondly, the knowledge of this truth, is the ground of faith: for so our
Apostle would have us conceive, Knowledge of the truth is the ground of faith.
2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
that the faith of the elect is raised upon knowledge of the truth as the
matter of it: and in this sense, we read that faith is called the faith of
truth, even for this reason, because it is begotten in the acknowledgement of
the truth: and Paul in asking that question, How shall they believe, except
they hear? plainly concludes, Romans 10.14.
that no hearing of the truth, no faith in it: and how may he that runs read
in the Scriptures, that to whomsoever faith is given, they be such as are
taught of God? such as to whom the holy spirit is become a schoolmaster, who
opens their understandings, that with much assurance they can see and
acknowledge the truth for seeing faith is much more then an uncertain opinion,
or wavering fancy; it follows that that knowledge which is the ground of it,
must be no shaking reed with every wind; but a certain acknowledgement of
the truth, approouing of it, and assenting unto it. Neither may we think that
the spirit of truth traineth men in blind and ungrounded conceits, nor leaves
their hearts in uncertainties; but that wheresoever he works such an eminent
grace as faith is, he makes men able in some good measure to give a reason of
the hope that is in them. 1. Pet. 3.
And as little reason have we to conceive that the work of the Ministry, is
to build castles in the air, or the castle of faith without a foundation; but
that Ministers are sent to make the mysteries of salvation clear in the
evidence and demonstration of the spirit: and so lay men on that foundation, to
become a spiritual house, consisting of living stones fit for the honor of
the Lord. And to end the proof, notably does the Apostle Paul prove the
effectual faith of the Thessalonians from this ground of it: for our Gospel
was not unto you in word only, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.5.
but in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance: which place must
be understood so to be both in the teachers and the hearers, as the context
declares.

Use. 1. If knowledge be the ground of faith, Lampas fidei facile extinguitur
nisi subinde infundatur oleu^ verbi dei. Chrysostom. in parab. virg.
then slight is the faith of the most, whatsoever men profess. Numbers of
most silly creatures swarm every wheare, who pretend, and presume upon as
strong a faith to God ward, as the best preacher of them all; and yet live no
better then Atheists, even without God in the world: without the knowledge of
his ways, without his fear in their hearts: to love God above all, and their
neighbors as themselves, is but a breath with them: to believe in Jesus
Christ, is so natural, as they never doubted of it all their lives; to bring
forth fruits of faith (whose property is to work by love, in the obedience of
the Commandments of the first and second table,) this they do, they hope as
well as God will give them leave, or as others of their neighbors do: whereas,
alas, even their speech bewraieth them to be destitute of understanding, and
consequently utterly void of the faith of truth.

Fides explicita, implicita.
2. If the ground of faith must be a certain knowledge of heavenly truth: then
hereby, 1. is ouerturned that fond distinction of the Papists, which masketh
there more then Egyptian blindness, joined with wilfulnes and obstinacy, under
their modest veil of unexpressed faith, or the faith of laymen; whereby if
they can profess themselves Catholics, and live, and die in the belief of
their (falsely so termed) Catholic Church; although they know not what it
believes, it is sufficient for their salvation. And indeed be that professes
that religion (which like the apples of Egypt will abide no touch,) had need
lean upon an implicit faith. And so some of them pretending more learning the^
is common among them, being pressed by argument, have thought they have
learnedly enough answered, in saying that their Doctors can answer for them.
But who sees not these Pharisees taking away the key of knowledge, and
incurring that we denounced against such as will neither enter themselves,
Matthew. 23.13.
nor suffer others to enter into the kingdom of heaven? for surely if little
or no knoledge, little or no faith of a man's own were enough; how unwise was
Paul so to trouble himself, and the people of his days, whom he would not
suffer to rest in far more knowledge and proper faith then this we have in
hand? Col. 2.2.5.7.
how urges he the Colossians that having received a taste of the true knhwledge
of God, nay even a kind of steadfastness in the faith of the Lord Jesus, yet
here they should not make any stay, but proceed on to the full assurance of
understanding, in all the riches of it to know the mystery of God: yea to be
further rooted, and built, and stablished in the faith of Christ, and never to
give over till they come to be complete in him: which how they can stand with
that Popish position, a weak eye may see. The like, of Peter, 2. Pet. 1.12.

And 2. wauerers in religion, and unsettled persons in their profession, may
hence be informed to judge of themselves, and their present estate. We hear
more then a few uttering such voices as these; There is such difference of
opinions among teachers, that I know not what to hold, or whom to believe: but
is not this openly to proclaim the want of faith? which is not only assuredly
persuaded of, but certainly knows the truth of that it apprehends? Heb.
10.38.
The just man (we know) lives by his faith; but this is to withdraw himself
to perdition. Let not therefore such wavering minded men look for portion in
Christ, whose followers and disciples can profess unto him, Ioh. 6.68.
Master, thou have the words of eternal life, and whether shall we go? And
though all men forsake thee, yet we will die with thee before we deny thee.
Matthew. 26.35. Gal. 1.8.
Our precept is, that if an Angel from heaven should come and bring another
doctrine (so settled and stablished our minds ought to be in the present truth)
we should hold him accursed. But lamentable it is, that Angels from heaven need
not come to prevail against the truth: for let but a blinded Papist come from
Rome, and broach his vessel, and in effect affirm that all the Apostles were
deceived in their doctrine; a number of Protestants may soon be turned to
another Gospel: the experience whereof, has brought swarms of Jesuits and
Seminaries among us, to the poysning not of a few.

3. If the elect are brought to the faith, by the acknowledging of the truth;
then after long teaching, and much means to be still blind, and not to see
the things of our peace, is a most heavy judgment of God: for here is a
forfeit of faith and salvation. Here indeed is the voice of Christ, but here
are not sheep of Christ that hear it: Ioh. 10 ^^
here is the glorious light of the Gospel shining, but here are none but
Infidels, the eyes of whose minds the God of this world has blinded, 1. Cor.
^.^.
that they cannot behold it: here is the anointing, offering to teach all
things, 1. Ioh. 2.27.
but here are not they that have received him: here is spiritual meat* but
here are not spiritual men to feed upon it: for if any think himself
spiritual, 1. Cor. 14.37.
let him acknowledge the things delivered to be the commandments of the Lord:
which who so does not, he is still in the snare of the devil, far from
repentance, and prisoner to do his will. Whence are all our plagues in the
Church, and in the land, but for want of not acknowledging the truths, 2. Tim.
2.
which have bin clearer then the sun to our eyes? and how just is it that such
as will not know the voice, should know the hand of God? and that whom the
vocal word cannot reclaim, the real word of the Lord should overtake?

Thirdly, whosoever in truth entertain the Doctrine of the Gospel, the hearts
of such are framed unto godliness. This truth h^ghly advanced above all other.
For herein this truth takes place and pre-eminence above all other truths,
and writings, in that it does not only inlighten the understanding, but also in
that it fashioneth the heart unto that which it teaches: nay, herein this
doctrine far excels that of the law of God; which is indeed a lantern to
direct, and teaches what to do by enforming the mind in the several duties
of it; but gives no power to the performance of any of them: but this truth,
besides the showing of the duty, conferreth strength acceptably to do it: for
it conuerteth the soul. More plainly, we read of a twofold law, but in
substance the same: 1. the law of God: 2. the law of Christ. Gal. 6.2. Ioh.
23.34.
The former, is an old commandment prescribing love: the latter, a new
commandment prescribing love also. The newnes of this commandment then,
stands not in any new matter and substance of Doctrine, but in this new
manner of delivery and propounding: in that, the law commanded love, but gave
no strength to perform it: it writes it self only in the fleshly tables of
the heart, and so in the flesh it cannot be fulfilled: but in the Gospel with
this commandment of love, goes in believers the giving of Christ, and the
gift of faith whereby they are enabled in the performance of it: whence also
the Apostle John calls it both an old doctrine, 1. Ioh. 2.7, 8.
namely, in regard of the substance of it; and a new doctrine, not as latter in
time, but in respect of that effectual power of renewing the soul which
accompanies it, and makes the doctrine effectual to the believer; it being
the quickening spirit, which reformeth the mind informed. In like manner does
our Apostle elsewhere oppose the evidence of this doctrine to the veiled
knowledge of the law, and ascribes unto it two things above that which the law
affoardeth. 2. Cor. 3.18.
1. a clearer illumination: We behold as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord
with open face: 2. reformation of heart and life: and are changed into the same
image, from glory, to glory; which is the end of the former enlightening, unto
which the law could not lead us: which lets us see indeed some part of the
glory of the Lord, but cannot change us (as this) into that we see. And as the
property of this truth is, Coloss. 3.10.
to renew men by the knowledge of it, to his image that did create us; so
whosoever have learned Christ as the the truth is in Christ, Ephesians. 4.10.
he has cast off the old man, and is renewed in the spirit of the mind. This
knowledge leaves not men in vain speculation, but leads forward every
Christian toward his perfection, 2. Tim. 3.16.

Humane truths frame not the heart to godliness.
Use. 1. If this be the pre-eminence of the word, to frame the soul to true
godliness, then is it a matter above the reach of all humane learning: and
therefore the folly of those men is hence discovered, who devote and bury
themselves in profane studies of what kind soever they be, thinking therein to
obtain more wisdom, then in the study of the Scriptures. But in forsaking
the word of the Lord, what wisdom is there? and what is their gain more then
that (by the just wrath of God upon them) they are commonly turned into that
they read, living in open profanes, or else at the best, are but civil men,
without religion or good conscience. For let a man read and study all his
days, all arts and sciences, let him be exquisite in tongues, languages, and
all commendable literature, (which are things excellent) yet let him neglect
this knowledge, which bears the bell in making men wise unto salvation, such
an one can never have his heart framed unto godliness.

2. Every hearer of the truth must examine whether by it his heart be thus
framed unto godliness, E^amine if the truth has thus framed thy heart.
for else it is not rightly learned: for as this grace has appeared to this
purpose, to teach men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, and justly, and godly in this present world: so is it not then
learned, when men can only discourse of the death of Christ, Rom 6.6.
of his resurrection, of his ascension, except withal there be some experience
of the virtue of his death in themselves, killing their sins, so as
henceforth they serve not sin. 2. some feeling of the power of his blessed
resurrection, Phil^^. 3.^0.
in being ingrafted with him into the similitude of it. 3. and some ascent of
our affections after him into heaven, provoking to seek the things that are
above: a bare and unfeeling speculation, Coloss ^.1.
is here not only unprofitable, but much more dangerous and damnable. The
Jews could boast that they were free borne, and of Abraham, as many among us
take themselves to be strong believers; but let Christ come to the point with
them, If the truth has set you free, Ioh. 8.32.36.
ye are free indeed: the truth is, that the Son has not freed them: for
they are not free from their lusts, nor are kings to rule over them, but
vassals under them still. The spirit of God in the ministry (which is his
chariot) has not freed them from servitude of sin and death: 2. Cor. 3.17.
for where the spiririt is effectual, there is liberty. A dangerous thing is
it, that men so chained in ignorance, and manifold lusts, should overthrow
themselves by ouerweening conceits: feeding for faith, fancies; for confidence,
carnal presumption; for truth, error, bringing them into a fools paradise for
the present; but the end will be the sinking and sorrow of their souls. He is
a good scholar indeed, and raised into the highest form of this school of
God; (not who can talk well, and give religion some good words, which are good
cheap) but he that has so far profited in sound godliness, as that he has
attained unto faith, the fear of God, humility, endeavor in obedience,
thankfulness, uprightness: and has proceeded in the true worship of God
according to his word, in hatred of false worship, in glorifying the name of
God, sanctifying his Sabbaths, reuerencing his sanctuary, loving the image of
God in his brethren, and such like: such a man shows that the truth has
sanctified him; Ioh. 17.17.
that pure religion and the power of it possesses his heart. These things
seek and find in thy self, thou have profited in this truth; else whatsoever
may seem a body of religion in thee, is turned into a shadow without
substance, without truth.

v. 2. Under the hope of life eternall] In these words the Apostle commends
his ministry, partly from the end of it, in that it leads (by the truth
preached) the believers of it unto the hope of eternal life: as also partly
from the effect of it in them, which is the full furnishing of them with such
graces, as lead them comfortably to their happiness, adding unto the faith of
the elect, such an hope as makes them not ashamed. And they affoard two
instructions:

1. That the end of the ministry, is to draw men's minds upward, from earth
toward heaven.

2. That true faith never goes alone, but attended with other excellent
virtues, and namely, with knowledge, hope, etc.

The aim of a faithful ministry is to bring men to heavenly mindednes.
Doctr. Every faithful teacher must conceive it to be his duty, to draw men's
hearts from things below, to the contemplation of things of an higher strain,
and from seeking the things tending to a temporal, unto such as belong to life
eternal.

Reasons. 1.
Reasons. 1. This was the aim (not only of our Apostle here) but of all the
men of God, whose faithfulness the Scriptures has recommended unto our
imitation. All that pedagogie during the law, was only to train men unto
Christ, and to salvation by him. But that rudiment being abolished, and the
truth further breaking out, the chief doctor of his Church (setting himself a
copy to all teachers) called men to no other thing, then first to seek the
kingdom of God, and to labor (not for the perishing food) but that which
abides unto eternal life. And after him his holy Apostles made no other use
of those maine articles of our faith, the truth of which they left confirmed in
all their writings: as if they were occasioned to speak of the death of
Christ, it was to the end that believers should die to the world, that
henceforth they should use it, as not using it, or as men crucified unto it: if
of the resurrection of Christ, it was to the same purpose, that men should be
raised with him henceforth to seek the things which are above: if of his
ascension, it was that men might in heart, and affection ascend up after him.

2. All other professions further men in their earthly estates: some employed
about the health of the body, 2
some about the maintaining of men's outward rights, some about the framing of
tender minds in humane disciplines and sciences, all which further our
fellowship and society among men: only this of all other professions,
furthereth men in their heavenly estate, and fitteth them, yea makes up for
them their fellowship with God, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

3
3. Hereby men lay a sure groundwork of profitting men in godliness: for this
expectation and desire of life eternal once wrought in the heart, it easily
brings men to the denial of themselves, both in bearing the cross for
Christ, Hebr. ^1.26.
as Moses esteemed highly of the rebuke of Christ; for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward: as also in stripping themselves of profits, pleasures,
advancements, friends, father, wife, children, liberty, yea, life it self.
Set this treasure before the eyes of the wise merchant, he will sell all for
it. Tell a man of an earthly kingdom, and let him thoroughly digest the conceit
of obtaining it; it will be such a commander, as he willingly both undertakes,
and deuoureth any travel for it; even so let the believing soul once conceive
of reigning with Christ, it will easily suffer any hardship with him. Rom 8.1^.
Matthew. 19.28.
The disciples desirous to know what recompense their Lord would make them, for
leaving all to follow him: Christ presently tells them of twelve seats, on
which they shall sit and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, at the appearance
of the son of man: well knowing, that if this promise were once well
digested, it would so feed up their hearts, as they should not after bethink
themselves as ouershot in leaving all things for his sake. Yea further, this
course will be a sweet constraint, provoking men to the imitation of Christ,
and the expressing of his virtues. Whence it is that the Apostle praising God
for the faith, and love of the Colossians, Coloss. 1.5.
presently points to the natural mother of these virtues, of whom they both
are bred and fed: for the hopes sake (that is, the glory hoped for) which is
laid up for you in heaven. And the same Apostle exhorting the Philippians not
to mind earthly things, Philip. 3.20.
but to traffic as the citizens of heaven, notes this the most effectual
reason, because from heaven they looked for a Savior, who would change their
vile body, and make it like his own glorious body.

Use. 1. Ministers must take heed of earthly mindednes, Ministers must then
beware of earthlines.
not seeking theirs, but them who are committed unto their trust: not only
hereby to avoid offense, but also that they may feelingly speak of such
points as concern the forsaking of the world in affection, a point most
difficult to learn from the most sanctified teacher. Which course if a
minister take not, long may he look for an harvest, yea, even till his eyes
fail, but he shall never see his seed again: he has sown to the wind, and
what can he look to reap but earthlinesse, or atheism amongst his people.
For men's minds will be working, and settling themselves upon some pleasurable,
and profitable object; if not upon that which is truly good, yet at least upon
that which is apparently good; and their hearts can never be taken off things
below, but remain wordlings still, unless we show them better treasures
elsewhere, and that in such feeling manner, as they may think we speak in
earnest. And again, if they without this doctrine be suffered, like the
Sadduces, to include all their hopes and desires in this life, no other fruits
can be expected, but open Atheism, and contempt of God.

Use. 2. People must conceive, that now in the ministry they are called to
the beginnings of the heavenly life. Cleave to the Ministry which pulls
thee from earth to heaven.
For we may not think that the Lord means only to manifest his love
hereafter in heaven to believing souls: but (as love desires present
communication, and union with the thing loved) so the Lord enters into present
league with such as he strikes his everlasting covenant withal* and never
marries himself into any soul, in that indissoluble wedlock, with whom he
contracteth not himself even here upon earth. And seeing the Gospel in the
ministry of it is the Lords love letter: every one in the hearing of these
glad tidings must say to his soul, this is the suite, and offer of God unto
me, calling me in this sermon to nearer fellowship with himself: oh
unthankful wretch, if I refuse his love, if I still cleave unto earthly
affections, and earthly conversation, on whom so much labor is spent, that I
might be called out of the world.

Try thy profiting under the ministry by this note.
Use. 3. Hence may every hearer make a trial of his profiting under the
ministry; look how much thou find thy heart lifted up toward heaven, and
heavenly things, how much thy earthly cogitations are abated, how much thou
find salvation nearer then when thou first believed, so much have thou
profited by the word, and no more. The which checketh many of our hearers, who
are every whit as worldly, as earthly minded, as they were at their first
receiving of the Gospel: and some professors that have much earthlinesse bound
up in their bosoms, the following of their own ploughs, causes them often
contentedly, to pluck their hands from the plough of the Lord. And because it
is common with men, to think they have attained enough in Christianity, when
they have gotten a little knowledge, and may now make holiday, and go no
further: it is meet that all of us should bring our hearts to some certain
trial and touch, whereby we may have assurance that the word has framed them
to this temper of which we speak: and that we may do (as by many other) so
especially by these three notes.

Ier 9.23. Job. 31.25.
1. Whereas all earthly reioysings are condemned, as wherein men easily loose
their hearts, and whereby death is made distasteful, and unwelcome; 3. notes to
show when the heart is drawn up toward heaven.
examine whether thou reioysest in God, in his word, and graces, as in thy
chiefest joy, and advantage. 2. Seeing in all our earthly employments we may
not while we use the world, become worldlings: whether by all earthly things we
be drawn to the love of heavenly: for although God has appointed but one
Sabbath in seven days, yet to a Christian, every day is sanctified to be a
rest, from all the deeds of the flesh: wherein he is to walk with his God, and
show forth the religious keeping of his heart, and good conscience, in every
action of his whole life; so making every action of his particular calling, a
part of Christian obedience and duty unto God. 3. Seeing a well ordered heart
has nothing in earth in comparison of God; search thy soul whether it finds
more sweetness in the service of thy Lord, then in his outward benefits: as
there is great reason seeing these must leave thee, or be left of thee before,
or at the day of death, when accounts must also be made both for the getting,
keeping, and expending of them: at which time those who with most greedy
appetites have sought them, and purchased them, shall find them far from
counteruailing that good which they forfeited for them. By these notes gage thy
heart, sound the depth of it, and thou shall doubtless find such deceit, as
shall occasion thee to cleave to that ordinance, which he that framed it at the
first, has in his wisdom appointed for the further reformation of it.

Doct. 2. The second instruction out of the words is, That true faith never
goes alone; but as a Queen, is attended with many other graces, as knowledge,
love, fear of God; among which hope here mentioned, not only adorneth, and
beautifieth, but strengthens and fortifieth the believer, and as an helmet of
salvation, Ephesians. 6.17.
causes the Christian soldier to hold out in repentance, and obedience. Hence
it is that our Apostle speaks not of the faith of the elect, but he
mentions as an inseparable handmaid, the hope of life eternal: so does the
Apostle John, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
We are now the sons of God: here is faith, making us the the borne of God:
and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: there is hope:
and, whosoever has this hope purges himself, as he is pure: there is the
strengthening of the believer in obedience. Notable for this purpose is that
place in Romans 5.1, 2. etc. where the whole train of graces attending and
following faith, are fully and excellently described.

Now this hope is a gift of God, whereby the Saints patiently, and firmly
expect good things to come already believed, especially their resurrection, A
true description of Christian hope.
and life eternal, provoking them in the mean time to all duty. In which
description, diverse things are to be considered. First, the original of it.
It gift of God, and obtained by prayer, as faith also is: whence the Apostle
prays that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.17.
would give the Ephesians to know, what the hope is of his calling. Secondly*
the subjects in The Saints: for as the practice of believers before Christ to
wait for his first coming in humility, as we read of Simeon, Annah, Luke
2.37, 38.
and many others; so now believers as constantly wait for his second coming,
and the comforts of it, Reu. 22.17. And that it belongs only to the Saints is
clear: 1. In that it is joined with the faith of the elect in this text. 2.
Because it arises from faith, is nourished by it, and is proportional unto
it. 3. The thing hoped for, belongs only to the Saints: they only have right
in the tree of life, and only they enter in, through the gates into the City.
4. That which meriteth the thing hoped for, Rev. 22.24.
that is, the righteousness and obedience of Christ, belongs only to them;
for them only he prayed while he was on earth, for them only he died, he rose
again, ascended into heaven, and now makes requests at the right hand of his
Father.

Thirdly, the object of this hope; Things to come, and namely after life
eternal. In which regard the Apostle calls it an hope laid up in heaven:
which is all one with that in the text, hope of life eternal; unto which it
lifts up the heart and affections. Where the excellency of the grace may be
conceived, from the excellency of the object: it is not conversant about
momentanie and sleeting matters, not insisteth in things below; (...) looks
at things within the ^a^le.
but about durable, and eternal things to come; and not only comfort the
soul here below in earth, but crowns it hereafter in heaven. And this grace
it is which puts such a difference between the godly, and the wicked, that
whereas these are well appaied, and contented with things present, and wish for
most part, there were no other heaven, then that happiness they enjoy here
upon earth: the other look upward, and outward, and see a far off; and are
such as wait for the adoption of sons, and the redemption of their bodies,
which is the full harvest of those first fruits which they have already
received.

Fourthly, it is added in the description, that this grace of hope does firmly
and not waueringly expect this eminent object: and this it does, both because
it is grounded not (as the Papists teach) upon man's merit, power, or promises,
but upon the most firm promise of God, (more stable then the hills) of which
mention is made in the next words: as also in that the holy Ghost, who first
works it, does also nourish it, yea and so seals it up unto the heart, as
it can never make ashamed: it may indeed be tossed and shaken with many kinds
of temptations, Hope the sure anchor of the soul.
yet in the patient attending upon the Lord, it holds out, and fails not.

obeyed God, and held out, looking for the recompense of reward: whence it is,
that as true faith is called in the Scriptures, Coloss. 1.5. 1. Pet. 1.3.
a living faith, so found hope is also called a lively hope, that is, such an
one as is effectual in the heart of the believer, to stir him up unto all
heavenly conversation.

Use. This doctrine teaches us what a rare thing this grace of hope is among
men, and that the thing it self is not so common in the world as the opinion
of it. Ask any man how he means to be saved, the answer will be; ^.
infallible properties of Christian hope.
he hops well, and he trusts in God, that hoping well, he shall have well:
but if this doctrine be true, it followeeh, that as faith is no more is hope.
For it is a grace peculiar to the Saints, who heart humbled with the touch for
sin, and yet possessed with true peace in God, grounded on that promise which
is made to the poor in spirit: for of these two it is engendered. It
procreateth and preserves heavenly lifting up the heart to wait, and wish for
their masters coming, so as that day never comes unawares upon them, as it
does on those who are yet in the night, and in darkness. It suffers not a
man he that has this hope purges himself, and auoydeth the corruptions that
are in ^he world, through lust. It vpholdeth the heart in Voluntatem spes facit.
and the diligent hand to undertake and perform, and strengthening the whole
man in temptations, dangers, and distractions, unto all perseverance in the
ways of God. So that although when pleasure or profit is to be cast off, or
when crosses and losses betide the hypocrite for his obedience, all his hope
perishes, and vanishes as the dew before the sun; yet this hope makes not
ashamed; but comfort in this life, and crowns in the life to come.

Let blindness therefore make fools bold, whose property it is to believe
every thing, Prou. 14.15.
yet the wisdom of the wise will cause him to understand his way, and not
suffer him to nourish for hope, either a doubtful desire of something, which
with Balaam, he may naturally wish, Vigilan^^um somnia. ^lato.
or a dream in the slumber of conscience, deluding with a persuasion of life,
that heart which is as dead as a stone within him.

Which God, who cannot lie, has promised before the world began.] The pronoune
relative ( which) some, from whom I would not easily depart, refer rather to
the word [ truth] then [ eternal life] because of that in the 3. ver. But has
made his word manifest: and thence indeed might our Apostle justly have
defended his doctrine from suspicion of novelty, being the same which was
looked for, even in the first ages of the world, and now made more manifest: by
which, occasion were offered to overthrow sundry new broa^hed novelties of
the Popish doctrine, not sauouring of ancient antiquity. But I rather incline
to that other construction; referring the relative unto life eternal,
immediately going before: which as we have heard it to be expected by hope; so
is it here said to be promised by God: for in the promise hope has his
steadfastness. And this promise is described, 1. from the stabilitie of it, in
that the author of it is God who cannot lie. 2. from the antiquity of it,
gathered from the circumstance of time, before the world began: both which
considerations most effectually commend this promise of God, and also confirm
this our hope which leans upon it.

Quest. What kind of promise is this he^^ mentioned* Ans. The word signifies
such a promise, as is merely free, and most absolute, as the learned have
observed: D^fference between (...) and (...). Budaeus.
and is opposed unto all legal promises, which are not free but conditional,
and made good to the keeper for the keeping of the law; for the man that does
the law, shall live by the law: but evangelical promises (whereof this is the
principal) are no such compacts or bargains, but free without all antecedent
inducement, and all condition of doing any thing on our parts. As for the
condition of faith, which some may here allege: the answer is, we receive
nothing for our faith, nor the worthiness or work of it, but by it as a hand or
means we receive the free promise of eternal life.

Quest. But how could God promise before the world began, that is, from
everlasting, Res decreta ponitur pro ipso decreto. meton.
seeing there was none then to promise unto? Answ. By an usual figure of
speech the thing decreed, is put for the decree it self: and the true sense is
this; God promised, that is, decreed to promise before the world began, and in
due time has made that promise manifest in the word preached, as in the next
words. The like phrases we find, 2. Tim. 1.9. He has called us with an holy
calling, -- before the world was. Ephesians. 1.4. we were choosen before the
foundation of the world, that is, God decreed then to choose us. Neither will
this speech seem strange to him that considers, 1. that with God all times
are present, none former, or latter to him. 2. that hereby the Scriptures would
note the certainty and assurance of such a maine promise, of such use and
expectation. Out of which words we note three lessons.

1. That life eternal is ours by free promise. 2. That God cannot lie, and
therefore the promise is infallible. 3. The admirable care and love of God to
man, tendering his eternal good before he, or the world was.
Doctr. 1. That eternal life is by promise, appears by that usual metonimie
in the Scriptures, Life eternal is ours by free promise.
whereby it carries the name of the promise it self, although indeed it be
the thing promised. Heb. 6.12. be followers of them, who through faith and
patience attain the promise, that is, life promised. This truth was lively
typified both in the sons of Abraham, as also lively shadowed in that earthly
Canaan. The sons of Abraham were Isaac and Ismael, two sons, but one heir,
and he the son of promise: by which title alone he held his prerogative,
whereas Ismael was the first borne. Hence was it usual with the Apostles to
oppose the sons according to the flesh, to the sons of promise. And as it
was then, Romans 9.8.
so now is there a seed of promise, even all faithful men and women, who are
raised out of faithful promises, faithfully apprehended, called elsewhere not
sons only, Heb 6.17.
but heirs of promise, that is, not only such, as to whom the promises
belong, but such as claim their inheritance only by adoption and promise, and
not otherwise. In like manner, the earthly Canaan was called the land of
promise, Deuteronomy. 8.17.18.
not only because it was long before promised to Abraham and his posterity,
many of whom for many generations only so enjoyed it: but also because those
that were brought to the possession of that good land, had it not for their
own worthiness: they were charged to beware of such thoughts; for God gave
them this power by stablishing his covenant with them: Ephesians. 1.13.
figuring unto us no other thing, but that this blessed rest prepared for the
people of God (the truth of that shadow) is held in no other tenure but by
virtue of the promise, neither here nor hereafter: add hereunto that
whatsoever grace the Lord powers into the hearts of the elect, they all
(being not only steps and degrees, but pawnes also and pledges of eternal
life) look out unto the promise: faith apprehends it, hope expects it,
love thankfully entertaineth it, yea, and all the rest are quickened and
strengthened by it. Nay in this regard, the holy spirit of God from whom these
streams of grace do flow, is called the spirit of promise, not only in that
he was promised to believers, as Joel. 2. I will power out my spirit: but also
because he seals up unto their hearts, the certentie of this maine promise
touching their salvation.

Object. But life eternal is called a debt. Ans. It is so of his promise, not
of our desert. Herodias craved John Baptists head as her due, Non debendo sed
promittendo deus se debitorem f^cit. August.
but not because by dancing she had deserved it; but because of the Kings
promise. And that these promises are free, may appear in the first and maine
given to Adam, when he was far from deserving it, in whom was nothing to
move to the Lord, but to the clean contrary.

Use. Then not by desert.
1. Whosoever pretend any other title to the inheritance besides the promise of
God, are of the bondwoman, and Ismaelites descending of Agar. The Apostle
shows how we receive the promise of the spirit [that is, freedom from the
law, sin, death, hell, Gal. 3 14.
and damnation] namely, through faith: here is no merit, but faith taking ^old.
Which condemns that arrogant doctrine of the Church of Rome, who will have
life eternal repaied to the merit of works, for their condignitie: which is
all one with the renouncing of the promise of mercy, Evangelical promises are
made to the worker, not to the work: nor for his work, but for Christ's merit
in which both his person and work are accepted.

Hope cannot lean upon mer^t; but the promise.


and to fly for relief unto the justice of God. Whereas the whole new
Testament draws us from that legal righteousness, and suffers us not to
behold our best works, but God the promiser, and Christ the mediator, and our
birth which brings our inheritance, and our selves in the gifts of
righteousness and remission of sins, only receivers: and in the matter of
our justification before God, mere patients, and no agents at all.

Use. 2. The strength of our hope stands not upon merits, but upon this same
promise; which confuteth another Popish error, that to hope without merit is
presumption: but Abraham had another prop for his hope, it was not merit that
made him hope above hope, but because he knew who had spoken, Romans 4.18.20.
he doubted not the promise through unbelief.

Object. 1. Ioh. 3.19. If we love indeed and in truth, we know that we are of
the truth: And therefore hope of salvation is to be fetched from the works of
love. Ans. The scope of the Apostle is to teach, that true faith cannot stand
without a good conscience: not that the persuasion of it either only thence
arises, or thereupon only depends, or cannot be without works: but that then
we have more full persuasion of our conjunction with God, and soundnes in
faith, when together with the inward testimony of the spirit, the same spirit
effectually produces such fruits as outwardly freeth our profession from
falsehood and fayning, which is the thing there condemned by the Apostle. More
plainly we may consider a twofold assurance, on which our hope may be
confirmed. The former is the assurance of faith, flowing from our
justification: the latter is the assurance of sanctification. The former is
when the spirit witnesses to our spirits that we are adopted, which may be in
weak Chrstians, young conuerts scarcely yet experienced in their own change,
yea such as can object such things against their faith as themselves cannot
easily answer, yet even in this is there an assurance of faith, which can only
lean upon the promise and the truth of it: and this I take to be more
especially meant in this text of our Apostle. The latter arises from the
experience of our own sanctification: the use also of which is not to make us
so, but to try our soundnes in the former; yea to seal it to our selves, and
clear it unto others: this is that the Apostle John speaks of in the place
alleged.

Yet notwithstanding that we may meet with an error on the other hand in the
practice of Protestants, we affirm with our Apostle, that true hope relying
upon the promise goes with faith, knowledge, godliness, and grows up in
these, and therefore those the tenure of whose conclusions runs thus,
Because grace has abounded, we may do as we list; because Christ has blood
enough, God has mercy enough: we have promises enough, we may be the boulder
in our sins: these I say turn Gods grace into wantonness to their own
destruction: thus indeed to lean or bolster a man's self on the promises, is
an high presumption. The reasonings of the spirit in the Scriptures are of
another kind: Does grace abound? Tit. 2.
oh this must teach me to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: has God mercy?
mercy is with him that he may be feared: has Christ blood? Psalm. 131.
it is to purge me from all my sins, both the guilt, and the dominion: 1.
Ioh. 1.7. 2. Pet. 1 4.
have I promises? such precious promises are given me, that being partaker of
the godly nature, 2. Cor. 7.1.
I should fly the corruptions that are in the world through lust: and seeing
then I have such promises, it is meet I should cleanse my self from all
filthiness of flesh, and spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God.

Use. 3. We must often have recourse to the promises, Acquaint thy self with
these promises.
and acquaint our selves with the Scriptures, wherein we may peruse our
privileges, and thus ever be laying surer hold of eternal life, by the
applying, and bringing the promises home to our own hearts: otherwise faith
shall be easily shaken, hope quickly foiled, and the rest of our graces in a
continual wane and decaie. Cast anchor out of the ship, if it sound no
bottom, the ship shall be at no stedfastnes in the storm, but be in danger of
shipwreck by every surge and billow: in like manner, the anchor of hope if it
pitch it self upon promises, it keeps the soul in stabilitie and constancy
in weldoing; but impossible it is that in stormy temptations or afflictions,
the hope of the heart should strengthen and uphold that man, that is not
acquainted with the promises.

Doct. 2. The next instruction out of the former words is, God cannot lie.
that God cannot lie: which shows the promise to be stable, and infallible.
That God cannot lie, appears both by testimony of Scripture, and reason.
Balaam himself uttering his parable could say, God is not as a man, Numb.
23.19.
that he should lie: and the Apostle, Heb. 6.18. says, that it is impossible
that God should lie. And the reason is, because to lie is against the nature of
God, so as he shall as soon cease to be God, as once to do it: truth is of
his nature, yea he is truth it self: truth in all his promises, which are yea
and amen: truth in all his threats, for shall he say it, and not do it?
wicked Nebuchadnezar having good experience of both, in being cast among the
beasts, and after raised up again above men, could confess, Dan. 4.34. 2.
Tim. 2.13. Iam. 1.17.
that his words be all truth: yea, in this nature of his, he is unchangeable,
he cannot deny himself, there being in him no shadow of change. Now to
ascribe a lie unto God, were to impute not only change, but contrariety to
that most simple nature of his: for what is a lie, but to utter something
contrary to the known truth, and that with an evil intention: which
wickedness seeing it implies a contrariety between his will, and his word:
seeing he has condemned it in his law, as not enduring it in his creature:
seeing this of all other is such an odious iniquity, as that the phrase of the
holy Ghost, includes under this title all manner of unrighteousness; and
opposes it unto all holiness, Zeph. 3.13. how can it be ascribed unto the high
majesty of God? unless we will blasphemously say that he has enacted laws
against something which stands with his nature and will; or at least that he
has changed his will, to love that which once he hated.

Quest. But why may not God change his will, which even a creature may do
without sin? or if he cannot, how can he do all things, and remain
omnipotent?

The Papists teach that the Scriptures are variable and fitted to the times, so
as if the Church change the sense, so does the holy Ghost also. Cusan. see
hence how truly.
Ans. 1. To change the will, were an argument of weakness and impotencie, for
even so is it in man, whether he freely do it, or forcedly. If freely, it is
because some second deliberation seems sounder then some former, which
argues want of foresight, and wisdom: if forcedly a man change his mind, it
argues want of power, which suffers the former deliberation to be let by
some cross accident: neither of which can befall that most simple, and
immutable will of God; who neither of his own accord, nor yet by constraint,
can be forced or hindered: because he sees all things in their causes and
consequents together in one act; and as soon and easily produces the thing he
wills, as he pronounces the word; as appears in the creation.

2. The omnipotence of God is to be referred to the things which he wills,
and can will: for his power cannot thwarte his will, nor his arm disapoint his
mouth: Impossible est deo, non quod virtuti arduum, sed quod naturae est
contrarium. Ambros. lib. 6. epist. 37.
nor either of them go against his nature. That God then cannot lie, deny
himself, change his purpose, proceeds not of weakness or infirmity: but of
wisdom, power, and majesty; to whom only that is impossible, which is
contrary to his nature.

Object. But God has spoken many things in the Scriptures, some of which
implie change in him, and some seem altogether untrue; the former appears in
such places, as where he is said to repent him that he made man, Genesis 6. 1. Sam
15.17. Exodus 32.14.
that he made Saul King, that he changed his mind from the evil which he
threatened to do to his people. Ans. All such speeches as these, are to be
understood not properly, but figuratively, improperly, and according to man's
apprehension: (...).
for in proper speech Samuel in the same Chapter verse 29. denies that God can
repent, whom he had heard a little before repenting that he had made Saul King.
The like in Balaams confession, Numb. 23.19. Yet it pleases God in the
Scriptures to set out himself to our weakness, not as he is in himself, but
as he can be known of us: for as man speaks like a man unto God, so God
speaks like a man unto man, who else could not be understood of man. We must
therefore meeting with such speeches, hold these grounds: 1. That all those
things which we cannot do without motion, and change of our selves* the Lord
does them without motion, and change of himself. 2. That God may change his
action but not his counsel and will: Mutatio non est in deo sed in rebus neque
Deus mutatur cum in opere apparet mutatio. Calvin.
for before all worlds he did so decree to change his action. When he deposed
Saul to stablish the kingdom in David, he did from all everlasting dispose so
to depose the one, and set up the other: so as here was no change in God
himself, but in the thing formerly determined so to be changed.

In like manner the Lord promises many things to his children, which he
seems after utterly unmindful of; he threatens things which never come to
pass: as Hezekiah with death, but presently retreates it: the Ninevites with
destruction after forty days, but destroyed them not: yea he seems to
feign, by uttering things clean contrary to his mind; as when he bids
Moses let him alone that he might destroy the Israelites, whereas he never
meant to destroy them. To which in general I answer, 1. That all promises are
made with condition of faith, and repentance, as also with the exception of the
cross. 2. That all threats are made with exception of conversion, and
repentance, in neither of which the condition is expressed often, but ever
included: and being added to that threatening against the Nineuites, and
against Abimelech, Deus non murar consilium (...) sententiam: non arcanam
voluntatem sed patefactam.
Genesis 20.3. dissolueth the objection. 3. That the Lord never changes his
counsel and secret will, but sometime his reueiled: and that then, when it
includes some condition depending upon some event: which condition had it not
bin included in the denunciation against Ezechias, the decree of God had been
absolute, and so not revocable, neither by the prayers, or repentance of that
good King as it was. 4. That the Lord may denounce a thing which yet he never
decreed to do, and yet neither lie nor feign: as in deliberatiue propositions,
such as that was against the Israelites, Let me alone: for had Moses taken it
for a simple interdiction, Exodus 32.10.
I see not how he could have without sin proceeded on in his intecession for
them: but he perceived the Lord carrying this matter as one in a deliberation
what he might best do in it. Again, although the Lord cannot speak contrary
to his will, yet he does and may speak something diverse, and besides it: as
here both to teach Moses what it was that withheld his wrath, even his prayer,
which was whetted hereby; as also to quicken the people to speedy and unfeigned
repentance.

Object. But in the Scriptures we meet with many parables, and hyperbolicall
speeches, which never were, nor can be true: as the conference among the trees;
Judge. 9. Ioh. 21.25.
and that the world were not able to contain the books of Christ's words and
works: which we see not how they can stand with the truth of God.

Ans. In the Scriptures are some speeches diverse, and some contrary to the
truth, and yet neither lies, nor sin. Judge. 10.14. 1. king. 22.15.18. Mark.
7.9. 1. Cor. 4.8.
For God speaks sometime by 1. contraries, as by ironies or speeches of
derision: which are not always vicious in man, never in God, but carry with
them most severe reprehensions against sin. 2. sometimes by parables, in
which not falsehoods, but by fained things, unfeigned truths are taught and
delivered. 3. sometimes by excess of speech, speaking of infinite and
incomprehensible things, so as we may comprehend and affect them. But in all
such forms of speech, we must hold these conclusions: 1. That they tend to the
instruction and edification of the Church. 2. There can be no purpose on Gods
part, to deceive (as in a lie) but to profit, by a more powerful, and forcible
manner of teaching the truth. 3. He intends nothing but the truth it self:
for he conceiueth not one thing in his mind, and utter another, but only
omitting the proper speech, in figurative and tropicall, he more elegantly,
powerfully, and profitably explaneth the same truth.

Thus having proved and cleared the doctrine, we descend to the uses of it.

Neither can his Ministers speaking from him lie.
Use. 1. If God cannot lie, then whatsoever his Ministers promise or threaten
from him, and out of his word, is above all exception; seeing he has spoken
it, who cannot lie* deceive, or be deceived: which should stir up every man
to give glory unto God (as Abraham did) by sealing to his truth; that is, by
believing and applying unto his own soul every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God: for whosoever thus receives his testimony, has sealed that
God is true: then which no greater glory can be given unto him. Whereas not to
believe him on his word, is as high a dishonor as any man can cast upon him:
for it is to give God the lie: he that believes not, has made him a liar:
which in manners and civility we could not offer to our equal, and which even
a mean man would skorne to put up at our hands. Has God made thee any promise
that he will be with thee in six troubles, and in seven? has he promised
that he will dispose of all things to the best to thee that love him? Isa.
43.2. Romans 8.28.
has he said that no good thing shall be wanting to thee that fear him?
Psalm. 34 10.
do thou lean and hang upon these promises; and give God the honor of truth
by believing him. Thou would trust a man, whom thou think will not lie,
though thou know he can lie, and deceive thee: much more may and ought
thou the high God, who is as far from the power as the will; and as far
from both, as from ceasing to be God.

Yea, but I see no means, no hope, but all things are rather clean contrary
to the promise: and the common order of things carried against it. Be it so:
yet must thou depend upon the naked promise, which is true and not lying, as
John speaks of the anointing. Thus have the servants of God done before us:
Hezekiah knew not what to do; but his eyes were to the Lord: Abraham hoped
above hope: yea then when all means failed, and the order of nature was set
against him, did be not doubt of the truth of the promise, but gave glory unto
God: the victorious conquest of whose faith, is often in the Scriptures
recommended unto our imitation. And this lesson must be laid up in our hearts,
especially against the times of our deepest distresses and afflictions by
persecution, or otherwise; wherein if they be either more smart, or more
durable, we shall not want Rabsakes, who will not stick to revile the God of
heaven. For either Satan by his suggestion, or his instruments; or which is
more to be feared, Isa 35.10.
we shall hear the whisperings, and mutterings of our own flesh saying, Where
is the God, in whom ye trusted: let not thy God deceive thee any longer: and
with Iehoram, Is not this evil from the Lord, ^. King. ^.33.
and shall I wait on him any longer? to all which, let us be bold to answer
with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed: even him whose bare word is
above all bonds, who never promised more then he was able to perform; and
never performed less then he promised: faithful is he that has promised, and
no unfaithfulness of man can make him unfaithful.

The like truth and steadfastnesse carry all his denunciations and threats: for
neither when his messengers threaten wrath against the impenitent, shall that
be found a lying word, but the sentence of the Judge, which cannot fail of
execution. True it is, that the Lion has often roared, but the beasts of the
field have not trembled. The Lord has uttered his terrible voice against the
unrighteousness of men, but his threatenings have met with mockers, who say
every vision is deferred, Isa. 5.19. Ezekiel. 12.22. 2. Pet. 3 4.
and where is the promise of his coming? with swarms of Atheists, who say
there is no God, but deny heaven, hell, and immortality of the soul: in the
mean time making leagues, and covenants with hell and death: with beastly
Epicures, who live vnmooueably from their carnal delights, and sensual
pleasures: with heavy and dead hearted professors, with whom they have been
but as a blast: all which sorts of men promise to themselves life, although the
Lord has said of them, they shall die: and is not this to charge God
expressly with a lie, and as much as to say that he is not God? But these
shall know, that the words the Lord has spoken, shall be done* Ezekiel. 12.28.
And as the Lord lets his children see for the present that it is not in
vain to worship him; so he lets his enemies often feel even before their
death, that all his words fall not to the ground: when he meets them at every
corner with sundry plagues, and judgments in their souls, bodies, estate,
name or friends: all which are the accomplishment of his word, which shall not
pass away, when heaven and earth shall be dissolved.

Use. 2. Seeing God cannot lie, Express in every thing this part of Gods image.
let every one of us labor to express this virtue of God: first and
especially the minister in his place, seeing he speaks from God, nay God
speaks by him: he must therefore deliver true sayings, worthy of all men to
be received, that he may be able to say in his own heart, that which Paul
spoke of himself, I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not: and justify that
of his doctrine, 2. Tim. 2.7.
which Paul did of his writings, the things which now I write unto you, Gal. 1
20.
behold I witness before God that I lie not.

Now then is a minister a liar, when he either speaks false things, as every
where the false Prophets are charged; Ier. 28.1, 2. and cap. 29.21.
an example whereof we may see in Hananiah the son of Azur, and Abab the
son of Roliah, and Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who are said to prophecy
lies in the name of the Lord, in that when the Lords Prophets were commanded to
carry yokes about their necks, these would break them, and so caused the
people to trust in a lie: or else true things falsely, misapplying that truth,
which they could not but utter: for this was ever the note of a false Prophet,
to make their hearts sad, who should have been cheared, and to speak peace to
them, against whom the Lord had proclaimed open war: so falsifying the word
of the great God, which injury no earthly King would suffer unrevenged. If a
king should sign and send out his letters of death and execution against some
archtraytor; and the officer betrusted with them should serve them upon some
faithful counselor, who is near and dear to his Prince; so as the innocent
and well-deseruing shall be put to death; and the traitor suffered to live in
honor: should not the life of this man so betrusted, go for the life of the
other? In like sort does be, who in Gods place whetteth his tongue against the
righteous of the land, and disgraceth the most forward in the ways of God: let
him discourse against them in Scripture phrase, and speak things in themselves
never so true; yet is he a loud liar in the false applying of them, and
wresting them against them, upon whom the eyes of the Lord are for good: and
with liars shall be kept without the gates of the ^oly city: and that most
justly, in that he has not lied of men, but of God himself: whom (so far as
his malice could extend) he has endeavored to draw into his sin, in making
him a liar also like unto himself.

Ephesians. 4.^5.
2. Every private man must take up that exhortation, to cast off lying, and
speak every man truth unto his neighbor, and that because it is a piece and
sparkle of Gods image, and a part of the new man which is to be put on. Which
reason the Apostle urges sundry times in the epistles. Coloss. 3 9.
And indeed no man can more lively resemble the image of his heavenly father,
then by the practice of truth: in which one word is included that whole image
of God, which stands in righteousness and holiness: as Ioh. 8.44. the angels
stood not in the truth. As on the contrary, no man can more lively resemble
the devil then by lying, for he is a liar from the beginning, and the father of
lies. True it is, there be many defenses made for sundry sorts of lies, which
we shall have better occasion to scan in the process of this Epistle: verse. ^^*
but let all such as would have themselves marked with the stamp of Gods
children, know, that they only can have assurance of the pardon of sins, in
whose spirit is no guile; and those only shall rest in the holy mountain that
speak the truth from their hearts: and they alone shall stand with the lamb
on mount Sion, Psalm. 15. Psalm. 32. Romans 14.5.
and sing the new song before the throne, who have no guile found in their
months.

Doctr. 3. The last general observation out of the former words teaches, Gods
grace is from everlasting, and therefore most free.
what an infinite and free love the Lord embraces his elect withal: in that
be decrees from everlasting whatsoever he does for them in the due season of
it. Hence it is, that not only in this place, but thorough the Scriptures we
may read, that all the stayres whereby we climb to heaven were laid by God
before the world began. If we look at Gods predestination and election, the
names are written in the book of life from everlasting: Jacob was loved, not
only before he had done good, but before he was to do it. If to the end,
which is the kingdom, that is prepared from the foundations of the world. If
to the means, Matthew. 25.34. Rev. 13.8.
which is Christ, he is the lamb slain from the beginning of the world: both
1. in regard of Gods counsel; and 2. of the promise to Adam: and 3. of the
efficacy of his death, the saving power of which was the same to all
believers, yesterday, to day, and for ever: Heb. 13.8.
and thus even Abraham saw his day. If to the Gospel, which is a peculiar
doctrine concerning Christ, it is called an eternal Gospel: not that it was
eternally preached, for it was a mystery kept secret, since the world began,
Rev. 14.6.
Romans 16.25. but 1. because it proceeds from the eternal counsel of God: 2.
it contains the word^ of eternal life: and 3. it remains for all
eternity. Finally, if to our effectual vocation by this word, yea and our
whole salvation: he gave us of grace, and purpose, salvation, 2. Tim. 3.9.
and effectual vocation before the world began: that is, in his counsel and
decree.

Use. 1. Hence we see, that the Popish doctrine of justification by works, was
prevented even before the world began. For, No faith or works foreseen as
motives.
if God laid all the degrees of our blessedness up in himself, before the
world; much more before we were in the world: who sees not that all our
salvation is freely coming unto us, both in the promise, and execution, or
accomplishment of it, not according to our works, but according to the good
pleasure of his will? If it be here alleged, Ephesians. 1.5. Object. Sol.
that God in electing us foresaw our faith and works, and therefore elected
us. The answer is, that that is unsound; seeing faith in Christ is a fruit, and
effect of election, not going before but following after it. Whence Paul says,
that God had mercy on him (not because he foresawe that he would be faithful)
but that he might be faithful. And, we are elected before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy, and without blame. If yet it be said, 1.
Cor. 7.25. Ephesians. 1 ^. read also Act. 13.48.
that God might as well foresee the faith and works of his elect, as their
salvation: I answer, he did foresee them as means and ways which himself
prepared for them to walk in to their salvation; and so did decree them: but
the decree in regard of the beginnings and motives to election, cannot be
otherwise then free and absolute, Romans 3.24. Gratis per gratiam.
if that of the Apostle be true, that we are justified freely by his grace. And
if God cannot elect men to life, except he foresee that they will use their
free will well (as the Pelagian) or that they will become faithful and
righteous: necessarily must this decree of God, which is the first and eternal
principle of all things, depend upon some other external beginning out of
himself: contrary to that of the Apostle, who says, that he predestined us
to be adopted, through Jesus Christ in himself, Ephesians. 1.5.
(...), pro (...), as Beza well observes, that is, finding no cause, neither
present, nor to come out of himself, of this his most just counsel and decree.

Besides, salvation being but one, and one way unto it, and Gods decree but
one, how should by the former doctrine any infants be saved? in whom the Lord
could not foresee either faith or works: So that as the former doctrine called
upon us, to give God the honor of his truth: so does this, to give him the
glory of mercy: in that it is his good pleasure, even before all times, to
give his a kingdom freely: to which purpose he gives faith freely, works of
faith freely, the end of faith, which is the perseverance of it unto salvation
freely; and in a word, as the decree before all times, so grace and glory in
due time most freely.

Much more will God love us now when we are, and are reconciled unto him. Romans
5.8.
Use. 2. Did God thus freely love us when we were not? much more will he now,
being reconciled unto him by the death of his son. If while we were yet
sinners and enemies, he set his love upon us, much more now being justified
and friends, will he save us from wrath. Thou may be sometimes frowned upon,
yea buffeted, and under the rods of God to the breaking of thy heart: but yet
all these proceeding from this love, are far from breaking it off to thee,
who have ever tasted how good the Lord has been to thy soul. Well may thou
cheer up thy heart and say, why art thou cast down my soul? what is it that
can separate thee from this love? which has two excellent properties, namely,
to be free without desert, and constant without end? nay trust in God rather;
yea, repair with the boldness of a child to thy father, that loves thee never
the less, because he corrects thee: and strengthen thy prayers herein, that
his love will not suffer thee to want things meet for thee.

Use. 3. What an heinous sin were it to requite such a free love with hatred,
Return love for love.
repaying evil for good: which consideration alone should make us smite our
hearts, and be ashamed of our unthankful sins: and it is a note of one, who
has tasted of this goodness, to be grieved for his sin, in this respect,
Express this ver^ue toward thy brother.
that it displeases one who has bin such a good God unto him.

Use. 4. Let us express this virtue of God, toward our brethren, not so much
waighing their deserts, no mote then God does ours; but be ready to repay good
for evil, love for hatred, blessing for cursing: Reasons.
knowing, 1. that it is the grace of a duty of love or mercy, when it is

v. 3. But has made his word manifest in due time by preaching] Having seen
how the maine promise of life eternal has been made by the God of truth: we
are now to consider this truth of God further in the accomplishing of that in
due time, which he promised before all times. And then was that promise
accomplished, when the word was made manifest: which manifestation is
amplified, 1. by the circumstance of time, in due time: 2. by the means of
this manifestation, and that is by preaching.

For the meaning of the words, we must necessarily open 3. points.

First, what is meant by the word. 2. what by the manifesting of it. 3. what is
this due time here mentioned by our Apostle: which being explaned, we shall
more profitably descend to the several doctrines.

1. By the word, is meant either Christ himself, (...)*
so called Ioh. 1.1. being that inbred word, even that person by whom the
father reuealeth all things: for none knows the father but the son, and he
to whom the son reuealeth him: so as the father by this word his son makes
himself and his will known to men, as one man reuealeth his mind to another
by his words. This word is the matter of the Gospel. Or else by the word is
rather meant, the doctrine of the Gospel, (...)*
which is the word concerning Christ: both these indeed were revealed in due
time, and both may be truly meant: but this rather, this more properly,
because the words contain a reddition, and have reference to the former verse,
which speaks of promises; which promises by the doctrine of the Gospel
preached are fully revealed to be accomplished.

2. By the manifestation of this word, is meant, such a clear revelation of
it, (...).
as unto which is required a great light: for the word notes so much. Before
this coming of Christ, there was an appearance of this word, but not a
manifestation: some light there was, but dark and obscure in types and
shadows, and like to that of the dawning of the day, compared to the
brightness of the sun in his strength. But now the sun of righteousness
being risen (as he was newly and not long before the writing of this Epistle)
there is a clear publishing of the Gospel: at what time, not a few Prophets
were sent to one people to promise the future performance of ancient
predictions; but that great Prophet, and Christ doctor of his Church, both by
his appearing, his preaching, his life, his death in his own person, cleared
unto the Jews: as also by sending out his disciples, and Apostles into all the
world, proclaimed unto the Gentiles, the present, and perfect performance of
whatsoever was written of him. This is the doctrine here meant, and elsewhere
so magnified by the Apostle, who comparing it with former shadows, calls it
the Gospel of glory, 1. Tim. 1.11. 2. Cor. 3.9.
and a ministry of righteousness, which exceeds in glory.

(...).
3. The word translated, due time, signifies, the proper time of this
manifestation, that is, that very time which the Lord in his counsel
appointed for this purpose, called elsewhere, fullness of time: that is, such a
full time, as whereof all the parts and periods are expired. More plainly,
this fulness of time is, when after the scepter is departed from Judah; and
after Daniels seauentie weeks, the Messiah is borne, is put to death, and
raised unto glory: then must he be preached to all the world. In fulness of
time he was borne. Gal. 4.4. when fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
son made of a woman. In fullness of time he died, 1. Tim. 2.6. he gave
himself a ransom in due time: and, in this fullness of time he opens the
mystery of his will, to gather into one all things, Ephesians. 1.9.10.

Quest. But why does the Apostle so carefully add this circumstance not here
only, but also in so many other places of Scripture? Ans. To stay the curious
minds of men, who would be inquiring into the cause why God did no sooner
manifest this word in the world, but suffer 4000 years to pass in such
obscurity. Why did not he reveal things before? why did he then? the reason
is, no time was Gods time but that, who has put all times and seasons in his
own power, who is most wise to dispose to all things their fittest seasons.
Again no time but that, was their due time; their fullness of time was not
till then; their proper time complete in all the Articles, and periods of it
was not till then. Whereof the Scripture affords us some grounds: as 1.
between the time of promise and performance must intercede a time of
expectation for sundry causes, that both the wisdom and truth of God, and
the faith and patience of his people might shine gloriously. 2. There must be a
time, wherein the Gentiles must be suffered to walk in their own ways,
before the time of calling an holy seed from among them, Act. 17.30. 3. There
must be a time of bondage and servitude of the Church under the elements of the
world, and rudiments of the law* before this liberty and freedom was to be
procured, Gal. 4.4. 4. If Christ and these promises had been exhibited and
accomplished to the Father, the end of the world had been before we had been
borne: but because God would not have them perfect without us, the promises
were deferred. Heb. 11*4.


These words thus explaned, afford us these 3. instructions.

1. That the doctrine of salvation is more clearly manifest then in former
times. 2. That the Lord effects every thing in the due season of it. 3. That
the evidence of the doctrine of salvation is to be sought and found in the
preaching of the word.
Doct. 1. That salvation is more clearly revealed then in former ages,
appears in that all the time of the law was but the infancy, The doctrine of
salvation is more clearly revealed then in all former age^*
and nonage of the Church, which then was as a child under Tutors and
governors: and as a child was initiated in rudiments, and elements of
Christian religion, and endued with a small measure of knowledge, and faith,
because the time was not come wherein the mysteries of Christ were unfolded.
Yea even Kings and Princes who had the greatest means of knowledge, desired to
see the things which we see, and could not, and to hear them, but yet could
not, as Christ himself witnesses. To which purpose the Apostle Peter says,
that of this salvation, the Prophets have inquired, and searched* 1. Pet. 1.1^.
and prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, not that the Prophets
themselves had no comfort of that grace; but in comparison it may be said to
have come unto us, as being so eeuidently accomplished unto us, as it was not
unto them: the waters from under the threshold of the Sanctuary reached but to
their anckles, which now is become a stream which cannot be passed: the cloud
at the first appearance to them was no bigger then the palm of a man's hand,
which now covers the whole heaven. Thus had the old believers ^he like
precious faith with us; and Abraham saw the day of Christ, but a far off,
and more darkely. But not to insist in the proof, See chap. ^.^1. and 3.6.
because we shall meet with the point more fitly, we come to the use of it.

Use. 1. How blessed were we if we could see our blessedness to whom such means
of blessedness are offered? Let thine eyes be opened to see thy blessedness.
how is the land in many places filled with the knowledge of God? but would God
that even in such places men knew the day of their visitation: and that the
things of their peace were not hid from their ei^s. The light is out of request
with a number; others think there is too much manna; many look back into
Egypt, to the darkness of Popery and superstition: to whom I only say, let
them beware least with the Israelites, they have their longing too soon.

Walk answerable to the light: increasing in Luke 12.48.
Use. 2. Having these blessed means of salvation, our part and duty is, to
endeavor to be answerable unto them: for to whom much is given, shall much be
required: and according to the increase of means, the Lord looks for
increase of 1. knowledge, 2. faith, 3. obedience. A less measure of knowledge
was accepted in the ancient believers, 1. knowledge.
then will or can be in us; seeing where there is a clearer light, men of right
sight, see more distinctly: and here above all places and persons in the land,
we that live in the right eye of our Realm, must look to our selves: for if
to any of us, the word of God be a clasped book, a parable, or if the Gospel
be after so long teaching hid, it is so to them that perish. Mark that when,
2. faith.
or wheresoever Prophets were sent to blind a people, destruction was always
the next. Again, unbelief in these days is far more sinful, then ever
in any age before us: for if they believed not, they might plead that they saw
not, or not distinctly: but we have evidently seen, and yet have not believed:
the Prophets complaint stands in force against us* Isa. 53.1.
Who have believed our report, and to whom is the arm of God revealed? 3.
obedience.
Finally, in former ages many things might better be borne withal, and were
so: for to stumble in the dark, is no great shame: but to stagger and fall at
noone day, argues either blindness or wilful heedlesnes: yet how do a
number live, as though the light had discovered no sin? what a fearful
condemnation hangs over the heads of men so ignorant, so unthankful against
the light? some love darkness more then the light, because their deeds are
evil: some plead against the light: some fight against it, whose case is most
fearful: and all this while if men were inuincibly ignorant, though their
sin were not none, yet were it not so great: but in saying they see as well as
the best their sin remains. Libertines (who by the abundance of grace have
a straiter bond laid upon them) turn all this grace into wantonness: but if
they escaped not, who sinned against the word spoken by Angels, how shall they
escape that neglect so great salvation: Heb. 2.3. and cap. 12.25.
and if to neglect salvation shall be so fearfully revenged, how certain and
just shall their damnation be, that despise it by refusing him that speaks
from heaven?

Gods providence guides all actions and their circumstances. Eccles. 3.1.
Doctr. 2. The Lord (who does not only by his wisdom order his greatest
works, but every circumstance of them) effects all his promises, and purposes
in the due season of them. To every thing, says Solomon, there is an appointed
time: that is, whatsoever is in the world done, or suffered, or enjoyed by man,
it has his time wherein it is beautiful: Nothing is so great, nothing is so
little, whether it have a natural proceeding, or whether it be voluntarily
undertaken, or involuntarily and necessarily sustained; but it has an
appointed time, wherein it is timely and seasonable: the infinite wisdom and
eternal providence of God, has fitted and set the due season wherein it shall
be done or suffered, not contenting himself to create, govern, and dispose of
all his creatures, but even all the circumstances of them, as time, place,
manner: The deep and bottomless sea of Gods wisdom.
all which are determined according to his disposition, who is wisdom it
self. In like manner, the Prophet Habakuk pronounces of all visions and words
of God, whether of promise or threatening, every vision is for an appointed
time: Habac. 2.3.
let them seem to lie lea and void never so long, yet shall they be not only
certainly fulfilled, but in that period of time, which the wisdom of God has
impropriated unto them.

Use. 1. This doctrine condemns that heathenish idol of Fortune, Then not
fortune or chance.
or chance, which some of them called by the name of God, and worshipped as
God; especially the soldiers, who took him for their patron, and unto him
referred all the doubtful events of war. But if the Lord have appointed to
every event, a due and determinate time; then can there be no chance: and that
which we for ignorance call fortune, the Scripture challenges to be the
providence of God: for example, If a man hew a tree, and the head of his
hatchet fly from the helue, and hit his neighbor so as he die, though we call
this chance-medly, yet the Scripture calls it expressly, Gods giving a man
into the hand of another: Exodus 21.13.
and opposes it to lying in wait, and wilful intended murder.

Object. Time and chance fall to all things, Eccles. 9.11. Ans. Solomon
speaks out of the opinion of the Epicures, and in their language: who because
they saw not the race always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor
bread to the wise, nor riches to the learned; thence concluded, that therefore
things must needs be wheeled about, by a blind Fortune, rather then by an
occulate providence: whereas indeed things in the world are thus by a special
providence disposed of, sometimes for sin, sometimes for trial of faith and
repentance in the godly; and for the hardening of the ungodly.

Object. Luke 10.31. By chance there came a certain Priest: that way. Answ. 1.
It is a parable, and being uttered in the common received terms, cannot be
stretched so far beyond the scope of it. of the Hebrew charah, and the Greek
(...), both signi^ying, to fall.
2. the Greek words (...), signify properly, it fell out, or came to pass;
namely by the providence of God, so oueruling the matter. 3. it fell out
casually to the Priest, who expected no such event: but determinately in regard
of God, who sweetly disposes all his means to his and their proper ends. Thus
we need never doubt, and demurre with the Philistims, 1. Sam. 6.9.
whether God or fortune smite us.

Whatsoever befalls thee is now come to pass in Gods fittest season, and do
thou so account it.
Use. 2. If that be the proper and fittest time of things wherein they are done
or suffered, because they are so by the determined counsel of God, we must
hence learn to make our accounts just with Gods. Which will affoard us firm
ground, of 1. the patient expectance of the hand of God, both in releasing us
from the teadiousnes of present evils, and fear of future: as also in
procuring any good thing, which we stand in need of. Art thou in trial,
temptation, persecution, want, sickness, or other sorrow? lay hold upon the
promise of deliverance: there is a time in which be that will come, shall come;
patiently expect his time: the period of time is set to thy affliction, at the
end of which, and not before thou shall find relief and release: stay thy
heart for the time, exercise thy faith, quicken thy hopes and affiance in his
mercy, wait his leisure, and make not have: flesh and blood is in this case
short and hasty: it will be vnyoked and free, though by Satan, sorcery, and
all unlawful means: but that is not Gods time of thy release, but thy own:
thou have not stayed, but prevented the proper and due time of thy deliverance.
And what is the issue of it? surely thou have escaped a bear, but a lion
meets thee: thou art leaped out of the pan, but into the coals: thy very
breaking of prison has made thy case more hopeles and desperate then ever it
was before, thy durance had been far less miserable, then thy escape.

Stand thou in fear of any evil, or hard measure from Satan or men?
moderate also hence that fear, seeing there is an hour for the power of
darkness to work in: and till that hour come, an hair shall not fall from
thine head. Ioh. 10 39. and chap. 7.30.
Let the Jews take up never so many stones against Christ, yet he shall escape
out of their hands: let them seek to take him, yet shall none dare to lay
hands upon him, if his hour be not yet come. Let Herod seek to kill him: he
will not stick to send that fox word, that he must work so many days in
despite of him, Luke 13.32.
to day and to morrow, that is, now for the present, and afterward until his
consummation.

Again, stand thou in need of any present good, whether any spiritual
mercy or temporal favor? lift up thy heart and hands unto God in invocation,
but prescribe no time, leave that to him, who alone knows the proper time of
making his blessing seasonable and wholesome. Thirty years after the promise
(notwithstanding many prayers in the mean time) is the proper time, when Isaac
must be obtained. The Cananitish woman was not heard, till after three sore
repulses. Lazarus must not be raised by Christ, till the fourth day: no nor
Christ himself, till the third. Thou must have a time to sow thy prayers, and
water them with tears of repentance; and then in due season thou shall reap*
if thou faintest not.

2. Hence we have a ground of strength in temptation. Do we see the days
wherein iniquity abounds? the wicked flourish? the godly perish, and eaten
up of the wicked as bread? well, wait a while: Psalm. 14.
God has a due time to convert so many of them as belong unto him: and to make
of them, of persecuting Saul's, preaching Paul's: or otherwise, a set season to
overtake them as birds in an evil net. Eccles. 9.12.
Both the days of the Lord are set: the day of refreshing; and the day of
retribution. The former is the day when Joseph's head shall be lifted up; the
latter is that convenient time of the Lord, Psalm. 75 2. Exodus 12.41.
when he shall execute judgment against the wicked ones of the world. The same
night, which expired the 400. years, the armies of the Lord were delivered out
of Egypt, and Pharaoh and his armies drowned. The same night that dated the 70.
years, appointed for the Jews captivity, was Baltazer slain, Dan. 5.30.
compared with Ier. 25.12. The time is set how long the rod shall be in wicked
hands, or rather how long the Lord will hold the wicked as rods of his wrath in
his own hands: but it shall not be long, before he will throw them into the
fire.

Use. Entertain Gods due seasons, and time of grace.
3. We are taught further wisdom in entertaining the seasons which God has
allotted to every purpose: some of which, he has hid with himself: and some,
he has made known to us: I speak not of the former, for it belongs not to
us to know the times and seasons which the Father has put in his own power:
such secret things belong not unto us: as to inquire of the time and day of
judgment, which the very Angels in heaven are ignorant of. But things
revealed, belong to us, and our children, to enquire into, and make our best
benefit of. Let us therefore imitate the wisdom of God in performing all our
duties in that proper time, which the Lord has made their due seasons:
especially seeing he has so clearly manifested to us our day of grace, and
time of our visitation: it is our duty to betake our selves to seasonable
conversion and repentance: the due time of which, is the present time; because
God this day calls, and if to day we hear his voice, let us not harden our
hearts. There is a time when God is near, and may be sound, and that is the
fit time to seek him, and then is he nearer: and then must we seek him when he
seeks us by his gracious inuiting of us to repentance. There is a time when
with the wise virgins, we may enter into the wedding chamber; and no sooner is
it past, but the door is shut, and all the foolish virgins excluded. A time
there is when the blessing may be obtained; and a time when Esau shall not get
the blessing, although he seek it with tears. Now is the fit season for all
these duties. Now learn to know God in Christ or never: now become a believer,
or eue^ an Infidel. Enter fellowship with God now, or never partake with him
hereafter. Love the communion of Saints here, or never shall thou enjoy it
hereafter: begin to live eternal life here, or thou shall never see life
hereafter, but abide in death. Men are wise enough in outward things, to strike
while the iron is hot, to watch their best winds, which blow them profit, to
foreslow no time in striking up gainful bargains; but here as though the
wisdom of men were not in them, are without all providence, and have cast care
away: and yet how has the Lord a long time manured us, that like good trees of
righteousness, we should be laden with fruits of righteousness, and
repentance in our due seasons? yea how has his pruning knife of correction
followed us for the same purpose? has not he taken many from the means? and
does he not many ways threaten to take away the means from those that are
left? does not the time of his mercy seem to be dated and full expired upon
us, in that though he has most fearfully smitten us with durable and lasting
judgments, yet he cannot satisfy his justice, but his arm is stretched out
still? and seeing that as his hand is against us, our hands are still against
him; may it not be thought that the period of his vengeance is upon us, and
that the vision of wrath and burden of England cannot long be deferred? It is
high time then to meet the Lord, if after such prouocations yet his wrath may
be turned away. Wisdom yet cries in our streets: Gods word in the mouths
of his messengers; his works of mercy, and judgment which run into our
own eyes, all of them call us to be wise hearted, to know the season of our
fruitfulness. Let us presently answer the Lords present call. Say not with thy
self, when I have dispatched this or that business, or purchased this or that
pleasure or profit, or have ouergrowne such a trouble and distraction; as
though repentance stood in the change of the outward estate, and not in the
change of the mind: but know it that no time is thine, but the present: and it
is little better then Popery, to profess free will in this matter: it is too
much thou have been deceived in the time past; deceive not thy self also in
time to come. Well said one, God has left man time past to repent of, and time
present to repent in, but the time to come, he has reserved in his own hands.

Doct. 3. The manifestation of salvation is to be sought for in the preaching
of the word. Which point is plain, in that the preaching of the word is an
ordinance of God: 1. to make Christ known, in whose name alone salvation is to
be had: 2. to beget and confirm faith in the heart, by which alone as by an
hand, we apprehend and apply him with his merits to our salvation. Preaching
is the silver trumpet appointed by God to gather the elect.
The former the Apostle affirms, Ephesians. 3.8. the unsearchable riches of
Christ was by preaching made known to the Gentiles: and, Coloss. 1.27. God
would make known what is the riches -- which riches is Christ in you; whom we
preach. For the 2. that faith is wrought by the word preached, see Romans 10.14.
and 1. Cor. 1.21. By the foolishness of preaching, it pleases God to save
such as believe: in that herein he both offers Christ unto us, and gives us
faith by which we receive him. 2. This truth appears in that wheresoever the
Lord had a people to call to salvation, there he sent his Prophets, and
Apostles, whom he appointed so long there to stay, till his work was finished:
and then sent them elsewhere: when Paul was resisted, Act. 8 6 9.
and blasphemed by the Jews at Corinth, he pronounced them guil^ie of their
own blood, and purposed to turn to the Gentiles: but the Lord suffered him
not, but caused him to stay there a year and six months longer, because he
had many people in the city: so Paul and Timothy having gone through Phrygia
and Galatia, were forbidden by the holy Ghost to preach in Asia, Act. 16.6.9.
and by a vision were assured that the Lord called them to preach in Macedonia.
Which direction of them by the spirit to some places, and restrayning them from
other, argued that they carried with them the means of converting such as whom
the Lord at that time purposed to call. In this ordinance is it called the word
of faith, 1. Tim. 4.6. delivered by exhortation and doctrine, verse. 13. in this
embassadge is it called the the word of reconciliation: and thus preached, 2.
Cor. 5.19.
is called the Gospel of the kingdom of God: Mark. 1.14. John came preaching
the Gospel of the kingdom of God, powerfully raising up men thereunto: and,
the Gospel of our salvation, Ephesians. 1.13.

Use. 1. It must needs then be the greatest blessing that any people can enjoy.
The preaching of the word is the greatest blessing that the Lord bestows
upon any people; and such a one as God in his anger depriues that people of
against whom he intends a plague: the former appears in that great care of
Christ himself, who before and after his ascension, providing for the good of
his body the Church, as the special gift and loue-token he could leave behind
him, appointed Apostles, Evangelists, and after them Pastors and teachers to
continue to his coming again. The effects also show the power and price of
the blessing, which are reconciliation with God, sanctification of the spirit,
mortification of the flesh, the life of God; all which are brought by the
revealing of Jesus Christ. The latter is evident in Amos 5.13. that when the
Lord is about to bring evil times, he makes the prudent to keep silence.
Both which show unto us, that the Lord has opened unto us in this Church and
land his chiefest treasure: in that he has put the bars into the rings of
the Arc, whereby his glory is carried throughout our country; and in that he
has lifted up his cloud in the sight of all our people to direct us in all our
iourneies: he has not dealt so freely with every nation, Exodus 40 38.
neither have they known his laws, Psalm. 44. last.

Use. 2. Those people are bound to much thankfulness and duty, among whom the
Lord has planted a preaching Ministry, And those who enjoy it are bound to
more ^hankfulnes.
by which men may be directed in the path of salvation. It is a blessing we are
to wish and pray for to all Gods people: and bewail their want that have it
not. The former we are enjoined by the express precept of Christ, considering
the greatness of the harvest: The latter by his example, who mourned to see
people as sheep scattered without a shepherd.

Object. But people may do well enough if they have the word read publicly,
and they can read it at home. Ans. My purpose is not by establishing preaching,
to derogate from reading, the manifold fruit which accreweth by reading the
Scriptures, has otherwise taught me, together with the custom of the
Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself (of which I have elsewhere expressed
the principal: Beauties of Bethel.
) But the things which God has joined together, let no man separate. In the
old Testament the Levites must read the book of the law, Nehem. 8.8.
give the sense, and cause the people to understand the reading. In the New:
after the reading of the law, Luke ^.16.
there was expounding: Christ himself after the lecture of the law, had a
book given him, found the prophecy, closed the book, sat down and
expounded it: so did the Apostles Paul, and Barnabas, Act. 13.15. Thus has the
Lord afforded his Church a further benefit and more full blessing, a more
ordinary, and principal means, to beget faith, and repentance, and to lead
men along unto salvation by a more full manifestation of the promise of life,
(...).
which is here said to be by preaching, that is, by explaning and applying
things read to the heart and affection. This is the labor in word and
doctrine, 1. Tim. 5.^7.
commended unto us that are the Lords builders and laborers: who in raising the
spiritual walls must imitate Nehemiahs builders, every one of whom in
repayring the walls of Jerusalem, must hold the trowell in one hand, and the
weapon in the other: in like manner should every Minister exhort with whose
some doctrine; there is the use of the trowell, and improoue the gainsayer,
which is the use of the sword: to want which ordinance, is to want that which
the wisdom of the Lord thought most necessary for the welfare of his Church:
who would not have his people stick in the outside, but pearce into the depth
of his wisdom revealed; neither content themselves with a bulk of corn, but to
get it trodden out: nor with bread in the lump, but divided. Whether therefore
their estate may be good in such a want or no, we are not so much to sit as
judges upon them, as become petitioners for them, that their want may be
supplied: seeing the word has taught us, that where vision fails, people
perish. And for private reading; would God men were better acquainted with it
then they are: yet although the Jews had the law privately at home, Deuteronomy 5.7.
the priests must notwithstanding publicly not only read but expound it.

Which is committed unto me, according to the commandment of God our Savior.
Our Apostle insisteth still in the justifying of his calling, and shows how
he came to be a dispenser of such great mysteries as these are of which he has
spoken: it was not ambition which made him thrust himself in for a Pastor:
neither necessity or want, which urged him to take up this calling (as many
base wretches now a days make it as a city of refuge) for whilst he went
with commission against Christians, we never read, that he was glad to work
with his hands to minister to his necessities: neither was it ease or honor
which solicited him; for ever after the undertaking of it, he was in disgrace,
in perils, in pains, and labors above all the rest of the Apostles: neither
was it a voluntary motion taken up of his own head, which moved him unto
this function of preaching: But first it was a business or charge committed
unto him of trust, (...).
or wherewith he was betrusted: Secondly, he received it by commandment, the
nature of which commandment shows, that he was so far from undertaking
this office of his own will, that it was rather forced upon him: the word in
the original is properly a martial word taken from the wars, wherein the
Captain has a power to press soldiers, (...).
and to place them in the foreward, rearewarde, or wings at his pleasure, from
whom or from whence they may not start, under pain of martial law: to which
he seems to allude, when he says, that he had fought a good fight. 2. Tim.
4.7.
And how Paul was extraordinarily pressed into this field, even against his
heart, and (as we say) the hair, appears, in that he must be beaten down to
the ground, struck stark blind, eat and drink nothing in three days: that
of an extraordinary waster of the Church, he might become an extraordinary
chosen vessel to publish the doctrine he had persecuted: And thirdly, he
receives no more commandments from the high Priests to afflict the Saints,
but a commandment of a fair contrary nature, from the high Priest of our
profession; even from God our Savior. Which may be meant either of the son,
to whom the title of Jesus or Savior, is properly ascribed in Scripture,
(whence is notably proved the divinity of Christ, who as God meriteth man's
salvation:) or else rather here of the Father, (...).
the epithet being truly referred unto both: for the Father saves by his
Son, and the Son by his flesh in reconciling us unto the father. Again,
the father is called a Savior as he is the God of life imparting to the elect,
through his Christ the life of grace and glory: which message of life, the
Apostle was to publish by virtue of this commission, and commandment: which is
said (to show this order) to be received both from the Father our Savior, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 1.1. If here it be asked whether Paul was called
only by the commandment of God: The answer is, yea only: for herein is the
difference between the Apostles, and ordinary Ministers: the propriety of
the former was to be called immediately by Christ; of the latter to be called of
God, Analys in Levit. 8.3. Prior est de ESSE consecrationis: posterior de eo
quod dicunt BEEN ESSE.
but by men: being general to all ordinary Consecrations that there is
required a twofold presence; 1. of God; 2. of the Church; as Iunius out of the
Schoolmen learnedly observes: but not so in extraordinary callings, to which
the former suffices without the latter.

Out of these words naturally arise these three considerations: 1. That the
office of preaching, is an office of trust. 2. That whosoever undertakes, must
find himself pressed by this calling and commandment of God. 3. A direction
from the Apostles example, how and when, ministers may and must, insist in the
commendation of this office.


Office of preaching is an office of trust.
Doctr. 1. That every minister called by God, is one of Christ's committes,
unto whom he betrusteth now after his departure, the care and oversight of his
spouse, who is deerer unto him then his own life, appears; in that they are
called stewards of this great house, having received the keys to open the
kingdom of heaven, and to distribute to the necessity of their fellow
servants: Act. 9.15.
chosen vessels, as Paul, not to contain, but to carry the pearl and
treasure of the kingdom: feeders, as Peter: husbandmen, to whom the vineyard
is let out till his return. Of the doctrine much more afterward.

Use. 1. The honor of a Minister, is faithfulness in the diligent and
careful discharging himself of that trust committed unto him: And therefore
requires faithfulness, care, and diligence.
the principal part of which repose, stands in the faithful dispensing of
Christ's legacies to his Church, according to his own testament: which as it is
his duty enjoined, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20.
1. Cor. 4.2. so is it his crown, his joy, his glory, that by his faithful
pains, he has procured the welfare of his people: and brings with it a
great recompense of reward: for if he that shows himself a good and
faithful servant in little things, shall be ruler over much; what may he
expect, who is faithful in the greatest? Happy is that man that out of the
uprightness of his heart, can say with Paul, that nothing, Act 20.
no not his life is so dear unto him, as to fulfill his course with joy, and
the ministration he has received. If any man ask, how he shall come to this?
I answer, he must take the course that Paul did: 1. he must teach the whole
counsel of God, and keep nothing back, v. 27. and 2. he must dispense it
sincerely: not handling it deceitfully, nor making merchandise of it: 2 Cor.
2.17. and chap. 4.2.
but, 1. as of sincerity, as in the sight of God. 2. in the declaration of the
truth, approouing himself to every man's conscience: here by he shall become a
sweet savor to God, even in them that perish: whereas the false and foolish
Prophet, has a cup of gall and wormwood tempered by the hand of the Lord,
Ez^^. 23.^^.
Ier. 23. and the Prophet Ezekiel shows both the head and tail of this
unhappy condition, the first entertainment of him is a woe, and his farewell a
curse: and therefore I say to every one present, whom it does or may concern,
as Paul to his Timothy, O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thee:
and, 1. Tim 6.2^. 2. Tim. 1.14.
That worthy thing which is committed unto thee, keep it: yea, I charge you
all in the sight of God, who quickens all things, that you keep this
commandment.

Use. 2. The ministry is no calling of ease, And is no matter of ease.
but a matter of great charge; nor contemptible, as many contemptuous persons
think it too base a calling for their children: but honorable, near unto
God, of great trust, a calling committing unto men, great matters, and worthy
things, which not only the Angels themselves have dispensed sundry times, but
even the Lord of the Angels, Jesus Christ himself all the while be ministered
upon earth: the honor of which calling is such, as those who are employed in
the duties of it, are called not only angels, Malac. 3.1. 1. Cor. 3.9.
Cooperarij in ministerio non conversione. Every minister must exercise his
calling by virtue of a commandment of God.
but co-workers with Christ in the salvation of men.

Doctr. 2. Whosoever would find comfort in themselves, or clear and justify
their callings to others, or do good in that place of the body wherein they
are set, must be able to prove that they are not intruders, but pressed by
this calling and commandment of God: that as Paul performed every duty in the
Church by virtue of his extraordinary calling, so they by virtue of their
ordinary. For can any man think that a small advantage to himself, which our
Apostle does so dwell upon in his own person, and that in every Epistle?
making his calling known to be committed unto him, not of men, nor by men, but
by Jesus Christ? See Gal. 1.1. and cap. 2.7. Ephesians. 3.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.

The necessity of this commandment appears: 1. because it implies a
fitness in the persons so commanded, for the Lord sends not a message by the
hand of a fool: for this is as he that cutteth off the feet. A Prince would
not send an ambassador, who is only able to read his message out of a paper,
every post might do that; but one of parts and gifts, by whom the message
might carry all the grace it possibly could. Even so the Lord sends the
tongue of the learned, some Ezra, some Apollos, men mighty in the Scriptures,
and full of authority in regard both of life and doctrine. Levit. 8.3.
In the consecration of Aaron and his sons, we read that they must be sitted
two ways: 1. they must be washed with water, that is, purged from the evils
which might corrupt and blemish their callings: 2. instructed and furnished
with gifts: and they two sorts: 1. of graces, as wisdom, understanding, etc.
signified by the garments with which they were to be arrayed: 2. of sweet
smell, the which both by holy doctrine and life, they were to diffuse in the
Church; signified by the sweet oil powered on their heads, v. 12. These only
are sanctified, and set apart by the Lord to serve before him, Exodus 29.4.

2. This commandment imposes a necessity to perform the duties of the
calling, the acknowledgement of which breeds conscience, and willingness
therein, not for the profit and commodities, but because the dispensation is
committed unto him: Paul seeing that necessity was laid upon him, denounced a
woe against himself if he should not preach the Gospel; 1. Cor. 9.16.
not for the vain applause of men, but to please God which tries the hearts,
1 Thessalonians. 2.4.

3. This commandment makes the function and works of it powerful, and
fruitful in the hearts of all men, even the greatest: and whereas such as have
not their commission sealed from the Lord, find not their sacrifices burnt by
God, but often labor all day, and all night, and catch nothing, yea themselves
with their work perish together: the tongues which the Lord armeth from above
are cheines unto authorities, linkes of iron to bind Nobles and Princes, and
bridles even to the devils themselves: yea not seldom by virtue hereof,
Princes and people may stand up in apology and just defense of a poor man
whom the Lord reports: as Ier. 26.15. He is not worthy to die, for he has
spoken to us in the name of the Lord.

4. This commandment brings much comfort in all troubles raised up against
men, whilst they endeavor in the faithful execution of this most thankles
office amongst men; which otherwise might well be taken for so many plagues
wherewith God follows him who runs unsent: for such is Gods grace, as he
never comma^deth, but includes also a promise of blessing to the obseruer; and
namely of special protection, which is so necessary for such as are
dispatched to encounter against Satan and the wickedness of the world: so as
hereby the heart is fenced and strenghthened against the malice of Satan and
men: which while the sons of Seeva wanted, ^
we see how mightily Satan (who easily espied their want of commission)
prevailed against them.

Use. 1. Let no man presume to take upon him any office in the Church uncalled:
He^. 3.^.
no man takes this honor to himself: Christ himself must be appointed of
his Father.

Use. 2. Let none content himself with the calling of man, separated from Gods
calling; for this was the guise of the false Apostles, against whom our Apostle
opposes himself and calling almost every where, who were called of men, but
not of God.

Use. 3. In all other callings let men be assured they have Gods warrant, both
in the lawfulness of the callings themselves, and in their holy exercise of
them; passing through them daily in the exercise of faith and repentance: not
forgetting daily to sanctify them by the word and prayer.

Doctr. 3. Ministers may be more or less in the commendation of their calling,
as their people be.
Ministers may and ought to be more or less in the commendation of their
calling, as the nature, and necessity of the people to whom they write or
speak, do require. As the Apostle here magnifieth his authority in that he is
a servant of God: 2. an Apostle of Jesus Christ: 3. that he received his
Apostleship by commission and commandment of Christ himself: and 4. all this
while has by sundry other arguments amplified the excellency of his calling:
the reason of all which is not so much to persuade Titus, who was before
sufficiently persuaded of it: but partly for the Cretians sake that they might
the rather entertain this Doctrine, so commended in the person of the bringer:
and partly because many in this I Will lifted up themselves against him and Titus,
as men thrusting in their sickles into other men's fields too busily; or else if
they had a calling, yet taking too much upon them, both in correcting
disorders, and establishing such novelties among them as best liked the^: so as
here being to deal against false Apostles, perverse people, and erroneous
doctrines (as in the Epistle we shall further see) he is more prolixe and
lofty in his title: otherwise where he met not with such strong opposition, he
is more sparing in his titles, 1. Cor. 15.10. 2. Cor. 11.12.
as in the epistles to the Coloss. Thessal. etc. So was it the pride of the
false Apostles that made him say, By the grace of God, I am that I am: and,
that grace of his which is in me was not in vain: and, they are Ministers, I
am more in labors, more abundant, etc.

Use. In our days when the basest of men account so basely of the Ministry,
as the most abject, and despised calling; will it not be thought very
seasonable to insist upon the just excellency and dignity of this calling?
can it be thought unequal, if we take more care then usual of freeing it from
contempt, which is more then ever? The faithful Ministers of Christ can, and
do think as basely of themselves as any man can think or speak of them: and
if they advance their calling, it is not pride nor pleasure unto them; but they
are compelled unto it: as Paul, I was a fool to boast of my self, but ye
even compelled me. 2. Cor. 12.11.
Others do it because their love to the ordinance of God does constrain them:
others considering how the world was drowned for despising Noah and his
Ministry; and how God departed from his own City and house at Jerusalem,
because they despised his Prophets, and mocked his messengers: and fearing
least the like befall our Church and land for the same sin, most profitably
and justly both by word and writing magnify this function. If men were like
the Galatians, Gal. 4.14.
who would have plucked out their eyes for Paul, and received him like an
angel, yea, and Christ himself: if men would know them that labor in word and
doctrine among them, to have them in singular love for their works sake: then
where we labor to magnify, we would and might endeavor to abase our selves,
and become weak to the weak, and all things to all men: but to free Gods
ordinance from contempt, we may and must challenge such titles, as the Lord
has honored us withal, who has for our encouragement styled us by the
stewards of his house, disposers of his secrets, disbursers of his treasures,
keepers of his keys and seal, secretaries, ambassadors, angels.

v. 4. To Titus my natural son according to the common faith; Having spoken
of the person saluting, whose high calling has hitherto detained us: Now are
we come to the person saluted: and so afterward are to proceed to the form of
the salutation it self; both of them being contained in this 4. ver.

The person saluted, to whom the Epistle was written, is described, 1. by his
name, Titus. 2. by a title of relation, My son according to the common faith.
3. by the adiunct of his sincerity, my natural son.

First, for the name: It shows him to be an heathen, or Gentile born: by
nation a Grecian, Gal. 2.3. of heathen parents and education, for at this time
he was uncircumcised: and it is probable that he remained so unto his death:
yet such a one as was without God in the world, without Christ, without hope,
is begotten by the Gospel, not only to be a believer, but to sincerity in
the faith: and thus he becomes a true Titus, that is, truly honorable, yea
so far honored, as that he was a chief pillar and instrument in the Church,
and much employed in the Churches affairs by the Apostles themselves. What an
undivided companion of Paul's he was in his peregrinations and trauells
appears, Gal. 2.1. what great delight Paul had in him, 2. Cor. 7.6. how he
used him as a Legate unto diverse Churches, and betrusted him with the
gathering of the alms for the poor Christians in Judea, 2. Cor. 8.6.16. how
he graceth him with the title of a companion, (...).
and a fellow-helper in the Lords business, v. 23. yea, he vouchsafes him the
title of a brother, 2. Cor. 2.13. nay more, of that which is much nearer, even
of a son, in this place.

Doctr. Note hence the freedom, and power of Gods calling to grace. For what
merit or dignity? what works of preparation appeared in Titus, being of
heathen parents, country, and education, whereby he should be raised to such
services, so near unto God? or what worthiness was in Paul himself? he was
indeed an Hebrew of the Hebrews, circumcised the eight day, of the tribe of
Benjamin, brought up at Gamaliels feet, and a great scholar; but by all this
he was armed to wast the Church, and he acknowledged himself such a tyrant,
and persecutor of the Church of God, as that he was unworthy to be an Apostle:
and being one, he was in that regard, the least of them all, 1. Cor. 15.9. and
for the latter, the power of Gods grace breaks through the strongest
opposition, even Gentilisme, and Paganism it self: yea, he whose honor it is
to produce light out of darkness, and quicken the dead, does often where
sin has abounded, make grace abound much more: and of the greatest and
notorious sinners, raise up such special instruments of his glory, as shall
strippe and go beyond a number that have always lived more ciuilly then they,
before their calling.

Use. 1. Meritum meum est miseratio domini; non sum plane meriti inops quamdin
ille miserationu^ non fuerit. Bern. in Cantis. sermon. 61.
Hence is confuted all that Popish doctrine concerning works of preparation
and disposition before grace: and of merit and supererrogation after: Gods
grace is free, not man's will, his mercy is man's merit.

2. Consider thy own baseness and indignity before thy conversion to be
humbled by it, yet let not Satan go beyond thee in it. He will be alleging
against thy faith, after this manner: Would God show mercy on thee, who were
so desperately drowned in thy sin? or can thy calling be sound, who so long a
time did fight against the truth? here thou have answer for thy self: I was
never worse, though I was as ill as an heathen and Publican: I was not worse
then a blasphemer, or a persecutor, yet God had mercy for such, and soundly
called such, and why not for me? But he will object further, Indeed if thou
had lived a civil life, and not have been so outrageous and desperate in
thy sinful course, there had been more hope of thee, as of one who were not
far from the kingdom of heaven: but the case was not so with thee. To which
thou may truly answer, That there is no more disposition to grace in a mere
civil man, then in the most profane person: although there be some more
restraint of corruption in the one, then in the other: nay, for most part,
there is less hope of such, then of greater sinners: for they are often
hindered from seeing the truth of their estate, by reason of their civil
virtues: and by comparing themselves with men notoriously wicked, conclude
(with the Pharisie) themselves to be in good case, for they are not thus, or as
that man, who is an open inordinate person: whereas the other are more easily
convinced in their own consciences, and are sooner brought to say with the
Publican, Lord be merciful, and so go away more justified: yea, and much more
may be added hereunto, namely, that there is much more hope of great sinners,
then of many who have (not only civility, but) a show of religion, and want
the power and life of it: of whom the speech of Christ is true, that Publicans
and harlots shall go into life before them. The seven devils in Marie
Magdalen resisted not her conversion so much, as their conceit does theirs, who
think that all devils are cast out, if Beelzebub the prince of the devils do
not discover himself: greater hope there is of the cold Laodicean, then of the
lukewarm: and experience, and good reason from the Scriptures teaches, that
such as have been before their conversion, either more outrageous in their
sin, or zealous against the truth, when as once their change came, have
proved far more eminent instruments of Gods glory, then such as before
their change never so highly dishonored him: both because those affections
which were so violent in sin, are turned in their vehemency against sin:
as also because the sense of much love in forgiving many sins, does greatly
constrain and enforce double thankfulness: all which I have spoken that no
man be discouraged (otherwise then to lead him through his course with constant
humility) for his estate past, if for the present he find a change; but
rather break forth into the magnifying of that marvelous power of God, and
that free grace of his, who is the moouer and perfecter of our whole salvation.

The 2. point in this description of the person of Titus, is the title of
relation, my son according to the common faith: that is, my son, not whom I
have begotten according to the flesh, but to the faith: namely, both to the
gift of faith, for Paul was his spiritual father, by whose means, and
ministry he was converted: as also to the doctrine of faith; not to believe
and profess it only, but also become a teacher of it. Which doctrine is
called the common faith, Doctrine of the Gospel called the Common Faith why.
1. because the matter of it is common to Paul, Titus, and all the elect. 2.
the manner of propounding it, in which they did mutually consent; is common to
all believers. 3. in regard of the common object; which is Christ and all his
merits, which belong to all the faithful. 4. in respect of the common
profession of it: it being the badge of every Christian. 5. of the common end
of it, which is salvation, the end of every believers faith. Out of this
title note two lessons.

1. That Ministers ought to be spiritual fathers to beget children to God. 2.
That faith is one and the same in all the elect.
Ministers are under God spiritual fathers.
Doctr. 1. That Ministers are spiritual Fathers to beget children to God,
appears in that the Hebrew phrase not only styles them by the name of
fathers: 1. who indeed are so properly by the way of blood and natural
generation: 2. neither only those who are in a right descending line, though
never so far off: 3. neither only those who adopt others into the room and
place of children: 4. but those also that are in the room of fathers, either
generally, as all superiors, in age, place, or gifts; or more specially such as
by whose counsel, wisdom, tenderness, and care, we are directed as by
fathers; who in these offices and not in themselves (for sometimes they be
inferiors otherwise) become fathers unto us. Thus was Joseph an inferior,
called a father of Pharaoh: that i^, a counselor: Job for his tenderness and
care, called a father of the poor: Genesis 45.8. Job 29.11.
Scholars of the Prophets, called sons of the Prophets: Elisha says of
Eliah, my father, my father: and Iubal was the father of all that play on
harpes. But much more properly is the Minister called the father of such as he
conuerteth unto the faith: because they beget men unto God, as Paul did
Onesimus in his bonds: in which regeneration the seed is that heavenly grace
whereby a divine nature is framed: the instrument by which it is conveyed, is
the word of God in the Ministry of it. The mother of these children of God is
the Church, which conceiueth them in her womb, which trauelleth of them and
brings them into this spiritual world, Gal. 4.27.
which brings them up in her bosom, and nourishes them at her breasts, first
with the milk of the two Testaments, and after with stronger meat till they
be strong men in Christ.

Object. Matthew. 23.9. Call no man father in earth: and God is the only father
of spirits, Hebr. 12.9.

Ans. The place does not simply and absolutely forbid the calling of any man
father, for then had the Apostle sinned in calling himself the father of the
Corinths, and Timothy and Titus his sons: 1. Cor. 4.
yea the Lord himself goes before us in example in giving this title not
only to the fathers of our bodies, but all superiors besides in the first
commandment. But the scope of that place is, 1. to condemn the ambitious
seeking and boasting in the titles of father, doctor, etc. 2. to teach that no
man should depend upon any other, as the principal efficient cause of his
birth, either natural or spiritual: for God is properly the father of us all,
not according to our spiritual birth only, but even our natural also: for he
forms in the womb, he brings out of the womb, and in him we live, and
move, and have our being: and what Ministers or fathers of our bodies act
herein, they do it as instruments, by whom the Lord works. True it is that
the Lord hides his work by instituting such means, as have in them some show
of inherent power, to produce such effects; and for their further reverence
ascribes to these instruments his own work, and his proper titles of fathers,
saviors; yet is no man for this to ascribe the principal power of begetting
him, whether in the flesh, o^ in the faith, to any man, otherwise then as a
subordinate means under God, that the whole praise of the work, and of our
life natural and spiritual, may be ascribed unto the God of life, and the
spirits of all flesh. Thus we see how Ministers are fathers, and so to be
accounted.

The soul must hau^ a father as well as the body.
Use. 1. No man can be saved in an ordinary and visible Church, where the
Ministry of the word is settled, but by a second begetting, and birth: for
that which is borne of flesh, is flesh: and therefore he must have another
father besides the father of his body: for no spiritual father in earth, none
in heaven: every child borne into the world has a father, although many sons
of the earth know not their father: examine thy heart, am I born into the
Church? who was my father? and here what a number of the sons of the earth,
earthly and base minded men and women, professing themselves to be the sons,
and daughters of God, know neither father nor mother, besides those of their
bodies: and conceive no more of this heavenly birth then Nicodemus, who
although Christ himself taught the doctrine of regeneration, yet asked how
could those things be: for what is that which is generally taken and rested in
as the new birth, and deceives the most men and women in the Church? surely
the repressing of wickedness of nature, that it break not out into excess of
riot: and perhaps not the restraining only, but the reforming of some gross
vice, or vices; which may be, and generally are, where is no renewing, nor
birth into the Church. Judas so lived as no man could say, black was his eye,
but yet was a devil: out of which example we evidently see, that even the
supernatural decrease, and restraint of vice in the reprobate, is far from
the new birth of the elect. Let him then that would not be deceived in this
weighty matter, look he be renewed, that he be a new creature, a new man
complete in all his parts: for as the soul is whole in every part of the
body, so is the believer renewed in every part; that although there be no lust
but may assail him, yet none shall dwell peaceably with him.

Carry a childlike affection to these spiritual fathers.
Use. 2. This near relation works special affection between the Minister,
and people converted by him: I say not there ought to be, but there is also a
special affection of love between them. The Minister loves him that is
begotten by him, as if he were his natural son, and the issue of his body,
nay even above him; seeing it is a more ardent and lasting love which is
grounded in grace, then that in nature: the love of women is not comparable
unto it. The people have such in singular estimation for their works sake. The
Galatians tasting the sweetness of the Gospel, Gal. 4.14.
did receive Paul as an Angel of God: yea, as Christ himself, and would have
plucked out their eyes, that is, departed from their dearest things to have
done him good. Act. 16.
The Iaylor being converted, was as ready to wash the wounds of the Apostles,
as ever he was before to inflict them: Lydia constrains them to tarry with
her: and all this, because they see they owe them (which Paul challenged of
Philemon) not only their service, but even their own selves unto them.

Let Ministers feel this fatherly, yea this motherly affection, Gal. 4.19.
toward their people, and like tender mothers rejoice when they prosper and
thrive in grace, mourn when they are sick: but when they are like to die, be
ready to die for them and with them: such a tender mother was Paul, that
wished himself rather accursed, then his countrymen should be cast away. We
have many teachers every where, but few such fathers: too many Ministers
resemble the mother of the dead child, who care not what become of the living
one, whom the true Solomon shall in the end discover to be no natural mothers
of his children.

And justly may we call for childlike affections at this day in our hearers,
especially seeing a number challenge the Church for their mother, but deal
with their fathers, as Simeon and Leui dealt with their father Jacob, so far
as they can, making them to stink among their inhabitants: or like another
cursed brood, with Cham, seek to discover their fathers nakedness: well may we
wish such to become children in malitiousnesse: 1. Cor. 14.20.
and seriously to consider of this truth, which informs us, that whosoever
they be that find not that those Ministers feet are become beautiful, who
perhaps before were strangers in their hearts: whosoever for their works sake
receive them not into the inward closet of their souls: whosoever in their
departure mourn not after them; as King Ioash after Eliah, my father, my
father; such may be allowed to make question of their conversion, as he may of
his legitimation, 1. king. 13.14.
who could never come to know who was his father: for were the Gospel powerful
in a people, a most proper fruit of it would be, the converting of the hearts
of fathers unto children, and of children unto their fathers. Malac. 4.6.
Now if any be desirous to carry themselves toward their Ministers, as
children toward their parents, they must perform unto them these duties.

1. They must give them double honor, Duties to spiritual fathers.
1. Tim. 5.17. reuerencing their persons, their places.

2. They must partake in all their goods, as the Levites in the law did, yea,
if need be, lay down their necks for their sakes, Romans 16.4. in way of
thankfulness.

3. No accusations must be received against them, under two or three witnesses:
a dutiful child will not hear, 1. Tim. 5.19.
much less believe evil reports of his father.

4. In doubtful cases of conscience resort unto them for counsel, as children
to their father.

5. Obey them in all godly precepts, endure their severity, be guided by their
godly directions, as those who have the oversight of souls committed unto
them, even as the child ingeniously imitateth and obeys his father.

Doctr. 2. Faith is one and the same in all the elect; and is therefore called
the common faith, Faith of the elect is but one.
Ephesians. 4.5. there is one faith which is true, whether we understand it of the
doctrine of salvation, which in Athanasius his confession is called the
Catholic faith of all Christians, because it is a doctrine received and
believed by the Catholic Church: or if we take it for the gift of faith,
whereby we believe to justification. Which grace is but one, and common to all
the elect, notwithstanding there be diverse measures and degrees of it peculiar
to some. Hence the Apostle Peter calls it, 2. Pet. 1.1.
the like precious faith, 1. in respect of the kind of it, being a justifying
faith, by which all that believe, have power to be the sons of God, Ioh.
1.12. Gal. 3.26. 2. of the object of it, which is one Christ, the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever: who dwells in the hearts of every
believer, Fides vna* respectu non subiectorum graduum: sed specici, obiecti,
finis.
Ephesians. 3.17. whom although the fathers of former ages beheld him to come, and
the latter ages already come; yet both rejoice in seeing his day, with the
same eye of faith: the difference is, that one sees it somewhat more clearly
then the other. 3. of the same end of it, which is salvation, common to all
believers; called therefore by Jude 3. the common salvation.

If but one faith, but one way to heaven.
Use. 1. To confute such as foolishly imagine and teach, that there may be as
many faiths and ways to salvation, as there be nations and peoples: that the
Jews must be saved by the law of Moses: the Gentiles by the law of nature:
Christians by the Gospel, and every man by the religion he professes: to
prove which vanity they allege, Habac. 2. The just shall live by his own
faith. But we that have learned that there is but one Christ, one way to
heaven, and one common faith, evidently perceive that every man cannot be saved
in his own way: except some can come to the father, and not by the son. The
Apostle Peter having learned the doctrine of faith from Christ's own mouth,
writing to the dispersed Jews, calls that his faith the same precious faith
with that of the Gentiles: teaching thereby, that the faith is but one, and
that published in the Gospel, whereby both Jew and Gentile can be saved. As for
that place of the Prophet, the scope of it is only to urge the special
application of that one and only true saving faith, which every man is to
labor for, that he may live by it: and further is no ground for such fancies.

And if the common faith be this way, then not common works out of the Churches
treasury.
Use. 2. This doctrine affords us another way to salvation then the Popish
Church, and guids manifest unto us. For 1. here is no mention of common works
out of the Churches treasury; the Apostle reaches that the common treasury
of the Church is the common faith: which excludes all merit; seeing to
believe, is not to merit, but to apprehend (not another man's, but) Christ's
merits; yea the Scripture it self speaks cautelously in this matter, Four
maine differences of this Apostolical faith from the Romish apostaticall faith.
Per fidem, ex side, non propter fideru.
least even our faith it self should come in the schoale to be poised with the
grace of God, when it speaks so often that we are justified by faith, and of
faith, and through faith, but never for faith.

2. This apostolical faith is not a faith of two or three, but a common faith
which every believer has: but the apostaticall Popish faith (falsely called
Catholic) is not so: for it is the faith of the teachers of the Church only,
which their hearers may safely rest in, although they have no special faith of
their own; neither indeed know what their Church or teachers do believe: but
who sees not that this gross faith in the lump cannot be either saving or
Catholic? saving can it not be, for the saving faith of the elect goes with
the knowledge of the truth, v. 3. neither can it be Catholic or the common
faith, no more then that can be a common commodity which is engrossed into
some few men's hands, and never sees the open market; or rather which is a
monopoly: for to believe, say they, as the Pope believes (although they know
not what he believes) is sufficient.

3. This apostolical common faith purifyeth the heart, cleanses the
conscience from dead works, and works by love: but the apostaticall Romish
faith, is a pragmatical fancy working by rage, fury, violence, and blood:
filling their hearts and hands with detestable resolutions and attempts,
fouling their consciences with most impure, and impious works of the flesh,
and such as the issues of death follow, as often experience has been their
mistrisse.

4. This common faith is most ancient, it is the old and the good way: but so
is not theirs; let them term it the old religion as long as they will, it is a
strange doctrine, a new devised faith, not sauouring of apostolical
antiquity: as will appear plainly to him that compares that which they now
profess, with that which was professed, when Paul writ the Epistle to the
Romans. Hence will it follow, that their faith not being the common faith, I
say not that they must amend their faith, but change it, if they will be saved
by it: it is not all the patching and daubing, and refining of their points
will help them; nor all the baulme in Gilead can so supple their positions,
that we may join with them, until they begin again and lay the same
foundation with us, which is to seek to enter into life by the door, and not
as thieves, seek to creep in at the window: till this be done, the joining
with them will be the departing from the common faith: till this be done, we
may not give them the right hand of fellowship. Let them first shake hands with
Christ (which is our hearty prayer to the Lord for them) and we will gladly and
heartily reach the^ ours.

Use. 3. If the faith be but one, we must all then study to keep the unity
of faith in the bond of love, Study to keep this unity of faith.
which is the Apostles collection on the same ground, Ephesians. 4.3.4. we ought so
to compose our affections, as we may go out with one heart, and one mind in
the profession of this one common faith, which makes communion between the
highest and lowest, rich and poor, Master and servant; Preacher and people:
for in Jesus Christ all are one, Jew, and Gentile, bond and free: Paul was
Titus his father in the faith; but yet this common faith made him his fellow
and brother; 1. Cor. 4.6.15.
2. Cor. 8.23. so he calls himself the father of the Corinthians, and yet
them his brethren: as Onesimus a poor servant by virtue of this common faith,
became the son of Paul, and yet his faithful and beloved brother: Philem. 10.
so as howsoever in earthly relation, we have our difference, and inequality;
yet in regard of this common faith, believers may say (as they in the Prophet)
we have all one father, and one mother, yea one meat, and cloth, one
education, and one inheritance. The Ministers must therefore so acknowledge
himself a father, as that he is a son too; so a teacher, as that he be a
diligent hearer and entertainer of the doctrine also. The Master must not
forget he has a master in heaven, and that his servant in regard of the common
faith, is or may be, his fellow servant, and if he be a religious servant, he
must be counted more then a servant, even an Onesimus, a brother in the Lord.
The Magistrate must so rule, as a subject under Christ, and not altogether
stand on authority; but cast an eye upon the common faith. The husband must
not altogether stand on his headshippe, but like a man of knowledge, 2. Pet.
3.7.
dwell with his wife, as one who is with him a joint heir of the life of
grace: so in other relations. Which consideration, were it observed, it would
cut off much discomfort in families, cities, societies, Church and common
wealth: it would keep men from offering occasions of unbrotherly strife and
contention, as we see in Abraham and Lot, it would cause them to forgive and
forget old injuries, as Joseph, Genesis 50.17. if they would conceive that they
are all brethren in the faith.

The third point in the words, is to consider of the adiunct of sincerity by
which Titus is commended, my natural son: that is, not illegitimate, or base
borne; (...).
but my rightful true, and (as we say) lawfully begotten son, one that both
resembles my self, and is a right follower of me. The same word is used, 2.
Cor. 8.8. where the Apostle persuades the Corinths, to the cheerful relief
of the poor brethren in Judea, by this reason that he might try the
naturalnes of their love. (...).
Which commendation was of good use: 1. for Titus his encouragement, whom so
great an Apostle so esteemed: 2. that the Cretians might with more respect and
reverence receive him thus highly commended. 3. to distinguish Titus from some
other of his sons, who a while fathered themselves upon him, but after
falling from the faith, proved but bastards, and counterfeit, as Hymenaeus,
Philetus, Alexander: Titus was not such a one, not Timothy, see 1. Tim. 1.2.

Doctr. 1. In that the Apostle powers not out his commendation of Titus,
neither this but upon good ground: We must be wary whom we commend, for what,
and how far.
observe how wary every man should be both whom, and to what end, and how
far they commend another, and yet this more especially, if their judgment be
required or esteemed. Thus Paul commends Titus, 1. one well known to be
worthy, and not out of partiallitie. 2. for a good end; the benefit of the
Church, that his person and doctrine might be more lovingly embraced: and that
this was his end appears, 2. Cor. 8.23. If any enquire of Titus, he is my
helper and fellow: or of our brethren, they are messengers of the Churches,
wherefore show toward them the proof of your love. 3. he commends him
sparingly, and is not lavish beyond the truth: Neither is he general in such
elogyes, for scarce any else but Timothy received such a testimony from him.

Use. In this Seedplot of the ministry, whence young Titusses are to be
commended unto the use of the Church: it stands those in hand, who are to
dismiss them with letters testimonial, not hand over head to give a rash
testimony to every one that requires it: but know the party to be worthy, and
one who shall not be found inferior to the testimony given of him: not
because he is a friend or kinsman, or one whom thou would prefer, neither
for form or fashion; but because herein thou shall discharge a good duty in
faith to God, and his people.

Reasons. 1. Because the judgment of men in the places of Masters and Fellows
of Colleges, are much esteemed and relied on. Letters testimonial not to be
given rashly, why.
2. it is a matter of much moment, to commend a man to be set over a people:
for which function the Apostle asks, who is sufficient? 3. the setting to a
rash hand here, is as the rash laying on of hands; which sin the Apostle
forbids Timothy, not only in his own person, but even the communication
with it in the persons of other men. 4. this rashness draws not only thy
self into the sin of false witness bearing, and that against the Church:
but also it draws others into the same, as Patrons, Prelates, being the
collaters and Instituters to benefices: besides, it is a confirming of the
insufficient party himself in his insufficiency, and a special patron of
idleness; seeing every insufficient person by friends or favor, may procure
an ordinary form; and be as far commended as the diligent hand. All these
reasons, besides the example of our Apostle, should provoke our care in this,
which is more then a matter of ordinary favor: and to imitate the
circumspection of the Apostle John in the 12. of his third epistle; Demetrius
has a good report of all men, and of the truth it self; yea and we our selves
bear record, and ye know that our record is true.

Doctr. 2. All are not natural sons that are so accounted; many that seem
to be begotten to the faith, All that are in account sons are not natural.
are no better then base borne, begotten only after the flesh as Ismael, and
still remain a strange seed. The Apostle had a clear eye, who perceived many
false challenges, and unjust claims to be made to the inheritance by a number
who were never natural sons, but only made a flourish, as though they had
been the next heirs: and hence every where we are taught, that all are not
Israel, who are of Israel, and he is not a Jew, who is one without: and though
Ismael seem a long time to have the right of the first borne, yet in the end
he is cast out of the house, and proves disinherited.

Use. It stands then all of us in hand, to look to our legitimation, least
we loose the inheritance. The adopted sons of God are the natural sons of
his ministers.
It is not outward shows that will entitle us; he that will be the adopted
son of God, must be the natural son of his ministers, and such an one as
stands not in the ceremony, but feels in his heart the sincerity of
religion: it is more to be the natural son of the Church, then to come to
Church there to hear, pray, and receive the Sacraments; it is more then to
give good words to religious persons and exercises, which are good cheap: for
a man may perform these outward services, and get praise of men, and yet want
the praise of God: these things then must be done, but not insisted in, if we
would have God to praise us. Quest. But what may we do to get approbation of
God? Ans. Because the Lord who loves, prayseth also truth in the inward parts,
we must beware of guile; become Nathaniels, men without guilfull spirits, get
our hearts circumcised, that we may be Jews within, and not in the letter
only. Examine then thy spirit into which the eye of flesh cannot pearce; T^ie
thy self by these sparkles of Gods image.
but that spirit which is all an eye does discern, and enquireth whether thy
heart be his Temple, in which the Christian sacrifices of prayer and praise be
daily kindled. Whether thy soul be his Arc keeping the Tables, and pot of
Manna: that is, treasuring the word as a pearl, and thy portion. Whether that
precious Jewel of faith, the cleanser and purifier of it be there? Whether his
fear, that vigilant Sentinel of thy soul, cause it to depart from every evil
way? Whether a good conscience like a Cynthius or monitor, be ever watching
thee, and pulling thee by the ear in thy slidings: he looks how his spirit
is entertained, whether fruitful in his graces, quenched in his motions, or
grieved by thy sins: he sees how thy heart affects his Ministers, whether
thou with Timothy, Philip. 2.22.
as a natural son with thy father, seruest in the Gospel. These are things
which must commend thee to God, as being lively sparks of his own image,
far passing all shows and semblances, which are but as a painted fire, not
any whit warming the heart, but leaving it frozen in the natural dregs of
sin.

Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our
Savior. In these words is laid down the form of the Apostolical salutation.
Which is a prayer containing two parts: 1. the enumeration of the graces he
wishes for Titus, and these are three, Grace, mercy* peace. 2. the persons of
whom he craves these, who are the first causes of them: and they be, 1. God
the Father. 2. the Lord Jesus Christ: further described by his proper office,
our Savior.

In the words, 1. of the meaning, 2. of the doctrine.

By grace, is meant the free favor of God, accepting us in his Christ, and not
any gifts of grace, which are the fruits and effects of it. (...)* nor (...)
(...).
I call (...) a free favor, because else were it not grace, if it were not
freely given.

By mercy may be meant the former, and that not idly added, because the
freedom of this grace might be more lively expressed, and confirmed; and yet
because mercy has ever an eye to misery, I rather understand hereby some
fruits of that former grace of God in Christ: such as are remission of sins,
justification, sanctification, and life eternal, by which we are freed from
all misery of sin and punishment, in part here, and in whole hereafter.

By peace is meant the effect of this mercy, and that is peace with God
through Christ who is our peace: peace with the creatures, and peace with our
selves inward and outward: so as in these three terms, in this order
depending one upon another, is requested whatsoever can make to the
accomplishment of happiness, temporal or eternal.

From God our Father] This title of Father is attributed unto God, either, 1.
essentially, or 2. personally: when essentially, it is taken for the whole
Trinity, as Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye reward him, O foolish people? is he not your
father? In this sense God is a Father two ways: 1. generally of father of
spirits, Heb. 12.9. and thus is Adam called the son of God, Luke 2.38. and
angels the sons of God, Job. 1. and of both may be spoken that of the
Prophet, have we not all one Father? Mal. 2. 2. More specially by grace, the
first person: and this title is given principally to the first person in
Trinity: The first person called Father, why.
1. because he is the Father of the second person the word, by nature, and by
eternal generation. 2. because he is Father to Christ, in respect of his
manhood, not as to other men, by nature, or grace of adoption, but by personal
union: the humane nature subsisting in the person of the word. 3. because from
both these follows, that by Adoption he becomes the father of all the elect
being members, and making up the body of Christ. And this is the respect
wherein God is termed Father in this place, both because it has relation to
the second person here nominated; as also because in prayer we must repair to
God the Father, in Christ our head and Mediator.

And our Lord Jesus Christ] Christ is Lord in himself, as God and Lord over
all, blessed for ever, both in that he gives essence, and susteining to all
things; as also possesses all things; and rules even the most powerful and
glorious of all creatures, and is called Lord of the Angels; much more over the
Devils themselves. Christ our Lord, why.
Again, he is our Lord, 1. as Mediator, we being his inheritance given him
of his Father. 2. as a Redeemer, purchasing us being captives, and thralls to
Satan. 3. as a head of his Church, quickening and governing the whole body of
it, whether militant or triumphant. 4. in regard of his power and dominion: for
to him all power is committed in heaven and in earth, who has put all things
under his feet; in him we hold all things, as in capite, and to him we owe all
homage and subjection in all obedience, both active, and passive.

Quest. But how can Christ be a Lord, seeing he is every where called a servant?

Ans. Christ considered in the office of Mediatourship, is after a special
manner a servant of his Father: and so his Father calls him, for my servant
David's sake: Isa. 37.35. and chap. 42.1.
and, Behold my servant: because he faithfully served him in the work of
redemption, in that he was made man, came into the world, fulfilled the law,
prayed unto his Father, and was made obedient even to the death: yet all the
while of his service, he remained a Lord in himself, and by his service became
the Lord of his Church, and redeemed ones, in a special manner.

Our Savior.] There is no other name given but this. Object. The Father and
the holy Ghost save also. Answ. Although all outward works of the Trinity, 1.
Ioh. 5.7.
which make for our comfort and salvation, are undivided, as being one, and
coworking; yet in performing them, we must observe an order among them: the
Father is the fountain from whom, the Son for whom as a meritorious cause,
the holy Ghost by whom we communicate of all blessings: so all three save, but
the Father by sending the Son, the Son by paying the ransom, the holy
Ghost by applying it: so all create, redeem, sanctify: yet observing this
order and manner of working; when the works are more personally attributed
unto them, creation is ascribed to the Father, not excluding the son, and
holy Ghost, redemption to the Son, and sanctification to the holy Ghost.
Which order is rather here to be observed, because our Apostle expresses it in
his prayer for these graces, when he craves them both from the Father and the
Son, not excluding the holy Ghost: whereby we are taught, how to direct our
suits also, namely, that the Father, by the Spirit, through his Son our Lord
Jesus Christ would enrich us with grace, and the fruits of it. Object. But
there are other saviors; as Joshua, and other Judges, and Kings: yea,
Prophets, and Ministers, Men called Saviors 3. ways.
are called saviors. Ans. 1. These all were men, and as men saved* But of
Christ it is said, Behold our God, he shall save us. 2. Some of them, as
Judges, were typical saviors, saving, 1. the bodies, 2. of one people the
Jews, 3. from temporal death and oppression; but Christ saves the bodies and
souls of all believing Jews, and Gentiles, from hell and condemnation. 3.
Others, as Prophets, and Ministers, are only ministerial and isntrumental
saviors, not properly: only for sundry causes the work of the efficient, is
ascribed to the instrument, whom the Lord uses in publishing this salvation:
but Christ alone saves by meriting and paying the price, and bringing home to
the heart this redemption. Object. But we have yet sin in us, and therefore
are not saved from it. Answ. We are saved even for the present, from the wrath
and poison of it in part, and for ever from the damnation of it, so as the
strength of it is gone.

This is the meaning of this salutation, which being a prayer, shows us,
both of what kind our salutations ought to be, in which we would testify our
love, to whom we write, namely, to wish them the best blessings: as also in
what manner; not sending formal salutations without feeling, abstracting
courtesy from conscience: but they must proceed from a religious and reverent
affection of the heart: for every prayer ought to come from the heart, and as
having God himself a witness of the truth of the spirit in such wishes; as Romans
1.9. and Phil. 1.8.9.

Now the principal lessons in this prayer are two: 1. That the free and
everlasting grace of God in Christ, is the foundation of all blessings
spiritual and temporal. 2. Peace is the fruit of the grace and mercy of God.


Doctr. 1. The grace of God is the whole sufficiency of his people: Gods grace
the foundation of all other blessings.
the first, middle, and last cause of every good thing, conuaied unto them or
issuing from them: not once did the Lord enforce this point upon his own
people, teaching them by things temporal, their spiritual estate and
condition: Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord set his love upon you, and chose you, not
because you were more in number, for you were the fewest, but because he loved
you: and, cap. 9.4.6. Say not in thine heart, because of my righteousness, the
Lord has given me this good land: for thou art a stiffnecked people: and were
they not yet further off from meriting and procuring to themselves spiritual
blessings, and that heavenly Canaan, and everlasting rest prepared for the
people of God? and if we consider our condition, before this grace be reueiled
and shine upon us, are not we in our blood, when the Lord first covers us
with his skirts? and no eye but his pitieth us: he calls us with Adam out of
our thickets, when we run from him, and are hiding our selves, then finding
us, when we would not be found.

Use. 1. To confute the Popish doctrine, which depresseth this grace of God,
Not cooperation of man's will with grace.
and endures not that the castle of a man's salvation should be altogether
founded without himself, or builded without his own strength: Gods me^cie is
man's merit.
while it teaches, that there are some meritorious works, which serve to
prepare men to their justification: and that there is a cooperation of man's
will with Gods grace in the first act of conversion: a doctrine full of pride,
and vanity; as though the Lord did not first by setting his love upon us, make
us lovely, rather then find us so. Besides, if our justification and salvation
were partly by grace, and partly by our own dispositions and preparations;
grace were not every way grace, and consequently no grace at all. The Prophet
Hosee shows the nearest reason that we can reach unto of this grace of God;
Hose. 14.5.
I will love them freely: but wherefore? not for any disposition or desert in
them, but because my wrath is turned away. If we be about the doing of any
good, it is not I, says Paul, but the grace of God in me, that does it: for as
it was in the building of the second Temple, Zerubbabel who represented Christ,
must lay the highest stone of the building, Zach 4.6.
notwithstanding the high mountains, that is, the strong opposition of the
enemies: and this he must do, not by army or strength, but by his spirit: so
in this living Temple (which we are) the Lord himself both foundeth the
lowest, and lays the higest stone, not by our arm or strength; nay we rather
have mountains of impediments to hinder this great work, and our selves are
the greatest enemies to our own building; but by the power of his spirit,
which makes all plain before him. Yea further, whereas the abstaining from
the least evil, is good, though the least good; even this is denied to our
power, and laid out of our own reach, and must be given us from the father of
lights. Let the Papists therefore sacrifice to their own nets, and burn
incense to their yarne, as though their own hand had made them rich, and their
own arm happy: but let us labor to see, 1. how woeful creatures we are by
nature, and be ashamed of our selves, and sins: 2. fly to this infinite
grace and mercy, which is the living fountain of our welfare: 3. return the
praise and honor of all our good, to the right author of it: which is the
right use and end of all the doctrine of free election, justification,
vocation, and salvation: all which are noted by Paul, to tend to the praise of
the glory of his grace; yea and of all the Gospel, which is to stop every
mouth, and cause all that would find salvation and happiness, Ephesians. 1.6.
to seek, and find it only in God, and the riches of his grace.

Use. 2. This free grace being the fountain of all blessing, Seek grace in
the first place.
it behooves every man to seek it in the first place for himself, and others
to whom he wishes any good: get grace for thy self or another, thou have
gotten peace: a lesson observed of few Husbands, Fathers, Masters, who whilst
they beat their heads till thy quickly become hoarie with cares for the
purchasing of outward things for themselves, and theirs, scarce dream of the
best blessings, and of purchasing (by laying hold of the covenant for
themselves and theirs) the grace of God in Christ, which is the portion of
very few. Many say, who will show us any good, and can rejoice when their
corn, and wine, and oil is increased: but to say, Lord lift thou upon us the
light of thy countenance, is the voice of the smallest number. Thus it is too
plain that the spirit of prayer and supplication has no delight in the most;
who can heartily pray for daily bread, for health, for wealth in the want of
them; but neglect the fountain which is Gods grace, and mercy in Christ: and
no otherwise do they crave for others, then they have done for themselves: in
these distempered prayers resembling sick persons, both in that they have more
sense and grief for the fits of their sickness, then for the cause: as also
that they most desire that which stands with the feeding of the vicious
humor, which should rather be purged and expelled. The spirit of God is the
spirit of wisdom, and directs to a more compendious way of prevailing with
God; and so teaches us to ask, as that we obtain far more then we have
asked, or that which is far better.

Doctr. Only they that are by grace and mercy accepted of God, Only by grace
we come to true peace.
have their portion in this peace here mentioned. Reas. 1. Peace, that is, all
kind of prosperity is promised only to the godly, Psalm. 1. they shall
prosper in every thing: and the Apostle pronounces it, only upon the Israel
of God. 2. it is accordingly bestowed upon those only, Gal. 6.16.
that are justified by faith, Romans 5.1. seeing they only have peace with God,
which Pax haereditas Christianorum. Aug. de tempor. ser. 200.
as that it is called the peace Philip. 4.7. and that God is called the God of
peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. as also that difference which is worthy to be observed,
between the salutations of the old and new testament. In the old Testament,
grace and peace are never joined: the ordinary form of salutation was, Peace
be with thee, peace be to this house, go in peace: but the Apostles after the
mystery of redemption was revealed and perfected, before the ordinary
salutation, prefixe this word, Grace, or mercy, or both; that as they are
never joined in the old Testament, so are they never separated in the new, to
show that we cannot look to have one of them alone, or separate them, no more
then we can safely sunder the branch from the root, or the stream from the
fountain.

Use. 1. Here is an other motive to stir up every man to seek to partake in
this grace, If thou would have peace with men, get peace with God.
even as he desires sound and settled peace. Who is the man that desires to
see peace and good days here upon earth among men? let him lay the foundation
of it above with God. Would thou not offend men, nor that men should offend
thee? be careful that thou offendest not God. Would thou be at peace with
the creatures, and have a league stricken with the stone in the wall, and beast
of the field? the way is, by being at one with their Creator, whose hoasts
they are: then shall thou walk safely upon the lion, and tread the basilisk
under thy feet: would thou find inward peace in thine own heart and
conscience to stablish thee in thy combat against terrors of sin, and
temptations of Satan? thou must serve under the Prince of peace, and become a
subject under him; who will possess thee with such peace, as shall make thee
in mourning and suffering persecution for righteousness rejoice, not only in
the promise, but in thy possession of a present happiness: would thou have
all enmity subdued under thee, and thine enemies become friendly? then let thy
ways please the Lord. In a word, would thou enjoy all prosperity? Job
22.21.
acquaint thy self with God, make peace, and thou shall have prosperity: Isa.
54.13.
become a child of the Church, for much peace shall be to her children. Humble
thy self, sue for mercy, else thou shall never see peace, and the rather,
because desperate sinners have neither peace with God, nor themselves: secure
sinners have peace with themselves, but not with God; only repentant sinners,
who in hungring have obtained mercy, are at peace both with God and themselves.

The wicked wanting grace, want pence also. Isa. 57.21.
Use. 2. If peace be the daughter of Grace and mercy, then is there no peace
to the wicked man, because he has no assurance, no feeling, no not so much as
a true desire of this grace and mercy: necessarily therefore do they want, 1.
grace with God: for they are as tenants that live out of the favor of their
landlord. 2. Peace with their own consciences, for howsoever they may slumber
for a time; or be benumbed, and past feeling, or feared and cauterized as by an
hot iron: yet if God touch them never so little their conscience is like a
wild beast hastily wakened, which having laid couchant a long time at the
door, is now gotten in upon them, and ready to pull out the throat of their
souls, as restles as Cains, or Judas, forcing them to fly when none persues
them. 3. not with the creatures, who are all armed against him, Prou. 28.1.
who by sin takes up arms against their creator.

Object. But none have more peace then the wicked man, he prospers in the
world, all things go with him according to his hearts wish. Isaac goes to
slaughter, while Ismael sits secure at home. Jacob keeps sheep, while
Esau hunteth and takes his pleasure: none of all Joseph's brethren are sold and
bought, cast into the pit, and prison, but himself: how is it that even the
godly have almost slipped and fallen at the wicked man's prosperity, if he have
no peace?

Ans. They have indeed a kind of peace, The peace of the wicked is crasie in
three respects. Job 20.5.7.
but 1. it being all outward, not inward, nor grounded on peace with God, nay
abstracted from it; let it seem never so fair and flourishing, yet is it
deceitful, unsound, and vanishing: Job compares it to a dream, and affirms
that the wickeds joy is but for a moment: so as let his excellency mount up to
heaven, and his head touch the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like his
dongue: elsewhere the Holy Ghost compares it to the crackling of thorns under
a pot, which make a fair blaze, and a great noise for the time, Eccl. 7.6.
but all is done almost as soon as kindled: it deceives them when they most
lean unto it, the Lord snatcheth it from them, or them from it suddenly, which
makes the Prophet say, that the Lord will make their sun go down at noone
day: as Baltazar sunk down at his banquet, Amos 8.9.
Dan. 4.2. As it is uncertain, so is it unsound while it lasts, being a
rejoicing in the face, not in the heart, 2. Cor. 5.12.
like that of the theife who laugheth on the ladder: even in their laughter
their heart is heavy, Prou. 14.13.
and of all their rejoicing, a man may say as Solomon of laughter, separated
from the fear and grace of God, I said thou art madness, and the end of it is
heaviness. 3. That their rejoicing has such a sudden end, is a misery; but
to be waited on with such a woeful end, is fullness of their woe: for
according to that of the Prophet, not only while they seem to be blessed, the
Lord curses their blessings, but in the end he takes them in fetters, Malac*
2.2.
who have so long walked on snares, Job. 17. and binds them under that
everlasting curse: the way seemed right unto them, but the issues thereof are
death. Stolen waters were sweet, but now they know that the dead were there:
all this while their prosperity deserved nothing less, then the name of
peace: it was rather a truce for a time, which once expired, the Lord is up in
a^mes, for further revenge against them. Job 21.1^. Affect only that peace
which i^ an effect of Gods mercy in Christ.
Let us therefore say with Job, Let the counsels of the wicked be far from
me: of whom, some are never so quiet, as when their sins cry loudest for
vengeance: others extol the peace and prosperity of that people, that have no
means of grace and mercy: some shamelesly say, the world was better when we
had none of all this preaching, but there was more peace: others are secure in
a peace which has beginning in the flesh, and arises from the sudden feeling
of some worldly delight. But let us only affect that peace, which is an effect
of Gods mercy in Christ, which arises from sorrow for sin, and which is a
fruit of righteousness: for so it shall come to pass, Job 18.7.
that when the wickeds own counsel casts him down, we shall be able to
say, There, there are they fallen, but we stand up, because their peace was in
the face, ours rooted in the heart: theirs was an heritage hastily gotten, and
suddenly forgone and forgotten, but our peace and joy, shall none be able ever
to take away.

Verse. 5. For this cause left I thee in Creta, that thou should continue to
redress the things that remain, and should ordain elders in every city,
as I appointed thee. Now we come to the second part of this Epistle, which
contains the narration, and the subject matter of it. Wherein partly to
authorize Titus, and partly to encourage him: 1. the Apostle makes a
declaration of the place and duty to which Titus was destinated, and unto
which he was incited, from the final cause [ being therefore left in Creta.]
2. he gives him direction, how to carry himself in it.

The duty enjoined Titus, is twofold. 1. General, to correct things that
remain. 2. Special, to ordain elders, that is, to institute Ministers, and
Pastors, and that in every City: that is, where there was a body of people to
set them over.

The direction is also twofold. 1. more general, As I commanded thee. 2. more
special, If any be unreprovable, etc.

Before we come to speak of the 2. branches of Titus his duty; we are to
consider the entrance thereto, in these words, For this cause I left thee in
Creta: which words offer unto us some worthy considerations.

1. Note. That the Apostle himself continued not long in Creta after there
appeared an outward face of a Church, but went elsewhere to gather men to the
faith; wherein his faithfulness appeared, in the diligent performance of his
own administration: for the office of the Apostle was to plant Churches, and
to leave them to others to water: to found the house of God, as master
builders, but other laborers must build it up: to travel in birth till the
Churches of God were formed, but left them to others to bring up; 1. Cor. 3.10.
Matthew. 28.19.
to make Disciples, but others must confirm them.

Which lets us see the difference between the Apostle, and the Pastor. The
former is as the Lords leiftenant to set Christ in the possession of his
kingdom; The difference between an Apostle, and a Pastor.
the latter is as a deputy to keep him in possession. The Apostle gathers a
flock of the wild beasts of the forest, the Pastor must stay to feed, and
attend upon that flock: the Apostle must change his place upon immediate
commandment; the Pastor may not: for he must be ready at all assaies to feed
the flock depending upon him, 1. Pet. 5. he must always present himself as a
pattern and example unto it, 1. Tim. 4.12. except we will say that the
ordinary Ministry of the Gospel, is not as straightly bound to duty, as the
ordinary Minister of the law: for the Priests must always be ready in the
Temple to answer all doubts, as Ely, 1. Sam. 1.9. to keep in the holy fire,
and lights; to receive all sacrifices and oblations, to renew the bread before
the Lord: yea and for this end was that institution, that the Priests might not
dwell far from the Temple, but their houses were builded close to it,
according to the pattern of David, 1. Chro. 28.13.

Yet so, as by the Churches call, a Pastor whose gifts are found fit for such a
purpose, may be sent from his place (if in the interim it be sufficiently
provided for) either to gather a Church, or reduce such as have gone astraie.
See 2. Chron. 17.7.9.

2. Note. That Paul departing from Creta, leaves them not at six and seauens,
neither neglects the business, and work he had in his hands; Every child of
God must wish and endeavor that the Lords work go forward eeuery where.
but leaves Titus to perfect that which he had begun. Herein teaching us,
that every man whom the Lord has called to do good in his Church, and whose
conscience stirs up his care; must find in himself this holy desire, that
the Lords plow be ever followed: his building ever reared: his work ever
furthered by all, but especially so far as lies in his power by his own
means; and that both in the places abroad, as also where he lives. Paul
cares not only for the Churches where he becomes, but where he has been;
and this was the ground why he left Timothy at Ephesus, 1. Tim. 1.3. and Titus
here at Creta, upon which occasion he wrote both these Epistles. So should
every man in his place, whom God honors to be the beginning of any good
thing imitate that worthy Nehemiah in his care, Remember me, O God, Nehem.
13.14.
and blot not out my kindness: that is, suffer not thy worship restored by my
means in Jerusalem to be defaced, and much less abolished. In like manner, if
a man be called from his place, so as he must leave it to another, his care
must be, that it be furnished with a fit man. Eliah when he was to be taken up,
walking with Elisha, whom he knew was to be his successor, 1. king. 19 16. 2.
king. 2.9.
by prayer obtained for him an hard request; namely, the doubling of his own
spirit upon him. Memorable is the speech and practice of Moses, who when the
Lord had bid him go up into the Mount, and see the land, and then die: he
neglects himself, and forgets after a sort, his own present death, and
breaks out into prayer for the people: O Lord God of spirits, appoint a man
over the congregation: 1. that he may be instructed to go in and out: 2. least
this people be as sheep without a shepherd: Neither would Christ himself the
mirror of grace, ascend up into heaven, before he had appointed furnished men
for the building up of his body: his earnest charge to Peter, and in him to
all the Disciples, and their successors, that if ever they lou^d him, they
would feed his sheep, shows the care of this great shepherd of our souls.
Men need not be provoked to provide for their children, while yet they are with
them, that it may be well with them after their departure: and should not
spiritual fathers do the like for their children, to whom they are tied by a
strayter bond.

Fearfully sin they against this example, who while they craple and couple
livings together, that they may fill their own bellies, and have there portion
in the fleece and fat, neither stay themselves, to teach as they ought, nor
yet leave any Titus behind them (of whose sufficiency we heard before) to
redress things that remain: but offer the sheep of Christ to the wolf, and
sell souls for pieces of silver, and morsells of bread. The men of God were
wont to extend their care for Gods people (with neglect of themselves) even to
the time of their departure; yea and after, 2. Pet. 1.13.15.
although they might seem to be loosed by remoouall, or at least by death: but
these feel no weight of such an heavy burden, which presses them even for
the present.

A chief wisdom in the beginning of any business, to consider the end.
3. Note. That the Apostle thus sending Titus, he will have him consider the end
of his calling and placing, both to provoke himself to diligence, as also to
obtain for him more liberty, and authority in that Church where he had left
him: and it was no more then needed, for to go about to innouate and reform a
whole Island, having an hundredth cities in it, and bring new offices and
officers among them; might both exasperate the one, and altogether discourage
the other, and to both seem a thankles business. But now if Titus shall think
with himself, This is the end of my calling, wherein God requires my
faithfulness: and if the Cretians shall conceive within themselves: for this end
was Titus placed amongst us; both to settle things that are wanting, and to
reform things that are amiss: this consideration could not but move and
persuade both of them to a mutual, and comfortable consent in the business of
Christ, and a loving entertainment one of the other.

Which teaches, that that man who would Christianly, and comfortably carry
himself through any calling, must ever have the end of it in his eye. Romans
13.4.
The Magistrate must set before ^is eye, that he is the Minister of God for
men's wealth, and that therefore he must not carry the sword for naught; but
necessity lies upon him to execute the judgments of God. The Minister must
propound before him his end, which is the gathering together of the Saints;
hence a necessity is imposed upon him, Ephesians. 4.12.
and woe to him that not aiming at this end, preaches not the Gospel. The
private man must set before him the public and common good, and in his whole
course aim at that. The efficacy of which argument is such, as that the Lord
himself most usually urges it in stirring up men, to the right receiving and
use both of spiritual blessings, as also the holy fruition of temporal
mercies. How does the Lord urge his people to the pure use of his holy
ordinance of marriage, otherwise then from the three ends of it. 1. in that
thence they must expect an holy seed: 2. for avoiding of fornication: 3. from
the comfort of a fit help, and a comfortable companion, Mal. 2.14. compared
with 1. Cor. 7.2. and Genesis 2.18. So as look what Mordecai said of Hesters
advancement, Hest. 4.14.
Who can tell whether thou art come to the kingdom for this time? let every
man say of his own gifts: why has God given me learning, wealth, advancement;
surely for some good end in the Church or common wealth: and how dangerous a
thing is it to pervert Gods end in giving his gifts?

And further from hence, let him that would take a compendious way, to
entertain the Ministry, always behold with one eye, the end of it: for
otherwise it will often seem harsh, and intolerable: flesh willingly abides
not the handling of the Minister: oh no, meddle not with mine eyes, my dear
and tender sins: the body abides not the pulling out of eyes, or cutting
off of hands and feet: so as let the Minister come to saw or fear a desperate
member, there is such reluctation and opposition, as makes a whole parish too
little for the Minister and people. The cause of all this is, they consider not
this end of the Ministry. If they could thus reason; for this end is this man
set here, to be the watchman over the house of Israel, to sound a trumpet
against the sins of Judah, to redress our disorder, to plant Gods graces
amongst us, to beat down sin, superstition, ignorance, profanesse; then
should we not here such graceless speeches, as Corah and his company utter
against Moses the man of God; Who made him a controller? he is very busy to
meddle with such and such things, which concern him not; come let us smite him
with the tongue: and much a do is there to keep Zidkiahs fist from Michaes
face. Whereas if they could think them the Ministers of God for their wealth,
(as the Apostle speaks of the Magistrate) or if they could conceive them to
have the watch of their souls committed unto them: either of these arguments*
by the judgment of the spirit of God, would be strong enough, to enforce
reverence unto their persons, and obedience unto their doctrine.

Now to the duty and office of Titus: the Apostle reduces all his labor to
two heads. 1. (...): 2. (...).
1. the reforming of things that remain. 2. the appointing of elders in every
city. In the order of which precepts, the Apostle shows, that the way to
plant Gods ordinances, is first to redress and remove such disorders as make
most opposition: for Dagon and the Arc will not stand together, He that would
lay the foundation of a house, must first remove the rubbish.
but one will fall down on his face. As it is in the natural body, so is it
in the Ecclesiastical, if there be a predominancie of some peccant humor,
that must necessarily be first purged out, before any means can be to purpose
used to breed good blood and humors. Never did any of the kings of Judah any
great matter for the establishing of true religion, till they had rooted out
Idolatry, and broken down the altars and groves of their Idols: Asa took a
right course, to bring the holy vessels, and things dedicated to the Lords
house into the temple; 1. King. ^5.
when he broke his fathers idols, took away the Sodomites, put down his
mother Maacha from her regencie for her idols, and burnt them by the brook
Kidron. See the like in Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 31. who gathered all Israel to
break down altars, cut down groves, cast down the high places; and then made
the divisions of the Priests and Levites, according to their ministry in the
Temple. Of Josiah, see c. 34.1. ad 8. Yea, Jesus Christ the wisdom of his
father, could not, nor did establish any thing until in his first sermon he
had reformed the gross expositions, and Pharisaicall glosses, whereby they had
corrupted the law: teaching the same truth with our Apostle, that the
redressing of disorders is but a way and means of planting the Lords
ordinances.

Use. We pray that Gods kingdom may come every where, and that the Lords
ordinances only may take place in his Church; now that this may be effected,
we must also pray, that he would overthrow the man of sin, and disperse the
mists of darkness in all countries, which trouble the shining brightness of
the Gospel: that the whole bondwoman may be cast out, which stands against
the right of the right heir; that the head and tail of Antichrist may be cut
off, and that no stumpe of Dagon may remain to keep out the institutions of
Jesus Christ.

For the former of these two: It will first be asked, what power Titus had to
control disorders in this Island; and if he had any, whether it did not
derogate from the power of the civil Magistrates? Ans. Titus had a
ministerial power, which no more derogated from the sovereign power of the
Magistrate; then if the Gospel were now established in it again, would it
weaken the power of the Venetians, Ministerial power weakeneth not, but
st^blishet^ the power of the Magistrate.
in whose hands now it is: nor no more then the power of the Gospel, does
weaken the states and scepters of Christian Princes, which indeed are
stablished by Christ's scepter. The reason is, because the power of the word and
sword of the magistrate and Minister, are of a diverse nature: for although
both of them have their power from God; and one general scope, which is the
good of men; yet in them is it far different. 1. In their object. Difference
of these two in 3. things.
The one has power over all men, and all the things of men. The other has
power over all men, but only in the things of God. The one binds The
minister only may execute ministerial office and power.
the other the inward man, his soul, conscience, and spirit, of which God
only is the Lord: the one orders causes Ecclesiastiacall according to the
w^^d, the other only may execute them. 2. In their manner of commanding. The
civil power may command obedience to it self in it own name, as means of
enforcing. The civil has the use of the sword, to arrest, imprison, make own
dominions, where they are only under God.

And here first may be noted, that after the Apostle had taken great pains in
the planting of this Church of Creta: yet were many things wanting and
defective still: He says not (...), but (...).
for Titus is left behind him, to redress things defective, which must not be
conceived, as that the Apostles either thorough ignorance, forgetfulness, or
carelessness, omitted any thing; but because they were cast into straights of
time, and could not every where finish every thing, at least effectually and
executionally, but only by way of direction. Which is a ground of sundry
considerations:

Comites Apostolorum.
First, it notes what was the special work of an Evangelist; namely, that
being the companions of the Apostles, they were to bring on the work of the
Lord to perfection, both by establishing that foundation they had laid, and
building on further by their direction, where they left off. The office was
middle between the Apostle and the Pastor, the calling was immediate from the
Apostles, as the Apostles was immediate from Christ. Where by the name
Evangelists, are not meant those, who in a straighter sense are so called, as
whose help the Lord used, to write the history of Christ, and beginnings of
Christian religion; two of which were Apostles, and other two their companions,
as Mark, and Luke: but those whom we call vice-apostles, or pastors
forerunners, who were in preaching the Gospel, planting the ministry, and
administration of holy things, to be (as hands and feet) wholly at the
Apostles appointment, to call and recall, whether and when they would: such as
Timothy, Titus, Mark, Tychichus, serving now in one Church, now in an other,
as the Apostles pleased to use them; whose office because their calling was
from the Apostles, and their work serving the founding and rearing of the
first Christian Churches, and that by the direction of the Apostles, must needs
also cease with the Apostles.

Secondly, notwithstanding many defects and wants in this Church, and those
great ones, and that in constitution, for we see their cities were destitute of
elders, and Church governors: yet was it neither neglected by Paul, nor
separated from by Titus, as a cage of unclean birds: teaching us, Ex ijs quae
in Ecclesia Christiana requiruntur vt partibus suis omnibus constet, solam
doctrinam videri nobis absolute and sine vlla exceptione necessariam. Beza de
Praesb. and excom.
not presently to condemn, a number and society of men (much less of
Churches) for want of some laws, or government (for no Church is not wanting
in some) if they join together in the profession of truth of doctrine, and
worship: for so many of the Churches, planted by the Apostles themselves, might
have been refused for wanting some officers for a time, although they were
after supplied. How much better were it that the spirit of meekenes should lead
into a patient expectation, when God will further beautify his Sion, to make
her become the praise of the world; then that the spirit of pride should hurrie
us into a rash and peremptory sentence against even whole Churches? Did not
Paul when the Church of Galatia had revolted from the Doctrine of free
justification by Christ, yet call and account it a Church still? Let them show
any of our errors of this nature. Object. But those Churches, and this in Creta
was in constituting; but yours after a long time by public laws, and common
consent, have refused the laws of Christ, and that after you have been
convinced not to be the Church of Christ. Ans. But where is this sufficient
conviction? If it be said in their books; the truth is, although they have
pointed us to some wants, yet none of them have sufficiently concluded us no
Church at all: and suppose our case were altogether as ill as they would make
it, who are they that they should give us a bill of diuorcement? If a private
man err and offend, must he not first be admonished, and then censured, and
judged? but by whom? by private men? no, but by the Church: and shall not a
whole Church, or many Churches challenge the same form of proceeding? and
therefore seeing this is not done by our neighbor reformed Churches, which no
doubt are the true Churches of God: we remain, and shall truly retain the
name of the Church, and people of God; and leave them to the reforming of their
error, both in the matter of their plea, as also in the manner of their
proceeding.

Thirdly, we learn hence, that no Church is hastily brought to any perfection.
The Apostles themselves the master builders, No Church can suddenly be brought
to perfection: why.
with much wisdom, and labor, and often in long time, made not such
proceedings; but that, had they not provided laborers to follow them with a
diligent hand, all had been lost. Much a do had they to lay the foundation,
and prepare matter for the building: and yet this they did, by converting they
belong to the Catholic Church) make not a particular visible Church, till they
join in some public service, and worship of God, according (...).
never had any building (except Babels towers, which had Gods own hand from
heaven against them) such outward opposites against it, as this has: here is
Satan, and all the gates of hell: here is Sanballat, and Tobiah, Simon Magus,
and Amaziah: here are false Christ's, false Apostles, Heretics, Tyrants, all
standing against Christ, and making war against his body. In all which
regards, if Solomon in the days of peace without all opposition, 2. C^r. 2.17.
having an hundredth, and three and fifty thousand and six hundred workmen,
cannot under seven years finish the material Temple: how hardly (think we)
must this spiritual house, standing of living stones, go up? how slowly is it
reared, having more enemies (and those no weak ones) then Solomon had workmen:
even as many as there be natural men in the earth, unmortified lusts in men,
or devils in hell; all of them with all their power, resisting the proceedings
of the Church, and Gospel.

Use. 1. This doctrine lets us see, what great things God has done for such a
people, A great work has God done for that people among whom he has settled
his ordinances.
as among whom he has planted h^s ordinances: many strong holds, and
oppositions has he brought down, many enemies has he subdued, many engines of
Satan and his instruments has he broken, before he could settle his glory,
and cause it to dwell among his people. For as it was at the first breaking out
of this light to the world by Christ's own preaching, never was the world on
such a fire, never was any age so fruitful in tyranny, and heresy: so has
it been proportionally ever since, in the several parts of the world, where
this grace has appeared. Witness in these parts of Europe the stirs, and
tumults in all the countries against the light restored by Luther: witness also
the fires, and flames consuming the bodies of Gods servants in our own
country, in and since the days of King Henry the 8. of worthy memory: that
had it not bin the truth of God, it could never have come to this where we see
it: for which mercy all the land should be moved to much thankfulness.

Use. 2. Let every man hence be moved to help forward, and lend a hand to the
beautifying and perfecting of this spouse of Christ; Every man set hand to this
work to help it forward.
that as it were by many hands, this difficult work may become the lighter.
Among the Jews every man brought somewhat to the Tabernacle, and so it was
reared, some more, some less, but every man something: so let the Magistrate
bring his authority, and countenance: the Minister pure doctrine and holy life
to the building of the Church: the rich their riches to the honor of God; the
poor good affections* and all hearty prayers, that we may once see Sion in
her perfect beauty. Thus even very mean men shall be honored so highly as
they shall become assistants to the Ruler of the whole earth; as some so
understand the place of Iehoshuah, Zach. 4.14.
and Zerubbabel.

Use. 3. A ground of moderation, Bear with meeknes some wants which thou can
nor help.
to bear so far as good conscience, and a man's calling will permit, the
imperfections of any Church: and in the wants of it, carry our selves as
peaceably as may make to the honor of the God of peace; and the manifestation
of our selves the sons of peace, as well knowing, 1. that it is not to be
expected of any Church It is not yet time to build up the house of the Lord:
Hagg. 1.2.
and therefore content our selves to dwell in seiled houses, and sleep in
sound skins, although the Lords house lie wast. And hereupon, that the Church
before time has a long time been wanting in many things tending to the
perfection of it; to ground a perpetual imperfection, is a piece of Satan's
sophistry: and argues the want of that most dutiful affection of children
toward such a mother, pleading rather for her blackenes then beauty, and not
rejoicing to see this spouse bedecked with all her ornaments.

The second point in this first duty of Titus, is gathered out of the word
translated, to redress: but properly signifies a continual and instant
straightning of things which grow crooked in the Church. (...).
Whence we learn, that there is a continual bending, and inclining of good
ordinances in the Church, even in their best estate. Gods best ordinances in
their best estate are continually bending.
After that sin got once into Paradise, and took the hold of our first
parents innocent hearts, not the best ordinances that ever the Lord instituted,
could so fence themselves, as to keep it from them: how soon after had all
flesh corrupted their ways? how were his laws engraven in the tables of men's
hearts so forgotten, as he must be forced to write them in tables of stone?
after that, how was that law written by his own fingers, generally corrupted,
and violated? as appears by Christ's reformation of them: how his own polity
was violenced of Priest and people, all the Prophets as with one voice and
mouth complain: how all the ordinances of the new Testament were soon
ouerturned, and by degrees clean shaken out of the Church by the rising and
grouth of Antichrist, who even in the Apostles days began to work; appears
in the history of the Church. Hereunto add the readiness of the malicious man
to sow tares; the unwillingness of the flesh to endure the Lords yoke; the
business, and curiosity of man's wit and fleshly wisdom, which will be adding,
detracting, or deprauing his institutions by a restles turkising of them: the
state of the Church militant, now here now there, exercised with continual
vicissitudes, and changes (as of day and night) so of prosperity, and
adversity, according as God gives Kings over it, either in mercy, or wrath,
protectors, or persecutors: all these plainly prove, that which is not
obscurely employed, that the best things in their best estate, are on the
bending hand, and inclining unto corruption.

Our perfection here is a sense, and strife against imperfections. Aug. de
temp. sermon. 49.
Use. 1. This point lets us see our imperfection in this world, and that all
our perfection stands in two things, 1. in sight of imperfection: 2. in
strife unto perfection. For that the Church cannot be perfect, is manifest in
the continual declinings of us that are the members. Which should make us
ashamed, when we see our turnings back daily reproouing us. The Lord if his
pleasure had been such, might have as perfectly beautified and stablished his
Church in earth, as ever it shall be in heaven: but he sees it fitter for us,
to be brought to an humble walking before him, in sense of our infirmity; as
also daily to repair unto him, who is both the author and finisher of our
faith; that he would be pleased to lay as the first, so the last stone of this
his building, that the whole praise of it may be his.

No Church on earth so well ordered as that it need not further reformation.
Use. 2. They may hence see their error that conceive of any Church in earth so
well settled, and ordered, that it needs no further reformation: little know
such the necessity of the Church, and the continual bendings even of her
strongest towers. See we not that almost every year requires a new parliament
for the ordering of the commonwealth, that new disorders may be restrained, or
redressed by new laws? do we see any man let his house, but from year to
year, but he will surely bind the tenant to constant reparation, as often as
need shall require? and yet inconsiderate men can boldly, and bluntly bolt
out; they marvel what men mean that seek for more, and further reformation,
and they cannot tell what they would have. But alas, are we so near God as we
cannot possibly be drawn nearer? what mean then the common blasphemings,
drunkenness, fornications, riots, Sabbath breakings, and what sins not?
committed almost without all fear? what means it that such dens and breaches
are unmade up, but that hog and swine may enter into the presence chamber of
the great King? Let the strong man keep these holds, we shall see all the
earth fit still enough. But easily may we in every particular member see the
necessity of daily strengthening the whole against such daily declining, as the
first and purest Primitive Churches planted by the Apostles themselves could
not free themselves from; and much less any since.

The second branch of Titus his duty, is the placing of Elders in every city:
where that we may come to the meaning of the Apostle, must be considered 3.
things, 1. who are meant by Elders. 2. who must place these Elders. 3. where
they must be placed.

1. The persons to be placed are called Elders, that is, (...). Chrysostom hom.
2. and Hieron. in hunc locum.
Ministers, Pastors, Bishops: for those who are here called Elders, are called
Bishops, v. 7. true it is that sometimes the word is used generally for any
that bear any Ecclesiastical function, in which sense the Apostles themselves
are sometimes called Elders, yet here I take it, it must be understood of those
who labor in the word and doctrine: 1. Pet. 5.1.
for such are described thorough the Chapter. The reason of the name is taken
from their age, not as though they always were the oldest men: for wisdom is
not tied to graie hairs; and Timothy was one of them, and yet a young man:
but in regard of the wisdom, experience, and staidness, required in such as
are to be called to this office; which ought to be such as ordinarily is not to
be found in young years. For how meet is it that the man of God should be
furnished with gravity and authority, that every way he may be worthy of
double honor, both in regard of his person, as also of his gifts, place, and
works sake. The Papists every where translate this word Priests, and make
praesbiteri, and sacerdotes all one. Wherein although the word cannot be more
unfitly translated; yet would we be loath greatly to strive with them about
names and titles (as having matters of greater moment and difference, more then
we wish) were it not that the very name were a supporter of that horrible
Idolatry of theirs, so infinitely derogatorie to the only sacrifice of
Christ. And therefore, seeing the Ministers of the new Testament, are never so
called in the new Testament, but (...), and (...), and never (...), it were
good and safe to keep our selves to the titles the Gospel has given us. Est
diligentia digna pijs propter concordiam loqui cum Ecclesia recte sentiente.
Chem. de vtilit loc. theolog. 1. Pet. 2. Rev. 15.

Patres non nunquam abusione quadam nomen sacerdotis tribuunt ministris Euang.
sij. Whitak. contr Dur. pa^agr. 48.


And seeing that the Papists impiously not only retain the name in the proper
signification, but also an office of Priesthood, flatly opposite unto the
Priestly office of Jesus Christ* it is no less then our duty to oppose our
selves against both such an office, and such a title. Which in the proper
signification is so peculiar, as it is attributed to none under the Gospel, but
unto Christ himself. I deny not but in the common acceptance of the word, it
is ascribed to all Christians both Ministers and people, who are called an holy
Priesthood, and believing are made Kings and Priests unto God. Neither is it
denied, but that some of the Greek and Latin fathers called the ministers of
the Gospel Priests, but this was by improper and translated speech: partly in
that by their ministry they do daily offer, and sacrifice men unto God, Romans
15.16. and partly, because they held the places in the Church which the Priests
and Levites did before the coming of Christ: imitating herein the Prophets
themselves, as Isay 66.21. prophesiyng of the glory of the new Testament,
says, that the Lord would take of their sons for Priests, and for Levites:
not that they were to be such as were to offer typical and figurative
sacrifices of that only sacrifice, Nec hoc loco permisisse se ^it Tito vt
libera and quasi regia potestate ministros Ecclesiis praesiciat, sed vt salvo
iure and potestate eligendi sive praesentandi quae est penes Ecclesias, and
collegia sacerdotu^, moderator ipse accedat, and ordinator. Magalianus Jesuit.
ad Tit. cap. 1. sect. 5. annot. 2. Antequam diaboli instinctu studia in
religione fierent co^muni Praesbyterorum consilio gubernabantur. Hier. in
locum. Omni actu ad me perlato placuit Praesbyterium contrahi vt firmato
consilio, quid circa personam eoru^ obseruari deberet omnium co^sensu
statueretur. Cypr. lib. 3. epist 11 ad Cor.
as the Jewish Priests; nor yet commemoratiue, as the Romish (seeing all
sacrifices but only the spiritual oblations of Christians were ceased) but he
calls them by that name then in use, noting them only as the successors of
the Priests and Levites, but not ascribing any proper work of that office unto
them.

2 The person placing these Elders, is Titus, who has commission given him,
that as the chief governor and moderator of this action, should establish
teachers of sound doctrine in all the cities throughout the Island: and because
the whole action was to be chiefly ordered by him, it is wholly ascribed unto
him: as the Consul is said to create Consuls, when notwithstanding there was a
court or assembly of Consulls at the choice or appointment of them. Which if
it be not thus to be understood* I see not how Elders could be appointed by
election, as the manner of the Apostles was, Act. 14.23. and Timothy must
neither lay hands on any man rashly, nor yet partake herein with other men's
sins, namely, such as were used to be joined with him in this business, 1.
Tim. 4.14.

3 The place where, is, in every (...), subaudi (...).
city: that is, wheresoever there is a body of people for a fit congregation,
there must a Pastor or Elder be placed: the phrase is of the same valor with
that, Act. 14.23. When they had ordained Elders by election, in every (...)

No religion can thrive or continue if the min^sterie be unsettled and
discontinued.


Church. For even in the Apostles days there was a certain kind of
distinction of Churches, and congregations: for the Elders had their flocks,
over which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, and which depended on them,
1. Pet. 5.2. Act. 20.28.

Doctr. Even there where the Church is planted, is such an absolute necessity
of a settled ministry, as without it, it is impossible that religion can
either thrive or continue: and therefore as the Lord had formerly dealt, in
planting his polity among the Jews, so does he here in planting Christian
religion among the Gentiles: no sooner was his law given concerning his
Tabernacle, but Aaron and his sons, and the tribe of Leui must be sanctified
to the office of Priesthood, to attend on holy things, to teach and offer, and
perform their several duties according to the Lords direction, else had the
former labor been lost: in like sort in vain had the publishing of the
Gospel been (although by the Apostles themselves) had they not established
such ordinances every where, as served for the strengthening and proceeding of
it: of which the settling of the ministry, and appointing Pastors over people,
is the principal.

Reas. Reasons.
1. How necessary was it for the whole administration of God among his people
to have a set place of abode, that they might ask

2. Our weakness is such that notwithstanding all the benefit of standing

3. Experience shows, that in such places, where such ministeries be

4. The ordinance it self speaks for it own necessity: being the Ephesians.
4.11.
For we may not always be babes and weaklings, but there is a perfection of
Christianity which hereby we must be led unto, Heb. 6.1. not that any
perfection of knowledge or holiness can be attained of us, as Anabaptists
foolishly dream; but partly in respect of that further degree which we ought
ever to contend unto, for in the school of Christ we may wax old daily
learning, and the greatest scholar shall yet be far from perfection: and
partly comparatively, men of grace and knowledge may be called perfect, and
have attained a further degree of perfection, then such as are rude and
ignorant, subject to be carried about with every wind, and are not yet gotten
out of the elements of religion: a man is said to be of perfect wisdom,
strength, and other gifts of body and mind in comparison of a child, or one
not come to man's estate; a Master of Arts may be called a perfect scholar in
respect of a schooleboy: and to this perfection of Christianity are we led by
means of this ordinance.

Every man stands in as much need of daily bread for his soul as for his
body.
Use. To reprehend such as conceit themselves, that when they have gotten a
smattring of knowledge, they must needs have faith also, and afterward need no
Ministry nor sermons: but mark where the life of God is, it will make the
soul crave the daily bread, as the natural life does the body: neither sees
that man any thing of God, and the mysteries of his kingdom as he ought, that
presumes of his knowledge so far, as that when he has begun to build, and
laid a foundation, like the fool gives over, and never comes to lay the
roof. Perfection of true knowledge is the sight, and sense of imperfection,
and religion in the heart, espieth daily wants and decaies in the soul: and
repaireth to the ordinary Ministeries, for the daily repairing of them. Which
ordinances whosoever co^temptuously forsake, great scholars they may be, but
they were never good men.

Bless God for thy own liberal supply.
Use. 2. Let us rejoice, that the Lord has so liberally supplied us in this
necessity, and testify our thankfulness in diligence and subjection under
the settled ministry, that our judgments, wills, and affections may be settled
in the truth: for to the obseruer it will appear, that such for most part are
wavering and variable, who content themselves with a variable ministry, now
hearing one, now another, now here, now there, without fixing themselves to
some one. As for such as under a settled ministry come and go at their
pleasure, now they hear one Sermon, then another, slipping in and out as they
list, to them I say, little is their conscience, great is their sin, and
manifest is their fickleness and inconstancy in their religion.

Pray that others in want hereof may be supplied.
3. Hence is a ground of petition that God would place Pastors in every
congregation, that his kingdom might come every where, that every
candlestick might carry a burning and a shining light: seeing we see here that
it is Gods ordinance, that so it should be. And the greater the harvest is, the
more ought we to apply the Lord of it, that he would thrust forth laborers
into his harvest, remoouing whatsoever impediments he sees to hinder such a
blessed and glorious work.

As I appointed thee] After that the Apostle had declared Titus his place and
duty; he comes to the second point, namely, his direction therein: not
giving him leave to add any thing of his own invention, or alter any thing
which Paul himself had done; but binds his hands from doing, or undoing any
thing, in his whole administration, but as Paul had commanded and appointed
him: the tenor of his commission reaches no further. Whence we may learn,
that

Doctr. The ordering and governing of the Church, The ordering of the Church is
not left free, no not to an Evangelist.
is not left arbitrarie, no not to an Evangelist, but Apostolical direction
must go before and guide him. The Church is the house of God, and must not be
ruled by man's inventions, but by the direction of the great housekeeper: and
seeing the father has committed all the government of it to his Son, who
has purchased it with his blood: the charge and burden of it now lies upon
his shoulders, and his prerogative it is to give laws and orders, and by his
voice to rule the house of Jacob. The whole Tabernacle to the very pinnes,
must be framed according to the pattern; and yet that was a mooueable in
comparison of our most stable administration, which shall continue to the end
of he world: and the Lord in describing the parts thereof severally, still
remitteth them to the commandment, to the pattern, and form showed in the
mount: See Exodus 25.9.26.30. and cap. 27.8, etc. twice repeated in so many
words, Act. 7.44. Heb. 8.5. As they therefore in the old Testament had their
pillar of fire and cloud, at the going and standing of which they must go and
stand in all their iourneys; so have we in the new likewise a watch of the
Lord to keep, namely, the will of God expressed in his word, which must be the
beginning of every motion and rest in the Church.

Use. Let the bold Papists come and say one by one, I have a vision, or I have
a dream, No traditions or impositions under Apostolical authority
warrantable.
I have found out this or that tradition concerning prayers for the dead,
fasts, or feasts, confirmed by some diabolical delusions: let them pretend
their rules of perfection, standing in the observation of Evangelical
counsels, such as concern chastity, voluntary poverty, etc. let them
obtrude to us the Church, the Church, and the Church must be heard; and hereby
thrust upon us, what laws they list, for the holding and keeping of life in
that beast of Rome: We say to all these things, that if any of them stand by
Apostolical authority, we will receive all such traditions; but if they be
under Apostolical power, who are they? or what have we to deal with them, or
they with us? seeing that neither an Evangelist may take upon him, nor we take
from him any impositions under Apostolical authority. Object. They allege
Luke 10. He that despises you, despises me. Ans. So long as they speak
according to their commission, which is, teach them to keep all that I have
commanded you, Matthew. 28.28. Object. Matthew. 18. Tell the Church, if he refuse
to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen. Ans. But the Church must
be in their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction tied to some certain rule, which is
described in the word. Ob. But Paul and Timothy delivered some decrees
ordained by the Apostles and Elders, to be kept, Act. 16.4. Ans. 1. They must
know their power subjected and inferior to this Apostolical. 2. even the
Apostles themselves gave no decrees, but such as were comprehended in the
written word: as in Act. 15.29. It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us, to
lay no other burden, but in these necessary things: wherein besides that in
ordering the Church we see they had such an immediate assistance of the holy
Ghost, that they could not err: so also the things decreed were according to
the written word: As the things offered to Idols, and fornication were
condemned in the moral law: the eating of blood forbidden to Noah, before
Moses; and in the law: partly, because there was some symbol in it of the blood
of Christ, by which the soul is purged: and partly, to avoid the note of
inhumanitie and cruelty. And things strangled were before the Apostles times
prohibited for the former reason, least blood not let out should be eaten.
Which two latter, although their nature were changed and free in themselves
after Christ: yet the Apostle in the time of gathering the Church of the Jews
and Gentiles, because he would have no bones of dissension cast between them,
and avoid the scandal; for a time required them, and forbore to abrogate
them: but would have them for the time retained without all opinion of worship,
necessity, and much less of merit: by all which bonds the Papists would
fasten upon us all their humane inventions: so that all their allegations are
too weak to remove us from this hold, so immooueably grounded upon the
Scriptures.

Verse. 6. If any be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children, which are not slandred of riot, neither disobedient. In these words
the Apostle enters that particular direction, how Titus should behave himself
in the house of God; both in the placing of Elders, and redressing abuses in
all sorts of persons. For the former, because it is the maine either beauty or
blemish of any Church, either to be g^aced, or dishonored with gracious, or
graceles Ministers; they being as captains or leaders to the people in
whatsoever ways themselves take up; therefore that Titus should not lay rash
hands upon any, but after trial make choice of such men, as should be found
worthy every way for that worthy work: and that he should not be deceived in
his choice, Paul takes pains to draw him a pattern, and give him a lively
picture of the man whom he means. And this he does by a full description of
the qualities and conditions (as his lineaments) the proportion of which, if he
can epsy, he has found the man he sought, and whom the Church needs. Now
these qualities, as they concern either his life, and conversation; or else
his ability and fitnes for doctrine and instruction, so does the Apostle in
this order prosecute them: the former from this to the 9. verse, the latter in
the latter part of this Chapter.

First then for the life of him, who is to be called to this office in the
Church, it is required, 1. in general, that he be unreprovable, and that
both at home and abroad, as we shall see: 2. more specially for his further
beautifying, he must both be furnished with certain virtues, which must
positiuely shine in him: and these are such as concern his private life, and
family: described in their kinds, and partly in this 6. verse, and urged by
reasons in the 7. as also he must be freed from many particular vices, which
are reckoned up, and amplified by the opposition of the contrary virtues which
he must exercise, verse. 7.8. This is the carriage of these verses, the
particulars whereof shall be propounded, and further prosecuted in their places.

First, it is required in general in the life of him that is to be set over a
people as their pastor, and teacher, that he be unreprovable. By which the
Apostle means nothing less, then one that is without fault, or infirmity,
or sin: for there is none that lives, and sins not: and the high priest,
though a special type of Christ, and the chief Minister of the ancient Church
of the Jews, must first offer for his own sins, and then for the sins of
the people: yea, and Christ himself teaching his Disciples (the chief
Ministers of the new Testament) to pray; taught them to say daily, Forgive us
our trespasses: (...) non (...)
neither does the nature of the word here used, require any such angelical
purity: but means such a one as no man can justly call into question, or
taint with any infamy, and crime. Justly, I say: for otherwise it is not the
privilege of the best, Nunc been viuitur si sine crimine: sine peccato autem
si quis viuere se existimat, non id agit vt peccatum non habebat, sed vt veniam
non accipiat Aug. Quis e^i^ innocen^^t accusasse sufficiat. Julian.
to keep them from tribunalls: before which the Prophets, the Apostles, yea,
and Christ himself had such crimes intended against them as proved capital,
but all iniustly: so is it the lot of the godly, to be often blamed, and
condemned for that wherein they are not blameworthy: and if bare calling in
question, did disable a Minister from the office, it would quickly be brought
about by the malice of the Devil, that all the most conscionable Ministers in
the world should soon be suppressed. And as the charge must be just, so it
must not be frailties, or infirmities that hang upon our nature commonly
corrupted; but gross and open sins, yea and enormious crimes in the sight of
the sun: the just challenge and proof of which, disable a man from this
function by this Apostolical Canon. And howsoever he that is the cleanest, and
has washed himself in snow water, has his own clothes that will pollute
him: yet read we of diverse in the Scriptures, that have attained to walk
without reproof, as Job, Zachary, and Elizabeth: Sine querela, non sine
peccato. August. contr. Coelestin*
and many even private Christians at this day, through Gods mercy, live
without crime* though not any, save the Son of God himself, ever lived
without sin: All which open to us the meaning of the precept.

A man of scandalous life is unfit to be a Minister. Reasons.
Doctr. How able soever a man be to teach, yet if he be of corrupt
conversation, and scandalous in life, he is not fit to be chosen for a
Minister. Reasons. 1. Our Apostle here in the first place, and more largely
insisteth upon the life of him that is to be chosen, and afterward in fewer 1.
Tim. 5.22.24.
adds, that some men's sins go before hand, and some men's sins follow
after judgment: as though he had said more largely, Use all the circumspection
thou can, yet some hypocrites will creep into the Ministry: some are
inwardly profane, and such close sinners thou can not discern, till
afterward they manifest themselves: others are open sinners, of which thou
may judge aright: these latter thou art to hinder; the former reclaim, or
seasonably remove, and so salve up the sore again: for how requisite is it,
that such a sweet and sauorie doctrine, should be matched with a Leuit. 21.17.
neither come near the veil, nor stand by the Altar. 3. A scandalous art thou
become weak like one of us? Isa. 14.10.
and the word shall be still returned upon himself, how can it be expected
that he should do good amongst them? Christ prevented that scoff, Luke 4.23.
Physician heal thy self: and Paul shows the duty of every Minister,
namely, to minister well: and the fruit of it, he gets a good report, and
great liberty in the faith. Wherein let a Minister be wanting; if he were able
to speak with the tongues of men and Angels, 1. Tim. 3.13. Ministri est verba
vertere in opera Hierom. ad Paulinum.
yea, if he had a fiery tongue sitting on his head, he shall never be able to
prevail with ignorant persons, who must be sensibly taught, and that as well by
their eye, as by their ear. 4. It is a most dangerous condition to himself to
be a good teacher of a bad life: 1. Tim. 3.7.
for such a one is in the snare that is, when he sees his life still more and
more exprobrated, and himself more despised every day then other (for it is
just with God, that with the wicked should be reproach) then he begins to grow
so bold, and impudent, as that he casts off all shame, and care, and as one
desperate and hardened in sin, prostituteth himself remorselesly unto all
lewdnes and ungodly conversation.

Use. 1. Hence may we see the reason, The devil has reason therefore both to
deprave the best, and thrust in the worst into the ministry.
why the Devil so mightily labors to slander the most faithful Ministers
of Christ: namely, that by the contempt of their persons, their doctrine also
might be condemned. And therefore he will play at small game ere he sit out. If
he cannot hinder the Ministry, he can disgrace it: If he cannot discontinue
it, he can continue a devil still: that is, both an adversary, and an accuser
of it: for either Christ's Disciples wash not, or fast not; or Christ himself
is a good companion; or John Baptist is too austere and precise; or some
natural infirmity (as Elishaes bald pate) shall be cast as a rub in the way to
make the Doctrine less welcome. And all this because long experience of many
ages has taught this old serpent, that the most wretched miscreant, even Herod
himself, will hear gladly John Baptist, if he conceive him (as he is) a good
and godly man, carrying himself without reproof and exception. The self same
is the ground why he sets himself in all ages to shoue in, and hold in the
Ministry such persons as (like vnfauorie salt) are too base for the dunghill;
every way for the overthrow of this apostolical direction, using and urging
most impregnable arguments, drawn from affinity, affection, some base and
seruill demerit, letters, and requests of great men, or gifts, which blind the
eyes; by which and many other means, Satan's Ministers (for the Apostle calls
them no better) keep out the Ministers of God. 2. Cor. 11.15.
What mischief these stratagems of Satan have wrought in the Church we may see
and bewail, and provoke thence our prayers that the Lord would so let his
kingdom come every where, that such maine pillars of Satan's kingdom, may be
shaken and broken, especially in reformed Churches, which profess, The most
commendable conformity is to join to vncorrupt doctrine ^n unblameable life.
and auow the lifting up of the scepter of Jesus Christ.

Use. 2. Note hence what conformity is most urged by Christ in all his
Ministers: namely, the ^^iting to vncorrupt doctrine, an unblameable life: by
these two, shall all men know who are the true Ministers sent of Christ: this
voice, and these hands are infallible distinctions not only of Ministers from
other men, but even of Ministers among themselves, and the maine and
intolerable inconformitie of Ministers, is the suiting of Jacobs voice with
Esaus hands. The Minister has not done his duty when he has pointed to
others the way to heaven, and himself either stand still like a statue in the
way; or else like the creuise, goes backward: but he must in nothing give
offense, least his Ministry be blamed: 1. Pet. 5.3.
yea more, he must be an example to the ^^ocke: so Paul enioynes Timothy to be
to them that believe, 1. Tim. 4.12.
an example in word, conversation, love, spirit, faith, pureness, even as he set
himself an example to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.10. But thou have known my
doctrine, manner of living, purpose, faith, long suffering, love, and patience:
for this example has the force of a rule either good or bad: Peter's example
constrained the Gentiles to do like the Jews: Gal. 2.13.
and Barnabas was drawn in with him: see also 1. Pet. 3.1. Now not needing
further motives to provoke Ministers to labor after good life, we will only
mention some means, whereby every of them may become unreprovable.

Rules to keep a man unreprovable.
1. Labor with thy heart to set it self still in the presence of God, and this
will be a means to keep it order; whereas otherwise an unruly heart will
break out one time or other.

2. Have a care of a good name, as well as a good conscience; not so much for
thy own as for Gods glory: neither because thy self, but others stand much
upon it.

3. Avoid occasions of sins, appearances of evil, seeing thy motes become
beams.

4. Study to do thy own duty diligently, meddle not with other men's matters.

5. Curb, and cover thy own infirmities, buffet thy body, and bring it in
subjection.

6. Daily pray for thy self, with desire of the prayer and admonition of
others.

Thus ought thou that art a Minister set thy self a coppie unto men;
howsoever the most rent such coppies out of their books, as too precise and
exact.

Use. 3. How men are to conceive of Ministers, not as of men without sin, or
infirmities, as the Apostles confessed they were mortal men, subject to the
same infirmities with others: Act. 14.15.
and to acknowledge the goodness of God in keeping them altogether not from all
sin, yet unreprovable, that is, untainted of greiuous crimes, whereby his
name and this calling should be highly dishonored: which were it well
considered of men, we should not hear such outcries against every infirmity
in the person of the Minister, as though the very calling could exempt him
from sin, which we see the calling of the very Apostles could not do.

Husband of one wife] Having ^eard what is generally required of every Minister
that he be unblameable: Now we are with the Apostle, to descend to those
private virtues which concern his economicall administration. And those in
this verse are two; the former concerning himself, in preserving his own
chastity: the latter respects the persons within his family, namely, his
children, over whom he is to exercise Christian authority, governing them as a
father, who is a Minister: framing them to duty toward God, and himself, and
trayning them up carefully in the doctrine both of faith and good manners. For
1. concerning their religion, it is required that they be faithful children.
2. For their manners they must be, 1. temperate, 2. obedient. And both of these
declared in their contraries whereof they must be free: as 1. they must not be
slandred of riot, which is a lavish wasting, and a needles spending of goods.
2. Not disobedient, but such as will endure the yoke. These two virtues must
especially be exercised of every one that is to be a Minister of Christ: the
former of which beautifieth his own person; the latter graceth his family; and
both of them adorn his calling and profession.

To understand the former aright, we must first remove the false
interpretations: and 2. propound and establish the true sense, and then come
unto the doctrines. And first where the Apostle requires that the Minister be
the husband of one wife: the Papists interpret it most ridiculously in an
allegory, affirming that Paul's meaning is, that an Elder must have but one
wife, and that must be his Church. But the scope of the place is not to answer
the question, whether one minister may have two Churches or no; but what a one
he ought to be for the government of himself and his, that is to be set ever
any people. 2. What means it that this husband must have faithful children;
if he may not have a wise other then the Church? If it be said, that by these
children must be meant the faithful and the children of God begotten in the
Church: I answer, that the same Apostle to Timothy, cutteth the sinews of all
such cauills: where he expounds the same precept necessarily to be meant
literally, and not in this allegory; by the reason of it annexed, ^. Tim 3.^.
for if he cannot govern his own house, how shall he govern the house of God?

Secondly, others say, he must be the husband of one wife only, and that after
the first he may not have a second. Which opinion Montanus and Tertullian
extended to all sorts of men: the Grecians after restrained it to the Clergy:
and the Romanists were ready enough to take it up, and still reserve it among
the rest of their rubbish. But that also is as gross and false exposition. For
1. he that marries a second wife after the decease of the first* (if he keep
himself faithfully unto her,) is still but the husband of one wife, seeing the
law of the former is by God dissolved.

2. It is a general commandment, that if the brother die without children,
Deuteronomy. 25.5.
his next brother was to marry his brothers widow, and raise up seed unto him.
Now as in the other tribes, so doubtless happened it among the Levites, and
therefore the Leuite although a widower, was to marry his brothers wife.
Object. If it be here said, that we now are in precepts delivered to Ministers
of the new Testament; and are not to square our selves unto that special
administration of the old: I answer, that the general precepts of the new
Testament affirm no less: as, He that cannot contain, let him marry: and to
all widows the Apostle gives leave to marry, 1. Cor. 7.39.
so in the Lord: and that that is of general and perpetual equity to men, as
well as women, and to all sorts of men, as to one kind, is plain by Romans 7.3.
The woman if the husband be dead, is free from the law of the man, so as she is
not an adulterer if she take another man. To which truth many of the fathers
accord.

Thirdly, an other sleight of the Papists must be avoided, who have thus
corrupted it: If any have been the husband of one wife, and now be not, he may
be a minister: but the spirit of God changes no tenses here, and the word
(...), must be supplied (...).

Lastly, neither must it be understood, so as the Minister must of necessity
be the husband of one wife, and may not live single: for though all cannot
receive Christ's speech concerning continency, yet some there are to whom it is
given, Matthew. 19.11, 12.
and to them his counsel is, he that is able to receive this, let him receive
it.

But the true meaning is, that the minister ought to be content with one wife
at once, and not defile himself by polygamie: and this precept was not without
ground: for among both Jews and Gentiles, the custom of polygamie had so
far prevailed, that it was become as natural, to marry many wives at once:
now the Apostle perceiving that custom, had taken away the sense of the sin,
and placing Titus to redress things amiss, he begins at this great
enormitie, and prohibiteth him to choose such into office in the Church, as had
given such note of an inordinate life. Quest. But was it lawful for other men
to have more wives then one at once, seeing the precept is given only to
ministers? Ans. No: and yet the minister here only inhibited directly, as whom
he deals with: but the people herein also, so far as his example was
propounded to their imitation, in the observation of the whole law of God. For
here we may fitly observe these 2. rules for our directions. 1. That all the
virtues which are required of common Christians, must be much more in the
minister, as every thing in the sanctuary, was double to that which was
common, as the cubit, the shekel of the sanctuary. 2. That all the moral
virtues required and expressed in the life of the Minister, must be imitated of
common Christians; who must follow him so far as he follows Christ: and in
his general duty see their own; both of them having but one way to heaven.
So much of the meaning. The doctrines are two.

1. The marriage of ministers is a lawful, and holy ordinance of God. 2.
Polygamie was ever a thing blame-worthie, even in the best.
Doct. 1. Seeing that we are cast into the last times, Marriage of Ministers
lawful. 1. Tim. 4 1.2.
wherein the spirits of error shall be more rise then ever: and 2. that many
shall depart and give heed unto them: and 3. that it is enjoined every
faithful teacher to arm his people against them: it is no less then our
duty to warrant out of this place the marriage of Ministers, against all the
impious decrees of Papists: who that they should not want that note of
Antichrist fore prophesied, namely, the contempt of women under a semblance of
sanctity, Dan. 11.
and chastity, as Hierome expounds it: and least their doctrine should not
otherwise appear to be as it is, a doctrine of devils, 1. Tim. 4.1.3. have
prohibited marriage to all orders of their Clergy, and admit none into their
orders, without a vow of perpetual single life; from which if they ever after
depart, they deprive them of all dignities, cut them off as apostates from the
faith, and adiudge them if they justify that opinion, even to death it self.
Quest. But why should they deprive themselves of their liberty, and the
comfort of that estate? it seems to be mere conscience that should lead them
to undergo such a burden. Ans. I hope to make it appear that it is nothing
less then conscience, informed by the word, by the answer of their chief
allegations. Reasons why the Papists resist this doctrine.
In the mean time among sundry other, observe three maine beams which bear
up the this Popish roof. 1. gross hypocrisy, causing them to make a show of
presumptuous pride, for by their doctrine, hereby they seek for a further
perfection then that which the Law requires of them. 3. the maine humane
policy: for hereby they keep their wealth together, may see to be the proppe
of their greatness, and which by the marryage of all their orders might
quickly be dissipated and dispersed. 2. by this policy they have their vassals
and instruments, whom they must dispatch with death and deadly things about
them into all countries, more free and prompt to the undertaking and
accomplishment of any misc^iefe. These I take to be their strongest foundations
of their tottering building; as for other which they vent out to the world,
they are but shows and pre^ences, and sandy grounds of foolish builders, as
now we are to manifest.

Ob. First, out of the old Testament they allege diverse things, as Leu. 11.
Be ye holy, Three maine obiectio^s briefly answered.
for I am holy: and, ye that carry the holy vessels of the Lord, be holy: and,
the Priests and Levites in ministering their turns before the Lord, must
abstain from their wives: and Abimelech would not give David's young men
hallowed bread, unless they had abstained from women: and, they that eat the
Passover had their loins girt, which is the seat of lust. Therefore none in
orders may marry.

Ans. 1. In such allegations they are long and tedious, but of which I may
truly say, as the Stoiks of diseases; if they be long, they are light. And to
begin with their last symbolicall argument, we will lightly pass it, as
worthy of something else rather then an answer: both because symbolicall
divinity will bear no argument, but also in that they have not proved, nor
can, that all they that eat the Passover were Priests: Exodus 12*11.
neither regard they that they were presently to depart out of Egypt, and
therefore needed to trusse up their long and loose garments.

As for that of Abimelech, 1. David's servants were soldiers, not Priests, and
therefore is it impertinent. 2. they were such as had wives, how can we
conclude from them, 1. Sam. 21.4.
that other men ought to have none. 3. it was a question which the Lord would
have Abimelech ask David, and that by oracle, as appears, v. 11. concerning
some legal defilement; which even by touching some wo^en, might debar them
from touching the holy bread. 4. let them ^ so conclude that no Israelites
might marry, because at the giving of the law, they must abstain 3. days
from their wives.

In the three former allegations they are not unlike an inexpert musician, who
harpeth altogether upon some one iarring string, and so marres all the music:
for all of them are laid upon this unsound and ungodly position, which they
take for granted, that marriage is an unclean and unholy thing: They forget
that they make marriage a Sacrament.
for this is the tenor of all their conclusions, be holy, and therefore
abstain from marriage. Which heresy of Montanus and the Manichee^* Pope
Syricius and his successors have fought manfully to maintain (...) of that
place of the Apostle, Those that are in the flesh, cannot please God: as though
they had never read, that God was the institutor of it, and not as a remedy,
but when there was no malady, Romans 8.8. Of all the works in the flesh
reckoned in Gal. 5.9. marriage is none.
in the state of innocence, between innocent persons in an innocent place:
that it was an estate blessed by God before the fall, and after the fall had
the same blessing renewed upon it to Noah and his children, as though they had
forgotten that the Son of God had sanctified it by his presence; graced it by
his first miracle; called it a conjunction of God, whom God has joined, Adeo
honorabile est coniugium, vt cum eo possit quis eti^ ad sanctam fide^
asc^ndere. Chrysostom. in locum.
etc. as though they would not know what the Apostle had said, that every
ordinance of God, is sanctified by the word and prayer; and that all things are
pure to the pure: and this institution so especially, as that the infidel
husband is sanctified in the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife in the
believing husband: and that the woman thorough bearing of children shall be
saved if she continue, etc. But what should I light so many candles in such
sunshine, were it not to discover their monstrous delusion.

Secondly, are none commanded to be holy but the Priests, and not as well all
the Israelites? or was that sanctity any other, but that which stands in
pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned, in innocence and love toward
God and men? Now if all such as thus must be holy are inhibited marriage, where
should we seek an holy seed?

Thirdly, Nec ratione nec authorita^e probatur, quod absolute loque^do sacerdos
peccet contrahendo matrimonium nec ordo in quantu^ ordo, nec ordo^in quantum
sacerest impeditivus matrimonij. Card. Caiet in epist. Tit. 1. tract. 27.
if the Priests had some legal purifications which must be used before they
appear and approach before the Lord; were they not all typical
representations of that spiritual holiness, wherein even we ought to resemble
them? and being so, are they not all dated? or if we consider them as they
were also antetypes of Christ's purity, the high Priest of a better covenant,
are they not expired? or if the Popish Priests will be so exact in imitating
them, let them give us a reason, why they follow them not in all such rites of
that kind, as well as in some? for when the Priests entered the tabernacle, they
were prohibited the use of wine, Leu. 10.9. neither must they at any time
meddle with the exequies and funerals of the dead, neither must they be
shaven, Leu. 21.1.5. but to imitate them herein would not stand with their ease
or profit. And yet notwithstanding all these purifications, was it never
concluded that Priests and Levites might not have their wives: but if any found
reason may be gathered from their example, it might rather be thus framed; Even
the Priests and Levites had their wives, and much more may the Ministers of the
new Testament.

As for that they object out of Isay 56.4.5. The answer is ready and plain,
that the Prophet speaks not of any that had vowed continency; but of such as
had been made Enuches involuntarily, to whom that comfortable promise is made,
not for their continency, or being Enuches, but for keeping the sabbath,
choosing the thing which was pleasing to God, and taking hold of his covenant.

Object. Further out of the new Testament they allege many things, especially
out of the 1. Cor. 7. as where Paul wishes men to be without distraction, ver.
5. to abstain for a time to give themselves to fasting and prayer, 7. where is
concluded that this estate hinders the exercises of piety, and therefore
intolerable in a Minister: and further, where he says that the unmarried
cares for the things of the Lord, but the married rather care how to please
one another, v. 32. and, those that are unmarried, it is good so to abide: and,
he that gives not his daughter does better: and, the widow is more blessed if
she so abide, ver. last. Ergo. No Minister may marry.

Ans. Do not these men bewray the nakedness and poverty of their cause, when
they are glad to snatch here and there a word, to wrest against the authors
meaning, without due regard: yea, with utter neglect of the scope and all
circumstances of the place? for to whom writ the Apostle? was it not to the
whole Church of Corinth? so as by their collection, it was not lawful for any
man or woman of that city to be married. 2. what times writ Paul in? was it
not in times of most heavy persecutions; which in all that chapter he had a
special eye unto? 3. In what manner writ he? (...), non (...).
does he not say, that he writ this by permission, and not by commandment? v.
6. does he not affirm that every man has his proper gift, according to which
he is to walk? v. 7. and 17. does he not profess that he speaks for their
commodity, as giving them an wholesome counsel, and not to entangle them in a
snare? v. 35. and that which he speaks is in regard of the present occasion
and necessity: v. 26. notwithstanding all which, no married persons may
defraud one another, v. 5. and much less depart one from an other, v. 10. 4.
For the matter alleged. Because the Apostle would have all Christians as free
from distraction as might be; and because they must abstain too extraordinary
fasting and prayer, which those dangerous days, and tyrannical times called
upon them for, (the place not being meant of ordinary prayer) can it be wr^ng
out of the place, that marriage therefore must be vowed against, either of
them, or much less of any other sort of men? Again, because the Apostle
speaks of some carnal persons matched together, that they regard the things
of the world, and the pleasing one of another above the pleasing of God: can
any show of argument evince, that therefore either marriage is unholy, or is
of any sort of men to be disavowed? for that the place must be so understood,
is evident: else what shall we think of Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca,
Elcanah and Annah, Zachary and Elizabeth, Aquilla and Priscilla: shall we
think that these faithful couples cared not for the things of god? and if they
did, why cannot other believers? and if marriage were such an enemy to prayer,
and hinderance of piety in it self, as they would make it, why are all
Christians commanded to pray continually? to possess their vessels in
holiness, and honor? how is it that we read of families called Churches? how
could any man say, I and my house will serve the Lord? how does the wise man
say, that by a wise woman the house is built up? And indeed where God gives
such a one, a man is freed from many distractions, and finds his wife a fit
help made unto him; whereas it was not good for him to be alone. Finally, as
all married persons neglect not; so all single persons seek not the things of
God: for we read of many foolish virgins.

Furthermore, where the Apostle affirms it to be good to abide single, either
in virginity or widowhead; and not to give the daughter in marriage, etc. and
that only in regard of the present times; shall no time afford lawfulnes for
some sort of men to marie? And that those precepts are so to be understood, the
Apostle himself expresses: for if good were opposed to evil of sin; then
had the Apostle contradicted himself, when he said, that he that marries (not
only does not evil) but does well: but good is opposed to that which is
incommodious, or inexpedient: so is the word also used Matthew. 19.10. and this
is that the Apostle says, it is not good for the present necessity: that is,
it is not conducible, (...).
expedient: for that it is more joyous for a man to drink his own cup of
trouble in troublesome times, then to be vexed with the miseries of a destitute
wife and children. The like precept was given upon the like occasion to the
Jews, that they should not marry, nor get children: Why? Ierem. 16.
some Papist would hence affirm, because marriage is an unclean thing, and a
sin: No: but in regard of those most heavy times of war, exile, and
captivity; wherein they should have less sorrow and grief who had none to
care for but themselves: and this is the reason expressed by the Apostle, where
he says, that such as are married shall have sorrow in the flesh: verse. 28.

Many more places they abuse, but these are the chief. Against all which, this
place of the Apostle may settle the judgment; where is avouched, that the
Minister may be the husband of one wife, and the qualities of this wife
described, 1. Tim. 3.12. the evidence of which two places collated, none but
such as are willingly blind can resist: which with some other places have so
pressed them, as that they have been driven to, and from many poor shifts. As
1. they allege against this place, that in the Apostles days indeed while
the Church was rude and deformed, there were fewer precepts given, and there
being but few converted, it was permitted to the Clergy to marry: but
afterward the Church growing more confirmed, and better ordered, this precept
of chastity was added. Ans. But who but Satan could teach them so to
distinguish, Ecclesia tanqua^ ADAMVS prima origin integertima fui^, quo
longius pergit* plus sordis contrahit. Brightm. in Apocal.
and determine that which was lawful in Paul's time, to be now a sin so
capital as must be prosecuted with no less punishment then death it self?
again, how basely do they deem of Apostolical constitutions, in regard of
their own devises? accounting them as rude, and childish things, and such as
could bring no Church to any perfection. Besides, how do they forget that the
Apostle had reformed many things in this Island already, (...).
and left Titus to absolve the rest, and proceed in the reformation thereof
still? and yet in that his finishing and perfecting things begun, this rule is
delivered, if any be unreprovable, the husband of one wife. 2. Others seeking
to elude this text say, that the Church indeed had power then to appoint what
constitutions she pleased, and saw fittest for her present condition, and that
this power she still retains: so as look as the Master of a family has it
in his power to entertain none but single men servants in his family; the like
power has the Church if she please, to admit none into this service or
Ministry but single persons. Ans. But to follow them also into that starting
hole: 1. They must prove their Church to be this family of Christ: and the
Pope to be the master of this family. 2. Let them improoue that the Master of
this family is the Lord Jesus, who has already prescribed a certain form,
by which he will have his Ministers chosen: and for the use of the Church to
the end of the world has recorded it in the Scriptures, of which this is a
special branch, if any be the husband of one wife. 3. Others have found out
another shift: namely, that he who now is the husband of one wife and has
children too, may be chosen: but the Apostle says not, that after one is made
a priest, he may marry a wife: so that if the worst fall, the vow of chastity
at the consecration of a priest shall still stand in force. Ans. But what a
miserable shift is this? for can it be lawful for a married man to be a
Minister; and not for a Minister to be a married man. It is all one as if an
Anabaptist should thus reason; He that is now a Magistrate, may lawfully use
his Magistracy; but yet it is not lawful for any man to become a Magistrate:
or when we are commanded to fear God, a man might thus reason: God bids him
that has his fear exercise it; but yet he enioynes us not to use the means
to come by it. Surely notwithstanding all these follies, it must needs be as
lawful to become an husband, Sacerdotium non dirime^re contractum matrimonij,
etc. Caietan. in loco supra citato.
as be one: and he that can without sin have a wife, may without sin marry
one: we will therefore conclude with their Cardinal, that priesthood dissolueth
not matrimony, whether before or after ordination contracted, if we seclude
all other laws, and stand only to those which we have from Christ and his
Apostles.

Use. Seeing then this is one of the laws of nature, Every man that has
nature (...) him has right in this law of nature.
every one that has nature in him has right unto it. In the state of
innocenci^, marriage was instituted as a further perfection, then man had by
his creation: since the fall, it is also a remedy of his imperfection. 2. The
Apostle calls it, honorable among all: the new Papists shift, in all things,
is a senceles cavil, and full of folly: besides, (...).
the words following restrain it to persons: But whoremongers, etc.

Object. But if among all, says Bellarmine, then among them of consanguinitie,
and affinity. Ans. If he had looked to the words following, and the bed
undefiled, he would have saved that objection. 3. The priests of the law, yea
the high priest that was to offer before the Lord twice every day, and the
Levites, and the Prophets, and Prophetisses: and the Apostles, and most of
their successors, till 1070. years after Christ, Till the time of Pope
Hildebrand.
were married men. Famous and very remarkable is that confession of Policrates
Bishop of Ephesus, who affirms of himself that he was the eight Bishop all
descended of Bishops: Eusebius hist. eccl. lib. 5. cap. 24.
which history me thinks might blanke them, or cause them to blush. 4. But if
that do not; the curse of God upon this their constitution, if they were not
given over to strong delusions, might cast dung upon their faces in this
defense. Well observed Luther, that this one law brought in among them all the
sins of Sodom: Rev. 8. Johannes a Casa Bishop of Beneventum, wrote an
Italian Poem in commendation of Sodomie.

Zeged Mutius did the like, whose book is approved by the bull of Pope Julius
3. Pope Sixtus 4. built a Stews at, Rome for the same unnatural lust.

Contra Origin. haeres. 29. de quibus August. Isti sunt nefanda facientes, sua
corpora corruptioni tradentes.


for which no doubt the spirit of prophecy calls Rome by the name of Sodom,
for the sodomiticall filthiness of it: for the defense of which unnatural and
monstrous sin (not to be thought on, much less without blushing named) some
of them have written and published sundry books. If the monasteries in other
countries came as well to the rifling as ours did in the days of King Henry
the 8. of famous memory therefore; no doubt but many Bales might be set on
work to write many centuries of their filthiness. Or if some of their fishponds
come to the casting, as that in Gregory the greats time, it may be that some
of their own would not stick to write of 6000. heads of infants found in the
mudde of some one of them. But because it is a shame to speak in public of
the things they shame not to do in secret, I will forbear further to move
and stir in this sink, which sufficiently stinketh in the nostrills of God
and men; and conclude the point with Epiphanius his speech; They have refused
marriage, but not lust: no true^ of the Originians then of all the Popish
orders.

Doctr. Polygamie was ever a thing blameworthy, and evil in it self,
notwithstanding much used of Jew, and Gentile. Reasons.

1. The first matrimony was instituted between two persons only; Polygamie
is and always was unlawful.
of whom the Lord said expressly, they two, (not they three, or more) shall be
one flesh. In which first institution are two grounds ouerturning this sin.
1. Gods action of creating one man, and one woman, and no more. 2. His
iniunction and strait charge to all posterity, that one man should cleave to
one wife, who must be his wife and no stranger; and not to many wives at once:
so as it is against the law of nature, and the first institution.

2. The Lord by Moses forbids it, Leu. 18.18. Thou shall not take one woman
to her sister: that is, thou shall not take one woman to another, to make them
as sisters; for in the 16. verse the marriage of the wives sister is forbidden
by proportion even in monogamie: no not after the sisters death, seeing
consanguinitie and affinity agree in duration alike. Besides that the phrase
in Hebrew is commonly so used: as Genesis 26.31. Exodus 26.3. and the reason of the
precept is, that such a one must not be taken to grieve the other, and seems
properly to be meant of wives in polygamie, aemulae. Genesis 30.1.
who in the Scriptures are called adversaries.

3. The Prophets themselves reprove it upon the ground of the first
institution, Mal. 2.15. God made but one woman at first: and why but one? not
that he wanted spirit, for he had abundance; but because he sought a godly
seed: wherefore keep your selves in your spirit, and let no man transgress
against the wife of his youth: where the Prophet proves it to be not only
against the first institution, but wishes all posterity carefully to avoid
it.

4. Christ himself taxes it as a violencing of the first institution, Mat.
19.4.5. Have ye not read that God made them at the beginning male and female?
and for this cause shall a man leave father, and mother, and cleave to his
wife, (not wives) and they twain shall be one flesh.

5. Christ's Apostles condemned it, Ephesians. 5.31. the same speech of our Savior
Christ repeated: 1. Cor. 7. Let every man have his own wife, not wives: and
here the Apostle accounts it such a blot, as hinders the admission of any
such into the ministry. And thus polygamie being condemned by the first
institution of marriage before the Law, Objections answered.

The first coming in of Polygamie seems plainly to ouerturne the contrary
opinion of Aquinas, whose words are these, Fieri potnit dispen^a^io a Deo per
inspirationem internam. Supplem. 3. part. qu. ^ ^. art. 2.


and also in the Law, after the Law by the Prophets, after them by Christ
himself, and by his Apostles, it follows, that it was ever an evil
condemned even from the beginning.

Object. But the example of the most of the Patriarchs is alleged for the
lawfulness of it, for else all they would not have used it, being the best
men that ever lived.

Answ. The canon law says, that a common error may not prejudice the least
truth: true it is, that after that most savage tyrant Lamech had first depraved
Gods ordinance, it greatly prevailed by example, and especially then when there
was no King in Israel: yet notwithstanding the Prophets, and Christ call men,
not to example, but to the rule of the first institution. 2. We never read of
any of them (no not the best) well carried it: but what fruit had it between
Hadah and Sillah at first, it still retained: For what molestation brought it
even to good men? what a stir had Abraham to compose Sarah and Hagar to
peace; and in their children Isaac and Ismael, what a number of sparkles of
contention were kindled? what heart-griefe was it to Jacob to see such daily
emulation between Leah and Rahel? and what other was the fruit of their envy,
but an occasion further to draw him into sin, in taking first one of their
maids, and then another, and all to please both; to say nothing of the do he
had doubtless about their children. When Moses speaks of Esaus 2. wives, he
added, they were an heart grief to Isaac and Rebecca, Genesis 26.35. when the
Scripture speaks of Gideons 70. sons begotten of his own body, with the
reason, for he had many wives, Iud. 8.30. the very next chapter shows how
Abimelech slew all these 70. sons on one stone, save Iotham. How was Elcanah
troubled to satisfy and recompense his wife Hannah, for the reproach wherewith
Peninnah her adversary vexed her sore? In the inclining of Salomons
prosperity, 1. Sam. 1.6.
the first exception the Lord took against him was, that he loved many
outlandish women, 1. king 11.1.
which sin brought him to all the wickedness that was found in his hands. 3.
Whereas it is said that the Patriarks were carried hereunto not by fleshly
lust, but in desire of increase of that holy seed which was in that one
people: I answer, we may so religiously and charitably conceive of them, and in
that regard of the Lords more special indulgence and connivence, yet can it
not prove lawful; it may make it in them a less evil, but not no fault: for
if it had been lawful for the fathers in regard of multiplying the Church,
and filling the earth, it had been much more lawful and fit for our first
Parents, for to them was said, increase and multiply, and fill the earth, and
yet God permitted it not to them, but it crept into the world against that
first institution.

Object. 2. Sam. 12.8. He gave thy Lords wives into thy bosom; therefore David
had many wives both of his own and Saul's, the Lord being the author.

Ans. Those words (into thy bosom) indeed often signify the near
conjunction of marriage: yet here, as in some other places, it signifies
only, that they were given under David's power and hand, namely, into his
subjection; and so it signifies sometime nothing else, but to have something
with a man: as elsewhere David says, he bore the reproaches of the mighty in
his bosom; Psalm. 89.50.
so here David had with him his Master Saul's wives. 2. If the phrase should not
so be here taken, incest would be defended in David; seeing the consanguinitie
of the wife is in the same degree to the husband as to the wife: and therefore
David could no more marry the stepmothers of his wife Mical, then if they had
been his own. 3. We never read that David took any of them that were Saul's,
to become wife unto himself.

Object. Deuteronomy. 21.10.15. there are two laws which seem to favor it. If a man
cast his affection upon a woman, etc. And if a man have two wives, the son of
the hated, if first borne, shall inherit: and therefore the Lord at least
permits polygamie.

Ans. Neither of these two were simply lawful, nor by the law approved to be
done: but after it was done, the Lord provides a law to avoid the greatest
confusion, by tolerating and not dissoluing it: neither is the law unrighteous
herein, seeing it neither approoueth it, nor simply permits the fact, but
(supposing such a disorder may be done) shows what is best in such a
confusion: so the Lord tolerated the bill of divorce, but never as agreeable to
his will: but as observing a wise rule of lawgiuers, Videndum and quid debeas,
and quid possis.
that in public corruptions, special evils are then to be tolerated, when
they cannot be cured, without a more grievous public evil. If it be here
said, that the wisdom and power of God might have amended or cut off such
disorders, if he had so conceived of them: I answer, it is a vain allegation
of men, not considering that the Lord then sustained the person of a lawgiuer
to a people whom he chose above all the nations of the earth, and not of a
Judge.

Object. Deuteronomy. 25.5. The law was that a brother dying without issue, the next
brother (who perhaps was married) must marry his brothers wife.

Ans. We shall not need to answer with some of the learned, that the widow was
not to become the wife of the brother suruiuing; but that he was to go in to
her and do the duty of a husband in raising seed to his brother: but that it
was a special commandment, for those times, for certain persons, and causes.
For it was not so general as some may take it: seeing 1. it must be meant of
brethren dwelling together, that is, such as had not planted themselves in some
other family. 2. and not if any brother should die, but if the eldest or first
borne, whose name and family must be preserved and reared; see Matthew. 22.
both in type and signification of the prerogative of Christ, the first borne
of many brethren; as also for the preservation of inheritances to families, and
by families the polity and ordinances of God amongst his people. Now these
special considerations, cut off all pleas for polygamie, and the rather seeing
Christ has since put an end to all ceremonies and shadows, and called us unto
his first institution.

Use. 1. In that this practice was ever condemned in the word, and yet come to
such an height, even in Gods dear servants, that scarce they retained any
sense of the sin, Principalis prudentiae est omne malum initio opp^imere.
Council. Chalc. act. 3.
learn to break off every sin in the beginning: a crooked custom quickly
grows to a rule: the instance shows that not only believers of old, but
even Ministers, who should have hindered the sin in others, were themselves
entangled in it. There are two great mischeifs in the admission of sin; the
first is the treasuring up of Gods wrath against the soul of the sinner,
Consuetudo peccandi tollit fensum peccati.
who while he hatcheth sin, the Lord hatcheth judgment: the second is the
sencelesnes of sin, through the repetition or custom of it, for the heart is
by little and little stolen away: and the sinner becomes like Ephraim, Hos^.
3.11.
as a dove without heart: that is, without understanding of the sense and
danger of sin, through too near acquaintance with it: he that lives in a
mill (we say) hardly discerns of sounds, and he that has been in a noisome
place is stuffed; even so many a one we see who a while will strain courtesy
with some sin, as drunkenness, swearing, riot, wantonness, gaming: but after
the second or third greeting, grow so familiar, as they seem in their eyes to
be virtues, at the least necessary vices. Thus by Gods judgment the heart is
hardened, and sin rises to his regiment: men are of too good nature, too
soft, and gentle in the case of this acquaintance, and too loath to offer it the
least discourtesie: which is a maine cause why the Prince of the air, the
patron of it, works so mightily in the sons of disobedience. Let us
therefore apply our hearts to learn the Apostles exhortation, Let no root of
bitterness spring up to trouble you. Let us beware of rooted sins, shut the
door of the heart, Heb. 12.15.
that Satan may find no entrance, whose manner is where he finds the least
welcome, to bring in seven spirits worse then himself: and if he can sow a
seed if it be no bigger then a grain of mustard seed, he hops the next
harvest for a great tree of it: sin seems very reasonable in the
beginning, and the tempter says, is it not a small one? But if the Lords
Samsons suffer themselves to be bound with small cords at the first, which they
may think to break from at their pleasure, the enemy will ere they be aware
bring on them the two new ropes which will hold them fast enough, Lex divina
curat de minimis.
till they be made a pray for the spoyler.

Use. 2. Never let examples of men prejudice the truth of God. Impudens oration
est dicere sic factum est, non enim si quid contra leges factum* est id imitari
licet. Demost. contr. Aristog.
If we see a good man fall, we are ready to think that vice no longer a
sin: espcially if we see not the sin required upon the commission. We see
Abraham himself led into a sin and overcome: 1. by common custom: 2. by the
motion of Sarah, enticing him through infidelity, to take Hagar: so in other
Patriarchs, we see how ready the children were to take the color and die of
their parents. And therefore from hence let the blinded Papist say, their
fathers worshipped in the mount with the Samaritans, or before such and such
altars and images, and so will they also. Let the profane swine of the world
say, Jacob married two sisters also at once, and by as good reason so may we.
Noah was drunk, Sarah lied, Jacob had many wives, and why may not we? and so
think they have a sufficient cover. As for all the Israel of God they walk by
another rule, then that of the world, the guise of which is to lie in
wickedness, and gives none but crooked directions: nor by the naked examples
of the best men, who have their wanderings; but that of the word, which is as
the cloud and pillar to guide them in all their iourneys.

Quest. But how shall we profitably behold the examples of the Saints? Ans. By
observing two rules. 1. If we make their falls and infirmities, a glass to
behold the same in our selves either for the present, or else suspect them in
our selves for time to come. Non numeranda suffragia sed appendenda. August. in
Psalm. 39.
2. If with judgment we weigh examples by the word, I say not, number them,
but weigh them in the balance of the sanctuary, and try them by the
touchstone of the Temple. It is very liable to exception to say, others that
are learneder, wiser, greater, grauer, do so and so, and teach thus and thus:
but what if the author be blinded, as every man may become a liar? or what if
he will not speak the truth, because he will not be a meddler, or bear the
times displeasure? this is such an argument as whereby Christ himself should
have been denied; for did any of the rulers believe in him? Solomon says,
that he that believes hastily is light in his heart: and the reason why
examples ouercarrie men into evil, is because they can easilier give credance
unto the persons of men, then soundly judge of the actions of them.

Having faithful children] After a man's own person, respect must be had of
his private government and carriage, whom the Lord will have called so near
him, as to serve in holy things before him: and because it is meet that such a
one be a man of experience and government, the Apostle would have him observed
in the private ordering of his family, whence an aim may be taken, how he is
likely to behave himself in public: that if his fitnes and skill be tried in
ruling the lesser and fewer, he may the better be trusted with the greater. For
that this is the reason of all this diligent inquiry, is plain in 1. Tim.
3.5. For if he cannot govern his own house, how can he govern the house of
God? We know that he that is not able to guide a boat, is not able to govern a
great ship: and he that being married, cannot rule two or three of his own
children, so near him: much less can he govern a whole Church, men and
women, who in comparison of the other are as strangers, and few of them fully
known unto him.

Quest. But in ordering the family, the first care must be had of the wife;
why does the Apostle utterly omit that both in this place, and that of
Timothy, and in both places only mention the government of the children?

Ans. 1. That care is not excluded. 2. The wife is not so absolutely put under
government as the children; but are partly gouerners in the family with the
husband; and being the wife of a Minister, is presupposed to be of that grace
and wisdom, as that she is able to take up her own duty without such
enforcement: and therefore the Apostle thinks it sufficient to show what a
one the Ministers wife ought to be, 1. Tim. 3.11. But 3. and especially,
because in the government of his children there is a more lively resemblance,
of such duties of government, which he is to dispense toward the Church. And
if we look a little nearer the words, we shall see that there is nothing
enjoined the Minister as a Father of children, which belongs not unto him as
he is a spiritual father of the children of God. For if we respect matter of
instruction and doctrine, he must have faithful children: so in the Church, by
diligent teaching of the doctrine of faith, must he bring men unto the faith:
or if we look at matter of manners, he must do two things: 1. displant vices,
and plant the contrary virtues, that they may not be accused of riotous or
other ungodly courses; which also he must publicly perform in the
congregation by the word of exhortation and rebuke. 2. correct and chastise the
obstinate and rebellious, that they be not disobedient: and so as Minister he
has a rod of correction, and the censures of the Church to inflict upon the
obstinate.

Now in the children of Ministers are required two things: 1. for their
institution, that they be faithful children: 2. for their conversation, they
must not be, 1. riotous: 2. disobedient.

By faithful children, are meant such as being instructed in the faith, are
at least in external conversation, answerable to the profession of the faith
they make. Quest. But is it in the power of any Minister, or man to have
faithful children: may not a good man and a Minister too, have most graceles
children? Ans. There is no man but he is to endeavor that his children may
have even the grace of faith; which is further laid out of his power then by
getting himself within the covenant. But there is no good man, who has it not
in his power, to instruct his children in the doctrine of faith: and also for
outward order to make them conformable, and in some measure answerable to that
prof^ssion, so long as they abide under his roof. And if the Lord afterward
for some unknown, and secret cause by leaving them, show he has no delight in
them; such a father may herein comfort his conscience, that to his power he
has used the best means for their good.

Doctr. 1. He that must reform others abroad, must first begin at Right
reformation of others begins at a man's self.
so true religion reformeth at home first: and conscionable reformation
begins at a man's own heart. The tenor of the 101. Psalm shows, that
David coming to his kingdom, 1. reformeth his person: 2. his Court and
family: 3. his country. The same course took Joshua, I and my house: and
Hester, I and my maids. And indeed sound reformation cannot correct in another
what it self cherishes, neither can teach another, and it self abide
untaught. As if it be a zealous reformation, proceeding from pure zeal; it
hates disorder most of all in the own bosom: it less spares sin in the
own heart, then in the house; and less in the house then abroad; and the
nearer this serpent approaches, the more is it feared and fled from. Well knew
the Apostle, that he that cannot abide reformation in himself, can never
endure it in another; and he that suffers vanity, prophannes, irreligion,
and disorder in his house, he can never hate these in the house and Church of
God: and therefore makes it a sufficient cause to debar such a one from the
Ministry.



Begin not with others till thou have done with thy self.
Use. 1. Let every man know the due season of this weighty duty: and that is,
when he has done with himself. For then he shall better see the mote in
another; he shall the better discern the danger, and discover the shifts of
sin: he shall more patiently and pitifully deal against it; he shall more
watchfully prevent it; he shall more zealously purge it: which not being first
done, many have swet in redressing their wives, children, servants faults,
altogether fruitlesly, because they never in earnest dealt against their own.
Private men would feign see public reformation of disorders, (and who can
blame them) but they must begin, by giving religion a room in their own
houses, and hearts, else shall they never see that they desire their eyes may
behold. Who ever saw whole Churches or countries reformed on the sudden? No:
this is a work which must first be performed by several persons, and so
brought into families, and so into towns, and so into countries. For otherwise
let never so good laws be enacted for common welths, never so pure orders in
any Church, the labor is no less then lost. But especially let the Minister
look to this, that first himself, then his house, and then Gods house be
reformed.

Use. 2. Here is a note to know a true professor by, not to deem him as he
appears abroad; but if thou would have the just length of his foot, follow
him home from Church; see how wisely he walks in the midst of his house; see
whether his house be a Church; how his children are ordered; whether his
servants be like Cornelius his servants; Psalm. 101.2.
and in a word, whether he and his house at home serve the Lord.

Doctr. 2. He that would have the blessing of gracious children, Whosoever
would have gracious children must begin at religion. Reasons.
he must begin at religion; planting it in them as their tender years will
bear, training them in the institution and reformation of the Lord, seasoning
them with the words of piety, distilling and by little and little dropping
into them seeds of holiness, and the fear of God: and providing that they
might if it were possible suck in godliness with their mothers My son, if thy
heart be wise, I shall rejoice: whereas, by the just judgment of God, Prove.
23.1^.
many lewd sons never come to know or perform duty to parents, because
parents have had small or no care to teach them duty toward God. 3. teach his
family, Genesis 18. On the contrary, Ely, otherwise a good man, how severely was
he with his whole house corrected, for neglect

Quest. But wherein especially does this duty consist, and how may we perform
it? It stands in two things.
Ans. It stands in two things, 1. in acquainting them with the grounds of
truth necessary to salvation, and this must be done by private catechizing. 2.
by bringing them to the public assemblies so soon as they are able to sit
either fruitfully or reverently: and in both these, watch over their profiting.
Thus may thou and ought to teach, even a child in the trade of his way.
Prove. 22.6.


Object. But this is a vain thing to trouble children, alas what would you
have children to do? Answ. But although it may seem to be fruitless while
they are young, yet will they remember it, says Solomon, they are old: teach
thy child to speak well while he can but speak, and when he will conceive
afterward the sense and meaning of it. 2. Thou shall not loose thy labor, for
by this means thou shall displace, at least restrain natural folly which is
bound up in their hearts, if thou do nothing else. 3. Look upon the examples
of godly parents, Hannah brought Samuel to Heli his instructor, so soon as he
was weined, 1. Sam. 1. Solomon was but a tender child, when David his father
taught him, and said, Prove. 4.4.
let thy heart hold fast my words: Eunica the mother of Timothy, taught him
the Scriptures of a child: and what excellent fruits and testimonies appeared
in these, of their timely instruction?

Use. Let every parent resolve of the timely instruction of their children;
that as he has begotten them in the flesh, he may be a means to beget them in
the faith also; that as he is the father of their bodies, he may also become
after a sort the father of their souls also: and let the mother be a nurse to
the soul of her little ones as of their bodies, and both fathers and mothers
use means that as their children wax in bodily strength and stature; so also
they may grow to some strength and age in Christ Jesus. But this duty is not
discovered in the fruits of it: nay, the practice of our youth without, and on
the Sabbath, points with the finger to that rule that is within doors
throughout the week: and if to profane the Sabbath, swear, rail, curse,
game, contemn superiors, be notes of faithful children; there is a number
such: but if these be things better beseeming the education of infidels, it is
a shame for professors of the Gospel to have them so rife amongst them. And
what other is the next cause of the general profanenes and dissolutenes of our
age; surely, because men content themselves to send their children to Church
(and yet some scarce that, and many that for a fashion,) that if they can meet
with knowledge of God or religion there, so it is, but they banish it out of
their houses. And how infinitely do we hereby disadvantage our selves? The
Papists confess that all the ground we have got of them, Preface of the
Catech. of the Council of Trent. Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 10. cap. 32.
is by catechizing: and it is to be feared, we shall loose our ground again
for want of it. Julian himself cannot devise a readier means to banish
Christian religion, then by pulling down schools and places of education of
children by chatechising: And when lost the Church of Rome the soundness of
religion, but when they put down chatechisme, and set up idols and images, the
books of laimen and children? Considering therefore the corruption of the
heart, which needs reformation with the soonest; even as the body must be
framed at the first swaddling, and weeds plucked up at the first peeping up;
together with the commandment of God, which enioyneth the parent to whet
precepts upon his children; the practice of Christ calling babes unto him, and
instructing his family: and lastly, the benefit which hence shall redound to
thy child, thou leaving him the only pearl and treasure, which is likely to
abide with him; be not wanting in thy endeauours, but give all diligence
whereby thou may be the father not of children only, but of faithful
children.

Not slandered of riot] As the Apostle requires that the children of Ministers
should be taught in wholesome doctrine; so now by remoouing the contrary,
would he have them suitable in their manners and behavior: that even in the
Christian carriage of the children, the fathers fitnes to govern may be
approved, scandal may be avoided, and neither his doctrine, nor life may be
justly excepted against. Whence in general may be noted, that the carriage of
a man's children is a great credit or disgrace to his profession, which as it is
true in every professor, so especially in the Minister: for either the fathers
glory is seen in his government; or the profanenes of the children is the
fathers blemish. A wise son, says Solomon, is the crown of his father: but
lewd children are like Simeon and Leui, Genesis 34.30.
which make their father (otherwise a good man) stink among his inhabitants.
There was a law enacted that if any man laid slanderous things to his wife; as
that he found her not a virgin: Deuteronomy. 22.19.
the woman her self may not follow the action, in clearing her self against
her husband, least the marriage should seem to be dissolved pendente lite: but
the Lord most wisely ordered, that the parents should for her: and why they?
surely because their name and honor was impeached, in that their daughter was
accused to be corrupted in their house, and they did not their duty in
watching over her virginity: and accordingly as the matter was found in issue,
the father was dealt withal: for if the defamation proved untrue, the party
must make the father amends, by giving him an hundred shekels of silver: and
yet shall he not be troubled with his daughter: and if the daughter was
convicted, she must be brought to her fathers door, and all Israel must stone
her: and the reason is added, why she must be there stoned, because she has
wrought folly in Israel, and played the whore in her fathers house, that is,
for transgressing the law of God, violating her parents authority and credit,
and defaming her fathers house.

But an especial law besides was made for the daughter of a Priest. If a
Priests daughter play the whore, Lev. 21.9.
she polluteth her father, and therefore she must be more severely dealt with
then any other, she must be burnt with fire. Object. If it be said that
whosoever of other tribes were deprehended in the same folly were also put to
death: I answer, yea, if they were espoused or married: but if virgins (except
a Priests daughter) were not.

And well may the Church esteem of a man according to the government of his
children, seeing the Lord himself goes before in this example. How was
Abraham honored in his eyes, in that his children were so instructed, and
ordered? how was Ionadab graced by the Oracle of God himself, Ier. 35.
promising that he should not want a man of his seed to stand before God for
ever: and all for the obedience of his sons, testified in following their
Fathers so strait injunctions. And on the contrary, how were good men
blemished and dishonored for the profanes of their children: 1. Sam. ^.29.
as Eli is said to honor his sons above God.

More specially we are to consider in the precept, 1. The special vice
prohibited. 2. the hatefulnes of it. 3. the use.

1. Riot is a prodigal and lavish wast of a man's substance, in eatings,
drinkings, intemperance, voluptuousnes, uncleanness, or any other filthy lust.
(...).
The word in the original being taken from a certain people, who were wont
to spend their whole days in feeding, and stuffing themselves, and this was
the greatest part of their care and calling: whom for this cause the Grecians
called (...), that is, such as cannot be saved from a most desperate misery:
or else such as save nothing for themselves, and their family, but in the end
being brought to extreme want and penury die most miserably. Riot an hateful
sin. Reasons.


2. The hatefulnes of this sin appears, 1. In that it is a note of all
faithfulness. 2. It is lusts of the Gentiles: and called excess of riot: see
1. Pet. 4.4.5. 3. It is not only an enemy to religion, but even foileth all
civil virtues: as Deuteronomy. 21.20.
to become the evil of sin: 2. to take away the evil of infection: that all
others may fear by his example.

3. The use. 1. Let no man that would be counted religious, A note of
irreligion in parents to suffer it in their children.
uphold riotousnes in his children, it being a note of unfaithfulness,
irreligion, and a tainted heart. How can such paren^s be counted faithful,
that suffer their sons and daughters to run into the infamy of pride,
prodigality, excess; not using means to reclaim them, but rather fitting
them by outward means with fuel to these flames? Shall God command thee to
bring out thy riotous son to stoning; and will thou rather strenghthen him in
this sin?

2. If the sin be so hateful in all men's children, Especially in a Ministers
child, staineth the labors of his father.
much more in the sons of Ministers, against which our Apostle leuelleth. And
let all our youth, especially Ministers sons, of whom there are such s^ore in
these schools of the Prophets consider, that by their riotous and unthrifty
courses, which are taken up by too many; they not only stain their fathers
doctrine, calling, and profession; but call his fitnes into question; and put
it also out of question, that themselves are altogether unfit for the
Ministry. And further, if it be so hateful in Ministers children, it is
altogether intolerable in Ministers themselves: would God a number could as
easily wash their hands of it, as it is odious and hateful in them. To be
bewailed, that so fearful a sin should be so general.


3. It ministers us occasion to bewail the riotous days we live in: True is
that speech of one, The liberality of the world has hurt the inhabitants: but
the plenty and abundance of our country, has set Antonius and Cleopatra
again at strife, who can be more prodigiously profuse, and riotous: yea it
seems that men can scarce devise how to spend them fast enough in excess.
See we not that the dishes of our fathers were nothing so costly as our sauces?
their Nobles not better apparelled, then some of our grooms; that our Nabals
feasts, though but farmers, are like the feasts of a King? where shall a man
sit down in the meetings of men, where a man shall not trulier apply that
question, then he that uttered it, What means this wast? but in some
entertainments the idle and sinful wast of Gods good creatures is such, as
set by that of Caligula, who must have his bread gilded; it is justly
suspected that all the world of the Gentiles themselves would fail us of such
presidents: and what is this other then the nurse as well as the mother of
infinite other evils? what merueile is it that the hearts of men are so
heavy, and oppressed, as that no sense and feeling of religion can be fastened
upon them? How do men's mouths run over with impure o^ unseemly speeches?
how do other escapes pass from them exceeding scandalous and offensive to the
Church of God which are in these ways: sometimes loosing the holiness and
chastity of their souls and bodies; sometimes striking up most graceless
matches in this their forgetfulness, rashly ouershooting themselves so far as
brings just matter of repentance all their days: as Herod in his riotous
feast, passed his word against John Baptists life: a fearful fruit of this
sin.

The godly must moderate their affections, to contain themselves within the
golden mean.
4. Let every Christian learn hence to moderate his mind, and keep it within
the mean and measure in the fruition of all earthly delights: and the rather,
because even Gods children are so prone to be carried after the fashions of the
world, and to exceed in diet, apparel, both above their calling, and beyond
their abillitie: which is a blot to be repented of, and that the more timely,
because the further the child of God goes from the mean, the more grace he
loses, and the weaker is his soul: and it cannot be but voluptuous living
will choke the word, even in the best: Luke 8.14.
and therefore it is not unseasonable to exhort Christians, and converted ones,
To gird up the loins of their minds, and be sober. Even as the Jews and
Eastern people at this day, 1. Pet. 1.13.
tuck up their long garments to make them more expedite and free to a journey
or business; so Christians iourneying toward heaven, must take short their
minds from earthly delights, and hasten themselves homewards with so much the
more neglect of these things, as they have better in their eye. Now the rules
which will help us in this duty, Rules to help forward in this duty.
are these three. 1. Before the receiving of any comfort of any creature,
acknowledge God the giver, the blesser, the looker on. 2. Look to thy self,
and watch thy own heart in the use, that it be not withdrawn from the love of
the Creator by the creature. 3. after the use, take up the practice of Job, who
after his sons had liberally and a long time banquetted together, he
sanctified them, and offered prayers and oblations to God according to the
number of them all. Job 1.5.


Not disobedient. (...).
] The word in the Greek is a Metaphor taken from unruly and untamed beasts,
such as know not the yoke, but are refractary and headstrong: and in this one
word two things are alike condemned, as well the sin of the child, as the
cause in the Parent. The former is always a note of irreligion, disobedience
in the child: the latter for most part, a note of indiscretion, and that is
remisnes in the father: both of them unbeseeming common Christians; but in a
Ministers house may raise a just suspicion, that he is not a fit man to order
and govern the house of God: for if every family of common Christians be, or
ought to be a little Church; is it more then just and mere that the family of
the Minister be not only, not a conspiracy of rebels, sons of Belial, and
disordered and licentious mates; but such as may join together in the worship
of God, and holy conversation, for the good example of others? Here note these
two points.

First, that disobedience of children is a note of irreligion. Even as we noted
in the former vice, Disobedience of children to parents condemned. Romans 1.30.
which the Apostle also makes a note of one given up to a reprobate mind, and
full of all unrighteousness, and marketh for one of the courses wherein the
Gentiles walked to destruction: and prophesiyng of the last and worst times, he
sets in the beadrole of ungodly men, which should make the times so bad,
those that are disobedient to parents. 2. Tim. ^.2.
And this consideration may be of good use to all that would be esteemed
gracious and religious children, to learn to become obedient unto their
Parents in all things, with that only exception, or rather interpretation of
the same Apostle, in the Lord. Coloss. 3.1.
And this obedience must bewray it self, bo^^ in doing all their lawful
commands, Ephesians. 6.1.
seem they never so base: for God has set a stamp on them: Wherein obedience
to parents must be showed.
and this with such cheerfulness, as that so far as they can come to know
them, they may even prevent their good desires, not deferring till their duty
be demanded: and 2. also in suffering, 1. themselves to be disposed in their
lawful callings, and in their lawful marriage, as Isaac: 2. to be rebuked,
corrected, and chastened, so yielding them all reverence, as Heb. 12.9. Reasons
enforcing the duty.
Neither is the Scripture wanting in motives unto this duty. 1. It is a just
thing, (...)*
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.1. that being in the power of their parents, they
should perfo^me nothing of that instinct which the Lord (for the conviction of
graceless children) has put in some of the bruit creature^ themselves toward
their breeders. 3. this is the first commandment with promise, that is, with
obedient to his parents: Luke 2.51.
notable was the obedience of Isaac even to the knife in the hand of his
father, and a lively type of Christ, who was obedient to his heavenly father,
and that unto the death. Philip 2.8.
Whereas on the contrary, disobedient children never escaped unpunished, as in
the examples of Cham, Absalom, Reuben, Ophni, Phineas, Abimelech, and many
others, as we might plentifully explane. And look what duty the Lord
requires to natural Parents, the like also is due to those who are in stead
of fathers and mothers, as stepfathers, tutors, masters; Ruth loved Naomi her
mother in law, and claue unto her as unto her own mother: the sons of the
Prophets obeyed their masters as their own fathers; Elisha spoke of Eliah, my
father, my father, 2. Kin. 2.12. this lesson if it were so heedefully regarded
as it might, would be of special use in this place above all other in the land
besides, wherein so many youth miscarrie, even for this; because they cast off
the yoke, and willingly know no duty nor subjection to superiors, tutors,
and those who are in stead of parents unto them.

The second point here to be noted, is, that the cause of lewdnes of sons is
for the most part, The cause of lewdnes in sons is often the indulgence of
parents.
the indulgence or other want of government in the parents: for this the
Apostle implies, when he measures the fitness of the fathers government by
the carriage of the children: for can fathers let their reine loose to liberty
and licentiousnes, and the sons feeling the reine in their necks not run
riot at their pleasure, and fling out and kick like a colt in a fat pasture,
knowing neither owner nor feeder? and do not many fathers deserve, to have
their eyes plucked out by their children, who for want of government, cause
their childrens eyes to be picked but by the ravens of the valley? some never
had the fear of God themselves, and cannot teach their children the ways of
God; nay many hate Gods fear in themselves, and in their children, and in all
Gods children: whence by a secret judgment of God it is, that as they taught
them no duty toward their heavenly father, so they deny all duty not
seldom to their earthly pa^ents. Others may not displease their children, and
so either are fond and loose their authority, not chastening the^ while there
is hope; or else they pamper them, as men do the beasts they would feed up, and
not seasonably break them; or else by mild reproves they rather cocker and
bear them in their sins, then correct them, 1. Sam ^.
as Eli did: or else if they be but crept out of childishness, oh then they
are past the rod; Parents must have their children counted men, when they are
but boys, and never so fit for the school and discipline: by all which
means, they bring in the end mischief on their children, and shame upon
themselves: this indulgence in David was the overthrow almost of all his
children; but especially noted in the fall of Adoniah, his father would not
displease him from his childhood to say, what have thou done? 1. king. 1.6.
Yea, but parents say, what would you have us do? they be but young and youth
must have a time, and we may not ever be dulling them with correction; their
own rod will beat them well enough in time, and soon ripe will be soon
rotten. To whom I say, I would have you to consider the state of your children,
and the great measure of folly that is Even a child makes himself known in
his works, Prou. 20.11.
whether his work be good and pure: that is, you may read and guess in a
child how his course is likely to prove afterward: we read of good children
that became good men, seldom or never of wicked children altered: it is not
more commonly then wickedly said, young Saints old devils; but truer it is that
seldom do young devils become old Saints. 3. That it is the note of a
fleshly mind in thee, to love nothing but thine own flesh in thy children,
hatred which spares the rod: or call it love if thou will, it is a cruel
love, cruel I say, 1. to thy child, 2. to thy self. 1. to him, because thou
neglecting his timely correction; the Lord either causes him to fall into the
hand of the Magistrate the father of the country; or else takes him into his
own hand to control, or else cut off: whereas thy rod might have given him
wisdom, and thy timely rebuke might have delivered his soul from hell, that
is, his life from the grave. 2. to thy self, for we seldom read, but that the
darling child, Prou. 23.13, 14.
was the sorrow and shame to the parents; according to that of the wise man, a
child let alone to himself shameth his mother: Prou. 29.15.
and God has most crossed his children, in their children best beloved, to
teach them to love all of them in good measure.

Neither in all this would I have parents to provoke or exasperate their
children, as Saul did Jonathan: 1. both by an unjust commandment, to deliver
his friend, and an innocent to death: as 2. by an undeserved reproach, calling
him the son of an harlot: and 3. by a furious action, of casting his dart at
him to slay him: which made Jonathan rise and leave him. Neither yet do I here
exact the forfeyt of every offense in the child (as neither the Lord does of
his children) knowing that the child is the fathers own bowels; and that the
parent after a sort suffers with the child: and sometimes God himself
threatens, and forbeareth, and warns his own children: as Exodus 32.34. But
yet this precept enioyneth parents so seasonably to break their childrens
corrupt desires, as that they be far from disobedience, to God, or
themselves: and therefore that is a worthy precept of Solomon to every parent,
read according to the best translation, Be thou great in the feruencie of thine
anger in forgiving a fact: Prou. 19.19.
that is, show thy great indignation against that sin, the correction of
which, for the present thou forbearest, saying, that is, threatening, that if
thou shall deliver him, thou will further punish him afterward. And thus
trayning them in obedience at home, it will become thy glory, and their
beauty abroad. Whereas the cause that now they swagger, and are masterlesse
abroad, is because they were never well mastered at home: and the reason why
now in man's estate, perhaps under a faithful ministry, they are so
incorrigible, is because in their youth they bare no yoke, were not inured with
corrections. Fathers affoarded no help to the Ministers, by their good
education, and therefore now good means cannot prevail with them.

Verse 7. For a Bishop must be unreprovable, as Gods steward, not froward,
not angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre. The
Apostle in the former verse, having spoken of those positive virtues required
in the private life of every Minister: in the former part of this verse he
enforces them by reasons; and in the latter part reckneth up many vices, from
all which he must be free, if he will be unblameable. The reasons are two, the
former of which is included in the change of the name, a Bishop: the latter
propounded in a comparison, He is Gods steward. In both which regards his care
must be doubled, that he may walk unblameable before his people.

For the former of these, to understand it the better, we must conside^ two
things: 1. the signification of the name: 2. the force of the argument. By the
name Bishop, Tunc temporis adhuc Prae^byteris and Episcopis vocabulum erat
commune. Chrysostom. homil. 1. ad Phil.

Ipsum dicit Episcopum quem superioris Praesbyteram nomina^it. P^^masius in
locum.

Apud veteres ijdem Episcopi and Praesbyteri fuerunt* Lomb. lib. 4. distinct.
24. cap. 8. vid. Pless. de Eccl. cap. 11. Dij tutelares. (...).


he means those whom before he called Elders: and throughout the new
Testament it is indifferently given to all teaching elders, that is, Pastors
and Ministers; and so is here to be taken. A title well known in the Apostles
days in the tongue then commonly used, to betoken a painful office, and a
diligent labor; borrowed from such as are set in the watchtowers o^ (...) o^
camps, to epsy, and by a loud voice, or sound of a trumpet, or otherwise by a
bell, or warning piece, to discover and signify, the approaching of the
enemy: for such were properly called [(...),] Bishops or watchmen: and from
hence the name was by the Heathen translated, to signify such gods as they
conceived the patrons of their countries, or cities: yea by the spirit of God
in the Scriptures, to signify Magistrates; so calling them, to put them in
mind of that care and charge which heavily lies upon them. And yet more
frequently and fitly, it is attributed to the Pastors and teachers of the
Church. Not only the great Pastor and Archbishop of our souls, 1. Pet. 5.4.
and the Apostles, Act. 1.20. but to other pastors and teachers, who in so many
places, as so many cities of God, are set as on a hill, Apostoli constituerunt
Episcopos sed illi vocabantur communiter Praesbyteri, and inter se aequales
erant: quod vero Episcopi post^ Apostolorum aetatem Praesbyteris maiores habiti
sunt; ^llud magis consuetudine quam dispositionis dominicae veritate factum
est. Hier. ad Tit. 1.
to descrie, and with the voice of Christ in the word, as with so many silver
trumpets at their mouths, give warning of those most cruel and fierce
enemies, and spiritual wickednesses, which seek the utter subversion of the
Church, the City of God. And that thus the word must needs generally be taken
in the new Testament appears, Phil. 1.1. where the Apostle writes to many
Bishops in one city Philipi: and Act. 20.28. speaks to many Bishops in one
city of Ephesus: and here the Apostles argument, and context can admit no
other acception. How this general title came after to be restrained, it is not
so pertinent, and profitable to discourse. The learned may see it in Jerome
upon the place. As for my self (as before I promised in the title of Elders) I
mind not to trouble the peace of the Church about names and titles.

Doctr. This very name fastneth upon every Minister this maine duty, namly, to
keep watch in his charge over the souls of his people, and to discover unto
them both Gods affection unto them, and their estate with God. Thus the
Prophets being the Bishops of the old Testament, All true ministers are Gods
watchmen.
are called not only watchmen, Ezech. 3.17. and Seers* 1. Sam. 9.9. but Gods
Trumpetters, Isa. 58.1. and their successors in the new Testament are called
not only eyes, and light of the body* Matthew. 6.22. but also voices* as John
Baptist was the voice of the (...), Mark. 1.3. Ioh. 1.23. And yet the word
considered (...) the composition of it, betokens a more intent watchfulnes,
instantly considering the wants, and necessities of the Church for the
seasonable supply of the same: by feeding, and by ruling, which we read
seldom separated in the Scriptures. See Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1. Tim. 5.17.
1. Pet. 5.1. Thus must every Minister whom the Lord has made an ouerseer of
his people, watch their souls as those who must be counteable for them; for if
they die for want of food, and be famished; or else for want of ordering, of
admonition, reprehension, correction, and censures according to Christ's holy
institution: there blood shall be required at the Pastors hand: for look what
charge Ahab had concerning Benhadad; the same has every Minister concerning
every soul committed unto him: Keep this man, if he be lost and want, namely
by thy default, 1. king. 20.39.
thy life shall go for his life. See also Ezech. 3.18.19.

Use. 1. Whence it will follow, that look how unfit blind, or dumb men are for
a watchtower, so unfit are unlearned and unpreaching Ministers for their
places. A blind e^e is a blemish and burden in the natural body, much more in
the Ecclesiastical.
How can he be called an eye that has no eye? how can he be called a voice
that is dumb? how unfaithful is the sleepie watchman who that he may have ease
cares not to betraie an whole city? How dangerous are they both? for if the
eye be dark, how great is this darkness? if the blind lead the blind, both fall
into the ditch. By both of them vision fails, and by both of them people
perish. See for this purpose a notable allusion Isa. 56.9.10. where the Lord
compares his Church to a flock of sheep: the Priests and Prophets to
shepherds, and shepherds dogs: the enemies of the Church to wolves and
wild beasts: and being offended with his people, he calls all the beasts of
the field and forest, to devour and rauin, that is, the Chaldeans, Assyrians,
Antiochus, and the Romans; by all whom they were diversely oppressed; and the
reason is added because the watchmen were all asleep the dogs were sleepie,
and greedy, dumb and barked not: ease took up some, covetousness others; and
therefore no remedy, if those that should drive away enemies from the Lords
folds cannot be at leisure to epsy the danger, but a fearful spoil and
destruction most needs befall such a people. Which if it be so, then let every
Minister stir up his watchfulnes and care, and though the faithful discharge
of his duty cannot but purchase him the malice of many* y^^ let him be con^ent
to make exchange of such friends and freindship with the favor of God, who as
he hat^ committed his flock unto him, ^o let him resolve and say to the Lord
as Jacob to Laban: I will feed and keep thy sheep. In like manner let every
congregation to whom the Lord has given a pastor according to his own heart,
Genesis 30.31.
testify their thankfulness herein, in being contented to have their ways
looked into and spoken of, as well conceiving the miserable estate of sheep
without shepherds; not saying to the Seer see not* least that plague befall
the^ pronounced against the men of Anath^th: ^er. 11.21.
praying also that the kingdom of God may come every where, and his lightsome
countenance shine on them that want such means, seeing their estate is such as
has great need of watchmen.

Secondly, from the force of the argument, namely, that he that is to be a
Bishop over others must of necessity watch over himself, and his own in
private, note a general rule to be observed in all elections, and furnishing
of any place and office: namely, Doctr. 2. In designing men to places the first
care must be of such gifts as the function requires.
that due respect must be had what gifts the office requires, and those must
be principally regarded in that person, that is to be placed in it: as for
example, if the place require the tongue of the learned, seek out for learned
men: if wisdom, seek out wise men: if gravity, sobriety, conscience, and
diligence: seek out for grave, sober, conscionable and diligent men: and thus
the Lord deals whenever he places any man: If he have a curious sanctuary
to build, he seeks out some B^zaleel, some Aholiab, or other, filled with
excellent spirits of wisdom and understanding, and knowledge to work in
curious works of gold, silver, etc. Exodus 35.35.
If he set Solomon to build a glorious temple to himself, he directs him to
send to Hieram for a cunning man, a wise man, and of understanding. If he be to
bring his people out of Egypt, he furnishes a Moses, and an Aaron. If to take
the land by fighting, he fitteth some valiant captain, as Joshua: if to bring
them out of captiuities, he raises some Darius, or Zerubbabel, or Nehemiah,
even suiting persons unto places: yea the Son of God being to gather his
Church among the nations, and to plant his own ordinances to bring men out of
their nusled idolatry and Gentilisme to serve the true God: if he had not
aforehand considered the difficulty of the work, and accordingly furnished
such as he dismissed for this purpose: how had it like ever to have been
effected?

Use. The cause of all corruptions in elections, It is a general corruption to
begin where God ends
and designements to offices and places lies here, that men look not to the
quality of the place first, but (beginning where God ends) first at the man,
either because he is a proper man for parts, and gifts of body and mind, or
by such and such commended, or furnished to perform such expectations and
contracts, or an ancient, or a kinsman, etc. this marres all, and often
sets fools on horseback, when wise men walk on foot by them. Let every
man whom it concerns learn wisdom of God and his spirit here, which first
inquireth into the place: and so in passing their suffrages in elections, thus
reason; oh this is a difficult matter, where have we a fit man for it: if to
choose a Magistrate, this requires one able to execute the Lords judgments:
where have we a man of courage fearing God, and hating covetousness? If a
fellow of a college, this requires learning, judgment, and one able at
least to bring up youth in knowledge and godliness, where shall we find such
an one? but if a minister, oh this requires one able to build up the body of
Christ, and who is sufficient for this thing? Reasons for the duty.
The reasons hereof are, 1. the external election of the Church ought to
follow the internal of the spirit: see 1. Sam. 10.24. 2. it ever argues
corruption, to prefer private respects before the public good. 3. the ends
of every calling are, 1. and principal Gods glory, 2. nearer and inferior:
1. the helping of the communion of Saints, 2. building of the Church, which he
who is likely most to prefer, is principally to be preferred.

As Gods steward] Here are likewise to be considered two things. 1. the
signification of the word. 2. the force of the argument.

First, the word implies thus much, that God is a great householder, Matthew.
21.33. that his house is his Church, where he as a great personage keeps his
residence; more stately and honorable then the court or standing house of any
earthly king in the world; in that herein he pleases to manifest his presence
by his spirit, working in the word and ministry: and as it is with other
great houses, so the spirit of God speaks of this, as committed not to one,
but many stewards, who take the charge of it, to order and govern it according
to the mind of the Master, and unto his greatest honor and advantage.
Ministers called stewards, why.
And these stewards are the ministers, so called 1. because as the steward in
an house is to dispense Eliacim, Isa. 22.22. even so every Minister receives
the keys of the kingdom of heaven; to open, and shut heaven, to bind and
loose, to remit and retain sins, Luke 16.2.
but is to be counteable and to give up his bills monthly, or quarterly, when
the master shall call for them; so every Minister is to be counteable of his
talents received, and of his expenses, and how he has dispensed his masters
goods. Heb. 13.17. They watch for your souls as they which must give accounts.

Doct. From which similitude, we may learn that it is the duty of every
Minister, to see that he have both the calling, and also the properties
beseeming him, who is the steward of God. And for his calling, he must be Gods
steward: the Lord must set him in this place of service so near him; or else
he is but a theife and intruder: of whom it cannot be said, that the Lord has
made him ruler over his house. Luke 12.^2.
The properties of Gods steward are principally two, 1. Wisdom, 2.
Faithfulness. So we find them in the place alleged: who is a wise and
faithful servant, The properties of a good steward. 1. faithfulness in 3.
things.
whom the Lord may make ruler over his house? And first of the faithfulness of
this steward: as the chief Doctor of his Church has gone before in example,
who was first appointed, and then faithful unto him that appointed him, Heb.
3.2. so is it required of every Minister of Christ; 1. Cor. 4.1.2.
and disposer of the secrets of God, that he be found faithful. Now this
faithfulness stands in, 1. distributing, 2. all, 3. his masters allowance to
those of his household. For 1. he is called to be a distributer to distribute
their

2. He must distribute his Lords meat and allowance, according to own goods,
so also calling them to accounts, Matthew. 25.14.
requires the return and gain of his own. Whence also every Minister is
here called Gods steward, and the dispenser of Gods mysteries. Who if he
speak, he must do it as the words of God: if he minister, he must do it as
of the ability which God ministers: if he have received the gift, 1. Pe^.
4.^1.
let him minister the same gift as a good disposer. And thus speaking,
ministering, and dispensing, he shall be acknowledged a steward only, and not a
Lord; an instrument, and not the author of the food he breaks: and thus shall
men depend not upon man, but God for the food and life of their souls: and
thus in all things shall God be glorified. Such faithful stewards were the
Apostles: Paul delivered to the Corinths what he had received of the Lord: and
John in the name of all the Apostles, 1. Ioh. 1.1. That which we have heard, 1.
Cor. 1^.23.
seen with our eyes, and with our hands handled, declare we unto you. And, We
preach not our selves, but the Lord Jesus, and our selves your servants for
Jesus sake, 2. Cor. 4.5. And if we cast eye upon the arch-type and vnfailing
pattern of all faithfulness, we shall clearly see that herein he approved his
faithfulness to him that appointed him: for his whole doctrine, himself
affirms it was not his but his Fathers, Ioh. 7.16. and that he gave to his
Disciples, and so by them to all believers, the words which his Father gave to
him, Ioh. 17.8. And for his works, he did nothing of himself, but as his
Father taught him, Ioh. 8.28. and for both, he set himself an inimitable
coppie unto all the servants of his house. Moses indeed was faithful in all
the house of God as a servant, and herein his faithfulness appeared, that he did
and caused all things to be done in the tabernacle according to the pattern:
Heb. 3.5.
but Christ as the Son, was faithful not in another, as Moses was, but as a
Lord in his own house, goes before Moses and all other his servants.

all his masters allowance, else is he a theife and an unjust steward. He must
keep nothing back, but deliver the whole counsel of God; and then if any
within the house die for want of meat, the fault is not in the steward, who
measured them out their portion; and delivered faithfully that whole truth of
God necessary to salvation; but their blood is upon their own heads, Act 20*
27.
in that they refused that food which the steward dispensed unto them. All
which branches of faithfulness if they be not performed, assuredly the day
comes wherein the unfaithfulness of every such offender shall be discovered.
Many eyes are upon thee for the present who art unfaithful in Gods house.
Satan's eye to accuse thee, the eye of thy own conscience to condemn thee:
Gods eye to revenge thy sin upon thee: Psalm. 139.12.
all these eyes are waking enough to discover thee; yea as many voices in that
day of the Lord shall be lifted up l^ke so many trumpets against thee, who by
unfaithfulness have wro^ged so many: oh that men would remember and before hand
consider what a fearful cry and loud noise, the voice of the blood of whole
towns, and congregations perished and famished for want of the food of their
souls, will make in the ears of the Lord, crying for vengeance against idle,
and nonresident Ministers, whose sin shall not be hid, if either such
watchful eyes, or such loud voices can discover the same.

Secondly, this steward of God must be wise as well as faithful: this wisdom
stands principally in two things. The second property of a good steward:
Wisdom in 1. forecasting.
1. In a wise forecast and provision of necessaries before hand, that he may be
able to bring out of his store such things as the necessities of the house
shall require: together with a plotting and contriuing to put forth his Masters
goods to the best profit: for else although he intend never so much
faithfulness, yet shall he not avoid the accusation of a waster of his
masters goods. 2. In a wise dispensation of things so provided; 2. Dispensing
in due 1. sort.
and this 1. in due sort. 2. in due measure. 3. in due season. First, in due
sort, providing courser meat to servants then to sons: stronger meat for men
of years then for children. No wise steward would set milk before strong
laborers, and beef bones before sucking children: so the minister as a wife
steward must consider the age of men in Christ, whether men be weak or strong
Christians; and accordingly apply himself to feed them with milk, or lead
them to stronger meat: so whether he be to deal with men wicked or godly, that
he may set courser meat of threats and judgments before the former; and finer
and sweeter dainties of promises and blessings before the latter: so also
whether they be sick or sound, that if they be diseased or of sick
consciences, he may heal them; if dangerously wounded by Satan's temptations he
may salve them; if broken hearted he may help to bind them up. Which point of
wisdom where it is wanting or neglected by the Minister, he lays himself
open to that fearful woe, Ezech. 34.4. Secondly, in due measure, some need
more promises some more threatenings, 2. measure.
he must be wise not to exceed the measure in either; for thus he shall make
such wanton who should rather be kept under, by speaking peace to whom it
belongs not; as also make their hearts heavy and sad, whom the Lord would
have lightened and comforted. And this is made the work of the faithful and
wise steward to give every man his portion, both for quantity and quality.
Thirdly, 3. season.
this portion must be given in due season: Luk 12.42.
this due season the Apostle has expounded to be in season, and out of season,
that is instantly, importunately, watching all good occasions hereunto; not
once a quarter, nor once a month, nor so often as men shall say they need,
who for most part have lost their stomach and appetite hereunto; but even so
instantly, as his master can never come but he may find him so doing, Luke
12.43. and blessed shall only such servants be: whereas on the contrary, Non
fidelis haec dispensatio sed crudelis dissipatio est. Bern.
if the master shall command to give his family their daily meals in order,
and the steward of the house should give them but one meal in a month, and so
starve up his Lords servants, were he not worthy to loose so many lives, (if he
had so many) as he suffered to perish by staruing them?

Use. 1. The Papists mistake this calling, who in the ordination of their
Priests, make mention of offering, massing, and daily sacrificing, but not a
word of this maine duty of feeding, distributing, and dispensing, which is the
proper work of a steward.

2. This doctrine shows what a square and furnished man he had need be, who
must stand under such a burden as this is, It is not every one that can get a
living that is fit for this calling.
which made the Apostle ask the question, who is sufficient for these things?
not every one that can run and ride, or can make means to get a living, nor
he that cannot devise ways enough riotously to wast the Churches patrimony;
but such as are fitted with the calling of God, and gifts of faithfulness, and
wisdom: let our sons of the Prophets consider what they are to be called
unto, and apply God by their prayers, for their fitness thereunto.

Men must so account of the^ as dispensers of Gods mysteries.
3. Let people hence learn how to esteem of Ministers; even as of Gods
stewards, 1. Cor. 4.1. Let men so esteem of us, etc. neither too highly, least
Gods glory in the ministry be obscured; nor too basely, least the ministry
it self be contemned. They are not the light, but such as testify of it: not
the authors, but such as people must seek unto, and depend upon for the food
of their souls: that look as when the famine was over the land of Egypt,
Joseph opened all the kings storehouses, and sold to releive the Egyptians:
even so must the ministers in time of spiritual dearth, set open the Lords
granaries to releive his people from the famine of their souls. Thus this
title teaches men to conceive of their ministers, as the dispensers of
mysteries, which are things otherwise hard to come by: and disposers of the
manifold graces of God, 1. Pet. 4.10. The steward we know has all things under
his hand, and holds them under lock and key, so as without him no man can
come to any thing. But how many thus esteem of them? the silly sheep
depends on the shepherd, for else could they not sold, feed, and fend
themselves: yea the ox and ass know their owner, and cribbe: but men
generally are without understanding to acknowledge these feeders.

And not rest till they have their masters whole allowance from the^.
4. Let men learn with more diligence to attend on the ministry, and not be
satisfied, till they have the whole counsel of God necessary to their
salvation, revealed unto them: let them call upon their stewards and urge them
to faithfulness. There is no servant but he may and will look for that whole
portion which he knows his master allows him; and cannot abide that the
steward should gain any thing by him: oh that men would call for their portion
in heavenly things also, or that they would receive it, being forced and
thrust upon them. But the Lord sees the contempt of this manna, and therefore
he has withdrawn it from many places: and in other have made it to rotte and
consume, even in the mouths of many, to their further hardening and damnation:
and yet withholdeth it from many people, who are not wise-hearted to enquire
after it; who if they could call unto the Lord with faith and feeling of their
want, that grace of his which feeds the very ravens when they call upon him,
would furnish them with a seasonable supply.

The second thing in this similitude to be considered, is the force of the
argument, which is this; That because every Minister is called to a place so
near the Lord as to be his steward, therefore he must be unblameable. Where we
have the ground of another instruction.

Doctr. Every man as he is nearer unto God in place, must be so much the more
careful of his carriage: that he may both resemble him in his vettues*
dignifie his place, The nearer any man is to God in his place, the more
careful must he be of his carriage.
and walk more worthy of him that has drawn him so near himself. Besides
that, every master looks to be graced by his servant: and much more will the
Lord be glorified, either of or in all those that come near him, Lev. 10. For
as the master quickly turns out of his doors, such disgraceful persons as
become reproachful to the family; even so the Lord knowing that the infamous
courses of the servant, reaches it self even to the master, turns such out
of his service, which are the just subjects of reproach. Whereof we have an
excellent example in Ezech. 44.9. to the 15. for the Levites which had served
before idols, were thrust from the Ministry of holy things; yea although they
were of the house of Aaron, yet could they never be received into the priests
office to come near the holy place, but at most must keep the doors, or do
some other inferior service: So as such as come near unto God, whether
Ministers or professors, may not say, they do but as others do; much less as
many servants abuse their Princes, or Lords cloth to the privilege of their
disordered courses, and to face out their bad matters: but the servants of this
house, as they must have a special representation of the image of their
master; so may they not do many things which are lawful for other men: the
Priests, who must come into the inner Court, may not marry widows but maids,
nor such as were divorced, verse 22. both which were lawful enough for others.

Use. 1. Let every Minister make this use, Ministers must think that it is for
the honor of God to have the stewards of his house unblameable.
in considering the excellency of his calling above others. When he shall
begin to say in himself, with Joseph, there is none greater in the house
then I, follow the matter as he did: Shall I do this sin? shall I sort my
self with wicked persons in wicked practices? shall I defile my self with
unlawful stolen pleasures? so should I be a swearer? a tauerner? a drunkard? a
riotous, perfidious, idle, or unclean person? seeing my master has thus
advanced me, how can I do this? God forbid I should thus sin against God. I
am the steward of Gods house, and it is for the honor of God, to have the
steward of his house unblameable: my place is to blame and censure all
disorders in the family, and can my self be so disordered. See and consider an
excellent example in Nehemiah, Nehem. 6.11.
when he was warned by a prophecy (though a false one) to fly into the Temple
for his life from before his enemies: he answered, shall such a man as I fly?
this were neither glorious to God, nor honorable to my self: he set me about
this business, and he can and will deliver me: and my self am the captain, and
set over all the people, and can I fly? who is it that being as I am, would
go into the Temple to live: the fact then being in this, and other respects,
against the law of God, and against my conscience, I will not for the saving of
my life do it.

Such as draw near unto God in profession, must be careful to beutifie it.
Reasons.
Use. 2. Every professor of the Gospel, being drawn much nearer unto God,
then the common sort of men, must endeavor to walk worthy of God, Colos.
1.10. and worthy of the calling to which he is called, Ephesians. 3.1. namely, both
the general calling of Christianity, which must be beautified and adorned: as
also the special calling and condition of life, unto which the Lord has
disposed him: for even that must he has called us, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. And
further, if we consider unto what we are called, the same place of the Apostle
shows, that we are called to be very near unto God: walk worthy of him that
has called you, to his kingdom and glory: to a kingdom; we were indeed
far off, alients, and Gentiles, and very despicable, without all hope: but now
are called to participate in another manner of kingdom then that of great King
Ahashuerosh, to which poor Hester was called: And seeing many may be in the
court of a Prince, and yet some of them abide in baser offices, and not many of
them glorious, or gracious, as the Queen, and children are: God has called us
to a kingdom and glory; that with the residue of the Church, we might become
his own spouse, and so partake of his own glory and majesty. Now how much
are such beggars as we, (called to such aduancements) bound to walk worthy of
such a condition, as sins present; as also the preventing of sins for time
to come. 3. Whereas Solomon says, that the righteous falling before the
wicked, are corrupt well, and troubled spring; that is, they trouble, offend,
Prou. 25.26.
and after a sort poison many: let the godly be more careful to make right
steps unto their feet: and the rather in these days, which so much the more
call for our watchfulnes, by how much the wicked are more ready maliciously to
disgrace our profession: that before we shall go away unreproved, they can
cast reproaches on us for well doing: yea and for our sakes, even upon civil
conversation, often in such as have no grace, neither show, or substance of
religion in them. And therefore seeing we are so sure to suffer, let us be sure
we suffer not as evil doers.

Not froward] Now follows in the rest of this 7. verse, the enumeration of
the vices which must be far removed from that man, who is to be chosen for a
Minister, that he may be unblameable: and they are five in number: 1.
frowardnes: 2. anger: 3. wine bibbing: 4. contention, and fighting a fruit of
it: 5. covetousness.

The first of the five, is frowardnes. The word signifies one wayward, (...).
stiff, inflexible, stubborn: and carries with it two properties; the one,
that such a one pleases himself, yea setleth, and rests himself wholly in
his own invention, counsel, opinion, or action: the other, (...).
that waywardly and peeuishly he rejects, and despises others in their
opinions and actions: an instance of which we have in Nabal, who was so froward
as their was no speaking to him, so hardened he was against all counsel or
persuasion. 1. Sam. 25.17.


Doctr. Frowardness in whomsoever, is a matter of evil report, and such a
spot as must not appear in him, Frowardness most dangerous in a minister.
who is to be chosen a Minister.

Reasons. 1. It is the mother of error in life, and doctrine, yea of strange
opinions, scismes, and heresies themselves; Reasons.
and it cannot be otherwise, thoughts come to naught; Prou. 15.22.
as where many counselors are, is stedfastnes. And as every where almost the
wicked man is termed a froward man, and a wicked and ungodly heart, a froward
heart, so is it generally true which the wise man observed, that such a froward
heart can never find good, but evil and woe cleaves unto it: Prou. 17.20.
and therefore David when he would shut the door of his soul against much
evil, said, a froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know, that is,
affect, Psalm. 101.4.
and act evil. 2. Whereas men think it a note of learning and wisdom,
Christian, may be as shaking reeds, tossed hither and thither with every blast
of wind; but yet is it a wise man's part to hear and try, and not stick to
his own counsel; as a man wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can
give a reason: for there is greater hope of a fool

Use. This doctrine may be profitably applied both to Mnisters and people. The
Minister must learn to be 1. docible, 2. affable: the former fitteth him to
learn of others, the latter to teach others: for none can be apt to teach
others, who is not apt to learn of others: and in the Minister especially a
tractable and teachable disposition, is a singular inviting of others by his
example, more easily to admit his teaching, whether by reprehension,
admonition, or howsoever. Elihu joins learning and teaching together, Let a
man of understanding tell me, let a man of understanding hearken unto me: Job
34.34.
and every one will think it fit, that young Joshua should minister unto
Moses, young Samuel to Eli, Elisha to Eliah, Baruch to Jeremy, Titus to Paul;
yea the disciples to Christ; and think it unreasonable that the blind should
offer to lead the blind. But this is the fault of many Ministers, that
conceiving they are now fitted to teach others, they disdain to be taught by
others, and think it too base for them to hear such as they conceive meaner
and weaker in gifts then themselves: Great scholars may and must be taught by
meaner then themselves. Reasons.
whom I wish they would remember what a dangerous thing it is to have the faith
of God in respect of persons, and to receive the word as man's word, and not as
Gods whose indeed it is. 2. That the Apostle Peter thought it meet that even
such as had knowledge, and were stablished in the present truth, 2. Pet. ^.1^.
should be put in remembrance of such things as they knew, and stirred up to
the practice of them. 3. That all have not the same gifts, nor the same gifts
in the same measure, that no man might say of any man's gifts, I have no need
of them: Joseph can expound a dream when he hears it, Genesis 41.25. Dan. 2 ^^.
but Daniel can declare a dream which the King has forgotten, and expound it
also, which is a double knowledge: yea, that Iethro in some things may see more
then Moses, and Naamans servant more then himself. As for the other virtue
opposed to frowardnes, namely, affability, which teaches to entertain the
talk of others with signification of our good will unto them in our speeches
and gestures, it is a great grace, and a profitable ornament in a Minister,
that can graciously and wisely weld it.

2. So hearers (seeing frowardness is such an impediment to instruction) must
learn to cast it from them: which in many (otherwise well affected) is a
disposition hard to please: in some making them seldom contented with the
pains, matter, or manner of their ministry: but having a bed in their brain
of their own size, whatsoever is longer they cut off, whatsoever is shorter
they stretch and rack it, for their own o^inions may not yield, not knowing
to give place to better. Others are secure, and therein grown froward against
the word: being mourned unto, they weep not: being piped unto, they dance
not: if their Minister be a companion, they reject him as he is, if he be not,
he is too austeere and too precise: yea, numbers are so superstitiously
froward, and so settled in their superstitions and old customs, that let the
Minister speak out of the mouth of the Lord, they say plainly they will not
hear him, as the Jews did against Jeremy: Ier. 44.17.
oh that the tractablenes of our people were so come abroad, as it might be
both their own praise, and their ministers joy; Romans 16.19.
whereof we should soon see fruits well beseeming the people of God: for while
it attributes unto God, his truth, and men teaching it that authority which
is due unto them, it freeth the mind from ignorance, delivers from the bands
of delusion and errors, and opens a large entry into the treasures of
wisdom.

Not angrie] Quest. Is it not lawful for a Minister to be angry at all? Answ.
We must know that all anger is not condemned in Scripture. How far anger is
warranted in a minister.
For 1. anger is a natural affection, which may be used as well as others, both
calmely and in heat also, of holy men in an holy manner: as Moses the meekest
man in the earth, as appeared both by the Lords testimony, as also by bearing
such reuiling speeches of his brother and sister, Numb. 11. yet is he said to
be very angry, yea his fierce anger caused many to be slain, Exodus 32. 2.
The Prophets and Apostles were very angry oftentimes, and therefore
commended, as Phineas: and Paul calls the Galatians, foolish Galatians: nay,
Christ himself is said to be angry, Mar. 6. and called Peter, Mark. 31.5.
Ioh. 2.17.
Satan, Matthew. 16. 3. It is an affection commanded, Ephesians. 4.26. and, Eccles.
7.5. anger is better then laughter: so as it is sin, not to be angry against
sin. 4. When the Scriptures condemn anger, they use such restraint, as that
the sin of it, rather then it self as sin should be condemned: as Matthew.
5.22. whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of
judgment; yea, and when we are commanded to be angry and sin not, it is
plain that not anger, but the sinnefulnes of it is condemned.

Quest. In what respect then is it here prohibited? Ans. So far as it is not
rightly grounded, or not rightly bounded and moderated: for in the right
ordering of this affection diverse offend diversely. How ^arre it is prohibited.
Some there are who are not so soon moved to anger, but being so, their anger
is bitter and long abiding, (...).
the passion working in them as fire does in iron, which is long in heating,
(...).
and longer in cooling. Some are implacably angry, whose patience being once
moved and broken, they are hardly ever reconciled: the passion in these is as
fire hid in some mouldring matter, but never bewraying it self, without the
ruin and wast of the thing it has caught: neither of these two rightly bound
their anger, but it rests in the bosom of fools. (...).
There are a third sort of men, who are easily overcome of the passion, not
moved hereunto upon just cause, as when Gods glory is impaired, or the cause
weighty: but suddenly for every trifle, and upon every dislike, whose passion
works as fire in stubble, soon in and soon out: these are here noted in the
word used by the Apostle, men of short spirits, so hasty, and ^eastie as they
seldom look to the right grounding and footing of this affection. Neither
natural, nor sanctified, but corrupt anger condemned. Eccles. 7.11.
The thing then here condemned, is not so much anger, as hastines to anger,
which is a disorder not only reproved in the Minister (for every where it is
a vice) but Solomon speaks generally to all, Be not of an hasty spirit, to
be angry.

Hastines to anger a great blot in a minister.
Doct. Hastines or pronesse to anger is a great enemy unto the ministry, and
such a blot as may not appear in him, who is to be admitted into that calling:
which proposition must not so be understood, as that every hasty man is to be
debarred from the ministry (for this infirmity will dwell with the best) but
shows that he that ordinarily is so fiery and furious, as even small
trifling occasions inflame him; and herein is so far from crossing and
curbing his corruption, as that he rather follows and fostereth it: this man
is utterly unfit for the ministry.

Reasons.
For 1. whereas a minister ought to be a man of judgment, knowledge, to the
heat and headie violence of the distempered affection. Not unfitly therefore
does the same Solomon note, that he that is slow to wrath, is of great
wisdom, and that he that is hasty to anger, commits folly. Prou. 14.17.29.


Secondly, the pestilent effects and fruits of anger, and the natural anger is
cruel, and wrath is raging: it cares not for any, nor spares any that come in
the way of it; Prou. 27.4.
for who can stand before envy? And from this indignation of heart proceed
usually, impiety against God, for all prayers and parts of his worship are
interrupted: contumely against men, for the bond of love is broken: clamor of
speech, violence of hands, temeritie of actions, late repentance, and many more
such symptoms of this desperate disease: for he has lost all the bridle and
moderation of himself: Rage blinds reasons eye.
I had almost said his reason, for I think Solomon says no less, affirming
that such a man as cannot refrain this reuengfull appetite, is like a city
broken down, Prou. 25.28.
and without walls. Now what government is he worthy of, especially in the
Church of God, that ordinarily loses all the government of himself.

Thrirdly, the Minister standing in the room and stead of God, ought (if he
would resemble him) to be a mortified man: for till he have put filthy fruit
of the flesh, can he never lively express the virtues of God, who is a God of
patience, meekness, much in compassion, Gal. 5.20.
slow to wrath: and much less can he fitly stamp and imprint that part of
his image on others, yea or teach them to withstand such hot and hasty
affections, which so suddenly surprise and inflame himself.

Fourthly, as the Minister is to be a means of reconciling God unto man, so
likewise of man unto man, which commendable duty an hasty that is slow to
wrath, appeaseth strife: Prou. 15.18.
for this unruly passion will disable a man to hear the truth of both the
parties indifferently, nor abides to hear the debate, but it will be
thundering threats before time serve to take knowledge of the matter.

Fifthly, this vice preiudiceth all his ministerial actions. 1. in his own
world. For the Minister shall often meet in his calling with those both
lothing even his wholesome doctrine. Now his calling is, and consequently his
care should be, to gain these to the love and liking of the truth: to which
end he is not presently to break out into anger; for thus he sets them further
off, and scandalizeth such as otherwise he might have won; no more then the
Physician is or may be angry, though the weak stomach of his patient, loath
and cast up his wholesome physic; for that would set the patient into further
distemper: but such must be restored by the spirit of meekness. Gal* 6.1.
2. in his peoples hearts, by alienating their love and affection, which are
easily worn away with the distasteful fruits of this hasty anger: let him
instruct, admonish, reprove, every one finds this evasion, one he does in
anger, an other not in love, and so his whole work is lost and become
fruitless: whereas by loving usage he might have pierced his people with a
permanent and lasting affection, and won better entertainment to all his
proceedings.

Use. 1. All this must teach the servant of the Lord, to be gentle to all men,
2. Tim. 2.24.
apt to teach, suffering the evil, and instructing with meekenes the contrary
minded. Where the Apostle seems to conclude him not to be apt to teach, who
is not inclined to a gentle and meek disposition; not that they are to show
irreligious mildnes in Gods matters, nor to exercise such patience as can bear
all things, nor such lenity as men should be flattred, No mildness may betray
the glory of God.
or endured in their sins. For there is a vice which shrowdeth it self under
the mask of a virtue, and that is a stockish senselesnes, or a sufferance of
any evil, without any great sense of it, condemned in the Angels of the Church
of Thyatira, Rev. 2.20.14.15.
suffering the woman Iesabel, and of Pergamus suffering those that maintained
the doctrine of Baalam, and of the Nicolaitans. But such a patient nature is
required, as was in the Pastor of the Church of Ephesus; Rev. 2.^.
I know thy works and patience, and that thou can not endure and bear with
them that are evil: but thou hate the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate. The Minister then must be patient and suffer the evil: But what,
when he hears them floute at the word, blaspheme, rail on the Ministers? No:
but he must instruct them, and so far only use meeekenesse as may lead them
unto amendment: ^. Thessalonians. ^.7.
so were the Apostles, gentle as a nurse with her little ones, tenderly
handling them, but not suffering them to harm or mischief themselves.

Use. 2. Seeing anger is not only an enemy to the Ministry in the Minister,
Iam. 1.^^.
but in the hearers, let such as are swift to hear, be slow to wrath, as
being a great enemy to a teacheable mind; causing men to cast-off all such
instruction as comes near them, or wageth war against any affected lusts.
And this not only it does in the wicked, but often in the godly themselves: as
Asa (otherwise a good King) yet was wroth with the Seer, and put him in prison.
And true it is, 2. Chr. 16.10.
that rash anger against the teacher, never accomplisheth the righteousness of
God, but causes men to cast off the care of that righteousness which God in the
Ministry enioyneth and urges upon them. Wherefore laying apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of maliciousness, let us receive with meeknes,
that is, with silence, moderation of mind, and teacheablenes, the ingrafted
word: for upon whom else can that holy spirit of God rest, but upon the humble
and meek? Isa. 66.1. Psalm. 25.9.
and none but these does the Lord teach in his way.

Use. 3. Let no man minister, nor people give place to this unruly and
troublesome affection of rash anger, which must be pleased in every thing, be
it never so unjust, or else the whole man is enflamed with the unnatural heat
of this raging fever of the mind. The truth of which appears in Abner, when
Ishbosheth King of Israel asked him, why he so boldly went in into his Fathers
Concubines: what, faith he, 2. Sam. 3.8.
am I a dogs head, that thou should say thus unto me? and yet every man saw
the unrighteousness of the action besides himself. Besides that, the dangerous
fruits of it are daily discovered in sudden quarrels, and barbarous
mischeifes. Notorious was the effect of it in Theodosius, otherwise a good
Emperor, who upon occasion of a seditious tumult, Theodor. l. 5. and August.
de Civ. dei. l. 5. c. 26.
wherein a few of his officers were slain, called all the citizens of
Thessalonica into the theater, as though he had had to show them some
solemnity: and there commanded his soldiers to fall upon them, and slew of
them both innocent and guilty, to the number of about seven thousand: for
which fact Ambrose excommunicated him, and brought him to public repentance
and humiliation. How cursed was the rage of Simeon and Levi, who most
treacherously and barbarously, for one offender, brought so much innocent blood
upon themselves? How fearfully did David forget himself, in vowing the death
not of Nabal only, who was churlish toward him, but of all his guiltles
family, who were so well affected toward him?

Object. Oh but I am of such a nature that I cannot but be angry: would to God
I could bridle mine hasty anger.

Ans. 1. A Christian must have more then nature in him: grace must teach him,
when, and how, and how long to be angry: Vivere secundu^ naturam non est
credentis. Just. Martyr.
it breaks not meeknes for trifling occasions, but in causes of importance,
especially in case of Gods dishonor; in our own great damages of name, goods,
or estate; and the injuries of others, especially the Saints of God: in all
which cases the Scriptures are plentiful in examples. Again, grace must
moderate anger, and suffers it not upon any pretext to degenerate into
rancour and malice: not to wrack it self upon the person, but the sin: nor
for one person to hate any other, (as commonly for the weakness of some one
professor, all are hated) nor to puff up, but to humble himself in the
weakness of another; nor to rejoice, but sorrow in their falls; nor to revenge,
but compassionatly to correct, considering himself. And for the time, grace
suffers not the heart to give place to the devil, nor the sun to set upon
our wrath, much less to make it our bedfellow.

Means to repress rash anger, of two ^orts. 1. Meditations.
2. The means to bridle and stay this rash and unadvised anger, stand partly
in meditations, partly in practices. For the former: 1. Meditate on the
providence of God, without which not the least grief or injury could befall
us: for even the least is a portion of that cup which Gods God has bid him
rail: and Job looked not at the Sabeans and thieves, but the Lord has taken
away, blessed be his name: and Joseph accused not his brethren, but comforted
them after their fathers death, and said, The Lord sent me into Egypt before
you. 2. On the patience and lenity of God, who with much mercy suffers
vessels ordained unto destruction. How long did he suffer the old world? how
loath was he to strike, if in an hundred and twenty years he could have
reclaimed them. And add herunto the meeknes of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
commanded us to learn it of him: his voice was not heard in the streets: a
bruised reed he would not break: how long bare he with Judas, being no better
then a Devil within his family? that even when he was meditating his sin, he
was loath to discover him plainly to be the man; but he that dippeth with me,
and one of you shall betraie me; not expressly noting Judas: and when he was
acting his sin, Christ refused not to kiss him, but called him friend, and
uttered such words, as might have wrung out not tears, but blood, out of the
most rockie heart of any, but the son of perdition. 3. On the unbounded
measure of Gods mercy, wilt not thou let one drop fall upon thy brother, to
forbear, and forgive in trifling wrongs. 4. Upon the danger of retaining
wrath, which is an high degree of murder: thou praiest to be forgiven, as thou
forgiuest: the promise is, forgiu^, (...) you: the threatening is, that
judgment merciless shall be to him that shows not mercy: and be sure that
what measure thou metest unto others, shall be measured to thee again, and
returned into thine own bosom.

And for the practices: 1. In thine anger, make some delay, 2. Practices.
before thou speak, or do any thing: which point of wisdom, nature has
taught I had smitten thee, but that I was angry: and memorable is that answer
of Athenodorus to Augustus, desiring him to leave him some memorable document
and precept, advised him that when he was angry, he should repeat over the
Greek Alphabet before he attempted any speech or action. But although this be
a good means, yet will it be to no purpose, without the heart be purged of
disorder.

2. Apply to thy heart by faith the death of Christ, to the crucifying Gal. 5.


3. After the inward disposition use outward helps: as, 1. avoid occasions,
Prou. 22.24.
and Jonathan avoided the fury of his father, by rising up and going his way.
3. drive away with an angry countenance whisperers, tale-bearers, flatterers,
who are Satan's seedesmen, by whom he sows his tares every where; and his
bellows by whom he blows up these hellish sparkles, desirous to bring all
things into combustion and confusion.

4. Pray for strength and grace against it, especially for the contrary 1.
Sam. 25.3^.
but testified the gladness of his heart in these words. Blessed be the Lord
which has sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy counsel, and
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood.

Not given to wine] In this precept the Apostle prohibiteth a vice, which is as
great a let unto ministerial duties as any other, namely, the drinking of wine
and strong drinks: for under one kind all the sins of that kind are
forbidden. Wherein all use of wine is not inhibited the Minister, it being a
good creature of God, and pure unto the pure: and in w^^kenes of the body, or
grief and heaviness of heart* permitted to his chearing and (...): How far a
minister may lawfully use wine.
(...) unto them that have grief of heart, and let him drink that he may
forget his misery. And Timothy himself may and must drink a little wine for
his health sake: yea and besides this case of necessity, it is not unlawful
for a Minister sometimes to take his more free liberty herein, for his honest
delight and pleasure: as in Christian and religious feasting, at marriages, or
other meetings of friends: seeing Christ himself at a marriage feast, not only
not prohibited use of wine; but by his first miracle of turning water into
wine, furnished the same with great plenty and abundance. But here these rules
must be observed. 1. this free and delightful use, must not be ordinary and
customable. 2. the heart must always be watched, that it be not oppressed, nor
made heavy to godly duties, Luke 21.34. 3. Joseph's affliction must not be
forgotten, Amos. 6.6.

The thing therefore condemned in the precept is, when a minister is given to
the wine, a quaffer, or a wine bibber; one that sitts at it with pleasure
swilling in wine or strong drink, and such a companion as the Prophet speaks
of, who continues at the wine or beer til it inflame him. A vice which in
common men has many woes denounced against it in the Scriptures, Isa. 5.11.
but most hateful in a Minister, as it is also the greatest let to the
faithfulll performance of ministerial duties: both which the Lord himself
has proved true, in that one strange judgment inflicted upon Nadab and
Abihu: Lev. 10.8.
upon occasion of which, the Lord makes a general law, that seeing they (as
some think) in their drunkenness, had offered strange fire, The minister may
not be one that sits at the wine.
and were burnt with fire: whosoever therefore should come to minister before
the Lord, should upon pain of death carefully avoid all lets and hindrances,
whereby they might be unfitted unto their duty and service: all which by
Synechdoche are comprehended under that one kind of wine, and strong drink; as
those which most disturb the minds and senses of men from their duties. And
where our Apostle affirms that Gods steward may not be given to wine, nor a
striker, what else does he then second that of our Savior in the parable
teaching, that of all men the steward may not sit with drunkards, Luke 12.45.
nor smtie his fellow servants.

Reasons. 1. To be addicted to the wine or strong drink, takes away the
heart, Hos. 4.11. that is, troubles the understanding, confounds the senses,
and equalleth a man to the bruit beast without understanding: and thus
disableth the man of God in all the practice of his calling. As the wise man
therefore says, Prou. 31.4. It is not for kings to drink wine, nor Princes
strong drink, least he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment
of the children of affliction: so much less is it for the Minister and Pastor
set over Gods people, least he forget Gods decrees, and change his judgments,
as Aarons sons did. And hence is it that the Lord delivers a double reason
of that former law, both to the same purpose. 1. From the end: Aarons sons
might not drink wine or strong drink, that they might be able to put
difference between the holy and unholy; clean and unclean: and so rightly
discern of the seueralls of their charge. 2. that they might teach the
children of Israel all the statutes of the Lord: herein implying that if they
did not carefully abstain from wine, they could not but be interrupted in both
these. To the same purpose may we observe how aptly the Apostle joins these
two precepts together, understand what the will of the Lord is: and, Ephesians. 5 17.
be not drunk with wine: for commonly such as give themselves over to this
lust, are by the Lord, given up to sottishnes, that what gifts they have had
are withered and taken from them: of which, examples are too frequent.

Secondly, this sitting at wine calls him from the duties and means of his
fitness unto his calling; he cannot attend to reading, exhortation, which is
straightly enjoined every Timothy, 1.4.13.

Thirdly, such a man is so far from performance of any faithful duty,
weeping, mourning, Isa. 22.12, 13.
baldnes, sackcloth: these call to joy, gladness, s^aying oxen, killing
sheep, eating flesh, drinking wine, eating and drinking and saying, to morrow
we shall die. Such Priests we read of Isay, 56.9.12. when the Lord calls all
the beasts of the field to devour and spoil, what say these fellows? Come,
we will bring drink, and fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow
shall be as this day: Thus the love of wine makes them fail in vision, and the
sitting at wine lulleth them a sleep, see Isa. 28*7.
even on the top of the mast, (as Solomon speaks of the drunkard) that in
times and places of most present and desperate dangers, they see none, nor
fear any.

4. It disableth all the duties that such a one in his most sobriety can
perform: (suppose them never so commendable) seeing he has made Prou. 23.33.
which is so accustomed to speak lewd things? and one who has shaken hands
with the most base and wicked companions in a country: which is an other
inseparable companion of this sin: Hos. 7.5. In the day of the King, the
Princes made him sick with wine: and what followed? he stretched out his hand
to scorners: so the Minister being hmselfe mocked with wine, he gives his hand
of fellowship to mockers of God, of all good things, and all good men. Besides
with what face or fruit can he dissuade from idolatry, Julian himself
commanded the heathen priests at least to cou^terfeit the lives of the
Chr^stian ministers, that the Christians should not cast in the teeth of the
Gentiles the wicked lives of their teachers: and hence he especially forbad
them to go into tavernes. Trip. hist. l. 6. c. 28. ^ph 5.18.
who is tainted with the vilest kind of it, having made his belly his God,
more diligently serving it then God himself? How can he persuade to the sober
and temperate use of Gods creatures, who himself continually abuses them to
surfeting, and intemperance? how can he call others to the mortifying of lusts;
to break through the rule and tyranny of sin; to the fostering of the
motions of the spirit, to the adoring of their profession by walking as the
children of light, who himself strengthens his lusts which fight against his
soul: who has made himself such a slave to his drink, as he cannot well sit
but between the wall and the cup, or not without the cup at his elbowe: who
being drunk with wine, cannot be fulfilled with the spirit: and who
delights in such works not of the day, but of darkness and of the night: yea
walloweth in such lusts as the very heathen walked in, 1. Pet. 4.3. yea some of
them were ashamed of. This sin then being every way so vile in this
subject, it appears how justly it is forbidden by our Apostle.

A lamentable thing that this sin is so rife in the ministry. 1. Tim. 5.23.
Use. This fearful sin is exceedingly crept into the Ministry, which no
doubt is a great cause why it abounds so among the people. For although
Timothies and Titusses ought to practice exemplary temperance and sobriety so
far as their health will suffer: yet many here pass all bounds, and go
beyond not only their credit and ability; but even that which their health
and life can well endure: to whom that precept were vain, drink no more
water, but a little wine for your healths sake; but rather drink no more wine
for thy life's sake; so immeasurably are a number addicted hereunto that they
make their bodies like runlets o^ wine caskes, and come too to near M. Bezaes
emblem of a Dutchman.

Object. But what may not a man be merry, and what was wine ordained else
unto, and if any other man, why not a Minister?

Ans. If a man were ready to perish, and had grief of heart, such a question
were seasonable: then Solomon himself would call for wine or in some other
solemnities more liberty may be taken; but a paineful Minister has other more
serious imploiments, then to feed up his hear^ in meriments: and what a sober
and grave carriage befitteth him, we sha^^ after see. 2. The Hebrew phrase as
lesning the sin, so speaks (...) plain drunkenness, which indeed is not the
true mirth of the heart, but (...) oppressing, and deading of it unto duty.
Thus was Ammons hea^^ made merry with wine: 2 Samuel 13. 1. Sam. 25.
and Nabals heart was merry within him. But the^^ merriments had a woeful end:
the former was slain instantly, and the (...) by the Lord ten days after.

Object. But why should men stand upon such precise points, such fellowlike men
maintain good company, and win the hearts of their people?

Ans. It is to stand upon points for a Minister not to drink and quaffe till
he knows not where he stands, or how to stand: but such as stand not upon such
points, I know where (without repentance) they shall stand in the day of
judgment: they have been good fellows in sin, and so are they likely to be
in damnation: they have kept company so long together, as now they shall not
part companies, but be cast together to hell.

Object. But I drink not to drunkenness, I would be loath to take more then I
can well carry away. Ans. But it is too much for a Minister to lie bezelling in
the delight of his taste, in beholding the coulor, and remembering the mixing;
and yet much more to be mighty to drink, and strong to power in strong
drink: and though thou be not so dead drunk, that thou can not stand on thy
legs; and be thou never so able to carry drink, and lay others vnderboard;
yet shall thou not escape the woe proclaimed against thee; seeing not only
drunkenness, but drinkings are condemned as one of the ways of the
unconverted, Isa. 5.22.
1. Pet. 4.

Object. But it seems no such great matter; honest men are sometimes
overtaken, many men's brains are weaker then other, and such infirmities the
Lord will not be so strait in. Ans. True it is, that (as in Germany, so) with
us the custom of the sin has taken away the sense of it: but yet the less
it cries out in the ears of men's consciences, the more noise makes it in the
ears of God. And can that be a small sin in any man (and much more in a
Minister) which the Lord usually so fearfully reuengeth, both here, and
hereafter, and that with the sharpest arrows of his quiver, and the greatest
plagues that the treasure of his wrath can afford? for it is plagued with many
attendant sins, Many arrows of Gods wrath shot against this sin.
even the violence of the whole law of God. For 1. it steals away the heart
from God, and his worship; for where the cupps are attended, there can be no
care of sanctifying his name, observing the Sabbaths; but the mouth is
modesty, and chastity, and make the eyes to look upon strange women: Noah's
daughters were sure that unnatural lust would follow their fathers Prou. 23.33.
4. It wastes the goods, iniureth the family, and makes him worse then an
Infidel: it defraudeth the Church, robs the poor of their alms: wrongeth
the common wealth, making himself unfit for office and service in it: yea both
himself and his a burden to others, and clotheth himself with rags. These
plagues of God accompanying this sin, Prou. 23.
cannot but hinder any sound judgment from deeming it small: so as I shall not
need to add those many bodily plagues whereby the Lord in all ages has
testified his displeasure against it: in miserable casualties, and sudden
death, some falling into the fire, and burning themselves; some into the water,
and downing themselves: some upon stones, and breaking their legs, arms, or
necks: some killing one another, by caus^es wounds, desperate stabbes: and
every drunkard killing himself by insensible wounds: and true it is, that wine
kills more then the sword. As for the plagues wherewith the Lord pursues this
sin after this life, they are unutterable, only let the sinner of this suit
know, that it banisheth him from the suite of the Saints, and excludes him out
of heaven: 1. Cor. 6.10.

Let Ministers and people therefore consider well, what a number of sins and
plagues that man thrusts himself into, that is given to wine and strong
drink, and sits down with drunkards: and yet how has this sin as a
deluge overflowed the land? yea and that height of it seeks not corners
whereby one man sporteth himself in making another drunk: see Hab. 1.15.16
oh woe unto that man that makes himself merry in another man's sin, which
should be as a dagger at his heart: and woe worth that deuillish rejoicing,
which triumphs in putting out Gods image, and brings a man to the condition
of a brute beast: whereas our rejoicing should be in remoouing blocks from
before the blind, rather then in laying them. Alas, that these should be the
fruits of the Gospel: will not such things force our God to remove the hedge
of his vineyard, and break down the wall? nay is not the hedge trodden down
already: seeing such and so vile sins, unheard of among the heathen, like so
many wild beasts, depopulate and wast this Garden of Eden, planted by the
Lords own fingers? that unless the Lord of hosts return and visit this vine,
and return us unto him by repentance, we that have bin envied for our
happiness, shall come of all nations to be pitied: when the long patience of our
God shall be expired, with a soddaine ruin and a woeful downfall. And yet
further, we who live in the Goshen of our Country, if darkness covered the face
of all the land, we should be light: the sun is upon us, we are in the sun:
let us walk as in the nooneday: those that are drunk, are drunk in the
night: let us be ashamed of such works of darkness, that we may be answerable
unto our light: should Gilead be a city polluted with such a bloody sin?
Hose. 6.8.
especially let the school, and the sons of the Prophets (as to whom it is
more especially directed) meditate of this precept, that a Bishop must not be
given to wine.

No striker,] This fourth vice seems fitly to be set after the former, as
being an usual attendant of them. The right meaning of which that we may
better conceive, we must know that we may not so understand the precept, as
that at no time a minister may lawfully strik another; for there be times, In
what cases a minister may lawfully strike.
and cases when it may be not only lawful, but necessary. For 1. it
detracteth nothing from his private economicall right, whereby he may and ought
moderately (as occasion is offered) exercise his power of correcting Beza does:
and Peter had a sword ready to draw and smite at Christ's apprehension. 3. Some
Ministers may be present in a just and Ambrose in the camp of Theodosius, and
of Zuinglius who died in the field: in which case it is not doubted but that a
Minister may strike and kill also the enemies of God. The meaning then is, that
a Minister may not be a man of a martial heart and spirit: such a one as in
his private matters, will stand out with every man at the slaves end in
contending; A minister may not be a swashbuckler, or a man of a word and a blow.
or a man of a word and a blow, an hackster or cutter: but one of a patient
spirit, meek, long-suffering, following peace with all men: yea propounding
himself a pattern of peaceable disposition to the flock. Reasons.

1. Because the weapons of our warrefare are not carnal, but spiritual. 2.
Cor. 10.4.
is a fight and warrefare, 2. Tim. 2.3. but they fight not against flesh and
blood, but spiritual wickednesses: and the weapons are suitable to the war,
and to the enemies; not such as wound the flesh, but which subdue Satan and
sin, and wound the consciences of men, and cast down high cogitations which
fortify themselves in strong holds, and exalt themselves against God: as of
pride, rebellion, false conceits, and opinions; namely the sword of the spirit
put into their hands, which in the constant and conscionable preaching of it,
being wisely welded, is sufficient and powerful, against all enmities
besieging the soul. Besides, they have prayers, Arma Episcopi lachrymae and
orationes. Ambr.
tears, faith, zeal, love: if Ministers will strike, they may with these, and
ought: and the effect will be proportionable, that is, not to bring men's bodies
into subjection unto themselves; but their souls and consciences unto the
obedience of Christ. This castle is not won by fists or clublaw; neither with
the strokes of the tongue, by bitter and feirce railing speeches: nay the
servant must not thus strive, but be gentle toward all men, apt to teach,
suffering the evil men patiently. 2. Tim. 2.24.

Minister medicus est, is curat vulnera non ipse verberat. Chrysostom.
but not make them, except for cures sake: And as a good Physician who beats
not his patient, no not when through distemper perhaps he may fall upon him;
but considers his case, and goes on in his course of cure: so must the
Minister (after the example of Christ) being smitten, 1. Pet. 2.23.
not smite again: being reviled, not revile again; being in passion, not
threaten. For if such had been fit means to build his kingdom, how easily
could Christ have been avenged of his enemies? nay which is more, if Peter
shall in the love and zeal of his Master, and that in the defense of his life,
draw a sword; Christ will bid him put it up again into his place, for he is
now out of his own element, and newly stepped out of his calling: not without
indignation threatening him, that if he dares to take the sword, when God has
not put in into his hands, he shall perish with it. Yea, and least any man for
his cause sustain bodily harm, he will heal Malcus his ear, who surely
deserved nothing less. Whence easily we see that those fiery men, who with
those two Disciples would for every injury call for fire from heaven, know not
of what spirit they are of. Luke 9.55.




Let none here allege Christ's whipping the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple, for he was not only a Minister, but the Lord of his Temple. Nor the
Apostolical rod wherewith Peter struck Ananias dead, and Paul Elimas blind,
which was a gift extraordinary, and temporary. We must walk by this
ordinary canon, which prohibiteth a Minister to be a striker.

Use. 1. What an happy change of things should our eyes see, if this one
charge of the Apostle were duly observed? how might brethren live together in
unity, although they retained some difference in judgment in things
circumstantiall and of lesser moment? then such as are too hot, might be wisely
cooled without chafing and storming: such as are weak, might be by softnes and
gentleness suported by the stronger: such as have strayed, might by the spirit
of meekness be reduced into the fold: and such as are loath to step awrie,
should be encouraged in their godly care. And surely this is the means used by
Christ, and his Apostles in the building up of his kingdom, and maintaining of
his causes; who while they had power to command, did rather choose to beseech
men, and not only practiced in their own persons, but prescribed to all those
who were to succeed them in their labors, and to continue the ministry unto
the end. Whereas contrariwise, what is it that has vpholden Antichrist so long,
and quickened and preserved life in bad causes, but violence, cruelty, and
rage, against the servants of God. The strongest arguments in Popery were ever
fire and faggot, and if they could not take away the reasons alleged by the
word, this they could do, even take away their lives by the sword of the
Magistrate.

2. Here are reprehended many Prophets, and the sons of the Prophets, who
perhaps in the school of the Prophets are no better then swashbucklers, fitter
to receive pay in the field, then pension from the Churches patrimony:
resolute Lamechs who readily revenge an injury seventy times seven fold:
whose glory is to quarrel, and stand out at swords point with any man: that
which is Gods glory they deem cowardice, namely, to pass by an offense. How
do these consider that they are either dedicated unto, or dismissed with the
tidings of peace? that they are to serve under the Prince of peace, even the
head of our profession? who in his own person bare all injuries, rebukes, and
buffettings of sinners, and commanded his disciples to turn the other cheek
to the smiter: not that it is not lawful for them to stand upon their lawful
defense, but to be so far from offering or returning injury, as that they
must rather suffer twain then revenge one.

3. The same duty belongs to every Christian, for the Apostle speaks not
a word in all these ministerial directions, especially in the manner and
carriage of the life of the Minister, but it concerns every man in his place,
and may be his glass of whatsoever condition he be: And who sees it not
unlawful for any of Gods people to live in wrath and enmity, or as we say
like dogs and cats? but as the children of one father, members of one body,
maintainers of one faith, and expectors of one glory. Isa. 11.
The subjects of Christ's kingdom are no longer cockatrises, basilisks, Lions,
but lambs, and as sucking children harmeles and innocent; so says the
Apostle, the wisdom which is from above is gentle, peaceable, Iam. 3.17.
etc. Which meets with a number of men marked as Caine was with the devils
brand, who was a manslayer from the beginning: who are men of a word and a
writ, nay a word and a blow, if not a stabbe: caring no more in their fury to
spill a man, then to kill a dog: such a black image of the devil is stamped
upon them, as they are professed enemies to the image of God, and care not in
how many they can extinguish it. But such bloody men whose valor and sport it
is to fight it out and quarrel, are for most part hit home in earnest: and as
they are the enemies of the common societies of men, are by God suddenly rooted
out of their society, and seldom go to their graves in peace: for the Lord
scatters the people that delight in war, and the cruel and bloody man
lives not out half his days. Psalm. 63.3.
He that sheddeth man's blood, by man commonly his blood is shed: Abner slays
Asahel, Ioab slays Abner, and Solomon slaieth Ioab.

Not given to filthy lucre] This vice of covetousness is the fifth and last
reckoned by the Apostle, of which he would have the Minister free. The word
notes such a one as being greedily set on gain, and outward profits, bends
the greatest part of his study that way: or else one that will take any
course, use any means lawful or unlawful; refuse no occasion, but out of
every thing never so base and mean can carue his own commodity: no matter
what wind it is that blows in his profit.

But to show that all is not gained which is thus gotten, the Apostle calls it
filthy gain or lucre. 1. because this immoderate and unnatural affection
makes a man most base and sordid in getting; seruill in keeping, and
illiberall in expending. 2. because by getting or keeping this gain, some
filthy sin or other will cleave to the fingers: as in Achab and Judas,
covetousness and murder were coupled: in Achan and Gehezi, covetousness and
lying were combined. In the Priests and Prophets of Ieremies time, Ier. 6.1^.
covetousness, and all manner of injustice, from the greatest to the least;
every one is given to covetousness, from the Priest to the Prophet they deal
all falsely: and no marvel if the root of all evil, be so fruitful in all
iniquity. Covetousness is a most base sin, especially in a Minister. Reasons.


Doct. 1. The Minister of all men must be free from such a base sin as this
is, the man of God must fly earthly mindedness, as a sin most dishonouring
his high calling, and disabling him from the dutie^ of it.

Reas. 1. This vicious affection distracteth him, and infoldeth him in warfare,
and infers this same reason against this vice in the person of a Minister;
2. Tim. 2.4.
that as he which goes a warfare does not implicate and entangle himself with
the affairs of this life, but having received his press money, that he may
please his captain forsakes all the care of wife, children, house affairs,
and calling, and wholly fixes his mind and eye upon the business and victory:
even so the Minister serving not under a Cyrus, or Alexander, but under the
eternal son of God, ought also to divorce himself from the distractions for
the things of this life, which in comparison must be utterly neglected. He is
in this warfare rather to expect dangers, blows, wounds, to forecast these, to
provide for these; and prepare how to encounter against Satan, sin, his own,
and others sinful lusts: following his captain at the heels; and
encouraging himself hereto, both with assurance of victory, and the
expectation of his pay and penie of life eternal. It was the greatest policy,
that ever the devil watched against the Church (as the woeful experience of
many ages has taught us) to heap excessive wealth upon the Clergy: then was
the study of the Scriptures, and the care of the calling laid aside, and was
diuerted into plotting and policy, both to get more, and hold that which was
gotten: by this Antichrist came in, hereby he rose to his height, and hereby he
stands at this day: this wealth joined with pomp and state, is that Davus
which troubles all the parts of the Christian world, both the Churches and
civil states, as in many instances might be declared.

Secondly, this vice will make a minister falsify the word, turn the Isa.
56.12.
every one looks to his own way, and accordingly prophesied for his own
purpose and advantage: so Jeremy joins these sins together, Ier. 5.31. The
Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests receive gifts in their hands: and
Ezekiel tells us, that this filthy lucre made the Prophets so base minded,
that for very handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread, some of them would
pollute the name of the Lord, in lying to his people: some of ignorance, by the
blinding and bewitching of this sin: and others against their knowledge and
conscience, pouring themselves out through the deceit of Balaams wages. Hence
is this sin branded justly to be the seed of heretics, and spawne of
scismatikes, false teachers, and apostates. What other was the white which the
authors of scisme, and heads of faction aimed at? Romans 16.17. they served not
the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. And no other God served the false
Apostles, Philip. 3.19.
who were enemies to the cross of Christ, but their belly was their God; why
so? because they minded earthly things; for what any man most minds, that he
makes his God. Hence could they please all sorts of men, and soon turn round
into square. In their doctrine, join circumcision with baptism, and so both
Jew and Gentile were contented. In their lives, they would suffer nothing for
Christ: but howsoever the squares go, their state and pomp must be vpheld.
And at this day, what other is the God of Popish Priests? who for their belly
have turned all religion into gain; and almost all essential truths into
lies; both which are readily to be proved in particular: whereas the true
Apostles were most careful to remove from themselves even the suspicion of
this fearful sin: who professed that both the Churches knew, and God bare
them record, that they were far from using flattering words, or colored
covetousness in their doctrine: and for their practice, when they might have
been chargeable to the Churches, they rather wrought with their hands, that
they might be eased.



Use. This confuteth many base minded men in the ministry, whose thoughts,
Many ministers aim at no other end.
study, pains, and labor, are altogether bended and set upon this
conclusion, That they will be rich: to which purpose they heap up living upon
living, cast their largest extent, and contriue the building of their own
houses, although in the mean time the house of the Lord lie wast. Hagg. 1.
Which grievous sin, if it were so fearfully accursed in the common people
of the Jews; what a grievous plague hangs over the head of that Minister,
whose calling lays a further necessity upon him, not to build a material
house made with hands; but a spiritual habitation for the Lord, consisting of
living stones in the hearts of men: and yet all this work is neglected, that
his own neast may be well feathered. And from the same fountain flows it,
that some are known usurers, others are farmours, and husbandmen, rather then
Prophets; others merchants, Episcopus aut Praesbyter aut Diaconus nequaquam
saeculares curat assumat, sui aliter dejiciatur. Canon Apost. 7.
buyers and sellers of Churches, people, and inferior commodities; others in
marketting, and yet in far baser affairs, spend their time and wast
themselves: which pitiful fruits of this filthy lust, are so rife and so
ripe, that if old father Latimer lived in these days, he would boldly avouch,
that if covetousness were lost, we might find it in the Clergy: some Judas or
other would have the bag.

Now there is no great hope of the recovery of those who are already clasped
in the windings of this sin; they are desperately endangered to be drowned in
perdition, so sweet is the morsel, and so pleasant is the booty, that they
will not let it go. To them therefore I will say no more, but as Peter to
Simon Magus; Pray to the Lord, that if it be possible, the iniquity of thy
heart may be forgiven thee. I will rather turn my speech to every young
Timothy and Titus, beseeching and exhorting them all, timely to prevent this
sin: and to frame their hearts to that exhortation of Paul, 1. Tim. 6.11. But
thou, O man of God, that is, who have place, or art to have office in the
Church by ordinary calling, as the Prophets and men of God of old had by
extraordinary; Thou, who after a special manner, art to be Gods peculiar, not
as all men by creation, nor as all godly men in respect of election and
sanctification; but besides these by reason of thy function art, or art to be
in special service about God, fly these things: that is, preserve thy self
from these noisome lusts, the breeders of most filthy and detestable
cogitations and practices.

And if any Timothy should ask, But how may I fly these? Apostolical
directions for the avoiding of so noisome a sin.
Paul gives direction in the same place. If thou would avoid such noisome
guests as these are, then 1. follow righteousness, deal justly, give every
man his own, as covetousness reaches to it self the things of another.
piety: covetousness is idolatry; practice thou piety, which is great faith: a
ground of covetousness love to men, a fruit of faith: self love occasioneth
covetousness, but Christian love seeks not her own things, much less other
men's. 5. Meeknes, waiting and expecting Gods coming to the Fight the good
fight of faith: strive by faith, patience, Lay hold on eternal life: being
called by faith I have desired no man's gold, silver, or garments: yea and their
people also may see and say of them, that they have sought them, and not
theirs; yea not their own private profit, but the profit of many that they
might be saved. Priests and Jesuits are content to venture life and limme to
win men to Romish religion, and how much more should Ministers of God be
content with any condition to gain men unto God.

Doctr. Out of the epithet added to withdraw the hearts of men from
covetousness, calling that a filthy lucre, which is gotten by it, we will note
two more general instructions. First, That there is much filthy lucre and
gain, which every Christian must abhor: which is the rather noted, because
men of filthy and corrupt minds think any gain cleanly and sweet enough,
Dulois odor lucri.
let it be gotten by hook or crook, or blown in by any wind. But we are to
know, that much gain is filthy, on which the Lord will one day so blow, as the
third heir shall have little cause to smile in it. Now according to our former
interpretation, whatsoever gain it is, the prosecuting whereof may argue a
base, and filthy mind; or whatsoever is joined with any sin, that is a
filthy lucre. But because men are loath to take knowledge of such a sweet
sin in such generality, I will in particular give some taste hereof, and then
use some motives against it. For the former I will comprehend it in three rules.

Sundry kinds of filthy lucre.
First, all unjust gain in dealing, whether in bargaining, or out of bargain,
is filthy lucre. In bargain: as selling things, 1. unprofitable for
vnsaleable: as, 1. Church-patrimonie, defective, either in substance, or use,
whereby they become of unjust price, either in that they are not of that profit
to the buyer they ought; or that quantity, because of unjust weights or
measure: but most of this is confessed filthy lucre. Out of bargain; 1. That
gain which any man takes for some duty which he

2. Rule. All that gain that is gotten by gaming for money, as by carding,
filthy lucre. For every penny must be accounted for, and if it be not patrimony
or gift, ought to be gotten in the sweat, and labor of a lawful calling. And
consequently all such gain as comes in by partaking and abetting in these
sins; as to make gain by converting their houses into gaming houses,
stageplay houses, or tippling houses, all which are the receptacles and roostes
of filthy and vicious persons; and the gain therefore cannot be but filthy:
the last of which three, although there have been and might be a necessary
use of, yet such is the common disorder of them generally, that in stead of
alehouses we may call the^ hell houses: for a Christian man need no other hell,
then to be next neighbors unto them: but if there be any better ordered, I
speak not aagainst them.

3. Rule. All that gain that goes hand in hand with the violence of filthy
gain. As that which is gotten by needles oaths, true or false; against the
third commandment: or by riding out on the Sabbath day, or staying at home by
employment in the ordinary calling, out of very extraordinary necessity,
against the fourth: or the price of an harlot, against the seventh: or by
stealth and vailes, whereby men unconscionably shape out their own commodity
out of another man's cloth: or by any manner of oppression, and grinding the
faces of the poor, as by monopolies, enhansing, engrossing, and regrating
corn or other commodities, against the eight: or by lying, and dissembling,
which is as ordinary with many as their trading is, against the ninth. All
these, with diverse other kinds, almost against every commandment, are filthy
lucre. Of all which the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. Let no man oppress or
defraud his brother in any thing: and adds two reasons; 1. because the Lord
is the auenger of all such things: 2. because we are not called to uncleanness,
but unto holiness: implying that these are practices, far unbeseeming that
holiness unto which a professor of Christ is called: as in Ephesians. 5.3.5. he
reckneth up these kinds of sins among those which for the uncleanness and
filthiness of them, ought not to be named among Christians.

(...) thy gain that it be not filthy.
Now it becomes every man to examine his gain, and try by these rules
whether it be filthy gain or no; that if he find it so, it may no longer
cleave to his fingers, but he may cast it away from him, as Zacheus did: and
for time to come beware of such a foul blemish, wherewith not only the soul
and conscience, but even that holy profession which every one (even the worst)
make of obedience unto the Gospel, is blemished and dishonored: and the rather
for these considerations.

1. In regard of that holy commandment, Philip. 4.8. whatsoever things are
honest, just, pure, worthy love, of good report, in which are any vetue, any
praise, think on these things, and do them, v. 9. Object. But it is
impossible to live by true and honest dealing. Ans. Mark the promise of God
made to such dealing in the words following; the peace of God shall be with
you, that is, his favor and love in Christ shall embrace you, and all that
outward prosperity and success as his wisdom shall think meet for you.

God cannot bless that which his law has cursed. Prou. 10.22.
2. Consider that it is not every gain that makes rich; every gain may bring
in wealth and abundance, but man's life stands not in that, but in the blessing
of God which makes rich, and he adds no sorrows with it: and therefore a
Christian man should not purse that penny which he sees not made his by Gods
blessing, and which he cannot crave a blessing upon. Now can God vouchsafe a
blessing upon that, which his unchangeable word has blasted already? Prove.
10.2.
for treasures of wickedness shall not profit: and can his hand bless that
which his law has cursed, as sin or joined with sin? which dishonors
the person and profession of a Christian? far be it from the Lord to be so
contrary unto himself.

3. Consider that such filthy gain, is for most part put in a broken bag; or
if it stand a while with a man, All is not gotten which is so gained.
the justice of God raises him up some fool or unthrift for his heir, who
shall as fast and sinnefully scatter as ever the father gathered, to the ruin
of himself, and not seldom of the whole family: as our eyes have seen many
great heirs, who have consumed themselves and all their substance above
ground, long before their fathers carkases have been consumed under ground.
Who has not seen the curse of God in the house of the liar and theife? or who
of reason is so young as he cold not daily observe it? Here is alleged
providence and care of wife and children, etc. but consider aright of the
matter, and thou shall see no just reason why the care of wife or children,
should cause a man to give up himself to filthy lucre: for this is the way to
bring the greatest curse and want upon his house and children; for so runs
the threatening, The curse enters into the house of the liar and thief, and
cursed shall his children be after him: and Job observed that the offspring of
the wicked are not satisfied with bread, Job 27.14.
although himself often be: the promise to the just is to inherit the land,
but the wicked shall not dwell in it, that is, shall not abide and continue in
their generations: their possessions shall spue out the ungodly possessors.

Doctr. 3. The very phrase of Scripture speaking of riches should pull our
hearts from them. Eccles. 5.12.
The Scriptures speaking of riches for most part joins some such epithet
with them as may be a backbyas to withdraw the hearts, and affections of men
from them: as here filthy lucre. Solomon observed an evil sickness under the
sun; or such an evil as brings grief with it, namely riches reserved for
the hurt of the owner: then riches are not always heaped up for good. The
Prophet Micha observed much wealth in the house of the wicked, Micha. 6.10.
but it was treasures of wickedness. And therefore all treasures and store are
not iustifieable, nor comfortable. Habacuk calls the increase of wealth,
Abac. 2.6.
the lading of a man with thick clay. Christ terms the care of them,
thornie cares: and themselves deceivable riches. Matthew. 13.22.
Paul styles them by the title of uncertain riches, according to that of
Solomon Prou. 23.5. Riches have wings, 1. Tim. 6.17.
and fly away like an eagle. For what other cause does the Scripture of
purpose every where speak of them, that we can scarcely read two words
together of them, but the one shall be as a curb to restrain our desires from
them; but to abate our fiery edge, and weane our affections from the
immoderate hungring after them? And further, because the spirit of God sees
what is in man, and well perceives the hardness and knottines of our mould in
this behalf; he has prepared other wedges as hard as this, to subdue these
covetous lusts. As,

1. By giving them the name of the most grievous sin: covetousness which is
idolatry, Coloss. 3.5. There is never a covetous man but would be loath to be
counted of but as a Christian, and a good neighbor, etc. but indeed if he
look his face in the Apostles glass, he is no better then an Idolater: for
his heart is quite withdrawn from God. Ephesians. 5 5.
Job in his time knew some that made Gold their hope, and heard some say to the
wedge of gold, thou art my confidence. Job 31.24.
And Satan knew that either this temptation would bring Christ to idolatry or
none; his last and forest temptation was, all these will I give thee; which if
it be resisted, Matthew. 4.
it is time for him to depart.

Secondly, by ascribing unto it an invincible power to hold men in the practice
of all impiety, discovering it to be an enemy to all religion, and opposing
it unto piety and godliness: 1. Tim. 6. It keeps out the word where it is
not, it choaketh the word where it is: it makes of professors, reuolters, and
Apostates; who in their beginnings could with Judas, teeme to forsake all as
the other disciples did; yet long before their end have with Demas forsaken the
truth, and embraced the present world: that (as the young man) they came not so
hastily, as they departed heavily. It has caused many discontented students to
grow up to resolution, in heresy, popery, treasons, and most desperate
attempts. And it is no less enemy to righteousness then to religion, being an
unmerciful and cruel sin, often with some one stroke, destroying fathers
with their children, orphans, widows, families, and whole towns. For whence
are oppressings, ^ent-rackings, vsuries, monopolyes, thefts, robberies, and
murders? are they not especially from these covetous lusts, which fight in the
members?

3. By showing the black tail of this sin, which causes the Lord in his
anger to smite with grievous strokes; Isay 57.17. for his wicked covetousness
I have been very angry with him, I have smitten him, and hid my self from
him: and is one of the sins for which the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience, Coloss. 3.5. teaching that such persons as
disobediently go on in this sin, and will hear no counsel against it; Gods
wrath bursteth out against them, and tumbleth them to hell: for no persons of
such vile affections shall enter into that holy city, into which no unclean
thing can enter: a truth of such certentie, that the Apostle assures himself,
Ephesians. 5.5.
that there is none but knows that the covetous person which is an idolater,
has no inheritance in the kingdom of God and Christ. Let the covetous person
then conceive of his estate as he will, God takes him for his enemy: for he
shuts none out of heaven but his enemies.

Quest. But how shall I know this disease creeping upon me? Answ. The proper
symptoms of it are; The symptoms and signs of this craving sickness.
1. A greedy desire and thirst, like that of the horseleach, which says
always, give, give: yea the more a man A nigardly heart to himself: Eccle.
6.2. there is a man to whom God has given riches, and treasures, and honor,
and he wants nothing for his soul of all it desires: but God gives him not
power to ea^e thereof. Although he has abundance, yet the covetous heart
keeps the key whereby he has locked it from himself: such a man (grudging
the very necessary use of his wealth to himself) can be most base and sordid,
in his diet, apparel, and whole course, and is loath to bestow any thing that
is good on himself. Thus he has the things, but little or no good of them:
for what is the goodness of a thing, besides the use of it? the possession is
but a title beyond the use. And this note brandeth a number of men, whose whole
life has been nothing but a gathering of goods, and a saving from himself of
goods gathered, until he has so abounded, as he can see no bottom nor end of
his wealth, and then the most nigardly person can be content to set out
himself and his, even to riot and prodigality: as it was observed in the
covetous rich man, Luke 12.19. when his ground was so fruitful, that he had no
more place to lay it: and when he had laid up goods enough for many years,
then he could say, soul live at ease, eat and drink, but never before. 3. A
withdrawing of the heart and hand from good and neglect of the good of the
Church, and of the poor. Good words indeed are good cheap, and feign would
they do some thing so far as mouth-mercie can extend: but the truth is,
Lazarus can scarce get the crummes; but their dogs are dearer unto them, then
the poor members of Christ: see James 2.16. or if they part with any thing to
any godly use, it is wrung from them, as water out of flints; delays are made
either till the present opportunity be ommitted; or till there be no remedy:
whereas the Lord loves a cherefull giver: and Solomon says; say not to thy
neighbor, Come again to morrow, if now thou have it. 4. A grudging of
confidence in them, as in a strong hold: The rich man's goods are his strong
city: Luke 12. the rich man said to his soul, soul take thy rest: and
whereupon should it rest? thou have enough for many years: but what a fool
proved he himself thus to reckon without his host: he could gather riches
together, but he could not tell who should enjoy them. So what other is the
covetous man's confidence, then the leaning upon these staffes of reed* which
while they think to sustain themselves by, they shiuer into pieces, and
pearce the hand of their holder. And whence are those so frequent inward
discourses and reasonings of the diffident hearts of most men, yea often of
good men, who are too ready to dream of an unshaken prosperity: as David, I
said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved, and this wealth cannot decaie;
but from this ground, that the heart is withdrawn from God, and set upon the
creature: oh these goods will stand by me, what dearth, what sickness, what
changes soever come, I shall be able to shift and send for one: and thus
whereas the bountifulnes of God should lead us to himself, it keeps down
the heart from being raised toward him, who is the portion of his people; so
as it is too well contented to live without him, as finding more sweetness in
the pownes of his love, then in himself.

Means to forbear such covetous desires. 1. Meditations.
Quest. But by what means may I subdue, and keep under this covetous desire?
Answ. 1. Meditate, 1. on Gods Commandment, Pro. 23.4. travel not too much to
be rich: and, Matthew. 6.25. Care not what and, having food and raiment, let us
therewith be content. And reason there is, that seeing distracting and
sollicitous thoughts are the ground of covetous practices, the care of a
Christian must be to walk diligently in his calling, but leave all the
success and promises, assuring thee that whilst thou thus leanest unto him,
his providence shall become a plentiful portion unto thee: Psalm. 55.24. Cast
thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee; 1. Pet. 5.7. Cast all
your care upon him, for he cares for you: make these promises thy purchase,
and possess them by belief, We ought to be content with things present,
because God is always present with his.
and they shall be in stead of a bridle unto all covetous and greedy desires
of gain. And thus the Apostle disswadeth it, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation
be without covetousness, and be content with things present. They might ask,
but how shall we attain hereunto: have we not cares, and charges upon us?
True: but you have where to I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. 3. On thy
own deserts: whereby Jacob in want stayed his mind, I am less then 4. On the
inordinacie of thy desire: for how little is nature contented with? and a very
little above a little choketh it: and yet grace is contented with much less:
it cares not how little it see about it, for it believes the more, hops the
more, trusts the more, prays the more, and loves the more. All the labor
of a man (says Solomon) is for his mouth; Eccles. 6.7.
the mouth is but little and strait, soon filled, yet the desire is not
filled: noting it to be an unnatural desire in many men, who labor not as men
that were to feed a mouth, but a great gulf, fit to swallow whole Jordan at a
draught; or such a mouth as the Leviathan, which receives the carte and
drawers of it.

2. Practices.
2. Practice these rules following. 1. Carry an equal mind to poverty I can
want, and abound, I can be full and hungry, in every condition I can be
content. If the world come in upon thee, use it as not using it: if it do not,
yet account the present condition the best for thee, because the Lord does so
account it* and the way to get wealth, is to give it up into Gods disposition;
as Abraham and for his graces esteem them above goods, craving with Solomon,
wisdom before wealth; the blessing of Jacob before Esaus pottage. Especially
labor to feel the want of Christ above all things; for this hunger would
starve the other, and work this effect, that while the fool gathers riches
to himself, and is not rich in God, thy conversation shall either be without
covetousness, or if at any time thou covet, Luke 12.21.
it shall be certain, not uncertain riches, which thou may treasure up in
heaven, and then send thy heart after them: while the other are fit only to
fix the hearts of the possessors in the earth. Hereunto agrees that of Paul,
to rejoice in the cross of Christ, by which the world shall be crucified to
thee, and thou unto it; for once begin to rejoice in the things which he has
done and suffered for thee, and thou will begin also to account of all things
as doung in comparison of him: hereupon the world will begin to frown on
thee, and hate thee, and then shall thou with more ease hate it: and thus daily
the more thou risest with Christ, the more will thou seek the things that are
above. 3. Thou must go one step further, daily to cross the affection
directly. 1. by daily seeking the assurance of the pardon of sin. 2.

Verse. 8. But harberous, one that loves goodness, wise, righteous, holy,
temperate. Now the Apostle proceeds to make enumeration of those virtues,
which in the Minister are to be opposed to the former vices, of which we have
spoken at large: and these virtues are opposed either specially, as to
covetousness, hospitality; to frowardness, love of good things, and men; to
drunkenness, wisdom and sobriety: or else more generally two other virtues
are set against them all; namely, righteousness in regard of men, and
holiness in respect of God. Whence before we come to the particular handling
of the^ severally as they lie in the verse, Doctr. The minister must not only
be free from vices, but for the honor of his place shine in positive virtues.
this instruction is generally to be noted: That, it is not sufficient for the
Ministers, neither any other Christians to be free from many vices, but for the
beautifying of their place and profession, they must shine out by many positive
graces, to the glory of God, and the gracing of his glorious Gospel, which
they teach and profess. 1. Tim. 6.11. But thou O man of God, fly these
things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, etc.
which truth is evident in an inferior office, even in the poor widows which
were to be admitted to the service of the Church, cap. 5.10. And for the common
Christian the commandment is not only to eschew evil, but do good: and the
general reasons are these.

Reasons.
1. Every commandment in Scripture has two parts, the affirmative,

created unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. 2. Gods peculiar to set out the virtues of
him that called him out of darkness into a wonderful light, 1. Pet. 2.9. 3.
Gods planting, to grow up as by the rivers of water, to a tree of
righteousness, laden with the fruits of the spirit: for this is the blessing
of the Lords plants, Isa. 61.3. 4. a member of Christ's body, and therefore (as
a member in the body) must not only be harmless, but of good use for the
service and benefit of the whole.



Use. 1. This doctrine fully answers a common plea which is made for the
justifying of many drones, It is no sufficient justification of a minister to
say he is an harmeles man.
insufficient, and ignorant ministers: they are every where received in the
minds of most, as honest simple men, well meaning, peaceable, and harmless,
and such as would be loath to do any man injury: and all this is well, but
what fruits of the spirit have they? what wisdom of God shines in them? what
sufficiency to do the duty of their calling? what love to Gods people? what
diligence in preaching, and making known the ways of God? oh no, here we
cannot say much: then I say, thou say not so much as would have moved our
Apostle to have either admitted, or permitted such in the Ministry: who
requires that such should not only be not graceless, and wicked, but
gracious persons, shining in the robes of piety and righteousness.

2. This doctrine discardeth also a number that go under the name, and in the
number of Christians; who think it Christianity enough to be harmless,
civil, or neighbourly men* or if they can say with the Pharisie, I am not thus
and thus, an oppresser, an vsu^er, nor as such and such precise and nice
fellows, who are as much hated of them, as ever were the Publicans of the
Pharisees; I pay my Church duties, and give every man his own: and this is
the religion of the common Protestant. But suppose thou were thus guiltles as
thou say; yet art thou not yet half a Christian: for the Apostle Peter
writing to believers, enioyneth them not only to fly the corruptions that are
in the world through lust; 2. Pet. 1.4.5.
but moreover to join virtue with faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance, and patience, and godliness, and brotherly kindness, and
love: and adds two reasons, 1. If these things be in you and abound, etc.
teaching that without these positive virtues, all the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and consequently his profession, is idle and unfruitful. 2. If any
have them not, he is blind and cannot see a far off* and has forgotten that
he was purged: that is, such a one sees but a little in heavenly things, and
little regards that covering, and curing of sin go together: nor that
remission and purging of sin go with sanctification of life and study of
well doing, and consequently can be no Christian: which agrees with Christ's
own posession, Ioh. 15.
that if any abide in him, he cannot choose but bring forth much fruit. Again,
it shall not be enquired in the last judgment, what thou art not, nor
judgment pass according to that thou have not; but what art thou? what have
thou? have thou received the spirit of Jesus Christ? if thou have not the
spirit of Christ, thou art none of his: have thou reciued the fruits of that
spirit; such as are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
Gal. 5.22.
faith, meekenes, temperance? If any have the spirit of Christ, it is life in
him unto righteousness: these shall show the faith of thy heart, Romans 8.
and that thou art a sound Christian, and not in show, as the most content
themselves to be.

Now to come nearer the virtue it self: (...).
the word signifies one friendly to strangers, and ready to lodge and
entertain them: a duty much commended in the Scriptures unto all Christians,
as a sweet fruit of liberality; but unto the Minister especially, as a father
and president unto the flock. In the precept consider four points. 1. The
occasion of it. 2. whether it binds every Minister, and how far. 3. the
reasons enforcing it. 4. the use.



maintain their family: it seems that every Minister ought to be a rich
man.

Ans. It is not for me to prescribe any thing in the Church constitutions
concerning Impropriations and Nonresidencie, Every minister even the poorest
may be harbour^es.
the former whereof were they restored to the Church, and the latter removed
out of the Church, no doubt there were, but that sufficient ministers might be
sufficiently maintained and furnished to hospitality through the land. But
this I say, that the poorest Minister may not exempt himself from this duty,
neither is altogether disabled from it: a poor man may be merciful, and
comfortable to the distressed some way or other, as if with Peter and John he
have not money, nor gold, nor meat to give, yet such as he has he can give:
he can give counsel, prayers, and affoard his best affections: Act. 3.5.
such cups of cold water shall not be vnaccepted nor unrewarded of him, Matthew.
10.42.
whose property is to accpet a man according to that he has, and not
according to that he has not, where he sees a ready mind. 2. Cor. 8.12.
Thus must that place, 1. Tim. 5.10. be understood, such widows as were to be
received into the service of the Church, were to be chosen of such as had been
hospitable and harberous: Now in all likelihood many of them, if not the most,
were very poor, and had no great matters to be liberal of: and therefore the
Apostle seems in the next words to declare wherein this hospitality might be
showed, even by such as had known want; namely if they had performed bodily
labor unto them, washed the Saints feet, bestowed their best affections, and
cheerful labor for their relief: and thus might these poor widows (like
that widow, Luke 21.2.) casting in their two mites into Gods treasury, find
more acceptance with him, then many rich men in giving greater beneuolences to
the distressed Saints.

Thirdly, the reasons enforcing this precept upon the Minister especially, are
these.

1. In regard of strangers, he must take up this duty, whether they be
strangers from the faith; that hereby he might win them to the love of true
religon, which they see to be so merciful and liberal: or else if they be
converted much more, that he may comfort and confirm such as are banished, or
otherwise evil entreated for the confession and profession of the truth: for
if every Christian, much more must the Minister be affected to those that are
in bonds, Heb. ^^.^.
as though himself were bound with them: and consequently look what kindness
he would receive, if he were in their condition, the same to his power he is
to bestow upon them.

2. In regard of his own people, upon whom by this means he seals his
doctrine sundry ways; but especially if he keep open house for the poor
Christians in want, he binds the souls of such receivers to obey the word;
and encourages them by his entertainment in their entertainment of the
Gospel. Which is the reason rendered by Hezekiah, why the people must give the
Priests a portion of their offerings, to encourage them in the law of the
Lord. 2. Chr. 31.4.
And thus by both these means the Minister by receiving the poor members of
Christ, becomes a great help unto the truth: which duty is imposed even
upon every Christian, by the Apostle John* 3. Ep. 8.

Fourthly, the use. 1. It teaches that it were to be wished that the
maintenance of every Minister were competent, certain, and proper unto
himself, that he might have wherewith to perform this so necessary a duty.

2. In regard of poor strangers, to stir up ministers and people to a
liberal heart toward them all, but especially if they be such, as the land of
whose own possessions being unclean, come over unto the land of the
possession of the Lord, Josh. 22.19.
wherein the Lords tabernacle dwells. Pity it is that having such a clowd
of examples in the Scriptures to lead us in this duty, yet that it should be
so far out of request. How few children has Abraham the father of our faith
among us, who sit in the door of their tent, Genesis 18.
to watch for and enforce strangers to receive their best entertainment? Few be
our Lots, who will undergo any loss, any indignity, before strangers shall
sustain any harm at all: he will offer his own daughters to their violence,
he will use reasons, they had known no man, and that which would have
persuaded any but the Sodomites he used last, that they were strangers, and
were come under his roof. Few Jobs who will not suffer the stranger to lodge
in the street, Job 32 32.
but open their doors to him that passes by the way. Romans 16.23.
Gaius has few followers who was Paul's host, and the host of the whole
Church: he was no inkeeper, but his house was as open as any inn to receive
distressed Christians. Few women of account imitate the Shunamite, who
constrained Elisha as he passed by to turn in, and eat bread; that consult
with their husbands to trim up some little room for the men of God, and to
set them up a bed, and a table, a stool, and a candlestick: nay, I wish that
even the old Gentiles themselves might not be induced to the shame of
Christians: who so religiously observed this duty, that of all other virtues
they made their greatest god Jupiter the patron of it, and called him therefore
(...).

Reasons to be hospitable to strangers.
And as we abound with examples, so we might be plentiful in reasons and
motives to provoke our hearts hereunto; but to avoid prolixitie I faith. So
soon as Lydias heart was touched and she baptized, mark how heartily she
inviteth Paul and Silas to her house: If yea have counted me faithful, come
into my house, and abide with me: and she constrained us, Act. 16.15. 2. It is
a fruitful and gainefull course of Christianity; never any lost by it. Some
hereby (says the Apostle) have received Angels, as Abraham, and Lot: Heb. 13.2.
and with them the one had besides the promise of a son, the destruction of
Sodom revealed unto him; and the other had deliverance from the same. And
surely such strangers as of whom we speak, namely poor Christians, bring no
small good with them. That woman of Shunem that received the Prophet, had above
a Prophets reward; the promise and gift of a son when she was old: and the
raising of him to life, when he was dead. Jacob being hunted from home, Laban
receives him, and is blessed for his sake. Rahab entertaineth the Spies sent
from home; and not only she but all her family is saved in the sacking of
Ierico. Joseph being sold from home, Egypt receives him, and all the Land
was preserved by him. Gaius his love was testified to the Church in his time,
but is commended in the Church through all ages. What good our selves have
gotten by strangers amongst us, we should be unthankful not to acknowledge;
the blessing of the poor has light upon us, and we have a long time fared
better for affording harbor to the poor Saints of God which have come a far
unto us. 3. Consider that our selves may become strangers, for the earth is the
Lords; and he may give our Land to other inhabitants, Love the stranger, for
ye were strangers; it binds us much more, who all of us are strangers and
pilgrims here upon earth, not having here any continuing city, but we look
for one to come, Heb. 13.14.

Object. But some may be dissemblers and wicked men, whom we may receive for
brethren and Disciples; and not knowing a man, I may be abused, and loose both
my gift and reward. Answ. Christian wisdom, and Christian love, must go hand
in hand. But here is a case in which charity must ouerrule the matter, and
that is not suspicious, but hops the best of every one, where there is no
evident proof or presumption to the contrary. And if thou receive a Minister
distressed in the name of a Minister, or a private distressed man in the name
of a righteous man, and give him but a cup of cold water with a good heart, in
that thou think he belongs to Christ, let him be what he will at his own
peril, thou loosest neither gift nor reward: Christ has undertaken to repay
it thee; and thou performest a fruit of faith, which shall further thy
reckoning.

Use. 3. If strangers by this precept may challenge harbor, much more may the
poor members of Christ amongst our selves. If a stranger, who is cast out of
house and home for the profession of Christ, ought to be relieved, much more
our own, suffering in good causes, whether bonds or imprisonment, loss of
living, banishment, or whatsoever they suffer, if for keeping good conscience.
And the like is to be said of our aged, feeble, and impotent poor; who have
been in many places of the Land pittilessely neglected and despised, so far
as (notwithstanding the wholesome laws provided in that behalf) some of them
have been suffered to pine and die in the streets, for want of harbor and
relief. The Lord lay not this sin (among other) unto our charge. Now when we
call rich men to reserve some portion of their wealth to such godly uses, oh no
they will cast their bread on no such waters, and they find no ability to do
any thing this way; this were to weaken their estate, and to strain themselves
so as they should not be able to hold out. Which no doubt were the reasonings
of the Corinths, whom the Apostle, 2. Cor. 8.9.
that he might stir them up to beneficence and liberality toward the
Saints, wishes them to consider what Christ had done for them: he strained
himself, and was content when he was rich to become poor for them: Christ
weakened another manner of estate for us, then any man can for him: he left all
his glory for us: but how few will leave their shame, their trash, their
covetous and voluptuous lusts for him? and to such as ask where they should
have to hold out if they should be so ready to distribute, he answers in the
9. chapter, following the same argument, that the Lord finds seed to the
sower: and he makes men rich to all liberality, verse. 10, 11.

Others object and say; but such a one has offended me, or I know this or that
by him, or he deserves no such thing at my hands. Answ. But take heed this be
not a churlish Nabals answer to David's just request, spoken out of partial
covetousness, rather then as the truth of the thing is. Again, let the person
be what he will, look thou on Gods image in him, this offends thee not,
injuries thee not, is not undeserving of thy love, Reasons to be ready to
distribute to the poor members of Christ.
and the fruit of it: and if thou give not to the man, give to manhood in him,
and consider that he may be a partner in the grace of life with thee. Reasons.

1. Hereby thou art like God, he sparseth abroad, he vnweariably gives 2. Cor.
9.9.


2. What thou give to Christian men, thou give to Christ himself. us, but
the poor we shall always have to show our affection to Christ in: who has
said, in that ye do it to one of these little ones that believe in me, ye
have done it unto me.

3. An hard man had rather lend to one that is able to repay him, then

4. Because many would give unto others, but for fear of wanting themselves,
mark the promise of blessing; Prou. 11.25. The liberal; and, he that waters
shall have rain: and, verse. 24. There is that scatters, and is more
increased: on the contrary, he that spares more then right, comes to
poverty: and he that turns his ear from the cry of the poor, himself
shall cry, and not be heard: and, judgment merciless belongs unto him that
shows no mercy. I would to God all this would bring on our rich men, who
will do nothing for the honor of God, 2. Cor. 8.3.
but half the way that the Macedonians were come unto: who bestowed to the use
of the poor Saints to their abillitie, yea even beyond their abillitie: verse.
5.
but till men learn to give themselves first to the Lord, and then to his
Ministers (as they did) it will never be done: that is, till they give up
themselves to obey God, teaching them such duties in the mouths of his
Ministers.

A lover of goodness.] Having exhorted to the doctrine of beneficence and
liberallitie to the poor Saints: Now the Apostle persuades unto the ground,
from whence that must rise, for otherwise it will prove rather a shadow, or
carkase of a virtue then a virtue or true grace it self, which perhapps may
profit another, but not ones self. This ground is true Christian love: of
which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 13.3. If I give all my goods away to the
poor, and want love, it profits me nothing: and therefore I think it is
rather to be read, a lover of good men: (...).
seeing the word in the original bears well either reading. True it is, that
these two are never to be abstracted one from another, for good men are to be
loved for their goodness; and whosoever loves goodness, loves good men; as he
that hates good men, hates goodness it self; yet of these two, the context
seems to favor and carry us to the latter. For as the Apostle would have the
Minister harberous, so would he have his house an harbor not for idle, and
voluptuous, much less vicious persons; but for good men: and besides, there is
another word more fit to express the former sense, as Beza observes. (...).


By good men, Whether only good men are to be loved.
are understood those unto whom the Lord has imparted, and communicated his
goodness: not general goodness, which he extends over all his creatures: but
his special grace in Christ, whereby he embraces a small number in comparison
of the whole mass of mankind; whom of the children of wrath, he chooses to the
adoption of sons: on whom he stampeth his own image, and so makes them both
lovely to himself, and worthy to be loved of us also.

Now for the better understanding of the precept, two questions are to be
resolved. 1. Whether good men only are to be loved, and not evil? Answ. As God
is good unto all, Psalm. 145.9. but especially to Israel, and those of a pure
heart, Psalm. 73.1. yea as he loved us when we were enemies, but much more now
being reconciled by the death of the Son: so is the commandment directed
unto us, to love, and do good unto all, but especially to the household of
faith, Gal. 6. Besides this word seems to eye such an inward affection, as
draws into the fellowship, company, and conversation of another, in whom for
some goodness appearing, it delights: and unto whom it would still draw some
degrees nearer. Whence thus we may fasten the duty more surely upon our
selves; I am indeed bound to love all men, in respect of Gods image, humanity,
and common nature, and the common law of nature; seeing I my self, were I
never so bad, would be loved of all: yea, and in regard that they may
participate with me in the same grace of life: but how much more then such as
are not men only, but good men, who have Gods image renewed upon them, Saints
by calling, such as excel in virtue: how should not all my delight in
comparison be set upon these? If I must manifest my love to all men, these may
well challenge brotherly kindness: see 2. Pet. 1.7.

Whether only ministers must be lovers of good men.
2. Quest. Whether this precept belongs only to Ministers or no? Ans. It is
here directed unto the Minister, and commended to his practice in the first
place: as a special both help and ornament to his calling and person; both to
show himself a friend, and familiar companion of all them that fear God, (for
such as a man's companion is, such is himself) as also to confirm, encourage,
and whet up himself and others in all the ways of God, not only by his
public Ministry, but in his private course, and conversation. For by this
means Pastor and people would not live estranged, but by mutual conuersing
together, and receiving mutual knowledge one of another course, gifts, and
wants; might receive also mutual admonition, instruction, strength. And thus
the work of God would thrive in all their hands. And what an encouragement
would it be to piety and virtue, if public persons would cherish those who
are coming forward? Surely, if the Magistrates eye be on them that are
faithful in the land, as David's was, Psalm. 101. and if the Minister be a
companion of all them that fear God, as every Timothy ought to be, we should
see men fly as clouds for multitude, and as the doves for swiftnes unto the
windows of the Church.

But yet this commandment being no other in the own essence, then that old
general commandment given to the whole Church from the beginning; as also
that new commandment, that is, renewed by Christ's appearing (by which although
many laws were antiquated, and reuersed, yet this law of love of the brethren
was revived and diversely enforced) it of necessity belongs to every one
that professes the Lord Jesus in the most inward closet of his heart and
affections, to carry such as are members of the body of Christ, sons of God,
temples of the holy Ghost, and heirs of the kingdom of glory.

Now the reasons enforcing it upon both Ministers and people, are these.
Reasons to enforce the duty.


1. Because the Lord has dearly loved such, as here he commends

2. There is no man so vile, but he professes he loves God: now it 1. Ioh.
5.1. Love me, love my dog: much more my child.
knows not God, is in the darkness and not in the light, and in saying he
loves God he lies, and the truth is not in him: neither can a man cleave any
otherwise to the body of Christ, then by love to the brethren.

3. Consider how lovely the society and fellowship of the Saints is.

Use. 1. Many Ministers herein fail, who being men of corrupt minds and
affections, oppose themselves against good men; if there be any in their
parishes more careful of their ways, more conscionable, more forward in
religion then other, these are as beams in their eyes; the objects of most
bitter invectiues: in the mean time they give their right hands of fellowship
unto loose and base fellows, who ought to be as vile in their eyes, as they
are in themselves: whom I wish timely to consider, that it was always noted
for an infallible property of a false prophet; to strengthen the hands of
sinners, and cast down such, as they ought to have spoken peace unto from the
Lord.

2. Although the Lord has by most strait injunctions provided for the welfare
of his children, not only in regard of their safety, but their loving
entertainment also in the world; with acknowledgement of all such offices of
love done unto himself, and of which himself will become the rewarder: yet
notwithstanding according to the prophecy of the Lord of the holy Prophets. In
the world good men do, and shall sustain affliction; their good shall be
returned with evil to the great affliction of their souls; and the world
which knows not but to love her own, takes no notice of such, but to hate
them, and hated they are and shall be of all men almost for the name of Christ.
Hence have such in all ages, were they Prophets, Apostles, or Christians, of
whom the world was unworthy, been thought burdens unworthy to be borne, or
live in the world. Here one Caine casts down his countenance upon him whose
works he sees better then his own, he cannot give him a good look. An other
wagges his head at such a man, as the Jews did against Christ, in derision of
him. An other is ready to burst for anger and rage, as those wicked ones
against Steven. Sometimes superiors breath out slaughter and threatening (as
Saul) against the Church. Sometimes equals, yea and inferiors, try them by
scornings and mockings: so as Jeremy himself shall hear the reuilings of
many against him. Nay, the base multitude shall tell Christ himself that he
dealt with a devil. And Satan's malice is so like it self in his instruments,
that if it be laid in their power, they proceed to draw the sword, and
stretch out their hand (as Herod against James) to take away their lives; and
even in killing them think they do God good service. But how good were it for
them to have nothing to do against such just men? for who deal they against?
or against whom do they rise up? against simple men? no surely, but against
God himself, him they persecute, him they blaspheame, the apple of his eye
they poare in. Now who ever rise up against God, and prospered? or who ever
kicked against such pricks, and bruised not himself? Is not he eternal, to
outliue all his enemies? Herod the Archenemie of Christ dies, but the enemy
of Christ's enemies is ever living. And is not his wrath the messenger of death?
cannot his power grind his enemies to powder? or shall not his right hand
find them out?

Again, thou art for the present a cursed man, that love not good men: Genesis
12.
mark the terrible threatening, I will curse them that curse thee: so as what
thou intendest against them, shall fall upon thine own head: thy sword shall
pearce thine own heart; Goliahs own sword shall sunder his head and body;
Haman shall hansell his own gallows; the Madianites that little feared to be
slain by the Israelites, shall be slain one by another. For it is just with
God (says Paul) to render tribulation to those that afflict his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
that as they secretly hatch mischeife against the godly, so the Lord should
secretly devise and prepare righteous judgment against themselves. And surely
many a man there is, that carries secret plagues about him, some in his inward
estate, some in his outward, some in his body, some in his soul, some in
himself, some in his, with which he strugleth and toyleth, and turns
himself to many causes and means of his harms, and it may be to some sins
as causes; but never epsy this curse passed from the mouth of God against his
malice toward good men, and so toyleth himself altogether in vain. Were
these things written in the hearts of men, how could it be but they should
stand in awe, and dread (with wicked Balaam, who otherwise was willing enough)
to curse where God has blessed?

3. Let us learn to see our inbred hatred of good men, at least our want of
love unto them: and seeing it, bewail it, and bewayling it, reform it. Let
our loving affection cause us to join our selves to their society among whom
good is to be gotten.

Object. Oh but this is a toil indeed, if we go amongst them, they are so
precise we may not take the least liberty, we must speak of nothing but
Scripture matters. Ans. If thou had the life of Christ working in thee, and
that delight in God which beseems a son or daughter of God: it would be thy
meat and drink to meditate, speak, and spend thy thoughts and time in holy
things: and think such times happily gained from thy vanity, yea from thy
lawful calling: or if thou did favor the things of the spirit, as thou
do the things of the flesh; that which is indeed the freedom of a
Christian, would not be such a yoke and burden: the spirit of Christ would
make thee willing thus to spend thy time, and become in no company neither idle
nor unprofitable; and much less vain or licentious: and take this withal,
that gracious words, are never unwelcome, but to a graceless heart.

Object. But I see no such good in their meetings. Ans. Thou may want
wisdom to draw it out of them: or else thou see it not, because thou
want eyes; as the soudiers sought Christ even in speaking unto him: or else
they seem simple and weak men, as the Church is black but comely: the sun
looks upon them, and their infirmities, falls, and afflictions make them
outwardly appear as the tents of Kedar; and upon these thine eyes gaze
altogether: yet as the Church is glorious within, so are the members in respect
of sanctity and ornaments of the soul, which weighed in thy balance are
found very light.

I exhort therefore all those that would increase in grace, that they link
their souls to such as fear God: so David made himself a companion of all
them that feared the Lord; and the next words seem to include the reason, and
which keep thy statutes: the statutes of the Lord are in their hearts, in
their mouths, before their eyes, and in their hands. This will keep them from
entering into the way of the wicked, and from being so easily plucked away with
the error of the wicked. But to such as would feign be acquainted with an
hellish life before hand, let them frequent other companies then this: where
God is not present, nor his spirit nor his love; but the spirit of mischief,
of swearing, swilling, uncleanness, and all hostillitie against God: where in
stead of men, are Devils incarnate: in whose minds a^ in a shop Satan is ever
framing, and forging unholy and unclean thoughts and desires: and according to
the abundance of their hearts their mouths speak lewd things, and their hands
act all manner of wickedness: hardly can thou come near them, but they will
infect thee, but keep with them, and thou will be like them: thy body is not
fitter to receive the infection of the plague from a person that has a plague
sore running upon him, then thy soul to be deadly poisoned and infected by
such society.

Wise] The Papists out of their vulgar translation abuse this word to improoue
the marriage of Ministers, and most improperly turn and translate it, (...)
quasi (...).
chaste or continent: whereas the word properly signifies, a man of a sound
mind, that is, prudent, circumspect; one that carries a continual
consultation within himself for the guiding of his whole course in such
moderation, as wisdom may appear in his speeches, gestures, countenance, and
whole life. Besides that, the Apostle requires the self same virtue of
married wives, 1. Tim. 3.11. and of all young men of what profession soever,
Tit. 2.6.
whom I hope they mean not to debar of marriage. How wise and circumspect a
man, the Minister need to be, will appear, if we consider either the works of
his calling, or his person, and place it self. For the former, what wisdom
is required of him, who is to utter the word of wisdom, whereby both
himself, and his people should be made wise to salvation: and so to speak
this word as becomes him to speak, Coloss. 4.4.
that in nothing he may be blamed? what a wise steward must he be, that must
give every servant within the house of God his own portion, and that in due
season? how experienced had that man need to be, who is as Gods own mouth to
separate between the precious and the vile? how circumspect and wary, least
his people being as lambs among wolves, should fall into the adversaries
hands, Coloss 4.5. (...). W^y the minister must be w^se.
and (being be guiled by words of humane wisdom) so perverted? And for the
latter, their very persons and places require even the wisdom of serpents,
to walk circumspectly, as persons Because they are lights set upon hills, the
eyes of the world are upon them, every thing in them is marked: as they are
eyes to epsy other men's manners, so are other men's eyes much more upon them,
either for imitation hide themselves; and the aged to arise and stand up, and
all sorts of men to listen unto his words: Job 29.8.
and all ears that heard him to bless him.

In all which regards, how careful was the Lord himself, that none but such
qualified persons should serve before him in that walking and elementarie
worship in the time of the law. He will have none but wise hearted men to work
in the building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 35.10. and no doubt aimed at the self
same thing, when he made that law in Numb. 4.43. that only they of 30. years
old and above even until 50. should serve before him in that tabernacle after
it was builded. For herein he required necessarily two things, first and
especially gifts of mind, as wisdom, judgment, gravity, experience, and
diligence, which most appear from 30. years upward: secondly, strength of
body. When he releaseth such as have served until 50. young men might bring
strength before 30. but being without judgment, gravity, experience, the
Lord refuses it: old men above 50. might bring with years experience, and
judgment, but the Lord requires the body to be answerable unto the mind in
some proportion. And to this observation that gives light in Numb. 1.3. that
howsoever in the tabernacle and Temple none might serve under 30. yet in civil
things they might, for they must count their warriers from 20. year old and
above.

Use. 1. This doctrine bends it self against such light, and childish young
men, Lightness in ministers condemned.
who are so forward to thrust themselves into this great calling, before they
have cast (as we say) their colts coats, or coltish conditions: whereas this
function requires another age, and other manners. May it not be said of many
Ministers in England, as it was of the Prophets in Jerusalem, Zeph. 3.4.
Her Prophets are light and wicked persons: for these two in this calling go
together wherein every thing is aggrauated. Lightness in some calling may bear
a lower note, and be termed weakness: but in this cannot be but wickedness:
and why so? because it will follow, that they pollute the sanctuary, and wrest
the law: the former by joining themselves to every light companion, in every
light or lewd practice: the latter, because whereas the judgment of the most
controuersall matters was committed by God to the priests, together with the
interpretation of the law, such was their leuitie and rashness, that they passed
their matters inconsideratly, and answered insufficiently and often falsely in
the name of the Lord: and thus must it needs be with such as run and ride
before the Lord has called them.

2. We must pray for the Ministers as Paul for Timothy, That the Lord would
give them wisdom in all things: 2. Tim. 2.7.
not carnal and fleshly policy, a thing too much studied of many of them,
for such wisdom the Lord never justifies in them; but sets such a cursed
brand upon it as that for most part it turns to the overthrow of the Church,
and the whole work of the Ministry; but such wisdom as is grounded in the
word of God, the study of which would make them wiser then the ancient: even
wise to raise not only their own estate but others also with them, not unto
earthly preferments; but unto life and glory immortal, reserved in the
heavens: to such wise men is the promise made, that they shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and in that they have turned their wisdom to
the turning of many to righteousness, they shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Dan. 12.3.


Righteous*] By righteousness here, is not meant that evangelical
righteousness which is Christ's fulfilling of the whole law for us: Neither
that infused gift whereby believers have an imperfect conformity begun in
them, according to all the parts (...) the law; although not according to all
the degrees of them: but here is meant that which is called a particular
justice, more external looking out unto other men to give them their due:
observing equality both in contracts and exchanges, which we call commutatiue;
as also a just proportion in distributing offices, rewards, punishments, which
we call distributive justice. So as this justice is an equal and upright
dealing with men fearful to offer the least wrong unto any* but ready to do
good unto all: grounded on love, which seeks not all her own things, much
less other men's, and in a word is the sum of the second Table. Now as this
virtue is in the text set between wisdom, and piety, or holiness, so may it
not be divorced from either of them for wisdom, our Savior wills all his
followers to join with this innocence of doves the wisdom of serpents: for
wisdom without innocence, were but fleshly, and from below; and innocence
without wisdom, were but reproachful silliness. Again, it must go with
holiness, which is ever mixed with piety, that it may be a fruit of that
inward righteousness which is by faith, for else it is gross hypocrisy. All
our justice must begin in Christ's justice, reckoned unto such as practice
piety, and are entered in some degrees of sanctification. All our obedience
must proceed from the inward renewing of the spirit of our minds by the finger
of God, that he may know it for his own work. All our outward conformity
must proceed from inward sincerity: for if we must approve our actions to
the consciences of good men, much more to the Lord, who is greater, and a most
occulate witness of all our ways. Join these two loving friends, which
sweetly accord in a Christian heart and life; then may thou with Paul, call
God and man with boldness to witness, that thou art unblameable: see 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.

But to speak briefly of these two virtues so far as they concern the
Minister, seeing we are to speak of both of them as prescribed unto common
Christians, cap. 2.10. let every Minister be exhorted as Timothy was by Paul,
But thou O man of God, follow after righteousness. 1. Tim. 6.11.
For hereby,

1. He gives testimony of his righteousness before God. Reasons why
ministers must be righteous in their dealings.
Luke 1.6. Zachary and Elizabeth were just before God, and walked without
reproof. Job a just man fearing God, and abstaining from evil. 2. He shall be
able to set his foot against his adversaries, and the enemies of the whose ox
or ass have I taken, etc. 3. He 1. Sam. 12.3.
in that he keeps himself unspotted of the world: which the Apostle James of
iniquity, and therefore depart from me.

Holy] This holiness respects God himself, his worship, his holy things, as
the word, sacraments, prayer, his sabbaths, his sanctuary, in all which the
Minister ought to be an example of holiness, and yet not only in these, but
in his whole conversation also. The commandment is general to all Gods
people, be ye holy, for I am holy, Levit. 12.44.
which requires both the internal sanctification of the heart, and the
external symbolls and profession of the same. But more necessary is it yet
for the Minister to be clothed with these robes of holiness, both that inward
which stands in getting and keeping faith and good conscience, Ministers must
be araied with robes of holiness.
and that outward which consists in a religious and strict course of life.
And yet this must not be so taken, as that holiness is so essential to a
minister, as that he cannot be a Minister that wants it, for Judas may be a
disciple and a devil too: but that it is a dangerous estate unto himself, and
hurtful to others for him to be destitute of it. How necessary it is for men
to put off their shoes, that is, their unsanctified lusts and affectons, before
they come to stand upon such holy ground, I will take a little pains out of
the Scriptures to demonstrate, and then make some use of it.

To omit the extraordinary ministry and Ministers of the old Testament, as
the Prophets, some of whom were sanctified in the womb, and others had their
lips touched with a coal from the altar to remove their pollution: Ier.
1.5. Isa. 6.
the ordinary Ministers in the sanctuary and temple were 1. Levites, This
virtue was lively and largely shadowed out in the old Testament: in the 1.
Levites.
2. Priests, 3. the high Priest. Many things were required in the setting apart
to their service the lowest of these, which were after a sort furthest removed
from God, whose seat was in the Sanctuary: but many more to the sanctification
of the higher, and those that approached nearer or next of all. As, first the
Levites were inferior to the Priests, as whose office was to serve under them,
to help to carry the tabernacle and vtensils of it, to keep watch for the
safety of it, together with the holy vessels and instruments; to help them in
killing the beasts for sacrifice, although they might not meddle in offering
them unto the Lord: yea as inferiors to the superious, they paid unto the
Priests the tenth of their tenths. And yet what a number of rites and
ceremonies did the Lord enjoin to be performed, before these could be admitted
to these inferior services, first in the tabernacle, and after in the Temple?
As, first they must be of one peculiar tribe, peculiar by Gods own election
for the first borne of all Israel, Numb. 3.13. 2. Whereas the congregation was
not numbered but from 20. years old and above, Number. 1.3. for till then they
were not apt to go to war: the Levites must be numbered every male from a
month old and above, Number. 3.15. not because they were then fit for service;
but that they must then be brought before the Lord, and set apart to his
service even from the beginning of their days. 3. They must not be presented
before the Lord before the 33. day of their age, for till then they were
legally impure and unsanctified, Leu. 12.3. but after this time they must grow
on to the thirteth year, which was the first year of this service, Numb.
4.43. at which time they must be taken from among the children of Israel, and
set apart to the Lord, Number. 8.6. And further in this separation there were two
things more: for 1. they must be purged, and then consecrated. Their
purification was, 1. by sprinkling purification water upon them. 2. by washing
their clothes. 3. by shauing the hair of their whole bodies. 4. by preparing
two bullocks, the one for a burnt offering, the other for a sin offering for
them: see for these, Number. 8.8.

Their consecration stood likewise in four things. 1. After all this
preparation, in drawing them nearer to the Lord, v. 9. 2. In the imposition of
the Israelites hands upon them, freely giving them from themselves to the Lord
and his service, verse. 10. 3. In Aarons receiving them of the people, and
shaking them before the Lord, v. 11. as such as now being mancipated to his
service, were to go and come at his beck: as also such as who daily were to
shake off that corruption which hindered the^ in their callings. 4. By laying
their hands on the heads of the two bullocks prepared; acknowledging the
expiation of their own sins, and in way of thankfulness now wholly offering
themselves unto that service. When all these rites were performed, they were
admitted to administer, and not before.

Secondly, 2. Priests.
the Priests the sons of Aaron whose office was to teach the people the
doctrine received from God, to pray for themselves and the people, to bless
them and offer sacrifices for them; had yet more state in their consecration:
for besides many of the former rites, as imposition of hands, their shaking
before the Lord, and the sacrifices common with the former: 1. In the election
of such a one more care was had: no deformed man, no man wanting or abounding
with any member, no blind or blemished person might come so near unto the
Lord. 2. In his consecration he must not have his garments washed (as the
other) but must have new garments put upon him, Exodus 28.41. neither must he
be sprinkled (as the Levites) with holy water, but with holy oil and blood
from the altar: and thus must he be consecrated seven days, Exo. 29.30. 3. In
his office he may not lament for the dead of his people, no not for the Prince,
but only for those that are nearest of blood in his own house, Leuit. 21.3.
he may not marry a whore, nor a woman divorced, or one polluted, v. 7. the
reason of all this is, because he must be holy to the Lord. 4. In his failing
and offending he must have more clensing then many other men, before he ca^ be
admitted unto his service: for his sin cannot be put away without a whole
bullock, Leu. 4.2. and no more was required for the expiating of the sin of
the whole congregation, v. 14. and the blood of the bullock must be sprinkled
seven times before the Lord for the Priest, as well as for the whole
congregation: implying that the Lord requires as much sanctity in one Priest,
as in all the people.

Thirdly, 3. high Priest.
as for the high Priest both in that he was a more eminent type of Christ: as
also came nearer the Lord then all the other, even into the holy of holies; he
must have peculiar garments made by cunning men, filled with the spirit of
wisdom, even beautiful and glorious, Exodus 28.3. in these he must be
consecrated, in these he must stand before the Lord; in one part of which,
namely, the frontlet which was put upon his forehead, must be written holiness
to the Lord, that by the Lords appointment that might be most conspicuous.
Again, other Priests might not marry divorced or defiled women; but he may
not marry a widow but a maid only. Neither might he mourn at all; no not
for his father or mother (which was lawful for the other Priests) thereby to
pollute himself, and the holy place. All which with a number more such solemn
rites, betokened a singular sanctimonie in such as were to be given up and
dedicated to the Lords service. Whence I conclude, that if in those that
ministered but in a material Temple; that served but in shadows, types, and
obscurity; that in comparison were so far off from the ministry of the
spirit of grace, of liberty, of life, and so after a sort from God himself,
was required such legal holiness at the least: how much more is the truth of
those representations requisite in us, who serve in the spiritual house of
God: who carry the substance and the body; and are so much nearer drawn unto
God, by how much he being a spirit delights in spiritual service before
elementarie? In Exodus 19.22. there is a special iniunction that the Priests
who were to come to hear the law delivered, should be sanctified, least the
Lord destroy them: much more then those that are the mouth of God in the new
testament, to deliver the law and Gospel, should be careful of their
sanctification, least the Lord sanctify himself in their confusion. For else
those should not be such sure consequents of the Apostle, where he dehorteth
Christians from unholiness and prophanenes, because of their present
condition: in that they were not under the law, but under grace: and that they
were not come to mount Sinai, Romans 6.14. Heb. 12.
but mount Sion. And if such arguments were strong enough to bind common
Christians to follow holiness, without which no man can see God: surely far
stronger are they to enforce the duty upon the minister, whose whole doctrine,
meditation, speeches, and actions private as well as public, should savor of
the spirit of God, and of his blessed regiment in their hearts.

Use. 1. Profane Ministers are hence admonished o^ their danger and unfitness:
how dare they take Gods name in their mouths, when they hate to be reformed?
How dare they rashly attempt to touch holy things with unwashed hands; when
David a most holy Prophet of God, would not compass the Altar, nor participate
in holy things, before he had washed his hands in innocence? are such fit
successors of the Prophets and Apostles, who were called holy men of God, not
only in that they were penmen of the Scriptures, and immediately assisted and
inspired by the holy spirit of God, and freed from error in their doctrine,
which privilege we cannot succed^ them in: but also in regard of their holy
and innocent lives, wherein also they shined as lights in the world, expressing
and showing in life, the life of that true and pure religion they taught unto
others.

2. Let such as count this holiness (which is nothing but purity of heart and
life) in Minister or people too much purity and precisenes, see their error,
and repent of it: if they shall not see God, who are without it; much less
shall such as scoff at it. We serve a God of pure eyes, who has pronounced
blessing upon the pure of heart, and threatened that dogs and unclean persons
shall stand without the gate of that holy city. Notwithstanding therefore many
a fools bolt, if that be puritanisme, which many so esteem; it becomes all
the people of God, much more his Ministers, in that way which they so term,
to serve the God of their fathers.

3. Note that marriage is no impure or unclean condition of life, nor a breach
of chastity and holiness: for ^e that in the words before is permitted to be
the husband of one wife, is here called also to holiness and chastity.

Temperate,] The Papists to maintain the former error of single life,
translate this word continentem: but the words of Scripture, which for most
part are more general, and figuratively comprehend many particulars, either in
commanding or prohibiting, may not be restrained to strengthen Popish error.
For although all the virtues of the seventh commandment may be here included,
yet the word is more general then so: seeing he is properly, (...), that has
any thing in his power, that is Lord over a thing to command it, and enjoy it:
and here one who is Lord over himself, his lusts, affections, appetite, who
enjoys these and is not theirs: who keeps the command of these, and they
have not him at command: requiring that the Minister should be a man, that can
curb and bridle himself in his will to ouermaster it; in his affections, of
desire, revenge, mirth, sorrow, etc. to moderate them, that they exceed not the
mean and due measure: in his appetite, of meat, drink, sleep, recreation,
that it be not inordinate: yea in all his parts, his hands, his eyes, his
tongue, etc. so order himself, as that no unseemly kind of gesture, fashion,
word, or dealing, proceed from him which may disgrace his calling: but to
carry himself in such a temper, as becomes the former virtue of holiness. For
even the word has affinity with that, which we call a right temperament, or
constitution; whether of humors in the body, (...).
or affections in the soul: which is, when none is predominant, but one of
them is equally mixed and qualified by another; as strong wine is tempered and
allaied with water: and implies that the Minister by reason, wisdom, and
religion especially, either allay, or break off the headines, and violence of
those troublesome lusts and affections, which may otherwise molest him, and
exceedingly prejudice him in the works of his calling.

Wherein the virtue of temperance stands.
This virtue then standing in the moderation of our desires, in the use of all
the gifts and liberties we enjoy; as also in laying a law upon our selves, that
no inordinate lust bear sway in us: it cannot but be most nenecessarie in a
Minister; who may not either in his private course unfit himself to the
performance of his calling; by the immoderate affection or use of any external
liberty, as of meat drink, recreation, riches: much less in his public
execution may he administer holy things; as the word, sacraments, prayer,
according to distempered passion or affection, as of anger, sorrow, lightness,
or any such. And further, as it is a great preservative in him of an equable
and constant Christian course; so is also a great nourisher of his inward
quiet, and outward peace: and so procures his freedom unto ministerial
duties; which above all other require that a man should be wholly his own, and
the Churches: for it brings down high thoughts, and proportioneth the mind
unto such an estate as becomes the simplicity of the gospel: it cutteth off
al affectation of state, pomp, sumptuousnes, and superfluities above that
which becomes a Minister of Christ: which things make rich men indeed, but
poor Ministers for the most part.

Means to attain it.
Now the means to attain this virtue, are two especially. 1. the denial of a
man's self, with a daily invring ones self to the crucifying of 1. Cor. 9.27.
Prove masteries with thy self, arm thy self against thy self, make war
without truce upon thy self: it is a war without bloodshed, hurting none, no
not thy self: but profitable to work thy peace with God, with thy self, with
others* remember Salomons speech* He that rules his mind, is better then he
that overcomes a city. 2. Prove. 16.32.
for neither this nor any virtue grows in our own grounds: neither good
nature, nor freedom of will can make this supply; but we must have recourse
to the father of lights: our selves are but our own burdens, of so miserable
molde, as we need no other enemies then our selves, to deprive our selves of
our good, if the Lord befreind us not: whom we must wrestle withal by our
prayers, and if we would prevail, unto our prayers we must sometimes join the
exercise of fasting, which (after a sort) doubleth our forces: both in
strengthening our prayers, as also by disposing us to the receiving of these
graces.

And now (to end this large treatise) it will be asked, But what if any Minister
be scandalous in any of the forenamed vices, or defective in the virtues
mentioned?

Ans. 1. If he be not answerable to these Canons, it is plain by the Apostle,
that he is not to be called. 2. If he be called, and after prove vicious, he
must be dealt withal as an Elder: 1. no accusation must be received under two
witnesses at least, 1. Tim. 5.19. 2. when he is accused of a known and
scandalous vice, all possible means must be used to reclaim him. As, 1. by
open reproof, verse. 20. 2. sometimes by translation of him to such a place, as
where are less means of that sin; as one given to drunkenness, or
contention, from a drunken and quarellous people. 3. sometime by a temporal
deposition from his office, if there be hope hereby to do him good. 4. after
sufficient admonition, censures, and trial, by a perpetual deposition from his
place: yea and further, if he still prove incorrigible, by proceeding to
excommunicate him, and cast him from the society of the Church.

And the rather, 1. Because Ministers are set over a people to edify, and not
destroy them. 2. Because the actions of Ministers have a secret power, not to
lead only, but even compel men to the like, especially if they be lewd and
wicked. 3. Weaker and meaner men for manifest vices not repented of, must be
proceeded against to excommunication: much more the Minister, whose scandalous
life is infinitely more dangerous and hurtful. 4. Such proceeding against
notorious, insufficient, and scandalous wretches (who never came in, nor are
kept in by the Apostles canons) would do good for example.

Verse. 9. Holding fast the faithful word, according to doctrine, that he also
may be able to exhort, with wholesome doctrine, and improoue them that say
against it. Having followed the Apostles meaning, and method in describing the
fitnes of him, who is to be chosen into the Ministry, who for the innocence
of his life ought to be free from manifold vices, and corruptions, which are
plentiful in the world, and for the integrity of his conversation (seeing
whatsoever he does is exemplarie) ought to shine with m^nifold graces, and
virtues, as we have heard. Now we come to the second branch of the Ministers
fitnes; which stands in his abillitie to discharge his high calling and
place: unto which is required such ^kill and cunning in the grounds and points
of Christian religion, as that he may be able to hold fast, maintain, and
justify against all challengers, that truth, and doctrine, which is agreeable
to the faithful word: that so whenever any blast of heresy, tyranny, false
doctrine, or flattery, shall rise against him; yet he may hold fast that
faithful word: which is therefore a sure ground of sound doctrine; and thence
instruct and edify the consciences of his hearers in all necessary doctrine.
Whereby it shall come to pass, that he (keeping himself constantly to this
truth) shall be fitted fruitfully to turn himself to any duty of his
calling: that let him be to deal with either of those kinds of hearers;
whether such as are obedient and teachable, he shall build them further and
make them sound Christians by exhortation out of wholesome doctrine: or else
such as are stubborn and opposite contradictors of the truth, these he shall
convince, and with manifest reason put to silence. And thus in regard of both,
Gods name shall be glorified, true wisdom shall be justified, Gods kingdom
shall be enlarged, and amplified, and Satan's kingdom shall be destroyed and
damnified. This is the scope of the verse: which contains two parts. 1. The
duty enjoined every Minister, to hold fast the faithful word, according to
doctrine. 2. the end, including a sound reason of it, in the rest of the verse,
That he may be able, etc.

For the meaning of the former part. Holding fast: the word properly signifies
such an holding as men use, (...).
when some other man has laid hold on that which they will not part withal;
even an holding with all their strength and force; not such an holding, as a
man cares not whether he hold or no; for then the thing holden, would of it
self slip out of a man's hand: but an holding against a contrary hold, which
uses to be the stronger, and firmer: enforcing thus much, that the Minister
must lay hold with both hands; surely apprehending the truth in the
understanding of his soul, as also in the affections of his heart: in either
of which if he fail, he holds not fast; seeing neither can a man love that
which he knows not, nor hold that he loves not.

But what must he hold so fast? The word, which is not tropically, as in many
other places, to be conceived, but properly. In which proper acceptance it
signifies all that heavenly doctrine, which is delivered to the Church in the
writings of the Prophets, and Apostles: which we call the holy Scriptures. Now
this word the Apostle does not nakedly mention, but adorneth it, 1. by a
notable adiunct, the faithful word: 2. from the porper end of it, according
to doctrine: which is fitted for the instruction, and edification of the Church
in all ages: which we will further expound as we come unto them. The word of
God is a most certain and infallible word proved.


Doctr. 1. That the word of God is a faithful word* and infallible. 1. If we
look to the author, he is holy and true, Rev. 3.7. and, verse. 14. Amen, the
faithful, and true witness: even God who cannot lie, as verse. 2. of this
chapter. 2. The instruments were led by the immediate direction and assistance
of the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21. matter of this word, is an everlasting truth:
the Law an eternal everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. containing promises of
eternal truth, which shall have their stabillitie after heaven and earth shall
be no more: besides such assured articles of faith, concerning God in the three
persons; and the Church of God, that if an Angel from heaven should come, and
teach another doctrine, he must be accursed. Moreover such divine prophecies,
and predictions, together with the exact accomplishments, although some
hundreths, yea thousands of years passed between: as by this one part
sufficient evidence may be gathered of the faithfulness and steadfastnes of
the whole. 4. The form of it, which is the conformity omnipotency, for this
power and arm of God never returns in vain, but does all the work of it.
In his wisdom, giving most perfect and sure directions, resolving all
doubtful cases, and making wise unto salvation. In his purity and perfection;
Psalm. 19.7.
being an undefiled and perfect law. In his omniscience; it searches the
heart, discovers the thoughts, deuideth between the marrowe and bone, Heb.
4.12. In his judgment; acquitting believers, to whom it is a sweet savor of
life to life: condemning Infidels, both here, and much more at the last day,
Ioh. 13.48. In his truth and verity; as here, and Coloss. 1.5. it is called
the word of truth. 5. The ends show the certainty, and faithfulness of it: Romans
15.4*
if it self were unsound, and uncertain.

Now as it carries with it all these grounds: so are there without it a number
more whereby we may confirm the same truth: as, 1. It is the foundation of the
church* Ephesians. 2.20. against which if hell gates could ever prevail, the Church
were utterly sunk. 2. Hereunto has the Lord tied his Church as to an
infallible direction; to the law, and to the testimony: ^
3. This truth has been above all other oppugned

Object. But some books of the canonical Scriptures are perished. Answ. Many
indeed are reckoned, but they were either not canonical, or the substance of
them is still contained in the canonical.

Object. But if God himself had written the whole Scripture, as he did the
law, and had delivered it to men (as he did the tables to Moses) then had there
been no doubt of the certainty of it: but it was written by men. Ans. Yet is
it as certain as if God had immediately writ it with his own finger: for holy
men spoke and writ as they were moved by the holy Ghost: not as men, but Gods
instruments, guided by extraordinary, immediate, and infallible assistance of
the spirit.

Object. In 1. Cor. 7.12. Paul says, I speak, not the Lord. Ans. The plain
sense in one word is; I give counsel in this case of marriage by collection out
of the word; of which the word has not delivered any express law: and no
more can be gathered of it.

Ministers hold it ^ast.
Use. This doctrine is of special use both unto teachers and hearers: unto
teachers it affoardeth a twofold instruction. 1. if it be so faithful a word,
to hold it fast. 2. to hold themselves fast unto it. For the former, the
teacher must look that he lay such hold on it, as he never suffer it to be
wrested from him: no danger, no favor, no power, no subtlety, may force him
to vnfasten his hold: much less go back and recoile from it, or play fast
and loose with it: or so carry it as one that would swim between two waters
but carry it and hold it out as faithfully and constantly as becomes such a
faithful word. Jeremy on this ground that he had a sure word, after he had
been smitten and stocked, he went not into corners, nor behind the wall to
speak the will of him that sent him: but as one that had laid faster hold on
it, in terms of defiance and personal application to the stoutest and
proudest of them, he utters with much boldness and plainness, what he had
in commission. Ier. 20 2.7.
The like we read of Amos against Amaziah. Amos 7.14.17.
The like of the Apostles thorough the Acts, and their Epistles: and all upon
this ground, that the Lord sent them with a faithful word.

And if reasons will persuade to this duty, we have not a few. For 1. what
sound comfort can any Minister find in life or in death, but in being found
faithful? where was Paul's rejoicing toward his death, but that he had fought
a good fight, and had kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4.7.
2. This faithful word was not easily purchased unto us, but by the blood of
many a faithful man, both of Pastors and people, shed in our own and other
countries: and should the preachers of it esteem lightly of so precious and so
dear a purchase? 3. If the Pastor depart or be driven from the faithful word,
how can his people hold it? he is guilty of all their Apostacy from the
faith. Let the Pastor receive such a blow, the sheep cannot but be smitten.
4. Look on the danger, and Gods righteous judgment on such teachers, as
esteem of men's words and writings above that is meet, in the mean time not
embracing this word in the love of their hearts. God gives them over to believe
and broach doctrines besides the word: all their learning hinders not, nay
rather armeth them to stick fast to falsehood and errors: and to defend
doctrines of much looseness and liberty. Especially the judgment of God is
come upon the Romish Church to the uttermost, who because they lay this for a
ground of their doctrine; that this word is not of it self faithful and
certain, The less certain must confirm the more certain.
unless the Church, and Councels, and the Pope authorize it to men's
consciences; and that any other word thrust upon the Church by the former
authority, is every whit as faithful as this: hence is their whole religion a
mystery of iniquity and delusion: hence comes in intercession of Saints,
worship of images, prayer to and for the dead, pilgrimages here, purgatory
hereafter, revelations, masses, bread-worshippe, propitiatory sacrifices,
mixture of Moses and Christ, which is a doctrine cutting them off from Christ;
who have before cut off the authority and credit of the Scriptures which are
the word of Christ: which fearful judgment let it move every Timothy, and
Titus, 2. Tim. 6.20. 2. Tim. 1.14.
carefully to keep the worthy thing which is committed unto them.

2. Every Minister is taught hence to hold him unto this faithful word* for
so he shall deliver not things doubtful and uncertain, Hold fast unto it.
but such as men may lean unto, rest, and (as we say) write upon. And this is
insinuated by our Apostle, that that is a faithful ministry, which holds
it self unto a faithful word, such as is the sure anchor of men's souls,
against which hell gates cannot prevail. Such was the ministry of the true
Prophets: Jeremy says, of a truth the Lord has sent me, and bidden me speak
these things: of the Apostles, who delivered such things as they received of
the Lord, and commanded us that if an angel from heaven, or a devil from hell
should bring (not a contrary, but) a diverse doctrine from that, to hold him
accursed: yea of the Son of God himself, who said, my word is not mine, but
my fathers. What horrible blasphemy then is daily practiced in the Popish
Churches? whose teachers calling these faithful words a nose of wax, send men
to dumb idols the teachers of vanities and lies, Habac. 2.18.
yea to Apocryphal writers, to fathers, councels, Bishops, and Popes; as
though the Scriptures had lost all their faithfulness; or as though the
canons, decrees, sums, and sentences of men were more stable then that
eternal truth, that shall outlast heaven and earth. Was this a faithful word
in Paul's time, and is it not so still? does the son of the eternal father
pronounce of his fathers word, that it is not only true but truth it self,
and that not one jot of it can pass or fail? and is it any other then the
voice of Antichrist, which shall say that it is no certain word at least to
me, unless the Church say so? Shall the spirit of God call it a sure word of
the Prophets and Apostles, and a word of truth, and shall we hear a wicked and
lying spirit come out of hell, and say that this stabilitie and truth depends
upon man? whereas, let God be true and every man a liar: and that if those men
whom they term the Church, change their minds or any sense in the Scripture,
Cusanus.
so does the holy Ghost also. Let these owls fly the light of the Scriptures,
as such as love to live in darkness: carnal religion must have carnal props:
Canon law a fitter rule for the Popish religion then Canonical Scripture.
like lips, like lettice, we say, and such a Church such laws. As for us, let
us as it stands us in hand hold us unto this faithful word, and not in stead
of it deliver the unfaithful words of men, whether Philosophers, or fathers,
or schoolmen. And is it not good reason that we should be tied to this word,
when even the Prophets and Apostles were? Isa. 8.1.16.
Isai must take a role and write, and bind the testimony, and seal the law
among the disciples: the commandment to Jeremy was preach the words that I
shall tell thee. Ier. 19.2.
In the new Testament they must hear Moses and the Prophets. Paul was
separated to preach that Gospe^ which was promised before by the Prophets, Luke
16.29. Romans 1.2.
and accordingly he witnessed that he spoke nothing besides the things foretold
by the Prophets. Act. 26.26.
Again what ministerial work is it, which this word does not most naturally
and happily effect: for this is a sure instrument to beget faith, Ioh. 17.20
and to confirm it, Act. 15.32. to convert souls, Psalm. 19.7. and to save
souls, Iam. 1.22.

Now unto hearers this doctrine affoardeth also special use of instruction
People must attend to the faithful word.


1. If it be so faithful a word, every man must attend unto it, 2. Pet. 1.19.
we have a surer word, -- to which ye do well that ye attend.

2. To lay up this word surely, as being the sure evidence of thy salvation,
and of thy heavenly inheritance among the Saints. Hold it fast as the evidence
of salvation.
Men lock up their evidences or convaiances of land in sure and safe places,
delight often to read in them, suffer no man to cosen them of them, whatsoever
casualtie come, these are by all means possible safegarded: and shall any man
carelessly neglect such an evidence as this is, without which he has no
assurance of salvation, nor the tenure (out of his idle conceit) of one foot
in heaven? a lame man if he hold not fast his staff, falls; and whosoever
loses his part in the word, loses his part in heaven.

3. Here is a ground of thankfulness, in that the Lord has not only
vouchsafed us life, and glory, and immortality, when we were dead, Be
thankful for it.
and when nothing could be added to our misery: but has also given us such a
constant guide and direction thereunto: we might either have groped after him in
palbable darkness; or have had such direction as might have affoarded us less
assurance and comfort; but now believers know assuredly that they were loved
of the father before the foundation of the world, and out of that love chosen
unto life: that the Son was sent to ransom them from sin, and present them
just before his Father: that his spirit is sent out to regenerate them, and to
further and finish their sanctification: that by his providence they are
supplied in all their good: that by his power they are protected from all their
evils. He might have brought us to heaven and never have let us know any of
these comforts in earth; yet would he not so slenderly leave his Church: but as
our Savior notes, he has spoken and written this word that our joy might be
more full: which is one general use of the whole word of God. Testify this
thankfulness.
Now what can we do less then in way of thankfulness, 1. yield up our selves
to be directed by this faithful word. 2. Object. There is no fear but we
shall hold out whatsoever should betide, we are grounded and settled. Answ. But
how many did in the fiery trial in Queen Mary's time: scarce one in
Cambridge, both the University and Town; or if one poor Townsman held it out
in the flames, that was all.

Lastly both Teachers and hearers, must try their doctrine by this touchstone:
if it abide this touch, it is gold, it is a pure and faithful word; if it be
not according to this word, there is no light in it.

Which is according to doctrine,] Here our Apostle both delivers another
note, and sets another mark upon the word; as also uses another argument,
why the Minister should hold, and hold himself unto the word of God delivered
in the Scriptures; because it is not only a faithful word, unto which the
faithful may cleave, and rest as upon a sure anchor: but also such a word as
bears the bell for the ^itnesse of it, to institute, instruct, and edify the
Church, and members thereof: as if he had said, That word which is most fitted
to edification and instruction, is to be maintained, and held fast, that it may
be held forth before Gods people: but this is such a word: and therefore
Ministers must hold it fast.

The word is every way fitted for the instruction of the faithful. Reasons.
Doctr. Whence we learn, that the word of God is his own ordinance, fitted to
instruct the elect in all necessary truth, and doctrine: which is the very
scope of our Apostle: and will otherwise also appear, if we consider, 1. The
wisdom of God, who has in the books of

mercy of God, who has written mysteries above the apprehension of the Angels
themselves, even to the capacity of the simplest, in things of absolute
necessity: whereas if he had but spoken the word, it had been more then he
ought us: but he has written it, that we might ponder, and meditate of it: yea
he has translated it into every man's language, and so fitted it to edify the
more; so as five words now are better then ten thousand if it were shut up in
it own fountain, or any other strange tongue: besides he has brought it to
us by an easy price, in one portable volume, that we might conveniently
exercise our selves in it day and night. And that we might understand those
hard places, which for our exercise we shall meet withal in reading: and that
we might be lead beyond the letter of the Scripture, to show the life of it in
the keeping of faith and good conscience, he has appointed a Ministry in the
Church: and in all ages has raised up men of God, whom he has furnished with
the gifts of prophecy, and enabled with sundry gifts of the spirit to see and
reveal the truth therein contained. For every manifestation of the spirit, is
given to profit withal: 1. Cor. 12 7. and cap 14.3.4. Ephesians* 4.11.
and he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, etc. for the edifying of the
Church, and the gathering of the body of Christ. 3. The power of God, who Heb.
4.12.
as whereby it becomes so mighty in operation; so able to cast down strong
holds, and every high thing exalted against God: yea so strong at the weakest,
as that by it alone the kingdom of darkness and of the devil is bartered, and
subdued, and Jesus Christ the Prince of peace set up in his throne within the
hearts of men.

Use. Would any Minister edify his people? There is no learning to this to
edify withal.
let him hold fast this word: would he teach them Christ? this word testifies
of him: would he beget faith in them? this word must do it, Romans 10. would he
destroy sin in them? as David said of Goliahs sword, there is none to that:
so there is no sword of the spirit but this: would he raise the afflicted?
hence may he speak a seasonable, and sauorie word to him that is weary: in a
word, if a man will take the most compendious way to bring souls to heaven,
let him observe this rule of holding him to this word, which is ordained for
doctrine. But if a man either for idleness, or ease neglect the reading* and
study of the Scriptures: or according to the vanity of his heart, lay by this
book, and fall to the study of Friars, or Fathers, and seek to preach
matters of more applause, or to get a name of learning; is in his profundities,
curiosities, and such quainte devises, as he meets withal in men's writings:
this man leaves the right way of edifying men in the ways of God, and is in
his conceit wiser then his maker, who has fitted this word for doctrine, and
no other.

2. Hence note, The s^^plest ought to be exper^ in the Scripture, being fitted
to their capacity.
that it is Gods will that every man should be expert in the Scripture, seeing
he has so fitted it for the teaching of the simplest. Which must force every
man to examine himself, whether he has found it such a fit word for doctrine:
for he whose heart cannot justify the word in this property, is no child of
wisdom. Many have heard this word a long time; and yet understand it not:
have learned little or nothing: are ignorant of Christ, and what he has done
but in gross, and general terms: have attained no lasting comfort from the
same. Where now lies the fault? the word is fit to ^each thee, the Ministry
stablished, and sanctified to the edifying of thee, all the gifts of the
^eachers are given to profit thee. Why then ha^t thou not profited? Oh the
sin lies at thine own door, in that thy self have refused, or resisted
instruction. Wisdom is easy to him that will understand.
It is not the obscurity of the Scripture, but the darkness of thy blind mind,
that has hindered thy profiting. The word is as fit to teach thee as the
choysest seed, is to take and grow with increase, but thy soul is unprepared:
thy heart is as the stony, or thorny, or high way ground: no seed can thrive
in it, all the labor of Gods husbandmen is lost upon thee. Thy sin has
suffered the word to loose the virtue and power of it in raising thee to life:
the veil is still on thy heart, and thou will not suffer it to be removed,
that the glorious light of Jesus Christ should shine upon thy soul. But mark
thy fearful estate all this while: For whosoever thou art, that perceiuest
not the mighty power of the word in thy change, and conversion, be thou sure
it is mighty in working thy overthrow and confusion. For God never speaks
but to salvation or perdition: the words of his mouth return not in vain,
they are the savor of life, or of death: they bind or they loose: they be the
sentence* either of absolution or of condemnation: oh then thou that love thy
soul, deceive not thy self: for if the Gospel be hid now, being a word so
fit to teach thee, and thou having bin so long taught, and yet remainest
untaught still, unchanged still inwardly, I may point with my finger, but I
cannot give the eyes to see what I point at. Aug. prolog. lib. de doct. Christ.
unreformed still outwardly: it cannot but be a fearful brand that thou art
as yet in the state of perdition; and that the God of the world has blinded
thine eyes unto destruction. And ^l^tter not thy self in a course of
security* because perhapps thou see not thy danger: for this word cannot
quicken thee, but thou shall perceive it; but it slays men insensibly; so as
if thou find not the life of grace wrought by it, thou have great cause to
fear and fly thy present estate.

3. The last use is directed against the Papists, who hold that the Scriptures
are, No imperfection or want in the Scriptures.
1. imperfect without tradition: 2. obscure and difficult. For the former:
Bellarmines position i^, that all necessary doctrine concerning faith and
Christian life, is not contained in the Scriptures; but many things of this
kind (that is, 1 ^om. lib. 3. cap. 3.4.
necessary things) are to be supplied out of the traditions, either of the
Apostles, or of the Church. And for the second; he affirms, that the
Scriptures are not so plain and easy to be understood, as that they be
sufficient in themselves to decide the controversies of faith without the
authority and expositions of the Church: nay rather are so obscure, 1. ^om.
lib. 3. cap. 1.2.
that even in things necessary to be known, they cannot without the
instruction of the Church be understood, no not of faithful men. Against both
which blasphemous positions this one of our Apostle opposes it self; in that
the word was ever fitted to the instruction of believers, and did ever
sufficiently instruct them in all ages, according to the age and state of the
Church. Nay, this word being perfectly fitted, and sufficient for the
instruction of the Church, when yet there were but the five books of Moses: are
they not now much more sufficient and perfect, seeing the expositions of the
Prophets, and the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles are added?

Object. But as then the Scripture was imperfect without the writings which
after were added: so is it now without the decrees, constitutions, and
traditions of the Church. To which I answer: that the written word was never
imperfect; for when the new Testament was added unto the old; it was made not
more perfect, but more clear; for even then it was entire, if not in so many
words, yet in the same sense and substance of doctrine. Let them a^ke then what
the Scripture speaks, of this and that, as the Baptism of children, of
Mary's virginity after Christ's birth, of purgatory, or what by the Scripture
we may think of the uncircumcision of women, of infants dying before the 8.
day, of the saving of the heathen, etc. I answer, if the things of which they
inquire be either false or fabulous, as that of purgatory; or not necessary
to salvation, as that of Mary's virginity, the question is not of them; it is
no impeachment unto the Scriptures to omit them, wherein we see many of the
words and facts of Christ himself omitted: but if they ask of things more
necessary, if they be of absolute necessity, these are taught fully and
expressly, as the substance of all Christian religion. But for necessary
circumstances, and inferior truth about them; the Scripture often (entending
to provoke our study and diligence) is not so express; and yet is not wanting
in teaching them; but by proportion and analogy. As in the example of
baptizing of children, it is by proportion and consequence taught in Scripture,
though not in so many syllables: as seeing that circumcision was administered to
children, so by proportion may children. 2. Christ calls them. 3. affirms
that they belong to him, and his covenant, and therefore the seal belongs
unto them. 4. the Apostles baptized whole households, wherein doubtless were
many children.

Object. But Apostolic men who writ the Scripture, had no commandment to
write the word; or if they had, they had no intention to write a perfect rule
to all the world: but writ occasionally either some history, Pro re nata.
as the Evangelists, or epistles and letters (as the Apostles) according to the
condition of several Churches, or men to whom they writ. Ans. ^. They spoke
and writ not by private motion, but by instinct, which is equivalent to a
commandment. 2. Although they writ occasionally, yet were they so guided by
Gods providence, that whatsoever things the Church ought to believe, is
clearly and largely delivered in their writings. Adoro plenitudinem
scripturae. Tertull. cont. Hermog.
So as we may conclude this point with this sure rule: That the wise providence
of God has so furnished the Scriptures with sufficiency, and clothed them
with perfection; that whatsoever they can allege to the contrary, they are
either contained in the Scriptures, or they are not necessary.

As for the obscurity of Scripture: We grant not that the Scriptures be
obscure, but that many things in them are difficult. The Rhemists upon 2. Pet.
3.16. that all Scripture is difficult, especially Paul's Epistles; whereas Peter
says, only that some things in Paul's Epistles were hard to be understood, and
not all his Epistles. Again, they forget that the same Apostle Peter speaking
of the Scripture, 2. Pet. 1.19.
says, that it is a light shining in a dark place.

Some things in Scripture difficult how, and why.
Now when we speak with the Scriptures that some things are difficult, we must
take with us these three caueats. 1. That this difficulty proceeds either
from the majesty and high excellency of the things of unregenerate, or
regenerate. The unregenerate person being in his natural estate, is endued
only with a natural understanding, so as the things of God are beyond his
reach and compass; they are foolishness to him, he cannot conceive of them.
The regenerate, although he has an inward light of the spirit, which the other
wants; yet these things even to him are revealed but in part; after an
imperfect manner, and in imperfect means, until that perfect come: so as the
best man is partly ignorant of the nature of the things themselves, besides his
failing in the means, as the knowledge of the tongues, his study, meditation,
and labor herein. 2. Whereas they say* that this obscurity is in things is in
things necessary to salvation. 3. that supply must be made by humane
expositions: whereas the right opening of Scripture, The sun is seen by his
own light*
is by Scripture.

That he may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine] Now we come to the end
of the former duty, which is, that he who is to be set apart to this weighty
function, may be fitted and furnished to all the parts of his calling: which
the Apostle reduces to two heads, according to the several condition of the
persons, with whom he is to deal: for all teaching is either the confirming
and strengthening of sound doctrine, tending to the converting and confirming of
the tractable: or else the infirming and weakening of false doctrine; serving
to the confutation and conviction of such as are refractarie, and gainsayers of
the truth: neither of which can any man possibly fruitfully perform without
diligence and setlednesse in the Scriptures, seeing that to these purposes he
must hold fast the faithful word. For the meaning: we must enquire, 1. what is
meant by exhortation, and wherein it differs from teaching. And the difference
chiefly stands in these 3. things. 1. every exhortation is teaching, but
every teaching is not exhortation. 2. to teach, is more properly to propound
out of Scriptures, and prove by the Scriptures things to be believed or done:
to exhort, is to incite and provoke the hearers to the believing or doing of
things, so proved by reasons and arguments. 3. Teaching is a former work for
the enlightening of the understanding, and frames the judgment: and exhorting
is a secondarie work more properly pearcing the affections, and so furthering
the practice. Secondly, what is meant by doctrine: that is nothing else but the
word of God taught: for that same which is here called wholesome doctrine, is
in c. 2.8. called the wholesome word: and to show the identitie of them, the
Apostle joins them together, 1. Tim. 6.3.
If any consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
doctrine which is according to godliness, he is puffed up. 3. Why is this
doctrine called wholesome? to which I answer, that that is wholesome doctrine,
which being well prepared before hand makes the soul sound, and in good
plight and liking: for it is a borrowed speech from the food of the body, to
the meat of the soul, which is the word of God, here called wholesome
doctrine: of which epithet something is to be spoken, but better occasion will
be offered us in c. 2.1.

Doctr. 1. In that the word is called doctrine, Who be the teachers of holy
doctrine.
and no doctrine is without a teacher; it behooves every man to repair to the
teachers of it. Now the teachers in the church, are either the great doctor of
the chair, who fully and sufficiently teaches every believer; and whose
teaching is absolutely necessary to the conversion of men: or else his
Ministers, who as so many vshers are set to teach all the forms of the Church;
but so as under the Master; far wanting and short of his ability; in
themselves insufficient to bring men unto the sight of their salvation, and
much less unto their perfection: not because they read not the same lecture
with the spirit, but because they can only teach the outward ear, not the
inward: neither are they Gods to convert (although the word be able to save
souls) as he is who in giving the precept, gives also power to learn,
believe, and practice it.

Use. Would any man be taught to salvation? not having this knowledge naturally
he must get him these teachers. First, he must go thorough these vshers hands,
and then according to his proficiencie, the spirit shall take him into his
teaching. But if a man will play the trewant, and sit at home when Gods
free-schoole is set open, despising the teaching in the ministry, conceiving
that he may by his own study or reading attain perfection; (...).
he never climbeth into the highest form; he never has the high things of God
revealed by the spirit: who teaches not now by new revelations or
enthusiasmes, but has erected a ministry of the spirit, which every one
must frequent that would be made wise to salvation.

Secondly, as this doctrine implies teachers, so does it also learners, and
scholars; Doctr.
Teaching us that we must all of us become learners of this word and doctrine:
for so long as there is doctrine and teaching on Gods part, Every man must
become a learner of this doctrine.
so long must there be an harkning and learning on ours: and the rather both
because that which is said of all knowledge, that it is infinite, is much more
true of this, for Gods commandments are exceeding large: as also seeing in
this school we are to become not only more learned but better men. It may not
therefore be with us (who when we are at the best are but in part good) as
many, who after they have learned a while, give over, as though they were both
informed and reformed sufficiently: but we must be still profiting and going
forward, and climbing as it were from on form to an other: so long as we live,
still aiming at somewhat beyond: for we may not conceive of Gods school as it
is in men's, which are fitter for boys and children, then men of years: a
shame were it for an old man to go to school: but here whatsoever many an
idiot say to the contrary, that now they are too old to learn, every man
must wax old in learning something daily: seeing the best man may far excel
himself both in wisdom and goodness. Thus Paul when he was an ancient
scholar in Christ's school pressed hard to things that were before him. And
David with other saints of God, prayed still to be taught of God, even when
they were well taught; as such as who the more they saw, the less they could
acknowledge.

Use. In our learning of this doctrine, we must examine our profiting and
progress, least we be such dunces as Paul speaks of, who were ever learning,
and yet never came to the knowledge of the truth. And then we profit when we
like good scholars have passed our grounds and elements: and as the Apostle
speaks, when leaving the rudiments and principles of religion, we are led
forward unto perfection: Heb* 6.1.
and then are we led to further perfection, An examination whether we have
been as fit to learn, as this doctrine is fit to teach.
when we have taken out the two maine lessons of a Christian man, which Paul
in every thing would be sure to keep, even faith and good conscience, by
which two rules till a man be molded and cast into this form of doctrine, he
is but a novice Christian, and a superficial scholar in this school of
Christ: the former of which implies the knowledge of the doctrine, and the
latter the ordering of every particular action of life by it.

Now the examination of our selves by these notes will reprove many of us as
non proficients, who would be loath to be so deemed. For 1. teach others; many
of our selves had need be taught in the principles of religion: we cannot be
gotten out of our A, B, C, and line of letters. If a master should for diverse
years together painfully strive with a boy, and could never get him out of his
letters, what hope were there of his reading? and much less of any skill in
higher mysteries of learning. It is the case of a number of us. Many years
have the masters of the assemblies plainly delivered doctrines, fitted to the
capacity of simple men, yea often repeated them, and often beaten upon them:
yet a number that go for Christians, are extreme ignorant in the principles
of Christianity. And whereas the Apostle implies that we may measure our own
ability by our fitness to teach others: how few of us be there that find any
competent ability to teach even our pettyes in our families our servants and
children? that cost and pains is ill spent, when after seven years schooling
a boy is not able to teach an other his letters: but many of us that have been
^earers and learners in this school thrice seven years and above, and yet
(to omit our unwillingness) are not able in any sort to catechize our families.

Further, whereas he that is cunning in his profession, he can speak of it

Finally, were it so that we had proceeded but a little way in our profiting
Tutor for every action, but can of themselves do something, especially in
smaller matters, and of lower conceit; but many of us can go no further then
our Masters are present with us: we are not come so far as to take out a
lesson now and then by our selves; we cannot meditate, pray, confer, to the
increase of our knowledge: and therefore we may conclude against our selves,
that we are but very dullards in this doctrine. And what is the reason of all
this, but that as negligent learners, we forget as fast as we learn? or as
idle scholars we idle ou^ our time otherwise, and allot the least time to this
study. Which requires so much the more time, pains, care and diligence, by
how much things more excellent be more difficult: besides that our helps by
nature are none at all to this, as to all other knowledge, and the benefit of
it far excels all other. Let us therefore stir up our selves, and be
stirred up, not to a smattering in this knowledge of God, 2. Pet. 1.8.
but to abound in it, as Peter wills us. And seeing we are far from our
mark, let us aim at more fruitfulness in our age, and walk from strength to
strength, from faith to faith, that so growing up in grace, cap. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, we may in due season be lifted
up unto our glory.

The men of God in speaking of the word have ever set some mark of excellency
upon it.
Doct. 3. In that the Apostle calls that here wholesome doctrine, which in the
words before he called a faithful word, and fitted for doctrine: Note that the
men of God, when they fell into speech of the word of God, they spoke not
^lightly of it and away; but were hardly drawn from it without leaving behind
the^ some notable elogie or other upon it: Romans 1.16. the Gospel, the power of
God to salvation: Ioh. 6.68. Peter says not, Master thou have the word of God,
but, thou have the words of eternal life: and what a number of glorious things
are ascribed unto it, see Heb. 4.12. mighty in operation, sharp, etc. Hence
according to their several occasions are al those excellent epithits ascribed
unto it through the Scrip^ures, some of the penmen looking at the author, some
at the matter, some to the qualities, some to the effects, and accordingly
invest it with titles well beseeming it. And good reason had they so to do:
for,

Reasons.
1. They considered that the word of God is the principal part of with most
harsh entertainment, and hateful opposition; that Satan, sin, and all
wicked ones, heretics, seducers, Atheists, and profane persons would
resolutely resist it: besides, numbers that would account it foolishness, and
that would take offense at it not a few: and therefore in great wisdom they
were careful, that it should carry some majesty with it.

Use. Those that find such sweetness in the word, as the Saints of old, cannot
but with reverent hearts conceive and speak of it, As men seele the word in
their hearts, so their mouths speak of it.
ever with signification of some eminent goodness in it: yea if they conceive it
in the author, the word (even of evil) will be confessed a good word, as in
Hezekiah; and much more will the promises, be sweet in the taste. And if they
acknowledge it in the most proper effects of it; oh how will they think and
speak of it, as of a thing more necessary then fire, and water? yea then the
sun in the firmament? How will they stir up others to taste also with them
how sweet and good God is in it? These cannot come as men use to come, but
will be reverent in the co^gregations, where such words are uttered, as Abraham
when God spoke unto him, Genesis 17.
fell on his face: they will not rush upon the reading of it in public nor
private, without some lifting up of the heart, and some gesture signifying that
inward reverence.

2. This argues it a deuillish and wicked practice to elevate the due
estimation and authority of the word, either in the Scriptures, Scripturas non
simpliciter, id est, ad esse ecclesiae, sed ad been esse solu^ necessarias, nec
tamen sufficientes disputat. Bellar. de verbo dei. lib. 4. cap. 4. What to
judge of the Popish spirit, speaking basely of the Scriptures.
or in the Ministry: once said Satan, has God indeed said, etc. So the
Papists speak basely of the word in the Scripture, calling it imperfect,
obscure, contentious, a waxen nose, an inken divinity, etc. and therefore well
may the letter of the Scripture be with them, but the life of it is far from
them. In like sort many profane wretches debase the word in the Ministry,
conceiving it as a vain word without profit; and boldly speak of preaching,
as of talking: and others mutter because there is so much preaching, plainly
showing by their speeches that they never knew the sweetness of it in their
souls, and therefore as yet have no part in it, nor in that life which it has
brought to light.

Doctr. 4. Whereas the Apostle is not contented that the Minister should teach
but exhort also; it ^eacheth Ministers to labor for this gift, whereby an edge
is set upon their doctrine, and wherewith as with a goad they prick on the
affections of those that are under the yoke of Christ. Ministers must set an
edge on their doctrine by exhortation.
A difficult thing it is; for teaching is an easy task in comparison of it;
and yet so necessary, as that all the ministerial work is called by this
name, Act. 13.15. If ye have any word of exhortation, say on. So Barnabas his
whole sermon is called an exhortation: to show, that he that labors not in
this point, fails of all his duty. Whence are all those precepts, that the
Minister should teach and exhort, 1. Tim. 6.2. and give all diligence, as well
to exhortation, as to reading, 1. Tim. 4.13. For the profitable performance of
which, 1. every Minister must labor for conscience of his duty: 2. for a
pitiful heart toward sinners: 3. for experience of that he teaches, that he
may have a flame in his own heart to kindle others by. Pectus facit disertos.


Use. Many men think they need not be taught: but if they did not, they need
exhortation. Others think it sufficient to be taught in general terms, but
to be urged by exhortation, were to save them whether they will or no. People
must endure the word of exhortation.
But it is not sufficient to know what is good, but to be led on to the
practice; to which that we may be provoked, the best of us while we are in our
race need spurrs. For as Paul writ of Christians, the slownes and weakness of
whom (he knew) required exhortation, as well as doctrine; so that Christian
that ^eeth not his deadnes and continual backslidings, knows no good by
himself: yea, he that perceives not a spiritual heaviness and slumber,
daily oppressing him; without this means, (nay and with it also) that soul is
cast on sleep at least, if it be not dead in sin. Besides the truth is,
there is much knowledge every where, and so little conscience, as if knowledge
and conscience could not stand together: but if men did make conscience of all
the duties they know, yet were exhortation still needful: seeing nothing was
more usual with the Apostles, then to stir up in believers such graces, as
they thankfully acknowledged in them. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. the Apostle thankfully
remembers their diligent love* see also Coloss. 1.4. collat. with 3.14.
and yet cap. 3.9.10. by a wise rhetorical preterition, exhorts them unto it.

Doctr. 5. Whereas the Apostle adds that exhortation must go with wholesome
Doctrine, Then is exhortation powerful when it is grounded on wholesome
doctrine.
we note, that then is exhortation powerful, and profitable, when it is
firmly grounded upon sound and wholesome doctrine; then it carries due weight
with it, then is it agreeable to this apostolical precept, yea to that
general practice of all the Apostles, whose manner was in all their Epistles;
first to lay down plainly the doctrine of faith and salvation, and then to
persuade and exhort unto the entertainment of it, and to testify that
entertainment by the fruits of faith, and love. For example: After Paul writing
to the Romans had disputed the doctrine of Justification, not by works in the
three first Chapters, but by faith in the two next; and of sanctification in
the three next; and of predestination, in the three next: In the 12. Cap. and
so to the 14. verse of the 15. Chapter, he exhorts to good works and
Christian duties, unto the very epilogue, and conclusion. The whole Epistles
to the Corinths is a mixture of doctrine and exhortation. In the Epistle to the
Galatians after he had disputed the doctrine of the righteousness of faith,
which the false Apostles had wrung out of their hands: after his manner in the
fifth chapter and sixth, he exhorts them to the study of good works. So in
all the Epistles may be observed, that after the doctrinall part follows the
hortatorie. And as for the particular practice hereof in particular cases, both
in prophetical writings, Christ's sermons, and sayings, and in the Apostles
Epistles, it would be infinite to observe.

Use. As this Doctrine affoardeth direction to Ministers, to carry their
exhortations level with the doctrine truly raised from the word, that they be
as goads to pearce and provoke to duty: which not observed, the speech will be
verified; a sea of words, but scarce drops of matter: so does it authorize
every hearer to examine the exhortations framed unto them: that if they find
the Messengers of God exhorting them from wholesome doctrine; they may
acknowledge more then a speech or persuasion of man: even such a doctrine, and
ordinance, as the Apostle judges fittest for the salvation of man. Which if
any shall dare to refuse, as accounting it (with many at this day) a liplabour
of man; or if any shall deem and repute it an impotent means to raise men to
the grace of life, I can say no more, nor less of such, then the Apostle Paul
to the hardened Jews, that put the word from them: that they judge themselves
unworthy of life eternal. One day to their cost shall they know, Act. 13.46.
that all the force of the word lies not in the Ministers tongue; and that his
words are more then wind, as they esteem them, Ier. 5.13.

And improoue them that gainsay it.] These gainesayers are of two sorts: either
such as contradict the wholesome doctrine, by teaching false and unsound
doctrine, whether Jews, Pagans, Heretics, or false teachers; or else such as
contradict it by their wicked manners, and conversation, as a number of
counterfeit Christians, who dare not open their mouths against such a clear
light, and manifest truth, but in their lives: whereas it commands purity,
they are filthy and impure: whereas it urges pyetie, they are impious toward
God; and whereas it prohibiteth all injustice, they are injurious to men: and
in one word, whosoever receive not the word with that reverence and subjection
as it requires, are in the degrees of this sin of gainsaying the truth. And
in the words the Apostle propounds three things to be considered of: 1. That
all these gainesayers must be convinced. 2. that every Minister must be able to
convince and improoue the^. 3. that he has this abillitie from the faithful
word.

Doct. First, when the word is resisted, and gainsaied, Ministers must resist
resisters of the truth.
there must be no bearing on the Ministers part, who is put in trust to resist
those that resist the truth. And hence are all our stirs and tragedies, in
that this truth must go away a conqueror, be it even against Kings, and
Princes, and the great ones of the world. Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, must be
gainsaid and resisted, though it cost the Messengers their liberties, yea their
lives. Many men fret, and fume, that the Ministers are so bold and peremptory,
and their sermons are too to censorious, speaking in effect the language of
Corah, and his accomplices, ye take too much upon you, Moses and Aaron: and
murmur against such truths as cross their lusts: saying with the Jews, they
are hard sayings, and who can bear them. If the word say, they may not swear
with the swearer, nor be drunk with the drunkard, nor profane the Sabbath,
nor scoff at religion, and the exercises of it, but set a watch before their
tongue, and keep the door of their lips from filthy, idle, and scurrill
speech: oh here are bonds indeed, fitter for gally slaves then liberal, and
free dispositions. Come, say they, we will break these bonds, and cast these
cords from us: and yet these men would have the Ministers tongue tied, and
chafe and fume if they hear any thing they would not. But are you gainsayers
of the truth, and must not we resist you? do you rise up against Christ in
falsifying his word, and contemning his ordinances, and must not we arm our
selves against you, sound trumpets, and proclaim open war against you; yea
must not we so weld the sword of the Lords mouth against you, as that we never
suffer you to have peace in your sins? And if any of you think much to be
called a gainsayer of the truth, because ye acknowledge in general the truth
of the Scriptures, and for a need can make confession of all the articles of
faith. I answer, It may be thou art not come to the height openly to gainsay,
as Iannes and Iambres did Moses: nor as Elimas and Demetrius; Phigellus and
Hermogines, Hymeneus and Philetus did Paul's preaching: but if thou secretly
spurn against the word, or endurest not the guidance of it, thou art a
gainesayer, and may not look to be pleased in the Ministry. Notes of him
that resists the truth.
And to know thy self a little better, try thy self by these three notes.

every thing manifest: Ephesians. 5.1^.
this makes Ahab hate Micha, 1. King. 22.8. and the world hate Christ
himself, because he testified of it that the works were evil. If thou then
want that obedient ear which should make thee bear a reproof, Prou. 25.12.
thou can not but be a gainesayer.

and so becommest the more a servant to sin, and a captive to the law of it.

3. He that is not with me (says Christ) is against me, and he that gathers
not, scatters. Art thou with Christ in thy affection? hear Act. 4.2.
and preached Christ? or that with Sanballat and Tobiah, who were sore grieved
that a man was come who sought the good of Jerusalem? Nay if thy affection be
with Christ, thou can not lightly speak evil of that way, the feet of
these tidings bringers are bewtifull, thou reioysest in their light. Now
examine thy self, if any of these be found in thee, although thou openly fight
not against God, thou art a gainsayer of the truth, and thou must be resisted
in the Ministry. The Jews held and maintained the letter of the Scriptures
most accuratly* and yet Steven tells them that they were always resisters of
the holy Ghost: and the reason was, because when it came near them, then they
kicked and spurned against it. If thou would not be roughly dealt withal in
the Ministry, resist not the word, but entertain it in thy best affections
to order thy self and life by it; and then though it have been tart and
bitter, thou shall afterward find the sweetness of it, it shall be as honey in
thy mouth in regard of the promises; and if it meet with any rellicks of thy
sin in the just reprehensions of it, thou shall be able to say, O let the
righteous thus smite me, for this is a benefit unto me, this is a precious
ointment which suppleth my wound, O let me not want it.

This is the way to find the word sweet. Micha, 2.7. Are not my words sweet
to him that walks uprightly? oh then be so far from spurning at the word,
that thou may rather tremble at it: and then in stead of the spirit of
contradiction, the spirit of God shall rest on thee. Isa. 66.2.
These things if thou do not, but wilt still rebel; blame thy self if in
the word, thou be still under blows; for thou thy self beginnest the fraie.

Doctr. 2. Secondly, A minister ought to be a man of knowledge.
we note what a sufficient man every Minister ought to be; namely, such a one
as has a word of knowledge in his mouth upon all occasions both to exhort, and
convince: for which purposes he must have a doubled knowledge, and as a good
shepherd a double voice, one to govern his sheep, which must be familiar
unto them; and another to drive away wolves: one to stablish and persuade the
truth; another to prevent errors, and heresies: herein resembling Nehemiahs
builders, who held a trowell in one hand, and a sword in the other, and
accordingly built with the one hand and fought with the other. Let a man
consider of which of these two he will, and then tell me whether it be not a
matter of great difficulty in any good sort to perform it: but both together
will force the Apostle himself to ask, who is sufficient to these things? it
is not every reader, nor every ignorant Preacher that can stand under this
burden. No, no, if every part of the Ministers office require as complete a
man as that one: Isai 50.4. if the speaking of a word in season require a
learned tongue: how much more does the whole office require an Ezra, Ezra. 7.6.
a man prompt in the law of the Lord? a workman indeed, and such a one as need
not be ashamed? And can we think that the Lord sends any other: does he use
to send a message by the hand of a fool? surely if he send any, he makes them
first able Ministers of the new Testament, 2. Cor. 3.6.
not of the letter but of the spirit. In the old Testament if he raised up any
extraordinary persons unto this work: what spirit? what power? what deep
understanding? what resolution manifested they? as that they seemed rather
petty Gods then men; both in the exact knowing (although by revelation) and
making known things merely to come: as also in the powerful resisting of
sin even in Kings themselves and the greatest upon earth: Such were Moses,
Elias, Isay, Jeremy, etc. If ordinary Ministers, they also are first fitted:
yea though they were but inferior Levites and Priests, both to be the peoples
mouth unto God, to put incense before the Lord, as also to be Gods mouth to the
people, to teach Jacob Gods judgment, and Israel his law. But if high Priests,
they must be such as whose lips must preserve knowledge, Deuteronomy. 33.10.
and such as who can resolve the people when they seek unto his mouth in the
difficult cases of the law of God, for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts, Mal. 2.7.

In the new Testament accordingly, if the Church have need for a time of
extraordinary Ministers, such as are Apostles, Evangelists, evangelical
Prophets; such are raised, and to such is given by the spirit the word of
wisdom, 1. Cor. 12.8.
that is, a more excellent revelation, and more special and immediate instinct
and assistance of the spirit, together with more eminent authority, in
explaning the mysteries of Christ. If ordinary Pastors be raised by God, A
dumb minister cannot be Gods messenger.
by the same spirit is given to them the word of knowledge, that is, by
diligence in the Scripture they obtain such knowledge, as that they are able
to make Christ known unto others, although they be far inferior to the
former. Where this word of knowledge is wanting, that commission is not sealed
from God. The Eunuch could read well enough, Act. 8.31.
even as many among our people can, and yet he could not understand without a
guide: and how could he have been a guide unto him (except a blind guide) that
could do no more then himself could? namly, read, perhaps without
understanding also. God sent him no such guide, but a Philip, a mighty man in
the Scriptures, and full of the power of God.

Use. Let every man whom this doctrine concerns examine hereby the truth of
his calling; whether he has received the word of wisdom or no: which finding
he shall boldly say with Jeremy, of a truth the Lord has sent me, and runs
not before he be sent. 2. It is a great motive to thankfulness wheresoever
such able Ministers are planted, where God gives learned tongues, that can
exhort according to wholesome doctrine: learned Ezraes skillful in the law of
the Lord; eloquent Apolloes, mighty to convince by the Scriptures the
gainsayers. Whereas pitiful is their want, Ier. 15.2.
who in this regard are as men cast out of Gods sight: wanting the blessed
means of an able ministry: If darkness be in the mountains it cannot but be
in the valleys. Chrysostom.
for in such places godliness must needs be vnperswaded, vice unresisted,
truth untaught, falsehood vnconvinced; there people cannot but lie open to
become a pray to the devil, a spoil to his wicked instruments, a shop for all
wicked practices. In such places seducers, and wicked Jesuits, the very heads
to imagine, and hands to execute all mischief lurk as in the vaults of safe
conduct; practicing daily to withdraw men from alleagiance to our heavenly and
earthly Gods and Kings: such soiles lie under the heavy wrath of God, as to
whom no sin comes amiss. If there be no knowledge of God in the land;
needs must there be variety, Hose. 4.1.
yea an inundation of most fearful sins: and consequently of heavy
judgments, into which both Prophets and people who have sinned together, verse.
4.5.
shall fall together: for where vision fails, people are nakedly laid open to
all the curse of God: and when Israel had been a long season without the true
God, without the Priest to teach, and without the law, 2. Chr. 15.3.6.
no marvel if there were no peace to him that went out and in: implying both
these points, that without true teaching, without the true God; and without
God, without peace, and blessing. Oh that men therefore could prize the
blessing where it is; and so bewail it where it is wanting, as that by all
good means they labor the procurement and presence of it.

Doctr. 3. The Scriptures furnish a man excellently to every ministerial duty.
All this ability in the Minister must be had out of the Scriptures; seeing
the Apostle affirms that by holding fast the faithful word, he shall be able
to both these maine works of the ministry. In like manner our Apostle
teaches Timothy not only in general, how the Scriptures are able to fit the
man of God to every good work of his ministry, but reckons up also all the
particulars of his duty, 2. Tim. 3.16, 17.
that no man might doubt but that it fitteth him unto all. And indeed the
Scriptures are a rich treasury, which affoardeth abundantly things both new
and old: he that would read the writings, speeches, and doings of the ancient
fathers, let him read the Scriptures diligently: they be a storehouse wherein
a man may furnish himself unto all, 1. doctrine, all of it being written for
our instruction. 2. unto all consolation, for through the comfort we have hope:
and David affirms, that if he had not found comfort in the law, he had
perished in his trouble. 3. unto all resolution of doubts, by which alone
Christ himself resolved the case of divorce, Math. 19. and the Sadduces in the
case of the resurrection, Mat. strength in temptation, by which sword of the
spirit alone Christ vanquished all Satan's assaults, Mat. 4.

Matthew. 21.16.
he presently proves his divinity out of the Scriptures. So Peter proved
out of the Scriptures, Act. 2. and 3. and Paul every where that Christ was the
Messiah and Savior of the world, Act. 26.22.
out of Moses and the Prophets: Act. 18 24.
Apollos was a man eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures; but not by his
eloquence did he mightily and with vehemency confute the Jews, but showed by
the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

Use. 1. To move such as are separated to the ministry, unto the diligent
reading of the Scriptures; and to redeem that time which they have or may
otherwise spend in reading filthy, lewd, and wanton books; superstitious
pamphlets, Machiauells blasphemies, or Popish errors, and heresies: unless it
be 1. with sound and settled judgment, able to discern right from wrong, truth
from falsehood: and 2. with this end, either more to detest them in themselves,
or fore warn others of them: and thus the wise mariner need not leave the
sea, if he can avoid the rocks. But let a Timothy or Titus hold him to this
book, he shall hence have supply of wisdom to save himself and others: or
what would thou wish besides wisdom for thy calling? would thou be fitted
to exhortation? deceive not thy self, philosophy cannot fit thee: only the
word of God works in all the parts and powers of the soul, mind, will, and
every affection: by Philosophy thou may inform the understanding although
but darkely, in the things of God: but did that ever reform^ or alter any man's
heart? read then this book, teach this, and thou shall ransacke the
affections, yea and consciences of the hearers. Or else would thou have a
dexterity and faculty in the quick resolving of doubts? study this truth,
Veritas index sui and obliqui.
be ready in it, and thou shall find truth manifesting both it self, and the
contrary. And seeing this is the only everlasting verity, it will much more
make the mighty to overthrow whatsoever is contrary unto it. Finally, The
Scriptures make the Ministers mouth a sharp sword, Isa. 49.2.
would thou have eloquence added to all these former abilliments, without
which they could not be but obscure? then study this truth of God, and thou
shall feel it framing thine heart; and so ministering speech: yea thou shall
speak out of the fullness and abundance of thy heart graciously: nay it will
be with thee in thy measure as it was with the Apostles: thou can not choose
but speak the things thou see and know.

2. To confute the Popish teachers, who contrarily, 1. teach that the Scripture
being so hard and obscure as they say it is, may be wres^ed and abused by
heretics at their pleasure: and that no man can be fitted unto these duties,
especially the latter of conviction of error fully by the evidence of Scripture
it self, except he borrowe some help and force elsewhere, namely, from the
expositions and voice of their Church. And 2. in deciding their controversies
of religion (according to the former position) they ^lie from the word unto
Bishops, Fathers, Councels, Decrees, and Popes. But to the first* we answer,
that although we are not to neglect, much less despise the light and direction
of godly men's expositions and judgments, The veil is over the heart of the
Papist, not over the Scriptures.
nor such truths as are received by the true Churches of God: yet without
them, by considering the nature of the things themselves, the conference of
places, the knowledge of tongues, and the suitable correspondence of the parts
of the context; we may come to attain the true meaning of the place
controuerted, and by that be able to convince and withstand all gainsayers. And
to the latter, their practice is contrary unto Christ's and his Apostles, as we
have showed. As also the practice of the ancient Churches since: as may
appear by that memorable course of Constantine the Emperor, who commanded the
Fathers met together in the Nicene Council, about 362. years after Christ, to
refer the great controversy then in hand against the Arrians, to the
decision and determination of the Scriptures. Which godly course Augustine
backeth, who lived not past 40. years after: when he affirms, that it was an
ancient order of disputing, to have present the books of holy Scripture, and
to stand to the trial thereof. If this was an ancient order of disputing in
Augustines days, Aug. epist. 2^3.
surely the contrary Popish practice is but a nouel^ie, and we justly press
them to antiquity.

Verse. 10. For there are many disobedient, and vain talkers, and deceivers of
minds, chiefly they of the circumcision,

11. Whose mouths must be stopped, which subvert whole houses, teaching
things, which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake.

The conjunction [for] shows that the words following contain a reason of
the matter preceding, namely, why the Minister should be a man so qualified
with able parts both to maintain the truth, and confute the falsehood. The
reason is drawn from the description, 1. of teachers, in these two verses: and
2. of hearers, in the 12. The teachers are described by three arguments. 1.
from their indefinite number, there are many: not two or three, who are easily
set down, but many. 2. By their adjuncts, which are two: 1. They are
disobedient, or refractarie; such as will not submit themselves to the true
doctrine, and discipline of the Church. 2. they are vain talkers: that is,
such as being given to ostentation, and vanity, contemn the study, and
delivery of sound, and profitable doctrine, and search out words, and matters,
of wit, and applause, both of them of more sweetness unto the flesh, then
soundnes unto the soul and spirit. 3. By their most dangerous effects, and
these also are two: 1. Their deceiving of minds: for which ungodly practice, he
especially brandeth them of the circumcision: that is, either by metonimie, the
Jews themselves circumcised: or else Gentiles Iudaizing, embracing Jewish
opinions, mixing the Law and Gospel; Moses and Christ; circumcision and
baptism together: making indeed an hotchpotch of religion, by confounding
things that can never stand together. The 2. effect of them is, their
subversion of whole houses: that is, they poison and infect whole houses: yea
and where the grounds and foundation of religion has been laid, they
ouerturne and overthrow all. This last effect is declared by two arguments: 1.
from the isntrumental cause of it, and that is by their false doctrine,
teaching things which they ought not: 2. from the final cause of it, that is,
covetousness, for filthy lucres sake. Now these teachers being so many, so
dangerous, and hurtful, their mouths must needs be stopped. Which is a
common conclusion set between the two verses, as having reference unto them
both; as a common remedy against all the mischeife which any way may be let in
by them: and therefore those that are to be admitted into the Ministry, must
be of abillitie to stop their mouths.

Error in life commonly a ground of error in doctrine. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Reasons.
For there are many disobedient.] Doctr. 1. In that the first thing taxed in
these false teachers by the Apostle, is disobedience, we learn that
disobedience commonly is the ground of false doctrine. For, 1. it is just with
God, to give up those to and delusion, that receive not the truth in the love
of it: for wheresoever it is received in love, obedience cannot but be yielded
unto teachers, which should bring in damnable heresies, but such as should live
in the lust of uncleanness, and live as bruit beasts led with sensuality? 2.
Pet. 2.1.10.12.
and what manner of persons were they, that like Iannes and Iambres, should
resist the truth, but men of corrupt minds, wholly given up to live in their
lusts? and not so only, but reprobate concerning the faith: such as depraved
the doctrine of faith, and the pure verity of God to their own lewd
affections? And if we look upon particular persons, was not this the reason
why Elimas resisted Paul and Barnabas, and sought to turn away Sergius Paulus
the deputy from the faith; because he was full of unrighteousness, Act,
13.8.10.
and therefore he could not cease to pervert the straight ways of God? And why
did not Diotrephes receive the Apostles and their doctrine, professing himself
a Minister among them? John gives the reason, because he loved pre-eminence,
which neither they nor their doctrine could affoard him. 3. Ioh. 9.


Use. 1. Never make any Minister the rule of truth, seeing error in life (from
which none is exempted) may breed error in Doctrine: but read with diligence
the holy Scriptures, whereby thou may be able to discern after trial,
between truth and falsehood; and accept it for it self.

2. Marvel not much if thou see many Ministers resist the truth, No
marvel if many ministers resist the truth, for many are disobedient.
for many in all ages are disobedient; and no mean ones, that hate to be
instructed themselves, contradict the truth, and in stead of building, hinder
the building of the Church; as Sanballat, and Tobiah the walls of Jerusalem:
yea one Jeremy had Pashur and all the Priests against him: Christ himself had
Annas, Caiphas, Scribes, Pharisees, people, and all against him: and who were
they but such as neither entered themselves into the kingdom of heaven, nor
would suffer others: nay rather mark the point that is resisted, whether it
fight against any of their lusts: thou might have seen 400. Prophets
against one Micha: thou might have seen in Queen Mary's time all the
Priests and Clergy that durst be seen, resisting and overthrowing all the
foundation of religion; and condemning to death, and executing whosoever durst
mute against the^: there is a Synagogue of Satan as well as a Church of God,
and consequently many Ministers of Satan, as well as Ministers of Christ. Rev.
3.2. 2. Cor. 11.25.


3. Who^^euer would know and be preserved in the truth, must learn to yield
obedience unto it: for this is a special means, Ioh. 7.17. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of my doctrine, whether it be of God, or I speak of my
self. They spend much labor in vain who are disobedient to the doctrine
themselves teach.


Vain talkars.] Doct. Preachers who themselves are disobedient unto the word,
for most part become in their Ministry no better then vain talkars. 1. In
regard of themselves, being vain glorious persons, affect applause rather
then godly edifying, which is a most vain thing. 2. In respect of their
labor, which is all in vain, never attaining the end and right scope of the
preaching of the Gospel unto salvation: for he that sows vanity, what else
can he look to reap? 3. In regard of the hearers, who also spend their pains
in vain: they hear a great noise and pomp of words, and a glorious show of
humane wisdom, which may rap the simple into admiration, but they are left
without reformation: their ear is perhaps a little tickled, but their hearts
remain untouched, neither are their souls soundly instructed, nor fed with
knowledge, but they go away as wise as they came. These Paul calls vain
talkars, and vain ianglers, 1. Tim, 1.6. and again, profane and vain bablers,
and that justly: 1. Because their puffed discourses proceed from the profanes of
their hearts: 2. They are as strange fire from the Lords Altar, opposed to that
which the Lord has sanctified to the salvation of his people: 3. They are so
far from the edifying of the Church, that they cause men to increase unto
more ungodliness and profanes.

Use. 1 Note the difference between these and godly Pastors, which are
according to Gods heart: Ier. 3.15.
these feed Gods people with wisdom and understanding; the other with
vanity, and wind: these as they have their gifts and calling from God; so
they speak every word from him, and for him: the other like the Devils cooks,
are ever blending with the truth, that it may never be purely tasted: and like
untrusty solliciters, speak one word for God, and two for themselves: these
bring meat in their mouths, which though it be course, and served in great
simplicity (like Daniels diet which was but water and pulse) yet because it is
Gods allowance, it goes with a blessing, which makes the children of god
thrive by it; the other serve up more curiously cooked dishes, with greater
state and ostentation of humane learning, and eloquence; but for want of
nourishable meat in all this variety, the souls of Gods people are kept
thin and lean, and rise and depart such banquets without any great saturitie.

Now if any would show himself a true Pastor sent from God, let him aim at
these two things. 1. Gods glory, not his own: for to seek himself is a note
of a false teacher: see Ioh. 7.18. 2. the raising of the Church unto heaven,
and not himself in earth. Romans 10.1. his hearts desire must be that Israel may
be saved: he must desire to fall, so that his people may be raised to heaven,
Romans 9.3.

2. Note hence a difference between the Apostles judgment, and the judgments
of many inconsiderate men. Men account such preachers vain talkers, that apply
the word home to every wholesome use, and the more dexterity a man has in
this excellent gift, the more liable is he to this imputation: whereas indeed
here we are taught an other lesson, that those whose doctrine vanishes away
without building on the foundation such as come preparedly to the word, those
are vain talkers; and their teaching is a froathie teaching: but if true
doctrine be wholesomly applied, and have quicknes and life in it; woe be to that
man, that says not, This is the finger of God, and that God is in you indeed,
1. Cor. 14.25.

3. Mark hence what kind of Ministers the Apostle would have put to silence:
not only such as are open enemies to the truth, or broachers of lies; but such
as are disguisers of the word, froathie teachers, such as seek out vain
things for the people: Paul would have looked to these betime, and would (were
he living) stop the mouths of such: he knew that the Church might better
spare a 1000. of these, then one godly and faithful Pastor: and were this
canon put in ure, for one silenced Minister we should have one hundredth.

Deceivers of minds,] By metonimie of the subject, the heart is put for the
mind: the ancient according to the Scriptures seating the mind therein: for
(...), Praecordia.
properly signifies the inwards about the heart: and further by Synecdoche,
the mind is put for all the faculties of it, especially the understanding,
reason, and judgment: all which are deluded and deceived by these vain
teachers.

Quest. How did these false teachers deceive men's minds? Ans. Four ways. 1.
by suppressing the truth; False teachers deceive men's minds 4. ways.
for by their vain iangling and speaking liker Poets, Philosophers,
historians, then Prophets, Apostles, or any successors of theirs, they made a
cleanly conuaiance of the light from the flattery, for they would not deal
directly against the sins of the age, as in false glasses, so as they never
see the truth of it: for people taught by fables and they sit down and please
themselves in that they have done their task required; especially if they can
bring home a jest or some witty sentence, when perhaps they scarce heard a
word of Christ, of their justification,

Quest. But whose minds are deceived? Answ. First, their own and then others;
for they are blind leaders of the blind, deceiving, and being deceived: and
although here our Apostle expresses not here who they be that are deceived,
yet elsewhere he does, as Romans 16.18. they deceive the hearts of the simple:
and 2. Tim. 3.6. they lead captive simple women: and 2. Pet. 2.14. they beguile
unstable souls: whence we see that ignorant, inconstant, and unsettled souls,
which hand over head receive any doctrine without examination or trial, whose
simplicity disableth them to judge between truth and falsehood, and whose
leuitie makes them like shaken reeds: these are the carkases on which such
vultures do seize.

Three properties of error.
Hence, 1. note three notable properties of error. 1. it never loves
solitariness, but is a spreading leaven, shrowding it self in multitudes,

The best fence against false teachers.
2. Note what is the best fence against false teachers, and an hedge against
seducers: namely, 1. knowledge, 2. love of the truth. The former armeth simple
souls, by letting them see the difference between the right hand and left,
without the which the mind cannot be good. But the latter is the surest pace
of truth, and that is the love of it: for no matter it is that men know,
profess, and can talk of the truth, if their souls cleave not unto it: for
even upon those that receive the truth shall God send strong delusions to
believe lies; if they receive it not in the love of it. Vt poena peccati non vt
pectatum.


Quest. But what is this doctrine to us, we all profess the truth, and love it
from our hearts, and therefore we hope we are fenced from deceivers, or being
deceived. Answ. But let us consider, 1. That these are the last times which the
Apostles prophesied of, even perilous times, wherein many deceivers should
creep into the Church, 1. Tim. 4 1. 2. Tim. 3.1.
and many should give heed to the spirits of error. 2. That these deceivers of
minds were such, as lived in the bosom of the Church, among such as professed
Christ and his religion. 3. That they lurked secretly, and that the Christians
of that time could hardly of themselves descrie them, and therefore the Apostle
is glad to help them, and wishes them carefully to prevent them: and
therefore there may be privy impostors among us. 4. That we having set doors
open for them, we shall not want deceivers: for whatsoever many men say, most
men love not the truth sincerely dealt withal: nay, they desire to be deceived,
while they hate with a deadly hatred such Michaes, as would let them see their
estate, and help them out. And is it not Gods manner of just proceeding, when
men desire preachers that will preach of wine and strong drink, to send them
such teachers as they desire, that he that is ignorant and filthy, may be
ignorant and filthy still?

Those then that care not for the truth, shall have teachers which shall be
Gods executioners to lead them into error: that as by the great Antichrist the
Lord revenged and plagued the contempt of the light in the world: so also in
particular Churches and places by false teachers, and petty Antichrists. If
men will not abide wholesome doctrine, but have itching ears; they shall have
an heap of teachers, after their own lusts to turn their ears from the
truth, and delude them with fables. Let Ahab once hate Micha; the Lord
presently consulteth who shall deceive him: and if this question once proceed
out of Gods mouth, the devil is present, and so forward in the execution of
Gods vengeance, as he shall prevail against 400. false Prophets at a clappe,
before he shall not fall by them. This truth is as a finger in the bile, and
being rubbed will perhaps make Zidkiah take his fist from Michaes face, and
say when went the spirit from me to thee? yet cease it not to be the truth of
God concerning our selves, who so long as we give heed to the spirit of error
cannot want deceivers.

Let men therefore professing themselves members of the Church, look unto
themselves, and labor to know the truth, to affect it, to stand unto it, if
they would be fenced against seducers: for such there be, and store of such,
seeing there is such store of the contempt of the light: indeed if there were
no hatred of the light, there would be either no deceivers of minds, or no
danger by them, for they could not prevail: but seeing there is so little love
of the light, these must needs abound. Hence is it that of late years such
troops of Jesuitical seducers of minds have entered upon us; and have been
bold (notwithstanding severe laws, some enacted, some revived and quickened
against them) to skulke in ignorant places: and how can it be but that such
places as want sound teachers should be haunted with seducers? Would God such
public persons whom it concerns would enforce a most forceable law against
them, which is the placing of faithful and furnished Pastors, (...), parish by
parish, who might fence them against such delusions. And for private men, let
them be resolute for the present truth, and contend for it, seeing the most
constant hardly hold out unto the end: and seeing the Lord sends false
Prophets to try whether we love him or no. Deuteronomy. 13.3.
If we hearken to deceivers, the Lord then manifests that hypocrisy which
was in our hearts, even then when the greatest shows were made by us.

Especially they of the circumcision,] Paul thus notably describes the Jews
by a principal adiunct, as elsewhere he puts circumcision, Gal. 2.7.
and uncircumcision for the nation of the Jews and Gentiles, the one of which
was circumcised, and the other not: in which sense also Christ himself is
called the Minister of circumcision, Romans 15.8.
that is, not of the law, which he put an end unto, and absolutely fulfilled;
but in that he was a Minister of the Jews, within whose borders he contained
himself, as he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Now
the Apostle not so much means the people of the Jewish nation, Matthew. 15.24.
as the Jewish teachers, the teachers of circumcision, such as are mentioned
Act. 15.5. with whom the Apostles were always exceedingly troubled: who, as
Gala. 6.12. compelled men to be circumcised, not by any outward force or power,
but forced it upon them in hope of merit, as absolutely necessary to
salvation: the omission of which, they taught to be a dangerous, and damnable
sin: whereas indeed by the death of Christ, circumcision was now nothing, as
uncircumcision was nothing, neither any outward thing any thing available to
salvation, but a new creature within. The persons then whom the Apostle
painteth, were such teachers as would join Christ and Moses, circumcision with
Baptism, and the faith of the Gospel with doctrine of the law to
justification. And these he boldly notes, and names, both because there was
an apparent vice convinced; as also because it was such a one, as being
permitted, would have ouerturned the Gospel, the faith, and salvation of men.
Which we will first show that it was so, and 2. what we are hence to learn.

For the former, the greatness of the error will appear, Use and ends of
circumcision.
if we consider the use, and ends of the institution of that legal Sacrament
of circumcision. The use of it (as of all other such ordinances, yea of the law
it self, by which they were quickened in their times) was, Heb. 10.1.
to be shadows of good things to come: and therefore they all were to receive
their date, and death, when the bodies of things themselves appeared: The which
would more clearly appear in this Sacrament, if we should stand to apply that
which the Apostle generally utters of the sacrifices of the old Testament
(and as true in their ordinary Sacraments) almost all things in the law were
performed with shedding of blood: Heb 9.22.
and without shedding of blood, was no remission: All which the Apostle there
proves to be dated, by the shedding of a more precious blood, then the blood
of bulls and goats. So as although before Christ's death, every man's shedding
of his own blood was needful to fulfill the rite of the (...)* yet seeing
Christ's blood once shed, puts an end to all ceremonial shedding of blood,
it must follow that this Sacrament must cease, because in Christ's blood the
circumcision of all was celebrated.

Again, consider the end of circumcision, which was either, 1. politic: or 2.
divine. In regard of both these, it must needs be ceased. The former was
distinctiue, to distinguish Gods people from all other nations, who in reproach
were called uncircumcised; as David in disdain calls Goliath an uncircumcised
Philistin: the Apostle calls it a wall of partition, parting the people
within the covenant from those that were without it. Which wall so long as it
stood up, they might contract one with another, especially in marriage: and
therefore the sons of Jacob would have this bar removed, before they would
match their daughters or sister to the Sichemites: yea they might not
entertain any stranger servant, but he must first be circumcised, whether he
were borne in the house or bought with money.

Object. If it be said, that other nations received circumcision besides the
Jews, as the Ismaelites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, as histories truly
affirm. I answer, it was easy for the people bordering upon Palestina, to
take it up from the Israelites: as the Moabites, and Ammonites: and for the
Egyptians, they doubtless learned it from them when they soiourned with them
400. years. But yet ceased it not to be a distinction between them. For, 1.
these received it not by the commandment of God, but of their own heads, by
Satan's malice seeking to ouerturne Gods ordinance. 2. Not as a sign of the
covenant, for God made none with them. 3. Not as a profession of faith and
obedience to the true God; for they claue still to their idols: in all which
respects, Gods people duly observed it: from whom at first they took it up by
foolish imitation, and afterward continued it as a rite, and tradition from
their fathers. Now who sees not, that when the Apostle writ this Epistle, all
such distinctions of men were ceased? and that Christ broke down this
partition wall? in whom now neither Jew nor Gentile bond nor free, Gal. 3.28.
male nor female, but all are one.

divine, and that is threefold. 1. To covenant it self. Genesis 17.10.
Now in this use it must needs be ceased: for if the covenant it self be
ceased, the sign of it is void and frustrate. But consider what branch and
clause of it you will, this truth will appear; if that, concerning the
multiplication of his seed as the stars, which was a temporal blessing, let
the Jews come now and say as in Christ's time, we are the seed of Abraham, and
Abraham is our Father: answer may be shaped them, that whosoever do the works
of Abraham, are Abraham's seed: or if that principal clause of the blessed
seed, in whom all nations should be blessed, Elizabeth's speech shows the
accomplishment thereof, Luke 1.42.
Blessed art thou among all women, because the fruit of thy womb is blessed:
which words she uttered being filled with the holy Ghost, ver. 41. or in
general look to the whole old covenant of the old Testament, it is after a
sort ceased, and a new established in stead of it; see Heb. 8.8. In that he
says a new testament, he has abrogated the old. Ier. 21.21.


circumcision of Christ: whereby he inwardly cutteth off the corruption of the
heart, justifies us, regenerateth us, sets us into himself, communicates
all his merits, and benefits of them unto us: to all which purposes he once
appeared in the flesh, and now in his own bodily absence sends out his
spirit. Coloss. 2.10,
This Paul calls circumcision made without hands. Now how just is it that
when the circumcision without hands appears, that the other made with hands
should cease.

Divine use was to represent baptism, which was to come in place of it, in the
new Testament, Coloss. 2.12. ye are circumcised, in that ye are buried with
him, through baptism. Now then when baptism, which is Christian circumcision,
is once instituted, necessarily must Jewish circumcision which was a type of it
cease. From which three ends, we may answer that maine allegation for the
continuance of circumcision, in that it is called an eternal, and everlasting
covenant. But 1. the covenant is said to be everlasting, not simply but
conditionally, namely so long as the covenant of it lasted; for gnolam
signifies not always a time without all end, but such a time as after a long
durance may admit determination and expiration. 2. In respect of the thing
signified, that is, grace in Christ, it may be said to have euerlastingnes. 3.
In regard of the perpetual supply thereof by baptism, which is to last as
long as time, but not in the ceremony or shaddowe of it (as the false Apostles
taught) much less with confidence in it as a meritorious cause of
justification.

All this has hitherto let us see the error and sin of these seducers: Now
the danger will be descried if we consider that of Paul, Gal. 5 2.
If ye be circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing: for what were this
other then to deny the true Messiah, and his appearing in fullness of time?
what were it but to rear up again the partition wall which is destroyed? what
else then to renounce the new covenant of grace? and establish again the old
one of works, which was to give place to the new? so as truly says the
Apostle, by establishing circumcision a man becomes a debtor to the whole
law; which cannot but be joined with the fall of all religion, faith, hope,
baptism, and consequently the loss of salvation it self.

Doctr. The plainnes of the Apostle in deciphering the seducers so manifestly
as they might be known; teaches, The greater the danger, the plainer must be
the reproof.
that where there is a common danger toward the Church, by means of false
teachers, we are not to spare their credit; but to lay them open, as not only
their errors, but their persons may be known and taken heed of: in which
regard Paul names these deceivers. And hereof are sundry other forcible
reasons: 1. Because the salvation of the Church, and members of it, is more to
be respected, then all Satan's synagogue. 2. It is necessary 2. Tim. 4.14.
and wishes Timothy to beware

But yet this text affords us some conditions of such plain reproof,
Conditions of plain reproof, three.
which necessarily must be observed to the right performance of the same. As,
1. the error must be certainly known, as this was. 2. It must not be every
small error; but such a one, as 1. greatly impaireth Gods glory: made void of
excuse: their wickedness showed them, and their prepared damnation preached
unto them) if they did not hurt others with themselves, the true Pastors might
with less danger dissemble their errors; and let them rot away in their
filthiness: but in the foresaid

Use. 1. This doctrine notes the simplicity of some, who think it very
uncharitable so to note open offenders in open reproofs, as men may carry them
level to the offenders, or impute it to want of discretion, or to some
malicious intent of the discrediting of men; whereas besides that no such thing
is intended, the property of charity is more careful to prevent the common
hurt of the Church, then to save the credit of some few men of corrupt minds.

Sundry plain reproves condemned.
2. Whereas some idle and foolish heads, have set themselves on work, to paint
out some worthier men then themselves in their colors, and to picture out some
sort of men, better then themselves, men of sounder judgment conspiring in all
the maine points of true religion, and of innocent and inoffensiue lives, with
the black coals of envious and slanderous invectiues, striving to besmeare
them; these have no color of warrant for such a rouing and distempered
practice. For, 1. they have no calling. God never sets any man on work to
defame his servants. 2. Are such errors as are imputed to them known and
convinced: or litigious and controuerted? or are they such as ouerturne
religion, and salvation? seeing they consent in the whole truth, and substance
of religion. 3. Do not all eyes which look on such pictures, see the
intentions of the picturers to have been gall, bitterness, vexation, and
wrecking of men's persons? so far from the spirit of meekness; that the
spirit of malice has suggested them with words as sharp as swords: and as Job
speaks of the crocodile, Job 41.10.
flames of fire go out of their mouths, and sparkles of fire leap out: the
smoke they send out is like a seething pot or caldron. 4. As the spirit of
truth is a peaceable and meek spirit, so never shall a man find a bitter
spirit conscionably utter pure truths, neither indeed will truth Gods darling
dwell with such. And what louder lie then to charge Gods children with damnable
heresies? Let all antiquity be searched, and we shall find three things which
must concur to make an heretic. 1. The broching of something contrary to
the Articles of faith. 2. A departing from the Church upon it, with profession
of drawing Disciples. 3. After solemn admonition, a stiffnesse in such error
and faction. None of which if they can be found in such as to whom all are
imputed. Let every man judge whether such boldness in any man deserve not more
open reprehension and censure; whereby such might learn at length to spare the
credit of such who are so far beyond the reach of their envy, as that they
justly pity their weakness and solly; and not with them attempt any more the
discovering of their fathers nakedness, which were a good way to cover their
own.

Use. 3. Let none look to be spared in the Ministry if they will be
incorrigible, no not great ones. If any people might look to be spared, surely
they of the circumcision might, being a people of such prerogatives. But 1.
Paul preferres the Churches good above their credit. 2. As God has no respect
of persons, no more has his word. 3. When great ones are more severely taxed,
inferiors will fear the more.

Doctr. 2. The Archseducers of the people of God.
Note further who are to be reputed the chief plagues of the Church, and the
archseducers of the world, even they of the circumcision, that is, such as
join the law with the Gospel, and works with faith in the act of
justification: for they ^each such doctrine as abolisheth from Christ, and
makes him profit nothing: and that in such manner as men can hardly shift or
avoid them, for they slily glide into the extraordinary commendation of that
the Scripture also commends, and attributes too much unto that, which the
Scripture ascribes somewhat unto. As for example: Circumcision in the prime of
it, was an ordinance to seal the righteousness of faith, and for a time was
worthily in such reputation, as that death is justly threatened against the
neglect of it; be it in Moses himself. These seducers taking hence occasion
go one step further, and will have it a meritorious cause of salvation, and
consequently will not have it dated, when the Lord has expired it: but albeit
the body has appeared, the shadow must remain.

The Popish teachers at this day are the just heirs of these seducers, Popish
teachers their successors, proved.
as appears in these particulars: the Jewish teachers would profess and
teach Christ, but not alone: for he must be joined with Moses, and all the
former rites; and all these with Christ's merits must be iumbled to
justification: yea their own rites, and traditions observed meritorious causes
of salvation: for they promise life eternal to masses, indulgences, auricular
confession, vows, pilgrimages, etc. and so tread in the very steps publish
lies, and dreams of their own hearts, Ier. 23.
that Gods people may forget his name: that is, the grace and mercy of God in
Jesus Christ.

Use. 1. This point lets us see how pernicious and dangerous the Popish
doctrine is, The holding of whole Popery cutteth off a man from Christ.
which whosoever holds and maintains is abolished from Christ, and fallen
from grace. Paul is not more confident in any thing then this, that the joining
of any thing with Christ, as the matter of our righteousness, is the cutting
off of a man from Christ, Gal. 5.3. Behold I Paul say and testify, that if ye
be circumcised (that is, with opinion of righteousness by it or confidence in
it, for else at this time the work of circumcision hurt him not, that kept
himself from confidence of righteousness by it) Christ profits you nothing:
so we testify truly against the Papists, that so many of them as will be
justified by the works of the law are fallen from Christ. Now because their
doctrine teaches this, and he is not an absolute Papist that believes it not;
we truly conclude, that it is a doctrine leading from Christ, and the absolute
Papist has no part in Christ.

Iam. 2.21.
Object. Does not James make a cooperation of faith and works. Ans. Yea, but
not in the act of our justification, nor in the matter, or work of our
salvation, but only in the declaration of the sincerity of our faith and
truth of our conversion, which by fruits of righteousness we show to be void
of hypocrisy: so as let faith and works jointly concur in the approbation of
our justification; but in case of making us righteous before God, away with the
works of the law if thou meanest to have part in Christ: these will never stand
together, here let Moses die and be buried, and let no man ever know where he
was laid to raise him again. This point shall be clearer when we come to those
words of our Apostle, cap. 3.5.
We are not saved by the works of righteousness which we had done. In the
mean time, dare Paul affirm of the law of Moses, Gods own law, that he
that holds unto it to be justified by it, is fallen from Christ: what would he
have said of their desperate and irrecouerable fall, who look for
justification out of their own traditions, vows, inventions, the dross and
chafe of their own devises, of all which the Lord will say, who required
these things at your hands? Let us beware of dogs, the property of whom is
to return to their vomit, Philip. 3.2.
so of such Christians as turn Jews again; beware of the concision, and
betake us to the circumcision, which worshippeth God in the spirit; and have no
confidence in the flesh, no confidence in the law. Get Christ, close him by
faith in the heart, he is the Lord and accomplisher of the law unto
righteousness: and thus have thou enclosed thy righteousness as a ring
encloseth a Jewel. Say with that Martyr, only Christ, only Christ.

2. Seeing Popish doctrine has not salvation but carries men from Christ, it
ought not to be tolerated, where it can be abolished: Popery ought not to be
tolerated where it can be abolished.
for the scepters of Christian Princes must hold up the scepter of Christ the
Prince of peace: and as it is no good religion in Princes to set up a religion
that would abolish Christ; so neither is it good policy, in regard both of
their treacherous positions and practices. For as they teach that heretical
(for so they call Protestant) Kings, may be deprived of life, Gregor. de Val.
Populus Christianus tenetur obsistere arctissimo conscientiae vinculo, and
extremo animarum periculo, si praestare rem possit. Creswel.
much more other royalties and temporalties; so is their practice
proportionable in deposing kings and Emperors, practizing hellish treasons,
and justifying the murdering of Princes. And therefore howsoever we should seek
to pull the poor seduced ones of them out of the fire; yet if they be
incurable, themselves have taught us how we should deal with them, or rather
neither make nor meddle with them, by the tenor of the oath taken of the old
leaguers in France, the form of which was this; Si ad haereticorum parts de
flexero, si amicitiam, si foedus, si matrimonium cum eis faxo, si opem fidemve
do, si ave, si vale dixero, illa die fulmine ferito: God make us as wisely
resolute to preserve the purity of the truth amongst us, as they are
cautelously circumspect to bar it out from themselves: then should they go
far enough, and stay long enough, before we should entreat their return.

Whose mouths must be stopped,] The phrase is metaphorical, and betokens
such an evident conviction of errors by weight of reason, and evidence of the
Scripture, as whereby the adversary of the truth is struck dumb, and has no
more to say then if he had his mouth shut up. Quest. But how should we shut
their mouths, Haeresi nunqua^ decrit ratio.
for such commonly rage against the truth; and join malice to error, and so
prostitute themselves in impudency, as that they will ever have some show of
words at least to pretend against the truth. Ans. This precept is first and
properly directed to the Minister of God, who by all his endeavor must take
away all the defense of such errors: and then confirm the contrary truth, by
such sure grounds and arguments as that all men may see, they have no sound
reason; much less Scripture at least interpreted by Scripture, for their
defense. And thus when the Church shall hear what such persons can say for
themselves, it will appear to be but vain babbling, and multiplying of words,
flowing not seldom from such as are even damned of themselves in their own
conscience. cap. 3.11.
And this practice is agreeable to that of Christ himself, who sometimes by
the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.34. sometimes by reason, Luke 20.25.26. Give to
Caesar: sometimes by a like interrogation and question, Luke 20.7. The Baptism
of John: sometimes by posing, and parling, Matthew. 22.46. so set up and silenced
the Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, and others, as none could either answer
him, or durst ask him any more questions. But when men are thus confuted by
argument, overthrown with the sword of the spirit, and confounded by the power
of truth, and yet still proceed to trouble the peace of the Church, and the
faith of the Saints: then may the Church, and must proceed by censure and
admonition, to enjoin them silence: the which if yet they will not hear, they
ought by the Church to be driven from the society of the faithful: 2. Tim.
2.14.
if they prove gangrenes, they must be cut off.

Faithful teachers must timely oppose themselves against seducers.
Doctr. The duty of every faithful Minister is, when occasion is offered,
timely to oppose himself against seducers, and stop the mouths of false
teachers, wherein also the Church ought to back and strengthen him. For, 1.
the example of Christ must be our president, who most 1. Tim. 3.9.
that they may prevail no longer. 3. In answered, least they be wise in their
own conceit: neither shall the labor be wholly lost upon them, for it shall
be a means either to convert them, and bring them to the knowledge of the
truth, or else so to convince them as they shall be made excuseles. And
further, the Church must strengthen every Ministers hands in this contending
for the faith: and so manifest her self to be the ground and pillar of truth,
which is committed to her trust, and safekeeping, against all gaynesayers.

Use. 1. This ministerial duty requires a great measure of knowledge, and a
man furnished with gifts of variety of reading, and soundness of judgment;
even a man who has a storehouse in his breast. First, he must be well read, and
skillful in the Scriptures, that by them in the first place he may be able to
shut the mouth of the adversary; partly by the express texts of Scripture:
partly by harmonical, parallel, and suitable places, as by the mouth of many
witnesses: partly by the analogy of faith, arising out of the whole body of
the Scripture: partly by the propriety of the speech in the fountain: and
partly by the apt knitting of the context, that there may be full concent with
it self, the antecedents and consequents: yea more, he must be furnished with
variety of reading, even in the works and writings of men, that he may be
able in good sort not only to apprehend the state of the questions, and
original of controversies, but also that he may refute his adversary, partly
by the concent of the Church in all ages; and partly by the help of things
that are granted and confessed on both sides; and partly by the contradictions,
which the patrons of errors cannot but unawares flip into: for it is true of a
liar, or a patron of lies, that he had need of a good memory. Secondly, to all
this knowledge is required a sound judgment, that he may be able to infer
good and necessary consequents upon the granting of the truth he stands
for; and on the contrary, the absurdities and inconveniences which necessarily
follow his adversaries false positions. Now alas, how far are readers, and
dumb men from this one part of the duty of a Minister? how dangerous are they
in their places? seducers may come, and do, with open mouths into their
parrishes, they cannot stop their mouths; nay in truth they are as the keys
to open them, and unlock them. Well were it, or much better with our Church,
if Theophylactus his rule were observed; Haec si non possis, ne sis Epis^opus.
Theoph.
that he who in some competencie could not do these things, should neither be
admitted nor permitted in the Ministry.

Use. 2. Hence we further see that it is rather to be wished, then hoped, that
all Ministers should be of one mind, and accord in the truth, and at peace
among themselves. For seeing it is the constant condition of the Church, to
have many daubars with untempered mortar, many vain talkars, It is rather to
be wished then hoped that all ministers should be of one mind.
deceivers of minds, enemies to the cross of Christ and the liberty of it:
what must now in this case all the world sit still, and be at rest? must
Christ's Ministers be silent? and the Pastors have never a voice to drive away
wolves from the Lords foldes? must hurtful doctrine be winked at, and suffered
still to creep in to the destruction of many? No, no; there must now be
opposition and strong dissension among the Ministers themselves. Ier. 1.18.
Jeremy must set himself as well against Priests, as Princes and people. The
Ministry of the Apostles did spend much of it self, against the false
Apostles that served not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. Christ's own
Ministry, though the Prince and author of all our peace, bent it self most
against the chief teachers of that age, who sought glory, and praise of men:
and thus must his faithful Ministers tread in his holy steps. If Paul had not
strongly opposed himself against many learned teachers, Act. 15.2. where had
the salvation of the Church of that age laid? Let men learn therefore to be
wise hearted, and get knowledge whereby they may rather judge of doctrines,
then take offense at the diversity of judgments, and practices of Ministers.
But if any one be sunk down so deep, that he voweth to believe none of them
all: neither will follow any religion, till they be all agreed among
themselves, to him I will say, that this rock was laid to break the neck of
his soul upon: and a fearful sign it is, that Christ himself is to him a
stone to stumble at. For came not Christ to make debate in the earth? Matthew.
10.34.
came he not to send fire, desiring nothing more then that it should be
kindled? came not he with his fan in his hand to divide between the chafe
and the wheat; the which shall never be wholly severed till the harvest?
Matthew. 3.12.
And meanest thou to be a looker on till the wheat and chafe become one: or
have thou well rid thy self, Act. 18.17.
by being till then just of Gallio his religion, who cared nothing for these
things? I assure thee who wilt look on whilst other contend for the faith,
thou shall be a looker on too whilst other go into heaven, and have less to
do in that business then thou desire, because thou desiredst it not when
thou might, yea when thou wast graciously invited, and desired to enter.

Which subvert whole houses.] In these words is contained the second dangerous
effect of these false teachers, declared by two arguments. 1. by the
isntrumental cause; namely, false doctrine: for they teach things which they
ought not. 2. by the end of it; for filthy lucres sake.

The danger appears in three things. 1. in that they subvert, that is, quite
ouerturne the salvation of men. 2. they subvert houses in the plural number.
3. whole houses. The first of these shows that these deceivers not only
shake men in the foundation of religion, but utterly overthrow them; and do
as a man who not only beats down a window, or a bay, or the side of an
house, but diggeth up the foundation: or as one who not only loppeth a tree, or
heweth it down by the ground, but diggeth it up by the roots, and quite
supplanteth it: so do these deceivers quite destroy the faith of men, and
turn it vpside down: that is, not only lead men away from the simplicity of
the Gospel, but wholly and altogether from every part of the saving truth.
Thus is the word used among the heathen, whereby they express such a raging of
the sea, as casts up and causes to floate that filth and mire which lay at
the bottom. Quest. But how did they ouerturne men's faith and salvation? Ans.
By teaching justification by circumcision; that is, the works and rites of the
law. But will some say, could this being but one point subvert all? I answer,
that fundamental truths are such and so linked and knit together, as break
one, and many fall: yea, some are such as being denied, all of them fall to the
ground. A man that pulls down an arch of the Church, endangereth the whole;
but yet the Church may stand: but he cannot dig up the lowest stones of the
foundation, but all comes to ruin. Of these the Apostle mentions two like
the two pillars which Sampson pulling down the whole house fell: the one that
of the resurrection, which being denied, all preaching, 1. Cor. 15.14.
and all faith is in vain: the other is this of seeking righteousness elsewhere
then in Christ, who is Jehovah our righteousness: for this makes grace no more
grace, and Christ to have died in vain. Gal. 2.21.
Whence by the way note the dangerous estate of such as live and die essential
members of the Church of Rome, who by their doctrine of merit, and
justification by works are subverted, and plucked up by the roots, and turned
of their salvation.

Quest. But if this be so, Whether a man may be saved that erreth in a
fundamental point.
whether may a man be saved that erreth in a fundamental point of religion, or
in such a one as by consequent raseth the foundation?

Ans. The things which all Christians are bound to believe may be reduced to
two heads. The former are such principles as make the rule of faith, so nearly
touching the matter of salvation, as that a man cannot be saved unless he
know and believe them: for all will confess that he that must be ordinarily
saved, must in some measure know the causes, the matter, the object, the
manner, the end, and means of it. If God I say ordinarily save him, he must
know the platform of Christian religion. As for example: 1. God in unity of
dietie, and trinity of person: for unless he know God in Jesus Christ, there
is no life everlasting. 2. himself in the guiltines, and under the curse of
sin; seeing Christ came to call none but sinners to repentance: and hunger
after the means of deliverance, for the waters of the well of life are given
only to such as thirst after them. 3. The means, as that without shedding of
blood there is no remission of sin, and consequenly that the Son of God
must take the nature of man, suffer in that nature, pay the price, and bear
the curse of sin: whose powerful victory over sin and death manifested in
his resurrection and ascension unto his father, applied by faith to the
believer, shall fully acquit and discharge him from wrath at his coming again
to judgment. These things must be known, I speak not of the measure of
knowledge, but so much as there must be an express belief of these things:
for he that believes not in the Son of God, shall not see life: and
consequently in some sort what need he has of Christ, and what Christ has
done and suffered for him.

Secondly, there are other truths which are consequents deduced from the
former: and these are of two sorts. Some things are so clearly deduced, as by
the near dependence with the former, the consequent is necessarily seen. For
example: that out of the Church is no salvation; that faith is ordinarily by
the word preached, etc. all which must necessarily be expressly believed, on
condition, if God make their dependence on the former to appear: For I doubt
not but that God not revealing them, many thousands are saved in the ignorance
of very many such truths: but we may not hereon build our ignorance, who have
so many means of revelation: Aliud est non credere aliud nolle credere.
our unbelief is not only damnable, because being bound to believe we
cannot, or do not, but in that we will not, but refuse the means of knowledge
and faith. The other kind of derived truths are further removed, and not so
clear: as concerning the rest of the fathers before Christ, the local dissent
of Christ into hell, etc. such as these a man may without danger be ignorant
in, yea and err also, so it be without pertinacie and obstinacy. The first
points mentioned, must expressly be known and believed: the former of the two
latter may be unknown in particular, so as in general a man believe all
things contained in the word, Implicit, and praeparatione animi.
and be ready according to means offered to travel further into the knowledge
of God. And the last I take it, a man may without danger, neither know nor
believe. And so much of that question, which lets us see how necessary it
is to see that both publikly and privately our selves and ours be grounded in
the truth of religion, and points of catechism, which are woefully and
dangerously despised.

Use. In that these seducers ouerturne men from off their foundation, we
learn, Many are called, few are chosen.
that all are not chosen that are called. Many believers were here called, and
seemed to be laid on the foundation, in regard of their outward profession, but
are subverted again; many of them made show as though they had been Temples
of the Holy Ghost, but proved to have had but sandy foundations: for the
waves of afflictions no sooner bea^e them, nor the windy blasts of seducers
sooner puff upon them, then they totter and shake like a leaf or reed, and at
last the fall of them is great. So many lanch fair forth into the sea, who
never safely and happily ariue at home again: and many sailors to heaven
suffer shipwreck by the way. Two set out of Moab, both Orpah and Ruth, Ruth
1.14.
but one of them holds on to Judah. We have too many Orpahs who forsaking her
own people for love of Gods people, trauelleth on a while toward the Lords
country: but Naomi alleging but one wordly reason, she turns back again,
she must have her husband, although (with bitterness of heart) she return to
her gods. Have not we those who had seemed to have forsaken the world, to have
joined themselves in zeal and hearty affection to God and his people? have
they not seemed to outgoe, yea outrunne others toward the heavenly Jerusalem?
would they not have been as forward in any good motion or action as the best?
and yet how suddenly have they turned sail, and fallen some to the world;
especially when the world came upon them, some to pleasure, some to coldness,
some to hatred of such courses; that men may see and say, surely some seducer
has met with them, and prevailed against them. How many who have seemed
waxe-hearted Christians, soft, and pliable, who could weep for sin bitterly;
be amazed at the judgments of God threatened out of his word, stood in awe of
God, and durst not sin, but are now of an other color? make no conscience of
oaths, dicing, gaming for their neighbors money, feasting on the Sabbath day,
and otherwise profaning it, and so contemning the ministry, that let all the
curses of the law be now directed against them personally, they are no more
moved then the Leuiathan, who rises not up when the sword touches him, but
accounts iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood: Job 41.
even so (with him) these laugh at the shaking of the spear, and the archers
of God cannot make them fly. Oh therefore let us beware, seeing so many
thousands set out of Egypt who never came into Canaan, that we miscarrie not,
Many set out of Egypt who never come at Canaan.
and fall from our own stedfastnes. Let us labor as much for affection now as
we have done for knowledge, that with our understanding we may join the
sincere love of the truth. And seeing it is no less virtue to keep the good
we have gotten, then it was praise to get it, let us fence our hearts, quicken
Gods graces in them, and pray for perseverance.

The second point whereby the danger is aggrauated is, Seducers secretly
in^ect, and creep into houses.
that these seducers subverted houses, not one or two, but many. And hence
observe what is the guise of deceivers, eue^ to creep into houses and secretly
to corrupt and deprave that doctrine which in public is taught, and
acknowledged the truth of God. Jude 3.
In 2. Tim. 3.6. the^ creep into houses, and (imitating Satan's subtlety) lead
captive simple women, assayling such as can least resist; who yet being
seduced, are cunning to prevail in the seducing of their husbands. Eminent in
this kind were the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.14.
who were the deuourers of widows houses, setting upon such as had no heads to
guide them; nor knowledge to discover them, and having all things in their own
hands, had none to control them in their liberality toward them: these were
persons fit to be ouerreached by their hypocrisy, and covetousness, both
which our Savior deeply charge them withal. The Apostles also foretold of
such who should in after times bring in damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2.2.
but privily: and these are not unfitly compared to foxes and wolves in
Scripture: for as these beasts come stealing and slily upon the flocks, taking
the wind least they should be winded, clapping their tails between their
legs least they should be heard, and softly as though they were friends to
the flock, when as all this is but to beguile the silly sheep: so these
deceivers craftily creep into houses, shrowding themselves in the sheep
clothing, whereas indeed they are ravening wolves. And the reason hereof is,
1. because publicly and directly, they dare not deny the Lord Jesus, nor his
holy Scriptures, nor the truth plainly delivered from that, for then the light
would discover them, so as the simplest could scarce lie open unto them: and
therefore they must first insinuate themselves, and then by addition, and
sowing of their own, both deprave and deny the truth. 2. The very nature of
error (being the child of darkness) is to fly the light: and as the adulterer
watches for the twilight, so does he that adulterateth the truth.

Iesuitical frogs creep into every blind corner.
Use. 1. Not needing to apply this doctrine against the Jesuits, who like so
many swarms of frogs and locusts, are sent out of the bottomless pit, and
creep every where into houses (especially ignorant corners) to beguile the
simple: Let it teach us this wisdom, to know whom we admit into our houses.
Many dangerous men there are of corrupt minds, who dare not, nor will speak
against a doctrine delivered to a man's face, nor before such as can justify
it: but behind a preachers back can traduce it, and before the weak and
simple offer impeachment unto it; of these there are not a few, who whether
they be Popishly or profanely addicted, must be wisely discovered, and remitted
for their entertainment to such as themselves.

2. We must in our private houses cleave to truths publicly delivered, Why
God suffers such hurtful men.
and beware least any deceiuer defeat us of such a treasure. The Lord might
free his Church in an instant of all seducers, but he suffers such hurtful
men; 1. to try the faith of his, and their love to the truth, whether they
will abide with him in temptation: Reasons.
2. to rouse us out of security, that the more gins and snares are laid for
us, we might be the Deuteronomy. 13.3.
for thus the Lord left the Cananites in the Land vndestroied, to exercise his
people; for which with other ends, he sees

3. As these wicked ones are subtle to corrupt the truth, and disperse their
errors, namely by infecting, and subuerting houses; so should we on the
contrary learn to be wise in our generations, and know hence that the way of
fortifying and spreading the truth, and banish error is, by instructing, and
enforming our houses. And surely truth will never flourish in the Church and in
public, till it be more heartily, and with better welcome entertained in
families. We wish good laws, and by Gods blessing many there are for the
Church: but were there none to our hands, every Christian should be a law to
himself, and all that is within his gates. Let us make good orders and observe
them in our families, and thus our houses shall become Churches. And by
whetting the truth upon our children and servants, they shall be able to teach
their families after us, and so we shall propagate the grounds of true religion
even to after ages.

The third point of the danger is, that they subvert whole houses; Error is
exceeding infectious.
not one or two persons in the houses, but whole houses. Where note the
infection of error, which is therefore compared to a gangrene, 2. Tim. 2.1^.
or running tetter, which let it take any one part, and destitute it of heat
and vital spirits, it proceeds on unto all; and no way is there to cure the
person, but by cutting off the member. Our Savior Christ calls the doctrine
of the Scribes, and Pharisees leaven, for the spreading of it. Matthew. 16.22.
So also if the error be in manners: let Peter dissemble a little, and a number
will fall with him, yea and Barnabas also will be drawn into the
dissimulation. Gal. 2.13.


Use. 1. Teaching Masters of families to become more wary of themselves, for on
them depends the good estate of the whole family, if they be ouerreached the
whole family is seduced: if the devil hold in his power the Master of a
family, he knows little good will be done in that house: except the Lord
preserve some Joseph in Potiphars house, or some Saints in Neros court to judge
and condemn the rest both here, and at the great day.

2. They must be watchful over their families, to keep Popish, and profane
persons out of doors, least they corrupt the rest. We know little what
mischeife a little leaven does, but the devil knows well enough; and
therefore he seeks to thrust into every society and family, M^sters of
families must keep out popish and profane persons, if they would not have
their houses infected.
some wretch or other, not to hinder good things only, but to spread evil and
mischeife, that if he can Christ's own company shall not be without a Judas.
W^ll knows he that one swearer, one drunkard, one contemner of God, and his
word, will do more mischeife in an house, then many religious persons can do
good. Let heads of families not take their servants hand over head, not caring
what their servants are, or are not, so they will be droyles and drudges: but
for their own sake, for their children sake, and for the more prosperous
success of all their business, make such choice of their servants, as they
may truly say with Ioshuah, I and my house will serve the Lord: and with
Ester, I and my maids will fast.

3. When Satan or his Ministers go about privily to bring us out of taste with
the word, or the preachers and professors of it, be wise to epsy his malice
betimes, and timely prevent him; for otherwise he will speedily subvert thee
and thy house; for he does his mischeife by degrees: and if thou yeeldest thy
self but a little to harken to his whistle, God in justice may yield thee
wholly, and thy house to delusion.

Thus have we seen the dangerous effects of these false teachers, which being
so great, must increase the true Ministers, 1. diligence, Act. 20.28. 2.
faithfulness against them. Gal. 2.11.14. Now we come to the declaration of
this latter effect: by the isntrumental cause, false doctrine: and the final,
which is covetousness, or filthy lucre.

Teaching things which thy ought not: that is, either impious doctrines, which
derogate from the glory of God, and extenuate the merit of Christ: or else
loose and licentious doctrine, rather giving patronage to corrupt manners, then
any way improouing them. And all these they teach for filthy lucres sake.

Doctr. Where the heart is set upon gain, it will have falsehood to feed it.
An heart set upon gain will feed it self by falsehood* Micha. 3.5.11.
True it is, in all sorts of men and callings, which is here said of false
teachers, filthy lucre and falsehood, are inseparable companions. The Prophet
Micha tells us, that the Priests that teach for hire, and the Prophets that
prophecy for money, while they bite with their teeth; that is, while they have
to bite and feed upon, all is peace to the feeders; but if a man put not into
their mouths, that is, satisfy not their appetite, and desire, they prepare
war against him, as if he were an enemy to God and man. Ezekiel. 13.18, 19.
The like affirms Ezekiel of the false Prophets, who polluted the Lord among
his people for handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread would sew pillowes under
every armehole: by which type they signified ease and prosperity to the
people: and made vailes for every head, thereby signifying Gods protection and
safety; and so fed the people with peace and pleasing things, when the Lord had
not spoken peace: and all this only to feed their covetousness. Which plowe of
their own that it might go forward, they would slaie souls which should have
lived, and give life to souls that should not live: make the righteous sad,
and strengthen the hands of the wicked, ver. 22. Such Merchants the Apostle
Peter speaks of, who through covetousness, 2. Pet. 2.3.
with fained words, would adulterate pure doctrine, and make merchandise of
men; buying and selling souls for gain, as beasts in markets. By which note
the true Apostles would be discerned from the false, we are not such as make
merchandise of the word of God: that is, 2. Cor. 2.17.
such as by fraud and base arts play the hucksters to enhanse the price, and
amplify our own gain: and, Phil. 3.18.19. speaking of false Apostles, whose
belly is their God, who mind earthly things; but our conversation is in
heaven.

And whence can such floods of errors as daily discover themselves, flow so
fast, but from such a corrupt head as this is? When Balaams eye is upon Balaaks
gold, it must needs be blinded; and when covetousness is become the conscience
of men, no marvel if they dare speak, write, attempt any thing, if it will
help them forward to their expected wages. It is no marvel that a graceless
pompous teacher, such as glories in the flesh, that can put himself out far
further and more boldly by the shadow, then an holy Christian man that has the
substance; for he has a sensible spur within him; not the glory of God,
good of Gods people, or purity of religion; but himself, his belly, his
back, his own glory; which before they shall give way or fail, let the
Church sink or swim; let errors and corruptions, as a deluge flow into the
Church, so he may rise by them, he will be so far from preventing and
refuting them, as he can strain his wits to patronage and defend them; yea
Church and common wealth shall fall too, if by it a privately minded man can
rise. Further, see we not the tyranny of this sin, which has forced so many
to turn the tippet from that they have commendably undertaken in their former
days? yea and in not a few who having missed of their expected promotion,
have resolved to become Papists, and traitors, thrusting themselves for
preferment into most desperate, and inevitable mischeifes.

Use. But here above all seducers, the Church of Rome and teachers of it, lie
most directly under this Apostolical observation, Multo aequanimius dece^
millium animarum ferunt lacturam quam december solidorum. Nicol. Clemangis de
Pontif.
who (not serving the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies) whatsoever they teach
is such stuff as they ought not, for filthy lucres sake: their whole religion
is compacted, and contrived for gain: yea and whereas it was never heard of,
that any seducers made gain of any but the living, Popish teachers above all
impostors, not only exact gain of the living by pardons, masses, confessions,
offerings, pilgrimages, worshipping of Saints, indulgences, and which is worse,
making but a money matter of the greatest, and most barbarous sins, of
witchcraft, perjury, murder even of father, mother, wife, child, infant in
the womb, incest, Sodomie, bestiallitie, (in none of which I belie them) but
even the dead escape them not, but pay large tributes, by means of the devise
of their purgatory. In one word, the best of their religion is a mystery of
iniquity. And would to God this sin were confined in the Popish Clergy.

2. Let all the Ministers of Christ learn, 1. to want and abound, and be
contented in all estates. 2. think it their riches, if they can enrich the
Church with spiritual graces. 3. Consider their callings, to draw men from
earth to heaven: and their titles of stars, which are fixed in heaven: eyes
which cannot look upward and downward at once: and imitate the eye, the sight
of which because it is hindered by a little mote of earth, it fears nothing
more then earth or dust, and is quick to shut it self against it.

Ver. 12. One of themselves, even their own Prophet said; The Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.

13. This witness is true, wherefore reprove them sharply, that they may be
sound in the faith,

The scope of the Apostle being not only to provoke Titus to diligence in his
own duty, but to a faithful care in the choice of the Ministers; and having
drawn one argument to this purpose from the multitude of false teachers: Now
he takes another as effectual as the former, from the disposition of the
people of Creta, who were naturally of an evil disposition, most ready to be
carried away, yea, even to offer themselves to any delusion. And that it might
appear so to be, he describes their manners. 1. by enumeration of the vices
to which they were naturally addicted: 1. liars: 2. evil beasts: 3. slow
bellies. 2. enlarges it by the circumstance of time, always. But least the
Cretians should challenge him either of untruth, or of hatred, and uncharitable
dealing with them, most wisely to avoid all their envy against his person,
which would hinder them from brooking his doctrine, he uses a preface, wherein
he shows that he speaks nothing of his own, but that which has been
before testified of them, and against them; and that by such a one as is above
all their exception, (...).
even one of themselves, even their own Prophet, borne, brought up, and living
amongst them, who therefore upon knowledge and good intelligence, writ
impartially the truth of them in that his Hexameter. The which being repeated,
first, he subcribeth unto the truth of it, This witness is true: and secondly,
groundeth an exhortation to Titus, that therefore he should reprove the^
sharply: to the end, that they might be sound in the faith.

These two verses then contain three parts to be in their order handled. 1. The
preface to this testimony. 2. The testimony it self. A minister may be
plain in his reproof.
3. The Apostles subscription unto it and illation from it. But before we come
to the parts, two things in the whole are to be noted. First, the plainnes of
the Apostle with these Cretians: he charge them very deeply, that a man
would think he were become their enemy; or spoke of malice and bitterness to
slander them: and yet he performs a maine duty of love unto them. The holy
men laid not their love aside in their sharpest reprehensions: Isai charged the
Jews, that their faithful city was become an harlot, that the people were
become murderers, their Princes rebellious, and all of them the enemies of
God, Isa. 1.21.
of whom he would be eased and avenged: but what was Isay now their enemy? see
cap. 24.16. how pitifully affected he was toward them, and his sorrow for them
was such, as even brought him into a consumption, my leanenes, my leanenes, woe
is me for the trangressors have sore offended. Jeremy tells them, cap. 3.13.
that they were rebellious against God, and that they scattered their ways to
strange gods under every green tree* and were disobedient children: and yet
cap. 4.19. he so takes their misery to heart, as that he cries out, oh my
belly, my belly, I am pained at the very heart, my heart is troubled within
me, I can not be still. And when cap. 9.2. he had desired a place apart, that
he might never come among them, they being become adulterers, an assembly of
rebels, and proceeded daily from evil to worse; yet to show that his soul
abhorred them not, neither that he had cast them out of his affection, he tells
them in cap. 13.17. that if they would not hear, his soul should weep in
secret, and his eyes drop down tears for them.

So for a Minister to charge a people with known and open sins, it is not
ever a sign of malice, nor a sting of bitterness, Exhibete vos matres
fovendo, patres corripiendo: extendite vbera, sed producite verbera.
but rather a sweet wou^ding of love. Hardly can we persuade men of our love in
this case: nay, even the Apostle himself who spoke with inevitable wisdom,
was glad to use many protestations, prefaces, and apologies, to persuade men of
it: as, 1. Cor. 4.14. when he had told the Corinths plainly of their
ingratitude, who suffered him to be hungry, naked, reviled, etc. is glad to
add a defense for himself, I write not these things to shame you* but as my
beloved children I admonish you. So when we deal plainly, and let men see
themselves and their ways, we cannot persuade them we love them: but for our
selves, our own consciences must be our brazen wall, if we be not entertained
and approved in other men's: we must do our duty, and tell Israel his sin,
Ezec. 18. And although it would do many good to see us silenced, and stopped
in the course of our diligence, yet would it do them no good to see us damned
for our negligence toward them. Oh says one, this preacher is ever speaking
of me, he has some spite at me: and therefore I cannot abide to hear him. Oh
but whosoever thou art, learn to suffer the word of exhortation and reproof,
for it is a sign of an heart in the gall of bitterness, to impute malice, and
uncharitableness to such Ministers as cry out against the known sins of it,
and to account of preaching (as many do) but railing. Such a one was Ahab, who
cried out of Eliah as his enemy, because he finds out his sin: such are
the hearts of such brutish men, who will be at defiance with God, and the
servants of God christianly admonishing or reproouing them, and then they cry
out, there is no love in them: which is all one to say, that unless we flatter
them, and partake with them in their sins, there is no love in us. John
Baptist dealt roughly with those that came to his baptism, Oh generation of
vipers: and yet who durst say, that that holy man hated them? and yet with us
it is no good divinity, if we cover not the sins that are as openly
committed as Absolons, in the sight of all Israel: other men may and can speak
of sins and impieties; and yet God must be dumb; they can see them, but God
must not: other men can openly speak of them in their houses, shops, fields,
and markets, and yet we may not mention them for fear of forfeiting all our
love. But we must much more take up that duty which every private man is
bound unto: Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but plainly reprove
him, and suffer him not to sin: We may not hate you so much, as not deal
plainly with you.

Secondly, note that howsoever the Apostle deals plainly, yet he deals
wisely, and uses a preface to cut off all the prejudice of the truth he
delivers: and is a grace to be imitated of all Ministers, who ought prudently
to temper their zeal with wisdom, so suppling and asswaging their reproves,
as they may appear to proceed from love. When the Apostle was to write of the
reiection of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles; Rom 9.1.
least he should seem to speak of any sinister affection, or from hard conceit
of the Jews, he cutteth off all such suspicion, by a large preface, in which
he attesteth by an oath, that he so embraced his countriemen the Jews in the
most inward affection of his love, as he could have been contented to have
been accursed for them: and in Romans 10.1. being to deliver the true cause of
their reiection, which was the stablishing of an humane righteousness, he
begins with a protestation, A minister must be wise in his plainnes.
that his hearts desire and prayer to God was, that Israel might be saved. And
great reason is* that Ministers should thus practice this serpentine wolves,
that is, satanicall instruments armed with serpentine subtlety, watching all
advantages to deprave their best actions, undertaken with best deliberation,
and on the best grounds. 2. pondering of the paths.

Use. 1. Let Ministers seeing they have so many eyes upon them, pray for
understanding hearts, and seeing they naturally want this wisdom let them
ask it of God, that it may as Solomon says, make their faces to shine every
where: showing wisdom as well as zeal in reproves, censures, in speaking of
events in the Church, and Land: and the rather, seeing even in Gods causes, we
may not be too forward. Hest. 4.11.
Good Hester in her warmest love to her self and people who were Gods people,
all of them sold to the sword, may not yet rashly step to Ahashuerosh, before
she had considered of the rigor of the law, which was sure to be so much the
more severely executed, by how much it was more commodious for the Kings
safety; also whether she was in favor and grace, not having been called of
30. days: and especially she and her people had fasted and prayed, and
consulted with the Lord. Nay more, Peter must not rashly draw his sword, and
strike to save Christ's own life: two worthy examples for our imitation.

2. People must also commend their Ministers to the Lords direction, and
whosoever stand in good causes, that the Lord who is rich in wisdom, would
give them wisdom in all things.

Now we come to the parts of the verses, and first of the preface unto the
testimony. Wherein 1. it is to be enquired who is meant, by this Prophet? Ans.
By common consent the Apostle means Epimenides an heathen man, and a profane
Poet, who i^ one of his books has this hexameter. Quest. But why does Paul
call him a Prophet? (...)*
Ans. Some think him so called only by a general acceptance of the word
Prophet, which as well signifies a public declarer of some truth past or
present, (...)* palam ^ario.
as of some to come; and so he openly taught the truth, persuading to virtue,
and dehorting from vice. Others think the Apostle calls him so ironically,
or in skorne, one who was a Prophet fit enough for such a people. Others
because he was so in the reputation and account of the people, who as the other
Heathen were wont to ascribe some divinity (...).
yea the interpreters and sons of the Gods. But I take it the truth that he
is so called because he was indeed a Prophet, Plato. (...) apud veteres fuerunt
fanorum antistites and interpretes oraculorum* test Festo.

Cicero. What kind of prophet was Epimenides.


and did divine, and answer of events to come; some of whose answers and
oracles are yet extant, and recorded in authors: besides that some of the
Heathen confess, that he was the chief of those, who by surie prophesied of
things to come.

Quest. But what kind of Prophet was he, or how was he and the other
heathenish prophets distinguished from the true Prophets of God? Ans. The
Prophets of God were of two sorts. First, such as were more properly so called,
who being extraordinarily raised, and inspired by Gods spirit, did reveal
some parts of the will of God, which he intended to do in, and for his Church
for time to come: such were Isay, Jeremy, and many other in the old Testament
until Christ the chief Prophet and accomplisher of all prophecies appeared;
but very few after. The second sort of true Prophets were such as only did
teach, and interpret the holy Scriptures; and ordinarily had not adjoined the
foretelling of things to come, but upon some special extraordinary occasion:
and of these were many both in the old and new Testament. In the old, 1. Sam.
19.20.
such were the company of Prophets, among whom Saul prophesied: and the
children and sons of the Prophets, who (as it is like) were such as studied,
expounded, and more accuratly explaned the writings of Moses, and kept the
doctrine delivered by Moses vncorrupt in the Church, although the masters and
those which were more eminent had both these gifts, such as Eliah, Elisha; and
the sons of the Prophets so far as they were employed and sent by these: as
we read, that the young Prophet knew not that Iehu was to be anointed King,
till Elisha told him. 2. king 9.1.
In the new Testament the Apostle brings all ministerial and ecclesiastical
duties, of ecclesiastical persons to, 1. Prophecy, 2. Ministry, Romans 12.7.
the former of which is nothing but the exercise of a gift of teaching in the
Church, applying sound doctrine out of the word to exhortation, edification,
consolation, 1. Cor. 14.13. Both of these are truly called divine Prophets:
both of them being raised of God, gifted by God, dealt in the things of God,
and endeauored to lead men unto God.

As for the other, such as were the oracles of the Gentiles, whether that of
Apollo at Delphos: or of other groaues, caves, dens* and woods very frequent
amongst them; Differences between the Prophets of God, and the Prophets of the
Gentiles.
or else the southsayers, such as were Bacchis, the Sibills, and this Epimedes,
these consent almost in nothing with the former, for they differ in all the
causes. 1. Whereas the former spoke by instinct of the holy Ghost, and
consequently whatsoever they spoke These latter spoke by instinct of Satan, who
being a lying spirit from the beginning, was often a lying spirit in their
mouths, but that he covered his errors by speaking in likelihoods, and
amphobologyes; and the things that came to pass, seldom came to pass as they
were foretold.

2. For the means whereby the Lord communicated his will, it is general, or
more special: the former was either vision to those that were awake; or dream
to them asleep: Numb. 12.6.
the latter was by word of mouth, or face to face. But the devil uses all
manner of tools as means to deceive; all elements, fire, air, earth, water;
so beasts, birds, stars, lottes, herbs, winds, and words, that look how
many kinds of creatures there be, so many kinds of divination there are, so
infinite is delusion.

3. Whereas the matter of the former are the great things of God, and of them
the maine, the foretelling of Christ the Messiah and Savior of

4. Whereas the former received their revelations into meek and Rev. 1.10.
that John was ravished in spirit on the Lords day: and that the spirit also
rushed on Ezechiel, on Daniel; and so this was no difference between them. I
answer, Dan. 8.27.
that far were these holy men from being mere passive instruments, or as
blocks and stones, as the other were: they were indeed mere men, and such as
when Gods greatness, and glorious majesty was more then ordinarily manifest;
were very much affected, and almost swallowed up of it; and almost ravished,
and out of themselves, as Paul confessed of himself: but neither were they
mad, nor sensles, nor foaming, nor deformed, nor ignorant what befell them;
but with knowledge, faith, reverence, wisdom, and affection, received the
things of God, which they were to deliver again afterward to the use of the
Church.

5. Whereas the former ever served the use of the Church, and endeavored to
lead men to God, furthering them in faith and obedience: the latter only
served the vanity and curiosity of men: and although they could not well lead
men further from God then they were, yet they the more detained them from
seeking after the true God. Thus the difference plainly appears, which has
given good light to the understanding of the place.

Quest. But whether did Epimenides utter this as a prophecy? Ans. No, unless
we conceive him as a Prophet in the general acceptance of the word. For, 1.
the devil is not willing, except he gain more by it, to

Doctr. 1. The Gentiles had their Prophets, and Poets, such as was Epimenides,
The Gentiles had their prophets so called to witness against their impi^tie.
which were sufficient witnesses against their impiety. And never were any
people so rude and barbarous, among whom God had not sufficient witnesses to
condemn them. Which appears plainly thus. First, without themselves they
had three things to condemn them. So Bucer said of Seneca.
and prints of divinity, then all the books of the schoolmen, put together.
2. their proverbs, and voice of men publicly Cretians was a prouerbiall
sentence. 3. The works of God, Romans 1.20. Act. 14.17.

Natural knowledge: the truth of God in unrighteousness. Where by the truth of
God, is not meant every truth in general, nor yet the truth of his written
word: but that light which remains in the nature of man after the fall,
called the law of nature, and the law of nations: which light they by their
injustice, impiety, profaneness, and superstition did seek to oppress, and
extinguish, and so detain as a captive in the dark dungeon of their hearts.
And v. 31. he affirms of them, that they knew the law of God by nature; that
is, not the law written, but a certain general and obscure knowledge,
concerning God, and themselves, whereby they were convinced of those general
notions; that there is one God; that this one God is to be worshipped, the
which even idolatry it self proves; that this worship must rather be in
spirit then bodily; that they might not do to others, that which they would
not suffer of others; that every one should have his own given him; that
adultery and unchaste lusts were to be avoided; these things they knew, called
the law of God.

Quest. But do you ascribe the knowledge of God to the natural man, are not
many Scriptures against it? Ans. Seeing the Scripture attributes both
knowledge and ignorance of God, to the natural man, we shall understand both
the better by distinguishing the knowledge of God: which is 1. either natural
and general, or 2. supernatural and revealed. The former is gotten and
increased by the light of nature, and things created: the latter is made known
in the word: the former a man may have, and yet vanish away in his
imaginations, and be no better then a flat Atheist, without God in the world:
the latter is neither idle nor vanishing, but forces to glorify God as God,
by loving, fearing, invocating, and obeying him. The use of the former is only
to make men excuseles in their just damnation, Romans 1.20. of the latter, to
raise up men to the sight and fruition of their salvation: both mentioned, Gal.
4.8, 9. The former the Scripture scarce vouchsafes the name of knowledge: and
so denying knowledge to the natural man, it speaks of that supernatural
knowledge, which Solomon says is too high for a fool; which only deserves
the name of knowledge: 1. Cor. 2.17. The natural man knows not the things of
God, nor can know them because they are spiritually discerned.

The second thing which inwardly witnesses against the natural man is his
natural conscience, whereby even the heathen not only knew, but did the
things of the law; Romans 2.14.
not that any of them could yield perfect obedience to the law, by the
strength of nature: but that without the help of the Law written, the
Gentiles had a certain kind of discipline, whereby they were restrained from
many notorious vices: for he says not, that they were just, but did certain
things of the law, proceeding hence, that with the light of some common
notions concerning God, they had also a sense of his justice, which was ready
to return to them according to their works. Now both these, namely, natural
knowledge, and conscience, were still according to the working of their
corruption, either more quick and stirring in them, or more dull and deaded:
and yet never insufficient to condemn them.

Use. ^. Has the Lord so many witnesses against the heathen* who never heard
of Christ, nay, nor had the law written: what a number of evidences (besides
all the light of nature, The Lord has a number of witnesses against
hypocritical and profane professors of Christ.
and helps from the heathen) has he against thousands, that profess Jesus
Christ, and yet are inferior to many of the heathens themselves. For, 1. what
a sure sentence of damnation does every Minister of the Gospel, pronounce
against the disobedient, who having not Satan's but Gods Prophets, and the law
escape the judgment of God, that despise the riches of his bountifulnes, and
patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God should
lead them to repentance? is not this to heap coals on their own heads, which
will burn to the bottom of hell? yea and to treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath? unto which we may add the works of his justice, disburdening his
just displeasure against the unrighteousness of men; revealed both in the
Scriptures and in other histories, yea and daily running into the eyes of such,
as provoke their diligence to observe the same. 3. Witness that worthy book
Catalogus testium veritatis.
for in the darkest ages, even in their Abbyes, and Fryeries, he raised up
always some one or other, from age to age, to witness against them, that
their error and wickedness should not have that security on both sides which
it desires.

Lord need not send so far a^ Cittim and Kedar to condemn us, but (as here)
by our own proverbs as by our own mouths might be judge us: what a number of
deuillish proverbs amongst us bewray the ungodliness of men's hearts: as, every
man for himself, and God for us all: and young Saints old Devils, and which is
the worst and most general, godliness is made but a byword, and a note of
reproach every where under the title of purity and preciseness. 6. And yet if
men were so wilful as to be blind at all these, yet can they not (as many
strive to resisted the word they heard, by lewd and graceless lives and
behauiours.

2. Let no man say, my sin shall lie hid, and it is in secret, or twilight:
no, no, there is witness enough to convince thee of the most secret of them
all, the eyes of God, the voice of thy own conscience, which will be as a
thousand witnesses; yea the Lord (who has more ways to the wood then one) has
given to all creatures tongues, ears, eyes, and hands against sinners. The
shed blood of thy brother shall call for vengeance, the timber and stone in the
wall cries out of oppression and cruelty; the rust of the gold and silver
against the wretched covetousness of miserable men, and so in the rest.

Not simply unlawful to allege the saying of a profane man in a sermon.
Reasons.
Doctr. 2. The second thing to be observed in this preface is, that this
testimony was not fetched from any of Gods Prophets, but from one of their
own. Whence we learn, that it is not simply unlawful to allege the saying
of a profane man in a sermon. For, 1. all truth is the Lords, and where it may
serve for his glory, it may not be rejected; Foelicias and oppugnabunt and
propugnabunt, qui in Gentilis sapientiae x^sto spatiis aliquot confectis, ad
sacram hanc militiam, veluti tyrocinio quodam, proluserint. Tilenus.
then may a Minister descend to humanity, and by earthly means teach things
heavenly. 2. In case of conviction of error, whether in doctrine, or manners.
In doctrine, when any controuersall point is handled, well may we free the
truth of novelty, by showing the consent of it with the ancient Church: for
hereby, 1. the weak and new conuerts are more confirmed: 2. the calumnies of
the adversaries are cut off, who commonly boast that all antiquity stands
for and with them. In manners, the conviction is of 1. Christians: or, 2.
Heathens. If of Christians, then such allegations may be used by way of
exprobration, or sharp reproof; Julian forbad the Christians the reading of
heathen Poets and Orators, least they should allege their authority against
the heathens. For, says he, they thrust us through with our own fathers.
so the Lord himself sends his people to the Isles of Chittim, and Kedar, to
see if any of the nations dealt so with their gods: yea to the ox, ass,
crane, storke, pismire, etc. If we be to deal with Heathens or Atheists, who
are not easily moved with the authority of the Scriptures; then can we
convince them no otherwise then by such testimonies of their own, which they
make most account of; and so the Apostle dealing with Athenians, Epicures,
Stoiks, and Cretians, by the testimony of Menander, Aratas, Epimenides,
convinced their wickedness. Thus for the clearing of Gods glory, and his
truth, as Paul says, all things are ours: Scripture, art, nature, etc. Now
because there accreweth a great hurt to the Church by the abuse of this
example, Cautious in such allegations.
we must carefully observe some cautions in such allegations: I will name three.

1. Whereas the former cases are not frequent, such allegations must be rare
and sparing: As Paul in all his books, adding unto his 14. Epistles

2. These allegations must be used soberly, without affectation. Paul 1 Cor.
2.17.
stands partly in concealment of humane skill, and partly in demonstration of
the spirit. And hereof he renders two reasons: 1. Because the doctrine of the
Gospel must savor still of the cross, be abject, and despicable, and so
resemble Christ himself the author of it, who never sought his own glory,
but departed from it, for the salvation of his body. 2. Least the faith of
believers should be in the wisdom of men, and not in the power of God, that
is, least men should ascribe that to humane eloquence, and wisdom, and gifts
of men, which is proper to the simplicity of the Gospel. True it is, as the
Apostle observed, the more pomp, the less power, and the more earthen the
vessels are known to be, the better is the treasure known to be heavenly.

3. They may not be used to prove points of Doctrine, or manners: for the word
is a sufficient, and sure ground for proof of all such points;

These cautions quite overthrow the common use of such allegations at this
day, wherein men are immoderate, yea infinite in every sermon, upon all
occasions, and to every purpose, and people. Hence it is that Arbanah, and
Ph^rphar rivers of Damascus, are more frequented then all the waters of Israel:
Fathers, Philosophers, and Poets, are loud in many sermons, when the Prophets,
Apostles, and the Son of God himself is silent. And all this is laid upon
this one practice of the Apostle, and no other commandment or practice can be
alleged in all the Scripture but his. And therefore we will look a little
nearer unto it, and search how far the Apostle has propounded himself a
pattern for our imitation. And to omit that scruple, whether we may lawfully
imitate him, except we had such extraordinary gifts as he had, and such
inspiration, as whereby he was able to make profane sentences holy, whereas we
finding a profane sentence cannot but leave it so. If we shall take liberty to
use them, as the Apostle did, I take it, no man can from thence directly
conclude the lawfulness of that manner of preaching, which is Non in coetu
ecclesiastico.
for he never used them but either in confere^ces, or disputations, or as here
in a personal Epistle. 2. Never before Christians, who reject not, but desire

The allegations of men for their practice are either weak, or impertinent. As
1. their large discourses in praise of humane learning, wherein they fight with
their own shadows, for want of other adversaries. For who discommendeth it?
does he that praises gold, dispraise silver? or do not we acknowledge it a
necessary handmaid unto divinity, but an Agar still, who if she presume to
step into Sarahs place, must be cast out of doors. Object. None speak against
them, but such as are ignorant, and not able. Answ. Not to speak of the
loudest sound of emptiest vessels, they are not in themselves spoken against;
but seeing there may be no composition in the holy oil; neither may the Lords
field be plowed with an ox and an ass, nor sown with diverse seeds, we
desire moderation, and restraint to the former rules, that the voice of God may
sound in the Church, and not the voices of men. Object. But it is lawful for
the Israelites to rob the Egyptians. Ans. But it is not lawful to make a calfe
of those earings, and set it up for a God. Object. But these adorn a Sermon.
Answ. Oh that our eyes were so spiritual, Augustine confesses that while he
continued in the pride of his heart, he disdained the holy Scriptures, and
thought the^ nothing to the eloquence and knowledge he found in the books of
the heathen, as Tullie, and others: but after he saw himself, he knew also
that all humane eloquence and Philosophy in comparison of the^ were no better
then bladders stuffed with wind.
that we could see that wonderful beauty in the pure word of God. What an
unwise man were he that would not content himself with a Jewel of infinite
price, all of gold, pearls, and precious stones, except he carry it to the
painter to paint it. Let Christ's voice put forth it self, and his sheep will
hear it, and follow him. As for the persons alleged, be they never so holy,
or profound, they are sufficiently honored in being the friends of the
bridgroome, though they be not the bridgroome himself: and for the persons
alleging them, let them remember that he is not praised in this business, whom
men commend, but he that is praised of God. So much of the preface.

Now we come to the Testimony it self. Wherein the Poet charge his
countrymen with three maine vices. 1. That they were given to lies, and
falsehood, The Cretians are always liars. 2. That they were of brutish and
belluine condition, void of the guidance of reason, evil beasts. 3. That they
were given to idleness, and intemperance, slow bellies.

For the first of these. Why he charged them of lying, although we need not
enquire the occasion, that the truth of his testimony (besides the Apostles
subscription) may appear in history: which records that the body of this
people was given over to invent, believe, and receive any fable or lie never so
monstrous; and among other, one especially made them noted and hated of all the
world, namely, that Jupiter the chief of the gods was dead, and that his grave
was with them; the which with other fables, made them so ridiculous, as that
they became a proverb among the nations: insomuch as to lie, was to play the
Cretian. (...). Plut.
Neither did the Poet speak of some slipps of the tongues of some few; or some
falls seldom ouertaking them: but of an habit, and affected custom and
exercise of lying and fayning, which generally, and continually they were so
tainted with, as little or no soundnes, uprightness, and faithfulness, but
treachery, guile, falsehood, appeared in their dealings.

Doct. Falsehood and deceit in word and deed is condemned, not only by the
light of the Scriptures, but by the light of nature it self. Falsehood in word
and deed condemned by the light of nature.
Which appears expressly not only by the testimony of this Pagan Poet, but
by other lights in nature: for the natural conscience of man accuses and
checketh for it; yea in children themselves, it makes them blush at the report
of a lie. Besides, the most graceles men of men, account it the highest
disgrace to have the lie given them, the infamy of which vice is such, as none
will take to it, none will confess it. And on the contrary, the heathen so
extolled truth, in word, in practice, as of all other virtues it was sayned to
be the only daughter of Jupiter, as whom most nearly it resembled.

They that are enlightened by grace must much more abhor it.
Use. How should we who would be reputed Gods children, abhor that practice,
which even the sons of men are ashamed of? shall the sparkles of natural
light make the natural conscience of a Heathen, and graceless man accuse him
of this sin; and shall not the clear light of grace force the consciences of
professed Christians to reprove them? Is it justly reputed a disgrace to
common men, to be taken with a lie, how disgraceful should it be to Christian
men? shall the Heathen profess truth to resemble God so expressly, as that it
is his dear and only daughter, and shall Christians who find in the
Scriptures the whole image of God, Ioh. 8.48. Coloss. 3.5.
styled by the title, and comprehended under the name of truth, in their
practice scarce express it as a part of that image? And yet how many
Christians are behind even millions of the Heathen, who although they be
commanded every man to speak truth to his neighbor, yet shame they not to
defend that they may lie, and forswear too for the advantage of themselves and
others: and therefore they say, that though they dislike hurtful lies, yet see
they not but they may (as they do) lie in jest, or for the good of their
neighbor, especially to save his life; For this, say they, hurts none, nor
is against the law of charity; and they find it commended to them in the
practice of the Midwiues, to save the male infants of the Hebrews; of Rahab to
save the Spies; and Michol, and Jonathan to save David from Saul's fury; and in
the doctrine and writings of some of the Fathers, as Origin, Jerome, who in
regard of the profitable ends, held these no sins.

To all which in few words I answer, 1. That every lie is hurtful whether in
jest, or earnest, for evil or for good; because it is an enemy to truth, and
against the ninth commandment. 2. For jesting or sporting lies, the threatening
is general, Psalm. 5.6. thou shall destroy them that speak lies: untruths
may not be spoken, although they be not thought: and, Prove. 6. Thou shall
destroy the lying tongue: he excepteth not, if it be not in sport, or for a
good end. And many of the Heathen themselves saw the sillines and folly of
this shift: we read of the Lacedaemonians that they would not suffer their
laws to be gainsaid in jest; and yet the law of the Lord may be controlled,
and gainsaied in jest of Christians. When Thespis the first stageplayer was
asked, if he were not ashamed to utter so many lies in such a worthy audience,
he answered, he did it in sport. But wise Solon replied, If we approve and
commend this sport, we shall find it in earnest in our contracts and
affairs: and even so by Gods just judgment it befalls Christians, who using
to lie in sport, get an habit of lying in earnest: and by his jesting lies,
raises a suspicion of his words, that he cannot be believed, be he never in
such earnest.

3. For officious lies, so called, there can be no such, There can be no
officiou^ lie, because every lie is against some office and duty.
because in every lie, some office or duty is violated. But they hurt no man:
yes; if they hurt not another, they hurt a man's self many ways: again, if
they hurt not the parties for whom, yet hurt they the parties to whom they are
told, who are abused, and urged to believe a lie: and were not this, yet they
hurt and prejudice the truth, which ought to prevail. But the end of them is
good. Yea, but that which is evil in the nature, Object. Sol.
and constitution, may never be admitted, let the end be never so good which is
pretended. The least evil may not be committed for the greatest good: to help
man, we may not hurt God. Moses would rather be blotted out of Gods book, then
God should be dishonored. Nay, we may not tell the least lie, for Gods greatest
glory, and much less for man's good. Job 13.9.10. Will you make a lie for him,
as one lies for a man; surely he will reprove you. And if a lie would make to
Gods glory, yet he is not unrighteous to leave it unpunished. Romans 3.7. But
they be not against charity. Yes, for charity rejoices in truth: and if they
were not, Object. Sol. 1. Cor. 13.
yet are they directly against piety, which two loving friends may admit no
divorce. 4. For the examples alleged, and all of that kind: we must
distinguish between the facts of the faithful, and the manner of them. The
facts of saving the children, and spies, etc. was commendable, and argued the
fear of God, and love of his children: but the manner of putting these in
execution, was never approved in the Scriptures, although the facts themselves
were. Neither is it strange, that faith and sin should combat together in
the same action in this condition of the infirmity and imperfection of the
dearest Saints of God, until that perfect come. 5. The very heathens
condemned all dissonance and dissent between heart and tongue, thoughts and
speeches, the one whereof was bestowed on us by God to express the other. The
Persian law for the third lie enjoined a man perpetual silence.

Zeph. 3.13. Reasons to urge truth of speech.


Let us therefore who profess the love and fear of the Lord, show our selves
to be of the remnant of Israel, by this, in that we neither do iniquity, nor
speak lies, nor have a deceitful tongue found in our mouths.

And to help our selves in this duty, meditate on these reasons. 1. All
falsehood and lies are directly against God himself, who is truth it self: so
as by them a man becomes most unlike unto God, and most like to the devil,
who is the father and first founder of them. 2. That does with them as we do
with the things we abhor; either remooueth them out of sight, by barring them
out of heaven: or destroys them, Psalm. 5.6. 3. That although that be the
greatest plague to have the face

Evil beasts,] This is the second imputation in this testimony. Epimenides
calls the Cretians beasts; because of their brutish conditions, and beastly
practices: and evil beasts, because they are not like the creatures, who by
their creation were ordained, and served for the commodious, and comfortable
use of man: but such as since the fall rebelliously refuse the Lordship of man,
and will not be brought unto tamenes and service: nay, rather are either fierce
and cruel against man, as Lions, wolves, etc. or else poisonfull, direful, and
venomous, as the serpent, crocodile, with such venomous beasts: both which
sorts are truly called evil beasts, not that they are not good in their
substance, or not very good in their creation: but because they carry on
them, the cursed marks of man's rebellion against God, being thereby subjected
unto vanity so far, as in stead of that primarie use and comfort from them,
man has just cause incessantly to fear, and often receives much evil by
means of them. And what does the Poet herein other, then that which the
Scriptures are very frequent in? for when men degenerate, and by sin put off
the nature of man, both God and nature strippe them of the name of men, as
unworthy of it, because they rather resemble the bruit beasts shrowding many
brutish qualities under the shape of men. The Scripture calls brutish men by
the name of beasts: why.
The Scripture speaks expressly that man being in honor, became like the
bruit beasts which perish.

But wherein stands this resemblance? Ans. By looking into the word of God we
shall find it to stand especially in three things. 1. In becoming without
understanding, and in all the things of God, by nature ignorant as the very
bruit beast: so Ierimie, Psalm. 73.22.
10.14. affirms that now every man is a beast in his own knowledge: and
Prou. 20.24. How can a man understand his own way? Spiritus sanctus vnum nomen
eis iure tribuit qui vnam rem agunt licet contratia specie.
Now hereby who sees not that hereby men loose the very thing which makes
them men, and distinguish them from the bruites without understanding? and that
is the mind it self, whereby only man was enabled both to see, and consider
of the things he sees: and seeing the mind without understanding is as an eye
without sight, therefore may he that is destitute of understanding be as truly
said to want his mind, as he which lacks his sight, is truly said to have
lost his eyes.

2. By giving up themselves to be led with sensuality as the bruit 2. Pet.
2.12.
and this property the Apostle Peter ascribes to natural and ungodly men.
Neither can it be that this should not rise of the former: for when men are
deprived of understanding, judgment, reason, as every natural man is in the
things of God, they must needs be led by other guides, of lusts, appetite,
sense and sight, even as the beasts are. Impetu quoda^ in sua obiecta.
For when the noble part of the mind (which should subject the inferior
powers of the soul unto it self, as also guide the motions and actions of men
by deliberation, counsel, judgment, and election) is deposed from his
regencie; the sensitive appetite which is common to man and beast, like a
rebellious commons takes the whole command, and carries the soul by a blind
force unto any brutish lust, and to whatsoever is delectable to the senses.
Notably does the Prophet express this property in the wicked Jews, saying,
that like fed horses every of them neighed after his neighbors wife. Ier.
5.8.


3. By the practice of many beastly and brutish properties. For what
properties have unregenerate men, which are not more beseeming evil unruly
beiffer, he knows no yoke, acknowledges no Master, lifts up his heel
against his feeder, Hose. 4.16.
and cares not for the owner of his fat pasture. 2. If we consider natural
men in themselves, no beast is so unclean and foul as they, whose filthy
hearts are fit for nothing, but to be stinking cages, and dens for filthy
birds and beasts, wholly bespotted as the leopards, Ier. 13.23. swinish men,
wallowing in the dirt and mire of sinful pleasures, and reuolting from
every good way as dogs to their vomits: for so the Apostle termed such
Jews as revolted from Christianity to circumcision; Philip. 3.2.
Beware of dogs. 3. Consider them in respect of their neighbor, no evil
beast is so cruel and venomous as they: in regard of the former the Scriptures
ascribe the property of the devil himself unto them, calling them ramping
and roaring lions: such as David and Christ himself had to do withal, Psalm.
22.13. such a one was Nero whom Paul had to do withal: 2. Tim. 4.17. God
delivered me out of the mouth of the Lion. And for their savagenes and
greedines they are called dogs and wolves, Zeph. 3.3. Her Princes are as
roaring lions, Homo homini lupus.
and her judges as wolves in the evening which leave not the bones till the
morrow. And for subtlety and craft to hurt, they are termed foxes, Luke
13.32. tell Herod that fox. In regard of the latter, namely their poison and
venom, Christ calls them serpents, and generations of vipers, their tongues
are like stings, sharpened against good men, and the poison of adders, and
aspes is under their lips, Psalm. 140.3. hence does the Lord threaten most
cruel and inevitable enemies under such speeches, as Ier. 8.17. I will send
serpents and cockatrices among you, which shall not be charmed, but they shall
sting you. Whereby he would describe and signify the implacable and virulent
malice and rage of the Chaldeans. Now man being above all other borne a
sociable creature, and to live in society with God and men in the family,
Church, and commonwealth, has by his hostility against God, and enmity
against man, after a sort put off the nature of man, and by such degenerating,
of good right has lost even the name of man also.

Doctr. Whence we learn, that such as are not led by reason renewed, Many
men so degenerated as that they have cut themselves from the account of men.
nor by judgment rightly informed by the word of God* but follow their own
hearts lusts for their guide, have cut themselves from the account of men, and
as worthily lost the name as the nature of men: for they are become beasts in
understanding, beasts in sensuality, beasts in brutish practices, beasts in
Gods account, beasts in the reputation but of reasonable and heathenish men.
The very light of nature adiudgeth them unworthy the name of men, being
rather like the pictures or images of wood or stone outwardly resembling
things, but inwardly wanting which above all could make them the things they
repre^^nt. And hence proceeded those poetries of metamorphoses, not that either
beasts or birds, or trees were changed into men, or men into these, but in that
the eye of nature in these men perceived, that men more and more degenerated
from themselves, and became daily nearer the beasts in properties, qualities,
and practices, although they retained still the shape and place of men. Like
Nebuchadnezzar, who was not changed into the shape of a beast (as some have
thought) although God could have done that; ^odin.
but his understanding together with his kingdom was taken from him, and he
driven from men, ate grass, as the beasts did, till his understanding (he
says not his shape) was restored him. Hence have some other of the heathens
lighted a candle at noone day, and run into markets, and throngs of men to
seek a man: as though it were a rare thing even in a number of men, to find
one deserving the name of a man: whereby doubtless the Lord would cast the
dongue of the Gentiles in their own faces, and that by themselves, as here he
did by Epimenides.

Use. Seeing the light of nature and grace conspire in the illustrating of this
truth, we must be more ready to embrace it, and make our best use of it, as
the truth not of a vain man, but of the true God. Who among us would not be
moved, and disdain to be called by any man a beast, an ass, an owl, a dog,
etc. and yet have we occasioned the Lord thus to repute and account of us, and
are not moved: for how few of us can show our selves men? what a number of men
and Christians in profession, hearing the word, and receiving the Sacraments,
are as the horse and mule without understanding? that is, not only ignorant,
but incorrigible persons, neither spur nor bridle avails them to
amendment. Such as the Prophet complains of, whom when the Lord had sundry
ways called them to amendment, he hearkened and heard, but no man said, Ier.
8.4.6.
what have I done? every one turned to the race as the horse to the battle:
yea as horses that have cast their rider, men kick and spurn against the
Lord, and his gracious admonitions, as Pharaoh, who is the Lord? and other
whilst the Lords sharp bit is in their mouths, they bite it in with much
coffeehouse, but as unruly afterward as ever before. How many deaf adders
are every where, which refuse to hear the voice of the charmer? some saying
in their hearts, some with their mouths, as the hardened Jews to Jeremy, The
word of the Lord in thy mouth we will not hear. What a number of swine are
abroad, rooting up, and treading under feet holy things, contemning the word,
Sacraments, ministry, discipline; wallowing in their filthy lusts of
uncleanness, drunkenness, fornication, pride, riot, earthlines, every one
according to his own appetite? and not a few hypocrites, who not sincerely
undertaking the profession of the truth, return to their own wont, as a swine
after washing to the wallowing. What a number of dogs without conscience, and
shame commit all manner of filthiness, even in the day light; and yet
incessantly barking and bawling with Shemei, against good men, and good things?
let a man be a stranger to them and their courses, let him be never so honest a
man, the dog has sufficient cause not to spare him: and let any thing never
so good be propounded or do^, if not so generally received or unusual, there
is no stilling of the dogs against it. Who can tell the number of cruel and
unmerciful lions? greedy gripes? covetous cormorants, woluish extortioners,
subtle oppressors, who as foxes, live by crafty conveiances, and whatsoever
other noisome beast and unclean that lives by the pray? to which add those
serpentine whisperers, tale-bearers, busybodies, the vermin and venom of
societies, against whom no caution can be sufficient; the number of all which
kinds of cattle so amounts, as that the world at a blush may seem rather to
be made for beasts then men.

Now if we would avoid this sharp censure which our nature so abhors, let
us judge our selves in the premises, and find out that brutish behavior in
our selves, whereby we have forfeited even the names of men; for to this
purpose are we so sharply dealt withal in the Scriptures that we should be
brought to be ashamed and blush at our behauiours. We have a common saying when
we see our selves ouerseene, or overtaken in any temporal and outward thing;
Oh what a beast was I? but well were it if we would seriously thus accuse our
selves when we have failed in our godly course; and to say, Oh what a beast was
I to leave the direction of the word, and suffer my self to be led by my
appetite, or by the lust of my heart, or the sight of mine eyes to this or that
sin? alas that I to to whom God has given reason, judgment, election,
deliberation, yea his word and spirit, should live all this while as one
destitute of all these. I understand not what the good and acceptable will of
God is, but am yet like the horse and mule without understanding: I have
stopped my ears at the word like the deaf adder, and have refused the things
of my peace: I have barked against God and godliness: I have wallowed in my
uncleanness like a swine in his own filth: I have been unmerciful, and
cruel, as any lion or wolf: I have spared no pray, and as subtle as any fox
to deceive my brethen: I have spit out my venom both to the face, and behind
the backs of my neighbors, and especially against the household of faith, the
professors of religion; Oh what a beast was I in all this? But now seeing my
understanding is restored unto me again, I will never hereafter carry my
self but like a man, not making my lusts, my law any longer, but reason shall
be my guide; nay, nor that only, but like a Christian man, I will by Gods
grace suffer my self to be guided hence forth by renewed reason, yea, by the
word and spirit of God. If I must needs in any thing resemble the beasts, it
shall be the ox and ass in knowing my Lord and Master: the storke and crane
and swallowe in acknowledging the seasonable time of my repentance, the serpent
in Christian wisdom, the lamb and dove in Christian meekenes and innocence:
and thus resembling them, I neither shall be nor accounted a beast, nor yet be
condemned by any of them. But if any loath to leave his brutish properties will
be a beast still and follow his l^st, it is fit he should see the end of his
way in one of his predecessors, Prou. 7.22. He goes on as an ox to the
slaughter. Many such think and pretend they go to heaven: but deceive not thy
self, no unclean thing enters within the gates of that holy city: thou
shall stand with thy fellows without, Reu. 22.15. Without shall be dogs, and
enchanters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, or whosoever
loves or makes lies: and one day shall by experience teach thee, Rev. 21.27.
that the bread of children belongs not unto dogs.

Slow bellies.] In these words this people of Creta are by their Poet accused
of habitual idleness, and intemperance: who howsoever to the duties either of
the first or second table, they were as heavy, and slow as any snaile; yet in
the feeding of themselves, and following Epicurus his trade so diligent, and
instant they were, as every man seemed rather to be a belly then a man:
Synechd* partis.
and therefore does the Poet by an usual figure of speech thus express them.
And as this whole hexameter, so much more was this part of it more frequent
among the heathen, who were wont prouerbially to call such persons bellies, as
they saw addicted to idleness, gormandizing, and intemperance. (...) Hesiod.
Zenoph.


Doct. A life led in idleness, and delicacie is condemned both by the light of
nature and of the Scriptures. Idleness condemned.
Of the former there is good reason, seeing it is against that order of nature
which God set in all his creatures at the first, Order of nature.
every one of which are s^ill vnweariably employed according 1. ordo partisi.
2. symmetria. 3. functio.
2. A proportion of them, or a symmetry, for the eye may not be bigger then the
head. 3. A function of each of them, for every one of them must have some
distinct office which it must diligently attend unto. 2. And if we look unto
the Lords institutions with man, we shall see that this idle Gods institution
before the fall.
and from that innocent estate, to the preservation of which all the creatures
offered up themselves to save man's pains: and yet even then must Adam dress
the garden: then when he was a more absolute Lord over all the earth, then any
man ever since was or is over any part of it, yet might be not live (as many of
our gentry) out of a vocation, and calling, but must abide in that vocation
whereto he was called. And even in paradise seeing the Lord instituted no more
Saboaths then one in seven days, what would he else declare then that
innocent Adam was no less bound, then now we are to employ the most part of
the week about the things of his calling, still in the midst of them
remembering to show forth the love is man borne to travel as the smoke to fly
upward? Job 5.7.
for seeing that by the curse of sin the creatures have denied their former
serviceablenesse, Much more since the fall.
but upon condition of great industry, and travel: Gods ordinance, and
commandment is, that now in the sweat of our faces, we should eat our own
bread, providing for our selves and ours; which is (besides the pleasing of God
who delights that man should make his calling a part of Christian obedience)
a sweet fruit of our pains, carrying us more comfortably thorough Most of al
christian profession.
and ordinance of God more forceably fastened upon those that profess
themselves Christians; every one of whom must be so far from that inordinate
walking, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
as that he must withdraw himself from such. And if any man, be he never such
a professor of Christ, will not work, 10.
he ought not to eat: let him starve, his blood be upon his own head. For
such as these in the profession, especially whose pride, whose ease, whose
tooth, whose play bring in ar^eareges upon them unawares, are the spots and
blots of religion.

Reasons to move to diligence in our callings.
Now therefore that such as profess the Lord Jesus may the better be contained
in this order of God, both for the discharge of their own duty, and the good
example of others, these reasons are to be considered. Idle persons pouerties
prisoners.
in the house, in the field, in our stock and in our store, whereas poverty
arresteth the idle person: Prove. 28. the idle shall be filled with poverty.
And all this is to encourage us to faithfulness, and diligence in the duties of
our callings. See Joshua* 1.8. 2. Whereas all other creatures A proper embleame
of such a person as is here mentioned.
And therefore although some other creatures be all a belly, as the crabfish
who walks with her teeth, yet a Christian man must be a hand to one, an eye
to another, a foot to another, a shoulder to support another, he must not only
consist of belly and teeth. Ask thy self then, what good does my life, to
Church, to Commonwealth, to family, to men? and if thy conscience answer, truly
little or none; then may thou conclude, surely I am rather a belly then a
man. But many such bellies want ears. 3. An honest calling is a An honest
calling a school of Christianity 3. reason^.
that 1. look as little children are sent to school to keep them out of
hurts, and unhappy turns; so diligence in the calling fenceth us from taking
harms by Satan's temptations, we lie not so open unto his assalts: again it is
a bridle to restrain our own lewd desires, abating wicked lusts, abandoning
lewd company, and fitting us for the Lords appearing whose service we are in.
2. In this school of Habet animam pro sale.
his soul is but as salt to keep his body from stinking above gound. And
think we they shall live when they are dead, who are dead while they live? no
surely, but seeing they did not subject themselves to the law of all mankind,
Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou get thy bread: they shall never
escape that other sentence; take the unprofitable servant, bind him hand and
foot: his hands and feet were bound when I called him to walk and work, now
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into hell.

Now for the latter of these vices reprehended in the latter word; it is worth
marking to observe how aptly the Poet joins them together (which seldom are
disioyned) because the one of these is the gound of the other. Idleness and
intemperance are seldom disioyned.
And as it is true in all sins which we say of evils, that one comes not
alone, for they are accompained still with their supporters; so these two
sins are of such special acqaintance, that as we say of a pair of turtles,
look where one is, the other lightly is within less then, a coytes cast: so
where the one of these is, it will not be hard to descry the other. If there be
idleness, there will be intemperance; and if intemperance, there must needs be
idleness. And therefore our Savior has combined them as near as the cause and
effect, which cannot be sundred; Luke 21.34. Take heed least your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting, drunkenness, and so that day come on you unawares:
implying that intemperance oppresses, and makes the heart dull and heavy;
and when the heart is so aggraued, the whole man is unfit either for heavenly
or earthly exercise. In like manner the combination of Sodoms sins shows
the same truth. Ezech. 16.49. Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness. And therefore seeing a man can never sufficiently persuade diligence
in the calling, till this intemperance be dissuaded: it shall not be amiss in
few words to speak of this sin, and persuade the contrary virtue,
Intemperance what.
for the preservation of it. And because this kind of intemperance is
restrained to the belly, I describe it to be an inordinate appetite, or
immoderate desire, and use of meat and drink: and this is, when a due mean
is exceeded, either in the costly, and excessive preparation of them for our
selves or others; or in the two liberal, and excessive use of them so
prepared: a vice which is a special enemy to all good duties toward God or
man; making men unfit to the word of God either to read or hear it, unfit to
pray, to meditate, to remember the works of God with praise and thanksgiving:
so as a man given up to this sin, is sunk down in Atheism, nay in
Idolatry, having no other God then his belly, a more base idolatry of many
Christians, then ever was any of the Heathen, who would worship the sun,
moon, stars, and glistring metals, but to have worshipped the belly and
draught, they would have abhorred. And for the duties of the particular
calling, they must lie lea, the bones of such full bodies had rather be at
rest; or to keep them from sleep must rise up to play, but altogether unwieldy
to any more serious business. And thus by this sin men make themselves in
stead of Gods Temples, Satan's kitchins; filling their bodies with noisome
lusts, and deadly deseases; their souls with a number of dangerous sins, 1.
Cor. 6.10.
which shut them out of heaven: framing their lives liker to the bruit beasts
then reasonable men, and in their deaths for most part no less brutish then in
their lives.

Now for the better avoiding of this sin, I will propound some reasons, and
after them some rules of direction. The reasons are three, Reasons against
intemperance.
1. The Lord is liberal, but not prodigal of his creatures: and they are his,
and not ours, but by his leave: neither does he ever give leave to use them in
the night, Romans 13.13.
whereas we profess our selves to be of the day, and is a weed or rather an
old ragge which must be put off, before Christ can be put on. 3. The time
calls us rather

Now the rules of direction, Rules of direction against intemperance.
are 1. to moderate excess in preparation for our selves and others to know,
that not abundance but sobriety is the ornament of a table: a rule which
seems to be dead with our Whether ye eat or the glory of God must be our
white to aim at in all the actions of our life: of which none is so small, out
of which the Lord challenges not his own glory: and therefore as we live not
to our selves but unto him, so we must not eat to our selves but unto him; and
this we do, when by our eating and drinking, we fit our selves for his service
and our own duties, namely by keeping the body under, and daily subduing it,
rather then by pampering and feeding it up. 3. To contain thy self in
compass in both, labor which the Son of man shall give; for the more thou
hungrest after Christ, the less do thou after these things: Romans 13.14. Put
on Christ, and take no care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; Christ is the
treasure unto which the Christian heart must be lifted; he is the carkase unto
which our thoughts ought to fly; he is meat indeed, drink indeed, bread of
life, water of life; blessed is that soul that hungreth and thirsts after
him, for it shall be satisfied; yea blessed is that hunger and thirst which is
never but accompanied with a continual feast.

verse. 13.
This testimonis is true:] The Apostle sets his hand and seal to this
evidence of the Poet, not thereby allowing the whole fabulous poem whence he
fetches it, Every truth being Gods, must be received whosoever be the
instrument.
but according to his drift, which is the just reproof of this people, he
only approoueth this particular report.

Whence, 1. note that every truth being primarily from God, it must be
received whosoever be the instrument and teacher of it: for the Apostle
disdaineth not to borrow a part of the truth from this graceless and heathen
man. Nay, there is not the basest of Gods creatures, into whose school we
cannot sometimes profitably enter: for else would not the Lord have sent us to
the ox, the ass, the emmet, and much more can he who opened the mouth of
Balaams ass to reprove the madness of his master, teach by weak and feeble,
base and simple men, yea if he please by gentile and heathen men.

Use. This taxes the pride of many, who think themselves too good to learn
of such whom they conceive meaner or inferior to themselves: such a pride
possessed the Pharisees; Ioh. ^ 34.
thou art altogether borne in sin, and do thou teach us? But if they
considered the ways of God, they might see him stirring up most base and
simple men to teach the doctor, the Scribe, and the wise men of the world, that
he may ashame them, and teach them to depresse their high thoughts: 1. Cor.
1.26. Bretrhen you see your calling, not many wise -- but God has chosen the
weak of the world, 1. to confound mighty things: 2. that no flesh should
rejoice, v. 29. Let this provoke our diligence to know not so much by whom, as
what the Lord teaches, attending unto the counsel of God, and not the
condition of man whom he uses; let him speak by never such abject persons if
they bring the truth, 1. Cor. 3.18.
it is our part to become fools that we may be wise: and then are we such
fools, when we depart with all opinion of our own wisdom, that we may be
wise in God, what means so ever he pleases to use: the Gospel teaches us
that poor women and creeples could tell often tidings of Christ, when all the
great clerks knew not of him.

2. This reprehendeth the waywardness of many, who not fancying the persons of
their teachers, refuse their doctrine though never so true and profitable.
Would men deal thus in civil things? If fire should take a town in the
night, and the watchmen being all fallen asleep, a stranger, nay a man's
enemy should give him warning that his house were on fire, were it safe for a
man to rush at it, because his enemy tells him so? No, neither would any be
so unwise: and if the truth in an heathen Poets mouth, be so entertained by the
Apostle himself; much more every divine truth in the mouth of the meanest
Minister of the Gospel. Let the vessel be never so earthen, the treasure is
heavenly; let the food be nourishable, hungry Elias stands not upon it,
whether an Angel or a raven serve it.

Secondly note, that this testimony being true, Titus might have been
discouraged, and occasioned hereby to have meditated of his departure from them
as an hopeles people; or to have repined that the Apostle should place him
among such a company of beasts, rather then men. Ministers must not be
discouraged from their duty, though they be to deal with a brutish and
wretched people.
But yet Titus must, and does with courage go on in his work among them, and
plowe up to the Lord, even this stiff ground. It is the lot of many gracious
Ministers to be called and planted among rude, barbarous, and beastly people,
such as these Cretians were, yea among viperous broods, who will reward their
faithful pains and travel, in begetting them to God, with extremity of
wrong and violence, Ier. 26.8. and little comfort find they, unless the Lord
give them a breathing time by the means of some Ahikam or other, v. 24. Now
what must the Minister do in this case? Surely, as he came not of his own
head, so now is he not at his own hand to remove himself at his pleasure.
And if he should depart upon this ground, he should perphaps meet with less
comfort in leaving an uncomfortable people, then in staying amongst the^. If
God bid Jonas arise, and go to Nineveh; but he will betake himself to a
ministry of more credit, and less labor; the Lord will teach him before he
get to Tarshish, that he is not his own man, and that no creature shall
shelter him from trouble, whilst he flies it as fast as he can. If Moses be
called to speak to Pharaoh, he must not excuse the matter, saying, But they
will not believe me. The Lord is said to hold the Ministers in his hand, Exodus
4.1.
and Christ the seven stars in his right hand, Reu. 1. First, in regard of
his disposition of them here and there at his pleasure. Secondly, of his
protection of them in their labors. And some he sends, and all the
heartening they have of him before hand is, But they will not receive thee, as
Moses, and some of the Prophets: and that is not all, but they must prepare
brows of brass; their shoulders to bear reproaches and wrongs, their backs
for stripes, their feet for ^etters and stocks, yea, their necks for the
very block it self. In like manner Christ sending out his disciples, he
forbidds them to possess gold and silver; and wishes them to possess
patience, for they should stand more need of that then the other; and tells
them that if himself the green tree could not be spared, much less should
they the dry branches: and that if the Lord and Master be called Beelzebub, the
servant must not look to be above his Master, and escape scotfree. And
therefore Ministers called to such an uncomfortable condition, must imitate the
Apostle Paul, who although he knew that bands and imprisonment did abide him
in every city, yet forward he must, and provoke his own readiness and
chearefulnes not only to be bound, but to suffer also the pains of death, for
the testimony Legati a latere
must make account to be hated of all men for his names yet their work is with
the Lord. 3. That the Lord Jesus foretelling his death at Jerusalem, yet went
foreward, and would not pity himself for all Peter's friendly counsel, but
pitied his flock, his body, his Church, more then himself: a worthy
example for the practice of all his minsters. All which reprehendeth all those
wandering Levites, who like so many planets, or wandering stars, are ever
shifting their places, and charges, and selling off their people upon the least
greiuances; but not without pretense and plea of sundry inconveniences,
sometimes of air and habitation, sometimes of ill neighborhood, sometimes the
rudenes and churlishnes, sometimes the incapablenes, and unprofitableness of
their people: but in all this, the sentence of the Apostle passes righteously
against them, unto which their own consciences cannot but subscribe, that they
seek themselves, their belly, their ease, their profits, but not the things
of the Lord Jesus, nor the winning of the souls of men to God.

3. Is this testimony true? How then are such a people as this privileged and
honored, to be among the first to whom the Gospel was offered? noting the
wonderful grace and free goodness of God, not looking at desert, merit, goodness
of nature, inclination of will, or any other forerunning prerogative: and is
not his grace as free unto us as them? did he find us any whit better then
them? were not we beasts in understanding, sensuality, and course of our
natural lives, before he called and washed us? truly might be said of us,
that our father was an Amorite, our mother an Hittite, our selves in our blood,
the frame of our hea^ts evil continually, the course of our lives a walking in
vanity, and no eye pitying us, neither of our selves, or others, until the
Lord covered us with his skirts. And hence are we supplied with a ground of
thankefulnes: that being by nature the children of wrath as well as others,
and every way by practice of ungodliness, as vile as this people of Creta, we
should yet be admitted to the participation of so great salvation, as is
offered in the Gospel.

Wherefore reprove them sharply,] Now from the former testimony affirmed to
be nothing but the truth it self, the Apostle infers that Titus not only
might safely* but ought also to reprove and check the inhabitants of this
Island, which reproof is enlarged, 1. by the adiunct or quality, sharply, or
as the word signifies to the quick, for it is a metaphor taken from Surgeons,
who cut and launch, and sear to the quick, if the quality of the wound or
sore so require, yea, and sometimes in desperate cases to cut off a dangerous
limb, or putrified member, which otherwise would perish the whole body: and
no otherwise ought every spiritual Physician to deal with the festered
soars of the souls of men.

2. By the end of this reproof, that they may be sound in the faith. Faith
signifies, 1. that whereby we believe, namely the virtue or gift of faith. 2.
That which we do believe, namely, the doctrine of faith, that is, the doctrine
of the Gospel, Gal. 1.22. Paul destroyed the faith, that is, the doctrine of
faith, which he now preaches. And thus is it here meant, because it is opposed
to the Jewish fables, and commandments of men, in the next verse: and then the
Apostle (following the former metaphor) wishes the Ministers who are the
Surgeons of souls, in all their launcing and cutting, to aim at the cure,
that is, the conversion of their patients, that is, their people; that being
freed from their corrupt diseases, that is their errors, whether in judgment
or practice, they may be brought to sound health, that is soundness of faith
and sincere doctrine, cleaving only unto God, and relying themselves only upon
the merit of the Lord Jesus for life and salvation. And yet in this exposition
I include also the virtue and gift of faith, so far as without it there can
be no sound Christians, but I admit it not to be the thing properly meant as
some do.

Doctr. In the word wherefore note, that when the truth of a fact or sin
committed is certainly known, No reproof may be vngrou^ded, but the cause
must be just and known so to be.
a man thereunto called may boldly reprove; this is the reason why the Apostle
subscribeth to the testimony, that Titus might have sufficient ground of
sharp reproof. As though he had said, it is true, the people with whom thou
art to deal are such and such* and therefore thou may sharply reprove
them. And it is not every evidence which is a sufficient ground, no not for
private reproof, and much less for public: but as our Apostle, 1. Cor. 5.1.
It is certainly heard that there is fornication among you; and so descends to
a sharp reproof: at the least there must be some credible information, such
as the same Apostle to the same Church of Corinth mentions; who upon the
report of the house of Cloe, 1. Cor. 1.11.
sharply reprooueth them for their contentions: for to that end he names his
author, that they might not think, he would upon suspicion; or surmise of his
own, neither upon suspected information from other, charge them so deeply:
but from intelligence of those, against whom they could not well except. Paul
stayed the reprehension of Peter, till he saw that he went not the right way,
and that he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11.14. Zeal running before knowledge, is
every where a reproach, but here (besides that it marreth such a necessary
duty, and hardens the person unjustly reproved against a just reproof for
time to come) it carries many blots with it.

Reasons.
For 1. it argues him to be a busy body, who (especially if a private is to
believe every thing; and of a slanderer to discover secrets, Prove. 10.19.

Quest. But what if I hear a report of my neighbor, and I have a vehement
suspicion, and some presumptions that it is true, may I not upon those
reprove? Ans. In this case observe two rules. The former in Deuteronomy. 13.14. Thou
shall rather seek and make search, and inquire diligently, and if it be true,
and the thing certain, then thou may safely reprove. 2. If thou can not
be certain, then reprove not but upon supposition; thou can not here say
directly, as Nathan to David, thou art the man. For such a plain reproof
implies the certain knowledge of a sin, which we must not suffer upon our
brother, Leuit. 19.17.

Sharply,] It will hear be demanded, what is this sharp reproof here
mentioned? Ans. To know it the better, we may consider it either in the person
of every Pastor, or that which is in the several Churches. The former
belonging to every Pastor, stands 1. in the enlargement of sin known to be
committed, that it may appear unmasked, and in it own face, that thus it may
appear more ougly and odious both to the understanding, and judgment of the
sinner. 2. In following it with the curse of the law, denouncing out of the
word those plagues of God, which shall surely overtake such a party, if he
fail of unfeigned and seasonable repentance: that thus there may follow a
renting of the heart, a breaking up of the fallow ground, and (seeing one
measure of sorrow fitteth not all sins) such a measure of sorrow in the soul
of the sinner as the degree of the sin deserves. The latter kind of sharp
reproof, is that whereby the Church seeks to recall offenders. Neither is
this that of the civil sword, but is spiritual, and respects the soul
alone: and stands in three things. 1. Admonition with denuntiation of
judgments. 2. In suspension from the Lords table. 3. In excommunication,
whereby the obstinate offender is given up to Satan for the humbling of the
flesh, and saving of the spirit as by a desperate remedy. The error will not
be great, to understand either of these in the precept: but if either more then
other, I incline rather to the former; namely that Titus is here directed how
to carry himself toward these vain people through the course of his doctrine,
rather then in exercising the censures of the Church; whereunto both the words
before, and the verse following seems to incline.

Doct. According to the nature of sins, and sinners, we must set an edge upon
our reproves, and sharpen them: Every reproof must be tempered to the nature
of the sin. Jude 22.
for all sins are not of one size, nor all sinners of one strain: but some
sins are more enormious then other; and some sinners are more obstinate then
other. Some sins are of ignorance, some of malice; some secret, some open;
some sinners are as wax to work on, some are stony and stifnecked; some have
here and there their freckles and frailties on them, others are spotted all
over like the leopards, or like the Ethiopian, they never change their hew, no
washing does them good. Now we must wisely put a differnce between both.
Compassion must be showed upon some, and others whom love cannot allure, fear
must force: some must be saved by love, and some be pulled out of the fire:
some sores need but a gentle lenitiue, some a sharper drawer: Jude 22.
some require but the prick of a needle to open them, others a more painful
lancing, and cutting; and some a cutting off. Object. 2. Tim. 4.2. Reprove
with all long suffering, how can that stand with this precept of sharp
reproof? Ans. Some which commit these two places together, would reconcile
them again by considering the persons to whom the Apostle writ them: the one
Timothy, who they say was severe, and austere, and therefore is exhorted to
patience and meeknes: the other Titus, who was gentle and meek of nature, and
therefore spurred unto sharpnes, and severity. But the context applies it
self fitlier to their answer, who draw the difference from the people over
whom they were set. The Cretians were hard and re^ractarie, full of bad
qualities as here we see: the Ephesians among whom Timothy was sent, were of
some better temper, and disposition: and therefore were more mildly to be dealt
withal. Besides more mildnes was to be used with such as yet had not believed,
then those who having professed the faith in word, and yet departed from it
again: as the Galatians, Gal. 3.1.
and these Cretians with whom Paul was so sharp: and this difference also some
of the ancient put between these two peoples of Ephesus, Theodoret.
and Candy. But howsoever, the places are easily accorded: for even to the
worst much patience, and lenity must be used, till it be despised, and till it
be clear that no meeknes will serve to win men: but then it is high time
that severity should terrify those, who by lenity would not be allured:
according to the example of God himself, Romans 2.4.

Reprove not rashly but with wisdom and spirit of discerning. Gal. 4. 1. Cor.
4.
Use. 1. As all Christian duties, so this much more ought to be ordered by
Christian wisdom, and therefore Ministers especially must labor for the gift
of discerning, to judge aright of persons and sins. Of persons, which are of
Hagars seed, and which are free borne of Sarah: which men need the rod, and
which the spirit of meekness: Of sins, which be greater, for which the
wounds may be the deeper; which be larger, for which the sorrow may be
enlarged: and in a word, which are hard knots which need hard wedges.

Add to wisdom zeal and conscience. Psalm. 50.21.
2. With wisdom and love every Minister must join zeal and conscience, yea
in some case vehemency and severity in their reproves, dealing as the Lord
himself does often, in setting the sins of men in order before them. If he
be to deal with Heli^s sons, the sons of Belial, it will not serve the
turn to say, What is it that I hear my sons, do so no more: for this is
rather a saluing and too hasty a skinning over of a rotten sore, the fester of
which quickly breaks out again with more rage and danger: but here he must
put on the zeal of God, yea a just and holy anger gounded upon the love of God
and godliness: wherein he has John Baptist, Matthew. 3.5. and the Son of God
himself going before him, Math. 23. It is thought great wisdom in men so to
carry their doctrine, as no man is offended at it: whereas (howsoever all
meeknes and patience in our own matters is a Christian and commendable virtue
yet) zeal in the matters of God may not be wanting: and were all men Saints,
or sinners but penitent, we might by tenderness and compassion raise them; but
some are in the fire and must be plucked out: many are fools to whose backs
stripes belong: many are festred in their sins, and must have corrasiues and
fretting waters to make them smart at the quick: in which cases if any of our
patients cha^e, and storm, and grow never so impatient, it will be no wisdom
in such as have the ordering of them to let him have his own will, in his
desire to be let alone, but still make incision, search further the depth of
the wound, and send in taints to the bottom: for such loving wounds must go
before applying of salues to sound healing.

3. Let all godly hearers learn to make manifest their patience and obedience,
by suffering themselves to be launched, Be willing and patient in being i^stly
reproved.
and pricked even to their hearts, by those whom God has sent as his surgions
to cure men's souls otherwise by sin wounded to death: as knowing, that the
hurt of the daughter of Gods people is not healed with sweet words: Ier. 6.14.
but as the bitterest pill is fittest to purge, and works kindlier then the
sweetest potion; Words sweetest to the care are not always the wholsom^st to
the heart.
and as the thunder and lightning more purify the air then the calmest
sunnshine: even so gall and wormwood is the portion, which the Lord has
tempered for many to take off the pleasant taste of their sweet sins. As for
us we take no pleasure in your smart or judgment, but that without it you
cannot be cured. You cannot but confess that when sores are ripe and raging,
the next way to cure is launcing: suffer us then a while, and try whether we
are not as ready with the good Samaritan to power oil as wine into your
wounds, Luke 10.34.
so it make to your soundnes. But all will not come unto the supper by
entreatie, some must be compelled, and if we bring a true word, and handle it
truly, it cannot but divide between the marrow and the bone, yea between the
soul and the spirits, and the joints, etc. Heb. 4.12. And can all this be done
and a man feel no smart? nay surely if our Ministry work no smart, it
works no cure.

That they may be sound in the faith,] Doctr. The sharpest rebukes in the
Church ought to aim at this end, The sharpest censure in the Church must aim
at the recovery of offenders to soundnes in faith.
the recovery of diseased Christians to soundnes in religion both in
judgment, and practice. Which appears in that the greatest ordinary censure
in the Church is not mortal, but medicinable. For as a surgeon cuts off arms
and legs that the body and heart may be saved; so in this body, parts and
members are cut off, that themselves may be saved as well as the whole body.
Paul excommunicateth the incestuous person, that his spirit might be saved.
Himineus and Philetus were cast out to Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme. Those whom Jude wishes to be pulled out of the fire by violence,
must be saved thereby. If any object against this, that in 1. Cor. 16.21. If
any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be had in execration to the death: and
therefore edification and salvation is not the end of this censure. I answer,
It is one thing for the Church to excommunicate, another to curse and execrate:
the one is an ordinary censure, the other very extraordinary and rare: the
one against those who may be friends of the Church, the other only against
desperate enemies and open and obstinate Apostates, even such as Julian whom
the Church judges to have sinned the sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore
execrateth and accurseth. So as that place nothing impeacheth the truth of the
doctrine.

Use. 1. Much more ought Ministers in their sharpest rebukes, aim at the
conversion of men: Ministers must not reprove to disgrace men's persons but
men's sins.
what a sharp reproof was that of Peter to Simon Magus, Act. 8.21.25. Thy
money perish with thee, and thou art even in the gall of bitterness: and yet he
adds, repent therefore, and pray unto the Lord, etc. So is it the part of all
Peter's successors to whom the care of the Lords flock is committed, so to
reprove, not as those who would shame men's persons, but disgrace their sins;
neither as insulting over men's evils, nor delighting in their falls, nor
despayring of their rising; but as imitating good Surgions, who whilst they
sear or cut, or cut off, still show compassion, and gently entreat the
patient, ever persuading him that this rough course will make to his health and
soundnes. 2. While Ministers thus dispense Christian severity, Hearers must
not mistake their ministers in their reproves.
in their reproves and denunciation of judgments, the bearers must not
mistake them (as many do) and much less say unto them, as Corah and his
company to Moses and Aaron; yea take too much upon you, or as the Egyptian to
Moses, who made thee a judge? who gave you the keys of heaven, to open and
shut it upon whom you please? when did God make you of his counsel to foretell
my damnation, etc. conceiving that in our menacies and threatening, we quite cut
them off from all hope of mercy, and that we take upon us to shut the door of
grace upon them, and to shorten the arm of the Lord that he cannot save them.
Whereas the truth is, while we thunder out damnation against the sinner (which
very many desperately rush into, while they avoid the mention of it in our
mouths) it is not that we despair of your salvation, or would have you so to
do; nor we do not admonish you to shame you, but you must if you will be
saved by the word we preach, conceive with us, that we desire your soundnes of
faith: and therefore we deal with you, as with sickemen, who commonly will
take nothing to do them good, but what is forced upon them: which if you do
not, we are not in your hearts the Surgeons of your souls, but rather your
executioners. 3. This reprehendeth those whose rebukes tend altogether to
discourage godly courses in their people, A fearful thing to reprove men for
aiming at soundnes in the faith.
and bring them from soundnes in the faith, making heavy the hearts of them to
whom the Lord speaks peace. 2. Those that maliciously thunder their bolte of
excommunication against those that profess Christ sincerely. Thus did the
Jews excommunicate whosoever durst confess Christ; as that blind man, Ioh.
9.34. so the Papists and others deal with such as stand with Jesus Christ; and
especially that great Antichrist the Pope, to testify his malice and rage
against Christ and his truth, strikes with the sentence of excommunication
both Kings and people, whosoever receive not his mark in their hands and
foreheads. But our comfort is, that Christ is not in such counsels, no more
then he was, in that counsel of the Jews when the blind man was cast out,
neither the spirit of Christ presents himself, whatsoever they brag and
babble of his infallible assistance. And again, such as are cast out of, and
by such counsels, if they stand with Christ and for him, he presently takes
them up and meets with them, as he did with the blind man, ver. 35. 3. Such
also as wickedly profane this high and great censure, pronouncing this
fearful sentence either for trifles, seeing the Apostles never used it but
against Apostates, incestuous persons, blasphemers, and great offenders, or
else for malice, policy, money, or any other end then to bring men to soundnes
in the faith.

Doctr. 2. Both Pastor and people must have care and conscience, No Christian
must content himself with spiritual life, unless it be accompanied with health
and soundnes.
that they may become found in the faith, both in judgment, which is here
aimed at especially, as also in practice, of which the precept is given, 1.
Tim. 5.7. These things command, that they may be blameless. Neither of them
must think it enough that in the spiritual life of grace they keep life, and
soul together, except this life be accompained with health and soundnes: for
as in our bodily life we think it not enough that we live, but we prize our
health, and soundnes above all earthly things; skin for skin, and all that a
man has will he give for his life: and yet of an unhealthful, languishing,
and painful life men are so weary, as (with Job) they would seek for death
as for treasures; so much more carefully ought we to prevent and remove such
spiritual diseases and infirmities of our souls, which hold us under, that we
cannot become the lovely plants in the Lords house, even fresh and well liking.
And that we may be better acquainted with the doctrine and our duty, it will
not be unprofitable to note the difference between a spiritual disease,
Difference between spiritual disease, and infirmity.
and a spiritual infirmity. An infirmity is a rellike of sin, subdued in
the believer, but still bewraying it self like the grudging of a vanquished
ague, whereby the child of God is prone to the practice of sin, and is made
heavy, and backward in performing spiritual duties. A disease, is the
ordinary prevailing of some sin or sins against grace. I say not every
prevailing of sin is a disease, for infirmities may sometimes prevail, not
only within the soul, but also without the body, as Noah's drunkenness, Lots
incest, etc. but that which is usually prevailing for some time, and more
frequent makes a sickness and disease in the as in the body not every
distemper, or qualme, or headeach is a disease; but some distempered humor
which has been longer on gathering, more tedious in affecting, and more
dangerous in threating the very life of the patient. Now both these may be in a
regenerate person, neither of them in the wicked: the former, because
regeneration is indeed the root and possibility of all graces, but not the
act of them: the latter, because in the wicked is no grace at all, against
which sin strives and grudgeth, none against which sin can frequently
prevail, for all is corruption, all is rottennes and reigning sin, as it is
not in the weakest of the regenerate.

Use. Let every Christian labor for soundness against both these; the which
being so necessary as whereon the comfort of all Christian life depends, I
will shortly describe, 1. some means whereby the careful Christian may both
come by, and keep this soundnes, and 2. some reasons which shall serve as
spurrs in the flank to provoke to the more careful use of those means.

Means to keep sound from spiritual sicknesses.
The means which I will propound are three. 1. To be careful to get and keep
a good heart: see that the heart be sound, that is, upright and sincere: for
while a man is not heart-sicke, all other infirmities and



good diet, be constant in the word, Sacraments, prayer, keep thy hours of
public and private exercises before the Lord; feed upon the purest food,
even upon wholesome doctrine; not rising out of earth, but delivered from
heaven. 2. By spiritual physic or surgerie, daily beat down thy body,
mortify thy corruptions, subdue thy lusts and swelling affections, by applying
the corrasiues of the law, and curse of it against the sins of thy soul:
and then bind thy self up with the lenitiues of the Gospel; and if thy own
skill fail thee, suffer thy self, if at any time thou be bruised or out of
joint, although it be painful for the time, by Gods skillful Surgeons to be
handled, and set in joint, and so restored to soundnes again.

Now the reasons or motives to the careful use of these means are five; 1.
drawn from every man's necessity, Reasons to use those means.
which is not so little as it is little felt and perceived. The poor woman in
the Gospel tired for 12. Be awake, and strengthen the things which remain, and
are ready to die, for I have not found thy works perfect or sound before God:
for the truth is, such a general consumption of grace possesses the most;
that were the bodies of many so far wasted and spent as their souls are,
from that which has been in them, long could they not look to remain in the
land of the living.

Secondly, it is the soundnes of faith which the Lord is delighted in: for
neuters and no bodies, fish nor flesh, hot nor cold, he cannot digest but
speweth them out of his mouth: half Christians he accounts no Christians:
and therefore be altogether a Christian, or thou art never a whit. What, a
Christian at Church, and a companion at home? a bible in thy hands at Church,
and presently a pair of cards or dice at home? here in the company of
Saints, and there of devils incarnate? here of them that fear an oath, Isa.
66.17.
and there of them that cannot speak one sentence without an oath for the
preface? the Lord notes thee for rotten at the core, and stampeth thee for a
counterfeit, although thou be never so cunningly washed over.





Fifthly, on the contrary what horrors of their fearful apostacy, have 1.
That the day of trial may not be far off, even our day of famine, by
particular judgment, or death. 2. The general judgment cannot be far off,
when only such shall be pronounced blessed, in whose spirits are found no
guile. 3. That he may shrowdly suspect himself to be an hypocrite, who herein
differs from a sound Christian, that the one can be content to be called on,
the other is unsound at the heart, and cannnot endure to be gaged.

Ver. 14. And not taking heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that
turn away from the truth. As the Physician or Surgeon having cured some
disease, or sore at his departure, forewarneth his patient of such meats, and
means, as may bring the same, or worse evils upon them: so deals the
Apostle, who having prescribed a course, by means of which this corrupt and
rude people, should be brought to soundness in the faith, he charge, that
whereas they had been formerly addicted to lies, and fables, which had been
the occasions, and feeders of their unsoundness, and spiritual diseases; yet
now they should no longer attend to such fables and commandments of men, which
otherwise will be as powerful as ever to prevail against them, to the turning
of them away from the truth, the which is now preached among them. 1. the
meaning. 2. the doctrines.

Jewish fables. Although all fables in matter of religion be to be rejected,
yet especially he mentions these of the Jews, because they were most
dangerous of all. 1. Because they directly opposed themselves, as ouerthrowers
of the whole doctrine of the Gospel, and the merit of Christ. 2. They were
persuaded under most strong pretenses, for they came as from Gods own mouth,
and from his own people, from such as were borne under the law; so as they
were urged as things of surest ground, and strongest authority from God
himself, and his greatest Prophet Moses. But what were these fables? Ans.
Jewish fables what.
Under this head may be comprehended all the false glosses, and false
interpretations of the law of Moses, urging the external, and literal, but
not the internal and spiritual meaning of the law: Non legem sed legis
minutias vrgebant.
for which corruption Christ challenges the Jewish teachers, Matthew. 5.6. and
7. chapters. 2. All their fabulous invention in their Talmud, such as that
concerning the coming of the Messiah, and the great feast at his coming: and
of the fruitfulnes of the earth, which at that time shall bring forth in stead
of ears of corn, loves of bread; and a number such, of which Paul says, they
are for number infinite, and for use, unprofitable. 1. Tim. 1.4.
3. But the context in the verse following, points us to expound them of some
other then these: namely, of all those doctrines of the Jews which concerned
the legal, and ceremonial observation of days, meats, drinks, garments,
washings, persons and peoples: for the Jews taught that the same difference
remained to be observed still as Moses from the Lord commanded it: so as yet
some meats were common, and some clean; some days were more holy then
others; so garments and persons much more lay open to legal pollution by
issues, touchings, etc. whereas the appearing of Christ procured final
freedom from all such impuritie, so as according to Peter's vision, Act. 10. no
man, no thing is to be called polluted or unclean. Quest. But why does the
Apostle call such doctrines fables, seeing 1. they were from God, 2.
necessarily imposed upon Gods own people in pain of death and cutting off
from his people in case of contempt, Why so called.
yea or omission: 3. they included in them that evangelical truth whereby both
they and we are saved? (...). for the word is general, and Homer still uses
it in the better sense.
Ans. Yet for all this he terms them so. 1. Because even these legal
institutions of God himself, when they were at the best, were but actual
Apologies, or shadows of things to come; carrying a show, or figure of truth,
but not the body, not the Allegories, (...).
that is, being the things that they were, signified the things Behold a
virgin shall conceive, etc. as a thing which they still expect the
accomplishment of; is it not evident that he leans unto a Jewish lie and
fable? for that which was once absolutely necessary to be believed unto
salvation, is now become so false, as that he that believes it, is sure to be
damned.

(...).
Commandments of men,] These words if they be taken by way of exposition of the
former, add something to the more full answer of the former question, implying
that those ordinances of which we speak, the which while they stood in force,
and till the fulness of time was come, were the commandments of God; now the
truth being revealed, cease so to be, and are become the mere commandments
of men. But yet I take it some difference is to be put between these two,
namely this, that by commandments of men, are more properly meant (not those
which were divine ordinances) but humane constitutions, and traditions thrust
by the Jewish teachers upon the Church, to be observed with like devotion, and
religious respect, as if they were the very commandments of God: such as those
our Savior found and left the Church of the Jews pestered with, and opposes
them to divine ordinances, Matthew. 15.9. In vain they worship me, teaching for
doctrines men's precepts. Which that we may a little better conceive, it is not
amiss to note, that the Jews have, and do affirm that Moses received the
law from God, either by writing, which was of things more obscure, more breife,
and difficult; or else by word of mouth, and that was of things more large,
serving for the interpretation of that law written: and for this latter sake
(say they) was it that he stayed 40. days in the mount Sinai, for else in one
hour he might have received the tables in which the law was written: and
although they themselves were at leisure to number the laws written by Moses,
and gave in the number of the affirmative to be 248. so many as there are
members in a man's body, and the negative 365. so many as there be days in a
year, to betoken that the Lord requires the through observation of them with
all the strength, and that all their days: which numbers added together were
burdens sufficient for many even to read over; yet laid they innumerable, and
more intolerable traditionarie precepts on the people, which they say Moses
received by word of mouth from God, and left them to Ioshuah: who delivered
them to the seauentie elders, they to the former Prophets, these to the latter,
from them to the great Synagogue, from whom they were preserved to the wise men
returning from the Babylonish captivity, and so from generation, to generation
even to this day: to write these explications, say they, is forbidden by God,
abusing that text, Prou. 4.21. but they are kept in the heart of some wise men
at this day. Of these the Apostle would have the Cretians to beware, and give
no more heed to them then to the former.

Which turn away from the truth.] By truth is meant truth divine fetched out
of the word of God, so called, 1. because it is absolute without error. 2. it
is most eminent: called before truth according to godliness* to be turned from
which, is to be turned from all godliness. In the word Turn away, is a
metaphor, the speech being borrowed from those, who turn away their bodies
from the things they dislike; and here translated to the mind, to signify an
inward loathing and dislike of the truth, which is the dangerous effect (...)
attending to fables and commandments of men.

A special means of soundnes in faith, is to shut our ears against fables and
fancies of men.
Doctr. 1. Whosoever would keep themselves sound in the faith and not be
turned from the truth, must shut their ears, and give no hee^ to fables, and
fancies of men, which have not footing and warrant in the pure word of God. 1.
Because these are things which hurt and corrup^ Avoid profane and vain
bablings -- which while some profess, they have erred concerning the faith.
Again, they encreas^ ungodliness, 2. Tim. 2.16. and more plainly, 2. Tim.
4.4. men given unto fables, turn their ears from the truth. The Physicians
reduce all the causes of health or disease, soundnes or sickness, from the good
or evil temperature of either the matter of which we subsist, or the
nourishment whereby we are preserved. Now the word of God is both the immortal
seed whereof we are begotten to God; and that food, which daily preseruet^ us
that we perish not, 1. Pet. 1.23. and 2.2. if it be purely and incorruptly
preached, all the sound members of the Church, by the power of the spirit
turning it into good blood and nourishment, are sound and strong: but if it be
adulterated and corrupted with man's devises: if it be blended, poisoned, or
leauened, hence are all sorts of spiritual diseases engendered and fed, which
ouergrowe the souls of men so, as they are of the commandment is love, that
is, both toward God for himself, and man for God: but this love must not be
unsound, not in word and tongue only, James.
but in deed and in truth, from a pure, that is, a sincere heart, a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. But how is this soundnes o^ grace wrought in
the heart? the verse going before tells us, that fables and vanities of men
are so far from this work; that fire is not more contrary to water, then
those be to godly edifying; the which plausible witty conceits while men
desire, they are soon turned, says Paul, to vain iangling. And Satan has
made use of this truth, to the overthrow of many souls, whose ancient practice
ever was to pester the Church with infinite toys, and tales, fancies and
fables, that men's senses might be taken up therein, least they should by the
searching of the truth, get out of 2 Thessalonians. 2.1^.
he gives them over to strong delusions, to believe lies: and to this end
according to their own hearts lusts, he sends them an heap of teachers, to
turn them away from the truth, 2. Tim. 4.4. And what can be more just? seeing
the Lord has enjoined us to captiuate all our senses unto the simplicity of
his word; but we will untie them to raunge after strange glosses, comments, and
words of no profit: he has separated the wheat from the chafe, but we will
mingle them; he has delivered a perfect rule of faith, and life; but we by
seeking out other rules from men, argue it of imperfection; he has offered us
the pure rivers and streams to drink at, but we will dig puddles to our
selves, or drink out of the cisternes of strangers: shall not men now
despising so great grace, neglecting so great salvation, offering such open
injury to the Lord and his ordinances, as justly as dearly buy their own
woe, and be given over to delusion?

Use. 1. Ministers must so teach, as they may be able to profess with the
Apostle, 2. Pet. 1.16. We have not followed deceivable fables, but the power
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: that is, concerning the exhibiting of the
Messiah, the accomplishment of promises, the abolishment of shadows, and his
mighty power in word and action, in his resurrection and ascension; these are
the things which we have opened unto you, not wearying you or our selves in
ungrounded fables, uncertain doctrines, or deceiving you with any show of
words, nor any thing whereof we were not occulate witnesses. Col. 2.23.
Other things have a show of wisdom, but if the word of the Lord be
forsaken, what truth of wisdom can be in them? Ier. 8.9. other things may
seem to bring glory, but the true glory of Gods messenger is that of the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 1.12. namely, in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in
fleshly wisdom he conuerseth in the world.

2. Hearers must beware least any spoil them, Col. 2.8.
or carry them away thorough Philosophy: the speech is taken from thieves,
who come secretly to carry away sheep out of the fold, to whom the Apostle
compares vain teachers, for they are no better; to whom if thou would not
be a pray, keep from their snares, men's wisdom will here betray thee, curb
the vanity of thine own heart in which thou art borne: else will it make thee
drink in vanity as the fish does water: be diligent in learning and keeping
such doctrine as concerns life everlasting: hear him willingly that tells
thee of Christ, of his doctrine, of his actions, of his suffering, this shall
feed thee to salvation: as for doctrines of quaint devises, Several doctrins
which as so many bad humors spread and feed spiritual diseases.
and conceits of humane wisdom, turn away thine care from them; 1. Of Turks.
else will they breed to more ungodliness.

3. The several doctrines of Turks, Jews, Papists, are so many bad humors,
feeding so many diseases, among whom if there be any faith at all, yet can
there be no soundnes in the faith, because all of them are patched together of
fables: to pass over the former as too blasphemous to be once named among
Christians, the very name of their Alcaron is suffitiently detestable. The
Jewish fables whereof their Talmud is full we have seen in part, 2. Of Jews.
besides that their Cabala is full of humane devises; but even in the things
which primarily were the Lords own institutions, they are become the embracers
of fables. If now they urge (as they do) distinctions of persons: he is a Jew,
not who is one outward or in the letter, but he that is one within. If
circumcision a note of that distinction; Romans 2.29.
now that is circumcision which is not in the flesh, but in the heart. If
distinction of days; seeing Christ our Passover is sacrificed, we must not
keep feasts with old leaven, neither with the leavened bread of maliciousness,
1. Cor. 5.^.
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity, and truth. If distinction of
meats; that which goes into the belly defiles not a man; and whatsoever is
sold in the shambles we may eat, asking no question for conscience sake. 3. Of
Papists.
For the Popish fables we need go no further then there lives, and legends, of
many of which delusions they are now ashamed. But if we add their Canons,
constitutions, decrees, and humane traditions (urged as things necessary
binding the conscience) concerning days, meats, garments, orders, and such
voluntary worship: we might easily see their whole religion placed in such
outward observations; neglecting, and deprauing whatsoever is of substance, to
the true and spiritual worship of God; as though Christian religion stood in
things corruptible, or in things indifferent, or bodily exercise: and not
rather in things spiritual, necessary, and premanent. Has the holy Ghost
said in the Scripture that the kingdom of God is not meat, and drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost? and that meat and cloth are
for the belly and back, and perish with the use, for God shall destroy both?
Let the blinded Papist keep his coard and cowle at his back, cloth himself
with sackcloath all his life, fast forty days if he can, or rather never eat
meat, never touch money, never marry wife, he shall never find the kingdom of
God in these: being things which God never required at his hands, and yet
these precepts of man's brain are the rules of all his religion. But yet here
is a goodly show of wisdom, what is it not profitable to abstain from flesh
every friday, and all lent; that by the one the flesh may be tamed, and by the
other our Lords sufferings remembered? and must not the Minister, who is to
deliver the blessed body of the Lord be unlike other men, yea far more holy
then they, and therefore must not he live single at home, and be seen in
hallowed garments abroad? But where is the word of the Lord, to free these from
being fables? The Lord looks not to what we are bent, or can pretend for our
own devises, but requires that his will should be our rule. Oh that we could
acknowledge the truth, in accounting our deliverance from this Popish Egypt,
and Romish blindness, the next blessing of God to the gift of his Son; seeing
in the body of their religion there can be no soundnes of faith, if any faith
at all; the best of it being a disease and rotennes, if we may not more truly
say, it has a name to live but indeed is stark dead.

Doctr. 2. A fearful judgment of God to be turned away from the truth.
It is a grievous sin and judgment to be turned away from the truth, and yet
this is the fearful fruit of humane devises. For the Apostle would here note
a judgment of God upon such persons as were addicted unto fables and humane
precepts: the which judgment, is a woeful and heavy stroke of Gods wrath,
whether a man estrange himself from it before, or after he have received it
much more. For what a plague is it for a man, to hate the truth, and in it God
the author of it, who is truth it self; the light of comfort, and direction of
it, as also the happy fruit of it, which is salvation; seeing all they are
damned that rereceiue not the love of the truth, whereby they might be saved?
2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
What a woeful delusion were it, that a condemned person for high treason going
to execution should refuse a pardon offered; nay be so far from accepting it,
as that he abhorres to hear of it, will not turn his eyes to behold it, yea
treads it under his feet: and yet such a spiritual frenzy possesses all
such as turn away from the word of truth, and when God calls them, run
another away. For seeing if the Son set us not free, Ioh. 8.32. we remain in
bondage under sin, and damnation, and are every day drawing to execution (in
the mean time as condemned persons being reserved in bolts and chains till
the time of execution:) Now in these bands of death, the Prince of peace our
Lord Jesus offreth a gracious pardon, the party offended seeks to the
delinquent, entreats and wooeth him to accept of a pardon procured by his own
blood, and sealed by his death: Now wretched men cannot abide neither the
message, nor the messengers: but in contempt tread under their feet that blood
wherewith they should be sanctified, and scorn the Princes clemency: shall not
the very consciences of these men in the Lords judgment accuse themselves as
worthy of ten thousand deaths? yes surely, and shall justify the Lords
righteousness, when he shall bring upon them that great condemnation of a great
part of the world: who the light being come, and shining on their faces, yet
loved darkness rather then light. But much more miserable is it after the
embracing and knowledge of the truth, to turn away from it: a great witcherie
it is to begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: an unworthy man is he of
Gods kingdom, Gal. 3.1.
that setting his hand to the plow looks back: after washing to return to
the filthiness of the world, and to wax weary of weldoing, is far worse then
never to have known to do well: this is properly called a revolt, when men
depart from the gracious calling of Christ: the relaps we say is far more
dangerous then the first disease, and the end of the Apostate is far worse
then his beginning: the devil that has bin once cast out, and entertained
again, brings seven spirits worse then himself, so as better were it for a
man never to have known the way of truth, then after the knowledge of it, to
depart from the holy commandment.

Use. If men were persuaded of the greatness of this sin, it could not be they
could be so indifferent in such a maine matter so nearely concerning their
final and everlasting estate: of whom many receive not the truth at all,
others turn away and fall from their first love, after they have once received
it. Did ever the world abound as at this day, with Worldlings, Libertines,
Atheists, Newters, and Epicures? and was yet the truth ever more glorious and
shining then at this day? Was there ever such coldness, loosenes, deadnes,
heaviness, drowsines, and earthlines, Men are generally too indifferent in a
matter of such moment and peril.
in professors? and if that added to the equity of Paul's reproof of the
Galatians revolt, that Christ was described plainly, and crucified before
their eyes, Gal. 3.1. may it not much more gall us, among whom notwithstanding
the clear evidence, and brightness of the truth, it is yet refused of the most,
and slenderly entertained of the best? The which what argues it either in one
or other, but that the former would herein hold their wont, which has been
generally to change, and turn their religion with the times, as though the
truth to salvation were not the same, but variable and alterable as the times
are: and that the latter have in no small measure turned themselves from that
truth, in the which they have formerly found much more sweetness then now they
do: and that delusion has possessed both; the one in whole, the other in great
part? Object. But it is not thus with us, we come to hear the truth, and love
it, and hope to hold it unto the end? Ans. Yet this detracteth not from that
truth laid down: For 1. how many will not grant the Gospel their presence,
their bodies, their ears? no man will gainsay but that these are turned away;
or if any should, the pitiful, ignorance, and the fruits of it would convince
it. 2. How many be there which hear, and yet in their judgments intertaine
not the truth? and these are thus far worse then the Jews themselves, who
could acknowledge that Christ taught the way of God truly. Men will not believe
that the way to heaven is so strait, as we out of the word of God describe it;
nor that God is so rigorously just, as to cast away those that mean well: nor
so strait laced, as to exact the forfeyt of every offense: neither that can be
the truth to salvation, which so few embrace, and so many contemn: what do
none know or go the way to heaven but a few mean men, and those perhaps more
nice then wise? what becomes then of so many great and learned men, wiser (we
hope) then all they? Thus while Paul speaks the words of truth, and sobernes,
he is counted a mad man, Act. 26.15. Men are wiser then to bec^^e fools that
they may be wise; it will not sink with them that Christ can come out of
Galily, Ioh. 7.41. And thus by Gods judgment upon the infidelity of men,
themselves can lay blocks enough in the way to stumble at the truth, and
desperately break the necks of their souls upon that very rock, which was
laid for the rising and salvation of the righteous. 3. At how many hands does
the truth go away reproched, yea hated, and persecuted? Gods graces are
derided, Gods children scoffed and mocked, by those who are borne after the
flesh, Gal. 4.29. And why does Caine hate and kill his brother? because his
deeds were good, and his own evil. And why are Christians, yea Christ
himself mocked? even for this confidence in his God, Psalm. 22.8. But here
every man blesses himself, and God forbid that men that profess Christ, or
that we who are ordinary hearers of his word, should be justly ranked in this
number. Yet even of us, how few are there whom the truth has set free from
lusts, and service of some sin or other? Many of us indeed have gone far in
the contemplation of this truth; but our minds, and souls are no more altered,
and changed, then if we had read or heard some humane Histories, affecting us
for the time, but leaving us where they found us at first. How few of us are
sanctified by this truth, and daily proceed on to increase in sanctification by
mean of it? which that it is the scope of it, Christ's petition teaches, Ioh.
17.17. Nay how many of our hearers detain this truth in unrighteousness? that
is, while they hear, learn, and can remember much of it; yet in their courses
are as vain and ungodly as ever before. Which plainly argues a forsaking of
the truth upon the plain field, making such persons more liable to more, and
more fearful strokes of God: who receiving the truth into their ears,
understandings, and judgments, but turn away their affections from it, yea
turn from it in their practice, in that they hate to be reformed by it. And if
we have not in great part turned away from the truth: where is our former
courage, and resolution for it? may not the Lord justly complain of us as he
did once of his own people? they have no courage for the truth. Many of us
durst better have been seen in Christian exercises then now we dare; we could
better bear a rebuke for our profession then now we can: we did more take to
heart the damage of the truth, then now we do: we did take more pains for it,
we could be at more cost for it, we could be more zealous against the enemies
of it, then now we are or can be. Alas, our dasterdlines, and timiditie, that
faint before days of trial; nay in days, not only of peace, but of
protection, and encouragements in the truth: what can we promise of our selves,
if we were called either to die with, or deny Christ? Oh therefore let us call
back our selves out of our ruins, and ^^call our former days, (...) with them
our former works: as such as mean to partake in that honorable commendation
of the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, whose works were more at the last then
at the first.

Rules to preserve us from being turned off the present truth.
Now that we may the better be preserved from being turned from the truth, some
rules are to be delivered and practiced. 1. Entertain it not for outward
respects, neither for the laws of the land, nor the encouragement it has, etc.
as very many do: but for the love of it self: Change of heart and life goes
with all saving knowledge.
the more thou love, and the surer do thou bind it upon thy self: and this
is the surest hold, Ioh. 7.17. when as in religion, faith and good conscience
are joined together: for such as thy conscience is, such shall thou be found in
religion; without which, hear every hour a sermon, read over the Bible as
often as he did, who gloried that he had read the text and gloss also
fourteen times over, Alfonsus king of Aragon.
all this knowledge will not lift thee up to heaven. 3. Call no ground of this
divine truth into question, suspect not that

Verse. 15. Unto the pure, all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled
and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. The connection of these words with the former is not easy to be seen,
unless we conceive the words preceding in that proper sense which we have
given of them; and then this verse will affoard a reason of the former. For the
Apostle having called these Cretians from attending to Jewish ^ables, and
commandments of men, that is, such fabulous doctrines as still would keep life
in the ceremonial differences of days, and meats, persons, and garments,
(seeing now all that partition wall was broken down) he draws a reason from
that liberty which now is obtained for Christians, unto whom now nothing was
common or unclean, but might be purely used of them, who have their hearts
purifyed in obeying the truth. And this reasons is enlarged by opposing the
contrary in a similitude of the like, To the impure nothing is pure: not only
outward things, but their chief and eminent inward parts are defiled, whether
we consider the theoricall part, that is, the mind and understanding, so as
they can neither apprehend, conceive, nor judge of the truth propounded: or the
practical faculty, (included in the conscience) seeing this depends upon
the former, it must also be polluted: the which two faculties, if they be
depraved and vitiated, that is, if the understanding be blinded, and the
conscience led by such a blind guide, how can it be but the whole man should
sink down in the puddle of all impious impuritie? That is the scope; the
sense and meaning follows.

To the pure, all things are pure,] In this former branch of the verse, three
general points are to be considered. 1. Who are meant by pure persons. 2. How
all things are pure or impure. 3. How all things are pure to the pure.

To answer the first question, Who are pure persons.
we must find out what purity both for kind and degree is here meant. All
purity is either in the fountain, or thence derived. The former is the most
simple, perfect, and immeasurable purity in the creator: the latter is some
dark image, and shadow of the former in the creature, according to the
measure of it, so long abiding with it as it cleaves unto him, or he unto it.
The former is not meant, but the latter which is of reasonable creatures,
either angels or men, differing indeed in degree according to their capacity:
but not herein, that before the fall of either, it was a purity mutable in
them both. But to draw to our Apostles subject, this purity is not now
considered in the Angels, but in man: Neither is it that purity which we had
in our innocence: for though then we were purer then the Nazarites of
Jerusalem, who were purer then the snow, and whiter then the milk: Lam. 4.7.8.
yet by our captivity under sin, our visage is become blacker then a coal:
But a purity of an other quality* such a one as is renewed upon us, by the
Lords beholding us, and cleaving unto us, and not that shining and spotles
purity, which we had while we were able to behold him, and cleave unto him.
This purity then is not set in us by nature, but made ours by grace; and
being the purity of our Mediator, is imputed unto so many, as shall stand
righteous in the sight of God the Father. The persons therefore here called
pure, are such as by faith, are set into Christ, by whose blood they are
justified, and by whose spirit through the means of the word, that immortal
seed of regeneration, they are sanctified and reserved unto life everlasting.
And hence to both these is the purifying and cleansing of sinners ascribed in
the Scriptures. 1. Faith not only as a hand lays hold on all Christ's
righteousness, to make the sinner stand just before God; but inwardly by
little and little purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9.
and causes that purity to break out to the eyes of others as well as our
selves. And 2. for the word in Ioh. 15.13. Now are ye clean through the word I
have spoken unto you.

Quest. But how can such persons be called pure, seeing the Lord finds no
purity in the Angels themselves, and how much less in those who dwell in
houses of clay? Job 4*18.
and besides Paul even a regenerate man, exclaimeth that he knew no good by
himself. Rom 7 18.
Answ. That place of Job denies not purity to the Angels simply, but only
comparing theirs with Gods, it is as a little stream, yea a drop to the
ocean, which is nothing in comparison. And for that of the Apostle, it was with
him as it is with other believers; who are able to discover more dross then
gold in themselves: and therefore neither he, much less ordinary and common
Christians, can be called pure of the greater part, but only of the better.
Hence is it, that though believers have received the spirit but in weak
measure, yet are called spiritual; and being far from perfection, are yet
called perfect; not by that legal perfection which is entire in all the
degrees, Reasons why men sanctified in part are called pure. Cant. 6.9. Ioh.
13.20.
but that Evangelical which brings all the parts forward toward those
degrees. Nay more, Christ himself calls his love all fair, and says, there
is no spot in her, yea, as pure as the Sun, as fair as the Moon: and to his
Apostles, that they were all clean every whit, save Judas: all fair. 4. has
promised them that for time to come, they shall become so absolutely clean, as
though they had never been defiled.

Doctr. The estate of a Christian is a most honorable estate; Christians are
pure, but not Puritans.

Puritas haec est iustitia viatoris, non comprehensorum.


because his person is pure in the sight of God, even whilst he lives here
upon earth. And this cannot otherwise be, seeing such a one being
predestined unto life, is also justified and sanctified: by the former of
which a sinner is perfectly freed from the guilt and curse of sin: and by the
latter imperfectly* and in part from the relics and service of sin: the
former, in that the blood of Jesus Christ sprinkled upon his conscience,
cleanses him from all sin: the latter, 1. Ioh. 1.7. Ezekiel. 36.25.
in that the spirit of sanctification washes his heart with pure waters until
it be clean. Now whereas some may think, they have enough confessed to endite
sincere Christians of blasphemy, or heresy at the least, as having opinion of
their own purity, with a Pharisaicall despising of others: saying with the
Jew, stand aloof, for I am more holy then thou: or with the Pharisie, Lord I
thank thee, I am not as this man, etc. let them know, that we teach, and true
believers hold, that their purity is neither their own, nor so in their own
account: but only in regard, 1. of Gods washing of their robes in the blood of
the Lamb: and 2. of his gracious acceptance of them so washed as pure and
clean. Far is the true believer from the damnable conceit of the Catharists
(whom in our language we term Puritans) who following Novatus his heresy,
were also called Novatians, who thought that the life of a just man is to be
made up without sin, spot, or wrinckle, or else the Church could not be made
up of them. Far also from that accursed doctrine of the Papists, Tu audes
Novatiane mundu^ ^e dicere, qui (...) operibus mundus esses, hoc solo verbo
immundus fieres. Ambros. de (...). l. 1. c. 6.
who are indeed Puritan heretics, and the right successors of Iovinian*
Ebion, Pelagius; in that they affirm, that in the regenerate after Baptism,
there is nothing which has the reason of sin, or which God can hate: that
they are able to fulfill all the commandments, yea, and do more then so: that
they have devout men and women that can merit life eternal for themselves and
others: that men may and must expect their salvation from an inherent
righteousness. Why should we not then abhor these heretical seducers under
this title; seeing they tread the some steps of the old Puritan heretics, the
memory of whom let it be accursed for ever. No, no, the believer is ^aught
daily to pray* Lord forgive us our debts: and with the Publican, Lord have
mercy on me a sinner: he accounts his own righteousness as a stained
clout: well knowing, that if he should challenge righteousness from himself*
that his own clothes would defile him: yea, let them take much snow and
nitre, yet of themselue^ can they never be clean, but that Christ becomes as
purging fire, Malac. ^.2^*
and fullers soap unto them. Now if any yet think it unreasonable to ascribe
both taught us how to conceive it, 1. Ioh. 1.7.8. The blood of Jesus Christ
purges from all sin: yet if any say he has no sin, he deceives himself.
It is indeed Gods grace and favor to account the believers his dove and
undefiled, and in regard of that perfect robe of righteousness he covers
them withal, to add that there is no spot in them: but it is grace in them to
acknowledge and utter of themselves that which Christ did of his disciples,
Ioh. 13.10. Non de puritate omnimoda, and perfectione absoluta, vt Job. 14.4.
and Prove. 20.9. sed opposita hypocrisi and dolo.

Psalm. 119.1. Psalm. 34.9. 1. Cor. 1.1. Scoff not at the titles by which the
Lord honors his children.


ye are all clean, but you had need have your feet washed: seeing that this
purging is not wrought all at once in us, but by degrees, and that in this life
there remains always some impuritie to be purged.

Use. 1. Let none dare to scoff at the godly under this title or any other
which the Lord vouchsafes them: hear thou the Lord accounting his Church as
pure as the sun, and perfect and undefiled in their way, calling them his
holy ones, and saints, and think thou this a sufficient ground to scoff at
them? or do thou show thy self one of this number, or rather is it not the
part of an Ismaelite and a cursed wretch, to scoff at the sons of blessing,
for the blessings sake? nay rather, seeing the Lord thus honors his
servants, and testifies his love in passing by all their imperfections, as
though there were none: let such as have taken occasion to scoff at Christians
from that which is their only approbation before God, even join themselves to
the people of God, that as the liberties of Gods people in Persia, made many of
their enemies become Jews, Ester 8.17.
so those that have been enemies, and ready to offer them violence, seeing the
favor of God toward them, may be moved to become friendly unto them.

Notwithstanding these scofs strive to further purity of heart and life.
2. If the devil do raise any scoffing Micholl to scorn our sincerity, while
we solace our selves before the Lord; and if the sons of men will not cease
to turn our glory into shame: Let not those that fear God be daunted, nor
give ground, much less fly back for any terms of contempt; but account
this their privilege before God, a badge of Christ's profession, and their
honor before all the world: and thus encourage themselves to strive on to
further purity both of heart and life. 1. Of heart, because the inside must
first be made clean: and 2. of life, for when the soul is purified it must
work in the life, in obeying the truth, 1. Pet. 1.22.
through the spirit. Thus the Christian man being like a clear crystal
glass with a light in the midst, which must needs appear through every part
of it, having within him the light of grace, holds it forth although in the
midst of a froward and wicked generation.

Reasons.
The reasons to move us hereunto are sundry. 1. In regard of Gods God
justify, and approve of him and his ways? 2. Hereby only a man becomes
capable of Gods graces, who powers not his gracious if any man purge himself,
he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Lord, 2. Tim.
2.2^.
and prepared unto every good work. 3. All the promises of God are made Surely
God is good to Israel, to the pure of heart. Let his trialls be what they will,
let his person be never so mean, let his name be never so reproched, the Lord
respects him that is of an holy conversation: there is no difference between
Jew and Gentile, rich and poor with God, so the heart be purified. Act. 15.19.
1. Tim. 2.8. Malac. 1.10. Ioh. 9.
Such are only fit to approach God in prayer who can lift up pure hands, and so
offer that clean offering prophesied of to be lifted up in every place. God
hears not sinners, says the blind man. And the exhortation is, let us draw
near God with true hearts, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from
an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water, Heb. 10.22. Nay
more, the study of purity has the promise of blessedness, of the blessed
vision of God, Matthew. 5.8.
for who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? and who shall stand in
his holy place? Even he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart. Psalm. 24.3.
Heb. 12.14.
Seeing then that without it no man shall see God, and that all unclean
persons shall be kept without the gates of the City: Rev. 22.
let this consideration added to the expectation of such pr^^ises move us to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit, and grow up unto
full holiness in the fear of God, 2. Cor. 7.1. 4. This course is a note of a
true believer, who purging himself as he is pure: 1. Ioh. 3.3.
the scope of the place is to show this to be a mark of our adoption, when
knowing our selves subject to sin, yet we desire and endeavor by all good
means to cleanse our selves daily, propounding herein before us Christ as a
pattern of imitation. 5. Heb. 9.14.
whose blood through the eternal spirit offered without spot by himself unto
God, purges our consciences from dead works to serve the living God: he has
given us of his spirit to renew us, by whose blessed dewes we might be
besprinkled as with pure water, so as we might be justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 6.11.
and by the spirit of our God. He has sent out his chastisements, and
afflictions in such grievous manner, as our Fathers never saw the like, by
which as by rubbing and beating, and wringing, many might be purified, and made
white. Dan. 12.10.
He has sought to purge his floor by sundry fannes of afflictions, by plague
and pestilence, famine, and dearth, violent and unseasonable winds and
weathers, and by the angry distemper of all the elements, which seem hardly
to contain themselves from the revenge of the sins of the Land. Against all
which means, if we shall remain filthy and unclean still, bespotted and
polluted with our former sins, which by such powerful means cannot be
driven from us; oh how justly shall we be led with the unclean works of
iniquity? Let us then search our selves, and fan our selves: let us set our
selves often in Gods presence, who is a God of pure eyes; and our selves at his
bar, before his tribunal and judgment seat; which if we be not
remediless, will make us strive in our further sanctification: and being once
washed, let us beware of fouling our selves any more.

Every thing by creation good in it self 4. ways.
The second general point is, how all things are pure or impure. Ans. All
things may be said to be pure two ways: 1. in themselves, and in their own
nature, by an inherent purity put into them by God before the fall. 2. in their
use unto us by an acquisite, and purchased purity since that time. For the
former, every creature by the creation was good, 1. in kind and parts of it,
every particular ^^ing, and every part of it, was free manner of being: for it
was good not qualities of it: in reasonable creatures were enlightened
understandings, rectified will, sanctified affections: in unreasonable was
subjection and seruiceablenes unto the Creator, and the reasonable creature: in
a word, all the actions, passions, and motions of them all, could not be but
very good as themselves were. 2. Every creature was good in regard of others:
whether 1. God, Every creature good in respect of others: as 1. God. 2. Man.
whose wisdom, power* and glory, they were witnesses of. Solomon says, God
made all thing for himself: that is, first and directly: or 2. man, for whose
use, commodity, comfort, and honor, they served: Psalm. 8.6. He has put all
things under his feet: or 3. other creatures: 3. other creatures.
for every particular creature was good, for the common good: and therefore the
Lord contented not himself to pronounce upon every particular creature, the
special approbation of it own goodness, Genesis 1.
as he did of the works of every particular day of the six: but vewing them
altogether, and delighting himself in the order and harmony of his creatures,
he pronounces of them jointly, that they were very good, Genesis 1.31. where both
the generality of the proposition is to be observed. God saw all that he had
made; as also the further vehemency of the affirmation above all the former,
and lo they were all very good. Now although we may truly say, that
(notwithstanding the vanity which is befallen every creature since the fall)
all things according to their common nature, natural parts, and created
qualities, are Gods good creatures, even the substance, reason, and
understanding of the devil himself, yet none of this purity is here properly
meant by our Apostle: But that purchased purity which cannot be so fitly
declared, till we have considered how since the fall, these things became
impured. Which to resolve, we must know that seeing no creature in the nature
of it, neither in the being nor manner of being; not yet in the natural
parts or qualities is impure; all the impuritie which is upon them is
accidental: and that either by 1. Gods holy institution, or 2. man's
corruption. By the former, creatures and actions in themselves, All the
impuritie upon the creat^re is either by 1. Gods holy institution. 2. man's
corruption.
never so good, become to man's use impure: 1. when God by his moral law does
interdict any thing: as for example, the common use of every seventh day in
our ordinary affairs; which is a necessary, perpetual, yea and an eternal
rule of righteousness: under which head is included all moral uncleanness,
contracted by omitting good duties, and committing evil actions. 2. When by
his law ceremonial he forbids to some people the touch, taste, or handling
of many creatures; which in themselves, and without such a restraint are every
whit as good, and as pure, as things not forbidden; so as such distinction and
prohibition, proceeded not from the disposition and temper of their own
nature, as some have grossly imagined; but from this commandment, Porphyrius.
which sanctifies this, and polluteth that; in which case, prohibited things
may not in any case be meddled withal, no more then though they were evil in
their own nature. Dan. 2.8.
Daniel determined not to defile himself with the Kings meat, and wine, not
that the meat was polluted in it self, but among other reasons, because the
Chaldeans ate, and lawfully, many sorts of meat which were prohibited the
Jews, as hares, blood, etc. And here it must be remembered, that ceremonial
and significatiue uncleanness any way contracted, being neither natural nor
moral, is neither general to pollute all men, nor all creatures, but only
that people to whom, and those creatures of which the law was given; neither
was it perpetual, but only for the time of the prohibition. And thus even the
tree of good and evil, of what kind soever it was, was neither evil in it
self, nor in regard of the fruit: but by Gods institution the use of it was
unclean: as appears both by Gods exception, and interdiction of that tree,
as also by the event: neither did it remain evil by that institution after
the fall, it being appointed a sacrament only for the time of innocence.

But the maine impuritie which is befallen the creatures, is by means of man's
corruption: and that is either more general, or more special. The general
impuritie on them all was by the sin of Adam, and all mankind in his loins,
whereby he both lost himself, and all things tending to his comfort: for as he
set all out of frame, and defiled every thing within him, insomuch as all his
thoughts are evil continually, all his words are tainted with the filthiness
of his rotten heart, which sends them out, all his actions spiritual,
civil, natural, are so many sins: even so all things without him, are
impured by and to him, seeing by his sin he has forfeyted them all, and has
no right to the least of them. And further, as all of the creatures are lost;
so many of them are after a sort unclean, impure, and so are become hurtful,
and evil to man's use, as todes, serpents, poisons, venomous, feirce and savage
creatures, all which the curse of God upon man's sin has impured in their
particular nature, although in their common nature they abide good still.

More specially, all creatures and actions, never so good, or indifferent, are
impured by man's abuse two ways. 1. when they are used or done, by any impure
person; 2. or else by any person in an impure manner. When any thing is done or
used by unholy men, or vnholily be it never so good, it is impured: not being
used or done in faith and good consci^nce. A thing good or indifferent in it
self, spoiled in the doing 3. ways.
A good or indifferent thing used or done, is spoiled and corrupted in the
manner of using or doing, three ways. 1. when it is used or done in way of
superstition: 2. of profaneness: 3. of scandal. 1. Of superstition, when any
creature is offered unto Idols, or used or not used profaneness, when any
creature or action is used or done out of that due manner, measure, or end,
which the Lord has appointed unto it: as all use of holy things, by way of
charming, or enchantment, especially good words, and those out of Scriptures to
spells and sorcerie: the intemperate use of indifferent things, to surfeiting,
drunkenness, pride, and excess: in a word, when any thing is done or used,
the carriage and end of which, is not Gods glory and man's good. 3. Of
scandal, either our selves, or others. Our selves, when we use any creature,
or perform any action with a doubtful conscience, that is, whereof either the
word has not, or we out of it, have no warrant: in which ca^e tender
consciences must be tendered, rather then be racked by authority: for be the
things in themselves never so lawful, be they never so generally entertained
in the judgment and practice of others, they are utterly unlawful to me,
without such information. Others if they be scandalized, they are either within
the Church, or without: and they both in things either, 1. evil, or 2.
indifferent, having on them a show of evil. For necessary things enjoined by
the word, there can be no scandal given, as preaching, hearing, praying:
these and such must be done, though all the world take offense at them. Thus
Paul preached Christ a stumbling block, and scandal to Jew and Gentile: and
Daniel prays to his God, although the king and all the country raged against
him. This offense is Pharisaicall, taken, but not given. Now for scandal
given, ^. in things evil is; when a man by word, deed, or doctrine
disagreeable to the law of God becomes a stumbling block, and cause of
offense. 1. To the wicked, whom they make worse in their evil, more obdurate,
and further off from repentance. 2. To the good: whether stronger, both
grieuing them, and bringing reproach upon them: or weaker, who are not only
discouraged from their good beginnings; but forced often to participate in that
sin, whereof they have a president in an other. Woe to that man by whom such
offenses as these shall come. In this kind was Peter an offense to Christ, whom
therefore he calls Satan, and commands him to come behind him. 2. In
things indifferent, scandal is given when unseasonably, and out of the rule of
charity they are used: in which case the Apostle acknowledges things lawful,
inexpedient: and professes that he will never eat flesh, before he will
offend his brother, that is, his weak brother: 1. Cor. 8.12. The strong ta^^
no offense but reioiceth in the use of Christian liberty.
he that is not taught, not he that will not be taught; he that is ignorant,
not malicious and is scandalized: for that he knows not the truth, and not
that he hates it, must be here respected; with the offense of whom, if the
most indifferent things be used, it is the violating of the law of charity,
and a reiection of the faith of Christ.

Now to remove all this impuritie, we must have a proportional purity
purchased by Jesus Christ. By whom, 1. in regard of our persons, being
believers, we partake with all his righteousness, and purity, and so are
again entitled to our first right in the creatures. 2. In regard of the things
themselves: our liberty is procured from the bondage and heavy yoke both of
the law moral and ceremonial; by whose appearance, death and resurrection
are obtained. 1. ^ deliverance from all evil of sin and punishment within
and without us. 2. restitution to all the good, yea a further good then that
was from which we fell. 3. freedom from all ceremonial pollution, and
liberty in all those creatures which by ceremony was unclean. 3. In regard
of our right use, he has given us precepts and commandments in things
necessary; and rules of direction in things indifferent.

Now from this second point we may note sundry worthy lessons, which I will
only propound, and not stand upon them, because I will hasten to the third and
principal point of all.

God has engraven some part of his image upon all his creatures.
1. Seeing all things were pure in their creation, we may herein as in a glass
behold the purity of God in all his creatures, admiring that goodness of his
which bewraied it self even in the meanest of them: yea provoking our selves,
to love, reverence, and fear before him, the image of whose goodness shines
out not only in angels and men; but even in the silly worm and fly, yea in
the liueles creatures themselves. And further, hence we may gather our own
duty toward the creatures, namely 1. reverently meditate and speak of them.
2. purely to use them. 3. mercifully to deal with them: all which we shall the
easier do, if we can spy out some part of Gods image in them.

All the hurt of man from the creatures is first from himself.
2. Consider our misery, and the woeful fruit of our sin, which has debarred
us from all comfort in heaven and earth, from God or any of his creatures:
sin has wrapped us under condemnation, has set God and his creatures as
hosts and armies against us, has made nothing ours but hell and damnation; so
as if we meet with any evil from any of the creatures through the venom,
poison, or noysomnes of the particular nature of it, or by any other accident,
we are not so much to condemn the creature, but our own sins: for they were
either not so made, or had not been hurtful at all to man, but by his own
sin, the poison of which has poisoned their natures, so that by them man's
sin is either justly punished, or himself righteously exercised. Now then
seeing our own sin has subjected the creatures of God (otherwise so
comfortable and sweet helps unto our lives) unto such vanity, we have great
cause to abhor our sins for ever, yea, and our selves for them, rather then
drink in iniquity as the fish does water. The sweetest sins would carry a
bitter tang, if we would but remember what sweet comfort of the creatures we
have forfeited for them. Not restored to our former right in the creatures,
before our reconciliation with their Creator.


3. The restitution of us to our former right is only from our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our first right is recovered to us on this manner. First, as we
were at odds with the Creator, and consequently with the creature; even so
first we are reconciled unto God through Christ, and then to the creatures: for
when Christ (who is our peace) has wrought our peace with God, he brings
back our peace: both the inward peace of our own consciences, which before
could do nothing but accuse and terrify; as also peace with others, friends
and enemies, yea even with the beast of the field, and the stone in the wall:
and every thing strikes a covenant of peace with him who has entered into
league with the creator of it. If any man then would have any right in any
creature he uses, he must not hold it by the broken title in the first Adam,
but by a recovered and new purchase in the second Adam, who is the Lord of
glory blessed for ever.

The third general point is; How all things are pure to the pure? Ans. That we
may rightly and properly conceive the Apostles meaning, we must know, 1. That
the universal particle, all things] admits restraint, and may not be
extended beyond the Apostles intendment, who speaks only of such things as
are not forbidden by the law of God, or nature: or rather only of things of an
indifferent nature, which in themselves are neither commanded nor forbidden,
and neither good nor evil in their substance and nature, but are to be used or
not used according to the circumstances and occasions of them: such things as
these are, meat, drink, apparel, recreation, sleep, marriage, single life,
riches, poverty, bondage, freedom, etc. And it may not seem strange thus to
restrain this general proposition; seeing we have it thus limited in sundry
other places, 1. Cor. 6.4. all things are lawful, but not profitable: and cap.
10.23. all things are lawful for me, but not expedient: Romans 14.20. all things
indeed are pure, but destroy not for meats, etc. 2. By pure is meant nothing
else but that all such things are free now to be used in good conscience,
without scruple, by means of our Christian liberty. And 3. in that he adds
to the pure, he shows how we come to have title in this liberty, even by
becoming believers, and getting our hearts purified by faith. In one word all
indifferent things, are pure, Note well.
and free to be used of the pure, and believing person, with this one
condition; so they be purely and rightly used. The which point leads us to
demand and answer a great question worthy to be with judgment determined, as
being of very great use thorough the whole life of a Christian.

Quest. How may things indifferent which in their nature are pure to the
believer, become so unto him in their use? How the pure may use any thing
purely.
or how may he rightly and purely use them.

Ans. Then does the believer use them purely when he is lead unto, and
moderated in the use of them by these three virtues. 1. faith. 2. love. 3.
sobriety. The first of which looks up unto God: the second looks downward
unto man: the third respects the believer himself; none of all which must be
offended and prejudiced in and by the use of them. The first looks to the
lawfulnes of the thing to be used: the second to the profitablenesse: the third
to the due proportion for the manner and measure.

Things indifferent used in faith.
Quest. When do we use them in faith? Answ. 1. When they are used both by
warrant and leave from God: our warrant is from Gods of God is good, 1. Tim.
4.4, 5.
thus sanctified by the word and prayer. The word gives us warrant that the
creature is made free and lawful for us to use with good conscience; not only
by the word of creation in the beginning; but since by that word which assures
that in Christ all things are pure to the pure.

Object. But how can the word warrant in these things which are neither
commanded nor forbidden in it, as to eat this or that meat, put on this or
that garment, etc. Ans. We must have a word, if not commanding, yet permitting
the use of them, for every one must be fully persuaded in his mind: Romans
14.5.14.
and although nothing is impure in it self, yet is it to him that thinks it
so. 2. Although we have not particular places, prescribing the particulars of
this kind, yet have we a general word freeing them from legal commonnes and
uncleanness: not only in this and many other texts, but especially in Act. 10.
in Peter's vision. 3. Although we have not a several precept for every
particular commanding, yet have we direction in the word by general rules of
restraint; the taste of which shall after be given. Again, we use them by faith
when we use them by leave obtained through prayer (which also implies a word
to ground it self upon) whereby we both entreat an holy use of all these
outward things: as also lift up our hearts in thanksgiving for Secondly, then
we use them in faith, when through the whole use of them, we propound before us
the glory of God: aiming directly hereat, that he may have the honor of them,
whose we and they are, and by whose leave we reap the comfort of them: 1. Cor.
10.3. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory
of God; men conceive that they need not think on God, but in the Church, or
in their private family worship, and so banish him from their tables, and
civil actions, but most of all from their recreations and sports, here every
mention of God is unsavory and unseasonable: but that word of the Apostle,
whatsoever ye do, and do all to the glory of God, teaches another lesson:
namely, that there is no action wherein it is lawful to dishonor, no not to
depart or forget God, and the glory due unto him. Thirdly, When by the
natural or civil use of them, faith raises it self to some spiritual
meditation: as for example: in the use of

Secondly, Things indifferent must be used in love: Things indifferent used in
Love, when.
for Christian liberty in the use of outward things, must give place to
charity. And then are they so used, 1. when without the offense, 2. when to
the edification without offense: Romans 14 20.
for it is evil to him that eats with offense: and Paul would never eat
meat, before he would offend. 1. Cor. 8.13.
Hence follows it, that we may not offend either private, or public persons.
Of private men, some are of weak consciences; and these must be borne up and
yielded unto for good, rather then destroyed by our liberty: the Apostle
became all things to all such persons: and Christ himself would not quench a
smoking flax. Some other are obstinate, stiff, yea and malicious, from whom
we must challenge our Christian liberty. If men be carping Pharisees, or
wilful Papists, the counsel is, Let them alone: nay more, Matthew. 15.24.
so precious must our liberty so dearly purchased be unto us, as we may not
neglect it, or dissemble it before such as are taught, and should be stronger,
although they be brethren; for this was Peter's case, for which he was justly
reprehended, who withdrawing himself from the Gentiles, to pleasure the Jews,
Gal. 2.11.
gave them who had been taught the contrary, occasion to conceive of the
Gentiles, as unclean still. This whole truth is confirmed by Paul's practice,
who would and did permit Timothy to be circumcised in regard of infirm, and
weak believers among the Jews, Act. 16.3. but would not suffer Titus, so to
be, Gal. 2.3. partly because he would not offend the godly; and partly because
he would challenge Christian liberty against those obstinate and malicious
adversaries, who had almost ouerturned all the labors of the Apostle in that
Church of Galatia, by urging circumcision as a thing of absolute necessity
unto salvation. Here is ministered a direct answer to that question, whether
recusant Papists are to be compelled to Church, because it is an offense unto
them. Papists must be compelled to come to church notwithstanding it offend
them: and why.
Whereto I answer, 1. that this is not a case of indifferency, but necessary
that they come into the pure worship of God: and therefore it must be effected,
either by entreatie, or compulsion. 2. Were it indifferent, yet were they not
to be festered in their error, because they refuse instruction, and are not
weak, but wilful. 3. Neither are they thus compelled to believe, but to use
the right means of faith. 4. Good Josias made a covenant with the Lord, and
caused all his people to stand unto it, 2. Chro. 34.32.

Now as we may not offend our private brethren, so much less the public
Magistrate, who has power given him of God to limit and restrain our
ouercommon use of these things by wholesome laws concerning things
indifferent, which laws we are bound in conscience to obey: for then their
indifferency cease not in regard of themselves, but of that law restraining
them. And here sundry questions may be further demanded: As, 1. Whether a man
may with a safe conscience eat flesh at times prohibited by the Magistrate?
Answ. In this one instance direction is given even in all the other things of
this kind, as concerning days, garments, etc. therefore I say, that to eat
or do any other thing against a law, is one thing: and to do otherwise then
the law commands in these things, is another: the former commonly 1. hinders
the end of the law: 2. contemns the authority of the law maker: 3. has no
just cause in it self: 4. cares not for the offense of others: this is
always a sin against God, and a breach of the fifth commandment: but
otherwise, the former cautions duly observed, I see not how it is a sin in
conscience to eat besides the law.

Quest. But can any Magistrate make a law to bind the conscience* Answ. No,
but yet we must obey their wholesome laws for conscience sake; which
conscience is bound not by the law of the Magistrate, but by Gods law, which
binds to obedience of the Magistrates laws in all lawful and honest things;
so Paul, Romans 13.5. subiecteth not the conscience to the laws of men, but to
Gods ordinance, enforcing obedience to such humane laws as ^ight not with his
own.

Quest. 3. But how stand we to the liberty, wherein Christ has set us free,
if we suffer the Magistrate to curb us of it? Answ. Well enough, seeing the
Magistrate medleth not with the liberty in conscience purchased by Christ:
Gal. 5 1.
for then we might not yield a whit, but stand on our right: but reserving that
as whole and entire as he found it, he only restrains the ouercommon use of
that liberty for example. The laws which prohibit this or that meat, being
civil, and made in respect of civil and politic order, for the common good
of men, are external, and the observation of them is a civil obedience, and
in it self properly no worship of God, unto which the outward man is bound
directly, and not the inward, but by accident. Which if we will plainly and in
a word understand, we must consider in every indifferent thing two things: 1. a
liberty to use them; 2. the use of that liberty, which two differ as much as
meat set upon the table, and the eating of it. The liberty is in the
conscience; the use is an outward thing: the former no Magistrates law medleth
with, nor can restrain: but in the latter, his law is a binder. And thus we
shut the door against all Popish ecclesiastical laws and canons, concerning
fasts, feasts, days, garments, and infinite other traditions, which they urge
as things necessary to salvation, directly binding the conscience: yea as
meritorious, and leading to a state of perfection: whereas indeed they directly
fight against Christian liberty; yea many of them against the moral law it
self. Let them plead (as they do) that to the greater authority more
subjection is due, and therefore they must be much more obeyed in their
ecclesiastical constitutions, then the Magistrate in his civil. I answer,
when they have proved their charter out of the word, whereby they may make
laws, which must be obeyed for conscience sake, as the civil Magistrate may,
we will subscribe unto them. In the mean time we have learned, that seeing the
Church has power only to ordain constitutions for orders sake; no man is
further bound to them, but only so far as he may avoid scandal of others, or
further the public good intended by that constitution. But what if the
Magistrate give life to ecclesiastical constitutions of the Church: whether
then do they become such laws, as bind the conscience? Answ. The Magistrate
gives no greater power to the Church to make laws, then Christ has given; if
he make his pleasure known, that he by his power will see order kept, it is
the part of every good subject and Christian, to obey him cheerfully.

Secondly, To use out liberty in love, we must not only not cast back our
brethren, but edify them, and bring them forward in godliness: Things
indifferent must be used to further our selves and others in godliness.
1. all things must profit: 1. Cor. 10.23. all things are lawful, but all
things edify not: And the general rule of all indifferent things is, Let all
things be done to edification: and Romans 15.1, 2. Let every man please his
neighbor to edification, even as Christ pleased not himself, but others.
Whatsoever then it is of this rank, which either would weaken, or not edify
our brother, be it never so lawful, never so profitable to our selves, never
so powerfully by earthly authority enjoined Christians, who are not borne to
themselves, but unto Christ, unto his Church, and unto the fellow members,
must not dare to meddle with it; seeing the higher commandment of God, binds
to give no offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God. And
herein let us propound Daniels example for our imitation, who to many might
seem not only too strict, but very unwise for so small a thing as he stood
upon to forgo the Kings favor and his own advancement; yet because he could
not use his liberty in the Kings meat without the offense of himself and
others, he would not do the least evil for the greatest good: it was not
frowardness in him, nor disobedience to the King; but conscience and obedience
to God, which made him keep himself pure from it.

Thirdly, although we use things indifferent in faith, and love, and yet forget
sobriety, Things indifferent used in Sobriety, when.
we impure them unto our selves. Then we use them in sobriety, 1. when we use
them as helps in our callings general and all things are lawful for me, but
I will not be brought under the power of any thing. The chief point of
Christian liberty is, to use the creature as not using it, rejoice in it as
not rejoicing: to buy as not buying, 1. Cor. 7.30.
to have a wife as not having one: to use things a while rather then to enjoy
them, and much less to be enjoyed of them.

Use. Now to draw this doctrine into our best use: it will be worth our
inquiry to consider how grievously men offend against al these rules, in which
that men may better take notice of their continual failings I will stand
somewhat the longer, and manifest how men impure these things. To use a thing
purely, 1. a man must sanctify himself.
1. in general. 2. in special, and both according to the former rules. In
general, men impurelie use them two ways. 1. in not sanctifying their
persons. 2. in not sanctifying the creatures. For the former: unsanctified
persons and unbelievers, receive the creatures and comfort of them, only as
the fruits of Gods general providence and power, whereby he sustaineth all the
creatures, the bruit beasts, the sensles creatures, nay the very substances of
the devils themselves: but not as the gifts of God become in Christ a
provident Father: nor as tokens of his special love as toward his children.
And therefore although the wicked man and cruel oppressor bear himself upon
the love of God, because all things succeed with him, and he thriueth in his
designs, yet in truth he has no more cause then the devil himself has,
because he is the God of the world, and Prince of the air, mightily prevailing
against the children of disobedience: for these are so far from being
special love tokens, that they are signs of a fearful future wrath, because
by them they have thrust and heaped up the measure of their condemnation.

Secondly, the creature not sanctified by the word and prayer, 2. He must
sanctify the creature by the word and prayer
is impurely used: and therefore general is the sin of the most, who
profanely and brutishly receive them without prayer and thanksgiving, by which
both the creator and the creature is blessed. The former obtains a blessing,
which is the applying of the goodness of the creature to our comfort, without
which we may have bread, and want the staff of it, put on clothes and not be
warm: get riches but want the fruition, earne wages, and incomes, but put them
in a broken bag: be diligent in our callings, but not thrive by them: for
this blessing and comfort of the creature, comes merely and more immediately
from the band of God: how is it not then most meet, that we should beg it at
his hands? This would the Lord teach, when he commands his people to
sanctify their very houses and dwellings: so in Abraham's servant, and Paul
who prayed for prosperous iourneys, Act. 25.5. Deuteronomy. 20.5.
The like ought we to do in all our recreations: and having received our
comfort from any thing, we must turn us to the other part of our prayer, which
is thanksgiving, not only for enjoying the creature, but that we have it by
virtue of the promise: neither only for the use, but for the right and holy
use of it, which is the portion but of a few. The two precepts of the Apostle
are worthy our continual meditation and practice; Pray continually, 1 Thessalonians.
5 17.18.
In all things give thanks. How many are so far from this, as that they
either cannot, or are ashamed to pray and praise God for their liberal
provision in meat and drink? a man cannot imagine the bruitishnesse of
numbers of men, and perhaps reputed Christians in this behalf, who no more
lift up their hearts or hands unto the Lord, then the bruit beasts themselves,
which devour the food, but cannot consider that they are fed by some other
thing without the food it self: such persons as little conceive that in Adam
all the creatures and the right in them was lost: so as there is no right left
in them, but by leave from God through Jesus Christ: as little do they depend
upon God for his blessing, which is the staff of their lives; but rather in
the midst of Gods mercy, they grow up into security and forgetfulness of him,
yea lift up their heels against him, and corrupt themselves in the things they
use, giving up themselves unto intemperance, idleness, filthy lusts, speeches,
and actions, Reasons proouing that a man ought not to use any of Gods creatures
without leave and thanksgiving.
and all because God is not at their tables, but is driven thence. Now that I
may convince this general sin to be an high kind of impiety, and not so
indifferent as many account it; I will use some reasons, to show that no man
ought to presume without turning to God to use any of his creatures.

For first, whose are the heavens and earth, and the furniture of them? the
birds of the air, the beasts of the field, the sheep on a thousand
mountains; Psalm 50.
they are mine, says the Lord. Who is it that opens his hand and fills all
things? who spreads our cloth for us, who fills our cups, Psalm. 145.15,
16. Psalm. 23.5. Psalm. 16.56.
who maintains our tents, who lays our lives? the Lord does all this for
us, says David. If all these things then be the Lords, shall we feloniously
take another man's things without his leave? shall he create all these things to
give us, and shall we be so unmannerly, yea and profane, as never to thank
him? Did David so? no surely; but this consideration that God had given man
dominion over, and interest in all creatures, as sheep, oxen, beasts, fowls,
fishes, etc. made him break out into an exclamation full of admiration; O
Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world? Psalm. 8.1. and last.
and this he begins withal and ends withal, to show us that both before
and after we have tasted the sweetenes of the creatures, we ought to testify
our sweet taste of God himself in them. Thou would not take a meals meat
of a mean man thy neighbor, but with many thanks, and some requital: and
dare thou take all thy meals from God, and never scarce so much as
acknowledge thy self a receiver?

2. Paul commands us, 1 Thessalonians. 15.19. In all things give thanks; and for
this is the will of God: does not he then against the will of God, that uses
his creatures without thanksgiving? nay consider the place a little further:
Christians are there enjoined to be thankful to God in their miseries,
persecutions, wants, imprisonments, in all straights, yea in death it self:
and should not such as profess themselves Christians, express much more their
thankfulness to God, for their riches, health, prosperity, pleasures,
comforts, and abundance of all things? which if they shall not do, the heathen
themselves which have no part in Christ, shall rise up in judgment against
them, who can and have been exceeding thankful for worldly prosperity; and
it is likely they would have been much more if they had known any better
portion: Nay, the very bruit beasts shall condemn such brutish men: for
shall the Lions seek their meat of God? shall the ravens call upon him for
their food? shall the eyes of all things look up unto God, to receive their
meat from his hand? and shall not all things condemn men, unto whom only the
Lord has framed eyes, that can turn themselves upward toward him; and yet
are seldom or never lifted up in testimony of their dependence upon him?

unless I would both pollute it, and my self in it; for till I pray, it is
not sanctified, it is unholy to me. Object. Open thanksgiving at our tables
necessary
But God forbid that we should not thank God for every thing: but if we do it
in general, or in our hearts, is not this enough? I answer, no: for the former
our Savior resolves in the prayer, not teaching us to pray in gross for all
good things, but specially for bread: and not for bread for all our lives, but
for the day, and every day we must pray, and consequently every day give
thanks even for bread in particular, how meanly many one thinks of it. And
for the latter, we have the contrary practice in the Church, both of the old
and new Testament. The poor maids of Ramah Zophim could tell Saul that the
people would eat no meat, 1. Sam. 9.13.
till Samuel the Prophet was come and blessed the sacrifice; which was no
mental, but a blessing of the meat by word of mouth: nay Christ in his family
though he was the heir of all things, never are meat, but first gave thanks;
yea he had a form of grace and thanksgiving, which was very well known to
the disciples, Luke 24.35. Paul in the ship would not eat bread, but first
gave thanks in the presence of them all: and how just a thing is it, Act.
27.35.
that that mouth which opens it self to the receiving of the creatures,
should open it self in the praise of the giver? which who so neglects,
besides that he sins against a special commandment, Deuteronomy. 8.10. when thou
have eaten, and filled thy self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God: he does
as a man, who sits down and takes his dinner in an inn, and goes away
without paying the inholder his due; Beza homil. 10. hist. resurr.
which every one will say is a shameful part. And as there be many who so
grossly forget God and themselves: so those fail also that formally bless
their tables, because it is a fashion, and they must do it at least by one of
their boys, and then the table is formally blessed: when as prayer and praise
for other daily comforts as necessary are neglected; as for conueniencie of
dwelling, and habition, garments, rest, and safety, health, comforts of the
calling, recreations, etc. for i^ men did conscionably and in right
apprehension of Gods goodness bless their meat; the same conscience would
continually provoke them to the like duty for the like mercies.

Now more particularly I will show in the several kinds of things
indifferent, the common failings of men against the three former rules: and
because the particulars are so many as if I should prosecute them all, I should
draw this treatise beyond a just extent; I will therefore only speak of
four which are of most ordinary use. 1. Of meats and drinks. 2. garments
and apparel. 3. riches and wealth. 4. sportes and recreations.

For the first: Meats and drinks not used in 1. faith.
1. Those offend against the rule of faith in meat and drink who eat not their
own bread lawfully gotten by Gods blessing upon a lawful calling, as all
gamesters, feeding themselves by other men's losses: all usurers, who eat up
other men's strength and sweat: all unjust persons, who eat the bread of
deceit: all idle, lusty, and wandering beggars, who ought not to eat; none of
these have right to a morsel of bread gotten by such means; and yet it is to
be feared that many amongst us would look but with lean faces, if they should
eat no more then they well came by: many a sta^uen face would convince many a
one of much stolen bread.

2. Love.
Secondly, those eat not in love, who eat and drink without regard of the
godly poor, especially near them: such the Prophet speaks of, who drunk
their wine in bowls, and anointed themselves, but cared not for the
afflictions of Joseph. Amos 6.6.
Thus many a Dives fares deliciously every day, but poor Lazarus cannot be
befriended with the crummes. We have an other rule, Nehem. 8.10. Go eat the
fat, and drink the sweet, and send part to them, for whom none is prepared.

3. Sobriety.
Thirdly, They fail against the rule of sobriety. 1. Who watch not
affections, but set them on meat and drink, putting themselves under the power
of these, but keep not their own power over them. As many cannot be without
the pot at the elbow, and drink for drinks sake, and eat not for strength
but for appetite. And hence men and women devise new ways of stirring up their
appetite both to eat and drink; a greiuous sin, which argues they make
their friend drunk. This wicked custom it seems had gotten footing among
the Persians; which was the occasion of that law that none should compel
another to drink above that himself would: Ester 1.
the like whereof were a disgrace to make, but a greater shame not to be kept
of Christians: the Heathen King shall condemn a number of Christians, who
would not have his house a school of intemperance, nor any one to drink but
according to his thirst and appetite.

Secondy, in apparel these rules are transgressed. The first. 1. When men or
women wear strange fashions and guises: Apparel not used in 1. Faith.
seeing the rule of the word for attire, is the presidence of the wise, grave,
and godly, of that pure, honest, of good report, etc. those things must we do:
and the threatening is, that God will visit all such as wear strange attire:
Zeph. 1.9.
and yet where can we cast our eyes, and not see numbers whose bodies were they
so monstrous, and of as many fashions as their apparel is, they would soon be
cast out of the company and account of men? but whatsoever their bodies be,
their minds appear monstrous, filled with vain and idle conceits, causing
them most wastfully spend their time, and goods: and all to show ( not the
hidden man of the heart) but that lightness, vanity, want on and dishonest
disposition, which wageth battle not against Christianity only but even
ciuillitie, and humanity it self: some wearing their apparel not to cover
their nakedness, the right end for which the Lord instituted it: but as having
put off all shame to discover their nakedness further then a man of any modesty
and civil behavior would be willing to look upon: others so devising and
wearing their clothes as if they were willing to put themselves into a frame,
wherein they cannot only not turn themselves to any business, but are scarce at
liberty to feed themselves; but as the picture in a frame or table is wholly
moved or else never a whit, so many women especially are so fitted in their
frames, as the whole frame must be removed before they can move any part
about any profitable labor or business: and so are fit for nothing but as
pictures in tables to be looked upon. Sure I am, the virtuous woman was never
thus attyred: Prove. 30. 2. Those transgress the first rule, who by their
apparel confound the sexes. Deuteronomy. 22 5.
The man may not wear the woman's then which nothing is more common in maskes
and plays, even hereby most justly condemned.

The second rule is transgressed by such, 1. as wear any garment in religious
or civil use with the offense of the brethren. 2. Love.
2. who loose their duties of charity, or justice: who shape not their gaments
according to their own cloth, but cut into some other man's; so far from
being helpefull to others, as others cannot have their due from them.

3. Sobriety.
They offend against the third rule. 1. That exceed their order and

Riches nor used in 1. Faith.
Thirdly, in riches men fail against the first rule of faith. 1. When the heart
is carried to seek abundance, for that is an apparent fruit of diffidence
snares of the devil: the former suffers not God himself, this latter
suffers not his kingdom to become our portion. 3. When men trust in
uncertain riches, as in a sure hold, saying wedge of gold, thou art my hope:
this makes it hard for a rich man, that is, (as Mark expounds it) one that
trusts in riches, to be saved, and necessarily must therefore be a great
enemy to faith.

2. Love.
The second rule of love is violated, 1. when they are gotten, kept, unrighteous
mammon, Luke 16.9.
in regard of the unrighteous Give alms of that ye have, and all shall be
clean unto you: in which words Christ teaches the Pharisees, that their meat
is not then clean, when it is served up in clean dishes, but when their
consciences are cleansed and purified by faith, which will manifest it self in
such fruits of love and mercy as he speaks of.

3. Sobriety.
The third rule of sobriety is diversely infringed. As 1. when men that God does
so: whereas the rich and poor meet, God made them both: he accepts not the
person of the rich, nor contemns the person of the poor: and of the two, the
broken soul is the delight of his eye. Why should then the gazing upon any of
these outward things, dazzle or perish any man's eye? seeing we ought to look
upon our selves and others as God looks. 2. When men wast them in pride,
prodigality, all, the young man, if he will follow Christ; must sell all, that
is, Praeparatione mentis saltem.
be ready if God call him thereto: for being indifferent things, we must in
getting, keeping, and parting from them, show and carry our selves
indifferently, learning with Paul in all things to be content: A man may not
ask more wealth in prayer then necessaries: and why.
if God supply necessaries, asking no more: for howsoever a Christian may use
abundance lawfully, if God give it; yet such must his contentment be with his
present estate, that he may not ask more then necessaries; both because there

The fourth sort of things indifferent, are recreations, in which the first
rule is broke, Recreations not used in 1. Faith.

Non est bonu^ ladere cum sanctis.


1. when men sport themselves with things not warranted, or forbidden in the
word. As seeing all recreations ought to be of indifferent things, no man ought
to recreate himself, ^. either with holy things: or 2. with unholy and
sinful things. For the former; (...) the word of God in the Scriptures is
holy, as God himself is; and to take the name of God in vain. 2. The
judgments of God are no Throwing at cocks an inhumane sport.
or painful tormenting of any dumb creature. Alas, sinful man, have thou
not brought evil enough upon the innocent creature, without such rejoicing and
triumphing over that bondage which thy impiety has imposed upon those
creatures, which in their kind obey and serve the Creator far better then
thou? God sets his good creature before thee, that in it thou might
behold his love, mercy, providence, and power toward thee, and not that thou
should show cruelty, and hard-heartednes unto it. A note of a good man is
to be merciful to his beast: but this practice is one of the cruel mercies of
the wicked: how can such recreation stand with the fear of God? how is such
rejoicing mingled with trembling?

It is no safe meddling with edge tools.
Secondly, Neither may we play with sin: for that is no indifferent thing
neither. As when we see a man given over to drunkenness, this spectacle is
indeed no matter of laughter or merriment, but of sorrow and lamentation, that
Gods image should be so foully defaced. Neither must the fear of God ever be
laid aside, especially in our recreations, wherein we are so soon overtaken.
Prove. 26.18.
Solomon makes it a note of a fool, that is, a wicked man, to make a pastime
of sin: and again, he casts firebrands, arrows, and deadly things, and
says, am I not in sport?

The second rule of love is neglected, 1. when any of our recreations 2. Love.
as to purchase thereby his money to his impouerishment or hinderance, as many
win more in short time, then they our recreations, we loose our patience,
meekness, and love, and rage, and scorn, and quarrel with them that therein
cross us: nay with the sacred name of God himself, or with the vain name of
luck or fortune; as gamesters are never so zealous in Gods matters, as in
their own gain.

Thirdly, they are not used in sobriety; 3. Sobriety.
1. when men make a calling of their recreation, and have no other, or no such
hold to maintain A good heart prizeth the word above the gold of Ophir, and no
treasure is comparable to it. Prove. 3.17.
when for their pleasure or recreation men omit the duties of the Sabbath; yea
further, when men sit at play day and night, longer then they would willingly
for much money be bound to any good thing; whereby they wast their substance,
neglect their callings, loose their good names, and go under the names of
gamesters, dicers, etc. in the mean time who is at home to guide and order, to
pray, and teach the family: oh this is a strange voice to a gamester.

Thus we see how men fail in these particulars, to which many more might be
added, whereby they draw much sin upon themselves in the use of their most
lawful liberties.

Now therefore shall it not be amiss to add a few general rules or
counsels, by the observation of which, Rules of direction for the use of al
things. A man will never give over earthly pleasures till he see better.
a heart desirous to please God in all things shall be able to avoid all these
wanderings, and turn it self to the comfortable use of all these things,
wherein Satan hides so many snares. As, 1. Labor for a pure eye, and all the
body shall be bright and lightsome; such an eye as may see Jesus Christ with
his merits; for till then, outward things cannot but be much and great in our
eyes. 2. When unto or from Christ. And what more proper cause can we give, why
men so corrupt themselves in outward things, then this, that they make there a
stop and resting place, whence they should make a step to climb

Use. 2. A second use of this doctrine, that all things are pure to the pure,
is to take notice what a privilege believers have obtained by Christ, that to
them all things being pure, they may without scruple of conscience use their
liberty in any indifferent thing, so it be used aright: because that law of
commandments which stood in ordinances is abrogated through the flesh of
Christ, Ephesians. 2.15.
that bondage which believers were put under before Christ's appearing, Gal.
2.25. Coloss. 2.14.
lasts now no longer seeing faith is come, the impotent and beggarly
rudiments are vanished, and taken out of the way: the handwriting by which
they subscribed to their own guiltiness and condemnation, and that so often
as they used the ceremonies of the law, is fastened unto the cross. Nay more,
sin which robbed us of all, is spoiled, the powers and principallities to
which our sin delivered us are vanquished, Satan, hell, death, devils, and
all hostility are gloriously led captive, and triumphed over, that we might
see our full victory, by our captain and head of our profession: who having
thus set us into the freedom of sons, and thereby given us prerogative to
all the privileges of heaven it self, which are constant and not fading; can
he grudge us, and not give us much more right to the creatures which are but
corruptible. Oh how should this urge us to labor for the precious gift of
faith, which as a chief instrument seals up to the soul possessing it, all
the former privileges of the Saints: it brings with boldness into the
presence of God, it reaches Christ in whom the Father is well pleased, it
restores our right in the most common benefits, even to the air which we
breath in, it makes prayers to be heard, the word to be profitable; alms and
works of mercy to be comfortable: whereas without it a curse follows, the
use of all blessings, all services are rejected, thy prayers are abominable
who turnest thy ear from hearing the law; thy hearing and reading the word,
is the reading and hearing of the sentence of thy own condemnation: thou
give alms of that which is none of thine own; all thy pains and labor is
but to get thee to hell* o therefore seeing such are the prerogatives of a
believer; get faith into thy soul, which is the only purchase of them: with
great sums of money these freedoms cannot be obtained, only the believer is
free borne. Which if it be so, what a woeful thing is it, that so few prize
these privileges as they ought; so few care for the gift of faith offered in
the preaching of the word, by which alone they can become pure to the
creatures, and the creatures unto them; yea they pure to all things, and all
things unto them: by woeful experience we find the truth of that of the
Apostle, all men have not faith; nay it is a gift, and given but to a very
few: for there are but a few freemen in a corporation in comparison of the
rest: and yet fewer benchers then freemen, as the Saints are; a few
counselors in a state, as believers are; and yet better were it to be no man
then no believer. And in the second place, when by much labor and means, we
have obtained these freedoms, we must be as careful to maintain them: for
otherwise we loose most precious things purchased with the precious blood of
the Son of God: the commandment is to stand fast in the liberty in which
Christ has set us free: we must suffer no cauiller to infringe our charter,
nor bind us where Christ has loosed us. If the Lord have pronounced all
things, that is, indifferent, pure and free to the pure believer, let a Popish
spirit come and boast of his vow of voluntary poverty, of single life, of
abstinence from flesh, etc. we have learned otherwise from this Scripture, A
wonder that to men so pure as they by their positions would be, so many sorts
of creatures should be impure, as meats, marriage, days, etc.
that not only all estates, bondage or liberty, riches or poverty, marriage
or single life, are alike unto God: but also that all creatures are sanctified
to the sanctified receiver; and consequently that all their vows, besides that
they are out of the power of him that voweth, do nothing else but revoke and
abolish Christian liberty. And lastly, we are to testify our thankefulnes for
such liberties purchased; especially by abhorring the wickedness of Popery,
which brings upon men a more detestable bondage then that of Egypt: 1. by
binding them to seek for righteousness, and justification before God by the
works of the law. 2. by impos^^^ a mass of traditionarie precepts and
commandments of men: (...) by, 1. they steal away this dearly purchased
liberty. 2. hold the Church under rudiments now after that faith is come. 3.
rob Christ of his honor by lessening his benefits, and darkening his grace.
4. set themselves in the room of Christ, in making laws to bind the
conscience upon pain of damnation, although God is the Lord of it. Thus much
of the former branch of this 15. verse.

But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled.] This opposition shows the truth of
the exposition of the former words: for as by the pure were meant the
regenerate and believers; so by the impure person the Apostle affirms that he
means the unregenerate and unbeliever, who wanting faith whereby he might
partake with Christ and all his benefits, whose righteousness and innocence
is the only lauer of the Church, by which also he might have his heart within
him purified in part, and his outward conversation cleansed from dead works
wherein he walks: he is no better then a leper in Gods eyes, ouerspread with
natural corruption, and outwardly spotted and speckled like the leopard, and
in regard of the whole man like a blackeamoore who cannot change his hew: for
such an impuritie is here asctibed to the unbeliever, as not only outwardly
runs upon him; but such a one as has taken and corrupted both the inferior
and the most supreme and excellent faculties of his soul, even his mind, and
his conscience. By the mind is meant the whole understanding part of the
soul; which being the eye of the soul carries with it reason, judgment,
and election. The pollution of which is to be taken up with darkness and
blindness, 1. Cor. 2.14. to be filled with vanity, Ephesians. 4.17. with
fleshlinesse, Colos. 2.18. in so much as all the natural wisdom of man is
fleshly and deuillish. By conscience is meant that faculty of the soul,
which by applying particular things judged of and done, Iam. 3.15.
does determine them either with or against them: which depending upon the
former, must necessarily be led into the errors of it, no otherwise then one
blind man is led by an other into a ditch. The pollution of it is, when it is
either idle or ill occupied; the former, when it is sleepie, sensles, or
feared, doing nothing at all, neither accusing, nor excusing: the latter, when
it does both these, but neither of them as it ought; but accuses where it
should excuse, and excuse where it ought to accuse. Now both these being thus
polluted, let the unbeliever turn himself to any thing in general without
himself (as all things in general fall under the understanding) or turn him
to any particular thought, word, action, concerning himself (which only the
conscience has to do with) in all these he is polluted, so as nothing to him
can be pure. So as we must here conceive of an absolute impuritie ascribed to
the unbeliever (which is the only difference in the opposition) for whereas
purity was in the former branch attributed to the believer in some respect
only: for 1. the best are encombred with original sin. 2. but in part, and
not fully regenerate. 3. overtaken not seldom with actual transgression,
which may and does make them still cry out with David, Lord create a clean
heart within me. This impuritie is absolutely, and without any restraint
ascribed to unbelievers and unconverted men. And in this branch also the
Apostle bends himself against the error of the Jewish teachers: who were
very strict and curious least they should be outwardly by this or that meat,
day, garment, or otherwise be defiled: for he would have them conceive that he
spoke of no such thing: neither were these the subjects wherein their impuritie
did so much consist: but in such a thing as stuck nearer them then any outward
thing, yea, then their very skins, even in unbelief, and consequently in
such a power of sin in their hearts as made all things, though in their
nature and institution never so good, yet unto them, and in their use, no
otherwise unclean, then a fustie vessel corrupts the sweetest wines that
can be powered into it. And therefore would he have these ceremonie-masters to
turn their eyes into themselves, and look into their inside, and then they
shall see themselves bootelesly to employ al their pains in keeping themselves
from outward pollution, so long as they carry that within them, which defiles
every thing they meddle withal. Whence we learn sundry instructions.

Doct. 1. Divinity of Scripture proved by discovering the inwa^d thoughts of
wicked men.
We have here a good argument of the divinity of Scripture, in that it can,
and does (as God himself) enter upon, and judge the thoughts of men: and of
men themselves (not as men) from things without, but from things within, even
according to their cleannes, or uncleanness before God. From this argument the
Apostle proves the same thing, Hebr. 4.12. the word of God is lively, and
mighty in operation, and deuideth, and cutteth a sunder the soul and spirit:
that is, it works not only upon the inferior faculties which are less pure,
but upon the purest and most supreme part of the soul called the spirit, and
the mind; and by Paul, the spirit of the mind: for nothing is so secret in
the soul, but it lies under the stroke of the word, Ephesians. 4.23.
which pearceth as far as the eye of the author of it, to whom all things are
naked and open, verse. 13. No Anotomist can by cutting up one part of the body
after another, so manifestly discover to the eye the several parts of man, as
does the word and the spirit therein discover and reprove the most inward
thoughts: such a light carries with it, as chaseth away the darkness of the
soul, 1. Cor. 14.25.
lets a simple man see the secrets of his heart laid open, brings him to
the sight of his sin, and to break out into the acknowledgement and
confession of the truth, saying, God is there indeed. Now nothing but the word
can tell a man his thoughts, nothing else can pronounce sentence according to
that which is in the heart: and therefore cannot but come out from God, whose
only privilege it is, to search the hearts which he has made.

Use. 1. Let Ministers gird this sharp sword upon their thigh, and strike down
the high thoughts of men; speaking rather to the conscience, then to the ears
of men: for else the word which is spiritual, and most directly works upon
the heart and spirit, loses in his hand the proper work, and powerful use
of it. This alone is that two edged sword in the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1.16.
whereby he gets the victory: as David said of Goliahs, so more truly may we
say of this, there is no sword to this: Philosophy, Poetry, and profane things
are too blunt to pierce the spirit, too weak to convert souls; too dull to
give sin and corruption deadly blows, or deaths wounds. Whosoever would
turn men from their wicked way, and from the evil of their inventions, must
stand in Gods counsel, Ier. 23.21.
and declare his words to his people. And the note of a true Leuite, is to have
the law of truth under his lips, Malac. 2.6.

2. Labor in hearing the word, to find it thus divinely and powerfully working
in thy heart, find thy soul stricken with the sense of death eternal, find
it the sacrificing knife to cut the throat of thy sins, and lustful
affections; find it to shake and astonish thy soul, for this is the only way
for thee to find rest in the day of trouble: Abac. 3.16.
if it slay not thy sins, it slays thy self insensibly, for it never
returns in vain.

3. Be patient to suffer thy hypocrisy, uncleanness, yea thy most close and
inward sins to be discovered in the Ministry: and when thou see this light
of the Lord searching out all the bowels of thy belly, Prou 20 27.
say of it, surely God is in it: for although I find not this presence by
thunder, lightning, earthquake, as in the mount, yet by a still voice the Lord
comes, and speaks to my soul: no voice but his can cast down such strong
holds as I see shaken within me; none but he can bind my conscience, none but
he can summon my thoughts, none else but he that made it, can work my flintie
heart like wax. The woman at the well conceived nothing above ordinary of
Christ, till he came near her, and told her of her secret unclean course;
then could she acknowledge him a Prophet, then could she ask her neighbors,
Is not he the Messiah that has told me all that ever I did? even so is it not
the Lord Jesus that in his word tells thee of all thy ways? come thy self,
call thy neighbors with thee to learn where such instruction is to be had.
When Christ told Nathaniel, that he saw him under the fig tree, where he
thought he had not: then could he say, surely thou art the son of God, the
King of Israel; even so when thou find the word discovering that in thee,
which thou thoughtest was hid from every eye; thou may say, truly this is
the word of the Son of God, herein it resembles him, it finds me out of my
fig leaves, and calls me out of my bushes where I had hid my self. Thou
may be bold to affirm; surely he is a Prophet of the God of Israel, 2. king.
6.9.
that can discover the secrets of the King of Syria, and the words which he
speaks in his privy chamber: and as truly, this is a man of God, that can
tell me the thoughts and counsels which I take in the most privy chamber of
my soul: yea in the secret and most retired closet of my heart. Many not
acquainted with this lesson, storm and rage at the word when it pricketh them,
and think that the Preacher is informed, and begin to suspect some
intelligencers: the truth is, we have an intellengencer, even a spirit which
goes after Gehezi, and stays by Ananias and Saphirah till their most secret
conveyances be discovered and revenged, to whom day and darkness are alike; and
for such let them in time beware to spurn against prevailing truth, least one
day teach them to their cost, what it is to despise such a word as this is.

4. Judge of thy self and actions as this word does, that is, not according to
thy show in the world, but according to thy pureness, or uncleanness before God,
to whom a poor man in his uprightness is better then a froward person be he
never so rich, yea a poor wise child more accepted, then an old foolish King.
This is the truest touchstone whence thou may judge certainly of thy estate,
and not be deceived. If this word reprove, or approve any of thy ways, or
thy whole course: thou may safely pronounce of it, Lord if I be deceived in
this, thou and thy word has deceived me: and if by thy word I err, I err
willingly, for I know that this is according to Gods judgment, and that is
according to truth, Romans 2.2

Doctr. 2. We learn further, what is the estate of a man unregenerate, whom
the Apostle sets out thus. 1. He is one that is unclean: The miserable
estate of a wicked man.
2. an unbeliever: 3. one to whom nothing is pure: 4. his mind: 5. his
conscience is polluted: in all which respects, 2. Cor 7 1. (...).
he is a most odious person in whom is nothing but filthiness of flesh and
spirit, the which the pure eyes of the Lord cannot abide. All which will more
easily appear, if we consider, that by our fall we were not only deprived of
that grace and goodness which was set in our nature; but there succeeded a foul
and monstrous prauitie, and evil, opposed directly to the former good, and
that through the whole frame of the soul. The mind which as a pure eye was
able strongly to behold the brightness of God, and the things of God, is now
not only destitute of that light of understanding, and reason; but is covered
and veiled with a black darkness of ignorance, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ which is the image of God, 2. Cor 4.4. 1. Cor. 2.14.
though in it self never so clear, yet cannot shine out unto them.

The will which was most conformable to Gods will, is not only spoiled and
robbed of the rectitude, and freedom it had to good; but is become rebellious,
and resisting the will of God: Matthew. 23.37. how often would I have gathered
thee, but thou would not: Ioh. 5.40. ye will not come unto me that ye may
live: yea and is a servant of sin, Romans 7.14. the inferior parts called the
flesh, are not only spoiled of that conformity which all the affections, and
appetite had with the law, but resist with hostillitie, Romans 8.7.
and enmity against God, yea and cannot be subject to the law of God. Thus
every way the wickedness of man is great, and all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart are only evil continually: Genesis 6.5.
neither can be other, seeing whatsoever rises of flesh, is no better then
flesh.

A more full description of man's natural estate see in cap 3.3.
Use. 1. Hence we see in part the corruption of our nature, and in it the
reproach of our first sin, and fruit of our first transgression: whereby we
might learn to be ashamed of our filthiness which is thus seated, and rests
not only in the inferior parts and powers of the soul, or as Papists speak,
in the flesh and sensual part, but even in the reasonable and most excellent
part of the soul, which is the mind and conscience. This very consideration
should be as a hammer to beat down proud thoughts, which rise upon the gazing
of outward things and respects, on which so many bear themselves: who doubtless
would quickly strike sail, if they could turn their eye a little to see
themselves by nature and natural courses the children of wrath, enemies of
righteousness, haters, and hated of God. Many a man blesses himself in that
he keeps his body clean from unlawful filthiness, his hands pure from
open injustice, his words free from iniuring men: and thus content themselves
with a civil righteousness, which is to glory in the flesh. But could they
look impartially into their souls, they should find a filthy sink and
puddle steaming out noisome and graceles parts into the whole behavior, all
which thrust them under the regiment of death. Yea even the best of men
regenerate find this law of evil with them, which ministers small joy to
some parts of their lives, when they see the seeds of all sin in themselves,
and these seeds to rise up into the blade and care sometime, before they
attend to cut them down, or weed them up; and when they find themselves as
ready to yield an harvest of iniquity as others, if the good husbandman
should not still be pruning and dressing them.

2. As man could proceed from an habit of good to the privation of it, so can
he not of himself go back from this privation to the habit, seeing no
freedom at all is left in any faculty of his soul to spiritual good. Is the
mind and conscience, and all things impure to the unbeliever, and has his will
any more privilege then the other? how erroneous then is that doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and the schoolmen, who teach that man's free will to good is
not altogether lost, but much weakened in spiritual motions; that it can
dispose and prepare it self to grace; and that it coworketh with the grace of
God in the very first beginnings of grace? Whereas the Scripture teaches,
that man is so far from his own help in his recovery, that he resists
it, and fights against it till the Lord mightily subdue him, as he did Paul
on his way to Damascus. The first degree or preparation to the cure, is the
knowledge of the disease, but the natural man will not be brought to
acknowledge and confess his estate: Psalm. 14.3. there is no man that
understands his way: our Apostle has elsewhere also ruled this case, 2. Cor.
3.5. we are not sufficient of our selves to think a thought, and therefore
much less to will: Philip. 2.13. It is God that works in us both to will and
to do: where we are not said to will actiuely, but acted, that is, so far as
God makes us to will good. Let our poverty then be hence acknowledged, Gods
glory magnified, Christ's merit amplified, in which alone we recover all our
wants, and are raised out of our graves of death.

3. Hence we see the necessity of regeneration in every part: Ephesians. 4.22.23.
be renewed in the spirit of your minds: confess then and cry out with the
leper, I am unclean, I am unclean: Lev. 13.45.
and seeing if Christ wash thee not thou have no part in him, pray with Peter,
wash me Lord, not my feet only, but my hands, and head* yea my whole body,
and my whole soul, my whole man. The Apostle prayed that not only the
inferior faculties of the Thessalonians, as the affections, and appetite which
are the feet of the soul might be washed, but uses this form, The God of
peace sanctify you wholly. 1 Thessalonians. 1.23.


4. If the wicked man be thus unclean, then hate his company, the vile person
is to be contemned, come not near him, touch him and thou will be defiled, he
is filthy within and without, Lev. 13.14.
and with the leper must be thrust out of the camp for fear of infection.

Doctr. 3. Before this natural uncleanness be purged, Before natural
uncleanness be purged every thing is unclean to a man.
every thing is unclean unto a man: the unbeliever tainteth every thing that
he touches; nothing within him, nothing without him, which is not polluted,
although not in his own nature, yet unto him and in his use. Let a natural
man turn him to any action, word, or thought, all of them not excepting the
best, are against God, because they proceed from unclean minds and
consciences. 1. His actions spiritual, even his best services, as praying,
hearing, reading, receiving of Sacraments, alms, all these being the
sacrifices of the wicked are abomination unto the Lord, Prou. 15 8.
who first looks to the person, and then the gift, who if he turn his ear
from hearing the law, Prou. 28.9. Isa. 66.3.
even his prayer is abominable; if he choose his own ways, let him kill a
bullock for sacrifice, it is all one as if slew a man; Agg. 2.14, 15.
if he be a polluted person that touches any of these holy things, shall they
not be unclean? yes surely, the most divine ordinances are turned to him to
sin: for the Lord first requires pure parts, and then pure actions, Ezech.
36.26. 2. His civil actions, his honest dealing in the world, his buying,
selling, giving, lending, his labor, care, yea all the duties of his calling,
are in and to him no better then sins. 3. His natural actions, as eating,
drinking, sleeping, recreation, physic, all are unclean unto him. 4. All
Gods creatures and humane ordinances, as meat, drink, cloth, goods, lands,
buildings, marriage, single estate, in a word, the whole way of the wicked is
abomination to the Lord, Prou. 15.9. All these are witnesses of his sin and
filthiness, all of them are enlargers of his woe and damnation, because he
wants faith to lay hold on the Lord Jesus, whereby the just do live, have
their heart purified, and so are made Lords over the creatures.

Use. 1. Seeing no man can with good conscience go about any thing while he is
in his sin and uncleanness, let it move every man to beware especially that
he approach not near the courts of God, nor compass the altar without washing
his hands in innocence. The Ministers may not take the word into profane
mouths and hands, themselves hating reformation. Exodus 30.18.
The brazen lauer must put them in mind of their duty, which was set between
the tabernacle and the altar, that the Priests might wash their hands and feet
whenever they came before the Lord: and the Lord will be sanctified in all
that come near him: people must not bring oblations with hands full of blood;
the Lord is soon weary of such sacrifices, Isai. 1. An earthly king accepts
of no service tendered by a traitor: and both ministers and people must learn
to renew their repentance, before they attempt any religious duties, whether
public or private.

7. main^ differences between the godly and the wicked: in
2. Let this doctrine move us to discern aright between the estate of the
believer and unbeliever, that the wretchedness of the one may break our
hearts for our sins, and the happiness of the other may whereas the thoughts
of the godly are for most part tending to God, to heaven and the things of
heaven, Thoug^ts.
and their hearts are still inditing good matter, wherein the greatest part of
their soundest joy and comfort is placed: the thoughts of the wicked are
earthly, lewd, and ungodly, often accusing themselves, and making away to the
most just sentence of the almighty. True it is, that the godly judge
themselves worthy to be destroyed for their iniquity, but yet they see great
light in that darkness, Eze^ 11.36.31.
which the wicked never behold, but are reserved in horror unto the darkness
of the great day. 2. The speeches of the godly tend to the praise of Words.
the tongue will be speaking of the praises of this King, Psalm. 45.1. their
talk tends to edification, and ministers grace to the hearer, their tongues
speak of matters grave and high, matters of Gods kingdom of grace here, and
of glory hereafter: the speeches of the wicked are either to magnify
themselves, or proud, or earthly, or rotten and unsavory: for the streams
can be no sweeter then the fountains whence they issue. 3. Whereas the works
of the Actions.
the works of unbelievers are crooked paths tending unto, yea the causes of
their destruction. 4. Whereas all the miseries of the godly are signs and
fruits of Gods Passions.
and out of which the Lord gives them a sure and seasonable deliverance: the
calamities of the wicked, are not only evident signs of Gods wrath, and
malediction; but the beginnings of eternal punishment, the first fruits of
there destruction, and the downfalls to hell it self out of which is no
redemption. 5. Whereas Promises.
and walk in the strength of them cheerfully, and their hope shall never
confound them: the ungodly man's false application of promises are but a false
fire; they may scramble and pull the promises unto them, but the childrens
bread belongs not to such dogs: God has promised nothing to such, but
threatened against them all the plagues written in his book, which shall surely
overtake them. 6. Whereas the life of the godly Life.
and glory, that they may see their salvation daily nearer them then when they
first believed: all the life of the wicked on the contrary is accursed and an
heaping up of sin, and plagues. If they pray, their prayer is turned, to
sin. If they hear or read, they receive or pronounce the sentence of death
against themselves. If they receive the Sacraments, the devil enters into them
as he did into Judas. If they give alms they give that which is none of their
own. If they enjoy prosperity they are lifted up as the thief on the ladder
for a more fearful breakneck. If they see many days, the last of them will
be more woeful, because they Death.
then the day wherein he was borne: for his body is cast on a sweet sleep,
and laid in a bed sanctified and sweetened by the blessed body of the Lord
Jesus; his soul sent up to the glory prepared for the just; and both of them
freed from all sin, and the woeful fruits of the offense of God, and passed
as by a strait door to a long life, even for ever and ever: the death of the
wicked is most accursed, the sentence of an angry and severe judge, and an
entrance or wicket to eternal woe and misery. And thus such works receive
such wages; such labors, such rewards; the stipend is proportional unto their
pains, and their death not unsuitable to such a wretched life. Seeing then that
faith puts this difference, and faith clears the eye to let it see this
difference, labor for faith, rest not till thou can find it in the signs
of it; without this grace, God has no pleasure in thee, neither will accept
any offering, Mal^c. 1 10.
without this spiritual eye, thou shall not see any such difference between
the righteous and wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not; but thou shall still account the proud blessed, and perhaps be soon
contented to fit and cast in thy lot among them. And whosoever thou art, that
have obtained this grace, be thankful for it, make much of it, use means to
cherish, and increase it; for hence only is thy acceptance with God, and hence
only thou know thy self, and thy services to be thus accepted.

Verse. 16. They profess that they know God, but by works they deny him, and
are abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. The
Apostle proceeding in the proof of that which he had said, that nothing was
clean to the unbeliever, whose chief faculties were polluted, brings in
this proof by way of answer to a secret objection; for some might say, But see
you not that many whom you thus condemn, are men professing religion, both
teachers and others; such as speak well of God, of Christ, and discourse
exceeding well concerning outward righteousness, and sanctimonie of life, and
therefore they seem not to be so justly, or at least too rigorously taxed.
Notwithstanding all which, the Apostle concludes against them, that they were
no better then he had said. For let it be granted, that both the vrgers, and
practisers of such laws and traditions given by men, should still pretend
piety and service of God; and should cloak all their ceremonies, and
constitutions under pretense of devotion; yet herein Paul espieth only the
fruit of their corruption, and that is gro^^e hypocrisy, apparent in the fight
and opposition between their profession, and their practice. They profess
indeed they know God, and all their outward carriage is so composed, as if
they only were the sons of Abraham, skillful in the law, strict obseruers of
it in the least particles thereof; that if all religion were to be measured by
their outside, they could not choose now being converted from Iudaisme to
Christianity, but go for good Christians. But in works they deny him: they
express no such thing in their life and conversation, they have only drawn a
fair glove over a foul hand. For look a little nearer them, and consider
their persons, so polluted they are, as that they are abominable, such as are
worthy that both God and good men should turn away from, (...).
as from things noisome to their senses: for so is the nature of the word, used
also Luke 16.15. And look yet further into their lives, in stead of
sanctimonie, you shall meet with rebellion, in stead of subjection unto God,
you shall discover disobedience: and whereas if they were the sons of
Abraham, as they profess; they would do the works of Abraham. They are
reprobate to every good work; which word is sometimes taken passiuely, as 1.
Cor. 9.27. I beat down my body -- least I should be reprobate: Heb. 6.8. The
ground that bears thorns and briars, is reprobate, and near unto a curse:
and so indeed are these refuse and rejected fellows, as soldiers cassierd, or
as base persons, and banquerupts, are passed by, and not called into office, so
these are rejected of God and good men. Yet it better fitteth the place, to
accept the phrase actiuely, and then the sense is this, that they are so far
from the practice of piety, that as men of corrupt minds, are said to be
reprobate concerning the faith: 2. Tim. 3.8.
so those corrupt minded men, are reprobate concerning good works, and
actions, which are the fruits of faith: that is, so given up to sin, and with
the Gentiles, Romans 1. to a reprobate mind, that they seem to have lost all
difference and distinction of good and evil, and can turn their hand to
nothing which is not evil. Which disposition of theirs, seems to be well
expounded, Ier. 4.22. They are wise to do evil, but to do well, they have no
knowledge.

In the verse three points are to be marked, and handled. 1. That there will
always be Hypocrites in the Church. 1. The Characters or notes of them, which
in the verse are four. 3. Their miserable estate and condition, in the word
abominable: unto which we will add the use.

For the first: That there ever will be in the Church together with sound
members many hypocrites, appears. With Abel will be a Cain, There will be
always hypocrites in the Church.
of two men borne in the world, one is an hypocrite: with Isaac an Ismael: if
Abraham himself beget two sons, one is an hypocrite: with Jacob an Esau,
making show of purchasing the blessing as well as he: with the wheat the tares
must grow to the harvest: the branne abides with the meal till the boulting:
the same net covers good and bad fishes, and much filth is drawn along with
the fish. Judas lurketh in Christ's own family. The purest primitive Churches
planted by the Apostles, Act 20.30. 1. Tim. 4.1. 2. Tim. 3.1.5.
could not long continue a pure virgin* as all the Apostles foresaw and
forewarned: neither can it be but in the peace of the Church, as in a sweet and
rainie season, many weeds come up and make a great show among the good herbs:
so many thrust themselves into the profession, bringing with them the cares and
love of the world, whom the first son of persecution causes to wither, Why.
and appear to be themselves. And although the Lord could easily and at once
purge his floor of them, Lev. 10.3.


Use. 1. Let every man try himself, and the soundnes of his heart; he is not
a Jew that is one without, T^^e thine own soundnes.
and therefore every man had need lay a good ground of his faith and
religion: he begins well that begins in the truth. The outward profession
may join thee to the Church indeed, which very thing deceives many, who
conceive that because we have changed the mattins into preaching, and the mass
into the Lords table, therefore they cannot but be of the Church: but the time
will come which shall separate those, whom now the bare profession joins:
when two shall be in a house, two in the field, yea two in a bed whereof the
one shall be taken, and the other refused; one taken like Ruth going on to
Judah, another like Orpah going back to Moab: when the fan shall separate
wheat from chaff^, the one to the garner the other to the burning: when the
shepherd shall divide the sheep from the goats which now grase together,
live together, feed together, are folded together, the one to the right hand,
the other to his left. Let not thy profession deceive thee, for many hypocrites
are in the bosom of the Church.

2. Let no man be offended if in trialls many by falling away be discovered to
be hypocrites, who have long made a show of godliness: Trouble not thy self
when others are proved unsound.
for in this great house, there must be vessels of dishonor, as well as of
honor. Let no man entertain any dislike, either of the doctrine, or the
Church, because some men turn from it: for being the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles; if Apostles themselves, yea or angels should come and teach a
contrary, or a diverse doctrine from it, we must deem them accursed: for God
is faithful, and no unfaithfulness of man can make him otherwise. And for the
Church that is the fame, even a number of believers sanctified and sealed to
eternal life, of which number they never were. They went out from us, but they
were not of us, for had they been of us, they would have continued with us, 1.
Ioh. 2.19. For what bonds have they broken, but some outward and visible bonds,
such as are external profession of doctrine, external conformity unto it,
outward worship, communion in the administration of the Sacraments, whereby
they were tied only to the members of the Church, all which are easily broken
and dissolved? but not any internal or invisible bond, such as is the bond of
eternal election, or the bond of the spirit of Christ, whereby they should
have bin first knit unto the head, which is of absolute necessity to be truly
united to the Church, for these knots once tied could never be dissolved.
Neither let any child of God hence too much torment himself with fear, least
he should not persevere in the grace received: but if any have received the
white stone, and the new name in it, Rev. 2.17.
let him know that the foundation of God remains sure: let him for his part
set his seal unto it, by departing from iniquity: and he that thus daily
purges himself, shall be a vessel prepared unto honor, 2. Tim. 2.19.

3. We may not look to live here below amongst angels, Look not to find a
soil upon earth, wherein wheat grows without chafe.
but if we willingly will not be deceived, we must make account of tares: for
such an heaven wherein dwells nothing but righteousness, cannot be looked for
upon earth. And therefore the Anabaptists following the Donatists while they
will abide no tares in their fields and floares, themselves remain no wheat,
no Church; for these two must abide together until the harvest, so as in the
mean time where the one is not, neither is or can be the other. But we must
look up and breath after that day of separation, when the Lord Jesus shall
make good that promise unto us, Cant. 4.8. Thou shall come with me my spouse
from Lebanon, and look from the top of Amanah, from the top of Shenar, and
Hermon, from the dens of Lions, and from the mountaine^ of Leopards: where
three promises are wrapped up in one. 1. of delivery out of the world: Lebanon
a part of it being put for the whole. 2. of victory, for the Church shall be
exalted as on the tops of the highest hills, and shall disdainefully and
tryumphantly look down upon her enemies, who shall be put under her feet. 3.
of safety, from wicked, lyonish, cruel, and bloodthirstie men; and from
leopards and hypocrites, which have as many contrary guises, as the leopard
has spots.

Four marks in the text to kno^ an hypocrite by.
The second point are the characters of an hypocrite. The first of the four is
in these words, They profess they know God. The hypocrite is a great
professor of religion, and hence comes to be answerable to his A form of
godliness.
or king, but is well known to be the next remove from a rogue: so these
fellows whom the Apostle notes, have often in their mouths the name of God
and of Christ; the title of the Chuch, and pretend great knowledge of God, and
cunning in the Scriptures, and other Ecclesiastical writings; yea further,
make a great show of faith and piety, and if bare profession would lead to
heaven, these could not be the least or last there. And to make this a little
more plain, an hypocrite can carry himself so level, and even in his
course, as no man shall be able outwardly to accuse him, or impute any thing
unto him, no more then the disciples could accuse Judas, when every man said,
Master, is it I? but none of them said, master is it Judas? Observe him in his
religion, you shall hear him crying unto God, Hos. 8.2.
and saying, my God, I know thee, challenging God for his God, and thrusting
himself under him as one of his people and holy ones: many shall cry Lord,
Lord, says Christ, and shall profess the knowledge of him, to whom he shall
profess that he never knew them for his. You shall see him outrunning all
that is required at his hands, he will bring many oblations not of sheep, and
small beasts, but many oxen, and not in one place as God requires, but in
many, yea in so many as the altars shall exceed the number of the cities: you
shall see him cleave to the Church, hear, pray, nay hear gladly as Herod,
pray boldly as the Pharisie, Mark. 6.20.
and receive often the seed with joy, and yet be bad ground. Look to his
outward carriage, he will not fail in the practice of just dealing; he will
abstain from most sins, as other men; he will cling to good men's company;
be pragmaticall and busy in performing many sightly duties; he will be ready
to pluck out his eyes for good Ministers (as the Galatians for Paul) and yet
afterward fall quite from his doctrine. You would verily think him to be a
sheep of Christ, and so himself may happily take himself to be the child of
God, and in all this led by the motions of the good spirit of God; whereas
not a few unclean spirits breath in him. Ob. Alas will some here say, what am
I better then such a man as you speak of? what am I other then an hypocrite if
this man may be one? I see my self come behind such as these, and so have lost
a great deal of pains, of hopes. Ans. As Christ said to the young man
vaunting of keeping all the laws of God from his youth, one thing is yet
wanting, so it is to this man, which if thou have, thou as far exceedest him
as light does darkness, though thou want a great deal of his appearance:
What this is, the next note shows.

The second note is in these words, But indeed they deny him: that is, all
the religion of an hypocrite is only an outward profession separated A denying
of the power of it.
All that we have spoken of him is but a liueles form of godliness, in which
the power of it is denied, 2. Tim. 3.5. Men may be said to deny a thing three
ways: 1. with the tongue. 2. with the heart; thus the Atheist denies God, Non
solum in falsis verbis, sed in simulatis operibus mendacium est. Item.
Christianum se dicere and opera Christi non facere mendaciu^ est. Ambr. sermon. a
dominica de Abrah.
Psalm. 24.1. 3. with the life or actions, which is here properly meant. For
ask the tongues and words of these men concerning their courses, all will
appear to be fish whole, but ask their lives, and you shall hear their
works (which are far more evident witnesses with or against a man, then his
words) speak otherwise. Or grant they do many glorious works to the eye, yet
even herein after a sort God is denied, in that they are lame, and indeed
carkases of good actions, without any soul to quicken the^; all is external,
and in such works they may be very busy, but spiritually they perform
nothing. Thus Christ charge the Scribes and Pharisees with hypocrisy, in
that they outwardly appeared righteous, but inwardly were like the graves full
of putrefaction and rottennes. And if narrowly we examine the most glorious
appearances of this kind of men, we shall out of the Sriptures more evidently
see the light of this truth, which teach us that there is a generation that
draw near God with their lips, but their hearts are far removed from him,
Ier. 12.
so as though he be near their mouths, he is far from their raines: they
can come with sheep and oxen to seek the Lord, Hos. 5.6. but not with faith
and repentance in their hearts, and therefore shall they find him? If God
delighted in outward sacrifices, they would give him many a one, but that
sacrifice of an humble and contrite spirit, which is his delight they detain
from him. Hence is all their righteousness compared to a morning dew, which
makes show as if it would water and moisten the heart of the earth, but it
only stands a little upon the face or crust of it, and the sun rising, it
presently vanishes away. If they cleave to the Church for a while, they do not
with full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord. If they abstain from evil,
it is more in regard of man then of God, or their care is but to cut off the
wash boughs of sin, but they leave the bole and stumpe standing, to stop the
courses of more shameful and gross sins, but not to damme up the fountain.
If they do any good, they are drawn to it not for the love of God directly,
but for some wordly respect; and the end is rather fear, favor, praise of
men, then the glory of God, as Ananias. If they humble themselves before God,
it is for corn and oil. If they howl upon the beds of their sorrows, it is
for their sickness, and not for their sin, affecting deliverance but not
repentance. If they worship, yet wish they there were no God to worship, as
Herod pretended to worship Christ, but intended to kill him. If they thrust
themselves into the company of good men, it is not to better themselves, but
to credit their actions: they can desire them to pray for them, as Pharaoh,
Simon Magus, but cannot pray for themselves. If they profess religion, it is
not for religions sake, but some other thing accompanying it; Hose. 10.11.
Ephraim is as an heifer that delights to thresh, because treading out the
corn, the ox must not be musled, but eat at his pleasure, but could not away
with plowing, the yoke was too heavy, and the commodity too light: so some
outward commodity provoke the hypocrite to profess religion, but he cannot
abide to plowe up his heart. Judas will carry Christ's bag till he can gain
more by him. Thus turn the hypocrite any way, he will be found swan-like,
which of all fowls has the whitest feathers, but the blackest flesh under
them; except we shall fitlier compare them (with Christ) to the fox, who has
this quality, that his skin is better then his flesh: a show he has of
godliness, but wants the power; he has a name that he lives, but is indeed
dead: seeing the whole life of religion consists in inward renouation of
heart and sanctimonie of life, both which is wanting unto him whose sin lies
under a cloak, and lives in his soul as in a closet, from which the
hypocrite will not be parted.

3. The third note or character, is in a further degree of the sin, in that
they are said, (...). Disobedience.
rebellious to Gods commandment, and disobedient to the doctrine of God. The
word gives us to discover two vices in these titular Christians: 1.
infidelity, 2. rebellion, or in one word, the want of the obedience of faith.
True it is they make a great show of faith, but the Apostle distinguishes of
faith; 1. Tim. 1.5.
one kind is fained, another is unfeigned: the former may be joined with much
knowledge, much talk of piety, but never with a pure heart and good
conscience, as the latter. Now this unfeigned faith being the mother and
mistress of unfeigned obedience, and the only root whence this fruit can
budde and blossom, whosoever are destitute of the former, cannot but be barren
of the latter: what are the fruits of unbelief, see Act. 17.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
Heb. 3.12. And although hypocrites, which taking on them the names of
Christians, make a great show of holiness in external service, in some
ceremonies or wilworship, that a man would marvel that the Scripture should
ascribe rebellion unto them; yet looking nearer unto their service, it will
appear no better. For in all that obedience of theirs, which they make such
account of, they depart from the word, if not in whole, yet in some part, yea
in such a part as makes it rebellion (which cannot properly be said of the
imperfect obedience of Gods children, whose best actions cannot abide the
trial of the law) for besides that the best of their obedience is wanting in
that which the word requires, not being fruits of faith, whereby only they
become acceptable; even in doing that which God commands, they become
rebellious, and that either by adding something of their own; as Iehu whose
fact (though commanded, and much commended yet) was such a rebellion as caused
the Lord not many years after to visit all the blood of Iizreel upon his
house, yea made the whole kingdom of Israel to cease. Hose. 1.4.
Or else by detracting something from the word, to which yet they seem to give
absolute obedience: as Saul, who although he obeyed the word, and made his
boast of doing the commandment, yet because he did not all the word, is
charged of rebellion, 1. Sam. 15.13. This consideration meets with the
excuses of such whited toomes, who scorn to be called rebels, because they
hear the word, and yield something unto it: they belong to God, and will serve
him so near as he gives them leave, but yet some lusts may not be left, some
sweet morsel shall be held under the tongue, and they cannot endure such a
continual martyrdom as mortification is: But those (we see) are not only
rebellious who stand out, and openly belch out blasphemies against God and his
word; such as say, we will not have this man to rule over us: come let us cast
away his cords from us, the word of the Lord spoken by thee Jeremy we will not
do: but those also who secretly in their course depart from the word, with
pretense of obedience, such as take the word into their mouths, but hate to be
reformed. Psalm. 50.17.


The fourth character of an hypocrite, is yet in a further degree of the sin,
and goes near the detection of him: Strangenes to the whole life of God, and
unfitness to make a vessel of mercy of.
when after long custom the word; ashamed to pray, confounded and sometimes
condemned in himself for his present ways: and justly, for although he seemed
sometimes to shine among the stars, yet his present courses suite not with
such practices, as he had better never to have bin acquainted with, then ever
to have grown weary of. Which alas, we know to be the case not of a few, who
seem to have received the sentence which passed against the fig tree,
presenting Christ with leaves, but not with fruit, never more fruit grow on
thee: for how soon are they withered? Nay more, it is to be feared, that many
who now stand not in the last ranks of professors, 2. king. 8.12.
if times should serve, would play but an Hazaels part: or stand at open
defiance of the truth, if once the chaffie profession should be blown away: no
man ever saw the change and alteration of religion, but he saw also this truth
verified.

The third point in the words, is the miserable condition of the hypocrite; The
miserable conditien of the hypocrite.
He is an abominable person. Where note, that men of corrupt minds, taking
upon them the names of Christians, and doing the works of Atheists, are
worthily abhorred of God; and if they could be discerned, ought to be an
eyesore to men, who should not with patience behold them. They are abominable
to God, which appears both 1. in their persons, 2. their actions, 3. their
punishment. For their persons, they are but half Christians, neither hot nor
cold, and therefore the Lord cannot digest them, compared to cakes but half
bakte, Hose. 7.10. and not turned on the other side: below they are hot, that
is, either in their own superstitions, or in smaller trifling matters, or else
in form and outward appearance, they seem so zealous, as though the zeal of
Gods house would consume them; but above, in matter of spirit and truth, in the
inner man, in the soul and heart remain vnbaked, impenitent, unturned, the
fire of the spirit has not once touched them, and so they remain a mixed lump
still, neither hot nor cold: Seeing therefore they are such as withdraw their
best part from God, the soul of God can take no pleasure in them. Their
actions, although never so good in themselves, never so specious unto others,
never so behoofull to the society where they live, yet are abominable unto
God: yea in their most devout services, Luke 15.15.
they do nothing but (as Ephraim) compass the Lord with lies, and deceit,
Hose. 11.12. Their punishment shows them to be every way abhorred of God; for
as men deal with things they hate, so the Lord 1. casts them out of his
sight: Job. 13.16. The hypocrite shall not come before him: the workers of lies
shall not enter within the walls of that holy City: yea sometimes they are
cast out of his presence, as Caine was, even out of the visible Church, as they
are ever out of the invisible, to show that they shall never be endured
hereafter. 2. Destroieth them: for their destruction from the Lord sleeps
not, but shall surprise them; perhaps while they are in the body, as Ananias
and Saphirah, but certainly hereafter: and the damnation of such is no ordinary
damnation, Matthew. 23.^4. (...).
but a more ample and abundant judgment is reserved for them then others: and
it is worthy observation, that when the holy Ghost would rouse up the
slothful servant, he threatens him his portion with hypocrites, Matthew.
24.51. and for both together it is said, Matthew. 13.41. that the Angels shall
gather out of Christ's kingdom all that offend, and cast them into a furnace:
Ioh. 15.6. those that abide not in Christ, though they cleave a long time to
the visible Church; yet are separated from the true invisible Church, and cast
out like withered branches: and men gather them, and cast them into the fire:
how shall then such abominable persons in Gods eyes, avoid the damnation of
hell? Matthew. 23.33.
it is almost an impossible thing for such a viperous brood of professed
hypocrites ever to be saved.

And ought not such persons also to be an abomination to good men, in whose
eyes every vile person ought to be contemned? yes surely, could we discern
them, or God discovering them, we should be affected toward them as Elisha was
toward Iehoram, who in his straitness could seek to Gods Prophet, and
otherwise to Baal: as the Lord of hosts lives, were it not that I regard the
presence of Iehosaphat, 2. king. 3.14.
I would not have looked toward thee, nor seen thee.

Use. 1. If these be the notes, and this the estate of an hypocrite, Thou can
hardly know an other to be an hypocrite.
then must it needs be very hard to know who is an hypocrite, because it is a
lurking sin, and so masked as there is little, yea often no outward difference
between the sound, and unsound; and consequently it cannot but be very
dangerous, to lay this imputation upon any man till the time, least we judge
our brethren rashly, and condemn the just, which is as odious a sin as the
justifying of the wicked. And this is rather to be noted, because it is become
so rise a practice to range every professor under this title, and mark him
with this black cole of hypocrisy. But as it is true that an hypocrite must
be a professor, so is it false that every professor must be an hypocrite. And
as for all other notes here observed or elsewhere in Scripture, they are such
as whereby the own heart of a man, and his own spirit within himself may
judge of himself, rather then the heart or eye of another man. Many are so
like unto the devil, that they make no bones of accusing the godly (as Satan
did Job) of hypocrisy, being led by that same spirit which is an accuser of
the brethren; but not by the spirit of God, which is the spirit of love, which
thinks no evil, but hops all things, even the best of the worst: which is
not judging, neither dare it enter into the counsel of God, nor judge the
person of another man's servant, who stands or falls to his own Lord: which
is so far from carping at, or misconstruing things well done in appearance,
as that makes the best, and gives most favorable construction of things and
actions, which are in appearance evil; as well knowing that the searching of
the heart belongs to the maker of it; and that no man can know with what
intention, upon what grounds or causes this or that is done by another. And
much less yet does that spirit of Christ, which uses not to quench smoking
flax, but cherishes even good shows, as in the young man, discourage better
proceedings, by deeming those who exercise themselves most diligently in the
courses prescribed by the word, the most worthy to be abhorred of God and man.
And yet where can a man go, but he shall meet with the spirit that bears
rule in the word, which conceiueth not, speaks not so bitterly against
whooremongers, thieves, drunkards, etc. as against many sound hearted
professors of Christ, and of his truth? thus with the wicked Jews, preferring
Barrabas before Christ himself. Oh that men knew what they did, and then would
they not thus crucify the Lord of glory in his servants, who will fearfully
revenge such indignity done against them. When David sent his servants to
Hanun to visit him, and he evil entreated them, using them as spies, and not
as visitors sent from a friend, how hotly does David prosecute the revenge of
their wrongs? he destroyed seven hundred charrets, and slew forty thousand
horsemen beside the forte, 2. king. 10.
insomuch as he forced other Kings to make peace with him: how much more will
the Lord, more powerful, more tender over his servants, revenge their abuse,
both in a better service employed, and in higher degree disgraced?

Look well that thy self be none.
2. Let every one lay these notes to his own heart, and especially beware that
his works give not the lie to his words and profession: for which purpose let
every of us be careful to approve our sincerity to God, our profession to
men, and both of them to our selves, by yoking answerable practice to our
profession; not disioining the things which the Lord would have coupled, nor
admitting discord, and jar in things whereof the one should be as the true
exposition of the other. Let us then look a little nearer the matter, and see
by the clear sunshine of the word, whether they only be hypocrites, who are
only so reputed; or whether our selves have not the beams which were worth the
casting out: and not to range into all particulars, let every man search his
own heart in this one point, whether whilst he professes to know God, he
deny him not in his works. To help us forward in this trial, we must
conceive that improperly the Scripture applies this name, not to such as by
infirmity flip into it: for the best actions of the best smell of it (as Mr.
Bradford confesses of himself) but to counterfeit and sembling professors,
who with Ieroboams wife, How fitly the hypocrite resembles the stage player,
from whom he has his name.
profess themselves to be other then they are: imitating and resembling stage
players, to whom properly the name belongs. To follow then the resemblance a
little: 1. Do we not see base fellows play, and act the Kings part, and take
on them as though they were so indeed, for an hour or two, and yet are glad to
hang themselves I am as thou art, Trials of such as profess they know God but
do not.
my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses: I and mine are yours to
command in any such services of sin. But to leave the resemblance and come to
a more special application of this examination. 1. There is never a one who
professes not that the eyes of God are pure, beholding all things, trying the
hearts and raines: we all profess that his ways are just, that he cannot
abide to behold iniquity, neither can do otherwise then punish sin
wheresoever he finds it: and yet in our practice we renounce all this
profession, for we can sin in the dark, as if the darkness, and the day were
not both alike unto him: if we can avoid man's eye we are cocksure. Nay we live
profanely in his sight, and against his justice we flatter our Father, and
therein acknowledge not only his general providence over all things,
disposing, nourishing, and preserving all living creatures; but his particular
providence toward our selves: But yet indeed we deny him so to be; for every
man spends out himself in shifting and shuffling for himself, as if he had
no father in heaven to care for him, which is the practice of a mere
worldling. Others depend not on him for their maintenance, but lean on the
broken reed of their own labor, wit, cunning, diligence: many more upon
unlawful, and indirect means of gain, by extortion, usury, deceit, false
waights, and measures. Others when the least injury is offered them, murmur
for the present, and lay up for time to come revenge, and malice, as though
there were no God to order their matters, or to commit vengeance unto. Thus God
is professed a father, but where is his honor? Others will have God their
Father, but cannot abide his children: others profess they fear him as a
Father, but come to their deeds, they fear man much more then God: for let a
man threaten, especially having power, they quake and crouch; but let God
threaten, they bristle as if they would bid him battle.

God is faithful, true of his word, and his word the truth it self; and yet
hardly are we brought to believe God on his word, or further then we see him:
his promises stay not our hearts, but when we have him in our hands: his
threatenings terrify us not, but when we have them in our eyes: the Pastor may
pipe, but people follow no dance: let such call back what they have said, as
having said too much, except they would believe more.

is only wise, that his word is our wisdom, and the only rule of all his
worship and our ways: yet how many stand upon old customs, examples of men,
natural reason, humane laws, and those of restraint or tolleration in matters
directly against the word? Trials of such as profess duties to God so known
but indeed deny them.
and many have better ways of their own, then any we can teach them.

And as we profess these things of God; so we profess as much in word of our
selves, wherein the general practice of men is not so answerable. For 1. who
does not profess of himself, that he loves God with all his heart, and it
were pity else that he should live? and yet indeed the speak thou to us from
God, and we will do whatsoever the Lord commands us by thee: and so profess
subjection to Christ as to our Lord: but with the Scribes, many of us say and
do not: or like the younger brother who said to his father, he would go work
in the vineyard, but did not. And many of us may fitly hear that sharp rebuke
of Christ, Why call ye me Master, why profess you your selves Christians, and
do not the things that I speak? do any servants so deal with their master,
and not be turned out of doors? 3. Who professes not that he serves God, and

Thus might we examine every particular through the commandments, and in
every branch of them discover in our selves such manifest fruits of hypocrisy
as these be: in which regard, let us challenge our deceitful hearts, and sift
them well, and we cannot but find seven abominations in them, every one
making us more odious to God then other. Object. But I hope I am no such man* I
cannot by these notes discern my self to be an hypocrite. Answ. Yet may
thou be one, and receive thy portion with them. For there be two sorts of
hypocrites. 1. such as know themselves so to be, they know they dissemble in
the things they speak and do, such were the Pharisees who did all things to
be seen of men, these have a cloud of witnesses against them: for besides God,
their own words shall be their judges, Two sorts of hypocrites.
their works shall accuse them, and their hearts and consciences shall be as a
thousand witnesses against the^. 2. others know not themselves to be
hypocrites, but think themselves sound enough, as that Pharisie, Luke 18. who
thanked God, that he was not as other men: and Simon Magus, Act. 8. who
believed Phillips words, was baptized, wondered at the things done by the
Apostles, and yet had no part nor portion in them, because his heart was not
right with God, and yet he thought that he had. And so is it with many, who
think that because their consciences sleep, or are brawned with some reigning
sin, that they are sound, when they shall one day find the Lord greater then
their consciences, with whom such righteousness as exceeds not the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees will not go for payment. It
behooves us then to take up the Apostles counsel, Take heed brethren least
there be at any time in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, causing you to
depart (while ye seem to approach unto him) from the living God: and on the
contrary, to labor to express the power of godliness daily, that in the
last of our days we may reap the sweet fruit of it, when we shall be glad
that we have had no part with hypocrites. Thus by Gods blessing are we come to
the end of the first Chapter, to him be praise for ever, Amen.

CHAP. II. But speak thou the things which become wholesome doctrine, 2 That
the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sound in the faith, in love, and in
patience:
THe Apostle having described the duty of a faithful Pastor in the former
Chapter, and exhibited a vewe of such as the Lord calls and approoueth, who
must be men both of singular integrity for their life, and of skilfulnesse and
ability to teach: he now applies all that spech to Titus, and exhorts him
to the exercise of his talents received to his masters best advantage. And
first, he generally instructs him what himself must teach; namly, wholesome
doctrine. And secondly, how he should particularly apply himself and his
doctrine to all sorts of men: who are distinguished, 1. by the sex, men and
women. 2. by the age, old and young. 3. by their condition, some being
masters, and some servants, the meanest of which must not be contemned: but
every man* and woman of what age and calling soever they be, although their
condition be never so servile, must have their portion in this wholesome
doctrine: from the 2. to the 11. v. Thirdly, he follows some notable reasons
why this holy and wholesome doctrine must be taught and learned, spoken and
heard: from the 11. verse to the end of this Chapter. First, for Titus his
own duty, it is laid down by way of opposition, and knit to the former
matter, and Chapter, by the conjunction, But, teach thou. As if he had said,
although the false teachers whom I have described dote upon dreams, and feed
their hearers with fancyes, and doctrines of men, to the corrupting and
poisoning of souls, and turning men away from the truth; thou must be utterly
unlike them in thy preaching: they speak pleasing things, but thou must speak
profitable: they by despising the simplicity of the Gospel, fall not only
into dangerous errors which they broach, but into loose and idle discourses,
which bring diseases upon the soul: 1. Tim. 6 (...).
But thou on the contrary must plainly, and familiarly discover unto all
estates of men and women their estates and duties, that thereby they may be
brought to soundnes: they cannot but speak and teach as they are: but let them
trifle as they will, and live as they list, thou have betaken thee to another
service then that of men, and must carry thy ministry as becomes a sound
teacher of the truth, which is according to godliness. Teaching us that,

Doctr. No Christian Minister, nor man, No example of man must turn us out of
our godly course.
must be so shaken at the ungodly courses of others in their rank; as that
they either give over, or give back from their vprightnes in their duties: for
Titus although he might seem to be cried down, by the general voice of false
and pompous teachers, yet must he not be silent; and though he might be
troubled and opposed, yet must he not be timorous or sluggish: and though his
doctrine were not received nor obeyed, yet he must not be evil men and
deceivers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, but continue
thou: 2. Tim. 3.13.
and cap. 4.5. many shall turn away their ^ares, and be given to fables, but
watch thou: and what a good proficient Timothy was herein, the same Apostle
shows, Philip. 2.20. for when all sought their own, yet then he as a son
with the father, served with Paul in the Gospel. 2. It is no slender
commendation which a Church of Pe^gamus, he shall bear the name and word of
God, even there where ^^tan has his throne: Rev. 2.13.
and then, when Antipas that faithful witness was slain. 3. The Lord for this
end permits many general defections

There must be differences of judgment amongst men.
Use. 1. Let none that professes Christ, take offense at the differences of
judgment or practices amongst men in the world, whether in the Ministers, or
other men. The truth was never but one, although there was ever difference in
the preaching of it. Some Prophets were smooth and sweet tongued: some Apostles
so stiling themselves, were much in speech, but not so much in power: some
Ministers must have their portions here, must have pomp, 2. Cor. 2.17. (...).
ease, wealth and applause; and this makes them merchants of the word, and
speak to their own ends and drifts. Others there are whose portion the Lord
is, unto whom they would approve their hearts, and therefore in sincerity,
and as of God in the sight of God they will speak. The former may be many, and
mightily backed with the grace of great ones, and perhaps but one Titus to
withstand them all: yet if there be but one Micah, one Titus, he must hold him
to wholesome doctrine, to Gods truth against 400. yea, 4000. of them. There is
also as great difference in their sufferings: the former, if they should
worthily suffer as evil doers, they shall not want mediators, and moderators:
the latter, in suffering for well doing, are in their just defense like Paul,
who in his answering had no man to assist him, but all forsook him. Here now
is a trial, 2. Tim. 4.16.
which will cause 70. disciples to fall off from Christ at one clappe; nay
which may occasion the moving of Christ's question to the twelve; to those who
are sound Christians but shaking, will ye also go away? But we must be wise
of heart, to enquire where the wholesome word is, and whither else should we
go?

In these differences it is safe to look directly to the word.
2. In the differences of men's courses we must look directly to the word, which
though it prescribe straight ways to heaven, and those beaten with the feet
but of a few, and those few by the most accounted singular and unwise, yet is
it good to mark what God speaks: what if we be as signs and wonders, Isa.
8.18.
yea as gazing stocks to men? what if the wicked wonder, and speak evil of
us, because we run not to the excess of riot with them? yet must we beware
that we be not plucked away with the error of the wicked, 2. Pet. 3.
and fall from our own stedfastnes. Excellent is that exhortation, Isai. 8.12.
Say not a confederacy to all them to whom this people say a confederacy: but
sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and let his fear be your dread: so in thy
calling, let all thy trade use deceit and falsehood in word and action, but let
them not be a rule for thee, for thou must walk to heaven by other direction.

Wholesome doctrine] 1. In regard of the matter: 2. of the work, or effect:
the former, when it is sound in it self. Then is it so, 1. when it propounds
things necessary to be believed or done. 2. proportional to the analogy of
faith, Romans 12.6. 3. agreeable both with other places and texts collated, as
also with the antecedents, and consequents of the same place. 4. when it wholly
leads unto Christ; the law being a schoolmaster to him, Gal. 3. and the
Gospel teaching nothing else, 1. Cor. 2.2. Secondly, that is wholesome doctrine
in regard of the work or effect, which makes the souls of men sound and
thriuing: for it is a borrowed speech from the food, or physic of the body
to the soul, which is the word of God here called again doctrine: and
elsewhere the food and bread of life; and Ministers Pastors and feeders. Now
this doctrine works men's souls to soundness two ways. 1. by drawing us out
of our spiritual diseases, not only inward, as of ignorance, error,
hypocrisy, etc. but outward also, as those maine sins reckoned up, 1. Tim.
1.9.10. and said to be contrary to wholesome doctrine. This it effects, 1.
by showing the danger of our disease. 2. by applying the remedy. 2. by keeping
us in good plight and health, not only free from those former diseases, but
strong and fresh to the duties of piety and righteousness, even as the body
is kept sound without onset of diseases by wholesome nourishment.

Doctr. The scope of every Minister in his teaching, Ministers must feed Gods
people with wholesome doctrine. Reasons.
must be to feed the people of God with wholesome doctrine, such as may bring
the souls of men to health and soundnes. For 1. if the common talk of
Christians must be edifying, ministering grace, bring sweetness to the soul, and
health to the bones: if it be required of every righteous man, that Prou. 16
24. Prou. 31.26.
if the law of grace must sit under the lips of every virtuous woman, much more
must the Ministers, whose office in peculiar binds him to be a Pastor or
feeder, and that according to Gods own heart, he having for this purpose
received his calling, gifts, and approbation of God. 2. Otherwise he peruerteth
the vain iangling, are said to roue, 1. Tim. 1 6. (...)
and err from the right aim, like unskillful darters or shooters. Now what a
fearful thing is it for a man to wander all his life long, from that station
and service in which the Lord has set him? Quest. But how shall any Minister
attain this end of his calling? Answ. Hereunto two things are required: 1.
ability, What things are requisite to an able Minister.
2. affection: both which provoke diligence, and faithful abillitie, 1. of
learning, 2. of judgment. For the former: he must be able to feed with
wholesome doctrine. We will not put forth our children to nurses whose breasts
want milk, unless we would starve them; so the Lord never commits his
children to dry nurses, though often in judgment he leave, and permit them
unto spiritual famine. Seeing therefore the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, and the Pastors breasts should be like Joseph's granaries, stored
with all provision against the time of famine; let all idle, and idol
Ministers that thrust themselves in for Pastors, and can only feed themselves,
consider of their danger betimes, least too late repentance cause them to know
what it is to starve the Lords people, and murder so many souls, the meanest
of which the whole world cannot counteruaile. For the latter, he must be of
able judgment, and wisdom, to know the nature, and constitution of his
people, the state of his flock; whether they be of weak or strong stomaks, and
so whether they need milk or stronger meat. 2. He must be able like a
skillful cook, to know how to season the food he delivers; he is not
presently fit to be a cook, that can put on a white apron, or conform in a
ceremony; but as he must be a man of skill in his quality, so must he be a
man of a good taste, and have experience of that he prepares for others, wisely
delivering points not only profitable for the persons present, but things also
proper to the present occasions, and be fitting occurrences. 3. He must not
only know when his provision is well seasoned, but also when it is seasonable:
like a good steward, who alters the diet of the house, according as the
several seasons severally furnish the market: for as every one must have his
portion, so must he have it in due season: a word in time to him that is
weary, is a fruit of a learned tongue, and to feed the impenitent with
judgment, is wisdom, seeing an humble soul is broken with threatening, and a
secure heart is h^rdned with promises.

Three things must be dear to a Minister: 1. Gods glory. 2. man's salvation 3.
sincerity of the truth.
But to the further furnishment of the Minister, the second thing must be added,
namely the affection of love. Which must look three ways at once; 1. to God,
2. to man. 3. to the truth. The glory of God must be prized above all things,
which will make him speak only for God, and he that speaks only for God,
cannot but be wholesomely conversant in his word, Ioh. 7.18. For love of Gods
glory effects two things, both concurring to wholesome doctrine. 1.
conceiuement of humane wisdom: 2. demonstration of the spirit, 1. Cor. 2.4.
that is, a secret power and authority of the spirit, going with his word,
enlightening with his own other men's understandings, and heating by his own
other men's affections: this made a grave Divine of ours say, that every true
Minister has after a sort a fiery tongue given him. Secondly, this affection
of love, must be extended to his people: Paul loved his countrymen, and this
stirred up his hearty desire, that Israel might be saved. The mother seeing
her child in danger, Romans 10.1.
is careful out of her love to provide any cordial or restoratiue that may be
gotten to do it good; the prosperity of the child, is the joy of the mother;
so the profit of the people is the Pastors crown of rejoicing, 2. Cor. 3.1.
Thirdly, unto the truth it self: he must affect to know nothing, and this will
cause him to affect to deliver nothing but Christ, and him crucified: this
sincere milk of the word, makes Gods children to thrive and prosper, whereas
the unwholesome milk mingled with error, or puddle water of men's devises,
brings sickness, diseases, and consumption into their souls.

Use. Let all Ministers, who have a care of profiting their people, and so
furthering their own account, acquaint them with this wholesome doctrine,
fetched out of the pure fountains of the Scriptures, and rightly divide it
unto them, as workmen that need not be ashamed. Alas, what vanity is it, out
of opinion of wit or reading, to seek out strange speculations among the
stars, to search out genealogies, peregrees, to dote about fables, to set
himself to tie hard knots only to untie them again (as the dog leaves
soft meat to gnaw upon bones) to mingle the word with the leaven of traditions?
what a dangerous thing is it, to heal the hurt of Gods people with sweet
words, or to handle the word either deceitfully, or deliver it phantastically,
with unseemly and rude, or affected words of humane wisdom and eloquence?
all this may puff up the souls of men for a time, as though they were
wholesomely fed, but indeed Paul shows the proper work of them, that they
breed diseases, and engender strife, rather then godly edifying: and when the
fire comes that shall try every man's work, his work shall burn, let him
escape if he can, who though he teach no false doctrine, yet if he build haie
and chaff upon the foundation; for he has not stood in Gods counsel: read the
curse denounced against false Pastors. Ier. 23.

Secondly, hearers are hence taught sundry duties. As 1. to desire only this
wholesome food, that their souls may be well liking; 4. duties belonging to
hearers.
laying aside their itching ears, which hunt after novelties; for the
Ministry is not appointed to beat the ear as music, but to sink into the
soul as the food and medicine of it, by becoming the means and rule of life.
In populous places, 1. Desire only wholesome doctrine.
are running auditories in which the most gape for painted phrases, pretty
witty sentences out of some Sage or other; or some sentence of Scripture
(which yet they least care for) but it must be turkist, and misshapen out of his
native simplicity, like cattle forsaking the green pastures to broose upon
leaves and boughs. These nice hearers are like the dainty gentelwomen of our
times, who scorning standing dishes on their tables, which are the wholesome,
fit, and strengthening nourishment, set them at the low end of the table; and
themselves only glorying in their art and cookerie, feed upon forced dishes,
and cookt conceits, though the ground in comparison be not better then a
bootshanke, as we use to say; and the sauce trebling the cost of the meat it
self. How good a sauce were hunger now to such persons, and stomaks, who in
their fullness despise an honey comb? This Athenian hearing, is the cause of
Athenian preaching, and the diseases running upon such hearers shows the
curse of God on them, who with contempt of the Mannah from heaven, wish the
onyons, garlic, and flesh of Egypt: these things they have upon their desire,
and with them more then they desire, for they rot even between their teeth.

2. To receive it being wholesome sauourly.
2. To receive this wholesome doctrine, as for the body we receive wholesome
food whatsoever it be, or from whomsoever: let it be bitter sometimes, or seem
too salt, yet if it be wholesome, hunger finds it sauourie: no man but will
strive to receive a bitter potion to restore his body out of any weakness to
soundnes; and yet who is it that will suffer an wholesome reproof to the
recovery of soundnes to the soul? and others stand so much upon toothsomnes
of their meat, and must know their cooks so well, that before they can be
resolved in these two, the plausiblenesse of the doctrine, and the friendlines
of the person, their souls are well ^ie starued to death. Hence is it that we
hear so many complaints: oh, says one, he seeks not the good will of his
hearers, nor casts to please them: he is of a tarte and bitter spirit; he
seeks to wound and gall, but he heals nor suppleth not. But what preaches
he, whether any errors, or the pure doctrine of God? No, say they, we cannot
except against his doctrine: True: for they never trouble themselves, so far
as to examine it by the word, or themselves by it. But then say I, is it the
word of God thou hear, and the truth by thy own confession? why do thou
then not tremble at that word? seeing every word of God is good, pure,
wholesome, though it cannot be denied but that some part of it is more
seasonable at one time then at another. Others allege, oh he is no scholar
in comparison, but a plain man, and a nouice to such and such. But can none
but the greatest clerks deliver wholesome doctrine, or was plain preaching
for Saint Paul alone, Never examine a ministry by the pomp but by the power.
and such as he? surely the world is greatly altered since his time, it cannot
skill of his preaching: who being the greatest scholar of all the Apostles,
was the most fearful to make the least show of it. Well, he is truly learned
that has learned Christ; and can teach him to another: although the voice be
still and humble, yet may the Lord pass by in it, when as he is not in all the
boistrous sermons of proud men.

Others can receive no doctrine from such a one as has expressed humanity in
some weakness, or want; or is not altogether to their own liking, nor of their
own size. Some cannot abide to hear the so called Puritan: others are as
far wide on the other hand, they can get no good, nor will stir out of
their doors to hear him that can buckle himself to the times: thus some hold
to Paul, some to Apollos, some to Cephas, but none to Christ. Here is
examination of the persons of men, but not of the doctrine of God, which by
both may be wholsomely, and truly taught: or if either of them should err,
have we exemption from hearing them? are we not rather to try the spirits, and
try all things, that we may hold our selves to that which is good? We deceive
our selves, while we look to be taught by Angels or Saints; Gods ordinance is,
that we should be taught by men, subject to the same infirmities with us; weak
men, and sinful men must under God raise us to strength of grace; that our
faith may not be ascribed to men or means, but that the mighty power of God
might appear in man's infirmity. But in one word, to remove all the pretended
causes of not receiving the wholesome word; turn thine eye inward, and thou
shall see the fault in thy self: for as if a man abstain meal after meal
from meat, and he does not, nor cannot be persuaded to eat wholesome meat,
it is plain he is a sick man, his stomach is gone, if he hold on he is
hastening to death; so it is with him who refuses the wholesome food of his
soul, some sore deadly disease has seized upon him. If this food seem tart
or bitter, it is not corrupted, but thy taste: thy spiritual ague causes thee
to deem honey bitter. If thou loathest that meat which thou have sometime
liked, the meat is the same, but thou art not the same; if thou art weary of
the doctrine of mortification, which sometimes thou affectedst, suspect thy
self: the case is with thee as with some children, who for novelty were
willing to go to school, but being held hard, some grow weary of their
Master, and would exchange him with another; but no cook could make this
doctrine relish thy taste, till it with thy self be altered.

3. Hearers must hold wholesome doctrine, 3. To hold it when they have it, and
not cast it up.
when they have received it, 2. Tim. 3.14. continue in the things thou have
received: buy the truth, but sell it not, and bind it fast upon their hearts.
And good reason: for if the meat be never so wholesome, if the stomach of the
soul keep it not, but it slip the memory, and is not by meditation
digested; the soul is as surely diseased as is the body when no sustenance
will stay to strengthen it. Many complain that they hear many good things,
but yet they stay not with them, but are soon forgotten; and hence may begin
to conceive that the meat was faulty, either not enough, but raw, or too
cold, or otherwise; but let them know assuredly that the fault was in their
own cold stomachs, which wanted zeal and love to the truth to warm them; for
we easily forget not the things we love: or else some sin like the
predominance of a bad humor has ouercharged them, which must be purged by
renewing repentance; which being done, wisdom requires that men do for
their souls, as they do for their bodies; in which if the meat stay not till
it be digested, or because although it be digested it staieth not neither;
howsoever a man returneh to his meat again: even so repair thou unto thy
ordinary meals again, hear preparedly, and thou shall at least renew thy
strength again: and if thou find thy stomach weak still, look as men of
weak stomachs before meat prepare them with some warm thing, and after close
them up again with some preserve or other: so must thou with prayer and
reading prepare and warm thy affection before, and close up thy stomach with
prayer and meditation after: by the former, the spirit is obtained, which
brings things to the remembrance: by the latter, things are held as a man's
own, being as strong vinegar to the nose, to hold that in which otherwise
would be presently cast up again.

4. Hearers must so desire, receive, and hold this wholesome food, as they may
grow by it, 1. Pet. 2. 4. To thrive and and grow in grace by it.
showing by their thriuing in grace, that they have wholesome meat: Psalm.
119.4. Behold I desire thy commandments, quicken me in thy righteousness: for
as in the body, if meat when it is digested, send not virtue whereby the
operation of it appears in all the parts, the body is diseased, some
obstruction or opilation hinders the work of it: so is the soul obstructed
with the itching ear, covetous thoughts, hardness of heart, formal worship,
all which keep the soul barren and empty of grace, yea lean and ill looking
in the eyes of God. Seeing therefore the Lord has spread his table for us, and
liberally furnished it with store of this wholesome food, let it appear in
our souls, by our strength to labor in Christian duties to which we are
called, to overcome the temptations unto sin, to carry the victory in our
strife against our own lusts: let it appear in patient and cherefull bearing
of affliction, and in the thankful entertainment of blessings, especially of
the best kind. And thus by commending the Lords bountiful hospitallitie, and
liberal provision in his house, we shall adorn our profession, and win
others to wish themselves entertained in the same service with us.

Now all these things shall be happily attained of teachers and hearers, if
they come to this business thus qualified and affected. First, Conditions
required hereunto.
If they come as the elect of God, whom he will teach: 1. humbled in the sense
of sin past, and of present corruption: 2. acknowledging the errors of

Verse. 2. That the elder men be sober, honest, discreet, sound in the faith,
in love, and in patience: Now the Apostle comes to direct Titus how to apply
his doctrine aptly to the several sexes, ages, and conditions of men. Whence
in general is to be observed, that

Doctr. Every faithful Minister must fit and apply his doctrine to the
several ages, conditions, and occasions of his people, Wholesome doctrine must
be applied to several ages and conditions of men.
that every man and woman, young and old, superior and inferior may know
not only what is lawful, but what is most expedient and beseeming our age,
place, and condition of life. It is true that all virtues in general are
commanded, as all vices in general are forbidden to all persons, of what sex
or estate soever: yet there be some special virtues, which are more shining
ornaments in some age and condition then others: as in young men staidness and
discretion, are special beauties; but are not (if wanting) such blemishes in
their years, as in old men, because of their observation and experience. So
there be some special vices (though all are to strive against all) which are
fouler spots and stains to some age then to other: and some to which men and
women are more subject by reason of their age or sex: as youth to headines and
rashness; old age to teastinesse, frowardnes, covetousness, etc. women to
curiosity, loquacitie, etc. against all which, the man of God must in special
furnish and arm his people; instantly striving to root out such noisome
weeds as of their own accord appear out of the earthie hearts of men; as
also to plant the contrary graces in their stead. Examples of this practice we
meet with all every where in the Epistles. Paul in diverse of his Epistles,
as to the Colossians, but especially to the Ephesians, describes in particular
the duties of wives, husbands, children, fathers, servants, masters: see chap.
5.^. ^ Peter in the 2. and 3. chapters, is as large in the distinct offices of
subjects, wives, husbands, servants: And from this practice the Apostle John
dissenteth not, 1. Ioh. 2.12. where he gives his reasons, why he writes to
fathers, to babes, to old men, and to young men. Besides these examples, are
sundry weighty reasons to enforce the doctrine: As first, the faithfulness
of a wise steward herein appears, namely, in distributing to every one of
his Masters family, their own portion of meat in due season, Luke 12.42.
Secondly, to this purpose is the word fitted, to make every man ready and
absolute to every good work, and thus the wisdom of God is made to shine to
all eyes, who can behold such a perfect rule of direction in faith and manners.
Thirdly, well knew our Apostle with other the men of God, that general
doctrines (though never so wholesome) little prevail, are but cold, and touch
not men to the quick, without particular application to their several
necessities: till Peter come to say; you have crucified the Lord of glory, we
read of no pricking of their hearts.

It is the learned tongue that can do this.
Use. 1. This duty requires also a man of understanding, an Ezra, a prompt
scribe, a learned tongue; not any bare reader, no nor every preacher attaineth
to this high point of wisdom; not bosom sermons, nor every learned discourse
reaches unto it. If he must be a learned Physician, that must first find out
the disease, and then apply a fit remedy to the same: he must be much more
learned then he, and one acquainted with more rare secrets of simples that
grow from heaven, who can here minister to every soul according to the
estate of it, which is far more hid then that of the body; as to the
weary soul a seasonable word; and to the secure heart, the just weight of
terror and threatening. Besides, who sees not that this very duty requires
no flatterers, no selfe-seekers, no time seruers? but men of courage, bold
through God to apply his word to all conditions of men, high as well as low,
rich as poor, not healing the hurt of great ones with sweet words, nor
respecting persons no more then the Lord himself does, whose word it is; but
binding even kings in chains, and nobles in fetters, as Nathan did David, Thou
art the man: For if the word has plainly described every man's duty, then
the dispensers of it must faithfully deliver out the same.

delivered in the ministry, be they old or young, rich or poor, one or
other, must yield obedience unto it. For seeing the Scripture is furnished to
teach all men all their duties, and the ministry ordained by God to discover
the wisdom of God; old men must not disdain to sit down at Christ's feet;
nor young men to learn how to redress their ways; nor the rich to become
rich in God, nor the poor to become poor in spirit, nor the master to
acknowledge a master in heaven, nor the servant to become the servant of
Christ. 2. To desire fit instruction in the ministry, Master, Luke 3.
what shall we do? See Acts 2.37. and 16.30. 3. To pray that we may and for
me, that utterance may be given to speak as I ought. No man but would desire
and call for a fit plaster or potion for his body: but when we labor against
men's particular sins directly, and speak aptly to their consciences, like
unruly and inconsiderate patients, they fret and storm, if we come any thing
near the quick of their galled consciences. No man but in trouble of spirit,
or terror of conscience, would hear from us words of comfort: but there is a
deal of proud flesh, which would vnremooued for ever hinder their ^ound cure,
which when it is consumed, we are ready to supple with words as soft as oil:
but till then men must pray for wisdom to dance to our pipe: and as we must
set our selves against the sins of all ages, and callings, so must they
themselves against their own sins. 4. Whereas many think that those sins
are least to be striuen against,

The elder men] Doctr. Our Apostle exempteth not old men from being subject to
the doctrine of God, because of their age: No man in this life can come to that
pillar on which he may write, Ne plus vltra.
but rather sends them first to school, notwithstanding all that knowledge
and experience which they might pretend, 1. Ioh. 2.13. For Gods school is as
well for old as for young, in which men are not only to be initiated in the
principles of religion, but also to be lead forward unto perfection of
wisdom: and seeing no man can attain in this life unto perfection, therefore
every man is still to press forward, and to wax old daily learning
something. And there is great reason that as old men must first be instructed
by Titus, Old men must first be taught their duty, why.
so they should be the first in learning their duty. Seeing, First, in regard
Prou. 16.31.
yea the ornament and crown of their years is, to be found in the ways of
righteousness: that is, in a life lead holily, and justly, which two can never
be found, but in a heart submitted to the word of God the rule of both. The
want of this crown makes much old age burdensome, dishonorable, and old men
to live even undesired, because they are not only every way unprofitable, but
hurtful and graceless; not only old stocks fruitless in their age, but
withered beginning, 1. Ioh. 2.14.
are most ancient, and consequently the knowledge and remembrance of him, is a
matter best beseeming them: to have their senses and tongues exercised herein
should be the delight o^ their age, to be conversant in the holy exercises
which witness of him, should be their chief business: as old Annah went not
out of the Temple, and old Simeon waited there to see his salvation.

Use. 1. This condemns the frowardness of many of the elder sort, who
although they never learned to know Christ, Old men must lay aside 1.
frowardnes.
and the way of life when they were young; yet are neither afraid nor ashamed to
say that they are now too old to learn him; the which speech bewraieth that
as yet they never learned him aright, as also that they are very far from
salvation; for whosoever is too old to learn the means, is too old also to
attain the end: besides the extreme folly of such an ungodly profession:
for would the oldest man that can be, sent on a journey in a way both unknown
to him, and not easy to be found or held, so sillily reason with himself; I
will right forward, I never came this way before, neither do I know it; but I
will never ask of it, for I am too old now to learn it: and yet thus mad
are old men in the matters of God and his kingdom. Others would feign learn
but not of young men, this stands not with their gravity. But howsoever
maturitie of years is not to be neglected in a minister, seeing that in the
ordinary course it carries with it ripenes of judgment; yet Gods grace in
youth must not be despised, 1. Tim. 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth: and who
is commanded here to teach old men, but Titus a young man? As for that place,
2. Tim. 3.6. a minister must not be a young scholar, Paul says not (...), but
(...).
it is not meant of one young in years, but young in faith, one lately
converted to the Christian faith, and as it were a tender and young plant in
Christianity.

2. Let this move our elder sort to lay aside the worldly wisdom and
experience, 2. Worldly wisdom.
and take out that point of wisdom to sit down at Christ's feet, and be
ready to be taught in the ways of God. By which means how might the younger
be provoked to take up into their affection and practice the love of the truth
and the fear of God? how exceedingly might they help forward the ministry
in all sorts? whereas it is the greatest stop it finds, and the greatest
toil we meet with to bring old men to leave their old courses; who are like
drawn vessels, in whom is nothing left, but lees and dregs of ignorance,
looseness, security, in which with other old courses, they are determined
even to rot away. What a number of old men be there, who are but children, not
in years, but in understanding, in knowledge, in experience of the things of
God; in respect of which, we cannot say they are twice children, for in truth
they were never other, they never came out of this their infancy and
childishnes. The exhortation is more necessary, then it is commonly taken for:
when as we may meet with some old men and women toward 60. years, if not
above, of whom one cannot tell that ever he heard of Christ: an other cannot
tell whether Christ be in heaven or in earth: a third cannot be persuaded that
he is a sinner: all which I speak of my own experience and trial; and yet
these live in our Christian commonwealth, and perhaps under preaching
Ministers, in whom is far less sense of God and religion, then in the very
heathen themselves. Oh, but these you will say are outcast people, and the
vilest of men, and they are but few. But what a great sin and shame is it,
that any should be so suffered to live out of all rank of Christianity, in
days of such grace and knowledge? But there are an other sort to which
multitudes and millions cleave, that are scarce one good step before the
former, and these are such as make a show of knowledge, and often frequent the
means, and by often sitting in this sun are a little outwardly colored: but
yet cannot give a reason of the faith that is in them, to their own or others
comfort, no more then the former. Urge them, they can tell you they mean well,
and have good hearts; but indeed they know not what they mean, and without
knowledge, says Solomon, the mind is not good: the which ignorance is so much
the more damable, by how much it is wilful and affected: Ioh. 15.22. If I had
not come and spoken, they had had no sin: but now have they no cloak for
their sin.

Sober,] Now the things which the elder sort must learn, are not so much
handled as named: and they are of two sorts, the former which beseem them as
they are old men: and these are three, the first of which is sobriety, or
watchfulnes, which properly respects things without them, as meat, drink,
etc. the two latter respect their own persons: the former of which is gravity
or honesty, which requires seemlines in the outward habit, speech, gesture,
manners, and behavior: the latter is wisdom, or discretion, which
restrains the more inward concupiscences, lusts, and desires of the heart.
The second sort of virtues are such as are commended unto them, as they are
ancient Christians, and these be three also; 1. soundnes in faith, whereby
duties are acceptably performed toward God. 2. soundnes in love, which looks
to all the duties of the second table. 3. soundnes in patience, which is as
salt to season and preserve both, without which they could not but quickly wax
weary of well doing. Thus ought old men to be qualified, not only as those who
have attained to ripenes in years, but as such who also have striuen to some
ripenes in Christianity, expressed in the practice of these three virtues.

In the first precept of sobriety, older persons are enjoined to watch against
the immoderate use of meat and drink especially, and in the use of these
(wine and strong drink especially) to moderate themselves within the confines,
and precincts of sobriety. And there is great reason of this precept, for this
age being full of infirmity, a cold, and dry age, is more desirous to
strengthen, warm, and moysten it self with wine and strong drink; and
without great watchfulnes easily ouershooteth it self; insomuch as the word
teaches how some of the holiest of their age, have been foiled and mocked
hereby; the infirmity of that age not only being weak to resist, but pro^e
to betray and deliver them up unto the temptation: as Lot, Noah: and this
seems to be one reason, why in the next verse also the older women are
forbidden to be given to wine. And the more cautelous ought the elder men to be
herein, Sobriety especially commended to elder men. Why.


1. Because it were a great shame for them that have lived so long, and all
this while have not learned to use the creatures aright; hardly can they be
reputed Christians, who for Christ will not forgo their watch unto sobriety,
according to the counsel of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 5.8. Oh that our old men
would be persuaded thus to number their days, that their hearts might be
applied unto wisdom; and moved to beware of shipwreck in their haven; and
provoked to watch but one hour longer with Christ, and so to finish their
welfare for ever. Let them bear that speech in mind, Care a while, and ever
safe.

Grave,] The word signifies a seemly, modest, and gracious carriage, opposed
to all lightness, vanity, or viciousnes in gesture, speech, apparel,
countenance, deeds, or conversation: and is a general virtue befitting every
age, and every vocation and condition of life: and not appropriated to any one
calling or condition more then other: required in the Minister, 1. Tim. 3.8. in
his wife, verse. 11. and in every private man, 1. Tim. 2.1. But yet the older
sort, in all estates, ought above other to carry a constant comlines, and
grave authority, yea a fatherly kind of reverent behavior: Elder men must
carry a seemly gravity thorough their course. Reas. Alia aetas alios mores
postulat.
that the gravity of their manners, may be suitable to the gravity of their
years; yea and may adorn their age: being as far from the lightness of
youth in their whole conversation, as they have passed it in the number of
their days.

Reasons hereof are, 1. God has honored them, and put dignity fathers, for
the love, and reverence which by their grave and worthy carriage, is due to
them from their inferiors: and Leuit. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the
hoarehead, and honor the person of the old man. Now seeing God has bound the
younger to honor the older; he has also bound the older, to maintain their
honor and reverence, by a reverent and Christian conversation: for honor is
unseemly for a fool, Prove. 26.1. 2. They are to instruct and admonish others
of their duty, and of their faylings; and thus ought to become eyes to the
blind, Job 25.15.21.
and feet to the lame: and the younger sort are to hear and wait, holding
their tongue at their counsel. Now let the advice, admonition, or counsel be
never so just, wholesome, experienced; yet it cannot choose but loose all the
authority, and credit of it, if the conversation of a man be vain, light,
youthful, or any way unseemly: so as they who fail from this precept,
disable themselves The young men saw me, and hid themselves, the aged arose and
stood up.

The which consideration, as it teaches how to retain the honor and crown
of age: so also when men fail of that due regard their years seem to call
for; that they are not (as most old men do) to lay all the blame upon the
insolency of youth, as not trained to better manners: but to examine how their
own footesteps have been directed: and whether they have not let fall the
crown of their age, which is the grace and gravity of it: and in a word,
wherein and how far, they have failed. The Heathen could say, that the way to
Honors Temple, lay by Virtues house: and it is just with the Lord, that with
the vile should be reproach, so as the base often rise up against the
honorable, and children can scorn the aged, in whose words, behauiours, and
actions, any unseemly lightness has bewrayed and discovered it self.

Discreet,] or moderate. The virtue was formerly required in the Minister,
cap. 1.7. and after in women, cap. 2.4. and in young men, Moderation of lusts
and passions is a most seemly grace in an old man.
verse. 6. which word, because it principally intends a moderation of all
fleshly concupiscences, and desires; as also extends it self to all the
parts of the life, requiring that all the affections, speeches, and actions, be
carried level, not according to the strength of will, or passion; but according
to the rule of prudence; both in forbearing that which is evil, and unseemly;
as also in choosing and practicing that which is good and decent: therefore the
older sort especially should become singular patterns, and examples of
moderation; both in the subduing and extinguishing all rebellious motions,
affections, pastimes, and perturbations; as also in preserving in them a wise
and vigilant care, that their minds may be kept in such temper, as becomes
sobriety, and Christianity: and these not of ordinary men, but such as may
bewtifie this age, which even of it self is in part disposed hereunto: as that
holy man observed, among the ancient is wisdom, and in the length of days,
Job 12.12.
is understanding.

Reas. 1. Unchaste desires are foul spots in every age, but in old age most
of all. How monstrous were it for old men to watch the twilight, to have eyes
full of adultery, to have their mouths filled with foul and rotten
communication, to be drunk with wine unto excess? how exceeding odious were
these things in them, above younger persons? who if they should fall into such
misdemeanors, some more excuses might be pretended? for they might be forced
by headstrength of passion, and perturbation, but these seem rather to force
themselves, and sin of election, as such who willingly leave not such sins
as have almost left them; nay who rather strengthen their minds to such lusts,
as to which their bodies are broken and decayed: and thrust themselves under
the power of such lewd Masters, from whom a man would have thought, they
should long before have parted as free men. 2. Old age is an age which ought
to be dedicated to the mind, meditation, counsel; ought to be taken up with
more seemly delights and desires, even such as are spiritual and heavenly;
ought to watch against such lusts as press down, that the aged man may serve
the Lord with more liberty and cherefulnes, and intend the straightning of all
reckonings between God and them, and so the finishing up of their salvation
with fear and trembling; for if every Christian ought to have his
conversation in heaven, much more such as have one foot in the grave, and
hasten unto the earth.

Use. This precept justly reprehendeth many of our elder sort, whose bones
seem still to possess the sins of their youth; as if they were minded not
to lay down their lusts, but in the same grave where themselves mean to lie;
without all care of beautifying their gray hairs with this grace of discreet
moderation; but in all their words and behauiours remain as vain, light,
foolish, without savor of grace, as ever they were in their warmest blood;
that even as all the dregs are settled in the bottom of a vessel, so their
courses are filled with ^estinesse, hastiness, and unadvised frowardnes: their
conversation blotted with base covetousness, as if they were to live over
their years again, their minds no less bending toward the earth then their
bodies; and though they can scarce go up and down in the world, yet for most
part are they more drowned in wordly affairs, then when they were in their
most constant estate. In a word, blackeamoores were they young, and now their
skins are not changed, the crimson tincture of their sin cannot yet be
washed, nor they in their age break through the snares wherewith Satan held
them in their youth; but the sinner of an hundredth year old goes on to
punishment. And here let none think, that any dotage or passionate affections
may be excused by reason of the age, nay rather every such breaking out is here
doubled, for an old man especially should be discreet, and the discretion of
a man moderateth all passions. Let Barzillai be an example to all old men, 2.
Sam. 19.35.37.
who being solicited to embrace courtly delights, he refuses all such
profers, and sets his mind upon his own death, in his own city.

Sound in faith,] Now follow those three virtues which are requisite in old
men, as they are ancient Christians. The first of which is soundness of
faith, in which three things are to be considered. 1. What soundnes of faith
is. 2. Why it is commended in special to old men, seeing every Christian
must have it. 3. The duty which hence is to be learned.

For the first: Soundness of faith stands in two things. 1. when faith is
sound in the quality, 1. Tim. 1.5. (...).
that is, sincere, not deceitful, not hypocritical. 2. when it is sound in
the degree of it, not a shaking reed, but grown up from the infancy unto
some strength and stature. Now unto both these is required that faith be sound,
Soundnes of faith stands in 4. things.
1. in the ground of it. 2. in the object. 3. in the work of it. 4. in the
fruits issuing from it: in any of which if it fail it is unsound, vnlasting.

First, the ground of sound faith, is a sufficient measure of knowledge of the
things of God revealed in the word, in a sound and incorrupted Ground.
Romans 10.14. that for the working of faith, there must be the interpreting and
delivering of doctrine out of the word, and an attentive hearing and
understanding of it, whereby after a sort the son of man is lifted up that we
may believe, Ioh. 3.14. Now every degree of knowledge and measure of
understanding, is not a sufficient ground of sound faith; but such a measure as
is able to discern between things that differ: for how can children in
knowledge be grown men in the faith? or how can any come to that ripe age of
faith here meant, but such as through long custom, have their senses exercised
to discern both good and evil? Heb. 5.14.
This must be then such a knowledge as enableth a man both to maintain the
truth, and convince the gainsayers; and so hold his own comfort by distinct,
and particular, yea some depth of knowledge; without which so far he shall be
from soundnes, as that he shall be dangerously carried with every wind of
doctrine. There is a fullness of knowledge, Romans 15.14.
which the Apostle commends in the Romans, and this is a notable fit ground
for this soundness of faith. Hence it follows, that all that implicit faith
of the lay Papists, folded up in an idle fancy without knowledge, is unsound
and ungrounded: for can any but a Papist, believe he knows not what?

Secondly, the object of a sound faith more general, is the whole word of God,
from which faith can no more be severed, Object.
then the beams the word of faith. Romans 10.8.
Hence all Popish faith is here proved again unsound, because it is corrupt
in the object: leaning it self in stead of the word, upon canons, counsels,
traditions, unwritten decrees: as also expecting salvation without the free
covenant of grace, by the merit of works; whereas in justification before God,
all works, all boasting, are excluded, Romans 3.27. and 4.24.

Thirdly, the work of a sound faith is twofold. 1. assent. 2. application.
assent, Work*
whereby we set a seal unto all the promises of the Gospel, as most sure and
certain; holding even an Angel accursed that should bring any other doctrine:
and keeping sure the profession of our hope without wavering in full assurance
of understanding. For faith is no opinion or fancy, Heb. 3.^4. Coloss. 2.2^.
but has in it a certainty arising from the stedfastnes of the promise, and
word of God. Hence are all such exhortations, as that, 1. Cor. 16.13. Stand
fast in the faith. The latter work of faith is application, whereby a man not
only assenteth that all the covenant of grace is true in it self, but also
that it is true unto him; who therefore rests and leans upon it for his
own salvation, being assured so undoubtedly at one time or other of his
salvation, as if he were already gathered up among the Saints. And this hand
thus laying on Christ unto righteousness, and applying Christ with his merits
unto ones self in particular to salvation, is the form of faith, or rather
faith it self formed, and not any works or charity, as Papists fondly
dream. And that this certainty is of the nature of sound faith appears,
because that modest, but graceles uncertainty and doubting of the Popish
doctrine, is opposed unto faith, and made a fruit of unbelief, Matthew. 14.31.
Oh thou of little faith, why doubtedst thou? of Abraham is said, Romans 4. that
he doubted not, nor reasoned with himself, but was strengthened in faith,
being fully assured. And what other reason is given, why the inheritance was
not given by the law, which was impossible to be kept: but by the promises of
grace, but that the promise might be sure to all the seed? Romans 4.16. Or how
could our peace with God continue our comfort, or last with us, if we had no
assurance of it, but still doubted of his love?

Let us therefore always take notice of this especial work of sound faith,
which makes the heart able to say with Job, I know my Redeemer lives: Gal.
2.20.
and with Paul, who died for me, and gave himself for me. Neither must the
godly refuse to subscribe to the truth of this doctrine, because they never
find such constant and full assurance, which is not moved with some doubting,
and sometime exceedingly ouercast with grudgings of unbelief, for by this
reason they might as well conclude that they never had faith: and it is no
marvel if faith and doubting be in one man, seeing they rise from two
diverse, yea contrary principles, which cannot but be found in the best, even
spirit and flesh. If thou look by the eye of flesh, thou can not but doubt
of the truth of the promises, at least to thy self, in whom so little good
appears: but open the eye of thy faith, which at length sees clearly the
salvation of God, chaseth away clouds of doubts and distrust, and gives glory
unto God. As he therefore that would deem the orb of the sun to be greater
then the earth, must deny his sense and yield to reason: so must the believer
renounce both sense and reason, and live by his faith.

Fourthly, the fruits of a sound faith are, 1. Inward: and these are all Fruits.
which cannot but accompany it: 2. Pet. 1.5.6. Join with faith virtue, etc.
for it works a through change in the whole man, by purifying the heart,
inspiring a new spiritual life, raising from dead works, and causing to grow
up in holiness and in the fear of God. It is as the heat in the body, the
fountain of life and heat, and as the root of a tree, affording life, sap,
and quickening of grace to all the the parts of obedience, without which it is
impossible to please God in any thing. 2. Outward: such as are the true love of
God and man. For as it makes us the sons of God, so it causes us to carry
our selves as children, desirous to please our Father in all things, to
perform unto him all the parts of his worship public, and private, to love
his word, to confess his truth, though with the loss of our lives, to think
of him, to speak of him, to delight in his presence and fellowship, and give
up our selves wholly to obey him in his commandments and corrections. Again,
it makes us to love Gods image in our brethren, and out of this love issues a
desire and endeavor to help them heauenward, and care to perform all other
offices of love toward their outward man, their persons, their lives, their
goods, their names, etc. These are the blessed fruits of that faith which is
unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5. which works by love, Gal. 5.6. And thus have we showed
the first point, wherein the nature of sound faith stands.

The second point is, Soundnes of faith especially required of old men. Why.
why soundnes of faith is required rather of old men, being a grace which
every one, young as well as old, must strive unto? Answ. 1. Because they have
had the use of the word longer, and therefore their profit should be answerable
to their means; neither them as inconstant in the faith, and as subject to
waver and reele as themselves, who in comparison are but newly planted. 4.
Their bodies and outward man waxes weak, and begins to fail, and therefore
they had

Use. All these reasons are direct against such as plead, that their years
coming on them, they cannot conceive, nor learn, nor remember, nor profit in
religion as they are urged in the ministry; their senses inward and outward
serve them not, their vigor and quicknes is gone: but it is good for them to
consider the hand of God upon Zachary, Luke 1. 18. for making his age a means
to weaken his faith, though in a far more difficult case. Does not our
Apostle here urge it as a chief argument, that because they are old, therefore
they must the rather be furnished with grace of knowledge, memory, zeal,
faith, love, and patience? and shall it go for a good plea, that because they
are old, therefore they shall be excused, if they cannot attain unto these,
nor greatly force after them? what a shame was it for Nicodemus being an
ancient and Ruler in Israel, to be ignorant in the point of regeneration, and
therefore Christ reproved him, Ioh. 3. And that was the sin of the Hebrews,
Heb. 5.12.
when as for their time they ought to have bin teachers, they were to seek in
the principles of religion; and were babes needing milk; such is the sin of
babish old men, old in years, children in understanding.

Doctr. Every man must make up decay of nature with sou^dnes of grace.
The third point, is the lesson which hence we are to learn; namely, that
every man must labor to recompense the decaie of nature, with increase of
grace; the weakness of the body, with soundness of mind; the failing of the
outward man, with the fortifying of the inward. The wiseman wishes timly to
prepare against the inconveniences of old age, with the remembrance of God in
the youth: Eccles. 12.1.
how much more should old men in the midst of their ruins and decaies, by
this means repair and fortify themselves? And the counsel is general, that
if the outward man perish, 2. Cor. 4.16.
care must be had, that the inward be daily renewed.

Reas. 1. It is made a note of a true member of the Church, to be afterward
destitute of radical heat and moisture: but renew their age as the eagle, and
with their days their strength. For Christ is that Sun of righteousness,
who once rising upon a soul, is so far from setting again, that he is still
rising even unto the perfect day of it; and therefore necessarily supplieth it
with moisture and heat of grace. And the promise is, that those that wait
upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, Isa. 40.31.
they shall lift up their wings, as the Eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not wax fainte.

Secondly, The comfort of old age depends hereupon, the tedious bright
morning star has not discovered his brightness? the least beam and glims of
whose saving grace, Rev. 2.28.
far surpasses the sun in his strength. What comfort can be to him, whose
strong men that keep the house, that is, whose arms tremble for weakness, and
whose thighs bow themselves as too weak to bear the weight of the body;
unless the Lords arm and right hand become his strength, and as a staff to
lean upon? as he was to David, 2. Sam. 22.19. What joy remains unto him,
whose age has worn away most of his senses; that now has his eyes dim, as
Isaaks; that with Barzillai he cannot discern between good and bad: he has no
taste in that he eats and drinks, he cannot hear any more the voice of
singing men and women? unless he has attained the eyes of faith, to see God
in Christ, and so with Simeon he can behold his salvation; unless he find
relish and taste in the bread of life, unless he can hear the sweet note of
Gods spirit consenting with his own, that he is Gods child, together with that
sweet harmony of a good conscience kept before God and men in all things, which
is heavenly music upon earth? In a word, what solace or rejoicing can be to
him, who has one foot in the grave, that sees death so near him, daily
threatening him, and no way to escape him; unless herein also the spirit
sustain his infirmity, by assuring him that Christ is his life, who has
bereaved that serpent of his sting, poison, and venom; so as he shall do him
no more harm then help him toward his happiness?

Thirdly, why should not we thus provide against that rainie day, and there is
no man that finding his eyes decaying, needs to be urged to provide
spectacles: nor he whose loins fail him, to prepare him a staff to lean
upon: and much more should grace teach every Christian, that when with David,
through age or otherwise, he finds his flesh failing him, and his heart also,
then to make the Lord his hope, and his portion for ever.

Heb. 11.13.
who never saw the promises accomplished to their own persons, but a far
off promised to their posterities, could willingly die in faith: how much more
shall they be able to wish their desolation, who by the eye of the faith shall
behold that heavenly Canaan, and that celestial Jerusalem, of which the other
were but dark shadows?

Use. This doctrine cries shame upon many old men, that are as weak or weaker
in soul then they be in body, far more blind, more staggering, every way
more sensles, more dead: they perceive their faces and eyes look drooping to
the earth, and yet their spirits never a whit more lifted up unto heaven: they
see the world forsaking them as not able to cherish them any longer; and yet
cannot they be drawn to forsake the world: they cannot but behold the earth
casting them off it, and making a way fot the next age their posterity; and
yet they cast care away, and never provide themselves of a continued city. The
eye of their body sees how they are grown into years, and stricken in age;
but the eye of their minds see not the gray hairs here and there upon them,
no more then Eprhaims did. Every man can see and say they are come even to the
period of their days, and yet no man can say, they are come to the beginnings
of any true grace. Thus although multitude of years should teach wisdom,
understanding, faith, application; yet may young Elihu truly object, to the
reproach not of a few; that old age is not always wise. Further urging of
this point, although carried further in the delivery, I purposely omit. The
Lord grant all of us whom it concerns to learn thus much as is said.

In love,] This second virtue beseeming the elder sort not only as old men,
but ancient Christians, is brotherly love, which casts eye unto all the
duties of the second table, as faith principally to the duties of the former;
and most fitly joined with faith, as being the inseparable companion of it, and
such a mark as freeth it from imputation of deadness or unsoundness. Which
virtue is enjoined every Christian old or young; both because it is the new
commandment of Christ: Ioh. 13.34. 1. Ioh. 3.23.
as also a note of a Christian and true disciple of Christ, Ioh. 13.35. and is
besides the bond of upright dealing in humane society, without which men were
little better then wolves or wild beasts. But it is here rather commended to
elder men, who in this virtue, as in the former, and following graces, must be
more at the last, then at the first: and in whom this grace of love must be
proportionable unto their faith: Rev. 2.19.
for this may not be an infant, if the former be of riper age; but according to
the proportion and growth of faith, must love abound. And it must be observed,
that our Apostle requires not the virtue simply, or in remiss degree, or
small measure; but soundness in love, in such a degree and measure as that age
seems of it self to call for.

Now if we would know wherein the soundness of love consists, Soundnes of
love stands in 5. things.
it is then sound when it has soundness, 1. in the ground. 2. order. 3.
seat. 4. work. 5. durance of it.

First, the true ground of all the love of the creature, 1. The ground.
is the love of the Creator; all the love of man must issue from the love of
God, and all duties of the second table must be performed in the first: neither
ought any creature to be loved so far as it is an enemy and hateful to God
the creator: Psalm. 139. I hate the wicked, that is, so far as wicked, namly,
their practices, not their persons.

Secondly, it must be sound in the order: 2. The order.
which will appear in two rules. 1. it must be in the greatest measure where
is most grace, and show it self most friendly and loving to them that love,
and are the friends of God. It must do good unto all, but especially the
household of faith. Gal. 6.
The Apostle commending the love of the Ephesians, which for the soundnes of it
he saw was praise worthy, he hence approoueth it, that it was toward all
Saints: Ephesians. 1.15.
and hence the Apostle John gathers a note that we are translated from death
to life, if we love the brethren. And herein we have God himself going before
us in example, who respected the poor widow of Sarepta above all Israel.

Now we shall descend fitly to this duty by these stairs. 1. by loving God
simply for himself. 2. Christ as man, the beloved of God, and the head of his
Church. 3. the Church it self, the body of Christ receiving of his fulness
grace for grace: and 4. the particular members must rise up higher in our
affections, as the Lord has highlier honored them with grace, and more
expressly renewed his image upon them.

The second rule for the right order of sound love is, that it must begin at
home, but may not there determine: the rule of the love of our neighbor,
Christ has made the love of our selves, and as we are to provide for our own
good first, and that according to the wisdom which the word teaches; first
seeking the kingdom, the pearl, the treasure for our souls, and then these
outward things for our outward man; even so are we to derive this love in this
manner unto the souls and bodies of others, according as they are nearer us,
or further off in the degrees of grace and nature. And here respect must be
had, 1. to those of our own house, as to whom we are tied either by the bond of
marriage, who being one with us, have right to the same affection wherewith we
love our selves; or of near blood, as parents, children, or of duty, as
servants: he that cares not for these, is worse then an infidel, and has
denied the faith. 2. He that cares for none but these is little better, for if
love be sound within, it will be working outwardly. As 1. to such as are tied
by any bond of blood, or alliance, even without the family. 2. to such as are
in a perpetual contract of friendship with us, as was between David and
Jonathan, 2. Sam. 18.1. and Christ had one who above the rest, was called the
disciple whom Jesus loved. 3. it must proceed on to strangers as men, and as
those that may be heirs of the same grace of life with us, yea to the poor as
well as to the rich, Iam. 2.8, 9. nay more, to our enemies, Matthew. 5.44. Love
your enemies: these are the degrees of sound love.

Thirdly, this love must be sound in the seat of it, and that must be the
heart; 3. In the seat.
Romans 12.9. Let love be without dissimulation: it must not be hypocritall, from
the teeth outward or fawning, but love must come from a pure heart: 1. Ioh.
3.18. Let us not love in word and tongue, but in deed and truth.

4. In the work.
Fourthly, it must be sound in the work or action of it. 1. in preventing the
evil of the brethren, not suffering men to sin. 2. in procuring their good.
The Apostle would have experience of the naturalnesse of the love of the
Corinths in their bounty and liberality toward the Saints in want. 2. Cor.
8.8. James.
For if any have this worlds good, and shuts his compassion from his
brothers need, how dwells the love of God in him?

5. In the durance.
Fifthly, it must be sound in the durance and lasting of it, Prou. 17.17. A
friend loves at all times: and here try the soundness by these notes. 1. If
in a mild and just reprehension it breaks not off. 2. If it hold in
adversity, Charitas quae deseri potest nunquam vera fuit. August. ad Iulianum
comitem.
a brother is made for adversity, see Act. 11.29. 3. If it hold then when
injury is offered, and occasions of breaking off, by unkindness or hard
measure: 1. Cor. 13.5. Love is not provoked to anger, but suffers all things.
In these two latter it resembles Gods love, which is both constant, and
closest to a man in the day of his trouble, neither takes it the forfeit of
our daily prouocations.

Use. By all this trial, both old and young may see how far they are from
soundness in this grace, contenting themselves even with a shadow of it: for
the most of men's love is grounded either upon receite or hope of benefit, or
upon flesh and fleshly respects, and is not begun in nor for God, nor knit by
the spirit of God: the least part of it is set upon the Saints that are upon
earth excelling in virtue: it generally determines it self in self loving,
and self seeking, not seeking the things of others, as well as their own; or
not seeking and loving the souls of men, as well as their bodies; or
respecting persons, and not embracing the poor as well as the rich; or not
blessing their enemies as well as their friends: the most love of men is a
lip-loue, a semblance, a counterfeit, and fruitless love, divorced from inward
hearty affection: or else a vanishing and flitting love, flinching in
adversity when most need is; and ready upon the least occasion to be
overcome with evil, and changed into bitter hatred: this crazie love every
where argues a riuen and cracked faith; such counterfeit love is the daughter
of counterfeit faith, and unsoundness of love is a sure token of unsoundness of
faith, and halting in religion.

In patience:] This third ornament of Christian old age, is fitly by the spirit
of God added to the two former, as the preservative of both: most requisite
unto all Christians. For seeing this virtue is nothing else, but a willing and
constant suffering of hard and painful things, Patience necessary for every
Christian.
for Christianity and honesties sake: and further, that affliction follows
the faithful, who study to testify their love of God in the love of man,
even and endures all things, 1. Cor. 13. 3. Every Christian must after a
special manner resemble God herein, who is a God of patience, yea patience it
self. 4. Every Heb. 12.12. and 10.35.
but by faith and upholding himself in his expectation, as the net is vpheld
by the cork from sinking.

Specially commended to old men. Why.
But it is here especially commended to the practice of old men, for sundry
reasons. 1. Because they of themselves are inclined to frowardnes, Persecution
the ancient arms of believers.
which indeed is the glorious arms of a Christian: it was therefore a very
seasonable exhortation, especially in those troublesome times, to old
professors, and ancient believers, to provide themselves of patience, that so
they might not shrink away in time of trial, to the prejudice of the
wherewith my self have been comforted of God. 2. Cor. 4.1.


Soundnes of patience in 3. things.
Now for the soundnes of this grace here also urged, it stands especially in
three things: 1. in a sure ground: 2. in sound fruits: 3. in the constant
enduring of it.

1. The right ground of all sound patience, is God himself. And this is so, 1.
in the ground.
when in any affliction either immediately from God for trial or chastisment,
or more mediate by man or other creatures Gods instruments, the eye of faith
turns it self upward, and causes the afflicted soul to run under the
hand that smites: and is (as the hebrew phrase is) silent unto God: Examples
of both these we have in David, who conflicting with Gods own hand in his
soul and body, held his tongue, and said nothing: and the reason is rendered,
because thou did it: Psalm. 39 9.
and in that great affliction brought upon him by Shemei, 2. Sam. 16.10.
he would not revenge himself upon Shemei, because the Lord had bidden Shemei
curse David. Hezekiah receiving a heavy sentence from God, said, the word of
the Lord was good.

Secondly, the sound fruits of patience are many, I will reckon five, 2. Fruits
five.
which are the chief. 1. To entertain crosses alike, and one kind of diverse
temptations, nor taking it to be in our own power to choose our own rodds: for
the Lord cures not all maladies with one plaster, neither tries the same man
always with the same trial. The sundry kinds of trialls of the Apostles, and
how equally and patiently they carried themselves through them, see 2. Cor.
6.4.5. our Saviors counsel aimed hereat; aduising his followers to take up
his cross daily: that is, to make account of, expect, and forecast one cross
or other; and when they come, though they come every day, nay sundry in every
day, they must be taken up, and cherefully and Christianly borne.

The second fruit of sound patience, is cheerfulness in affliction: Heb. with
joy the spoiling of their goods: James exhorts the Saints to count it
exceeding joy, Iam. 1.2.
when they fell into sundry temptations: and how Paul took pleasure in
infirmities, reproaches, necessities, persecutions, and anguish for Christ, see
2. Cor. 12.10. If it be here asked, whether this be not too Stoicall a precept
for Christians, who are commanded to weep with them that weep, and take to
heart public, private, and personal calamities? I answer, no Christian may be
sensles in affliction, neither can any affliction for the present be joyous but
grievous: and yet these two are not contrary, to mourn, and yet to rejoice in
affliction; because they are not both attributed to the same part, nor to the
same cause: weep we may according to the flesh, which is humbled; and rejoice
at the same time in the spirit, by Gods spirit supported in affliction: Again,
weep we may for the misery considered in it self, and on our selves; and yet
at the same time rejoice in the sweet fruit and event of it, both in regard of
God, which is his glory, and our selves, namely, the quiet fruit of
righteousness. So the Apostles, Heb. 12.11. and James 1. my brethren, count it
exceeding joy -- knowing that the trying of your faith, etc. that is, if ye
cannot rejoice in the sense of affliction, yet you may in the use of it,
because it makes to the trial of your faith, and increase of your graces. As
the husbandman all his plowing and sowing time, he has nothing but his labor
for his pains, he goes our weeping, but carries with him a precious seed;
his rejoicing lies in the fruits of his field and travel; Psalm. 126.5.
in that he is sure he shall bring in his sheaues with joy: and although he
sows in tears, yet he reapeth in joy.

thankfulness in affliction, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Job 1.21.
In all things give thanks. Jobs practice is recommended in Scripture for our
imitation, who blessed the Lord as well in taking away, as in giving. We easily
yield thanks to God for good things, and therefore we ought for afflictions,
the which the Lord sees to be good for his children, and makes them often
both see and say so much, as David, Psalm. 119. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I might learn, etc.

It may be the Lord will look on mine affliction, and do me good this day;
not making doubt (for neither did David in general) but constantly cleaving to
the promise, Psalm. 50.
call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Prayer for
deliverance must be joined with this expectation of our deliverance, not
prescribing time, nor means, nor manner, much less using unlawful means:
but reserve unto the Lord the glory of his wisdom, in ordering the whole
matter, and circumstances of our deliverance.

resignation of a man's self to the will of God, and a voluntary subjection
unto his good pleasure, who knows out of his wisdom what is the best, and
out of his love makes every present estate work to the best to his children:
example hereof we have in David, 2. Sam. 15.26. Behold here am I, let him do
as seems good in his eyes: yea even if he should say, I have no delight in
thee.

The third point wherein the soundnes of patience consists, is in the found
durance and lasting of it. 3. Durance.
And indeed not every patience and tollerance of evil is here meant, but such
as implies a delaie, and continuance under some weight or burden; nay the
very word imports so much, signifying as well perseverance, as patience:
neither is this sound patience a suffering only, but a long suffering, nor a
patience, but a long patience, such as the husbandman waits withal unto the
harvest; such as the Prophets endured all hard measure by, James 5.7.
such as our selves must possess our souls by: and every possession is of
continuance; such as makes not have, yea such as must wait until the coming
of the Lord. James in the place alleged, exhorts to be patient till the
coming of the Lord: which is not meant of his last coming to judgment, but
of his particular executions beforehand for the delivery of his chosen, and
the revenge of their wrongs upon their enemies.

Use. All these notes let us see the crazines of this grace in us. It is no
patience when men bear out crosses by stoutnes and stomach: neither by a
nature not so subject to impatience: for here is not silence unto God,
disposing the cross unto them. So when men can buckle well enough with, and
swim out of one kind of cross, which pincheth them not so much, but sink in
some other, when they must choose their rods and t^ialls, or else they are
heartles and dead in the neast; here is a crannie in their patience which will
sink their souls. Some again bear out their crosses, because they are yoked
and coupled to them like two spaniels, which must go together, because they
cannot go asunder, but without all willingness or chearefulnes, but this is
far from Christian patience, and is as we say, patience perforce. And lastly,
when we cannot entertain afflictions thankefully, as finding some goodness and
sweetness in them; when deliverance is not expected from God, as by such who
have title in his promise; when we desire to be at our own hands, and will not
stay his leisure, but hastily like infidels run unto indirect means, and
sometime to Satan himself, in sorcerers and witches; when we are so tugged
with afflictions, as we hold not out, but are ready to give up all; here is
all unsound, here men may not only suspect, but conclude from unsound
patience, unsoundness of love, of faith, and consequently the want of the truth
in all their profession of religion.

Verse. 3. The elder women likewise that they be in such behavior as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, but teachers of holy
things. Our Apostle having taught how and what doctrine should be applied to
old men, he proceeds now to make old women matchable unto them, and
therefore he begins with the word likewise, (...).
which shows that the same virtues as formerly have been mentioned, are to
be urged upon old age of both sexes: and who can deny sobriety, wisdom,
gravity, soundness in faith, love, and patience, to be as necessary for
ancient women as men; whether we consider the same inconveniences of the same
old age lying upon them, or the impotencie of their sex in undergoing them,
which yet makes the want of these virtues far more miserable then in the
other. And then he adds some further duties fitted to their estate, which he
does 1. by prescribing such virtues as are seemly for their years: and 2. by
prohibiting such vices as in all ages are wicked, but in theirs most unseemly
and scandalous. The duties are two. 1. an holy behavior in themselves, in the
first words of the verse. 2. a drawing on of others unto holiness and
honesty, in the latter part of the verse and forward. The vices prohibited are
two. 1. of slaundring or false accusing. 2. of intemperate desire or drinking
of wine or strong drinks: both which are contained in the middle of the verse.
But we will speak of the words as they lie in the verse. But before we come
unto them, we may learn this lesson.

Women as straightly bound to the means of salvation as men.
Doctr. In that wholesome doctrine must be taught and applied unto women as
well as men; note that no woman cannot without danger of damnation despise or
neglect the ministry of the word: they being as straightly bound unto the
means of salvation, and the Apostle takes double pains to teach them their
duties.

Reas. 1. As salvation is one to all, so is there but one way to all: for
written in the book of life, as well as men, Philip. 4.3.
that is, in the book of Gods election to life; so must they be also added
unto the Church as well as men; Act. 2.47.
seeing none are saved, who are not added unto the Church. Now this addition to
the Church stands not only in an outward profession of the Gospel, by which
they are added to the visible Church: for the foolish virgins made a great
show for a time, but in unfeigned conversion and sanctification, whereby they
are added unto the invisible Church. True it is, that women must be joined unto
the people of God, and therefore must participate, 1. in the word, which must
be preached to every creature. Paul preached to a company of women, Act. 16.13.
among whom Lydia was converted. 2. in the Sacraments, and be both admitted
into the Church by baptism, as Cornelius, the Iaylor, and all their households:
as also strengthened in the Church by the Lords Supper, in which they must
remember the Lords death until he come. But all this is not enough, yea
nothing at all unless they be first knit unto God himself; the bond of which
conjunction is faith wrought in the heart by means of the word, and working in
heart and life by love to God and men. If then women must believe to salvation
as well as men; 34.
the Iaylor and all his household believed in God: nay if women must continue in
faith to which salvation is tied, and not to bearing of children; 1. Tim. 2.15.
then surely for women to despise the ministry, which is the means of
beginning, and continuing in faith, love, and holiness, is chief women not a
few, must be disciples full of good works and alms to the Saints, as Dorcas:
all or any of which graces, if elsewhere they can attain or perform, Act.
9.36.
then by the direction and institution of the word, we will give them leave to
contemn it with the whole ministry of it: but if this be the word of faith
which we preach, the word of the kingdom, and if we have the words of eternal
life; let them go elsewhere, or by any other direction save this, whether of
natural reason, fleshly wisdom, lewd custom, or what ever may persuade it,
they shall surely fail of faith, of the kingdom, and of life eternal in the
end.

Object. But how often have we heard Popish or profane men allege to the
contrary: What should women mind the Scripture, Hosius affirms that a
dista^^e is fitter for a woman then the bible: de expresso verb. Dei. But more
blasphemously Linwood, who verily thinks it was the devils invention to
permit the people the reading of the Bible.
or meddle with religion? what, have they not huswiferie at home, have they not
children, servants, and a calling to tend? and how often does our religion
hear it self disgraced, in that it is embraced by women, who they say are
simple, and easily seduced? Answ. To all which I answer, that if these wretches
had proved that women had no souls to loose or to save, such graceless
discourses were more easily to be admitted. 2. Might not a man have come upon
Marie with the like interrogatories: why have you nothing to do, but to sit
down at Christ's feet, to hear words which concern you not? have you no
huswiferie to set your self about? do not you see you have a great Prophet to
give entertainment unto? do you see your sister Martha meddling with such
matters? But if Jerome commended a gentlewoman in his time for teaching her
maids the Scrip^tures. in Rpitap* Paulae.
the other to open her mouth with wisdom, and have the law of grace sitting
under her lips: without which latter, should a woman excel the life and
death of some bruit beasts? assuredly if the former were all, she should live
and die a little more ciuilly, but never a whit more religiously then they. 4.
It is so far from being a just reproach to the Gospel that women profess it,
that it is rather a note of the truth of it. God Luke 7.44.
far beyond him: and thought it no disgrace that Marie, out of whom he had
cast 7. devils, nor the noted harlot the woman at the well should follow him,
and entertain his profession: neither did his wisdom think it prejudicial,
or not beseeming the simplicity of the Gospel, to show himself after his
resurrection first to simple women, and to make them preachers of it even to
the Disciples themselves.

Object. But women are to rest in their husbands instruction, and need not
depend upon the Ministers mouth, 1. Cor. 14.35. Let them ask their husbands at
home. Ans. The Apostle there forbids open and public speech in the
congregation: where if in the exercise of prophesiyng they had any doubts
rising concerning the things handled; they were not permitted to stand up as
the men were, either to teach, or ask questions; but keep silence for the
time, and consult with their husbands at home for the resolution of their
doubts: but this place takes it for granted that they must resort to the
Church, and hear in the congregation, ver. 34. And pitifully should most
women be taught, if they should content themselves with their husbands
instruction.

Use. 1. We see hence what to think of the Popish doctrine, who will neither
admit women nor men, but their learned Licentiats to meddle with the
Scriptures, and least they should so do, they shut them up in an unknown
tongue, an high wickedness against the commandment of Christ to Laiks and
common men, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures: and the practice of the Church
and believers in the old and new Testament, Deuteronomy. 31.11. Nehem. 8.3.4. Act.
17.11.

2. Let no woman please her self that her husband goes to Church, and neglect
the means her self; 1. Cor. 7.14.
for an unbelieving wife may be sanctified by a believing husband, but she
shall never be saved but by her own faith; he sanctifies her marriage, but not
her person.

3. The husband may not suffer his wife to incur such danger; but if he love
her he must extend his love to her soul and better part, seasonably giving
gentle admonitions and reproves, if with Martha, they grow heavy or careless of
this duty.

4. Let no woman be discouraged, but encouraged rather in the powerful
profession of religion, and frequenting the exercises of it, of hearing and
reading it, reverent speaking and careful practice of it; imitating herein
those good women who followed Christ, and ministered unto him of their
substance. It is the modesty of women never to be ashamed to profess Christ:
and godly women have many times become more zealous then men, and their
sanctified affections have usually exceeded men's in strength and tenderness. And
although the darkness of the world endure no manifest light in men, much less
in women: yet Christ and his word highly esteems the least appearance of
grace in men, and much more in women: how careful was Christ to instruct,
comfort, and reveal himself to the women that followed him; honoring their
profession of him in some things above his dearest Disciples? what a great and
worthy praise was it, that Priscilla as well as Aquilla her husband, should
take such a man as Apollos home to instruct him in the ways of God? Act. 18.26.
and of how many women does the Apostle in his salutations give more then
common report of their love and faithfulness in the truth? As go no further
then the Romans: Priscilla was ready for his life to lay down her own neck:
Marie bestowed much labor on the Apostles: Romans 16.3.6.12.
Triphena, Triphosa, and Persis, labored much in the Lord. And the author to
the Hebrews after he had heaped up a number of the fruits of faith in men and
women, he comes again to commend the faith of sundry women, who received
their dead to life, Heb. 11.35. 1. king. 17.22. 2. king. 4.36.
alluding to the widow of Sarepta, who had her son restored by Elias his
prayer, and the Shunamite hers by Elizeus.

In a word, let all women seriously meditate, 4. things for women to meditate
upon.
1. That one thing is necessary, even to Martha. 2. That all other things are
vile in comparison of this one thing; or if necessary, it is but so far as
they help unto it. 3. Remember, Lord, how I

Now we come to the behavior of the elder women, which the Apostle does not in
special prosecute, but in general would have it wholly squared by this one
rule, namely, A general rule for the behavior of the elder women is, that it
be such as becomes holiness.
whether it be such as becomes holiness: that is, whether it be a witness
of the holiness of the heart, and such as adorneth the holy profession of
Christ. Wherein we must consider, 1. That every Christian must take out the
same lesson here read, and that the holy Ghost knowing all our diseases,
directs this counsel to elder women especially, that they might come to take
knowledge of an excessiuely proud disposition in themselves, to offend against
this precept, and the other particulars, far above others.

Secondly, that the Apostle holds it not sufficient for women outwardly and
abroad, or for a start or fit, as in the Church, market, or other places of
meeting, to take up a show of holy or demure behavior, which many do, who in
private can be lascivious, loose, and wanton enough: but by the word an inward
habit, (...).
and constitution beseeming holiness. For by this word Physicians properly
express a constant state of body or health, or a sound constitution; which
from them is here translated to the mind, to betoken that a Christian woman is
still one and the same, and her holy behavior the same, as well at one time,
as an other; in one place as an other, still bounding her self in all her
carriage within the limits of holiness; neither does she force her self
hereunto, but it freely issues from an inward principle, which is an habit of
holiness.

3. That seeing the disposition of the inner man is principally manifest, 1. in
the countenance. 2. in the speech. 3. in the apparel: therefore the behavior
may be tried by these, whether it be according to holiness or no. And for our
better direction herein: First, the countenance (under which is comprehended,
the gate, gesture, and looks) is beseeming holiness, 1. when it expresses
the inward humility of the heart; the humble heart must set an humble look
and gesture. David when he would prove the humility of his heart, Psalm.
130.1. Isa. 3.16.
says, I have no proud looks. On the contrary: the Lord accusing the
daughters of Sion of pride, he proves it by the stretching out of their
necks, and minsing of their feet. 2. When the countenance, gesture, looks,
testify the chastity of the mind: for chastity must be seated as well in
the countenance as in the heart, to dash all lightness. 2. Pet. 2.14.
Peter speaks of eyes full of adultery, and the daughters of Sion are
charged with wandering eyes: the children of the Church must resemble their
mother, Cant. 6.
who has doves eyes, and is both beautiful and comely to allure her own; as
also terrible to quell the purposes of vain and wicked men.

Secondly, the speech which carries with it an holy comeliness, is such as
bewrays the wisdom, grace, and modesty of heart: as when a woman is wise
to silence, as well as speech, especially where men are present: and in speech
not pra^ling, like busybodies of other men's matters, nor unsavory, nor
contending, nor audacious hardening the face to speak any thing: but opening
her mouth with wisdom, with modesty, with conscience of the presence of
womanly infirmity, and never otherwise. Quest. What no liberty, no not in our
gossepings, and womanly meetings? Answ. No; the Apostle gives no leave at any
time to lay aside this part of Christian behavior: there is no time wherein
Christian women professing holiness, may come so near the guise of the harlot,
Prou. 7.1^.
who is described to be babbling and loud: which were it well observed, many
that carry away all the speech in meetings would be struck mute, not being
able or willing one word thus ruled.

Thirdly, that apparel is fitted unto this Apostolical rule, when by the
outward ornament of the body, the inward beauty of the soul is expressed,
called by the Apostle, the hidden man of the heart. And this is, 1. when the
matter of it is not stately or costly, which must be measured partly by the
ability our selves have, and partly by the condition of life which God has
set us in: and partly by the sober and grave example of such as God has sorted
with us in age, degree, and condition of life, whom we may not strive to
exceed; but even in the matter of our apparel, our own sobriety, modesty,
yea and frugalitie must be made apparent unto others. 2. When the form or
fashion is not wanton, strange, curious, or odd, sauouring of pride, lightness,
vanity, or singularity, as when women will have a fashion by themselves,
contrary to the common and comely fashion of others: all which is a disgrace
to the profession, and the sin of most women, whose behavior expresses
little holiness.

Use. Whereas many will not be persuaded, that we can give them rules out of
the word, for this or that guise, word, look, fashion, etc. and require
particular and express words of Scripture, why we should dislike one fashion
more then another, or approve of one above another: we see hence we have
general rules whereby every particular is to be squared: as 1. Cor. 10.31. If
it make to the glory of God: Phil. 4.8. whatsoever things are true, honest, of
good report: and here whatsoever is beseeming or unbeseeming holiness; whereby
the whole behavior must be examined.

Not false accusers,] Well says one, that a man of an evil tongue, is a beast
in the form of a man, himself is a serpent, and his tongue his sting; but
here the word teaches us that he is worse, (...).
even a Devil in the shape of a man; for by this one vice of the tongue, he so
lively resembles the Devil, and plaieth his proper part, that he has also his
name put upon him* as the Jews were said to be of their father the devil,
because they did his work. That this vice of false accusation, Ioh. 8.44.
is the devils work, appears in that it was first practiced by him: who
be^ing from the beginning a devil, that is, one that goes between two with
tales* to cast between them bones of enmity, spares neither God nor man: God
he accused unto Adam and Eve; and accused Job unto God, False accusing 4. ways
committed.
and is called the accuser of the brethren: but yet it is not his alone, but
has ever since been taken up into the practice of his instruments, who have
their tongues set on fire of hell, where they shall be tormented. The nature of
which sin, that we may the better discover, we must know that it is sundry
ways committed, especially four.

1. In charging men or women, in public or private, to their face or behind
their backs, with things which are false and untrue: so dealt Ziba which
reioyseth in the truth. 2. Sam. 16.3.


2. There may be, and most usually is, false accusing even in relating true
things, sundry ways: as 1. by blasing secret infirmities, which love covered.
2. By aggravating through vehemency of words, 1. Sam. 22.9.
the story shows the grievous mischeife that came of that wickedness. Amos
7.9.
So dealt Amazia to the King against Amos. And Paul and Silas preaching nothing
but the truth, are brought to the gouerners, and exclaimed upon, as men
troubling the city, Act 16.20. and cap. 18.13.
preaching ordinances not lawful to receive, and teaching to worship contrary
to law. 3. By changing the truth little or much, or adding unto it. Thus the
false witnesses against Christ added to his speech, I will, and, made with
hands, and so perverted his whole meaning.

silence,

Act. 6.11.
as also against Steven his first Martyr. The latter, by receiving false
accusation: for as if there were no receivers, there would be no thieves; so
would there be no informers* and our commandment is, Prou. 25.23. and 17.4.
to drive away with an angry countenance the slandring tongue, as the North
wind drives away the rain. Now all these sins, with all other of this kind,
must be avoided of every man and woman, who would not be of that generation of
monsters, which the wise man speaks of, Prou. 30. Psalm. 59.7.
who in stead of tongues have swords in their mouths. And let every Christian
consider, that express charge of God, Leuit. 19.16. Thou shall not walk about
with tales among thy people: and 2. that whispering and backbiting, are reckned
up among the sins of those that are given up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.29.
This precept specially directed to old women for sundry causes.


But especially is this precept directed to women, because of the inclination
of their sex above men hereunto: for the holy Ghost well knowing our
constitutions, most aptly armeth us there where we lie most open and naked:
hence women are forbidden to go from house to house, 1. Tim. 5.13.
as pratlers, and busy bodies, and they must not speak things uncomely. Yea
to old women, 1. because their age increases the disease, by affoarding fire
too, to blow up a whole world of wickedness.

The rules to avoid this sin are: 1. Look to thine own calling, Iam. 3.
Rules to avoid false accusing.
and the necessary duties of it, that so following thine own plow, thou may
have no leisure to entermeddle in other men's affairs: busybodies malice
never spoke but is suspicious, and deprauing the best persons and practices,
and is one of the greatest enemies of truth, in which Gods image cheifely
consists. 3. Learn to esteem the good name of thy brother, the next thing
to his life: considering the truth of that homely speech, that

Not given to much wine, (...).
] The Greek word signifies such as are become servants and vassalls to any
thing; that look as a servant is not his own, but his masters, at whose
command he must come and go, whose work he must perform, and cannot choose his
own business, and whose hardest tasks he must undertake: even so the Apostle
implies, that men and women there are who are not their own, but wines; that
is, servants to wine and strong drink: at the command, at the call of it; and
have it not in their power to use as a servant, but themselves are subdued
under it. And what is here spoken of wine, may be fitly by Synechdoche,
referred to all daintines in meats and drinks, etc. as all inordinate desires
of this kind are comprehended in that one phrase, Eccles. 2.3.
to give the heart to wine. Now the sin is disgraceful in every man: for the
commandment is general, Ephesians. 5.
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: And the woe is as general
against all such as are overcome with wine; and no drunkards shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Isa. 28.1. 1. Cor. 6.
But in women, and old women it is besides the sin, most filthy and
shameful. The very Heathen accounted wine and strong drink disagreeable from
the nature of women, and therefore enacted laws against their use of it: but
the word of God is not so rigorous, which gives them as well as men, leave to
use wine for their weakness and often infirmity; yea sometimes for honest
delight as well as for necessity; but always moderately, for strength, and
not for drunkenness, never tying their delight or desire unto it, nor suffering
themselves to be overcome by it, for of whatsoever any is overcome, 2. Pet. 2.
to that he is in bondage. And the reasons why the Apostle directed this
precept unto old women, Drunkenness in old women most hateful. Reasons.
seem to be these.

1. It is not unlike but that the women of those times, as they had like
meetings upon their necessary and womanly occasions: so had they the drinkings
as well as drunkenness, 1. Pet. 4.4.
which are fruits of an unregenerate estate. And thus the Apostle by this
precept backeth the former, the due observance of which would cut off much
false accusing in such meetings; and in the neglect of it, it is impossible but
that the tongue will be walking without his own hedge, and wandering beyond the
pale of it. The proverb is true: In vino veritas.
what ever is in, must out in the cups. Agreeable to that holy proverb of
Solomon: Prou. 23.
to whom are contentions? to whom are strokes, and wounds without cause? even
to those that stay long at the wine: teaching us, that the hands and tongues
also of such lash on, strike as wandering eyes, lustful looks, tongues
speaking lewd things, gestures, and actions, more seemly for bruit beasts then
either women or Christians. 4. Besides the more public scandal, if we
consider the private damage of this sin in women, we shall find the Apostle
had reason sufficient to condemn it in them. For whereas the Lord has laid
this duty on the wise woman, to build up her house, to regard the ways of her
family, so as her diligence and labor should (if not much increase) yet at
least preserve and save that portion of maintenance her husband brings in,
accordingly as his heart trusts in her: this one sin strips her of all
fitness to govern the family, which for her goes at sixes and seauens (as we
say) it wastes and consumes the substance both privately at home, and by
calling in companions from abroad: and thus she sinfully wrongeth her family
for the present, lodeth her husband with debts and dangers, and depriueth her
children of that comfort which was meet should be reserved and laid up for
them.

Doctr. Out of the word we may further note the folly of our corrupted nature,
A note of corruption to yield our selves servants to the creatures ordained to
serve us.
making us ready to yield our selves slaves and servants to the creatures,
which by Gods institution and ordinance should serve us. And we yield up our
selves servants unto them diverse ways: as 1. in the immoderate desire of
getting them unto us; when men men will be rich, and hasten so to be, when they
will fare deliciously, go sumptuously, Means of putting our selves under
their service.
which to compass they will become base servants to any man, any sin, or any
drudgerie for a time. 2. When in holding them, the minds and affections of men
dwell in the delight of them, as when the abundance, variety, goodness,
sweetness, and pleasure of meats, when thou wast in prosperity thou said,
I will not hear: this has been thy manner from thy youth: for now the heart
is held as in chains, and has it not in the power to turn it self to any
other truer delight. 3. When a man has it not in his power to forsake or part
with them: when of as the common speech is. 4. When they are as fetters and
clogges from

Use. To resolve of the practice of these precepts. 1. To use the world as not
using it, neither growing proud in the smiles, nor too much depressed in the
frowning of it. 2. So to take our parts of our lawful liberties, 1. Cor. 6.12.
as that we be never brought under the power of any thing: under the pretense
of liberty in the creatures, we may not become slavish unto them, but carry
an equal mind both to want and abound. 3. To avoid all occasions whereby
unawares we might be drawn under their power, as looking at the wine in the
cup, Prou. 23.31.
for hereby thirst will follow drunkenness; so of daintiness, softnes, riotous
and spend thrift company, for by such means and examples, the heart becomes
wholly divorced from God, and glewed unto the creatures.

But teachers of honest things,] It will be here asked, how stands this with
that in 1. Tim. 1.2.11. Let the woman learn, and I permit not a woman to
teach. Answ. The Apostle there speaks of the order and comlines of public
ecclesiastical assemblies, wherein they were not allowed to take upon them any
power or function of teaching, for the reasons propounded, which are three. 1.
From their condition, which is to be obedient unto man, and therefore in men's
presence must not usurp the authority of teachers, but content themselves
with the place of scholars, in all mixed assemblies of men and women. 2. Their
function, which is to serve men: for Adam was first created, and Eve for Adam;
and not to exercise any function over them. 3. From the weakness of their sex,
which lies more open to Satan's seducement; for Adam was not deceived first,
but Eve. It is not fit that any such function of teaching should be committed
unto them; seeing Eve in innocence taking upon her to teach Adam, was so
easily prevailed against: and the Apostle expresses this his own sense, 1.
Cor. 14.34. where from the same ground of the woman's subjection unto man, he
says, let your women keep silence in the Churches. As for the examples of
Deborah, and Huldas, who were Prophetesses in the Church, they being
extraordinary, make nothing against this rule of Paul, nor for that Pepuzian
heresy, for women's teaching in the Church, nor that Popish heresy of midwiues
baptizing of infants in case of necessity, as they call it. Neither does this
place written by the same spirit and pen cross the former, seeing it
speaks of private teaching and instructing the family at home, especially her
children and maidseruants; so the text it self seems to restrain them,
pointing them out their auditors; namely, young women in the next verse; and
the lectures they are to fit unto them; the most or all of which are private
duties, and the end to make the younger women wise unto all godly
conversation; namely, both those within the family, and those that are without,
so far forth as they shall be occasionally called to instruct them, both by
Christian speech and example. Now that this duty belongs unto matrons, it
will appear, if we consider them, 1. as Christian women. 2. as superiors in
the family.

For the former: A duty enjoined every christian woman to call on others to
her godly course.
it is not sufficient that a Christian woman live uprightly and unblameably in
her self, unless she also endeavor to drive or draw the younger women to
the like godly course. For 1. every Christian must gather with Christ, and he
or she that gathers not scatters: whence are all those exhortations, thou
being converted, strengthen thy Heb. 10.
and provoke one another to love and good works. 2. The rule of speech for all
Christians is, that for the matter it be good, that is, of good things: and for
the use, that it tend to whose lips feed many, and they speak pleasant words,
which are health to the bones, and sweetenes to the soul, their tongues are
trees of life, Psalm. 37.30.
utter wisdom, talk of judgment, of high matters, etc. And that women
should not think that they are exempted from all this qualification of their
speech, Solomon ascribes it in special to a virtuous woman, that she opens
her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is under her lips; answerable to
this text, which requires that she be a teacher of honest things.

As for the latter, this duty of teaching honest things, belongs unto them
as governors of their family: wherein Salomons mother is a notable president,
who instructed her son, what my son? and what the son of my womb? etc.
and Timothies mother, and grandmother Lois, who acquainted him with the
Scriptures from a child: and what else proved these, but rare men, full of
grace and piety?

Use. 1. This reprooueth such as neither are able, nor willing to call on
others unto the practice of Christian and honest duties, the knowledge of God
seateth not in their hearts, nor the law of grace in their lips. 2. Others are
teachers, but of dishonest things, their mouths are ever open, but like the
open vessels, Numb. 19.15.
which in the Law were accounted unclean; nothing but idle and lewd speech,
nothing but impertinent or detracting speech proceeds out of them: all kind
of language fitteth their mouths, but that which befitteth holiness and
honesty: such as whose years calls for gravity and gracious sauorie
speech, even in the presence of younger women, are safe if they can chat away
much time, in ripping up the loosenes of their young and wanton days; or the
faults of this or that man or woman: this is their table talk, this is the
speech wherewith they season the young and tender years of their children, the
which these new vessels easily and long after retain, who for most part by
their graceless courses, repaie their mothers barrenness of gracious speech:
other speech then this, if ^auouring of grace and piety, let it be offered, it
is as welcome as smoke to their eyes.

Use. 2. How much more is the master of the family, bound to the trayning up of
this family in holy and honest things? for the wife must herein only help
forward his pains. The Lord wishes the fathers to lay up the memory of his
great works, for the instruction of their children: and the master was the
Prophet in the house: and accordingly the children after them could say, we
have heard our Fathers say thus and thus: their books were their fathers
mouths. But how carelessly is this great duty neglected of most men; that many
children may say truly, we have heard our fathers swear, and curse, and lie,
and backbite, and slander: but seldom or never have they declared unto us the
great things which the Lord has done for us; seldom or never have they become
teachers of holy or honest things unto us, either in their word or conversation.

Verse. 4. That they may instruct the younger women to be sober minded, that
they love their husbands, that they love their children:

5. That they be discreet, chaste, keeping at home, good, and subject unto
their husbands, that the word of God be not evil spoken of.

It being required that the elder women should be teachers of honest things;
the Apostle in these two verses, does these three things. 1. he shows who be
their scholars, namely the younger women: as also the lecture they are to read
unto them, namely sober mindedness: that is, by their counsel, and example,
frame them to become wise in the performance of all the duties of their
several places: for the Greek word, howsoever it seems at the first sight,
(...).
to express one only virtue; yet is it to be extended to the general
information of them unto moderation, providence, modesty, faithfulness,
diligence, and every other virtue suitable to their age and condition of life.
For it is most properly and usually ascribed unto schoolemasters, who have
youth committed unto them to be instituted in all discipline and instruction:
whence the whole information of youth, and that general education which they
receive from Masters or Tutors, is by the best humane writer upon that argument
expressed by this same word. (...). (...).
Secondly, he takes occasion hence to enter into more particular description
of such virtues, as should cause the faces of the younger women to shine: and
these be seven in number, 1. Love of their husbands. 2. Love of their
children. 3. Temperance. 4. Chastity. 5. Home keeping. 6. Goodness. 7.
Subjection, or obedience unto their husbands. Thirdly, he enforces the
necessary practice of all these duties, by a disparate argument; namely, the
reproach and blasphemy, which otherwise in defect of them, will redound unto
the word of God: of which three points we are to speak in order. Out of the
first of which, we learn,

Doctr. What must be the fruit of the elder women's carriage and speech; namely
the making of the younger wise, The fruit of the elder women's holy carriage
must appear in the younger.
in the general wisdom of godliness and honesty. Every practice, and every
speech of theirs, ought to be either a precept or example of wholesome
instruction, Prove. 31.6. The virtuous woman opens her mouth in wisdom: the
fruit of her lips yields instruction, and her life is a shining lamp: which
doctrine as it is clear both here, and elsewhere in the Scriptures; so is it
of exceeding profitable use. 1. To older women, to teach them warines in all
their words, and behauiours, and look to their carriage both abroad and at
home, as well within their own houses, as the house of God, whose eyes are
every where beholding the good and the badde; even in the den with Daniel*
and the dungeon with Joseph: that they may walk wisely even in the midst of
their houses; so setting themselves coppies of religious conversation to those
over whom they are set: fasting, praying, reading, instructing in private;
Private duties more comfortable* but public more powerful.
in which private duties they shall meet perhaps with much more comfort,
although public duties be more powerful: that in all common actions also of
life, they may bring them to this touch, whether they will instruct others in
wisdom or no. By which trial (if impartial) not a few shall find their
behauiours and speeches fitted to train the younger sort to prattle, and play
the busy bodies, to scoff, to quip, rail, heartburne their betters: to
instruct them to become as bold in behavior, as soldiers; to court it like
curtezans; and at the best to fill their heads with old fables, and follies;
which corrupt minds, and breed to more ungodliness: whereas they ought in these
years to account all that time of their life lost, wherein the younger sort
gathers not some virtue or good from them. And although this lesson
especially be directed to elder women, yet is it profitably to be extended unto
all Christians, of what sex or age soever: every of whom ought to sanctify
their speeches, and actions by the word, and by prayer, if ever they would
attain this high point of Christianity, of becoming shining lights, and
promoters of the glory and kingdom of God, as well in others as in themselves:
not speaking or performing any thing vnwarrantably, rashly, or carelessly; or
without this aim and end set as a white before their eye, namely, the edifying
of themselves, and others: 1. Cor. 10.31.

2. Whereas it is commonly, but inconsideratly, thought to be only a
ministerial duty, to make men and women wise unto salvation; we see hence the
contrary, that it belongs not only to other men, but even to women also, but
with this difference and reservation, that the Mininistry and Ministers are
appointed the ordinary, principal, and public means of begetting and
preserving men and women unto God; but this more private and common instruction
is appointed for the increase, and strengthening in that grace given. Again,
the Minister like a good Master builder, is to lay the foundation: and the
rest of the people are like laborers, bring filling to the work, and house of
God, and may not depart from his precepts and directions: and therefore Jude
exhorts the Saints, to edify one another in their most holy faith. Let not
women therefore be ashamed thus to labor with the Ministers in the Gospel, no
more then those holy women which labored with Paul: Philip. 4.3.
nay rather, because it is a good note, that their names are written in the
book of life: let them be encouraged unto this holy precedencie, and
testification of Christianity in every word, action, and behavior: neither
let them make dainty, fearing that in these corrupted days, none will be
hasty to follow their right ordered steps; for seeing this is the ordinance
of God, appointed to this end and use, it shall prosper to the same purpose in
such as whom the Lord has any delight in, to build them up further; when they
shall hear the gracious speeches of their lips, and see the grace of their
lives; and as for others, let them at their peril neglect their own duties,
yet shall it not be without use in them also, as not without comfort to their
own souls in the day of the Lord.

That they love their husbands,] Now our Apostle teaches younger women, how
they should carry themselves in their familes, and propounds many marriage
virtues, which ought to discover themselves in all women, called unto that
estate, and in younger women are special ornaments; whose love, modesty,
chastity, humility, and subjection, should be as the vailes of their heads,
and as the chain and garland of their necks. The first of these is love,
challenging rightly the first place, because it is the leader of all the rest,
and the chiefest of them, easily drawing the other after.

No needelesse precept to exhort younger wom^n to love their husbands and
children. Why.
This love must be set upon two objects. 1. their husbands. 2. their children:
for this is such an affection, as is to be set upon their own proprieties, and
not any besides. Object. But this may seem a needelesse precept, for is it not
natural for women to love their husbands and children? or can a woman ^ate her
own flesh: can the members but love the head? or can any monster of women so
far loose natural instinct, as to forget the fruit of her womb: Solomon
commanding the child to be divided, knew out of his wisdom, that nature could
not but work, and bewray it self in one of the parties. Answ. Many by Gods
just judgment, and their own corruption, are become without natural
affection, Romans 1. 2. Tim. 3.1.
2. The best nature of all if it be not extinguished as in the former, yet is
greatly corrupted, and

For the former of these, that a woman should love her husband, Why women
should love their husbands. Reasons.
yea embrace him with such a love as surpasses all other, even to the
forgetting of her own people, her fathers house, yea her own self in
comparison of him; besides the commandment of God, there is great reason. 1.
The commandment is often repeated in the book of God, Church does Christ
himself: how is that? look in the Canticles, through all which holy song, the
church never speaks of Christ, but breaks into the expressing of her most
fervent love; never mentions him without the titles bewraying her most entire
and inward love; calling him her love, her well-beloved, him whom her soul
loved, him who was more then other welbeloueds, the chief of ten thousand:
him who could not be out of her sight, but she was sick of love after him:
here is a glass set before all women, and a direction how to esteem of their
husbands.

2. The reasons are sundry: I will only note three. First, because of that
straight union between them, they being no more two but one* one in diverse
regards. 1. In respect of the woman's original: the Lord consulting to build up
Adam a fit help to join in marriage with him, They twain are one in 5.
respects.
did not think good in his wisdom to frame her of any matter diverse from
Adam himself, but took a part of himself to make her of; not of his head, as
if she should be a superior, nor of his feet, as to become an underling, not
of his hand, as to be a mere servant, but of one of his ribs, to lay her
again in his own bosom: hereby signifying to Adam, that his wife was no
other then a piece of himself, and that he was to embrace her as a branch
springing from himself, and she him as her root and stock, receiving under
God her original, life, and being law of God and man; God making the match
in heaven, and finishing it between them by men on earth, pronounces that
they are no more twain but one flesh: and humane laws account them but one
person. Now shall God, and all other men account them but one, and shall
themselves by being divided in affection mutual consent, nay, deliberate
choice and election; and by the consent of such as it belonged to weight and
observe whether God gave the one to the other: and also by their public
promise and covenant before God and his congregation; Prou. 2.17.
and therefore ought to preserve this bond of unity, and be far the covenant
of their God. 4. One actually, by coming into one family, Except the wife will
hate her own flesh she must love her husband.
one manner of living for bed and board: participating in welfare or woe, but
especially by becoming one body, and one flesh as Moses speaks. 5. One by
propagation, both of them (through Gods blessing) affoarding one common matter,
for the bringing of God made but one, and why, not because he wanted spirit to
have inspired a world of wives for Adam; but because he respected an holy
seed: inferring the same conclusion which is as strong in the one sex as the
other; wherefore let no man transgress against the wife of his youth.

consequently in special sort the veil of her eyes, her protector and cover
from all those who would offer her wrong: Genesis 20.16. Ruth 3.9. Isa 4.1.
and as he spreads his wing over her, so she has betaken her self to be
called by his name, she partaketh of all his honor and advancement, of his
gains and income: and could not raise her self, The husband and wife are
yoake-fellowes and joint companions in joy or sorrow.
but (as a vine) creep disgracefully as on the ground, were she no^ by him
propped and suported: in all which regards and many more, it is as little as he
can expect, or she perform in way of thankfulness, to embrace him with such
tenderness of love and inward affection, as never finds it self
sufficiently satisfied with requitalls.

Thirdly, the love of the husband is a notable preservative of Gods Genesis 24.
that he loved Rebeccah dearly, and this was a special preservative, that he
fell not to polygamie, or concubines, as the most of the Patriarks did: and on
the contrary, the want of love to ones proper companion, whether man or woman,
is the first breach of the covenant, and brings into the bosom of some
stranger, to the ruin of the whole family. In a word, let this affection be
wanting, all other duties will either be not performed, or else for fashion, or
for a while, but not constantly.

Use. 1. To reprove many women, who think it enough that they look well to
their household affairs, and so become good huswiues, although they take little
more delight in their husbands then in other men, against whom they can soon
break into sullenness, anger, and wrath, and show such distemper as if they
were borne in some angry hour: whereas they ought to possess inwardly an
honest and proper delight in them, and outwardly show and express it, that
the husband may requite their love with love proportionable back again.

2. Whereas many which love their husbands do it sinnefully and immeasurably,
Rules for the right loving of the husband.
it is meet to lay up some rules for the well doing of such a duty. 1. To
begin love not as the most at the man, or in the flesh; but contarie to the
practice of many Iesabels, who though there be no need to spur free horses,
yet are powerful enough to persuade and work them to ungodliness.

Genesis 27.
who provided for Isaak such meat 4. In wary circumspection, if God give her
to see more then her husband, with the least prejudice toward him, to turn
away, and hinder whatsoever would be dangerous to their good estate, and

In these things stands the true love of the wife toward the husband, all
which she owes him, be he a fool, a froward Nabal, or whatsoever else;
nothing can loose her from these duties which dissolueth not the marriage bond.

Now although this text speaks nothing expressly of the husbands duty, yet
may not the husband think himself lawles, or to expect the payment of these
duties, and live as he list. For not only other places of our Apostle bind him
as strait as this does the wife; but even this place secretly puts him in
mind of his duty, both because he is the fountain of all marriage duties (as
of marriage it self) as also in that all these offices of love in the wife,
should be a consequent of his love, yea a thankful return of love for love;
for so is the love of the Church toward Christ. We will therefore in few words
show (although not so directly laid down in the text) wherein the husbands
love must bewray it self toward his wife, Husbands duty toward his wife:
wherein.
that so he may the more justly First, by instructing her, and seeking to have
the seed of saving knowledge sown in her heart; dwelling with her as a man of
knowledge. Secondly, rescued his two wives, 1. Sam. 30.3.
Ahinoam and Abigail. Thirdly, by cherishing her: 1. her body, providing
necessaries bountiful: for in a Naballs hand or heart as dry as flint, is
just suspicion of want of love. She may look to be judged nearer then a
child, and yet no father but will provide necessaries before his child shall
need to ask or beg the same of him. 2. Her soul, and in it what grace of
salvation he espieth; so as she may see he reioyseth in it, and her for it, in
that she is thereby testified an heir of the grace of life. 3. The gifts of
her mind, observing what gifts of government, wisdom, and experience God has
given her, and employ them, that hereby she may see, she is not only not
despised, Prou. 30.
but also encouraged, when she finds the heart of her husband trusting in
her. Fourthly, hear Sarah. Genesis 21.12.
The want of which wise and holy carriage in many husbands, pulls by force
undutifulness on the wife, when she cannot see the image of Gods glory and
wisdom, shine in his government of her, who should be her pattern and
glass, but he loses his authority by indiscreet and childish behavior: he
diminishes her love, by froward, teastie, hard, or niggardly usage of her; so
as it is just upon him, that he be drawn into contempt, and to have the
comfort of his marriage withdrawn, although it be unjust that the wife should
neglect any part of her duty, because the husband does a great part of his.

That they love their children,] These words commends not unto mothers a bare
affection of love toward their children, wherein many are excessive, and too
to foolishly with the ape kill and spoil many of their young ones, with their
ouer-kind clasping and cockering of them; but he requires some maine duties of
love to be performed toward them, wherein mothers must walk as in the chief
duties of their special calling; neither are the most of these duties so
proper to them, as that the husband has no stroke in them; but are commended
to women the rather, because while children be young, it is their proper
employment, to be about them, and among them within the house, whilst the
fathers occasions for most part call him abroad.

The office of true motherly love.
The first of these duties of motherly love, is to nurse her child her self,
except health and strength suffer not, or else some just and weighty cause,
which in the court of conscience will be warranted, do hinder. A Genesis 21.7.
said, who would have thought that ever Sarah should have given suck: it was
taken for granted in those days, that she that bare a child, should also give
it suck, and so did Sarah although her age might justly have required
dispensation. Who was nurse to Samuel, 1. Sam. 1 23.
but his own mother? and when the Lord would choose a nurse for Moses, the
greatest Prophet that ever was, whom did he deliver him unto rather then his
own mother? Exodus 1.
Who did give suck unto Christ, Luke 11.27.
but his own mother? look whose womb bare him, her pappes gave him suck.
And what kind of women were they, whom the Apostle would choose into office in
the church, but such as among other notes of diligence, honesty, and grace,
had given suck to their own children? 1. Tim. 5.10. Let women consider
seriously not only how unnatural, but how ungodly a practice it is, without
just ground, on idle pretenses to depart from the steps of these holy women,
thrusting forth their children sometimes to such, as by whose negligence they
are brought short home; and sometimes (which is worse) to such who ought
neither to give milk, nor yet live by the law of God, I mean such as by
dishonestie have filled their breasts: but to whomsoever, they come short of
that love which even the brute creatures carry to their young.

instruction to frame them up to godliness: and this two ways, 1. By delivering
them precepts of piety, so soon as they can conceive them, that if it were
possible they might suck in with the milk, principles of grace and
godliness. Solomon wishes the parent to teach a child, while he is a child in
the trade of his way: and least mothers should turn off this duty to the
father, as being his, we read of a bundle of instructions collected together
which Salomons mother taught him, Prove. 31.1. That it is a fruit of love in
parents, Basil speaking of his nurse Macrina, says that she taught him the
Scriptures of a child. Epist. 74.
see Prove. 4.3.4. and the recompense of Eunica her timely teaching of Timothy
her son, appears in the commendations which Paul gives of him every where.
2. By becoming examples to them of godliness, and piety, careful what
speech, gesture, behavior, pass from them in the presence of their children,
which if it be sober, and religious, it fashioneth their behavior accordingly:
or if otherwise, it soon and suddenly corrupts them, as we see the loosenes
of many parents, fearfully revenged and visibly upon their children.

Thirdly, the third office of true motherly love, is seasonable and merciful
correction: Prou. 13.24. wherein two extremes are to be avoided. 1. too much
indulgence, for that is a cruel love in the event; a child let alone to
himself (says Solomon) makes his mother ashamed, and makes the father smart
often, as Hely, and brings himself to ruin: Prou. 29.15.
it is noted a cause of Adoniahs ruin and fall, that his father would not
displease him from his childhood: that this is a fruit of parentlike love, 1.
king 1.6.
see Leuit. 19.17. thou shall not hate him, to let sin be upon him: and Prou.
13.24. he that spares the rod hates his child, but he that loves him
chasteneth him betime. 2. Take heed of cruelty and too much severity, which
may provoke their children: both Parents must beware of abusing their
authority, either to unjust commands, or by unseemly reproaches and
contumelies; or else by unjust and immoderate stripes: by all which means
children, whom loving means might perhaps have reclaimed, are both exasperated
and alienated from the Parent; and hardened also and made desperate in bad
courses. The fruit appeare^h in good Jonathan, whom Saul every way provoked.
1. Sam. 20.34.
1. none must bring his dear and innocent friend David to be slain but he,
there was a most unjust commandment. 2. he unjustly reviled him, calling him
the son of an whore. 3. he wanted of his will that he slew him not, for he
threw his spear at him; and then the text says, that he arose and went his
way.

Fourthly, the last duty is hearty and daily prayer for their childrens

Use. Let women learn thus to love their children, and thus to love al their
children: The mother must thus love all her children.
for the precept is indefinite excluding no one child from any one of these
duties: which meets with the practice of some women, who love not their
children in judgment, but in affection, which sometime is carried to the
eldest, sometime to the youngest* with neglect of all the rest; some one must
be made the wanton and darling, some other so rigorously entreated, that they
seldom see a clear and vncloudy look toward them: some one shall have a
double portion, and be so set up, as that all his brethrens sheaues, shall not
fall down only, but be blasted before his sheaue; this is not to love children
religiously, as Job did, who offered sacrifice according to the number of them
all; and therefore let religious men and women shun this corrupt ^ffection,
least it be with them as it was with the Patriarks, who were never more
grievously crossed in any thing then in their darling children.

verse. 5.
Discreet,] or temperate. A virtue before required both in the Minister, cap.
1.8. and in elder men, cap. 2.2. and now in younger women, being a grace
requisite for all estates, ages, sexes, and conditions of life: requiring that
the raines of affections be subjected unto reason, and moderated by judgment,
not suffering a thought to be entertained and settled in the mind which is not
first warranted in the word: without which if the raines be slacked but a
little, A discreet carriage is a beautiful grace in a young woman.
the mind is suddenly vanquished, taken, and lead captive of manifold lusts.
This grace then is the watchman and moderator of the mind, keeping and guarding
it from pleasures altogether unlawful, and in lawful curbing and cutting off
excess and abuse. It watches also over the affections of the heart, and
actions of the life, resisting all light behavior, all childish carriage, all
unquiet and troublesome passions, such as are suspicions, ielousies, which are
the fewels and firebrands of much mischeife, and the distempers of flashing
anger, rage, and unjust vexation. It suffers not undutifulness to the husband,
unnaturalness toward the children, unmercifulness toward servants, untowardness
in her own duties, unthankful meddling with other folks affairs. It is a
procurer and preservative of many graces, a bond of her own, and others peace,
a setler of the comfort of her life, an ornament of her head, and of her house;
which once let her be disrobed of, she may bid farewell to her families welfare;
for let any vile affection bear sway but for a little while, as of anger,
impatience, excessive grief, intemperance, or any such, how is the whole house
in a kind of tumult? which as a Common wealth in the commotion and rising of
some one rebel, cannot be composed and settled till the rebel be subdued; which
they find too true, who in their match were left unto themselves, to make
choice of such as wanted then, and yet have not attained with the fear of God
the practice of this virtue.

Now then seeing this virtue is so necessary for all parts of life, that it
ought never to be wanting, many women who want not many good parts of nature
and grace, may yet see hence their error, who conceive that if they be
generally well reputed of, both for their religious and honest course, and can
in good manner please their husbands in the administering of the family; that
then they may be dispensed with in some predominant, indiscreete, and
intemperate affecton, especially if it be more private: as now and then in
extraordinary unquietness and bitterness, not seldom in some bitter root of
covetousness, drawing on injustice toward their husbands, perhaps to break
out into some prodigal and idle expense another way; in lashing out liberty
of speech against some that cannot answer for themselves, in becoming for some
days the greatest strangers at home, etc. all this while thinking that these
things, if seldom, will stand well enough with religion: but they are to know
that all Salomons wisdom could not reconcile two things so abhorring together,
the giving of the heart unto wine, or any one lust, Eccles. 2.4.
and the leading of it in wisdom: and it will prove stark vanity to make
trial of it after him: neither can it be other then the shuffling out of a
religious course for man or woman, to give way to any one inordinate lust. More
of this virtue see in the places forenoted.

Chaste,] or pure. The Apostle by permitting the three former virtues, has made
way unto this fourth, which is a fruit of them, issuing from the love of their
husband and children, and from tending and watching against inordinate
affections. And this purity or chastity is not that of the virgin or single
estate; but it is a marriage virtue, the keeper of the marriage faith, and may
thus be described. It is a purity both of soul and body, in regard of
unchaste lusts, abandoning all unlawful and strange pleasures: which
description is wholly couched and abridged in 1. Cor. 7.34. where the Apostle
calls it, the holiness of body and spirit: of spirit, when it is either not
tempted to uncleanness, or being tempted yields not, or yielding is recovered
by repentance: of body also, when it neither exciteth, nor being incited
executes not uncleanness. Now how equal and reasonable is it, that women,
especially such as have the remedy of marriage against impuritie, in whom the
want of it is more sinful and dangerous, Chastity of marriage urged by
reasons.
should be provoked to the preserving of such a sweet grace as this is.

First, if we consider how the Lord approoueth and urges it. 1. By his
commandment, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. this is the will of God, that ye should abstain
that is, his body, holiness and honor.

2. In that the Lord here interposeth himself; and though many husbands and
wives think of nothing but a mutual stipulation between Prou. 2.17.
so as she that forsakes the guide of her youth, forgets the covenant of
her God, that is, of marriage, of which God is the author, and whose name was
or ought to have been invocated in the match making.

3. In that the Lord professes that he narrowly watches, and clearly the
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord. Joseph might have sinned secretly
enough, but that his eye was happily lifted up toward this pure eye of God,
which cannot abide to behold such iniquity.

former appears, Prou. 5.22. the sinner of this suite destroys his own
soul, 1. Cor. 6. no fornicator shall inherit the kingdom of heaven: Revel.
21. no unclean thing shall enter within the gates of the city, but shall be
kept without with dogs, enchanters, and liars. The latter, seeing the law of
God is, that the adulterer, and adultresse should die, both because he would
not have the land defiled, nor the guilty person to live as an eyesore unto
the innocent: nay more, if a man were deceived in the quality of the person,
he has taken to wife, thinking to find her a maid, but he finds her
virginity bruised, and another man has humbled her, Deuteronomy. 22.21.
it is lawful for him to put her away, and the Magistrate to put her to death,
as an adultresse. Further, how strictly the Lord watched over this sin,
appears by that law, Numb. 5.21. If the husband were but ielous, whether
justly or iniustly, himself was accounted guilty, if he did not bring her to
trial; and this trial was not to be made by man, but was Gods own trial by
the bitter cursed water, by which himself from heaven, would revenge so
greiuous a sin, against so holy an institution as marriage is. And in
comparison the word of God, accounts this sin far more wicked, then some
of those which men's laws punish with death: we think theft a great sin,
because it brings malefactors to the gallows, and so it is, but not
comparable to this: for Solomon himself by comparing these two sins, Prou.
6.30.
puts them almost out of comparison; a thief steals for hunger to save his
life, but he that commits adultery sins against his own life: the
former is not always to be despised, but this is never to be spared: the
former may make satisfaction, by restitution of the thing, and four fold for
the sin, the latter can make no restitution at all: the satisfaction of the
thief may be accepted of the owner, or if he cannot satisfy with all the
substance of his house, yet his necessity may plead for him, and he obtain
pity: but here, as no satisfaction can be made, so if it could, it could
never be accepted; the owner, that is, the husband is enraged, he will not
spare, he will not bear the sight of any ransom, although the gifts be
augmented.

Secondly, if we consider how vile and odious the sin is: 1. in regard
Church, to be thought an assembly of harlots, which ought to be the Lords holy
ones, the undefiled doves of Jesus Christ? what a confusion brings it in the
Commonwealth, to have bastard broods inheriting? whereas the Lord would not
have them come within his congregation to the tenth generation: what an injury
to the family, to bring in unlawful and usurping heirs?

Secondly, for the parties offending. 1. Whereas all other sins are without
the body, this is against the body: 1. Cor. 6.18.
the body is not only an instrument

Thirdly, the curse of God follows this sin: 1. in the soul of the sinner,
Heb. 13. Whooremongers and adulterers God will judge: him that destroieth the
Temple of God, will God destroy. 2. In his body, Prove. 5.11. he shall mourn,
having consumed his flesh and body. 3. In his name: which precious thing is
irrecouerably lost, ver. 9. 4. In his estate: it brings him to a bit of
bread, Prove. 6.26. it is a fire which consumes all his substance, Job. 31.12.
The prodigal son spent all he had on harlots. 5. In their bastard brood: we
never read that ever any of them came to good, save only Iephthe: and yet what
a number of men be there, that care not to make their first borne bastards? By
these two considerations, the sin of impurity is sufficiently descried to be
most hateful.

Use. 1. Marriage is no abolisher of chastity, for then the Scripture would
not have enjoined the same person both to love her husband and children, and
also to be chaste, against all Popish doctrine to the contrary. 2. Let every
woman preserve this purity of body and spirit; every way expressing it in a
modest countenance, as Rebecca was abashed at the presence of Isaac, in a
shamefast eye, in a chaste ear, not intertaining impure communication; in a
pure tongue, by grave and holy speech exempt from lightness, Means of preserving
this chastity.
and rottennes. Quest. How may we preserve it? Answ. The best means of
preserving chastity, are these following. First, because from the heart issue
adulteries, get a pure heart to be the ground of it, make the inside clean
first, actions will not be cut off first; but first become a believer, let the
soul become a pure spouse of Christ, love him, and cleave to him, this is a
good beginning. Secondly, preserve in thy soul the fear of God. Eccles. 7.28.
He that is good before God, shall be preserved: this is no goodness of nature,
of education, no learning but Gods learning can preserve a man or woman: Prove.
2.8.16. If knowledge enter into the soul, thou shall avoid her snares: turn
thy eye upon Gods presence who sees thee; and would thou then commit that,
from which in the presence of a child of five year Thirdly, love thy husband
as formerly thou wast enjoined, it is not so much the having, as the loving of
an husband, Fourthly, avoid occasions of wantonness. As, 1. Idleness, one of
Sodoms sins, standing puddles purrifie; walk diligently in the duties of thy
calling, least Satan find thee as David on his gallerie. 2. Intemperance and
delicacie in meat and drink, the more fuel the greater flame, especially
beware of accustoming thy self to wine, and strong drink, for they are
mockers: Avoid intemperance in sleep, in apparel: let thy diet be sober, and
thy sleep seasonable, so as thy body may rather be beaten down and kept
under by fasting and watching, which are fit medicines to tame the body. 3.
Avoid much company, and the sight of persons which may become snares, as
Joseph went and kept out of his Mistress presence; death often enters by the
windows of the body, Melius vincitur fugiendo quam oppugnando. August.
and if thou make not covenants with thine eyes, adultery is easily
committed in the heart: beware of amorous readings, pictures, speeches, all
which suddenly corrupt good manners. Fifthly, use all good means appointed by
God, for this purpose. called unto holiness, and not to live in brutish lusts,
as the Heathen did, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5.
Romans 1. 3. That the pleasure of the sin is short, but the gnawing of the
guilty conscience, and the

Keeping at home,] As chastity is the maine marriage duty, Heb. 13.
and the undefiled bed the honor of it, in like manner does our Apostle
bring it in like some honorable Lady, who is not seen abroad without her
attendance, some making way before her, and some safeguarding behind her, even
so here all the marriage duties going before it, made way for it, and all these
that follow, are the preservatives thereof, all of them being such servants as
by their cognizance may be known to belong to such a mistress. And of them
all, the holy Ghost thought this of home-keeping, fittest to follow at her
heels, for house keeping is indeed chastities best keeper. Housekeeping is
chastities best keeper.
Not that a woman is never to be found without her house over her head; for
many necessary and just occasions call her often abroad, namely, 1. as a
Christian, the public duties of piety and Gods worship; as also more private
duties of love, and works of mercy in visiting and helping the sick and
poor. 2. As a wife, both with her husband when he shall require her; and
without him for the necessary provision of the household, and such like. But
the thing here condemned, is the affection of gadding at any or all hours,
with disposition of hearing or telling news, or affecting meriments, company,
expense or excess, accounting the own house rather a prison then an home, and
so easily forsaking it without just occasion. And justly is this course
condemned: That women should keep their own houses. Reasons.
for,

1. This is a forsaking and flying for the time out of the calling, wherein
they ought to abide, for their calling is commonly within doors, to from their
own place, is as if a bird should wander from her own neast. Secondly, Prou.
27.8.
this were the high way to become busy bodies: for what other idle, and busy
bodies: which if any wonder how they can be reconciled, thus they are easily:
those that are idle in their own duties, are most busy bodies in other men's;
and these busy bodies have two special marks to be known by to themselves
and others, namely, their open ears, and their loose The wife by keeping at
home auoideth both suspicion of evils, Prou. 7.11.
she is every where but where she should be, sometime gadding in the streets
with Thamar, sometimes in the fields with Dinah, sometimes without at her door,
sometimes at her stal, but her feet cannot abide in her house: and if against
her will her body be within doors, her heart, and senses will be without:
Iesabel must be gazing out of the window: whereas if the angel ask where
Sarah is, answer will be made, she is in her tent; As also occasion of it.
and the daughters of Sarah will be in their tents, not in the tauernes, nor
straggling so far abroad but that their husbands can readily

Wherein this goodness of a woman is most conversant.
Good,] Goodness is a virtue which is sometimes in general opposed to all that
inward malice, which lurketh in the nature of men and women, wherein the whole
troop of virtues are included: hereof speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.9. the
fruit of the spirit is in all goodness. And even this I am persuaded that ye
are filled with goodness: Romans 15.14.
and herein resembling Dorcas, who was said to be full of good works and alms
deeds which she did: Act. 9.36.
they shall meek; and yet of a cheerful spirit and temper: not sullen,
taunting, bitter, fretting or galling any, and much less her husband; neither
of a troublesome and iarring disposition* but of a good nature as we say: for
let her be otherwise never so honest, wise, painful, yet without this goodness
and amiablenes of behavior, she shall be no more pleasant then a continual
dropping, which drives out the owners. Prou. 19.13.21.9.
3. It is sometimes taken for profitable, and requires that the wife be
helpefull and comfortable by her advise, labor, and sweet society, whereby
she builds her Prou. 14.1.
Thus did the Lord see good in his wisdom to make man a meet help for him,
when it was not good for him that he should be alone. And thus the virtuous
woman is said to do her husband good, and not evil all the days of her life,
Prou. 31.12. and as she does good to him, and his within doors; so does she
also to others abroad: as besides the family, verse. 27.28. to the poor and
needy, verse. 20. And this I take (not excluding the other) to be here meant
especially, as a most comfortable and sweet virtue; without which that holy
institution of marriage would prove no better then an heavy burden and
molestation.

Subject unto their husbands,] Marriage in it self, although it be neither
virtue nor vice, Women must be subject to their husbands, Why.
but a thing indifferent, yet is it a shop of either, according as are the
qualities and practices of persons in this condition: and therefore this is the
seventh marriage virtue, prescribed unto the younger women: whereof there is
great reason and necessity. First, if we consider the law of creation that
every man should bear rule in his own house. This is one reason of our
Apostle, Est. 1.20.22.
1. Tim. 2.3. Adam was first created and then Eve, and therefore Adam must be
superior: to which if it be objected, that therefore the birds and beasts
should be preferred before both, because they were created before either: the
Answer is, that there is not the same reason, because the Apostle speaks of
the same kind, and not of diverse. 2. The Apostle proves not Adams
superiority so much from the order, as from the end of creation of the woman;
which was to be an helper and comfort unto him. Now in reason, whatsoever
serves to any end, is less then the end to which it serves: but Eve was
made for Adam, and not Adam for Eve, yea she was made of him, and not be of
her, Man's superiority was no part of the wives punishment.
and therefore even in innocence was she subject unto Adam; though then
without grief and molestation, which afterward came in by sin.

Secondly, consider Gods law and institution after the fall: Genesis 3.16. Thy
desire shall be unto him, and he shall rule over thee: as if he had said,
seeing thou can not rule thy self, meet it is that now especially, since
thy sin has set thee out of order, that thou should be put under the rule
and power of an other: yea although this subjection be not so liberal, sweet,
and free as before the fall, but joined with sorrow and difficulty, yea
although often thou undergo unequal commands: and this also is the Apostles
reason, Adam was not first seduced but Eve: and therefore her honor was first
lost, and a less liberal subjection was bound upon her so much more surely.

Thirdly, the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is of his Church: and
therefore as the members are subject to the head without reasoning, Ephesians. 5.23.
so should the wife be unto her husband: he provides for all, answeareth for
all, defends all as the head: and does not he best deserve the pre-eminence?
has not nature given the highest place and prerogative unto the head, and were
it not most unnatural, that the wife by seeking for sovereignty and rule over
her husband, should set the head under the feet? And further, by this
superiority he becomes the image of God unto his wife, and his lawful
commandments have a stamp of God set upon the thing commanded; and therefore
she must signify that she has a feeling of him in her heart, as the image of
Gods majesty, glory, and sovereignty; through her whole behavior in a meek
and quiet spirit, showing her self the glory of the man, respecting his
authority as the Lords, his will as the Lords in right and lawful commands:
against which if she rebel, she rises up against the Lord himself.

In these regards especially the Apostle concludes this duty and exhortation,
Col. 3.18. wives be subject to your husbands, that is, yield your selves unto
the will, direction, and discretion of your husbands: for it is meet, or
comely, namely, in regard 1. of the law of nature: 2. of Gods institution after
the fall: 3. the husbands headship: and 4. womanly infirmity. Neither is it
only meet, but so necessary, as where it is not performed, it cannot be but
the family should be laid open to ruin and downfall: no otherwise then if the
feet should refuse to go, the eye to look, the hands to take the things
which the head commands, the whole man must needs perish. All which
considerations, take away all the frivolous objections of women for exemption
from this so natural and necessary a duty. Objections to bear off the
duties frivolous.
Some plead, they are yoked to foolish Naballs: others are matched to such as
never consider their pains and kindness, and not meeting with that kind and
thankful retribution from their husband which they expect, take themselves
freed from such strict observance: others could love their husbands passing
well, were it not for such or such a bad quality: and others are tied to
frampoll or conceited persons, and so draw conclusions both of their
unfitness to govern, and the inconveniences of their own subjection. But
against all these reasonings, which are so unreasonable, as that they directly
fight with Gods ordinance, and that order which he has put in nature, which
admits nor of such exceptions: here is a cannon of battery: Thou must and
may before thy marriage consider, whether he be a wise man or a fool, but
after thou must know he is thy husband, which if he be, thou must be subject,
over whom (be it that he be a fool, and thou wiser then he) thou may affect
no rule, but knowing still thy place, by thy goodness, wisdom, counsel, and
persuasion, if it may be, prevent his or thy hurt, as Abigail did. As for his
unworthiness, whatsoever it may be in thine eyes, yet the Lord depriueth him
not of his worthiness to rule over thee, who have entered into the marriage
league with him. And for his unfitness, he cannot be so unfit to govern thee,
as thou art to govern him, who were taken to be an help, and not an head unto
him; and a monstrous thing were it in nature, for the feet to direct the head.

But that women should obey their husbands, none are so rude, Wherein must
wives be subject.
as not in general to acknowledge: but come to particulars, as 1. wherein, 2.
the manner how, there grows some question. The former the Apostle answers,
Ephesians. 5.24. Wives be subject in all things: that is, in all lawful and bonest
things: in all which, there must be a departure from their own wills, if a
contrary commandment proceed from the husband, yea even in those things which
may seem to be her peculiar for the government and keeping of his house,
whether in his absence or presence, she must administer according to his mind,
and direction. For so the members of the body are subject to the head, each
does his own duty, yet all by the appointment of the head, move or rest
themselves. And thus the Church dispenses to the sons of God, the children
of the Church, all necessaries for their direction, consolation, and salvation;
but yet by the prescript and order of Christ the head, and not any thing
without his appointment: and no more is the wife to administer (no not in the
absence of her husband) against, or contrary to his mind. Look up to the
heavens, and very nature will teach this lesson; while the sun is absent,
the moon takes upon her, governs the heavens, and shines above all the
stars, but yet not without the borrowing of all this light from the sun, if
Philosophy teach us truly; but when the sun is present, she gives place,
contracteth her light, and reuerenceth him after a sort by vayling her face at
his presence, upon whom she wholly depends: and thus should it be with the
wife, when the husband presents himself, whether in person, or in his
commandment.

Quest. Whether the wife may dispose of goods without her husband consent to
good uses?

Answ. There is no question but she may. 1. of any goods before marriage
excepted. 2. of those her husband gives her after marriage: for these also are
proper goods, and not common. 3. If she have general consent, when his heart
trusts in her, and refers in general things to her discretion. 4. If she
have implicit consent, when her husband knows she gives, and holds his
peace. 5. In extreme necessity, for often the case suffers not to expect
his consent. 6. In the unfitness of the husband to govern, as suppose he be
stricken with frenzy, and madness; for then the disposing of things is deuolued
upon her. 7. In his longer absence, as suppose he be a soldier, merchant, or
seafaring man. 8. Of that she can well save of her husbands allowance; or
procure by her labor above that her husband enioyneth. 9. That she gets
naughtily, she ought to dispose it to the owners, or to the poor, though he
should forbid her; because neither she nor he has right thereunto. The
Casuists add other cases which are more questionable. But the question is of
such goods as are common between them, whether she may dispose of them to any
use without his consent. And the common answer is negative, and sundry reasons
propounded. Which as I will not conclude against, so neither can I wholly
assent unto, for these reasons, which I propound to be further considered of.

1. Whereas one chief ground of that opinion is, that the wife has no more
but use of her husbands goods: I take it she has also a right and interest in
them. For marriage, which makes the person of the husband the wives, makes
his goods much more; so that as she has not use only, but right and power of
his body; so also has she not only an use, but a right and possession in his
goods. Again, if she have only use of them, wherein is her preferment above
the children and servants, who have use of them as well as she. Further, the
husband is bound to impart and make his wealth common with his wife, as Christ
imparted his heart blood upon the Church, which the Church has a state and
interest in: the which interest for any to debar the Church of, were to
withhold her from her right.

Secondly, the wife is as necessarily bound by God to show mercy as well as
the husband; Gal. 6.
the precept is general, to do good forget not, and to distribute. She must
therefore exercise her faith in the practice of good works as well as he,
though her husband forbid her, whom she is to obey only in the Lord: what if he
should command her not to hear the word, pray, and go to Church, or the
like: and the case is not unlike, seeing mercy is more acceptable then
sacrifice, and every way as necessary. Object. It will be here said, that we
may not do evil to do good withal; or give of that which is not our own.
Answ. It is the question whether it be evil or no. And she gives of that
which she has right and state in even to dispose, but in no other use then in
works of mercy, as present need requires, and that with wisdom and
discretion, so as she neither impouerish her husband, weaken his estate, nor
wrong her own family.

Thirdly, we have examples of godly women: for to let pass the fact of
Abigail, Calv. in 1. Sam. homil. 90.
that was (as Mr. Calvin says) extraordinary, in that God did inwardly and
specially direct her in that strait; and the case was of present necessity to
save the lives of the whole family: and further her husband Nabal, was not only
froward but drunk all that day, and not to be consulted withal, 1. Sam.
25.16.36. Luke 8.3.
The examples of Ioanna the wife of Cuza, and Susanna, and many other godly
women, were not so extraordinary, who ministered to Christ of their substance:
to say here they had the consent of their husbands, is but to insist in the
question without proof; and it is most probable, their husbands were not so
forward, especially Cuza, who was Herod's steward, in likelihood was of Herod's
mind. Most expressly Solomon says of every virtuous woman, that she
stretches out her hand to the poor, Prove. 31.20.

Fourthly, the most learned deciders of cases among the Papists, conclude and
determine that the wife in this case may do that which the husband ought to do,
but will not: as if she know much of his goods ill gotten, which ought to be
restored, she may give more liberally: whereby so far as she can, she
labors to heal his error; and witholdeth Gods judgment from her self, in
participating in his goods.

It is objected, that the vow of the wife may not stand without her husbands
consent, at least implicit, and therefore she may not dispose of inferior
things without it. To which may be answered, that this is a ruled case by
express commandment, not deniable by any, as the other is not. Besides, it is
an unlike case, seeing vows are voluntary, and in the power or choice of the
vower, to vow or not to vow; but so are not works of mercy, which are
commanded, and necessary duties.

It is alleged, that partners may do nothing without mutual consent. But
that is answered, because here steppeth in a superior power, to which both of
them must stoop, even a commandment of mercy, and charity, to the wife, as
well as the husband, and includes that the wife must have wherewithal to be
charitable as well as the husband.

It is alleged, that her desire must be subject unto him* and he shall rule:
but all such allegations drawn from his headship and authority, stand only
in indifferent and civil things, which a merciful and necessary relief is
not: for we say that she is in a civil manner subjected unto him, and to his
power, and may not dispose of any part of his goods at her pleasure to any
civil use; as to give away to her friends, to spend upon other other outward
uses. But yet is she not after such a servile manner put under his power, as
that upon no occasion whatsoever, she may not dispose of any part of the
goods, which by the right of marriage are common between them.

It is further alleged, that the Shunamite did not entertain the Prophet, 2.
king. 4.9.
but first she asked her husband. I answer, it is a commendable part for the
wife to seek her husbands consent in every thing; but the question is, where
such consent cannot be had: besides, one thing it is to give a merciful
relief; and an other for the wife to bring a man into the house to diet and
lodge him; which this woman might not do, without the consent of the husband;
for though there was a merciful relief of the Prophet of God in it, yet there
was more it being a mixed action, in one part of which the husband must have a
chief stroke.

It is further alleged, that by civil laws the wife may neither let, nor
sell, nor borrow without her husband, and therefore neither may she give. I
answer, these are civil actions, wherein the husband as the head must give
direction: but mercifully to give an alms, is a religious action: besides, the
laws state the wife in a great part of the husbands goods and lands, and
provides by giving her a ioynture, or her thirds, that the husband may not
deprive her of her right therein: neither by law can a man sell his lands
simply, unless the wife will give up her thirds, which plainly stateth her in
a right unto the goods and lands above the servants and children: the denial
of which, as I said at first, is the maine ground of the former opinion.

Other objections I have met with not worth the answering, therefore I will not
stand longer upon this question, leaving it to be considered further of,
craving that wives would be careful in subjection to God and their husbands,
not to stretch these grounds beyond the rules and ends propounded.

Quest. And here comes another question to be resolved, whether the husband
may beat his wife, to force her unto this subjection? Ans. It seems no,
Husbands may not beat their wives.
although some of reckoning be of the other opinion* For, 1. there is no word
or example for it in Scripture. 2. No man ever hated (much less except he were
mad beat) his own flesh. 3. Her subjection must not be seruill, but as of a
member to the head. Object. But a man may let himself blood. Sol. It is safe
in his arm or foot, in children or servants, but he must beware of letting
the heart blood. Object. But Christ corrects his spouse which is dear unto
him, and yet reteineth his love entire; and so may the husband. Ans. Christ is
not the husband only, but an absolute King. 2. An husband may check, and
correct by admonition, and reprehension; but to proceed to blows is
unwarrantable, being such entire companions, and of the same flesh; yea,
condemned by the Fathers, the civil laws, and the Heathen, writers
themselves. But what if the wives malice be desperate, and incurable? Ans.
Take up thy cross, make good use of it, bear as much as possibly thou can,
wait and apply God for her return. 2. Where thou can not bear (providing
that offense by all possible good means be avoided, and public peace not
interrupted) the next remedy is the Magistrate: but between husband and wife,
both tyrannical rule, and compulsiue obedience, ought to be banished.
Contrary to this free subjection, is the common vice of wives, which is to be
proud, as Vashti, not enduring the government of husbands; but by uncomely
gestures and unshamefast looks, and sometime by hot and bitter answers,
bewray the unquietness of their spirits, when once their own wills are crossed:
far are they from that meeknes and quietness of spirit, which Peter
prescribed, as the most comely attire for women; who ought scarce to give
themselves leave to be out of quiet with others in the family, in the husbands
presence, least he be unquieted, or any way offended.

That the word of God be not evil spoken of.] These words contain a general
reason, enforcing the necessary practice of all the former duties. By the word
of God, is meant the doctrine of the Gospel, taught, received, and professed by
believers in all ages, which holy Gospel as it is glorious in it self, so
ought the glory and honor of it to be preserved, yea and advanced in all that
look for salvation from it; and therefore no Christian may become so much as
an occasion of reproach unto it. And whereas the word is blasphemed, either by
the words or deeds of professors, the second is here aimed at: our Apostle
concluding that then the doctrine of the Gospel is blasphemed, when the life of
the professor is not tuned unto that doctrine. And yet fu^ther, whereas the
life of a professor is untuned unto the doctrine two ways, either by doing
that which is prohibited, or else by not doing that which is prescribed; the
latter is here especially condemned: namely, a life idly led in regard of
Christian practices; for the Apostle has not so directly reproved vices, as
required in women the practice of all the forenamed virtues, upon this ground,
least the word be evil spoken of: noting unto us hereby, th^^ a Christian
should be so far freed from the power of sin, as that to be idle or
negligent in the work of the Lord, is too sinful in such a one.

Doctr. Profession without practice, strikes not only the person professing,
but the word of God it self which he does profess, by occasioning the
profane to blaspheme and scoff at Gods holy religion: Profession without
practice, causes the holy name of God to be blasphemed.
Romans 2.24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles thorough you.

Reas. 1. Such is the malice of the devil, and his instruments, that hating
God himself, they turn whatsoever they can, against God and when they entered
among the heathen, they polluted my name: that is, the heathen diligently
watched the words and behauiours of my people, because they bear my name, and
came as it were out of my school; but my people being not so careful of my
name which was called upon the^ blasphemed it, justly causing others so to do.
Although therefore men may conceive that by their bare profession they endanger
themselves, yet indeed the dishonor returns upon God and his Gospel: even
as David might think that he only sinned against Vriah, Bathshebe, and his
own soul, yet the Lord tells him that his sin was yet more

Use. 1. Let every professor examine his life whether it bring honor or
discredit to the Gospel, Matthew. 5 16. 2. Cor. 6.3.
whether his light shine among men, or whether in any thing he give offense
unto any: for there is never a sin in a professor, but it is hereby doubled,
in that he wounds not his own soul alone, but many other Christians with
himself, yea and the Gospel of salvation. No marvel then is it that the Lord
is so ielous in the sins of such men who come near him, and in whom he
looks to be sanctified; that although he forgive their sin wherein they
dishonor his name, yet for the maintenance of his glory, he will visit it in
the eyes of men, with the rods of men; whereof we have a pregnant example even
in David himself, 2. Sam. 12.14. And whosoever they be who belonging to God,
has justly given advantage to the adversary, it will sit near him, and gnawe
his heart even when the sin is forgiven, yea trouble and afflict his soul
more then all the afflictions which can besides be laid upon him. This was it
which made David power out his very heart, when the enemy taunted and said,
where is now thy God?

The reasons to move us to beware of staining our holy profession with unholy
practices, are round about us. First, Reasons to move our care of not staining
our profession.
if we look up unto God, how careful is he that his name be not dishonored,
no not among his enemies, and how much more indignely and unkindly would he
take conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they might glorify God in
the day of their visitation. 1. Pet. 2 12.
And here the women professing religion, are enjoined all these former duties
to their husbands, although unconverted, that they might win them, at least
that the gospel should not be rejected as a teacher of discord, or as loosing
them from any duty. As for the wicked enemies, whether Papists, Atheists, or
profane persons, all of them watch for some color thorough thy sides to
reproach the truth; but by thy watch over thy life, though thou do not
reclaim them who are incurable, yet shall thou, 1. convince them in their
practices, 2. dampe and shut their mouths, 3. even in their consciences get
reverence to thine own person: and thus by living without rebuke, shine out,
Philip. 2.15.
yea and rebuke a naughty and crooked generation.

Again, if thou considerest thy self, 1. as a professor, then art thou set
upon a scaffold, many eyes are upon thee, and after a more public dishonourest
the whole house. If Atheists, profane wretches, or Popish persons should
despise the ministry, swear, be drunk, ouergrowne with covetousness, riot,
be loose and filthy in speech, impure or unclean in action, it is their
guise, it were no discredit to the Gospel in comparison, for they are strangers
and straglers from the Church: but for a professor to be covetous, wrangling,
sitting with drunkards, etc. oh this is a stayning of their whole house. And
therefore we may with David wish, that either there were no such Saul's, or that
they might live and die obscurely, that their ways might never be declared at
Gath, nor their courses published in Askelon, that no uncircumcised might
rejoice at their falls, nor any Papist find such advantage against our
doctrine of free justification by faith alone in any professor, who in practice
will be profane as Esau was. A great argument it is to keep many wretches
from heinous attempts, least they stain their blood and blemish the house of
their fathers; how much more should every Christian rising out of the most
honorable blood that ever the sun saw, beware of accounting this blood profane?



This worthy doctrine may not be passed without particular application to the
several estates and degrees of men. And here first the Magistrate if he
profess the Gospel, must beware least by his course the Gospel hear ill; by
being as slack in propounding and prosecuting good things and causes for God
against sin, as those who never made any profession. If the Lord shall
enquire of the Magistrate, what good constitution for the Church, for the
Corporation wast thou a means to make in thy year? Ethni^us quo modo aliter
respondisset:
or what wicked custom or practice did thou break off in thy government?
and answer according to truth be made, surely none, what less could a
contemner of the Gospel have done?

Secondly, Ministers in special sort must be careful that the Gospel which in
words they magnify, be not blacked and blasphemed thorough their lewd and
ungodly practices, 2. Cor. 6.3. We give no occasion of offense in any thing,
that our ministry should not be reprehended: But in all things we approve
our selves as the Ministers of God. Well may we wish we had none in the
Ministry like Ophni and Phineas, who when they should allure Gods family to
resort to Gods house, make his service and sacrifice to stink even among the
profane; much more should we be then able to stop the mouths of Papists and
Popish minded persons, who are so restles in blacking the lives of Protestant
Ministers, that thereby they might disgrace our doctrine and holy profession:
but to our grief we see that as unjustly they have slaundered and belyed those
holy fathers of our doctrine, and under God the restorers of our religion,
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, etc. so too justly may they take exceptions
against the lives of some of their scholars, who yet are maintainers of the
same doctrine; some being noted with covetousness, some with riot, some with
gaming, others with idleness, drunkenness, uncleanness. Wicked Saul is among the
Prophets, who can sacrifice to the true God, but yet practice such things as
are odious even to common men, such things as wherein his own servants are
ashamed to join with him, unless some monstrous Doeg who is sold over to play
the sycophant. 1. Sam. 22.18.
But w^e be to Judas, who being a disciple, delivers his Lord into the hands
of the wicked to be scorned, buffeted, and crucified again, it had been good
for that man, he had never been borne.

Thirdly, let private men show forth the virtues of Christ; so many as 2.
king. 1.
is a fruitless thing; to talk of Christ is not to live in Christ. Every
Christian must be not only the brother and sister of Christ, but after a sort
his mother, both in conceiving him in the womb of his faith, Luke 8.22. Thus
one wittily alludeth to the Angels words: first thou shall bear a son, and
then call his name Jesus.
as also by bearing him daily into the world by a spiritual and holy life. But
how many that profess Christ, and say they expect salvation by and in this
name only, yet can blaspheme him, rent him in their passion into small pieces,
they spare not his body, his heart, his blood, his wounds, his life, that
should but a Jew hear them, they would more cry out against them then
against their own rulers that put him to death. But this was ever the lot of
the son of God, to be smitten and wounded in the house of his friends.

Use. 2. This doctrine reprehendeth soundrie sorts of men. As, 1. such as can
willingly or without sorrow of heart see and hear indignities against Christ,
against his profession, and professors of his Gospel, and do not rescue the
honor due unto them, in their several places: and may it not seem wonderful
in our eyes and ears, that the very Turks who account of Christ but as a
great Prophet, and powerful in word and deed, should make it such a capital
transgression, so as they inflict death upon that man that speaks blasphemy
against Jesus Christ: and yet we that are Christians who profess Christ not a
great Prophet, but the Lord of the holy Prophets, the Savior of the world and
our Savior also: fill and suffer without rebuke or check the whole air to be
filled with horrible blasphemies, oaths, imprecations, reuilings, and
whatsoever most wretched speeches against God, his Christ, his Saints, and
dearest servants. What is this other then a treading under foot that blood
which should have washed us? 2. other professors there be that make sure
account of their justification, and salvation by Christ; and yet look to their
sanctification which inseparably follows the former as the shadow the body,
there the want shows that they have not that hope they made account of, in
that they purge not themselves, but as foul as they were, as black are they
still: the spirit has not powered out that clean water upon them which has
washed them from their filthiness; but wretched covetousness hangs upon one,
envy and malice clingeth to another, filthy speeches proceed from a third,
and the fourth is no changling. And does not this make the name of God
blasphemed. 3. A third sort there are, who take themselves far before either
of the former, and perhaps have some sound grace in their hearts, and yet not
watching over themselves, nor giving their hearts unto this doctrine, remit of
their care and diligence, and stand not so fast but that by some fearful fall
or other, they dishonor at once God, his word, themselves, and their
profession; who although they can truly say, my course is not that of the
swearer, curser, drunkard, adulterer, nor of such as are altogether profane,
yet be becoming slavish to some one lust, or by slyding into some one
unchristian action, they more dishonor God, (especially if they be of more
note) then some other men by a thousand oaths, or periuries.

Rules so to carry our selves, as we stain not our profession.
Quest. But how shall we so carry our selves in our profession, as the word of
God be not evil spoken of? Answ. Lay up these rules of direction. 1. Get a
good and reverent heart, which may think and conceive Deuteronomy. 6 6.
which if it magnify it, so will thy speeches and actions also. by Christ, and
yet mean not to forsake their swearing, lying, gaming, worldliness, and other
their lusts. Such as these who are no better then briars, I would advise to
keep them in the wast, and come not within Gods garden, which is no place for
them, nor within the pale of Christian profession, for the Lord will not hold
them guiltless who thus take his name in vain, and the axe and the fire will
meet them, if they stand in the grounds of this good husbandman. Thirdly, in
every Lord let no man be ashamed because of me. because of thee? and the
Atheists and scoffers because of thee to say, oh these be the stamp of
professors, of gospellers, of holy men, and brethren, Bible-bearers, and Church
gadders; they are all of a strain, I will believe never a one of them all:
what shall thy pride, covetousness, cruelty, looseness, cast dung in the
faces of all Gods children? does not the offense of one of Christ's little ones
bring woe enough, but thou must offend every one of them? oh then very great is
the necessity of that request, that none of them be offended because of thee.
So much of the duties of the younger women.

Verse. 6. Exhort young men likewise, that they be sober minded. These words
contain three points in their order to be considered. 1. The persons to whom
the precept is directed, or whom the precept concerns, namely, young men, who
must be taught, and dealt with as well as any others. 2. The manner how they
must be dealt withal, Exhort. 3. What they must be exhorted unto, that they
must be sober minded. From each of which, we learn a profitable instruction.

Young men must order their ways by the word.
Doctr. Out of the first point we are taught, that young men must look to
their ways and contain themselves in their duties, as well as others, of
whose courses the Lord takes as good notice as of others. For, Heb. 13.17.
and be submitted unto them. 3. If the word be 1. Ioh. 2.
as well as fathers. Solomon advises the young man, to remember his creator in
the days of his youth: and David, to redress his ways according to the word.

Use. 1. This doctrine reprehendeth a common error in the world: for generally
men think that religion and attendance unto the word, is for old age;
Experience wishes us to strike on the iron while it is hot: straight a tree
while it is a twigge: work wax while it is soft: and heal a sore while it is
green.
but as for youth, it must sow the wild oats, it must have his course; young
men must settle themselves in the world, and ground their estate first, for
other matters they have day enough before them to mind them in: and from this
first error proceeds a worse, that the religion of this age for most part, is
but promises without practice, and those promises but hypocrisies without any
soundness. But all this is but the wisdom of the flesh, even sensual and
deuillish, clean contrary to Gods wisdom, which urges the young man, if
ever he would be settled, in a good estate, to found it in the remembrance of
God: and asking the question how a man's life should be rightly ordered,
propounds it in the person of the young man, because that is indeed the age
of right reformation. For settle the soul upon his lees of sinful lusts,
custom in sinning proves another nature, and in continuance becomes
unchangeable, and incorrigible. Let a man through his youth set his face
against heaven, and blaspheme the religion of God, it shall be as hard for a
blackmoore to chang his skin, or the leopard his spots, as for such a one who
has been accustomed to evil, Ier. 13.23.
to learn to do well: for the curse is commonly passed against them, who have
been so long fruitles, Heb. 6.8.
never more fruit grow upon thee: and what other can the ground that brings
nothing but thorns and briars expect, but that the end of it should be to be
burned.

Use. 2. Let this be a motive unto all young men, to look betime to the
ordering of their ways, and if God call timely, as he did young Samuel, early
in the morning, beware of running another way, but with him answer, speak
Lord, thy servant hears: and the better either to persuade them to the
obedience of this precept, or else to leave them the more excuseles in the
departure from their duty, I will 1. by some reasons enforce the duty:
Reasons to move young men to look timely to their ways.
and 2. prescribe some means for the more happy practice of the same.

For the former. First, that age is the harvest and summer, in which whosoever
sleeps, is the son of confusion, but he that gathers, is It is with grace
as it is with grafts, Prou. 10.5.
there must be a time of insetting, and a time of outgrowing, and both these
must be seasonable, before fruit can be expected: the seed must be sown in
youth, that must come up in age, nip a blossom in the spring, and where is the
hope of autumn? We can conclude that a man borne to nothing, if he idle out
his youth, and apply his hands to nothing, is so far from likelihood of
proouing a rich man; that he cannot escape ragged clothing, (as Solomon
speaks) but needs must he bear a wallet, and die a beggar: and how is it
that we want wisdom accordingly to conclude, that where Satan can make youth
unprofitable, little good, nay much spiritual beggarie may be expected, in all
other ages through the life.

Secondly, another reason the Apostle John uses, I write unto you young men,
because ye are strong: 1 Ioh. 2.14.
young men are called out to bear strength is for war, says Rabsachie, and
therefore if they could not heretofore be Priests unto this service, yet let
them now serve as voluntaries under the Captain Jesus Christ, then any longer
abide under the colors of his enemies.

Thirdly, for young men to be early graced, is a beutifull sight in the eyes of
God and his children: it filled Paul with joy to remember Tymothies 2. Tim.
1.4, 5.
When Christ saw but some civil virtues in a young man (otherwise bewraying
many great corruptions) so lovely were they unto him, Mark. 10.21.
that it is said, he loved him: When children cry Hosanna, what a great
provocation of the elder sort is it, of which the Lord will make great use to
their shame and conuincement: that as it was a shamfull rebuke to the
Israelites, when Christ said of the Cananite, surely I have not found so great
faith in Israel: so shall the elder sort be confounded, when he shall say,
surely I have not found so great faith, zeal, knowledge, obedience in rulers,
fathers, masters, as in prentizes, servants, children. Or as he provoked the
Pharisees, John came in the way of righteousness, Matthew. 21.32.
and ye believed not, the Publicans and harlots believed him, and yet when you
saw that, you neither believed, nor repented of your unbelief, verily, I say
unto you, that Publicans and harlots shall enter into heaven before you: so
shall it be said; The elder sort received not the word, but many of the younger
sort were diligent hearers; and when the elder saw this, yet repented they not
to believe it: verily the younger shall be gathered into heaven before the
elder, who without timely repentance, shall never come there.

Psalm. 25.
not without a bitter sense and sting of them. It was the voice of Ephraim,
Ier. 31.19. I was ashamed, yea confounded, because I did bear the reproach of
my youth: God may now in thy youth suffer thee for want of knowledge and
conscience, to be senceles of thy most gross sins, as Joseph's brethren were;
but afterward if thou belongest unto him, he will waken thy conscience, and
make the thought of them as bitter as ever the practice of them was pleasant,
when they shall fill thee with trouble of conscience, and make thee call great
things into question; yea bring thee not only to doubt of thy effectual
calling to grace, but almost to despair of thy salvation, especially if thy
sins of youth by long continuance be grown into customs, and can hardly
therefore be subdued, even then when thou art converted. Would thou be
fenced now against all these afterclappes? Now is the time wherein thou may
prevent such afflictions: Nay more, thou may by drawing near unto the Lord,
and bearing his yoke in thy youth, lay the foundations of thy comfort in any
future affliction, during the days of thy pilgrimage, as Job did: the one and
thirtieth Chapter of whose book contains nothing but a gathering up of
himself unto his comforts, and hopes, through the recalling unto mind, the
innocence and uprightness of the former part of his life: As Hezekiah also
did, who when sentence of death had passed from the mouth of God and his
Prophet against him; had no such hold of comfort elsewhere, then in calling to
mind the innocence of his life, a testimony that he was in covenant with God,
and might look to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
Remember Lord, Isa. 38.3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.

Now for the helps furthering this duty. Helps to the former duty. Prou.
22.13.
1. Young men must take notice of that great bundle of folly, which is
naturally bound up in their hearts, the corruption of that age being such, as
needs not any occasion without it self, to cast it down. 2. That the means
to redress study of the Scriptures, unto the rules whereof they must Psalm.
119.9.
3. That if they will It was a great commendation of Origin, that like another
Timothy he learned the Scriptures of a child Eusebius. lib. 6. cap 3.
who in tender years was able to utter knowledge, Dan. 1.4. young Samuel, who
so soon as he is weaned, must stand before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. young Josiah,
who at eight year old walked uprightly, 2. King. 21. young Timothy, who knew
the Scriptures of a child; yea of Christ himself, who increased in wisdom as
in stature; so as at twelve years old he was able to confound the Doctors,
and great Rabbis of the Jews. 4. That against all the discouragements they
shall meet withal from men, as

The second point in the verse is, The manner of teaching young men, Exhort
young men: so, 1. Tim. 5.1. Exhort old men as fathers, and young men as
brethren. The scope of the Ministry is, to draw all men to duty, and being
ordained of God out of his singular love for the winning of men, all the duties
of it must be performed in such loving manner, as that men may be rather won
and drawn, then forced thereunto; yea even young men, who for most part are
headless and furthest from duty, must by the spirit of meekness be restored
and reclaimed.

The Pastor must sometimes entreat, where he may command.
Doctr. The Pastor is not always to urge and use his authority, but sometimes
he must lay it down, and in some cases where he may by the word command, he
must rather choose to entreat. Paul in all his epistles seldom commands out
of his authority (although Apostolical, and above the authority of ordinary
ministers) but ever almost persuaded and entreated out of his love. Thus he
deals with Philemon for the receiving of Onesimus, Though I have much
liberty to command, yet I rather beseech thee, ver. 8. For might not he have
commanded a Christian, to remit an injury, and receive a Christian servant
upon his repentance? and yet he besought him so to do. Magis docendo quam
iubendo, monendo quam minando. Aug. epist. 64.
And thus although we want not power to command men upon their own peril, and
so fasten Christian duties upon them; yet we rather entreat men to be
reconciled unto God: yea we are to beseech and exhort men in the Lord Jesus,
that they increase more and more, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. And the Scriptures are so
delighted with this manner of teaching by exhortation, that the special work
of the ministry is called by this name, Act. 13.15. the men of Antioch came
to Paul and Barnabas, and said, If ye have any word of exhortation say on: and
yet this word of exhortation was a sermon which they desired to hear preached
again the next Sabbath. We heard cap. 1.9. that the Minister must therefore
hold fast wholesome doctrine, that he may be able to exhort, as though this
were all he had to do.

But here must be great wisdom and circumspection used; for although the
Minister is often to turn his power into prayers, and threats into entreaties,
yet must be beware that he so lay not down his authority, as that the word
loose any, but abide still a word of power to command; observing wisely to this
purpose these two rules. 1. So to exhort as that the consciences of men may
conclude, that even there where he persuades and entreats, he has power to
command and terrify, though in his love he lay down that power for the
present. 2. That he do not there exercise lenity, where the case requires
severity, nor mildness when the case requires the work of seruent zeal.
As, first, where sin waxes bold, the Minister must put on boldness. If a
calfe stand before Moses, it is a case wherein the mildest man upon the earth,
must forget his meekness, and cloth himself with zeal for the glory of
God. Sometimes the Minister is to deliver the word as it were in a soft and
still voice; and sometimes he must change his coppie, and lift up his voice
like a trumpet, to show Judah his sin, and the people of God their
transgression. Secondly, when admonition and exhortation will not serve to cut
off sin, but there is rather a rejoicing in it. Here Paul himself will put
on his authority, 1. Cor. 5.2. and 13. put away from you that wicked man.
Thirdly, when the ministry is, or is like to be drawn into contempt, then
especially must it put on power, and authority. This was the practice of the
Apostles, who were forced often (partly by the low estimation of the simple and
ignorant, who esteemed of the preaching of the Gospel but as foolishnes; and
partly by the malicious oppositions of the false Apostles, who depraved their
ministry as weak and unlearned) to be long in the challenging of their
calling, power, and authority: see 2. Cor. 10.2.8. etc.

Use. 1. Ministers must labor wisely to discern between persons and actions,
as Joseph did between the persons and causes of Pharaohs butler and baker, and
speak differently to the tractable and stubborn: children and servants must
not be dealt with alike. Christ spoke not to the Priests and people alike: nor
John Baptist to the Jews and Scribes alike: nor Paul to the Galatians and
Ephesians alike: but Gods mouth must separate the precious from the vile: Jude
23.
Compassion must be had upon some, but not all, others must with fear be
pulled out of the fire; neither may the Publican and Pharisie look for the
same sentence and judgment. 2. Whereas men cannot endure preachers, who leave
exhortation, to thunder out damnation; let them know* that if their sins be
grown bold as an harlot, and the word of meeknes cannot prevail against them,
we must then come with a rod, and not the spirit of meeknes: otherwise as
Christ was most meek in his life and doctrine, so should his Ministers be also.

The third point in the verse, is the virtue commended to the practice of young
men, and that is, the grace of sobrieeie, which moderateth the mind in the
lusts and affections in general: and is not to be restrained to that outward
sobriety, which is opposed to intemperance in meat and drink: for it is taken
for granted, that intemperance must be nipt in the head, and broken in the
shell, before it be hatched and outwardly produced into the life. This
appears, 2. Tim. 2.22. where Paul in other words prescribes the same duty
unto Timothy, fly the lusts of youth: not meaning thereby such uncleanness and
lascivious filthiness wherewith graceless young men were carried away, for
Timothy was now of such gravity as befitted an Evangelist, but he would
prevent in him all that violent course and carriage of affections, unto which
that hotter age is more propense; not fearing that Timothy would break out
into filthy uncleanness of lusts so much, as least his youth should carry him
to rashness, pride, self conceit, and so cause him to fall through too much
confidence. The (...) of sob^ie^^e very (...) commended to young men. Eccles.
11.10.
Now how fitly is this precept directed to young men, the sin of whom is the
strength of lusts. Solomon himself ascribes this to their age, to carry much
indignation, wrath, grief in the heart, and much evil in their flesh: that
is, many noisome and troublesome lusts, wherewith through their heat they are
assailed. Of their presumption and ouerweening themselves, we have instance in
the young man, All these have I kept from my youth. Of their want of
consideration and experience in another young man, who heedlessely went on to
destruction, as an ox to the slaughter, Prou 7.22.
or a fool to the stocks; even so went he. Of their rage and heat with
unadvised rashness, in Rehoboams younger counselors, Seething pots cast off a
deal of scumme.
stirring up their master to needles terrors and threats. Of their prodigality
and uncleanness, in the younger brother called the prodigal son, who spent
all upon harlots: all which things are not spoken to free other ages from such
inordinate lusts: for natural corruption is not idle in any age, but
incessantly is hatching evil motions and actions; but of all ages youth is
most fertile and abounding (as the fattest grounds with weeds) with all wicked
inclinations, vicious and raging affections; and there is no vice under the
sun unto which it is not after a special sort subject, that it is a singular
favor of God for a youth so innocently to pass over his younger years, as
that some notable blot or inconvenience cleave not to him, which perhaps long
after craves his service, or adds unto his sorrows.

Reasons to enforce the duty.
But if these be not reasons weighty enough to draw young men to this grace of
sobriety, we might add many more. As, 1. to satiate ones Put away anger, etc.
Oh but we shall deprive our selves of the pleasure of our lives: but the wise
man has an answer ready, that youth and morning is but vanity, that is soon
gone, and without great heed lost irrecouerably.

Means of practice.
Now the means to attain this virtue. First, begin at the heart, be sober
minded, get an humble heart, which will frame to an humble carriage they think
they know more, can do more, and better then the ancient; it will make them
suspect all their counsels, which if Rhehobams young men had done, they had
prevented that great rent of the kingdom at that time: it will make them sit
silent before the elder, and suffer themselves to be lead by their experience.
Secondly, consider that these inward Thirdly, because David takes it for
granted, that these filthy Fourthly, fence thy self with the fear of God,
that being once fly the lusts of youth: Timothy might ask how should I be
able, the answer follows, follow after righteousness, etc. that is, get to
thee such virtues as may be special preservatives against them, among the
which the fear of God is most excellent, for being the beginning of wisdom,
it teaches wisdom to look unto, and order the heart, in the first risings
and motions of any lust. Fifthly,

Ver. 7. Above all things show thy self an ensample of good works, with
vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity,

8. And with the wholesome word which cannot be reproved, that he which
withstandeth, may be ashamed, having nothing concerning you to speak evil of.

Having propounded the several precepts fitted to all ages of men and women,
the last whereof was unto young men, our Apostle here inserteth a precept unto
Titus himself: whence it is probably gathered, that Titus was now a young man,
as Timothy also was, in the same office of an Evangelist: 1. Tim. 4.12.
and being a Minister, in him he closely again instituteth every Minister,
notwithstanding he has been most ample in that argument; as though Ministers
could never sufficiently be instructed. In these two verses, we will consider
two things, 1. a precept: 2. an inforcement of it. The precept is, That Titus
show himself an example to others: for as all the persons formerly taught, so
more especially the last sort, namely young men for the slipperines of their
age, need the benefit of good example as well as good doctrine and counsel. And
this exhortation is enlarged, by setting down wherein Titus must become an
example: which is done, First, more generally, In all things; we read it, above
all things: others above all men: which readings may be true, and grounds of
good instruction, but I take the first aptest to the place. Secondly, by a more
particular enumeration of shining virtues: as, 1. vncorrupt doctrine: 2. good
life fruitful in good works: and these not one or two, or now and then in
good moods, but there must be a constant trading in them throughout a grave and
pure conversation. 3. there must be joined gracious speeches and words; for I
take it fitliest interpreted of private communication, described by two
necessary adjuncts: (...).
1. it must be wholesome, 2. unblameable, or not liable to reproof.

The inforcement of the precept, is taken from the end or fruit of it, which is
twofold, 1. shame, 2. silence to the withstanders, and opposers. And thus the
general scope of the verses is, as if he had more largely said, That this thy
doctrine, O Titus, thus aptly applied to all sorts of men, may carry more
weight and authority with it; see thou that (considering thou art set in a
more eminent place, and clearer sun, and have all eyes beholding and prying
into thee) thou show thy self a pattern, and express type wherein men may
behold all these graces shining in thine own life: let them look in thy
glass, and see the lively image of a grave and pure conversation, which may
allure them to the love of the doctrine which thou teach; let them hear
from thy mouth in thy private conferences and speech, nothing but what may
work them to soundness; at the least, keep thou such a watch over thy
tongue, as that nothing pass thee which may be reprehended: and hence will it
come to pass, that although thou have many maliciously minded men, seeking by
all means to oppose thy doctrine and life; and to destroy the one by the
other, these shall either be put to silence, and have nothing to say: or if
they take boldness to speak any thing, it being unjust, the shame shall be
removed from thee, and fall justly upon themselves; and all the reproach shall
return home to their own doors.

In the precept I will briefly note one or two things, because all the
particulars of it have been handled in the former Chapter. In general
therefore observe, that

Doctr. 1. In every Minister there ought to be such an harmony, between good
doctrine, and good life, Concent of good life and good doctrine make a sweet
harmony in a Minister.

The priest might not come to the temple without the sound of his bells.


as the latter may be a strong evidence of the former, and both of them
exemplarie to his people in public and private. First, there must be doctrine,
else let his life be never so good, it is a dumb show, should not the
shepherd feed the flock, says the Lord? the first thing in that strait
charge to Timothy, is to preach the word, to be instant in season, out of
season: herein is the Minister a debtor unto God, 1. Cor. 9.16. a necessity is
laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel: a debtor also unto
his people, Romans 1.14. and therefore as much as in him lies, he must make
conscience of discharging this debt.

And this consideration by the way, may put ignorant and dumb ministers in
mind of their woeful estate, in that they want these letters of orders,
whereby the Apostle proves himself to be a Minister of God: 2. Cor. 6.7.
among other notes whereby he justifies himself to be an approved Minister of
God, this is one, that he carried the word of truth. And again, it stops
the mouths of many ignorant people, that plead strongly against themselves in
the want of a preaching Minister: We are well enough, we have an honest and
peaceable man, he cannot preach indeed, but he lives as well, and does as much
good as if he preached, we would not change him for the best preacher of them
all. But where is this harmony of doctrine and life in such a one? know we
not, that the best lives of the best men, are but servants and attendants to
their doctrine, and like the miracles of Christ, which served to prepare,
confirm, provoke, and condemn, but converted not the beholders? this is the
work of the Gospel in the ministry of it, which is the power of God to the
salvation of every believer. Was it ever heard that a dumb Minister by his
life converted a soul to God? and what is his life, but a living out of a
lawful calling? an injurious robbing men of their goods, which he before God
has no right unto? and a cruel murdering of their souls for want of
knowledge? And if the question were made to me, whether good doctrine or good
life might better be spared in a minister, I should answer readily, that to
preach well, and live ill, were far better, and more eligible, then to live
honestly, and not to preach, seeing the former brings ruin upon himself
alone, this latter both upon himself and his people.

Secondly, as there must be good doctrine, so there must be good life too, for
a Minister may not think he has done enough, when he has taught others, if
himself yet remain untaught: like some statue which points the way to
passengers, but it self stands a stock still and mooues not: but he must
first be a good man, and then teach others so to be. In the old Testament, the
Priest must first be cleansed himself, and then cleanse others: first wash
himself, and then sprinkle others, first sanctify himself, and then others:
so in the new, we must first become lights our selves, and then enlighten
others, first approach near God our selves, and then bring others before him:
for this is the property of a good shepherd, to go before his sheep, that
they may follow him. But all this while we may not think that the authority
of the word stands upon the good or bad life of men, which has a better
bottom of his own to stand upon, but yet it is a further seal of the truth
of it upon the simple, and that sundry ways, which I will not stand upon.

These two make a sweet harmony, especially within a man's own conscience,
when he can appeal unto his fellow-ministers, as Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim.
3.10.
and say, you have fully known my doctrine, my manner of liliuing, etc. and
unto the consciences of Gods people, calling them to witness both of his
painful preaching, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. as also of his holy and unblameable
behavior, verse. 10. yea even unto Gods tribunal, with much comfort at the
end of his days, as Paul did, Act. 20.19.20.26. Which two as they must
conspire, so the minister is to be an example in both, 1. Tim. 4.12. be an
example in word, conversation, etc. The Apostles were as lights upon hills, as
stars in the heavens. Pastors are called to be patterns to their flocks: 1.
Pet. 5 3.
the great Pastor of the sheep our Lord Jesus, set himself a coppie unto all
Christians, both in holy doctrine, and in blessed example of life. Ioh. 13.15.
Great is the force of godly example, especially in the Pastor, both to the
believer, to provoke him, and to the unbeliever, either to bring him to a
liking of the religion of God, or to condemn him, who has both seen and
heard, and yet has not believed; even as Noah condemned the old world by
making of the Arc: which are the reasons, why the Lord has ever scattered
some of his children here and there, a saint or two even in Neroes house, a Lot
in Sodom; and as a lilly rises up sometimes among thorns, so do the sons
of God in the midst of a froward generation, that they might shine as purer
lights in the darkness of the world round about them.

Use. 1. These are true notes to discern a true Minister by pure doctrine, and
holy life. If you consult with a Papist, he will decypher you one of his
Priests, by his mitre, crosyer staff, copes, and other garments; by his
oyntings, shauings, etc. which indeed are marks of the beast: but not a word
of life and doctrine, whence we know them to be thieves not entering in by the
door, but by the window, to rob and steal. 2. This requires the presence
and residence of the minister with his flock; for if he be ordinarily absent,
how can he be an example unto them? Thirdly, it proclaims woe upon them, who
by contrary practice to their preaching, give occasion of stumbling to the
people, as Elies sons did: better it were that such had never been borne,
then so to strengthen the hands of sinners, besides that by his own mouth he
shall be judged. Fourthly, it stirs up the men of God to care of their
lives: Reasons to stir up the men of God to care over their lives.
to which we in this calling might be moved by sundry other strong reasons.
1. We stand before God, and therefore we must put off our shoes, wash and
cleanse our selves. Ier. 15.19. If thou turn, thou shall stand before 2. We
shall be better enabled to our duties, both because God teaches his secrets to
his servants the Prophets: Amos 3.7.
as also the doctrine shall be more acceptable, and less excepted against.
Herod heard John, because he was a good man. 3. We else pull the sins of many
upon us, Do any of the Rulers and Pharisees believe in him? 4. He that
diuorceth shall be the least, that is, have no place in the kingdom of heaven.
Fifthly, it teaches all hearers to take benefit by the examples of their
teachers, who labor faithfully in the Gospel among them: for must we study to
show our selves examples in vain? Philip. 3.17. Brethren, be followers of me:
and 4.9. The things which ye have heard and seen in me, those things do.
Heb. 13.7. Remember them that have the oversight of you, whose faith follow,
considering what has been the end of their conversation. The examples of the
godly are called a cloud of witnesses, to put us in mind, Heb. 12.^.
that as the Israelites were moved as the cloud moved, so should it be with
us: cast our eyes upon the cloud of the faithful pastors, especially to follow
the^ so far as they follow Christ, which who so refuse to do, they have three
fearful witnesses against them, the word of God, their own consciences, the
Ministers lives. And here we must be put in mind to go one step beyond
ordinary: for many cast their eyes upon the examples of their Ministers, to
spy if they can obtain some liberty to the flesh, through their frailty:
but if they cannot, the most think it sufficient that they can commend them
for good men, and go no further: whereas they ought to be transformed into the
pattern, not only of our doctrine, but even of our lives so far as we follow
Christ.

It is possible for a man by grace to live unblameably.
Doctr. 2. We hence observe further, in that the Minister must so order
himself in regard of public and private courses, actions, and speeches as he
may not be reproved, that it is possible for a man by grace so to live as he
cannot justly be blamed. Luke 1.6.
Zachary and Elizabeth lived without reproof. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. Ye are
witnesses, and God also how holily, justly, and unblameably we lived among you.
And because it may be alleged, yea indeed Apostles, and some choice
extraordinary men and Ministers, one of a thousand may attain hereunto, but
we ordinary men may not look for it: the Apostle James answers, and
affirms that the endeavor unto it, belongs unto every Christian professing
religion, Iam. 1.27.
in that he calls the religion it self pure, and undefiled: and if he be
said truly to live without reproof, who after his effectual calling cannot
be justly charged with any gross or open sin, no doubt the Lord has many
ordinary Christians abroad, who by his grace have attained to live without
reproof.

Use. This reprehendeth many, who not having learned thus much in Christ's
school, can bear out all their gross vices and misdemeanors hereupon; What,
we are but flesh and blood: and men are but men, and not Angels, and all men
are sinners, we cannot be Saints, and thus swallow deadly things under the
color of humane frailty, as though even in humane frailty, such an
unreprovable life could not be attained.

2. Every man must aim at this white to live without reproof, and the means
are these. Means to attain to an unblameable life.
1. To beware of sin, in regard of God, and of conscience, and not only in
regard of men: the conscience must hate all the ways of falsehood. Notable is
that place to this purpose, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall not I be confounded, 2.
Stop occasions of

That he which withstandeth] In this inforcement, nothing is hard but to know,
how he that withstandeth the Gospel, may be made ashamed. And this is done by
the conviction of his own conscience, being even oppressed with the
uprightness of such a one, as gladly he would condemn: his own wicked heart
can witness to the righteousness of the other, and justify his person, as Saul
David's, saying, Thou art more innocent then I: Thus while innocence it self
pleads in their thoughts, their conscience is stricken with shame, and fear
puts them to silence: shame of that they have falsely surmised and spoken,
and fear to proceed further in such false accusation. Whence we may note three
points. First, that no Minister be he never so just, and faithful in his
Ministry, of never such sanctity and holiness of life, but he shall meet
with opposites and withstanders. 2. That their quality is to seek nothing more
then how to open their mouths against them. 3. That every godly man's practice
must be, so much the more carefully to shut their mouths.

Doctr. 1. For the first, Faithful Ministers shall not want withstanders.
(...).
It is the lot of faithful Ministers (as here of Titus) to have opposites, and
adversaries: yea such as are just contrary, and directly opposite: for so the
word is used, Mark. 15.39. The case is clearer then needs proof. How the
Prophets were entertained, our Savior shows by that speech to the Jews,
which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted, and slain? Moses was
often resisted by all the people, and before he shall go scot-free, his own
brother and sister shall withstand him; and as he was resisted by Iannes and
Iambres, so in all ages to the end men of corrupt minds, 2. Tim. 3.8.
shall start up to resist the truth. That the Disciples and Apostles
notwithstanding their Apostolical rod and power were resisted, appears by
Alexander the coppersmith, who was a sore enemy to Paul's preaching: 2. Tim. 4.
and Elimas who was full of subtlety to pervert the truth, Act. 13.10.
and strongly withstood the Apostles. How was Christ himself the chief Doctor
withstood by the Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Rulers, and people, that he had
never come into the world, if he had not made his reckoning to give his back
to the smiters, his cheeks to the nippers, his face to shame and spitting, yea
himself to the shameful, and accursed death of the cross. If it was thus to
the green tree, we shall need seek no further what was done to the dry, but
rather to enquire into the reason hereof, and that is this; so long as there is
a Devil, darkness, and death in men's souls, so long will there be resistance
unto God, his light, and life, in whomsoever it is: the Devil not only
suggesting, but working effectually in the hearts of reprobates, and natural
men, to withstand Gods work, as Sanballat and Tobiah used all means to hinder
the building of Jerusalem: and so do his instruments, the spirits of Devils,
go about the world to provoke men unto war against Christ, and his little
flock. Rev. 16.14.
Those spirits of Devils are graceless and wicked men, carried by deuillish
motion and violence against Christ and his kingdom: and the battle between
Michael and his Angels, and the Devil and his angels, Rev. 12.
shall not cease till time be no more.

Use. 1. Every faithful Minister must resolve to fight the good fight of
faith, 2. Tim. 2.4.
and suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Soldiers we see are
in continual danger, and ever in the face of their enemy, and therefore their
lives should not be dear unto them: but especially these Captains over the
Lords battles, must make light account of their lives, which they must rather
forsake, then cowardly either forsake the field, or yield the bucklers, but
hold out unto victory, striving lawfully.

Quest. How shall a Minister be able to hold out in such a conflict or
skirmish, so dangerous, so doubtful, against so many, so great, so learned, so
malicious, so skornfull adversaries? Answ. He must encourage himself by
meditating upon the promise of God, who has put him in his service, put a
powerful word in his mouth, and goes with him to see that none touch him, or
do him any harm. Jeremy was sent against Princes, Priests, people, who all
he knew must fight against him: how now should one poor Jeremy hold out
against them all? the Lord furnishes him with a gracious promise to lean
upon, I will be with thee to deliver thee: Ier. 1.19.
and when he was in his Ministry, found he this any idle promise, or God not
so good as his word? No surely, for he was in daily derision, every one mocked
him: he heard raylings and reproaches of many on every side: yea, and (which
was his chiefest grief) his word was a reproach and derision to the profane,
^er. 20.7. ad 11.
so that he was even determining to speak no more in that name. But how did he
uphold himself in this temptation, But the Lord is with me like a mighty
giant, therefore my persecutors shall be overthrown. Object. But for all this,
good men are prevailed against, exposed to reproach, wants, imprisonment,
banishment, and death it self. Answ. As the Apostle speaks of themselves,
they were killed, but not overcome: so the enemy prevails against the person
of a poor man, and Jeremy himself may stick and starve in the dungeon: but
neither against his faith, and constancy, and much less against his doctrine;
and the truth, which being strongest of all, shall prevail against them to
their confusion: so are the Saints in suffering made conquerers.

Use. 2. Let none be discouraged, if any times bring opposition to good
Ministers, It must not seem strange if good men be more withstood then worse.
as though it were a strange and unusual thing: if some one age only should
bring forth such a monstrous birth, it would be more burdensome, but no age is
barren, yea not fruitful herein, as might be made plain in all history.
Neither may any conceive worse of the religion, whose teachers are opposed by
great ones: for whereas men love their own devises, and what man affects not
the child of his own brain? never were any so maligned by men, as the Lords
own inventions.

Use. 3. Every hearer must set to their hands to help their teachers, and
every way to strengthen them against their withstanders, I mean not by
outward strength and power, but especially by their prayers, that they may be
delivered from evil and unreasonable men, and preach the word boldly: which
was both the commandment of the Apostle Paul, 2. Th. 3.1. and the practice of
the Church for Peter, Act. 12.5. ad 12. And further, in that we stand not for,
nor to our selves, but for the truth and Gods people; they must by other
encouragements be helps to the truth: 3. Ioh. 8.
for if the captain be in fight, is it meet that the common soldier should
stand only idly looking on? nay his safety they must account theirs, and
strive for him as for themselves: if he suffer, they must suffer with him, as
knowing that if the Pastor be smitten, the sheep are like to be scattered.
Notably does the Apostle urge this duty upon the Philippians, wishing them to
continue in one spirit, and one mind, fighting together in the faith. Philip
1.27.
What, does the Apostle proclaim arms? or stir them up to contention? yea
surely, but such a one as becomes the Gospel of peace: he would have them
them to fight not one against an other, but one with an other, yea all of them
with one mind. Neither with a cruel fight with carnal weapons, as one enemy
against an other: but with such a fight as they heard in him, and saw in him:
alas he was fast enough bound to the peace, for he was then in bonds at Rome
for the Gospel, he fought by suffering, so must they by their prayers for him,
by their patience, by all manner of ministry to the Saints in trouble, show
that they partake and fellow-feele in the afflictions of the Gospel.

Doctr. 2. Those that oppose themselves to good Ministers and men, are ever
speaking evil, and opening their mouths with reproaches against them, and
their godly courses. Moses was charged, Resisters of godly ministers have their
mouths wide open with reproaches against them.
and that not in corners, but to his face, that he took too much upon him,
whereas he was unwilling to undertake all that the Lord laid upon him. It went
current in court and country, that Elias troubled all Israel: Amaziah accuses
Amos to the king, that the land is not able to bear all his words: Diorrephes
not only withstood the Apostle John, but pratled against him. Quest. But what
is the reason of all this, have they any cause given them? Ans. The reason is
partly positive in themselves, and partly negative in the other. In themselves,
1. the malice of their heart is such, as cannot but continually out of the
abundance thereof, set their tongues a work: the the filth and offscouring of
the world, that is, most base and abject persons. 3. With this malice and pride
is joined exceeding subtlety and policy in their generations, 1. Cor. 4.13.
the kings tribute, Ezr. 4.13.14.
nor see the kings dishonor: they make no bones of letting fall two or three
untruths in a few lines to the king; for what hinderance had it been to the
kings tribute, what impeachment of his honor to have builded the Temple, and
established Gods true worship in Jerusalem? but thus got they their purpose by
insinuation and lies, which by their own force they could not do. 2. As they
can coin of their own, so they have a notable dexterity to deprave even
innocence it self. Is it not wonderful that the famous harbenger of Christ,
then whom in his time a greater was not borne of women: no nor yet Christ
himself, could so carry themselves, but that the one must needs be counted a
demoniake, Luke 7.33.34.
and the other a glutton, drunkard, and friend of sinners? Who then can look
to escape? and if they hereby obtain not their whole purpose, yet loose they
not all, having learned that cursed rule of Machiauel, Calumniare audacter
saltem aliquid haerebit.
that if they speak their pleasure, some ill conceit will stick in the minds
of men, which will be worth their labor. Now the negative reason in good men
themselves, why their withstanders speak evil of them, is set down, 1. Pet.
4.4. Because ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, therefore
speak they evil of you: dissimilitude of manners causes the ungodly by all
means banish the faithful out of the world, they may seek a new world for
themselves to live in if they will: if they should walk in such courses as the
Apostle Peter reckons up in the 3. verse of the cited chapter, and in such a
black darkness, as did not reprehend theirs, they could well enough give
them the right hand of fellowship, but if men will be so precise, as that the
high way cannot hold them; they cannot away with such singularity.

Use. 1. Take here a note of a false religion, which commonly is vpheld by
bitterness of word, writing, railing, and reproaches: consider here the Popish
writers dealing with Protestants, putting off even humanity it self, and all
but the image of the devil, which stands in malicious lying and accusing of
the brethren. The heat also and bitterness of the German divines, being
far above that which becomes brethren, makes not unto, but against the
goodness of their causes. Oh that we could all remember, that Christ's kingdom
is peaceable, himself instructs with all meekness, persuades, entreats,
seldom threatens, and never was his voice heard in the streets: the spirit
descending upon him like a dove, shows how far he was from bitterness and
contradiction. 2. This inseparable quality of withstanders shows, that to
speak evil of professors, is to withstand the truth: so is the boldness of
such, who tax Ministers discountenancing sin as too bold, to whom sin may
be bold enough before it meet with an angry countenance from them. In a word
therefore, let us take up that use which Christ raised of this doctrine, Let
wisdom be justified of all her children. Luke 7.35.


Doct. 3. Every godly man's endeavor must be to stop the mouths of such
adversaries, and so make them ashamed. Object. Every godly man's endeavor must
be to stop the mouths of Gods enemies, and make them ashamed.
But it is an impossible thing, they will have always something to say. Answ.
Yet so live thou as thou may boldly appeal unto God, let thine own
conscience be able to answer for thy uprightness, and so thou openest not
their mouths, if now they open them against thee, it is their sin and not
thine: and thus this precept is expounded, 1. Tim. 5.14. Give no occasion to
the adversary to speak evil, And is enforced with special reason, Reasons.
1. Pet. 2.12.15. This is the will of God, by well doing* to put to silence the
watched to find an accusation against him. Christ did the good work, but by
his question to them, cut off so far as he could the matter of their malice,
by clearing the lawfulnes of it. So out of their malice we shall draw our own
good: and thus it shall be true which the heathen said, that the enemy often
hurts less, and profits more then many friends. 3. What a glory is it for
a Christian, thus to slaughter envy it self? to keep shut that mouth

Use. Would God professed Christians were careful not to open profane mouths,
who shall not need to watch long but they shall meet with matter too much,
with swearing, lying, oppressing in some, with sabbath breaking, and formal
service in others; with pride, stomach, contentions, and vndying, almost
immortal suits in law, in a third sort: and yet more pitiful, that the
Papist shall scarce need to watch a whit, but his mouth is presently opened to
the slaundring of the Gospel, by the dead and carkase faith not of a few.

Verse. 9. Let servants be subject to their masters, and please them in all
things, not answering again,

10. Neither pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness, that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.]

After that our Apostle has at large described such Christian duties, as must
be urged upon free persons of all sexes, and ages; Now he comes to such as
are required in those that be in servile condition, and estate. And in these
two verses propounds two points: 1. He points them to such virtues, as
especially befit them: 1. He inforceth them with a reason drawn from the end
of them; namely the adorning of the Gospel. The virtues are four: 1.
subjection: 2. pleasing of their masters in all things: 3. silence, propounded
in the opposite of it, not answering again. 4. faithfulness, illustrated by
the contrary, not pickers. The enforcement is in the last words, that even
they may become ornaments unto the Gospel, which by a periphrasis is called the
doctrine of Christ, or God our Savior: and thus must they be, not in some or
few, but all things, that is, in all their speeches, actions, and behauiours.
The whole sense of the verses together is this, And now, oh Titus, having
applied thy doctrine unto other estates, at length cast down thine eyes upon
them that are of inferior condition: for they being members of the Church,
as well as any of the former, thou must fit and serve out unto them also their
portion, wherein thou must exhort them, that they be willingly submitted and
subjected unto the power, and under the will of their masters; yea what ever
their masters be, let them be unbelievers, unmerciful, froward, yet let them
cast to please them in all things, wherein God their Masters master is not
displeased. And although themselves be religious and called unto Christ, yet
let them acknowledge their places, and never advance, or embolden themselves to
return undutiful answers unto their masters or mistresses, as the manner of
many is. Let them not use any unfaithfulness, but all good fidelity, which is
the chief virtue of a servant, and that in every thing which requires the
same; and especially let then beware of one point of unfaithfulness, namely,
the secret purloyning, and filching the least profit of their masters, to turn
to their own or other uses, without their masters priuitie. And if all this
while they serve such hard masters, as return them small thank, or other
retribution for their faithful service; yet this shall they do, they shall
bewtifie the doctrine of the Gospel which they profess, and in commending it,
they shall get thanks of God, who will not dismiss them without a plentiful
reward.

The first and proper duty of every servant, is subjection, Subjection of
servants wherein it stands.
or a stooping under the authority of his master. Which stands, 1. in an
inward reuerencing in heart the image of God in his superiority. This reverent
subjection of the heart, the Lord in his own example requires in all If I be
a master, where is my fear? and is the first duty of that commandment,
honor thy father and mother: the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.5. calls for fear and
trembling from servants toward their masters. 2. In the outward testimony of
this inward reverence, The servant must honor his master as his better.
but especially in the free obedience of all his lawful, yea and unequal
commandments, so as they be not unlawful; Coloss. 3.22. servants obey your
masters in all things, that is, in all lawful and bodily things. And the same
Apostle mentions both in the Ephesians, and Colossians, bodily masters, to
show, that so far as the soul is not hurt, nor the conscience wounded, the
rule of the servants obedience is not his own, but his masters will, be it
irksome, difficult, wearisome: Luke 17.7. the weary and toyled servant, may
not come out of the field to ease and refresh himself at his pleasure, but
wait still upon the hand of his master, and sit down, and eat at his masters
appointment, and not before, as that parable teaches. 3. In patient enduring
without resistance, servants be subject to your masters, The master receiving
his authority from God* he that resists him resists God.
not only the good and courteous, but to the froward and bitter: for it is
praiseworthy in conscience toward God to suffer grief wrongfully. When Agar
was roughly dealt withal by Sarah, she run away, and would not endure her,
but the Lord by his Angel controlleth this course, and gives her better
counsel; return home to thy mistres, and humble thy self under her hand, or
suffer thy self to be afflicted by her. Genesis 16 9.
Quest. But may not a servant avoid the rigor and extremity of the unjust
anger of his master? Ans. It may be lawful, without despising of the masters
authority, to give way for the present unto his fury, and if conveniently it
may be, to withdraw himself ^ill the rage be past, and the storm blown over;
as David conveyed himself from Saul: and the Egyptian that directed David to
the Amalekites, made him to swear by God, that he would not deliver him to his
master from whom he had fled: neither did David sin in taking that oath,
because of that law, Deuteronomy. 23.15. 1. Sam. 30.15.
If a servant had fled from his masters rage, especially if an Heathen, who
cared but a little for their servants lives, he must not forthwith be delivered
to his master, but humanity must be exercised toward him, and they must add
no affliction unto him, but kindly entreat him, till mediation may be made,
and his Master appeased with him.

Hence we note, that religion and the doctrine of the Gospel, freeth no man
from any duty, but rather fasteneth it upon him; the Apostle says not, that
servants being now brought to the faith, are no longer to be commanded by
their masters, but by Christ; but writes to them not as free, but as servants
still, and inforceth their subjection, even to unbelieving masters: and
elsewhere writing unto masters, he forbids them not to exercise rule and
dominion over their servants, but only teaches them after what manner to weld
their authority. And indeed this is a point which occasioned much trouble in
the Apostles days, both unto masters, and servants: for they hearing of a
liberty purchased by Christ to believers in him, they presently begun to
cast up all, and would not serve any longer, especially unbelieving masters,
but would be at their own hands; against which conceit the Apostles, Paul,
Peter, John, much labored, still recalling servants to their former subjection
and obedience.

Let not now any object, that this servile condition is against the law of
nature, is a fruit of sin, is against the law of Christ, who has purchased
such liberty, as now in him all are one* is against the Apostles rule, 1. Cor.
7.23. Subiectio est servilis, vel civilis, illa vtitur praesidens subiecto ad
suiipsius: hac ad subiectorum vtilitatem and bonum atque haec fuit ante
peccatum. Aquin. sum. 1. part. quaest. 92. art. 1.
be not any longer the servants of men: which things surely the servants of
those times, and some since have taken hold of. For 1. every subjection is not
against the law of pure nature: who can deny but that in innocence there was
a politic subjection, of the wife to the husband, the children to the parents:
and this was no fruit of sin, although the tediousness and painefulnes of it
came in by the fall. 2. Christ has purchased a liberty for soul and body,
but we must be content with the first fruits of it here in this world, and
those are the spiritual liberty we have from Satan, sin, and condemnation,
which shall bring on that perfect freedom we expect in heaven, when we shall
not only be freed from the power of sin (as here) but even from all
molestation of it; and not only set free from the evil of servitude (as here we
are by Christ) bu^ even from it self. 3. In Christ all are one indeed, but in
regard, 1. of the spiritual and inward man, 2. of the means of leading men to
happiness: but in respect of the outward man, they abide master and servants
still, Prince and people still, bond and free still, noble and ignoble still.
Paul having converted Onesimus a runnagate servant, kept him not with him at
Rome, because he was called, nor freed him from the service of his master* but
sent him to Philemon again, who although he must in regard of the faith,
account him a brother, yet his outward condition was to be a servant still. 4.
We must be no longer the servants of men, namely, in respect of the inner man,
and the conscience, which in servants is as free from men, as in Masters, no
master can command that, for it is only to be commanded by God: but the
Apostle speaks not of bodily service to men, neither is there any word which
belongs to the doctrine of faith, that is a maintainer of any licentious
liberty; nay religion teaches them, that as Christ has set them free, so
also that they shall not use that liberty, as a cloak of maliciousness and
licentiousness; but carry themselves the rather as becomes the servants of
God, and the freemen of Jesus Christ.

Use. 1. If this be so, let Masters have a care, if they would have servants
subject unto them, to choose such as are religious, and frame to religion such
as they have chosen: that knowing what it is to be subject to their master in
heaven, conscience may compel them to be subject unto their earthly masters
also. Would thou have thy servant to please thee in all things? work him to
please God in all things. Would thou find him faithful unto thee? see then
that he be a Joseph, who will not sin and be unfaithful to the Lord. Would
thou have him a profitable servant to thee? see he be an Onesimus, and then
howsoever in times past he was never so unprofitable, yet now will he become
profitable to thee and others. Many masters feel the just smart of undutiful,
unfaithful, unprofitable servants, to the ruin often of themselves and their
familyes, because they have no care of their choice, nor to frame them to
godliness, and prof^ciencie in grace whom they have chosen.

2. This meets with the sin of many servants, who lift up their hearts
above the estate of subjection, and in their hearts despise the person or place
of their governors, and so the ordinance of God, yea the image of Gods
authority shining in them; by reuersing the condition of all subjection, which
is to stoop under the wills of superiors: for they must have wills of their
own, crossing not the unequal (which yet they ought not) but the most lawful
commandments of their Masters. And as for sustaining rebukes and correction,
they were never trained up unto it in their youth, and now being elder cannot
brook it, but sometimes murmr, sometimes resist, sometimes revenge. Whereas
this should be the resolution of all religious servants: I see the word
enioyneth me, being a servant, to account my Master worthy all honor, 1.
Tim. 6.1.
I may not therefore eleuate his authority in my heart, be he poor, be he
mean, I must not esteem him from outward things, but according to that
ordinance of God which has made him my master, and me not his compainion or
familiar, but his servant: and so being, I must cherefully obey his will,
although the things commanded be laborious, wearisome, and irksome: and I will
endeavor so to do, not making my will the rule of my obedience, but his in
the Lord: and if I be rebuked or corrected, my part is patiently to endure the
same; it may seem unjust often and undeserved, if I might be my own judge,
when indeed it is not: but were I sure it were so, be it far from me to take
the staff by the end, but I will submit my self to the Lords yoke, who has
commanded me to be subject, not to the good and courteous only, but to the
froward, if I be hereto called; and herein I will imitate my Lord Jesus, who
taking upon him the form of a servant, when he was wronged, committed all unto
him that judges righteously, see 1. Pet. 2.18.
so I will only say, the Lord look upon it and judge it. And now if any
servant make light account of these things, the day is coming when he shall
find what it is to rise up in rebellion against the ordinances of the Lord.

The second virtue required of servants toward their Masters is, that they
please them in all things. Wherein servants must please their masters.
Quest. How will this precept stand with that in Ephesians. 6.6. where servants are
forbidden to be men pleasers? Ans. To serve only as men-pleasers, as having
the eye cast only on man is hypocrisy, and the sin of many servants,
pleasing man for man's sake, and that is condemned by our Apostle, but to please
men in God and for God is a duty in servants next unto the first: who to show
themselves wel-pleasing to their Masters, must carry in their hearts and
endeavors a care to be accepted of them, even in the things which for the
indignity and burdensomenesse of them, are much against their own minds. For
this is the privilege of a master, to have his servant devoted unto his
pleasure and will, for the attempting of any business, the continuance in it,
and the vnbending of him from it: and when the servant has done all he can, it
was but debt and duty, Luke 17.9.
and no thanks are due to him from his Master, Matthew. 8.9. I am also a man in
authority, and I say to one go and ^e goes, to an other come and he comes,
and to my servant, do this and he does it.

Object. But my master is such a one as I cannot please, a churlish Nabal, The
place of service is from the Lord, who therefore will show goodness to him that
co^scionably performs it to wicked and cruel masters. Ephesians. 6.8.
that a man cannot speak unto him, he forgets humanity both in exacting
and rewarding my service. Ans. But this may not unyoke thee from thy obedience,
as though thou were bound no further to please then thou art pleased, thou must
do thy duty if thou have no other comfort from him, yet God to whom, and for
whom thou do thy service, will not leave it unrequited. Jacob served an hard
Laban one and twenty years, God gave him wages enough in the end when Laban
would not: and whatsoever a man does, that shall he receive of the Lord,
whether he be bond or free. And this reprooueth many servants, who if they may
not choose their own work, or their own way, or be put by their own will;
presently cast off all ca^e of pleasing, a^kely attempt and perform their
business as at a wrong end, or with a left hand: of whom the number is very
great, but all of them cast as guilty of this commandment of God.

Quest. But wherein must I please my master or mistress? Answ. In all things,
that is, in all outward things which are indifferent and lawful: I say in
outward things, so Ephesians. 6.5. servants obey your masters according to the
flesh: wherein the Apostle implies two things, 1. that the Masters are
according, and over the flesh and outward man: not over the spirit and inward
man, over which we have all one master in heaven. 2. that accordingly they are
to obey in outward things, for if the dominion of the one be bounded, so also
must needs be the subjection of the other. Again, these outward things must
be lawful or indifferent, Non adorationis equalitate, sed seruirutis
fidelitate. Bern.
for they must not obey against the Lord, but in the Lord. And therefore our
Apostle ever joins some such clause of restraint, Colos. 3.22. servants obey,
-- as fearing God: Ephesians. 6.6. as unto Christ: and, as doing the will of God.
Whence it will follow, 1. Cor. 7.15.
that if any ungodly commandment proceed from our superiorus, we say as Paul
in an other case, a brother or a sister is not bound in any such thing, that
is, against the Lord.

Use. Let no servant think it a sufficient warrant, presently to do a thing
hand over head, because he is so commanded by his Master, and by God commanded
also to please him in all things: but he must look to the chief power, to
which his masters is but subordinate, which if it command any thing crossing
the former, that saying has place, whether it be meet to obey God or man,
judge you: Act. 4.5.
and besides whatsoever is not of faith in the agent, be it never so
indifferent in it self, it is sin. If a servant here object, that he cannot
find out the nature of every commandment; I advise him so far as it lies in
his power, to search that he may not displease God in any thing, and after
this if he cannot be resolved of the unlawfulness of the commandment, I take
it that in supposition of a fault, it is rather to be laid on the commander,
then the obeyer.

2. Those servants are condemned, Masters must not be pleased in wicked
commands.
that sooth and please their Masters in wicked courses and practices, who are
so composed to eie-pleasing, that the very countenance of their Masters can
carry them to any iniquity: that as it is said of Pharaoh, that both he and
his servants sinned, so servants are contented to be made vassals unto their
Masters sins, Exodus 9.34.
as Absolons servants were in the s^iting of Ammon, and others like the high
Priests servants, the masters revile Christ, and the men spit in his face: so
many masters hate and scoff at religion, and the servants for company cannot
endure it. ^ike master like man.
Others to please their Masters break the sabbath, by working or carriyng home
work, by iourneying, by lying, and deceiving: such the Prophet speaks of*
that fill their masters houses by briberie and cruelty: whereas they are to
please them always with keeping good conscience. Ad aras.
The servants of wicked Saul, who were none of the best, refused to be
executioners of his wicked sentence against the Lords Priests, 1. Sam. 22.17.
although his commandment could have borne them out well enough. Let Christian
servants much more abhor to please any flesh against the Lord: and from this
place frame this conclusion in their own hearts; Must I please my master in
all things? how much more then must I be careful in all things to please my
master which is in heaven.

Not answering again,] Wherein servants may answer, or not answer their
masters.
Servants are here in the third place prohibited crosly and stubbornely to
reason, and dispute matters with their masters; but in silence and subjection
to sit down with the worse, even when they suffer wrong: for as they are to
carry a reverent esteem of them in their hearts, so must they bewray
reverence, love, and lowliness in all their words and gestures: neither are
they here coped from all manner of speech, for when just occasion of speech is
offered, as by questions asked, they must make respective answers, and not in
sullennes say nothing: for Solomon condemns it as a vice and great sin in
servants, when they understand, not to answer, Prove. 29.19. Yea and when they
have received wrong, they may in due respect of circumstances, as when the
masters passion is over, with all submission and soft answers (which break
wrath) clear themselves from unjust blame laid upon them: which was the
practice of David toward his master Saul, who having a notable sign of his
faithfulness which ministered opportunity of speech, he asks Saul, why he
should give ear to men's words, that said David seeks thy life, whereas now
thine own eyes may see, ^. Sam. 24.10.
that if I had sought it, I might have had it. And masters in this case are
bound in wisdom and patience to ^eare them, 18.
yea and to justify them, if they find their faithfulness, as Saul did. To
this purpose Job speaks, that if he had turned from the right of his
menseruants, Job 31.12.
and maidseruants, thus contending with him, he could not have answered God,
who made them both in the womb. The thing then here condemned, is that too
ordinary a sin of servants, when as they either privately mutter and grudge
against the commandments and corrections of their masters and mistresses, or
else more openly thwart and contradict them; yea by crooked and snarling words,
provoke their indignation justly against them: by all which, they manifest that
they have no feeling of the ordinance of God, no conscience of Gods authority,
seated in the person of their master, no wisdom to suffer and forbear, no
not for their own peace sake, nor respect of Gods commandment, which
forbids in them all muttering and undutiful answering again, a sure sign
of a wicked and rebellious heart.

Hence we might note, how the Lord strengthens his own ordinance in the
foundation of humane society, that he will not have it thwarted in words, no
not in stubborn and disdainefull looks, and much less by any action
resisted: against which, whosoever rebelliously rises up in word or deed,
resists not man, but God and his ordinances, and shall themselves be resisted
of God.

Not Pickers,] verse. 10.
By the former, servants were taught to bridle their tongues, by this precept
their hands. The word properly notes the setting somewhat apart, to ones
private use, which is not his, and is used, (...).
Act. 5.2. Annanias kept away, and craftily conveyed to his private use, that
which should have gone another way: So that servants are forbidden to pilfer
the least part of their masters goods, to dispose to their own or others use,
without the acquaintance of their masters: And herein under this principal
kind, all manner of unfaithfulness is inclusiuely condemned, as the opposition
in the next words shows, but showing all good faithfulness. Now that
servants, who at this day are so unjust, may be terrified from so heinous a
sin, let them know that there is a book full of curses and plagues which
shall cleave unto them, and enter into their house; the book is large, twenty
cubits long, and ten cubits broad, Zach. 5.
it is full of curses, even from one end unto the other: it shall come swiftly
upon them, for it is a flying book, it shall bring a fire with it to consume a
man's whole substance, and without repentance prepares unto the fire of hell,
being a sin which shuts out of heaven: 1. Cor. 6.10.

Object. But I hope I cannot be counted a thief for this, Colored theft of
servants detected.
I would be loath to lay mine hand upon any man's goods else, I may make a
little bold with my master, and it is but a little wherein I neither can nor
would hurt him. Answ. But this lessneth not the theft, because it is from the
master, but augmenteth it. For if it be not lawful to injury a stranger, much
less one who is so near unto us: every man will say, it is more capital to
smite the master then a stranger. Nay, the Lord less endures it in a child
toward the father, or a servant toward the master, then in one stranger toward
another. And it is sure that he that makes no conscience of robbing them,
makes less (were it not for fear of law) of robbing strangers: so says
Solomon, Prove. 28.24. He that robs his father and mother, and says it is
no sin, is a companion of a destroyer; that is, will easily join with open
robbers, to spoil others of their goods also. Besides, to say it is but a
small thing, and my master is neither better nor worse for it, the truth is,
thou that wilt crack thy conscience for a small trifle, wilt not greatly
strain if Achans more goodly wedge come in thy way; he that is unfaithful in
the lesser, will be unfaithful in the greater; serve the devil for a penny,
thou will be more serviceable for a pound, and augment thy labors, as he does
his wages. And whether it hurt thy Master or no, that is not the question, it
hurts thine own soul, by transgressing the commandment, and incurring the
curse of it.

Further, whereas some servants may truly say, that their masters are hard and
strait, and requite their service scarce with food and raiment, yet gives
this no leave to pilfer the least commodity from him; and what were this else,
then to fall into the hands of an harder master, into the hands of sin and
Satan? nay rather as Jacob went through an hard service of above 20. years,
through summers droughts, and winters frosts, Genesis 30.33.
yet in the end he professes that his righteousness should answer for him,
and that nothing miscarried under his hand, but he made it good: so should
servants in their years so justly carry themselves, as in the end of their
term, they may also say, let God make my righteousness answer for me.

Object. But Jacob in that place dealt not so justly, but rather cunningly with
Laban, in helping himself to his right, by laying the straked rods in the
sheep watring troughes: whence it may seem that a servant may right his own
wrongs, and supply out of his masters goods, his own wants. Answ. But far
was it from Jacob to use therein any deceit, who would not so boldly have
inuocated the name of God to such a wicked purpose: besides, what he did was by
Gods authority, yea and direction, Genesis 31.20.
who to help him to his right by dream (as himself professes) revealed unto
him such a natural means, as in all likelihood he was ignorant of before:
neither was it Jacobs intention, by cunning to conueie to himself any of his
uncles goods; but only in such means as God had appointed, expected a
blessing from time to come. Besides, what can this make to any secret
conueiance of their Masters goods, seeing here was a plain contract and
bargain, between him and Laban? from all which, seeing the counsel was
divine, the means natural, the contract open and plain, and the end, that by
the blessing of God he might come by his right, Jacob is freed from the
imputation of using evil craft, and out of good conscience professed that his
righteousness should answer for him.

Lastly, let every servant consider not only what his master depriueth him of,
but withal what he commits unto him; he hyreth him to be true, and not a
thief: he crediteth, and puts him in trust with his goods, and sometimes
with his whole estate, which he would not do to a thief. Now to deceive such
as trust him so far, is against all humanity. For a man to take a purse by
the high way, to steal sheep, to break an house, is a notable point of the
every in it self, and in our account: but none betrusteth such a fellow, no
man looks for any better from him, no man is deceived in him; but a strong
thief is he, that is untrusty to him that trusts him, and relieth upon his
fidelity.

Use. 1. Let this admonish servants to beware of such unrighteous ways, as are
too common and usual: some purloyning from their masters, to divert to their
own uses, some to riot away, some to play away, some to give away; in which
courses some are so traded, as that much better were it for many masters to
trust to a broken tooth, or a slyding foot, then to put any confidence in
them. Prove. 25.19.
But fearful is that sentence against them, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. God is the auenger
of all such things.

Secondly, such masters as are toyled and injured by the unfaithfulness of their
servants, have great cause to examine their own ways in former days, and say
to their own hearts, have I been unfaithful to my master, and have I made no
restitution? seeing I should have repaied a fifth part more then that I was
unjust in; that is all confiscate, and by Gods just judgment may carry much
more with it, yea and bring a curse on all the rest: see Levit. 6.4.5. Thus
ought the unrighteousness of servants, to force masters to righteous dealing.

But showing all good faithfulness, Here the Apostle extends the former
precept, and in this form of words affirmatively propounds it, requiring at
the hands of servants faithfulness not only in regard of their Masters goods,
but in all other respects wherein a servant ought to be helpefull to his
Master. In the former respect, he must not only not wast his Masters goods,
with the unfaithful steward; but he must carefully so far as in him lies
increase them: it is noted a property of the evil servant, that he increased
not his Masters talent: he is not accused for decreasing it, but he put it not
forth to his masters advantage. And yet much more must ^e by his providence,
diligence, assiduitie, and care, see that nothing be lost or miscarrie thorough
his default, after the example of Jacob and Joseph, whose diligence was so
approved, that neither the keeper, Genesis 31.38. and 39, 2^.
nor Pharaoh himself looked to any thing that was under his hand. In the
latter regard he that would show all good faithfulness, must be faithful,

1. In his Masters commands readily and diligently to perform them of
conscience, and not for eye service, The faithfulness of servants wherein to be
showed.
but whether his masters eye be upon him or no. Wherein Abraham's servant gives
a notable presiden^, whose master sending him to seek a wife for Izaak, he
presently gets him on his way, prays to God for good success and dispatch
of his business; G^^. 24.12.
and the Lord accordingly directing him to Bethuels house, where meat was set
before him, he refuses to eat the least morsel till he had done his message.
33.
But how many servants are there, who in imitation of such a worthy example,
would neglect themselves to dispatch their Masters business? But contrary
hereunto is the idleness and lazines of many servants, who affecting their own
ease, hire others to do their work, and pay the^ with their masters money or
goods: wherein the Master sustaineth a double damage: so also is that common
vice of iourneymen, who must first serve their own turns and lusts, and then
their Masters: whose present necessity be it never so urgent, can neither
command nor persuade the labor of such masterles vagrants.

counsels and secrets, never disclosing any of his infirmities, or
weaknesses, but by all lawful and good means covering and hiding them.
Contrary hereunto is that wickedness of many servants, who may indeed rather
be accounted so many spies in the house; whose common practice is, where they
may be heard, to blase abroad whatsoever may tend to their master or
mistresses reproach, having at once cast off both the religious fear of God,
as also the reverent respect of Gods image in the persons of their superiors.

messages abroad; both in the speedy execution and dispatch of them, as also
in his expenses about them: husbanding his masters money, cutting off idle
charges, and bringing home a just account; hereby acknowledging that the eye of
his own conscience watches him, when his masters eye cannot.

Masters wife, children, servants: wisely with Joseph distinguishing the things
which are committed unto him, Genesis 39.8.
from them that are excepted.

Lastly, as in all his actions and carriage, so also in every word, shunning
all lying, dissembling, untruths, whether for his masters, his own, or other
men's advantage: In the practice of which duties, he becomes faithful in all
his masters house.

Motives to the duty.
Now to incite servants to all good faithfulness, having showed the principal
things wherein it consists. Let them consider, 1. The promise the faithful
person 2. He that is faithful in little, paueth a way for himself to become
ruler of much, if God see it good for him. 3. The want, or worse things, that
their sin might return upon them with much more bitterness. 4. That a good
means to learn rightly to use If you be unfaithful in an other man's goods,
Luke 16.12.
who shall give you that which is your own? teaching, that he that is
unfaithful to an other, seldom is faithful in his own affairs.

That they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. First, for
the meaning. The doctrine of the Gospel, The Gospel called the doctrine of
Christ, Why.
is called the doctrine of Christ. 1. Because he is the argument and subject of
it: whence some of the Evangelists begin their writing thus, The beginning of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and the Apostle Paul begins his writing with
preach the Gospel of God concerning his Son: Mark. 1.1. Romans 1.1.
for Christ Jesus delivered to death for sin, and raised again for
justification, is the whole matter. Whence Paul calls it, the word of the
cross, not only because the cross followed it, 1. Cor. 1.18.
but also in that it is the doctrine of Christ crucified.

2. Because he is the first and chief messenger and publisher of it, who in
Paradise promised that the seed of the woman should break the serpents Ioh.
1.18.
who came from the bosom of the father, could reveal, and show the
favorable face of his father unto us: who also in fullness of time, to show
himself the chief doctor of his Church, came in his own person, and went
about preaching and teaching this doctrine of the kingdom.

3. Whosoever have been the teachers and publishers of this doctrine from the
beginning, either by word or writing (not excepting his Gospel, Romans 2.
and speaking of other Apostles also, our Gospel, yet must it be meant only in
regard that they were the publishers, but not the authors of it, for that is
Christ himself. and chap. 16.


4. As it proceeds from him, so it tends wholly unto him, and leads
believers to see and partake both of his grace and glory shining in the same.

Secondly, Christ is called God our Savior, 1. To prove his own dietie, not
only in express terms being called God; but also by the epithet agreeing
only to a divine nature, our Savior. 2. To imply our own misery, whose
infinite wretchedness only God could remove, and whose infinite good none
but God could restore. 3. And especially in regard of this doctrine; 1. to
confirm the divinity of the same, it being a doctrine of God, and a doctrine
of salvation proceeding from our Savior. 2. To enforce the duty toward it:
namely that seeing the author of it is God, the matter divine, the effect
salvation, meet it is that such a saving doctrine, a doctrine of such tidings,
should be beautified and adorned.

Doctrine of God adorned two ways.
Thirdly, this doctrine is adorned, when it is made bewtifull and lovely unto
men, and this by two things in the professors of it. 1. By an honest and
unblameable conversation; for carnal men commonly esteem 1. Pet. 2.12.
as whosoever should see their good works, might be moved to glorify God.
And this appears more clearly in the contrary: for when the work answers
not to the word, it causes the name of God to be blasphemed among unbelievers:
Romans 2.23.
and to glory in the law, yet breaking 2. By Gods blessing which is promised
and is attending such walking, whereby even strangers to the Church, are forced
to begin to like of the profession; for Gods blessing upon his people, is not
only profitable to themselves, but turns to the salvation of many others. We
read of many of the Heathen people, that when they saw the great advancement of
Hester, and Mordecay, Hest. 8.17.
they became Jews. And when the Egyptians saw the great works that God did
for his people among them, it is said, that many of them joined themselves to
the Israelites. Exodus 12.38.
So we read in the Ecclesiastical story, that when Licinius was overcome by
Constantine, and the persecutions ceased, which had almost for 300. years
together wasted the Church, how innumerable of them, who before had worshipped
their idols, were contented to be received into the Church. On the contrary,
the Gospel is dishonored, when the Lord is forced to judge and correct the
abuse of his name, in the professors of it; Ezech. 36.20. When they, that is,
the Israelites, entered among the Heathen they polluted my name, when they said
of them, these are the people of the Lord, and are gone out of his Land.

Fourthly, Servants adorn the Gospel, when professing it, they by performing
all faithful service to their masters in and for God, seek and obtain the
blessing of God, in the condition of life wherein he has placed them: whereas
the casting off of the yoke in believing servants, would make men conceive,
that God, whose name they profess, were the author of confusion, and not of
order, and that the Gospol were an enemy to civil and humane right. For what
is more right and equal, then for masters to enjoy their servants, as they do
the other parts of their goods? and better might a man miss a great part of
his goods, then the person, and labor of his servant.

Doctr. The meanest Christian in his place, may and ought to bring glory unto
the Gospel. The meanest Christian may and must bring glory to the Gospel.
These servants were sold and bought like beasts in smithfeild; yet must such
poor creatures by their faithfulness, diligence, and conscience, deck and
bewtifie the Gospel, which even by their lives receives either honor, or
discredit. In the Tabernacles building every man must bring less or more. The
Lord esteems not of men by the places they hold, but by their carriage in
them. A poor wise child or servant here, is better then an old foolish King.
In a word, no man is called to the truth, but on condition to show forth the
virtues of him that has called him.

Use. 1. Let servants, who for most part, leave the care of religion to others,
consider of this privilege, which the baseness of their calling cannot
deprive them of. As in every nation, so in every calling and condition of life,
he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of him: yea, the
poorest soul called to partake of the liberties of the Gospel, and freedom in
grace, is also called to this glory, that he is one who adorneth the Gospel.
Which consideration, may both comfort and encourage poor despised Christians
in good ways, and provoke them by expressing Christianity in their whole
course, to show their cognizance, and manifest to what house and family they
belong. 2. How much more do those in higher place, set up for many eyes to
look upon, either credit, or discredit the Gospel: and yet we may say of our
age, as Christ of his, the poor receive the Gospel: and this doctrine is much
more beholding to servants then masters, to inferiors then superiors. 3.
Masters must use means, that their servants may adorn the Gospel, and not
with the Egyptians, look only for taskes, and business to be done, but never
exhort them to sacrifice. And yet more wretched are some Masters, who when
their servants entreat to go and worship in the Church, do therefore evil
entreat them, as those that are too idle.

Verse. 11. For that grace of God, which brings salvation unto all men, has
appeared,

12. And teaches us that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and
that we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world.

13. Looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of that glory, of that
mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ,

In these words, our Apostle lays down a general reason, confirming and
enforcing all the former precepts; and it is drawn from the end of our
redemption, which calls all sorts of men out of their vain conversation,
unto a profitable and religious course amongst men. Grace has appeared to all
men, even the basest, as well to servants as masters, to slaves as superiors,
to one sort as another, that all sorts of men might by new life, and obedience
walk answerable thereunto.

By Grace, is meant the doctrine of the Gospel, called Act. 20.32. The word of
grace: so Jude, 4. Turn the grace of God into wantonness. Because, 1. it is a
gift of grace. 2. it teaches that remission of sins, and life everlasting,
are obtained only by the mere grace of God in Christ. 3. it is a mean under
God, to bring believers to the participation of this grace, through remission
of sins by his blood.

This grace is described, 1. by the adjuncts, 2. by the ends of it. The
adjuncts are two: first, the light and clear evidence of it in the present
manner of propounding; in the word appeared, which in the Greek signifies a
shining out in greater brightness then ever before: for before the rising up
of the sun of righteousnes^e, the greatest part of the world was in darkness;
and where most light was in the Goshen of the Church, it was but in shadows
and obscurity; but now a light is sprung up to them that were in darkness, the
doctrine of grace is gloriously preached to all the world.

The second adiunct, is that salvation, which this grace brings, and goes
with this light: for it is the power of God to salvation. And this is amplified
by the subject, all men: that is, mankind, or all conditions of men, servants
as well as masters, bond as free, poor as rich, women as men, young as old, etc.

The ends of the appearing of grace are two: the former is nearer, namely, to
become our schoolmaster or teacher in this present world. And it teaches two
lessons. 1. What we must forbear and avoid, 1. ungodliness, 2. worldly lusts.
Secondly, what we must incline unto, 1. sobriety, 2. righteousness, 3.
piety. And this we must do in this present life, 1. That others may witness
with us our faith to be unfeigned, for true godliness must not be hid only in
the heart, but visible also to the eye of man; both that it may be an
acceptable testimony to the truth, as also for direction to some, and
conviction of others. 2. Because this present world is our nonage time, wherein
we must be schooled to these lessons; which time if it be neglected, there is
no time hereafter alloted to learn them in. The latter end is further
removed, and concerns the life to come; namely, the fruition of our hope,
that is by Metonimy, our glory hoped for, in the appearing of Christ the
mighty God, which that it may be a spur to our more godly course, we are
willed to expect. So that the brief scope and sum of the words is, as though
he had thus plainly spoken: There is great reason, O Titus, that thou should
thus urge all sorts of persons, young and old, men and women, bond and free,
unto such several duties and virtues, as may most beautify their profession;
because that blessed doctrine of grace, offering salvation freely not only to
Masters, but even to servants, has more brightly shined out in these last,
then ever before in former ages: and like a schoolmaster instructs, that we
should both deny ungodliness and unlawful lusts, as also that we should
moderate our own affections with sobriety, exercise righteousness toward
others, and in regard of God, practice the power of that religion which we
profess: and further urges us with thirsting desire to expect and long after
that heavenly blessedness and immortal glory now only possessed by hope,
but which shall be fully assured us, when Jesus Christ that great God and our
Savior shall appear the second time to our full redemption.

For the grace of God] Doctr. Although the doctrine of the Churches of the old
and new Testament be the very self same, in regard 1. of the author, who is
God. 2. substance and matter, which is perfect righteousness required in both.
3. scope and end, to the justification of a sinner before God; yet are there
diverse accidental differences between them, which that we may the better
understand, both the offices, and the benefits by Christ, are meet to be
known: some of them we shall note out of these words as we shall come unto
them. The first difference is, 1. difference between the Law and Gospel.
in that the Gospel is called grace, which word the Law acknowledges not: nay
these two are opposed, to be under the law, and to be under grace. To be under
the law, is not to be under it as a rule of life, for so all believers on
earth, yea the Saints and Angels in heaven are under it; but to be under the
yoke of it, which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. For to omit
the least part of the yoke, standing in the observation of 1. many, 2. costly,
3. laborious, 4. burdensome ceremonies, what a killing letter is the law, which
commands inward and perfect righteousness, for nature and actions, and that
in our own persons? which promises life upon no other condition but of
works? do this, and live; and these must be such as must be framed according
to that perfect light and holiness of nature, in which we were created: which
wrappeth us under the curse of sin, and infolds us in the justice of God,
without showing any mercy at all? What a yoke is it that is ever galling us
for sin, partly showing it, partly (not as a cause indeed, but occasionally)
increasing it, it being the strength of sin? 1. Cor. 15.56.

Now to be under grace, is to be freed from all this bondage; not only from
those elements and rudiments of the world, Coloss. 2.20. We are not under the
law in 4. respects.
but especially, 1. When the yoke of personal obedience to justification, is
by grace translated from believers, to the person of Christ our surety, so
that he doing no condemnation to those that are in him. Romans 8.1.
4. When the strength of the law is abated, so as believers may send it to
Christ for performance; for it cannot vex us as before the ministry of grace
it could; which is an other law, namely of faith, to which we are bound, the
which not only can command as the former, but also give grace and power to
obey and perform in some acceptable sort the commandment. And this is the
doctrine of grace, which we are made partakers of.

Use. 1. Every Christian ought to take up that exhortation, 2. Cor. 6.1. We
beseech you that you receive not the grace of God in vain: not that the saving
graces of faith and love, etc. may be received and lost again, which is the
Popish collection from the place, which speaks only of the doctrine of grace
and faith, which may be received in vain, and is of all such hypocrites who
never knew what need they stood of this grace: and therefore some receive it
into their ears, not into their hearts: into their profession, not into their
practice; into their lips and tongues but never into the love, joy, and other
affections of their hearts. Whereas could they see the glory of this
ministration, they would exceed that people in their acclamation and cry,
Zach 4.6. How a man may know that he receives the grace of God in truth* and
not in vain.
grace, grace unto it.

Quest. But how may a man know whether he receive this grace in vain or no?
Answ. By these notes. 1. Whosoever receives this grace in truth, he receives
together with the commandment, a power which enableth him in an acceptable
performance of it; for howsoever the law 2. Cor. 3 6.
yet the Gospel believed, is a quickening spirit, the words of it are spirit
and life, in conferring the spirit of life, whereby the believing soul is
quickened in the ways of righteousness. The first thing then to be examined
is, whether the Gospel be in word or in power: for if it beget only to a form
and outward profession of piety and religion, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
it is received in vain.

2. As he receives a power, so does he also a will to obey the precept of the
Gospel: he is not now constrained so much by the bond of the in the newenes of
the spirit, or oldnes of the letter: that is, Romans 7.6.
by virtue of the spirit renewing the soul, and so working the will, and not
by the compulsiue power of the law; if thou find not this change and work
of grace in thy will, which carries ever a readiness with it to obey God in
all his commandments, thou have received this grace in vain: for Gods people
are a willing and free people, and bring free will offerings, their hearts
encourage them, and their spirits make them willing, even there where often
power and strength fails them.

3. Whosoever is not stirred up to thankfulness of heart and life for his free
righteousness by the only merit of Christ, never as yet knew will forbear,
and come to the other instructions.

Be sure to have thy part in grace.
Use. 2. Is the doctrine of the Gospel a doctrine of grace; then use carefully
the means to have thy part in it; for hereby only thou art vnyoked from the
curse and tyranny of the law, from Gods consuming wrath and justice, and all
the fearful fruits of his displeasure; hereby only thou come to see God in
Christ accepting thy person, and with thy person thy works: sparing thy
weakness even as a man spares his son that serves him; entertaining
willingness where there wants strength, and endeavor where there is no
power; remitting thy own unrighteousness; imputing the righteousness of his
own son; and beginning to frame such an image in thy soul, as tends to a
more happy condition then ever thou had in thy purest innocence. A happy
merchant he is that sells all to buy this treasure.

Call on others to partake in it.
Use. 3. Call others to partake of it, be speaking of it, tell men what God
has done for thy soul; thou can not but wish all men converted, if thy
self be. A righteous man here cannot eat his morsells alone; Christian
love is like fire, which warmeth whosoever stand about it; one brand will
kindle another, and iron (says Solomon) sharpneth iron, so one converted man
will strengthen the brethren: Andrew will call Simon, and Philip will call
Nathaniel, and the believer wishes all Gods people to be like himself, except
his sins.

Pity such as do not.
Use. 4. Pity those who are destitue of this grace, and are without the
means of it in the preaching and publishing of it, for such a people have not
yet obtained mercy. If Christ were living again upon earth, his bowels would
earne in compassion to see so many people as sheep scattered without a
shepherd. If we should see a goodly field of corn stand fair and white to
the harvest, but know that there were never a reaper in all the country to
gather it into the barn, but for want of reapers it should all rot and spoil
on the ground, it would greatly pity our hearts: and yet no other is the
condition of such people as want able and faithful Ministers: pray therefore
the Lord of the harvest to thrust out laborers into his harvest.

Use. 5. Detest the unmercifulness of men, who being called, neglect to teach
the people, for these do nothing else but damme up all the streams of grace
from them; and so it appears in the people committed to such vnconscionabla
men, who for most part are so graceless and so wicked, as though the old
Sodomites were reuived again.

Bringing salvation.] This doctrine is a saving doctrine, and word of salvation
to those that were wandering in the paths of death. Act. 11.14. the Angel
wishing Cornelius to send for Peter, affirms, that he shall speak to him
words whereby he and all his house should be saved. Whence it is called the
word of life, Act. 5.20. Go, preach to the people all the words of this life:
and the word of eternal life, Ioh. 6.68. because God has ordained it to this
purpose, that whosoever is brought to the faith by it, shall eternally live
thereby.

And here is another difference between the doctrine of the law and Gospel, the
which two the Apostle comparing together, 2. difference between the law and
Gospel.
he calls the law, a killing letter, and the ministry of it, a ministry of
condemnation, and the ministration of death: but the Gospel he calls a
quickening spirit, and the ministry of the spirit, and the ministration of
righteousness. Object. Psalm. 19.7. The law of God conuerteth the soul. Answ.
But there the law in a more general acceptance of the word, comprehends the
whole doctrine of the covenant of life and salvation, as it is also Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man that meditateth in the law: that is, the word of God day and
night. But in this straiter sense, the law is no isntrumental cause of faith,
repentance, or any grace; it only wounds a man, and prepares him to
conversion, but conuerteth none; it gendereth to bondage, and binds him that
looks for justification by it, in the conviction of sin, and deserved
damnation, and there leaves him in death: only this doctrine of grace, is the
converting and quickening word, revealing that God through his Christ is become
either pleased, or placable with us; till which time we cannot but either lie
in a slavish fear and the smarting twitches of our consciences, or else
desperately give over all; but when by the Gospel we perceive the readiness of
our heavenly Father to receive them that return, then we resolve to seek unto
his grace, to become his, and to love him who loved us first. So as the
believer can ready answer the Apostles interrogatorie, Tell me, received ye
the spirit, by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? by works,
Gal. 3.2.
is meant the doctrine of justification by the works of the law; and by the
hearing of faith, is meant the doctrine of the Gospel: hearing being put for
the thing heard, and faith, for the doctrine believed: they can now answer,
that it is the Gospel, that gendreth unto life, which is the instrument of the
spirit, both for the beginning, and confirming of regeneration and salvation,
and that the law is no cause (though an occasion) of Gods grace, showing only
the necessity of some other righteousness, then that in a man's self; but not
putting a man so prepared into the possession of it, which the Gospel only can
do.

Use. 1. If only the doctrine of grace bring salvation, then does no doctrine
of works bring it, or unto it, neither in whole or in part. No doctrine of
works can now bring salvation.
But the whole chain of our salvation shows, that we are saved by grace
only: 1. Our election, Romans 11.5. At this time there is a remnant according to
the election of grace. But it may be of grace and foreseen works too* but the
Apostle sets himself to prevent this objection in the next words, If it be
of grace, it is no more of works, or else were grace no more grace; but if it
be of works, it is no more of grace, or else were works no more works. 2.
Our calling, 2. Tim. 1.9. We are called with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his purpose and grace. 3. Our faith, Philip. 1.29.
It is given you to believe: and faith is the gift of God. 4. Our justification,
Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace. 5. Our sanctification, Ephesians.
2.10. We are his workmanship created unto good works, which he ordained that
we should walk in them. 6. Our perseverance in grace is by grace, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall never depart from me. 7.
Eternal life is the free gift of God, Romans 6.23.

Again, if our salvation were either depending upon our hand, or held in our
own hands, more easily might we loose it, then when we were in our innocence;
gold were no sooner taken out of little childrens hands, who mind to play with
it rather then to lay it up, then our comfort out of our own: but our
security is, that our chief treasure is not laid up in such a weak cottage,
but our life is hid in heaven, in the free grace and unchangeable love of God:
that now, 1. false Prophets cannot possibly seduce the elect, Matthew. 24.24. 2.
though many apostates fall back, yet Gods foundation abides sure, 2. Tim.
2.19. where Gods election is compared to a great building laid upon a firm
foundation, which may be shaken but never overthrown. 3. though our sins
like so many billows, would grow over our heads and drown us, yet this grace
is sufficient for us, and vpholds us that we sleep not in death. 4. though
tribulations may threaten to separate us, yet this grace by them drives us
nearer himself; and draws him nearer unto us, according to that gracious
promise, that in six troubles he will be with us, and in seven he will not
forsake us.

What mean then the enemies of this grace of God the Papists to seek for any
part of their justification and salvation in merits and works: whereas if we
consider the beginning of all our good, which they call the first
justification; the Lord is found of us who sought him not, his skirts covered
us when our father was an Amorite, our mother an Hittite, and we in our blood.
And for the increase of our good, which is that second justification which they
dream of, and is indeed nothing else but the increase of our sanctification,
he begins and perfecteth, he is the author and finisher of our faith, by
which we stand, and hold on unto salvation: 2. Cor. 1.24.
1. Cor. 1.8. who shall confirm you to the end, that ye may be blameless in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Use. 2. If this be a doctrine bringing salvation, then must we embrace it as
we would salvation it self: Embrace the doctrine of grace as thou would
salvation it self.
there is no man but would lay hold on salvation, yet no man almost claspeth
hold on the Gospel to make it his portion: many a one can make it his talk,
and his pretense, but scarce any makes it his portion, by yielding himself to
be cast into the mould of it. Now for the right entertaining of it, two things
are required. 1. To acknowledge that this word of salvation, is by God sent
unto us as men and brethren -- to you is the word of salvation sent: this the
Jews knew well enough, but Paul would have them acknowledge the benefit,
which a very few at this day do. 2. To be thankful for such a mercy, not
only by accounting their feet beautiful, that are the holding forth this
word of salvation, as we are commanded, Phil. 2.16. And this is done, 1. by
believing it in the heart to justification. 2. by professing it with the mouth
to salvation. 3. by teaching and propagating it to others by holy speech and
example: and thus only it becomes unto us as it is in it self, a sweet
savor of life unto life. And this duty is rather to be thought upon, because
this doctrine although it be in it own nature a word bringing salvation, yet
may it by accident through our default become (though not a cause) an occasion
of destruction, and a savor of death unto death; and what a woeful thing were
it so to sin against the Gospel, as it should become (working according to
the nature of the subject) a killing letter unto us? how fearful a sin were
it to turn this grace into wantonness, or to neglect and yet much more despise
so great salvation? seeing this is to sin against the nearest and immediate
word of salvation: and if those escaped not vengeance who despised the word
spoken by angels; much less shall such as despise the word uttered by the
Son himself. Heb. 2.3.
Many men when they see the law broken, especially those precepts wherein
humane society is more disturbed, as by theft, murder, adultery, perjury,
etc. oh these sins cannot be brooked for the foulness and detestablenesse
of them: but yet the same men live in a greater sin then any o^ all these,
and see it not; namely, the neglect or contempt of salvation offered in the
Gospel, which is more dishonorable unto God, and much more prejudicial to his
own soul. Let the Jews be our glass herein, in whom the Lord suffered many
contempts of his law, and yet never utterly cast them off: but no sooner
almost had they refused this corner stone, but he scattered them into all
winds, and would have no more to do with them unto this day. Let other famous
Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, Colossus, Thessalonica, the seven
flourishing Churches in lesser Asia, to whom John* writ his Epistles in the
revelation, teach us, that never did any Church wilfully refuse this grace, but
ere long God gave them over into the hands of Christ's greatest enemies: and so
of persons it will be true, that whosoever love not blessing, the curse of God
shall befall them, and run into their bowels like water.

To all men,] These words may be expounded, 1. without exception; and then it
must be conceived by way of publication or manifestation of this grace, which
in the general promises of the Gospel is published and offered to all,
excepting none, whosoever believes shall be saved. 2. with restraint, when
this grace brings salvation by way of exhibition, not offering only, but
conferring the same. And the restraints are two. 1. it brings salvation to
all men, namely, that are elected and saved: for whosoever are saved, must
pass by this door, and come to the knowledge of the truth: neither can this
be thought strange of him, who considers that the Scriptures acknowledge such
a generality, yea a world of the elect only. God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, that is, the believers who only are reconciled: and
Christ is the lamb that takes away the sins of the world, that is, of his
elect: see also Ioh. 14.31. 2. It brings salvation to all men; that is, all
kinds and conditions of men, not to every particular or singular of the kinds,
but to all the sorts and kinds of men, to servants as well as masters, to
Gentile as well as Jew, to poor as rich. Thus is it said that God would have
all men saved, that is, of all sorts of men some: so Christ healed all
diseases, that is, all kinds of diseases; and the Pharisees tithed all herbs,
that is, all kinds; for they took not every particular herb for tithe, but
took the tenths of every kind, and not the tenth of every herb.

3. difference between the Law and Gospel.
And hence we note a third difference between the Law and Gospel. That doctrine
of the law brought not salvation, no not by way of manifestation to all men; no
nor yet to all sorts and conditions of men; that was a more restrictiue
doctrine to the Jews only: and in that covenant was always a difference held,
and a wall of partition was set up between Jew and Gentile, and between people
and people. Before the flood were the sons of God, and the sons of men.
After the flood, before the law, there was the promised seed, and the seed of
the flesh; the sons of the freewoman, and of the bond woman: after the law
before Christ, was held the distinction of Jew and Gentile: with the former God
made his covenant, them he took into his teaching, and passed by the other: to
these pertained the adoption, the glory, the covenant, the giving of the law,
Romans 9.4.
the service of God, the oracles, the promises; these had his Temple, his
Prophets ordinary and extraordinary. This difference David implied, Psalm.
147. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel,
he dealt not so with every nation, neither have they known his ways. But now
in this last age of the world, this covenant of grace and life at least, for
propounding, is made common to all people: now every man is invited unto
repentance, Act. 17 30.
the partition wall is broken down, the veil is rent, and the mystery which
was kept secret from the beginning of the world, is published to all nations,
Romans 16.26.

Use. 1. This place thus rightly interpreted, yields no patronage to that
devise of Universal election, Universal election can not be drawn from this
place.
which they draw from the universal vocation of men to the knowledge of the
Gospel. But many are called, not every particular man, and the greatest part of
the world have always bin out of the covenant; besides of them that are
called, few come, so as all to whom this grace is published, participate not in
it.

Use. 2. Note the extent of this covenant far above the other: whence it is
fitly called by Jude, the common salvation, as in regard of the ends, and
means of it, so also in respect of the subjects called unto it: so in the
former Chapter, verse. 4. it is called the common faith, not only in regard of
the kind, and object of it, but also of the subjects, persons of all kinds
being called thereunto: which consideration should stir up our rejoicing, in
that the barren and desolate has more children, then the married wife, that
the place of the tents of the Church is so enlarged, and the courtaines of her
habitation spread out; as we are exhorted, Isa. 54.1.

Use. 3. Note that the kingdom of Christ admits no distinction of men; it
is not of this world, which accepts of men for their place, country,
calling: but all countries and callings are alike unto God, in every nation and
calling he that fears him, is accepted of him: he neither accepts the
person of the Prince, nor of the poor, for they both are the work of his
hands: he calls the Gentile, the servant, the poor, Job 34.19.
and these receive the Gospel. Where again we who are Gentiles, and were Lo
Ammi, and Lo Ruhania, may rejoice that we are received to pity, and that the
wing of Gods mercy is stretched over us, who justifies the circumcision of
faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. Romans 3.30.
Hence may the poor believer, be he a thrall, a servant, and base in the
world, raise his heart to comfort, that even he, whom men despise, is called
and that effectually, to see the grace and salvation of God; even he who is
perhaps a servant to some mean man, is a free citizen in Gods kingdom; even he
that has never a foot in earth, is become a purchaser in heaven. Here is no
complaint that the prodigal son is entertained, and the serviceable son
neglected. The Enunch need not say, I am a dry tree, Isa. 56 3.
nor the son of the stranger, the Lord has surely separated me from his
people, but whosoever cleaves unto the Lord to love the Lord and serve him,
them he will give a name better then of sons and daughters, even an
everlasting name, that shall not be put out.

Use. 4. This meets also with a woeful delusion among many Protestants, to
whom when we call for conscionable walking in a Christian course, What, say
they, did not Christ die for all men? and is not heaven as open for me as for
others? would not God have all men to be saved? is he not merciful? will he
condemn for such and such things? which what is it else, but from the
abundance of grace, to make their sins superabound? and thus they plainly
show that they were never yet effectually called, and that although they have
bin called to the supper, yet have they refused to come.

Has appeared,] The Gospel is compared to a great light shining out brightly
and gloriously. 1. a light, in that 1. it dispelleth a manifold darkness,
which before occupied the minds of men. 2. in regard of direction. 3. comfort
which it brings to the believing soul. Matthew. 4.15.4. difference between
the doctrine of the Law and Gospel.
And 2. a great light: wherein is a fourth difference from the old Testament,
in which all things were more dark and obscure through the veil of figures,
and ceremonies, so as their light was but like the obscure light of the sun
before the rising; The fathers of the old Testament had but a candle to see by,
not a sun, as we.
not that the substance and scope of their doctrine was not the same with ours,
but that in the manner of delivery it was far less lightsome. But now the
light is risen up in glorious sort, shining not as before almost to none but
Jews, but to the Gentiles also: so as according to the Prophets foreshadowing
hereof, the sun is not only risen and in our midheauen, but the light of it
is seven fold bigger then it was before. And the reasons are sundry:

1. Many were the types, and predictions of the old Testament, which The very
eue^ts have preached themselves.
as the body the shadow; or the thing it self, the figure and picture of it:
truly to this says one, that the exposition must be more clear then the
text. 2. The from the least to the greatest all should know the Lord: Isa. 11.9.
that the mountain of the Lord should be lifted up upon the top of the
mountains, that all the earth should be filled with the knowledge of God, as
the waters cover the sea: the which if they be only with it self, but all that
doctrine also which was formerly delivered in all ages to the Church of God:
and this latter most full and clearly explaned in the former. This light in
this regard is grown (like that cloud) from an handbreadth to cover the whole
heavens; and is indeed that water running under the threshold of the
sanctuary, which is risen from the ankles to a river, yea a sea covering the
earth. 4. The exhibiting The spirit to the old believers was powered out drop
by drop, but now in abundance.
to reveal things there secretly reserved from the beginning of the world; and
the plentiful pouring out of the spirit long before promised, and 50. days
after Christ's ascension accomplished to the Church of the new Testament, does
certainly seal up this same truth; besides those express places of
Scripture, which might be alleged to this purpose. In 2. Cor. 3. Paul
affirms, that the ministration of the spirit is far more glorious, then
that of the law, which he calls the ministration of death; of which he
affirms, that yet it was so glorious, that it made Moses cover his face with
a veil, without the which the children of Israel were not able to behold him;
signifying unto us, that they were not able to comprehend those manifold
obscure types of the Law, till the veil was removed; which, says the
Apostle, ver. 14. In Christ is now put away. In this respect our Savior
affirms, that although among them that were borne of women, there was not a
greater then John, (who yet in regard of his person, was inferior to sundry
of the Prophets) because of them all he was nearest unto Christ, and in his
ministry pointed at him with the finger now exhibited into the world; yet the
least minister, in the kingdom of heaven, that is, of the new Testament, is
greater then he. For he can preach that the son of man is lifted up, dead,
raised, ascended, which John could not do, as near as he was, and much less
Abraham, David, and the other Prophets, who saw his day further off.

Object. But hereby it seems that before Christ's appearing, the doctrine of
the Gospel appeared not. Answ. We must consider the Gospel in a double respect:
1. As it is a doctrine containing a promise of grace, freely for the Messiah,
who was to be the son of Abraham, and David; and thus was it ever in the
Church, delivered by God immediately to Adam after the fall; Moses writ also of
him, and to him give all the Prophets witness. 2. As a doctrine propounding
free grace in Christ exhibited, dead, raised, Evangelium promissum.
etc. and thus it appeared not before his own appearing, before which time it
was only a Gospel fore-promised, Romans 1.2.

Use. 1. In that the doctrine of the Gospel is such a shining light, we may
see the miserable estate of such as want the means of it, who abide in
obscurity and darkness, even as those are in the night, to whom the sun is
not risen; A candle is not so necessary in a dark house, as the light of the
Gospel in the darkness of men's hearts*
for man naturally perceives not the things of God, and therefore unless this
instrument of the spirit come, the spirit himself by whom only we know the
things given us of God, must needs be wanting. The which consideration should
move us to pity the estate of such poor creatures, who are in a far more
miserable blindness, then the Egyptians in their three days darkness. What a
lamentable thing is it, that a kingdom being given for going unto it, and men
being blind of themselves, and not able to see one foot of the way, cannot
get any guides or means to help them one step forward? but as blind me^
desperately run upon pikes and swords, into pittes and ponds, no one
recalling them from present death and deadly things.

Use. 2. Note hence with how little danger we can shut our eyes against such a
light as is risen up unto us; shall we without blame now living as at midday,
see no more nor so much as those who lived in the dawning? Not without great
danger can we shut our eyes against the light which has appeared.
shall the light of the sun be seven fold greater unto us then ever before,
and yet we stumble and fall, as if we were cast into the midnight? What a
fearful judgment hangs over our negligence, if under our ministry which
exceeds in glory, we come behind the ordinary believers of the old
Testament in knowledge, faith, and fruition of Christ with his graces? Is all
the pedagogie of the law past, wherein even the Prophets and arch-beleeuers
(so far as we consider the ordinary ministration) were to us but as children
in their elements? Is Christ come, crucified, raised up to glory, and so the
fullness of time come wherein we have the body and substance? Oh what a
disgrace is it, that we should be inferior to those who obtained but the
shadows? what a great condemnation will it be, that we who are reserved to
such means should sin against such a light? In a misty night to stumble and
fall were no such disgrace, no such danger; but with many Christians to say, I
am in the light, I see my way well enough, and yet to come behind not only the
Jews, who walked in a dark light; but even the Gentiles who not only walked
in darkness, but were darkness it self, in the practice of sobriety,
justice, mercy, chastity, and such like; is an heavy condition, and yet the
condition not of a few professed Christians.

It will be here said, but God forbid that we should not receive this light,
and walk also in the direction of it, and to say the contrary were to broach
a slander. To which I say, that when Christ himself preached, most of the
Jews were blind still, so true it is that many who hear and profess the
Gospel, yet never received the light to walk by it. Some receive indeed this
light superficially upon themselves, as the light of the sun falling upon
trees and stones, it enlighteneth the outside, and warmeth the bark a little,
but peirceth not into the heart and midst of them: so the Gospel shines round
about many professors, and it may be conformeth some outward actions, and set
them forward to speak of it, and for it, at least for a while, but it gets not
within them, nor peirceth their hearts: there is no change there, the soul
nastie corners of them lie unswept still, and so they remain hypocrites still.
Others receive this sunshine no otherwise then the air receives the light of
the sun; when the body of the sun is present, it enlighteneth the whole
air, but the body of the sun departing, darkness succeeds again: so many
hea^ers may be affected with the present sound of the word, and think
themselves sufficiently enlightened, but the sound being gone, the former
darkness comes, they hear many things but keep nothing, and so make
themselves fit for many stripes.

Quest. But how shall I know whether I receive this light aright or no? Answ.
By these notes. A trial whether thou receiuest this light.
1. If thou will not attempt any thing without the direction of it, no more
then thou would thy earthly business without the light of the sun or of a
candle. A few natural actions a walk as children of light: but how shall we
do that? the Apostle John tells us, Ioh. 12.35.
namely if we walk in the light; and while we have the light. The Israelites
might not move a foot toward Canaan, but by direction of the pillar, and the
wise men could not go to Christ without his star.

Secondly, light is a pleasant thing to the eye, says Solomon, and a
comfortable

Thirdly, thou must not only take direction and comfort, but go on we behold
the glory of the Lord with open face, we must be changed into the same image
from glory to glory: that is, seeing by the appearing of grace the veil is
removed, that we may see the face of God clearly, now must we by means of
this knowledge be transformed into his image; that image in which we were
created must be daily renewed, and by degrees further restoared in us, which is
the meaning of the Apostle when he says, from glory to glory: for
wheresoever this shining light is received, it not only illuminateth the mind
with knowledge of the truth; but by little and little it transformeth the whole
man into it self. Whence the Apostle says, Coloss. 3.10. that the new man is
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him: and no light else
can change the thing enlightened into it self. Examine then whether thou art
not only enlightened with knowledge and understanding, but whether thou art
changed by it from an unbeliever and unrighteous person, to a believer,
fruitful in the works of faith, whereby thy self shinest as a light in the
world.

Motives to entertain the light while it is with us.
Now the motives to provoke us thus to entertain the light, are sundry. 1.
Consider our business is such as requires light; the course of Christianity
is an husbandry, a race, a journey, a battle. 2. The difficulties, yet and let
the day once slip, whosoever walks, walks in darkness, he that works,
works the works of darkness; the former knows not whether he goes; the
latter knows not what, or how he works: and let this work be never so
civil and seemly, yea let it be never so good in the matter, yet is it evil
in respect of the worker. 4. Those that regard not the light while it abides,
bringing life and immortality unto light by the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.10. Coloss.
1.12.
and making thee inheritance of the Saints in light. Lastly, the freedom of
this gift to such wretched and ungodly persons strongly persuades, that we
should as freely offer our selves to the light, as it freely offers it self
unto us. The which reason is express in the text, which says, that this grace
offered it self, and appeared, when men sought it not, desired it not,
obtained it not by entreatie, or otherwise. So Ioh. 3.19. the light is come
into the world, namely, the world not expecting it, nor wishing it, nay when it
shone gloriously upon them, they not acknowledging it; and this is not the
least motive to the willing and thankful entertainment of it.

Notwithstanding all which reasons, Many refuse the light.
what a just damnation hangs over many men's heads, who still love darkness
rather then light. For, 1. a number please themselves in their natural estate,
find sufficient ^ontent

2. Others turn against it, and hate it, and the candlestickes too which

3. Others are not so malicious against the light, but would feign join light
and darkness together: they would be professors, and go for that the Arc and
Dagon will not stand together; and that they are either in Goshen or Egypt;
beware of thrusting this earth between this sun and themselves; for such an
eclipse portendeth great ensuing evils.

4. Another sort would feign walk in this light, but would be loath to



A third Use might here be fitly followed, against those who still accuse the
Scriptures of obscurity, now when the veil is gone, and the light is
gloriously shining: and thence frame a consequent, more impious and absurd,
then the premises, namely, that therefore they must not be meddled withal of
common people, but only by the Popes licentiates; against whom I only affirm,
that they as yet never saw the express face of Christ in the Gospel; and that
when all vailes and shadows continued vnremooued, it was not lawful for any
Jew thus to reason.

And teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,] This doctrine of
the Gospel is a schoolmaster, and full of instruction, wherein it differs
not from the law; for even that also teaches the denial of ungodliness, and
a sober, righteous, and godly life. Quest. What need the Gospel then teach
over the same thing again? Answ. Because though they teach these same things,
yet they differ in the manner of teaching. For 1. the law can teach, and
command them only; but the Gospel by sanctifying and inspiring a new life into
believers, gives them with the commandment, Ier. 31.33*
a power to obey it, which the law could never do; which power, if it went not
with the Gospel in believers, all the commandments of the law for performance
were but in vain, and more vainly repeated in the Gospel. 2. The Gospel
persuades to bring that power into act, by such an argument as the law never
knew; namely, from the great price that was paid for sin, even the blood of
that immaculate lamb, wherewith we are washed: which to count profane, or to
tread it under our feet, were horrible impiety, yea much more fearful, then
to transgress that law, which was confirmed with the blood of bulls and goats;
and yet if a man willingly transgressed against that law, there was no
sacrifice for that sin. And this manner of persuasion the Apostle here uses,
in saying, Heb. 10.26.
that the doctrine of grace which brings salvation, teaches us.

Doct. 1. In that the Gospel is a teacher, The Gospel a schoolmaster as well
as the law.
note that it is a schoolmaster of manners as well as the law. So soon as any
were converted by Christ himself, or his Apostles, they were presently called
Disciples, for thenceforth they depended on his or their mouths for direction
and instruction. And such as give up their names to Christ, must not look to
be lawles, for they come to take a yoke upon them, and to learn of him, yea
they are bound to fulfill the law of Christ: Gal. 6.2.
called Ioh. 13.34. a new commandment: so that Christians must still under
command: neither would Christ by any other touchstone, try the love of a
professor toward himself, then by keeping and obeying his word.

Use. 1. This doctrine meets with that slander of the Popish Church, whereby
they accuse our doctrine of licentiousness, and affirm, that we teach that a
justified person is freed from all keeping of the law: that all the law is
fulfilled in believing: that there is no sin, but unbelief: and that nothing
but faith is commanded in the Gospel: as for other things they are indifferent,
not commanded, nor forbidden. All which, with many more to this purpose, be
there own words, Council. Tri^. sess. 6. cap. 16. can. 19.20.
whereby according to the ancient cunning of Satan, they would bring in
disgrace with simple people the truth of doctrine, concerning our free and full
justification in the sight of God through faith, without the works of the law:
as though this doctrine were a destroier of the law. Whereto we answer, with
the Apostle, Romans 3.31. Do we through faith destroy the law? God forbid: yea
we establish the law. For although the regenerate be not under the law, in
regard of 1. justification, 2. accusation, 3. coaction, 4. condemnation; yet
are they under it in regard of direction, instruction, and obedience, so as it
is not yet destroyed: nay, it is established by the Gospel, 1. by apprehending
Christ's righteousness for the perfect obedience unto it, and fulfulling of it
by our surety: 2. by our own inchoate obedience unto it, which by means of
the Gospel, being a quickening spirit, we are enabled unto, and by the same is
also made acceptable and pleasing unto God, through his Christ.

Use. 2. Many a loose Christian can well endure to hear, that the doctrine of
grace brings salvation, The wisdom of God has joined salvation and
instruction together: man's fully would disioyne them.
and the brighter it shines to this purpose, the better: but oh, that the
Apostle had stayed there, and not come to teach them their duty, for they are
slow of heart to believe, and dull to learn. Let a man come and offer
salvation, and preach promises: who will not pin himself on such a man's
sleeue? but let him teach the same men their duties, and the way to become
partakers of these promises, and they will fall off as fast, Ioh. 6.6.
or faster then they did from Christ, when he asked his own Disciples, if they
also would go away.

But in great wisdom has the Lord happily joined these two together,
salvation and instruction, to show that he that has no care for the latter,
has no part in the former: grace brings salvation to none but to the
scholars of Christ's school; it is then no matter to thee that grace has
appeared, nor any benefit to thee that it brings salvation, unless thou be
also instructed by it in the lessons following. Do thou become docible as a
child, (...).
for so the word implies: yea as an obedient child fashion thy self and
suffer thy self to be molded into the obedience of it, or else in vain
expectest thou salvation by this doctrine: never dare to divorce the things
which God has coupled.

Be willing to enter into this school wherein salvation is offered to allure us.
Secondly, out of the manner of persuasion to yield an obedient ear to the
Gospel, namely, because it brings salvation: we learn what is a notable
means both to repress any temptation or stirring lust, by which we might be
ouercaried unto evil; as also a prick and motive to provoke our selves
forward unto good, namely, to consider of Gods goodness toward us, and what
he has done for us. This argument is frequent in the Scriptures: see 1. Pet.
1.17.18. If you call him father, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear:
knowing that you were redeemed, etc. And the reason is of great force, for
gifts and good turns have great power to hold men's hearts to the bestower, that
a man is scarce his own but as the borrower is a servant to the lender, so
much more does the giver bind the receiver; but if the gift be no trifle, but
of great price and necessary use, the receiver is much more straightly bound
then before. Prove. 17.8.
Solomon says, that a gift prospers where ever it goes, noting the great
power that gifts have to sway the heart to good or evil, and this latter so
effectually, as they can make a man who has eyes of his own, to shut them up
and see with other men's, yea and force even wise men to pervert judgment.
Joseph when he wrastled with the wicked attempt of his impudent mistress, how
did he fortify himself against such a shamlesse motion? he considered that
his Master had committed all into his hand, and advanced him above all in the
house, save his Mistrisse: how should I then (says he) commit a fact of such
indignity against him; for besides the wickedness of it against God,
shamelessnes it self would be ashamed of it. And as he was withdrawn from
this sin, so by the same motive would the Apostle draw on every Christian to
the performance of every Christian duty: for having disputed of free
justification by faith, and showed both from what estate, and unto what
condition believers were brought; he lays this for a ground to build his
exhortation unto holy life, Romans 12.1. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of
God even by these mercies of God, be persuaded to g^ue up your bodies a living,
holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God, and fashion not your selves like unto
this world.

Use. In any temptation unto sin, say to thy self as Joseph: what was I a
bondsman before I came to my master? nay, was I under damnation before, as the
bringing of salvation implies? was I without God, without Christ, held under
chains of darkness? was sentence passed against me not to die on a gibbet,
but to be held under everlasting death with the damned? has the Lord by the
word of his grace given me a free pardon, and delivered me from all this
woeful estate? Oh how can I do this wickedness against such a master? against my
God, who has not only freed me from my misery, but advanced me to such
dignity, as no man is in the house above me: and made me not steward only,
but heir with Christ to partake in the same glory with him: Oh I could never
answer such unthankfulness. Would God men in temptations would lay such
considerations to heart, and then could they not be so headlong carried into
the common sins of the age, of swearing, drinking, sabbath breaking,
uncleanness, and such like. Again, if the Lord make any suit unto us, as he
makes many in the ministry of the word, the motions of his spirit, and the
counsels and exhortations of his children; either to call us forward in grace,
or recall us from some sin; here is a strong motive for the good speed of it,
even the laying to our hearts the great things he has done for our souls: he
can command us nothing, but we are sure he has done far more for us: say
then with thy self, oh I was attainted of high treason against God the King of
glory, cast and condemned by the law, my neck was upon the block, and the
streak of death was even a giving: and then did this great King send me a most
unexpected, but a most welcome pardon; he has put away my offense, abolished
the stain of it, and restored me by act of parliament kept in heaven to my
blood: nay more, advanced me to an honorable office near himself, that none
is in greater grace then I am: shall this King now command me any thing that
shall seem burdensome? can he command any thing so soon, but I must needs
call to mind such free grace formerly bestowed? Nay, does he enjoin me but
some small piece of service for mine own good, and urge me thereto with the
remembrance of his former grace toward me? Oh what an unthankful creature
were I, if so equal a suit should not prevail with me, but go unrespected.
In a word, let us be glad of such a gentle schoolmaster, which inuiteth us by
such allurements, which if they be not of force to move, and prevail with
men, there remains nothing but that the terrors and curses of the law return
again upon them, and these shall school and tame them well enough.

Now we come to the former of the lessons which grace teaches, namely to
deny, 1. ungodliness, 2. worldly lusts. By ungodliness is meant properly every
transgression of the first table, namely, all irreligion and open despite of
God and his ordinances; all negligent also and deceitful serving of him: an
inbred and mother sin, having so many sins sucking upon her, as there are
ways whereby any or all the four first commandments are transgressed. Genesis
20.11.
And more indirectly the sins of the second table are included, so far as
they proceed from the neglect of the former.

By worldly lusts are meant two things. 1. the lust of unlawful things, which
tend to our own hurt, or our neighbors, in body, goods, name, etc. 2. the
unlawful or immoderate lust of things lawful, which are brought to three
heads. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
1. The lust of the flesh, that is, desire to live softly, to fare daintely and
deliciously every day, and that the soul may take the ease; and much more the
fruits of these, as unchaste desires, lustful and rouing affections, and looks;
loose and unclean words and practices. 2. Lust of the eyes, the covetous and
craving eye, the evil eye, which can see nothing but it wishes it: the
excessive seeking and holding of earthly things, immoderate desire of riches.
Achan will have the cursed Babylonish wedge and garment; and Ahab will fall
sick on his bed for Naboths vineyard. 3. Pride of life, ambition, thirst after
preferments, state, credit, popularitie, blind self love, contempt of others,
boasting, rash confidence, etc.

All these are called worldly lusts, because 1. they are not of the father, but
of the world, Lusts why called worldly.
that is, either in the best use of these things so affected, because they hold
and detain men so in the employments of this present world, as that they have
no leisure to think seriously of any other, and so can no more taste the
sweetness, or frame themselves to an heavenly life, then the brute beast can
live the life of an Angel.

These must be denied, that is, when temptation by Satan, the world, or our
own corrupt flesh will be still egging and urging, yea soliciting and
provoking with much instance to evil: as, thou see others do thus and thus:
or else pity thy self, favor thy self, enjoy this pleasure, it is twilight,
or darkness covers thee; here must be as instant denialls and refusalls, as
it was with Joseph, so must it be with every Christian: albeit his mistress
spoke to him day by day, yet he harkened not unto her, but kept him out of her
company, and when she offered violence to him, he fled out from her. But by whom
must these be denied? Genesis 39.12.
Answ. The doctrine of grace teaches us, says the Apostle, even the most
godly, Paul himself, who after many years conversion shall find the law of
his members rebelling against the law of his mind; he that has received most
grace, and most strength, must be here further instructed.

Lastly, the Apostle speaking indefinitely, shows that all these must be
denied, no ungodliness, no one lust excepted. For grace will not stand with the
cherishing of any lust, though never so secret, neither is he taught of God,
that lives and tradeth in any sin. Object. But this is an impossible
commandment, and as impossible a doctrine as any the law gives. Is the Gospel
become so severe a schoolmaster, as the law is? Ans. The doctrine of grace
teaches not what we can do, but what we are bound to, and ought to do. 2.
Though corrupt nature make such commandments impossible, yet by grace the
yoke of Christ becomes easy and light; in so much as Paul could do all
things by his grace that strengthened him. Grace can crucify the world to a
Christian, and a Christian unto the world. 3. In believers whom grace has
taught, there is a possibility in the commandment three ways. In believers
the commandment is possible 3. ways.


1. In regard of grace received, the nature of which is, even then when it is
foiled to preserve some resistance and denial in the heart of the things which
the flesh has unlawfully yielded unto; so as the godly sin things they would
not, yea even that evil which they hate. Romans 7.15.


Secondly, in regard of a godly man's disposition, who has with him, 1. I have
determined to keep thy words: and ver. 107. I have sworn, and will perform
to keep thy righteous judgments: so as they are in the sin they do as a
forced woman, whose whole will is never gained to the act she is in. 3. an
endeavor answerable to that will; Paul's endeavor was to keep a good
conscience before God and all Act. 24.16.
Psalm. 119.6. I shall not be confounded when I have respect to all thy
commandments. Indeed the believer is like a prisoner with bolts on his
heels, who having escaped the prison, cannot fly his danger as fast as he
would, cannot deny what he would, but yet some progress he makes; slowly he
goes forward, but as fast as he can, according to the not to sin, both in
that he commits not sin fully, the seed being in him: as also because it is
against his purpose, will, endeavor: besides that, he lies not in his sin,
and so sins not unto death.

Thirdly, there is a possibility in this doctrine in regard of Gods
acceptance; who in his Christ accepts of our weak endeavors, of the will
for the deed, and the truth of desire for perfection of action, and so makes
us more then conquerours. In all which points we see, how these are not
impossible lessons to believers; but no marvel if they be impossible to such
as never endeavor in them, whose liberty grace has not yet wrought, who for
their purpose imagine evil; for their wills rebel against God; for their
endeavor, they set themselves on a way that is not good; and in whose eyes
sin committed, is but a small thing. So much of the meaning, now follow the
doctrines.

Doctr. 1. Whosoever has truly received the grace of God, is taught thereby
to deny all ungodliness: Grace truly received has taught to deny all
ungodliness.
and whereas ungodliness seeks both to fix deep roots in the heart, as
also to display the branches abroad in the life; grace teaches to strive two
ways against it. 1. in purging the heart. 2. in striking off the arms, which
are (as we say) above ground, so as neither root nor branch is spared.

The first thing that grace attempteth, is to make the inside clean, and the
root holy, by working true and saving faith in the soul, the property of
which is, to purify the heart. Now as for the branches of ungodliness,
because they are very many, it shall not be amiss to enquire into some of the
principal, to the end we may the better acknowledge the work of Gods grace
expressing the same in us. And as they look and stretch many ways, so may we
reduce them to four heads. 1. some respect God himself. 2. some his worship.
3. some his ordinances. 4. some a man's own self. Ungodliness branched into 4.
heads.


The first branch of ungodliness is, to be ignorant of God, not to see
afflictions, and events. This is made a property of ungodly men by Jude 4.
ungodly men they are who deny God: and by Job, they say who is the almghtie
that we should serve him? Tush, the Lord sees not, he is within the thick
clouds; they ask what profit there is in serving the Lord, and walking humbly
before him: they see no danger in not attending him, but violently follow
their own lusts; this day is as yesterday, Malac. 3.14.
and to morrow shall be as this day: they can taste liberally of his blessings,
but never a whit of his good will in them: they dwell in the sweetness of
present profits and delights, but never taste how sweet God himself is. In
afflictions they in their hearts can say with Iehoram, Is not this evil from
the Lord, and shall I attend any longer upon him? Thus in the land of mercy
and righteousness to do wickedly, in the midst of blessings not to find the
heart more bound to holiness, not to be confirmed in Gods love, to gather no
strength of faith, nor desire to walk more worthy of God: as likewise to
refuse the rods of the Almighty, and not to bow or be humbled under his
hand, are high points of Atheism and ungodliness, the which although grace
teaches to deny; yet how many ignorant persons living under grace, in their
hearts and lives say there is no God? yea how many that profess this grace,
think themselves at the best ease in their neasts, when God and godliness is
furthest from them? that is their heaven, and then can they enjoy their
sinful pleasures most remorslesly, though dear shall they buy them: O how
unwelcome is a thought or sauourie speech of God to such persons? and in their
afflictions how many professed Christians fly as far from God, as hell it
self, to diabolical means, unto witches and sorcerers; because as Saul
complained, God answers them not? and yet many more with Asa, dwell in the
natural means, and seldom look any higher.

2. Another branch of ungodliness respects Gods worship, and has two
members. 1. To cast off the worship of God, either in public at the house of
God: or in private, in their own houses: whereby men after a sort banish
themselves from the presence of God, and with Caine cast themselves out from
the face of God; and herein they highly sin, whom conscience compels not
to come in, but law, custom, or imitation of others: as also those that lie
under their pretenses to justify the withdrawing of themselves: whether more
simple, who say that every man's good meaning is his good service of God: or
more froward, who say they can serve God as well on their horsebackes, as in
the Church; and what can they learn more there then they know? etc.

2. Ordinarily to join in Gods public worship, and not seldom at home in the
family; but yet with hearts full of guile and hypocrisy, when men approach
with their lips, but their hearts regard wickedness, and nourish
ungodliness: such as the Prophet speaks of, which sanctify themselves, Isa*
66.17
and yet in the garden behind a tree eat swines flesh, and mise, and such
abomination. Now although grace (which never contenteth it self with the
form of godliness, but works the power) teaches the denial of all this;
yet how many trewants have entered into this school, and lived under the Gospel
a long time, and yet the love of the world, the pursuing of the honors,
profits, and pleasures of it, has banished all the care of Gods true service
in them? so as howsoever many in some blind and sinister respect or other, can
come to hear Jeremy speaking from the Lord, and for the present delight in
that which is spoken; yet their hearts go after their covetousness: or some
other ungodliness has taken up their thoughts and affections, that the word
cannot sink into their souls; which is the lamentable condition of infinite
Christians, who are all pronounced ungodly persons, notwithstanding all their
profession.

1. in thoughts.
against which many notable parts of impiety break from a number of men. As,
1. Inwardly to conceive that either God speaks not in and by us; but that we
speak of our own heads besides the book; which were it not a general
received opinion amongst men, certainly they could not, they durst not show
themselves so careless, so vnreuerent and retchles in hearing, as most men do.
For I avouch, never did any of the heathen receive the oracles of their reputed
gods (devils indeed) so heavily and drowsely, as Christians do the oracles of
God. Or that we speak by instigation of others, as Jeremy was accused: or
else at the worst, Ier. 43.3.
if we do speak from God, that they shall struggle well enough, so as our
word shall not be true against them: let the sword pass through the land, yet
they shall sit safe enough. But what an height of ungodliness this is, we may
see by the curse and punishment of it, Reu. 21.19. whosoever shall diminish any
thing from the truth contained in the book of God, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life: and yet to this height either a number are come, or
else the Apostle Peter mistook his aim, who prophesied that in the last days
such mockers should come, 2. Pet. 3.1.
which should say, where is the promise of his coming? etc. imitating herein
those mockers in Ieremies time, who said, where is the word of the Lord? let it
come now.

2. in speeches.
2. Some go further, whose atheism carries them to blaspheme the word, and
according to the abundance of the wickedness of their hearts, their mouths
often speak. Some say plainly, that it is no matter to go to sermons, but to
hear divine service; some that there is too much preaching, and vision is too
frequent; others come not, because they can follow them no better, fearing
least by sitting by a fire they should grow colder: or more hungry by eating
their fill. Others live as honestly without sermons, as those that run
fastest after them: others can pretend warrant for any ungodliness, but can find
no warrant in the word to come to a sermon on the week day. What is all this
now but to show the brand set upon the wicked, who say to God, depart from
us, Job 21.14.
or we will depart from thee, for we have no desire to know thy ways.

3. Carelessly to reject the word in life, and run on a head without direction
of the word, 3. in conversation.
either according to the lusts of a man's own heart, or the fashion of others,
is a manifest note of ungodliness: for if it be a note of a godly man, not to
walk in the counsel of the ungodly, then must he needs be an ungodly person,
who leaving the counsel of the word, follows the wicked direction of himself
or others: and yet among Christians, what an intolerable yoke is it thought,
to be bound to call to examination by the word, the special duties and actions
of their callings and life? and a number are in such a gall of bitterness, that
having heard the word convincing, and overthrowing such and such lusts as not
only live, but reign in them; if they cannot find some shift not to make it
their case directly, they can be as direct as the people to Jeremy to answer,
The word which thou have spoken in the name of the Lord we will not hear it of
thee, Ier. 44.16.
but we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth. We have vowed to do
thus and thus. So men have vowed to their own lusts and ways, and will be as
good as their words. But grace has not taught any such, who have not denied
such ungodliness.

The fourth branch of ungodliness, respecting the ways of the ungodly

2. In not sanctifying the things they attempt or use, by the word and wealth,
authority, marriages; no not more holy things when they seem to draw nearer
to God; not their hearing, reading, receiving Sacraments, conference, etc. but
use all these without God: so as their callings make them worldly or worse;
their meat dull or wanton; their apparel proud; their wealth hard hearted;
their buildings high minded; their marriage unclean: and the holy things they
so profanely handle, make them either despisers or scoffers, or profane, or
unprofitable; but all is turned to sin unto them. They see a general
government and providence of things, and so neglect particular prayer; or are
without experience of the benefit of prayer, and of Gods love in answering,
Psalm. 14.4.
and so they call not upon God.

3. In running on in a desperate security, never calling his ways to
remembrance; I hearkened, and heard (says the Lord) none spoke aright, none
repented of his wicked ways, no man said, what have I done, every one turns
to his race as the horse to the battle. All these are the vile fruits of
ungodliness, the which grace teaches to deny: the which where they appear
(as they are there most, where they are least seen and resisted) such a person
may evidently see how little good he has learned by the Gospel; that
notwithstanding all the clearenes and evidence of it, he has not entered the
practice of the first precept of it, which is the denial of ungodliness.

The second thing which we must learn to deny, if we will have our parts in
the doctrine of grace, is worldly lusts. Rightly joined to the former, 1.
Because they are so near a kin to ungodliness, as until these supporters be
removed, it cannot but stand in full strength. For these lusts draw down the
heart and affections from the God of heaven, and set them on some things below,
which become their gods. Thus the covetous man is an idolator, his wealth is
his god: the Epicure makes his belly his God: the voluptuous person, is a
lover of his pleasure more then of God; and the men of the world, have the god
of the world for their god. 2. These are added as a touchstone of the former:
for if a man once begin to deny ungodliness, these lusts will down of
themselves. If God be once become the portion of a man, these lusts may
sometime tickle him, but cannot gain the heart to the service of them, as
before. Neither can any man think that he has denied ungodliness, who can
still be subdued under his lusts, as under a law.

Doctr. 2. Though many things solicit for these lusts, either of things
unlawful, or lawful things unlawfully, Whatsoever shall plea^ for the
entertainment of lusts, a Christian must resolutely deny them all.
yet a Christian man must still stand out in the denial of them. Nature,
custom, example, are ever carrying us to the worst desires: yea even after
grace received, the best find not the least molestation by them; but yet the
Gospel admits not any savor or taste of outward things above it self, and
the righteousness of the kingdom: Romans 13.14. If Christ be put on, there
fulfill the lusts of the flesh: the Apostle denies not a moderate care, to
nourish, refresh, and provide for the body; but implies that if Christ be
once received in the Gospel, he so fills and takes up the heart, that little
room is left for such unwelcome g^ests. And 2. this is the recompense which
the Lord expects, that we Great and precious promises are made unto us, but
upon condition, that we become partakers of the divine nature, and flee the
corruptions that are in the world through lust. Romans 13.11. Our salvation is
nearer then when we first believed: We must therefore rise from sleep, cast
off the works of darkness, walk honestly as in the day.

Use. Would thou know thy self, or manifest unto others, No way can
profiting in grace be better showed, then by this resistance.
that thou art taught to salvation, thou can no way so well do it, as by
this prevailing against thy lusts, such as are wantonness, ambition, anger,
covetousness, pride, idleness, etc. Exercise thy self therefore in this
contention: And the rather, 1. because thou have renounced them by solemn vow
before God, and his people, in thy baptism; the truth of We are by baptism
buried into Christ's death: thy baptism then is an instrument, not only of thy
death with Christ, which is the killing of sin; but also of thy burial with
him, which is a perpetual mortification or abiding under that death: for so is
burial.

2. The faithful acknowledge themselves strangers here in this world: as
strangers and pilgrims, Heb. 11.13. 1. Pet. 2.11.
to abstain from fleshly lusts: Christians are travelers, which seek a
country and a city to come, and it were no wisdom for them, to entermeddle
with the affairs of the country, through which they only are to pass; but as
citizens of heaven, send up their hearts desires thither where they profess
that there treasure is. The which lesson our Savior teaches, when he says,
that after all these things below the Gentiles seek, but seek ye the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it: and the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.2.
makes it a property of the godly, to sigh to be clothed upon with their house
from heaven, which is worth all our longing and labor: for howsoever we are
here clothed with a ragged and weather beaten garment of corruption, and all
these outward things, after which men so thirst and lust, cannot long uphold
it; yet hereafter we shall be clothed upon with one garment upon another,
namely, both the garment of Christ's righteousness, and the garment of
immortality and glory. But pitiful it is to see, how the thirst of the world
in most, has eaten out these longing desires; and that a number wish no other
heaven, then that they enjoy upon the earth; and can scarsely endure to hear
of any exchange.

We had in time past our conversation among the Gentiles, in the lusts of the
flesh -- but now, etc. which let such professors think off, who frame
themselves too much to the fashion of the world, in meat, drink, apparel,
sports, and other things, perhaps more unlawful then these. For thus to
walk, argues little or no conscience or feeling either of sin or grace; Romans
13.11.
and the gentlest name the Apostle gives it, is a sleepie walking. Such may
indeed carry the title of Christians, but the work of Christianity is not
present where there is a fight of lusts against the soul, but not of the
spirit against lusts; and much less where these furnaces are fed and fewelled,
and the flames are not daily dying and extinguished.

Use. 2. This teaches, that only true religion teaches true mortification,
(...)
and suffers not a man to walk after his lusts, though he walk in the
flesh, yet he cannot walk after the flesh. All false religions carry indeed
pretenses of the spirit, as Zidkiah smote Michaiah, and said, when went the
spirit from me to thee? 1. king. 22.24.
but the true religion only has the promise and presence of the spirit, which
indeed mortifieth the deeds of the flesh. Romans 8.13. Only our religion
teaches true mortification. 2. king 5.12.
Every water in Judea could not heal the lame, but only the water of the poole
of Bethesdah in which the Angel stirred; Arbanah and Pharphar the rivers of
Damascus (although in show much more excellent then Jordan) cannot cure the
leprosy of Naaman: No more can every religion, or any but this which alone is
from God, cure the uncleanness and leprosy of our souls. The religion of the
Pharisees was outwardly exceeding glorious, and very strict; yet Paul (who had
lived according to the most strict sect of them all) professes that before he
knew Christ, Gal. 6 14.
he was not crucified to the world. At this day Popery which carries with it a
great show of humblenes of mind, and bea^ing down the body, yet is far from
teaching true mortification: for what doctrine (the Turkish not excepted) goes
further in clayming justification and life, as the merit of their own
obseruances? yea take the strictest sort of them, as their heremites,
anchorites, etc. that go barefoote, pine and imprison themselves, lie on the
ground, cover their skins with sack cloth, etc. are they not such as the
former, looking for heaven as a reward for the strictness of their lives?
Plato of Diogenes.
do they not then (as one Philosopher said of an other) contemn the pride of
the world, but with more pride? Every show of humility is not true
mortification, for not only the Epicures who were sold over to pleasure, were
enemies to Paul, but those strait and severe sects also of the Pythagorians and
the Stoics did mightily oppose him. In a word, Act. 17.18.
among what sort of men does the lusts of pride, uncleanness, Epicurisme, and
covetousness more reign, then in the teachers of that doctrine, their Monks,
Prelacie, Cardinals, and their father the Pope himself? so as the truth is
clear, that only true religion in which the spirit delights to manifest
himself, is the teacher of true mortification.

And that we should live soberly,] Now we are come to the second lesson which
the doctrine of grace teaches, namely, that such as entertain it should lead
their lives in the practice of three virtues, contrary to the former vices of
ungodliness and worldly lusts: the which as they are directed either against
God, or our brethren, or our selves, so the first of these provides against
the disordered carriage of our selves, in requiring sobriety: the second
cutteth off hateful and uncharitable lusts against our brethren: in requiring
justice or right dealing man with man, Christian with Christian especially: the
third represseth impious and ungodly lusts, more directly against God himself,
in requiring godliness to shine out in the lives of professors. For all these
three must be practiced in the due circumstance of time, even in this present
world.

Doctr. 1. Doctrine of grace teaches not only to abstain from evil, but do
good.
The doctrine of grace teaches not only to abstain from evil, but also to
do good; and is the mistress of true sanctification in both the parts of it,
both the mortification of sin, as also quickening in righteousness. For as it
is in the lightning of a dark house, first darkness must give place, and
light must succeed, so is it in the shining of this light of grace, the night
must pass, and then the day must come; the old man must be cast off with his
lusts, and then the new man put on. Ephesians. 4.
That the Gospel is the teacher of both these, it appears in the end of
Paul's conversion; who for this purpose was appointed a minister of the things
he had heard and seen, and sent to the Gentiles, that he might turn them from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan unto God: and also in the whole scope of his
doctrine and ministry, from the first to the last, as himself professes,
verse. 20.
that when he taught first at Damascus, then at Jerusalem, after through all
the coasts of Judea, and then to all the Gentiles, he reduced all his doctrine
in all these places to these two heads, namely, that they should repent and
turn to God, and then do works worthy amendment of life. Hence is it that
his Epistles are full of such exhortations as these; cast off lying, and speak
truth every man to his neighbor, walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit: Be not drunk with wine, but be fulfilled with the spirit. The same is
to be noted also in the other Apostles, 1. Pet. 2.12. I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts; and have your conversation
honest among the Gentiles: and cap. 4.2. henceforth so much time as remains
in the flesh, we should live not after the lusts of men, but after the will of
God.

Use. 1. This doctrine confuteth profane Libertines, who as Paul speaks of
some in his time, because grace has abounded, continue in sin, they will be
saved by such a grace as quitteth them from all holy life, and conscionable
obedience. God is merciful, and Christ died for all, here is grace, but the
fruit and effect of it is to cleave unto ungodliness and lusts, and grow
every day more foul and deformed then other. Whereas the wisdom from above
is pure, and as he that calls is holy, so must he that is called be holy also
in all manner of conversation: and if we call him father, we must pass the time
of our dwelling in fear. The dogs shall be without, when as only the
undefiled in their ways shall obtain blessedness.

2. Such are justly hence reproved, who take themselves to be tolerable
scholars, if sometimes they make show of obedience unto God and his word,
that they may appear to men, to pray, to hear, to read, to give alms, etc.
and yet have not resolved to renounce all ungodliness, and lusts; whereas this
doctrine that brings salvation, washes not the outside only, nor begins
at a wrong end, but observes this method, first deny all ungodliness be it
never so inward, and then outwardly to reform the life.

3. Whereas many a man thinks himself soundly taught in Christianity, if he
can live inoffensiuely, do no man wrong, be reputed a good Churchman, and a
quiet neighbor, and so live out of the gunshot of the law; let such know,
that although this seem to be good country divinity, yet may a man attain
all this without one spark of this grace which brings salvation: for be it
thou be never so harmeles, that thou fear no man's impeachment, yet if
thou be not a servant of righteousness, thou never knew the teaching of
this grace, which delivers men into the form of it self: Romans 6.17,
mean thou never so well, live never so innocently; yet if thou seruest not
God in thy spirit both in public and priua^e; if thou releeuest not the
Saints, and draw on others to God and godly practices, thou art never a whit
nearer heaven; for that is a lame and halting holiness which has taught only to
abstain from evil, and traineth not up in the doing of that which is good. Let
here an indifferent man judge, whether that assertion of the Papists be true,
when they say, that our doctrine destroys good works; whereas it imposes
them upon such penalty, that he that has them not to show, has nothing to
do with the grace which brings salvation.

4. All that profess the Gospel must thus reason from their present condition;
We live under the Gospel, and may not converse profanely in the world after the
guise of the world; we live under the light, and the night is past unto us, we
may not therefore live in darkness, but walk as in the light, and as
children of the day. Of which kind of reasoning we want not example and
president in the Scriptures, Romans 6.14. ye are not under the law, but under
grace: Let not sin therefore reign: Heb. 12.16. Let there be none profane as
Esau, why? for ye are not come to the mount: that is, ye are not under the law,
where is nothing but a loud voice terrible and dreadful, but ye are called to
a still voice of Christ, and his Apostles, to news of joy and gladness, etc. So
say with thy self; What, shall I wast out my time in intemperance, in
unsavory meriments, or gaming? shall filthy, false, or swearing words be
heard proceeding out of my mouth? shall injustice, oppression, usury, etc. be
found with me? oh the Gospel which I profess, teaches me other things. I am
no scholar in this school, though I have never so often entered into it, if
any of these things, or of this quality stick by me.

Secondly, The Gospel brings salvation, but looks for an answerable return
and recompense.
note that where the Gospel brings to any person salvation, there it looks
for return of some recompense, and namely this, that it be enterteined with
sobriety, righteousness, and godliness, which are the three graces which go
hand in hand, and every one looking at another. Sobriety keeps the own
house, and moderateth the mind at home; Righteousness looks forth, and
gives every man his due abroad; Piety looks up unto God, and gives him his
right. Sobriety preserves, and is content with it own estate and portion.
Righteousness preserves, and is content that other men enjoy their estate and
portion. Piety preserves, and is willing that Gods part be reserved unto him.
Again, sobriety must go before as a nurse of the other two; for he that
deals not soberly, cannot deal justly, but depriueth the Church, the common
wealth, and family of their due. Righteousness without godliness is but
Atheism, and a bewtifull abomination; and piety without righteousness, is
but hypocrisy: for how absurd is it to be precise with man, and careless how
wickedly we deal with God? Now as sobriety the first is the nurce of the two
latter, so piety the last is the mother of the two former, which where it is
wanting, neither of the former, nor both of them can commend a man unto God.
Therefore none of these three aduerbs of Paul (as a learned writer speaks)
must be forgotten, which jointly contain all the rules of Christian life.

^ The proper work of sobriety.
In each of th^se we will observe two points. First, the proper work. Secondly,
the rules of practice. And first of Sobriety. The proper work of it, is to
moderate the mind* and contain it in due compass, both in all the affections
of the soul, and the actions of life which it turns it self unto, 1. in
things inward.
as may appear, 1. In things inward* and 2. outward. First, in the inward
gifts of the mind, it teaches three things. 1. To be have only a show of
wisdom, Coloss. 2.23.
but such measure of the gift of Christ, it acknowledges with thankfulness,
but arrogateth not that which it has not; for this were to run over the
measure, and Christ gives no such gift which is not in the measure of it. Of
this sobriety we have a singular president in the Apostles themselves: 2. Cor.
10.13.14. We rejoice not in things without our measure -- nor stretch our
selves beyond our measure, nor boast of things without our measure. 1. Cor. 4.^.
seeing it self has nothing but what it has received: it enuieth not those
whom God has made superiors, seeing the wisdom from above, Iam. 3.17.
is pure, peaceable, not judging, not advancing.

2. In outward things, it is a moderator, as may appear in things concerning
1. a man's calling. 2. in outward.
2. his estate. 3. pleasures and delights. 4. calling, but not as a drudge unto
it: it will not suffer the heart, to be oppressed with the cares of this life,
Luke 21.34.
no more then with surfeiting and drunkenness: it curbeth the unquiet desire of
increasing wealth, and so both gives freedom to the duties of the general
calling, and fenceth from being too much wrapped Secondly, in his estate, this
virtue of sobriety setleth a man in a quiet comfort and contentment, for it
teaches to want, and to abound, and puts into a man's hand the benefit of
contentation in all estates. Hence if want come, he that was rich, Iam. 1.^.
can rejoice in being made low: as well as the brother of low degree, in that
he is exalted; he is taught to be empty as well as full, and that sickness,
losses, crosses, (if present) are the best estate for him. Again, if
prosperous estate befall him, and the world come upon him, this prosperity
puffs not him up, but he can use the world as not using it: this excellent
grace hedgeth his heart, and suffers it not to be unlimited in the greedy
desires of these things, nor to seek hasty riches, nor to be too fast in
holding them when he has them; it confineth his cares within the day; and if
the Lord keep Mannah sweet but for the day, he is well contented, yea
heartily thankful.

Thirdly, in the pleasures and delights of this life, wherein a number say of
laughter, thou art madness, and to joy, what do thou? If upon occasion a
man give his flesh to wine, it preuenteth least the pleasure of it, make him
sensual and brutish, Eccles. 2.1.
and draw the heart from heavenly desires and heats: it suffers not a man to
power out his heart to pleasure, nor to become a lover of pleasure more then of
God; but to rejoice as not rejoicing, yea with trembling.

Fourthly, in things indifferent, as meat, drink, apparel, sleep* buildings,
knife to the throat, looks not at wine in the cup; eats and drinks for
strength, and not for surfeiting and drunkenness; to fit a man unto his
calling, and not to make him more dull or heavy; and that in season: with
watchfulness, and with care of Joseph's afflictions. In apparel it shunneth
pride, lightness, confusion of sexes and degrees, and idleness, and reduces
to comlines, decency, inward decking rather then outward: yea to such attire
as not only becomes holiness, but also agrees with the calling, custom of
the country, example of the grauer sort of our rank, and the right ends of
apparel. In buildings it suffers not to wast the substance in building
Babels, so as a man is unfitted to help forward the building of Sion. It
causes the sleep to be seasonable and moderate, and suffers not to sleep
till he be clothed in rags. In marriage, it holds from being drowned in
carnal delight, so as a man cannot come to the Kings supper, but so moderateth
the affection as though he were free from a wife: and so in other things: 1.
Cor. 7.29.
all which show the admirable excellency of this grace.

Now therefore we will come to the second point, namely, the rules of the
practice of it, and they be three. First, II. Rules of practice.
Deny thy self and thine own wisdom, and give up thy self to Gods teaching
and ordering, subscribing rest in nothing but i^ Gods portion of gifts and good
blessings: in which thou shall be able to say that thy lines are fallen in a
good ground, and that thou have a goodly inheritance, whereas the vanity and
desires of the mind Secondly, know and remember that the end of all thy receipts
is Gods glory in the service of the Church, and if thou have received more
gifts thou must do more service: for so the Apostle reasons, Romans 12.3.4.
taking a comparison from the members of the body, which have not all one
office, but diverse, yet never a one is his own but another; even so says
he, we are one another members: what then must the more honorable members
disdain the inferior ones as having no need of them? No, but this must
receive more service and safety from them: and this is a special
consideration to keep the heart from swelling, and proud conceits.

Thirdly, Labor to use all the good gifts of God. 1. In the right acknowledge
that it is God that teaches, feeds, clotheth thee, provides thy portion for
thee, and maintains thy rents and incomes. Thus shall thou not sacrifice to
thine own net in any thing, nor rejoice in that thine own hand has made thee
inwardly or outwardly rich; neither be so distrustfully provident, as though
thou had no father to provide for thee. 2. In the just measure of their
goodness and excellency,

Now the practice of this virtue in these rules is a fruit of our redemption,
1. Pet. 1.13.14. etc. to the which seeing the Gospel calls us, how ought we
to open our ears, and hearts to entertain this voice. The sons of Ionadab
the son of Recah obeyed their father when he called them to sobriety, they
neither drunk wine, nor built houses, nor planted vineyards, but obeyed their
father in these straight commandments, and for this the Lord blessed them
exceedingly: now the Lord comes not with such a strait charge, not such a
one as strippes us from these comforts of our lives, but only restores the
right and comfortable use of them unto us: and may not he much more say to us
as he did to the Jews; should not you hear my words also? If they obeyed
their earthly father depriving them of the things themselves, ought not we much
more to obey our heavenly father, who prohibiteth not the things, but only the
abuse of them?

Justly,] In this virtue of justice which the Gospel calls for at every
professors hands who looks for salvation by it, we are to consider the two
former points. First, the proper work of it: what that is will appear in this
definition: Justice is a grace of God, 1. The proper work of justice.
whereby we give unto every man that due which God would have us give him.
First, I say it is a grace of God: for in Adam we are all unrighteous and
destitute of the glory of God herein. 2. Whereby we give to man his due, for
there is a justice toward God, for which Job, Zachary, Noah, and such were
commended, but that is very little different from piety, of which we are to
speak: but by this we give man his due. 3. Because it would be shortly known
what is due from man to man, I add, not that which natural reason, or
civility, or man's law will give him, but what God would have us give him.
Wherein it passes all that just dealing which many unregenerate men can
perform and glory in, yea and that also which many of the heathen have been
famous for, seeing this must be a frui^ of the true knowledge of God revealed
in his word, and performed by (...) in the doer. This virtue is the maintainer
of all humane society ^hen no man's body, goods, name, are deprived of their
due, but have all offices of love performed them according to Gods will; when
superiors deal justly with inferiors, and inferiors acknowledge the
superiority of the other in and for God: so masters with servants, equals with
equals, buyers with sellers, and sellers with buyers: which shall suffice to
have noted in general, seeing the particular works of it are infinite.

The second point is the rules of practice, the chief of which are these
four: 2. Rules of practice.
First, that rule of Christ which is the whole law and the Prophets,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye likewise unto and on the
contrary, would not thou then be circumvented, deceived by false waights, or
measures, detracted in thy name, etc. do not thou so to others, the very
light of nature binds this on thee.

Secondly, let no man seek his own things, but the common good rather, every
man for himself, and God for us all; for it is an enemy to all justice, which
binds me to tender my neighbors, yea mine enemies body, goods, name,
coming in my way, as well as mine own; and far different from Paul's rule,
let every man be servant to an other for good. Luke 13.36.


Thirdly, be ready to distribute, and lend freely to the poor, looking which
Gods word has made an other man's due, as in purloyning his right from him. Now
the word commanding to give to the poor according to every ones ability, and
to lend to the poor members of Christ if need require freely; to be hard
hearted, and strait handed in these cases, is to be unjust, in deteyning from
the right owners that which God has made theirs. Let rich men especially
think that they are not Lords, but stewards under the Lord, to distribute to
the necessities of their fellow servants.

Fourthly, walk diligently in thy calling, idleness is an open injustice, and
the idle person should not eat, for he eats and drinks other men's. Beware
here of excessive pastime and recreation, a near friend to idleness, calling a
man out of that calling wherein he is bound to walk diligently through the
six days. Besides, the increase of goods by gaming, is a notable kind of
theft, for it is the increasing of a man's self with the damage and hurt of
others, by such a means as God never sanctified to such purpose: so also he
that decreaseth his wealth thereby, is a stark thief both to himself, as
also to his wife, children, the Church, the poor, whom hereby he robs of
their right. That rule of the Apostle must be remembered as a special means of
righteousness, Let him that stole, Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more, but rather labor that which good is.

Now that we might the better practice these rules, we have sundry motives in
the word of God. Motives to practice these rules.
1. God has appointed his kindness unto us thus to be recompensed, and herein
will have us manifest the estimation right of a father, the widow of an
husband, the blind of eyes, the lame of feet, and so in other callings,
although not so public. 4. Whosoever would have Gods image restored and
renewed upon him, must exercise

And godly,] First, 1. The proper work of piety.
the proper work of piety will appear in this definition. Godliness is a
grace, whereby God is rightly worshipped both inwardly and outwardly. I say,
rightly worshipped, that I might both include the knowledge of the true God, as
he has revealed himself in his word, and faith, love, and a sincere heart; as
also exclude all false worship, either of a false God, or of the true God in a
false manner, whether in Pharisaicall hypocrisy, or Laodicean coldness and
lukewarmenes. I add both inwardly: For, 1. God is a spirit. 2. the inside must
be washed first. 3. all oblations, sacrifices, fasts, alms, vows, are
rejected as abominable without this, Isai. 1.10. And also outwardly: For, 1.
God requires the whole strength. 2. himself has instituted diverse outward
actions of religion, as the hearing of the word, receiving of Sacraments,
prayer, observation of his Sabbaths, wherein we must profess our selves to be
his, and wherein we cannot be wanting without some degree of contempt against
himself. 3. God has created, redeemed, governs, and gives his law to the
whole man, yea to every member how it should be ordered both in his worship,
and out of it also.

The second point is, the rules of practice, 2. Rules of practice.
and the principal are fi^e. 1. Learn to know God as he has revealed
himself in his word; and rejoice more that thou know God showing mercy,
judgment, Ier. 9.23.
and First, by the light of his word. Secondly, First, set thy self often in
his sight, and himself always at thy right hand: let thy heart religiously
think upon him, and his presence: let thy tongue reverently speak of him and
his goodness. Secondly, whatsoever thou do, whether thou eatest or drinkest,
and much more performest the duties of thy calling, to which these are but
servants, do all to his glory: being about any thing, ask thy self, what
glory will redound to God by this speech, or by this action. Thirdly, by every
event make this use to gather still into his fellowship: by every blessing,
gather increase of faith, love, and confidence in him: by every cross, add
unto thy fear, reverence, watchfulness: by every special providence, observe
his admirable wisdom, truth, and goodness: and thus by every thing grow up
in him: these are worthy fruits of piety.



written, whether it be desirous to receive the law at his mouth, whether it
tremble at the word; as also how it subiecteth it self to the will of God
done: whether in prosperity, it lift up it self to be something besides or
without God, and whether in correction, it be silent unto God, because he has
done it. Attend it how ready or heavy it is to lift it self up in prayer for
wants, in praise for supplies: whether it pray always, or in all things give
thanks. Watch over it in thy services that it start not away, and leave thy
worship liueles without spirit, without truth; know that God is a spirit, and
will be served of thee (if aright) as he was of Paul, in thy spirit: and look
well to this matter, for Judas can follow and reverence Christ, and yet his
heart going after covetousness, be practicing to betraie him: and Herod can
pretend to worship, when he intends to kill. Watch it further in the motions to
sin, whether it be zealous and resolute against it, and whether it stick
fast, and with full purpose unto the Lord: whether it fear the least offense
of God; or can swallow smaller sins: whether it bridle the tongue from idle
talk, and smaller oaths; veil the eyes from wanton looks; or whether it can
easily digest such things, which are no small departures from God when occasion
is offered, and know that such is thine heart, as it is found in temptation.
Lastly, watch it in the motions of the spirit, how it entertaineth them; how
stirring it is in the causes of God, as when occasion is offered of promoting
Gods glory in his pure worship, or in the establishing of a conscionable
ministry; how it entertaineth such good motions offered; how it entertaineth
Gods counsels, rebukes, and exhortations in the ministry: a clear case it
is that those that neglect such motions, and much more resist them, are yet in
their sins, and are no better then impious and ungodly persons.

5. In the love of men, join the love of God: for charity abstracted from
piety is a counterfeit: and this thou shall do, when thou love Gal. 6.10.


Use. If these be the practices of piety, which cannot be attained but by
these rules, Many sorts of men bewray the ungodliness of their hearts.
then shall many a one who take themselves to have taken out this last lesson,
be found non-proficients, and such as whom grace never taught any such thing as
godliness. And to omit to speak of wicked Esaus and Ismaels, scoffers of such
as walk in these strait ways of God, tossers of reproaches against them, so
far from that inward and pure worship of the heart in spirit and truth; as
they are open despisers of the outward ordinances of the word and sacraments,
who are furthest from repentance, and very seldom reclaimed; yea so monstrous
and black are these filthy dogs and swine, as they are not more condemned of
others then of themselves for most part. We will leave to wash such bricks, and
come first to our common people, whose extreme and secure ignorance, loads
them with such a burden of impiety, as it is impossible for them ever to
stand under it when Christ shall appear; and yet they think to get to heaven
nimbly enough. For this whole practice of piety, is placed in that which they
call a good meaning, and a good hope: but reply and tell them that grace is
not contented with good meaning, but teaches to live godly, and so brings
piety into the life; they answer, that they could never make any shows as
many men can, but yet they hope they may have as good hearts as the best to
godward. Whereunto if you demand, how that root can be so good, which sends
out such sower fruit; or that fountain sweet which sends out such bitter
water; for in these good hearts ignorance reigns; and the goodness of their
hearts openly neglects the word, Sacraments, etc. the means of salvation, and
preservatives of piety: they can answer, that they keep their Church, and do
as the most do; and if they receive not the sacrament, it is because they are
not reconciled to some that have offended them, under which pretense they can
refuse that comfort for many years together: and carry ye^ the matter further
with them, and tell them your good heart sends out wicked oaths, bitter
curses, and fearful imprecations, then they swear either nothing but the
truth, or by nothing but that which is good, or if they did hap to swear or
curse much, they were urged unto it. And for the sabboath add, that whereas a
good heart makes it a delight to consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord,
neither your self nor yours observe it. They say they do as much as they
need, and they know enough: for they love God above all, and their neighbor as
themselves; and for the sabboath what need such strictness, it was made for
man, and not man for the sabbath: and as for this singing of Psalms, and
reading, and prayers in private houses, they must needs say it is too much
preciseness, and they cannot away with it; and they could never see hurt in
giving their servants and children liberty, to go on the saboath and do what
they list, and themselves may with good company play and pass the time (so it
be not service time) on the sunday, as well as other days. But take all these
pleas out of their mouths, and show particularly that good treasuries would
send out better things, they draw all to this one conclusion* What, we cannot
be Saints here, that is, in plain words, they cannot frame themselves to this
life of piety, and so are still without all the teaching of grace: and
pitiful it is to see, how many persons that think themselves no mean
Protestants, debar themselves from the practice of piety by such ignorant
conclusions as these: which I would not here have reckoned, but that I know
diverse, perhapps of our daily hearers, whom grace has offered to teach
otherwise, thus tainted. Well, a fearful delusion it is, to hope for
salvation in such a dangerous estate.

A second sort, far differing from the former, are such as have attained to
carry with him, that so he might have the benefit of the garden when he is a
great way from it. They can further attain to many good things, as to delight
in good men's fellowship, so did Judas in Christ's communion, gather from them
many common graces of understanding, speech, ability to pray, teach, comfort,
exhort, but all to their own hurt; for either they hide these talents in
napkins, not using them at all, or in using them without humility, abuse them;
yea not seldom making them bolder to offend God, and more careless of duties
unto men, by means of such gifts, then if they had them not: but here is yet
no teaching of grace, and better had it bin such had never known the way of
truth, then thus to depart from the way of righteousness.

A third sort there are, who many of them I doubt not are the Lords,

Let all of us therefore learn that precept, Reasons to (...) to the exercise
of godliness.
1. Tim. 4.7. to exercise our selves to godliness. Reasons. 1. Godliness has
the promise of this life, and that to come: a godly man has title to all good
blessings which heaven and earth can affoard. 2. Godliness is the greatest
gain, the best Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of men
ought ^e to be in all godly conversation, 2. Pet. 3.3. when we shall appear
before the great judge of all the world, nothing but godlynes shall be able to
bestead us.

In this present world.] 1. Note that godliness must not so lie hid in the
heart, but it must appear in the eyes of the world, Godliness must be exercised
in this present world.
neither must it be neglected till death, but exercised in this present world:
a point the more needful to be propounded, in that every man naturally
wishes with Balaam to die well and godly: but forget the practice of piety in
their life time, we see the most men would be put in mind of God at their
death, and send for the minister, when the Physician has left them hopeles of
life, yea albeit they have forgotten the almighty, and neglected acquaintance
with him all their days, yet at the finishing of them, they would seem to
seek unto him. But it is most righteous with God, that an ungodly life be
finished with a proportional death, whatsoever it seems to be: and therefore
it is a safe rule worthy our remembrance, that whatsoever we would be found
doing on our dying day, to be doing it every day while we live.

2. Note hence that it is a most deceitful and desperate argument thus to
conclude; If I be ordained to salvation, let me never pray, never serve God,
and do what I will, I shall be saved: and on the contrary; and hence to cast
off all the care of godliness: for this openly proclaims want of grace,
which directs men to the means, and leads them the way of salvation in
this present world. God in his wisdom has combined to every end his means
in all his ordinary courses, as to natural life, bread, sleep, Physic; so
to the spiritual, the word, Sacraments, prayer, sobriety, righteousness,
piety: and therefore the argument will be sound in the contrary, thus: If God
have appointed me to die the death of the righteous, he has ordained me to the
means, namely, to live the life of the righteous: if to glory, then to grace:
if to the full revelation of glory hereafter, then to the first fruits of it
here in grace: if to the great city of the great king hereafter, then to the
suburbs here: there is no iumping to heaven, no more then a man can leap from
one city to an other upon earth. Natural reason teaches, that there is no
skipping from one extreme to an other without a mean; and much more does
divine wisdom tell us, that no man can climb from earth to heaven without
Christ's the ladder, and faith with the fruits of hope, love, obedience, etc.
which are as it were the staves of the same.

The right end of this present life is to learn the way to a better.
3. Note hence what is the proper end of every man's life in this present
world, namely, that in the way of a sober, righteous, and religious life, he
may attain everlasting happiness hereafter: there is no other time to get
heaven but here upon earth, after death comes nothing but judgment: no other
purgatory is to be expected then that in this life by the blood of Christ,
whatsoever Poets and Papists fable to the contrary: nor is there any other
sactifaction, but by faith here to lay hold upon Christ only oblation. Alas,
how do many pervert the end of their lives, some to get wealth, honor, and
great estates: others to sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play:
others to trade in some one or other special sin and lust: but let us that
will be wise to salvation, seeing it is called to day, and our acceptable time
and day of salvation is come upon us, beware of hardening our hearts: let us
not dare to strive against the holy Ghost in the ministry, for contemners of
grace in this present world, shall never partake of the glory of the just
hereafter: this is the gate of heaven, and the just enter into it, or else this
ministry binds over to death, from which it is impossible ever to be
loosed.

Verse. 13. Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the
mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. In this verse is set down the
second effect of this grace which has appeared, namely, when it has revealed
and published the good things which are reserved for us hereafter, and put them
in our hands by faith and hope; to lift up the heart to the patient and
vigilant waiting for and expectance of them. And in the second place teaches
when the full revelation of these things shall be, namely, in the second which
is the glorious appearing of Christ: who is described, 1. from his majesty and
power, that mighty God: and 2. from his mercy and love, as he is our
Mediator, our Savior Jesus Christ. Wherein our Apostle includes a very
strong argument to enforce all the former duties, of which we have spoken in
the verse going before: as also an effectual means to contain believers in
those duties: as though the Apostle had in more full and plain form of speech
thus said; I have told of great things brought to light by the Gospel, the
which if you would have part in, you must take the way which I have directed
you into, leaving the bypath of ungodliness and worldly lusts, and walking
in the path of sobriety, righteousness, and piety; for those that wait for
the wedding, must prepare that they be not found without the wedding garment:
and if at any time any discouragements or wearines (...) you in this Christian
course, you cannot better sustain the one, or establish your selves against the
other, the^ by casting up an eye in to the things within the veil, the
expectation of which will be able to hold your hearts in your uprightness, and
cause you to forget that which is behind, and strive to that which is before,
and press hard to the mark, and the price of the high calling of God. Philip
3.13*
In the verse we will first give the meaning of the words, and then raise the
points of instruction.

Spes pro re sperata. meton. adiunct.
First, by hope is meant the thing hoped, by an usual form of speech, that is,
both Christ himself principally, as the words next following expound; as also
with him life, salvation, freedom from sin, and misery, perfection of
glory and immortality: the branches of this exposition are proved by two
places of Scripture, the former, 1. Tim. 1.1. where Jesus Christ is called our
hope: the latter, Ephesians. 1.18. that ye may know what the hope is of his
calling: and what the riches of his glorious inheritance is in the Saints.
Blessed hope why so called.
Blessed hope, 1. because Christ our hope is

And appearing of the glorie] By a metominie of the adiunct, for the glorious
appearing, a form of speech very usual among the Hebrews: not that Christ is
not now every way glorious in himself, but in that he shall then manifest his
glory: for then his glory shall break out as the sun, when he shall sit in
the throne of his majesty. And here we must note, how the Apostle opposes
this second coming of Christ unto his former; that was the appearing of grace,
this of glory: that was i^ humility, for he came meekely riding on the colt
of an ass; but this shall be in power, when he shall ride upon the wings of
the winds, and make the clouds his chariot: that was to teach righteousness,
but this to remnuerate it: that to be like a servant, to be judged and
condemned for sin, this to declare himself the Son, to whom all judgment
is committed by the Father: Now indeed his majesty, and greatness is trodden
down and contemned, and the glory of the world exalts it self above his;
but then shall all vanishing glory melt before him, when he shall appear in
such brightness, as shall obscure the brightness of the sun, yea make it
fall from heaven; and in such glory as neither the tongue can utter, nor the
mind of man can conceive, called in the Scripture, the glory of his Father,
that is, such as is proper to the Father, to himself, and the blessed spirit,
and not to any creature communicable. 2. This is a glorious appearing, not
only in regard of Christ himself, but even in regard of his elect also, who
shall appear with him in glory: Matthew. 19.28. When the Son of man shall sit
in the throne of his majesty, we which have followed him in the regeneration
shall sit with him: 1. Ioh. 3.2. We know that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him: For then we shall have not only redemption of our souls, which
even here we have in part; but even the full redemption of our bodies also, and
both in soul and body receive our inheritance, even the crown and kingdom
of glory.

Quest. But how shall this glory of Christ appear to be so bright?

Ans. Our Apostle says, Christ called a mighty God* Why.
that it shall appear to be the glory of the mighty God. Christ is called a
mighty God: first simply in himself, being of equal might, authority, and
power with his Father: and therefore, high Lord and terrible, and a great King
over all the earth: for that these titles belong to Christ, the effects of his
government following in the next words declare. Secondly, comparatively, and
who is God like our God, says the Psalmist. Thirdly, in regard of this his
appearance; for although he shall exercise

1. In his humane nature, he shall appear the head of the Church his body,
Ephesians. 1.22. 2. His power shall be such as shall subdue all the glory of his
power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. 3. He shall come with great, as being infinitely more
glorious white, answerable to the purity and perfection of the judge, and
judgment; and being set, he shall after the summons given to all flesh, and
presented before him, declare and judge not only open sins committed from the
beginning, but also (his godhead manifesting the same to his mind) even the
secrets of hearts, which none but God can do; and then proceed to the
pronouncing of a most righteous sentence, according to the qualities of the
persons presented; the which sentence once uttered, it shall stand without all
gainesaying for all eternity; In all these then shall he show himself as the
son of man, so also the mighty God.

Now because this appearing is set out to be so glorious and fearful, in that
the person of this judge shall be clothed with all his roabes of glory and
majesty; least the godly hereby should be terrified and discomfited, least
they should by reason of their sins and infirmities be afraid, and loath to
behold this glory; and least that they being in themselves so base and
abject, should begin to conceive, that they should be contemned, or neglected
of him, who shall show himself so glorious; the Apostle for the comfort of
such adds, that although he be a mighty God, yet is he also our Savior, and
will not in all his glory forget himself so to be: neither can neglect those
for whose salvation he paid such a price as was his dearest blood. Where also
by the way note, that these two titles, the mighty God, and our Savior, are
not of two subjects, as some heretics have held, laboring thereby to elude
this so pregnant a testimony of the divinity of Christ, the weight of which
so pressed them, as that they were glad to fly to a miserable s^ift, of
disioyning them by a colon; that so disioynted, the former of them might more
probably be attributed unto the Father, and the latter unto the Son. But the
Apostle professedly (as foreseeing how Satan and his instruments would oppose
the place) uses but one article, to note but one subject, to whom both the
predicates most truly and properly agree. (...).
The like example we have, 1. Cor. 15.24. So much of the meaning. Now follow
the instructions of the verse.

Doctr. 1. The doctrine of the Gospel truly received, lifts up the heart to
wait for Christ's second appearing: The Gospel received in truth, lifts up
the heart to wait for Christ's second appearing.
for seeing of the good tidings which the Gospel brings, the greatest and
best part are behind us, and seeing God has not his perfect glory from us,
nor in us, neither we our perfect happiness here below; and seeing further it
were a bootlesse thing for us to serve God here by faith and love, if we could
pass no further in assured hope and settled desire of a better life: therefore
does this doctrine teach us, not only that the full redemption of the sons of
God from sin, Satan, temptation, and tears is behind; but also raises the
eye of the mind to behold, and the affections of the heart to long after the
time wherein these things shall be revealed, wherein we shall walk by sight
and not by faith, and in a word, wherein our salvation now begun shall be
perfected, and we enjoy the harvest of those good things, the first fruits
whereof have here contented us. To the confirming of which truth, it is first
to be noted, Reasons.
that the Scripture speaks in such phrases, as if the whole work of the
Gospel were no Who has begotten us again to a lively hope, etc. that is, we
who before were strangers and without hope, are now through the mercy of God,
Ephesians. 2.12.
by the Ministry of the Gospel regenerated, and so restored to the hope of an
inheritance not fading, immortal, reserved in the heavens: Coloss. 1.23. If
ye be not moved away (he says not from the Gospel, but) from the hope of the
Gospel, namely, those sweet promises of life, which are the very matter of
the Gospel. Secondly, the whole doctrine is called by the name of confidence,
and hope, to show, that one maine scope of If we hold fast the confidence and
rejoicing of the hope: that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, whereby these are
dispensed and confirmed; then are we the house of God. Thirdly, the Apostle
sometime speaks, as if the whole work of every dispenser Ye know what
entering we had, and how we turned you from idols unto God, and to look for his
Son from heaven: no sooner were they turned to God, but they waited for his
son: and that all the gifts of Ministry are bestowed to work in believers
this expectation, we have an express place, 1. Cor. 1.7. Ye are not destitute
of any gift, waiting, etc. And lastly, it adds to the evidence of this truth,
that the faithful are hereby marked as by their property; even expect their
Masters coming, Matthew. 24.45. such as look for him, Heb. 9.28. such as love
his appearing, 2. Tim. 4.8. such as being wise virgins and loving spouses,
prepare themselves and every needful thing for the bridgromes coming: and
such as being strangers and pilgrims upon the earth, have their eyes still
toward their country, who while they live in earth, yet traffic and have
their conversation in heaven, from whence they look for a Savior.

Use. 1. Here is another trial, Philip. 3.20.
to see whether we have received this grace of the Gospel in truth, or in
appearance only: If in truth, Trial of our selves by the former doctrine.
then is the taste of the love of Christ so sweet unto us, as that we cannot but
long after our fill of him in his appearing: the sons of the Church, begotten
by the Gospel, cannot but wait for the adoption of sons: the Church is sick
of love after him whom her soul loves: the common voice of the spouse is
Amen, unto the promise of Christ's coming: Rev. 22.21. the bride says, Come,
and doubleth her desire and ardencie saying, Amen, Amen: Cant. 2.5.
so as they are none of Christ's spouses that say not come. Never think then
that thy heart is right affected, until thou find in it this desire, and
breathing after Christ thy life: for this is a special note of discerning
between the godly and the wicked; the one has the spirit which says come,
the other shake at the mention of this coming: the one longs till these
shadows fly away, and that day break on them; Cant. 2.17.
the other can no more desire his coming, then the guilty fellon can the
coming and presence of the judge.

But that no man may be deceived in this trial, examination must be more
particularly made, whether this waiting be such as the Scripture prescribes,
lest by mistaking it, men fail of that comfort they lean unto in their most
need.

Be sure then that thy waiting be sound and true, 1. in the ground of it: 2. in
the qualities: 3. in the sound fruits and effects of it.

To this expectation of Christ, are required 1. a sound ground.
The ground of this expectation, must be the free promise of God for all our
future welfare, applied by faith unto our own hearts: the which promise of God
being most certain, and our faith also as certainly laying hold thereon, gives
such a certainty to our hope, as the Scripture boldly speaks, it can never
make us ashamed: yea and ascribes a full assurance unto it, Heb. 6.11. and
calls it the sure and steadfast aucre of the soul, verse. 19. This ground
distinguishes our Christian hope, from those iogling persuasions of the
Papists, Lumbard. 3. sent. distinct. 26.
which they call hope: for ask them concerning their hope, what it is? they
tell us, that it is a persuasion arising partly from the grace of God, and
partly from our own preceding merits. But urge them, and say, me think there
should be no great comfort nor setlednesse, to lean upon a virtue founded upon
merit: they will tell you, that indeed no man can be sure of his salvation,
for that were too much presumption: but do well and hope well; hope well and
have well. But against them we affirm, that Christian hope builds certainty
upon special faith (neither of which they can abide to hear of) without
special revelation, and that by this reason: Look what was the ground of
Abraham's hope, the same must be the ground of the hope of all believers: but
the free promise of God applied by faith in special, was the ground of
Abraham's hope and waiting, Romans 4.20.21. He doubted not, but was strengthened
in faith, being fully assured that he which had promised was able to do it.
There is no difficulty here, but that Abraham had a special word, for
special faith to be grounded, which (say they) we want. But I answer, that in
the Scripture we have in substance a particular word, in that God who has
given the promise has also given a commandment to every believer to apply it
in special to himself: 1. Ioh. 3.23. and this is equivalent to a particular
word. Object. But it is presumption to hope without merits. Ans. It is indeed
presumption to hope for them, they being so far inferior to the thing hoped
for. Again, it is faith and not presumption, to hope for salvation in and for
the merits of Christ, though not for our own. So much of the ground, the
qualities follow.

Secondly, the qualities whereby the soundness of this Christian expectation
is discerned, are four. 2. sound qualities, which are four.
1. It must climb above all humane sense and reason; for it is no waiting with
carnal eyes, but with the eyes of faith, which the Apostle defines to be the
existence of things not hope above hope, when he saw nothing in himself, in
Sarah, in the whole course of nature, but things which would have dashed his
hopes; even so here while within our selves we can behold little besides our
sins and infirmities; while without our selves we have Esau hating us in his
heart, and Ismael persecuting us with the tongue; while in this life we are
compassed with miseries, in the end of this life with death, after this life
with the grave and corruption of it; all which seem to eclipse our hopes, and
cut them short; yet now is the time that our hope must be working, Heb. 6.19.
and looking at things within the veil, that as a strong staff it may uphold
us in a godly course.

2. The second sound quality of this hopeful expectation is, that it must be
patient; for what we hope we expect with patience, Romans 8.25. and to the
waiting for of Christ: that is, to endure in waiting for Christ. (...).
And we have need of patience to enjoy the promises: Abraham himself enjoyed
not the promise, till he had waited patiently, Heb. 6.15. we shall deceive our
selves if we look to be wrapped into heaven, as Enoch and Elias were; seeing the
promises of life go with exception of the cross, which will try our
patience. We know there is a time promised, we may neither prescribe it, nor
if we believe make have; Isa. 28.16.
but as the husbandman patiently expects the fruits of the earth; much more
should we possess our souls in patience, to reap our fruits and harvest in
heaven.

The third quality is a sighing and longing after the thing hoped for: the
heart that waits for such things has both a grief for the absence, We sigh
in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our body. To
this purpose says Solomon, that hope deferred, Prou. 13.12.
paineth the heart. Thus should we be sick of love, and never find our selves
well and at ease in any thing below, never think our selves happy in things
present, which are indeed but prison-ioyes, in comparison of the joys of
heaven; but (as crazed persons) be ever complaining, and wishing, Oh who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Now who sees not that this quality
includes an earnest love of Jesus Christ, whom we therefore wait for,
because we love him: whence the Apostle Paul fitly knitteth these two
together, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. The Lord guide your hearts to the love of God, and the
waiting for of Christ: concluding thence that we cannot wait on the Lord Jesus
Christ, unless we first love him.

The fourth quality, is a rejoicing in that our hopes shall certainly come: we
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, that is, that we shall partake one
day of his glory. Excellent is that place in 1. Pet. 1.8. whom we have not
seen, and yet we love him, and believe in him, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, receiving the end of faith which is salvation. And
surely if Abraham the father of our faith, rejoiced to see the day of Christ's
humility so far off, even 2000. years, how ought we his believing children
rejoice to see the day of his and our own glory approaching so near, that now
is even the last minute of the last hour? how should we rejoice in that the
time of refreshing and restoaring all things is come? and if we be spouses of
this bridegroom, we cannot but (as we are exhorted) rejoice in that the
marriage of the lamb is come, Rev. 19.7. 1. Pet. 5.4.
and the day of our own coronation with an incorruptible crown of glory.

The third thing to try the soundness of this expectation, is by the effects
of it, and these be four. 1. It purifieth and purges the heart and life, 1.
Ioh. 3.3. 3. sound effects, which are also four.
whosoever has this hope, purges himself: for he that waits for Christ,
wayteth for this end, to be like him: and therefore conformeth himself daily
unto his similitude, and becomes pure as he is pure: the when presumption and
ungrounded confidence confounds the person that gives them harbor. Do thou
hope then to be like Christ when he appears? thou must then resemble him in
this life, being in thy measure pure, holy, innocent, meek, loving, and
obedient: profess hope without this conformity unto Christ, it is but a
pretense, all is unsound and deceitful.

2. It not only freeth from sin, but frames to obedience both cherefull and
constant: whereof we have a pregnant example in Christ the joy that was set
before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame. So also are the Saints
in their measure looking to the joy before them invincible, both in labors and
sufferings: hope works the will, Heb. 12.2.
it sets the hands and holds them to work: it puts a difference
between the works of Christians and civil men: they attempt Christian duties
that their master may find them well doing, and hold out also in well doing;
but these undertake sightly duties, but in some by-respect or other; and
wanting this hope are off and on; especially in difficulties, they give up all;
whereas the Christian, who has the recompense of reward in his eye, can
esteem with Moses, the rebuke of Christ great riches.

3. This hope takes off our fiery edge and heat of affections from the world,
and sets them above: it fixes the eye upon things within the

4. It being the daughter of faith waeeth not weary, but still uses of these
are hindered, when the state of the ministry and ministers is destitute and
distressed; when the light and life of professors is obscured and darkened,
when errors are broached, maintained, and received: for these are things
coming between them and their hopes, and the just causes of heaviness and
grief.

Use. 1. Now this trial will discover to many men their estates, who lay hold
on the doctrine of grace to salvation, but not to instruction. Some believe
not, nor hope for any such estate herafter, as the faithful are in Christ
partakers of; but for all our preaching of the fatnes of that land, deal as
the Israelites did with Caleb and Iosuah concerning the promised land, Numb.
14.7.10.
who when they told the people, that it was a good and a fat land, and that if
the Lord loved them he would give it them, and seat them in it, they
rebelliously bad stone them with stones, but presently the sentence passed upon
them from the mouth of the Lord, verse. 23.
that they should never see that land. Which were it not the conceit of men, it
could not be that they could live so like the Sadduces, who say there is no
resurrection, nor angel, Act. 23.8.
nor spirit: Such as was that Cardinal of Burbon, who professed, that he would
not give his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise: of whose mind some who
perhaps will cry out on him are, while they were well appaid if there were no
other heaven, nor no changing of their estate: and were that Pope alive again,
it is to be feared he should not want Protestants taking part of his heresy,
who all his life time could not be persuaded, whether there was an heaven or
hell, and therefore at his death blasphemously uttered these words, Now shall I
know whether there be a God, an hell, or any immortality of the soul, and
shortly after knew it to his cost. Others are fallen asleep with the evil
servant, while their master makes stay of his coming, and in one dead sleep
of sin or other, (out of which they will not be wakened) wast out their
days, as though their souls should for ever sleep after death, such sleepers
are ill watchmen. Others call on the Lord Jesus to come, but never till they be
cast on their death bed, their hearts nor mouths never harbor such requests
in their life time, and therefore in all likelihood they are unsound. And many
others there are, who nourish a false hope, or rather a fancy in stead of hope:
for it is like the Popish persuasion of which we spoke, unsound in the ground,
they have nothing to show for the evidence of their faith: as also in the
qualities; for it must be fed by things they can see; it must have good hold
and pawnes of God, and then it can trust him: it is most impatient in any of
Gods delays: it wishes not but fears rather this coming of Christ, and so
cannot rejoice in the certentie that he will come to their full redemption: it
is unsound also in the effects, it purges not the heart, many nastie corners
lie there unswept and vntrimd up: it frames not to the obedience of Gods word
and will: it lifts not up the soul from the world to heavenly mindedness
and conversation: it uses no means of conscience to hasten this coming of
Christ: it rejoices not where they are, it sorroweth not where they are not:
let the state of the Church sink or swim, so they enjoy their own: but let
no man that would not be confounded, lean upon such an expectation, in which
there is nothing but deceit.

Use. 2. Seeing it is a property of the Gospel to lift up the heart to Motives
to the expectation of Christ.
therefore are the Scriptures plentiful here and elsewhere in most vehement
and forcible persuasions to urge us hereunto: For I. in the text blessed hope,
the person that hops is a blessed man, and the end of this expectation is
blessedness: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments. And,
Blessed shall the servant be whom the Master finds so doing. 2. the
appearing is called a glorious appearing, of a mighty God, Matthew. 24.46.
the just judge of all the world: and 3. that he who shall appear the judge,
is the same who is our Savior: in all which regards it is the part of all such
as would attain blessedness, participate of his glory, and be saved by him, to
wait for his coming. II. Elsewhere in the Scripture, 1. we have the
commandment Be ye like unto men that wait for 2. Herein is put a difference
between the godly and the wicked: it was ever a mark of hour he looks not,
Luke 12.46.
and in a day he thinks not: so the foolish virgins had prepared nothing. 3.
The danger of those whom this day shall oppress unawares; such a servant says
as wait for him. 4. From the time of this appearing: 1. in regard of the
uncertainty of it, Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a thief in the night, blessed
is he that watches: for if the house keeper knew what hour the theife would
come, Ignoratur vnus dies vt observentur multi.
would he not watch; but we know no hour, that we might watch every hour. 2.
In regard of the nearness of it: the Apostles time was the last hour, and
ours then cannot but be the last minute: a fearful thing and full of danger
it is, to conceive that the Master will defer his coming, or that the Lord
is slow, as men count slacknesse; or that the law is but a scarcrow because
fellons are put in prison, and bound over to the assizes, and not presently
executed. This day may be nearer in it self, at least to thy self then thou
think for; and yet a very little while, and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry. Let us apply our hearts hereunto a little. Every man when
he sees every thing grow worse and worse can say, surely the world draws
near an end: and much more may we, who have our senses exercised in the word,
when we see Satan so busy and stirring in the plotting, contriuing, and
executing mischief against the Church, may we not conclude, that surely his
time is very short? when we see particular judgments upon our country,
lingering and durable plagues, threatenings of whole kingdoms and countries;
with visible judgments upon particular persons; why do we not conclude that
surely these are forerunners of the general, and that it is not far off. If
we see the sun; and moon, and great lights in the Church fall from heaven
and be darkened; if the stars, the professors of the Gospel, loose their
shine, and fall from their first love; why do we not think that shortly the
heavens themselves shall shriule away like a scroule, and be no more? seeing
the Scriptures affirm that immediately after such things this appearing shall
be. In a word, when we see such general security, that all men cry peace,
peace, unto themselves; if we shall perceive Noah days returned again in
which men eat, and drink, build, and plant, marry and give in marriage, and
think nothing, either nothing else or nothing more; how is it that we cannot
conceive of this appearing, which shall be as a flood and destruction to all
that think not of it? for as a snare shall it come upon all the ungodly of the
earth.

Use 3. Seeing the doctrine of the Gospel not only brings the evidence of
salvation, but lifts up the heart to wait for it, it appears that it is
the doctrine of God, brought by the Son of God from the bosom of his Father;
the doctrine that raises the mind to heaven must needs be heavenly: and this
is the doctrine which we preach, because it is fruitful herein. Some busy
themselves in prying more into the men, and their callings that bring it, then
into the doctrine it self, and refuse this most blessed treasure, because they
see not the holy Ghost so visibly calling our ministers, as if he should sit on
our heads with fiery tongues. These I would wish, 1. to look well to their
own callings, for sure he that is pragmaticall in other men's callings, Curiosi
ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosi sunt ad corrigenda^ suam. August.
confess. lib. 10.
is careless and negligent in his own; and let themselves weigh the matter
and give sentence, whether to contemn and neglect so great salvation, will
stand with an effectual calling unto the grace of God. 2. To enquire not so
much whether our callings, as whether our doctrine be as good as Peter's or
Paul's. 3. To observe the work and fruit of our Ministry, in regenerating
many thousands, and begetting them to heavenly life and conversation: whereas
false teachers and false doctrine regenerate none.

Doctr. 2. An excellent means to provoke men unto the duties of Christianity,
is the consideration of Christ's coming unto judgment. The expectation of
Christ is a notable means to provoke men to Christian duties. 1. To attempt
them.
For some might have asked the Apostle, but how shall we be able to go through
the duties you have described, and hold out against the manifold
discouragements which in the entertainment of this doctrine we are sure to
meet withal? the answer is; Waiting for the appearance of the mighty God our
Savior. For first, it is a notable means to set and enter men into this
course of godliness: and this is clear in the Scriptures, where we may
observe the spirit of God using this consideration, as a special motive both
to draw men out of their sins, together with the love of this world; as also
to plant in them the fear and reverence of the Lord: all which must be done,
before men can come to breathe in the common air of Christians. For the first,
how does the Scripture revoke the young man from his unbridled vanity, and
from walking in the sight of his own eyes, and lust of his own heart, but by
the remembrance that for all this he must come to judgment. Eccles. 11.9.
This was the argument used by Peter to the people of Jerusalem who flocked to
see the lame man, who lay at the bewtifull gate of the Temple healed, Amend
your lives, and turn, that your sins may be put away when the time of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus
Christ. Act. 3.18, 19.
By the same argument would the Apostle Paul have won the Athenians from
their idolatries, Act. 17.30. But now he would have all men to repent, because
he has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world: and have reclaimed
unhappy Felix from his wicked and voluptuous life, when he made him tremble in
hearing the judgment to come. Act. 24.26.
2. To the forsaking of the world in the profits and pleasures of it, how
effectual this persuasion is, the Apostle in his own example declares,
Philip. 3.7. who accounted all advantages loss, yea dung to attain the
resurrection of the dead: while his mind was upon the resurrection and Christ's
appearing, he was mortified unto the world, and the world unto him. 3. For the
working of awe and reverence of God in the heart, Eccl. 12.13. Fear God, and
keep his commandments, for God will bring every work unto judgment. And when
the Angel would provoke the inhabitants of the earth to fear and reverence
before God, Rev. 14.7.
and stand in awe of him, he uses no other argument then that the hour of his
judgment is come. And surely were we not harder of heart then the anuill, it
could not be but the consideration of this judgment, should hammer and work us
to the undertaking of a godly and Christian course.

2. To hold on in them with chearefulnes.
Secondly, as this consideration may be of efficacy to beget us unto God, so is
it a most notable nurse of all good duties, and a sweet provocation to
cheerfulness and diligence in the duties of piety, righteousness, and
sobriety. The Apostle Paul himself was hereby underpropped, in keeping good
conscience before God and all men, because he looked for the resurrection of
the just and unjust: Act. 24.15.16.
and hence did the Apostles spur and provoke themselves and others to the
diligent practice of the duties of their callings, both general and
particular, 1. Corinthians. 5.9. considering the terrors of the Lord, we persuade
men. Thus Paul charge Timothy not only to keep those his commandments
without spot until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ; but also as he
would answer at the appearing of Christ to preach instantly, 1. ^im. 6.14. 2.
Tim. 4 1. 1. Pet 3 4.
in season and out of season: and Peter warns the Elders to feed the flock,
and be ensamples unto them, that when the chief sheepeheard shall appear,
they might receive an incorruptible crown. By which motives they much more
provoked themselves to their own special duties, as appears, 1. These. 2.19.
And for the general duties of Christianity, every Christian is by this
reason spurred forward thereunto: 2. Pet. 3.11. considering these things shall
be dissolved, what manner of men ought we to be in all godly conversation. And
that this expectation of Christ is a notable preservative of all Christian
virtues, who can deny that reads those manifold places, where watching and
keeping the garments, watching and sobriety, be sober and watch, watching and
steadfastness in the faith, are coupled together so inseparably, 1. Cor. 16.13.
as that they stand and fall together? who sees not hence, how this one grace
sets us forward in the whole practice of godliness?

Thirdly, this waiting is a notable means of holding out and constant
perseverance in all weldoing unto the end: 3. To hold out in them with
perseueranc^.
without which how often should we be discouraged, and too willing to look
back? how could we suffer with Christ, unless we had hope to reign with him?
Christianity is a warfare, wherein it is no matter of ease to hold our ground,
and our crown, that none take it from us: Now the special means to hold us
on in the contending for the faith, Jude 22.
is to wait for the coming of Jesus Christ: Reu. 3.11. Behold, I come shortly,
hold fast that thou have. It is a work of many labors, much sweat, and no
less difficulty: and here the sluggish flesh would contentedly thrust the
hand into the bosom; but here is a special means to renew our strength in
working righteousness; 1. Ioh. 2.28. little children abide in him, that when
he shall appear, we may be bold and not ashamed at his coming. Many
temptations will come in our way, the burial of the father, the tending of the
farm, the marriage of a wife, the care of the family, the bidding of friends
farewell; many will be the occasions of looking back, and plucking back the
hand from this spiritual plough: now what better way to continue with Christ
in temptation, then that which himself devised, namely, to remember that he
has appointed a kingdom for such, that they shall eat and drink at his
table, and judge the tribes of Israel? Luke 22.29.
Many are the reproaches, losses, crosses, unjust sentences and judgments
which will meet men in this profession; and it is no new thing to be hated of
all men for Christ's sake; now what better ground of patience, Iam. 5.8.
then that the coming of the Lord draws near? do then as Christ himself
did, commend all to him that judges righteously. Do as the Saints have ever
done, appeal from the unjust sentences of men, and look up to this appearing
of the mighty God our Savior, whose tribunal and judgment shall reuerse all
unjust and partial sentences, In that most perfidious Council of Constance.
whether public or private; so did Job, so did David, so did John Huffe, and
Jerome of Prage; and assure thy self, that the Judge of all the earth will
judge righteously, Genesis 18.25.

Quest. But what is there in this appearance of Christ, which makes the
expectation of it of such efficacy both to set us in, and stir up our
cheerfulness, as also continue us in this Christian course? Ans. The godly
know that Christ comes not empty handed, but his reward is with him; and
this recompense of reward works cheerfulness, increases courage, and
adds diligence to every good work. Quest. But do the godly work
mercinarily? Answ. No; for their offerings are freewill offerings; neither do
they look principally at the ^eward: for there be two things in their eye
between their work and this wage. 1. Gods glory, whom they love for
himself. 2. the discharge of their own duty: and then they know that their
labor is not in vain in the Lord. The which as the Scripture propounds as a
prick unto piety, so in this last place is it lawful and meet to cast the
eye upon it. That place 2. Tim. 2.6. imports that the husbandman in his
labor may look what is likely to be the fruit of his labor aforehand* he that
cares, 1. Cor 9.7.10.
cares in hope, and he that thresheth looks to be partaker of his hope, and
he that dresseth the figtree may look to eat of the fruit, says Solomon.
Prou. 27.18.
The same thing also teaches the Apostle, when he compares all our works of
mercy to a sowing, 2. Cor. 9*6.
and draws us to cast the eye of our minds upon our harvest, that as we
would wish that to be either more sparing, or more liberal, so to disperse our
seed. And herein the holy Ghost favors our infirmity, who well knowing how
foreceable the expectation of gain in earthly things is to hold men in labors
and travels, gives us leave in heavenly things to do the like.

Use. Whosoever then is an negligent meditator of this appearing of Christ,
strippeth himself of a special proppe both of his faith, and the lively
fruits of it: in want of which help, the best would go but faintly forward.
If Moses himself was enabled to suffer reproach with Gods people, because he
looked for the recompense of reward: and if David had fainted, Heb. 11.26.
Psalm. 27.13.
unless he had hoped to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living; what should we weakelings expect other then to fall down right never
to rise again, without such a stay as whereby these worthies supported
themselves. Let no man say, we are Christians, and strong, and should serve God
for himself: so say I; and yet so were these much more; and so were the
believers to whom the Apostle writ, nevertheless it had not been safe for
them to have refused so merciful an incitement, as is the hope of the
recompense of reward.

Doctr. 3. It may be hence also noted, when is the time that the glory of
Jesus Christ shall shine out in full brightness, Christ's glory shall shine
out in full brightness at his second appearing. Matthew 25.31. (...).
namely, the time of this his second appearing, for then he shall sit upon the
throne of his glory: and then shall we see the Son of man coming in the
clouds, with power and great glory: for he shall be glorious both in his own
person, as before we heard; as also in his whole administration of justice
against the wicked, upon whom he shall get himself a greater name then he did
upon Pharaoh and his host, or all the wicked Princes and people that ever
lived, who for the glory which shall shine about him, shall call for the hills
to cover them, and the mountains to oppress them. He shall be glorious also
to his Saints, when they shall behold him that was betrayed, spitted on,
condemned, crucified between two thieves, dead and buried, to be so exceeding
advanced above men and angels* and above all that can ever enter into their
hearts. Finally, he shall be glorious, yea merueilous in his Saints; who when
Christ their life shall appear, shall also appear with him in glory: 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Coloss. 3.4.
it shall be merueilous to them, who a little before were so afflicted, abused,
contemned, and persecuted, to see themselves so suddenly to attain that
fullness of glory, which their eye never saw before, nor their hearts could
before ever conceive; to see their souls clothed with such righteousness as
God himself delights in* and their vile bodies changed, Philip. 3.21.
arrayed with immortality, and made like the glorious body of Jesus Christ.

Use. 1. Let none be troubled that his first coming was in meeknes, baseness,
passion, for the Apostle Peter observed, 1. Pet. 1.11.
that it was meet that his glory should follow his suffering: so Luke 24.28.
Ought not Christ to suffer, and then enter into his glory? and is not this
that which all the Prophets and Moses said should come to pass? that Christ
should suffer, and be the first that should rise from the dead. Act. 26.22.
For what other thing could any of the Prophets write concerning Christ, but
either touching his humility, or his glory? and how could himself have been
raised but after, or we but by his abasement? Let not therefore both thine eyes
be fixed (as the Jews are) upon the baseness of his first coming, but let
one behold (as a Christian) the glory of this second appearing, which shall
abundantly counteruaile the humility of the former.

Use. 2. The glory of this second appearing, is a terror to all the ungodly,
who have despised his humility, and his still voice in the Ministry of the
Gospel. For whosoever now in this his appearance of grace, will not tremble at
his word, to frame their souls to the obedience of it, shall at this second
appearance of glory, tremble to dust at his greatness, and not be able to
abide the brightness of his glory. Those that are now ashamed of him, and
that contempt and dishonor that follows his profession, shall then be
ashamed of themselves, when the Son of God shall be ashamed of them. And as
for such as daily pearce him with the spears and nails of their sins, they
shall be sure to see him thus glorious whom they have pierced, when themselves
shall be pierced with shame and sorrow to their endless confusion.

Use. 3. To comfort the faithful, seeing there is a time when they also shall
appear in glory: they must be content first to suffer with Christ, before
they can reign with him, and wear the crown of thorns, before this crown
of glory: the Lord dealing herein with them as a father with his children, who
though they be borne to never so great places and estates, yet in their
minority subiecteth them to such discipline as befitteth their years, before
he bestow their portion upon them. God has his children now in the world, the
world knows them not, nor sees their glory: nay they themselves cannot in
any clearenesse behold their own glory, for no eye can see the full glory of
the Saints, till the fulness of Christ's glory appear: but when this time
comes, the least of them shall be known to be Kings sons; so as the Devil
himself, and his wicked instruments, who can now accuse them, and say, there
goes an Hypocrite, there goes a Precisian, a Puritan, a dissembler, and are
offended at the low and base estate of the Saints here, shall change their
note, and be compelled to say, there goes a child of God, there goes the Kings
son, there gos an heir of the kingdom, and shall gnaw their tongues for
grief, to see them exalted in glory, and shine in the brightness of Gods
image; and themselves utterly, and eternally excluded from God, and his
kingdom. Let us not then judge our selves or others according to the flesh,
nor walk by sight, but by faith, no^ altogether looking on our selves or
others as we now are, but as we shall be: for although indeed we are now the
sons of God, yet it appears not what we shall be, so long as our life is
hid with Christ: yea, let us lift up our eyes to that glory of our head, that
shall be revealed and distributed to us his members; and our hearts in the
earnest requests of faith, always praying, Lord let thy kingdom come: cause
these shadows to fly away, and that day to break, wherein thy glory which
now is obscured, may be manifest and shine out in the first place, as is meet;
and then the glory of thy servants, whose beauty shall be made perfect in thy
glory and beauty.

We must never speak of God or Christ, but in a weighty matter and reverent
manner.
Doctr. 4. The Apostle does not mention Christ, without magnifying him in his
titles both of power and mercy: teaching ^s by his example, never to speak of
God, or Christ, but in a just and weighty matter and occasion; and for the
manner, with fear, and reverence, and to such ends as we ought, and are
warranted by the word. Now for our direction, we have the Scriptures insisting
in magnifying God, and Christ, and the blessed Spirit, in their titles and
attributes, especially for these three ends. Reasons.
First, to show what a one God is in himself, as here to Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, not only for the glory
of God, but for the benefit of the Church; 1. That hereby they might
acknowledge him to be the true God: so the Prophet Jeremy opposing the true
God against all idols and false gods, speaks most highly of him, There is
none like unto thee, O Lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in power:
Ier. 10.6.
and in the next verse, he calls him King of nations, and challenges all
dominion to belong unto him. And our Apostle when he would bring the Athenians
to the acknowledgement of the only Lord, ascribes many and great things unto
him: as that he made the world, and all things else, Act. 17.24, 25.
that he is Lord of heaven and earth, that he gives to all, life, breath, and
all things: that he made of one blood all mankind, that he assigns their
times and the bounds of their habitation, that in him we live, and move, and
have our being, verse. 28. 2. That after this acknowledgement, we might provoke
our selves to answerable duties for example. In consideration of his mercy, to
break out into his due praises: Psalm. 3.3. Thou Lord art my buckler, my
glory, and the lifter up of mine head. Isa. 12.2. Behold, God is my salvation,
I will trust and will not fear, for the Lord is my strength and song, he is
also become my salvation. In regard of his omnipotence, to study for
uprightness: Genesis 17.1. I am God all sufficient, walk before me, and be
upright. In meditation of his omnipresence, to be every where reverent because
of his eye: Act. 10.33. We are all here present before God, etc. In respect of
his truth, to rely our selves upon it: 1. Chro. 17.27. Thou have blessed, and
it shall be blessed. Exodus 3.14. Moses must tell the children of Israel, that I
Am has sent me: that is, who gives being to all things, and especially to
this covenant of your deliverance out of Egypt now at the end of 400. years.
Thirdly, another end of Gods titles in Scripture is, that we should not only
glorify God, and edify our selves, but also stir up others to the great
God: namely, in being, knowledge, mercy, and power: Psalm. 40.9. I have
declared thy righteousness in the great congregation, I have not hid it, nor
concealed thy mercy and truth. And surely whosoever has his heart filled with
God and sense of his goodness, cannot not only himself, but reverently
speak of him, but also bring others to a feeling and love of him; such a one I
say cannot but bring men to confess the Lord, and make his works known unto
the sons of men.

Use. 1. Which condemns all the trifling use of the name of God and Christ,
the which no man shall guiltlessely lift up in vain, whether law of grace is
not under our lips, and therefore our hearts ^ndite not such good matters as
these; dumb spirits seem to possess men, and hold their tongues from speaking
of God, and good things, and when they speak, it is without sense, or feeling,
without reverence and grace in their hearts; or for fashion, least they should
seem to be (that which often they are indeed) mere Atheists, without any true
taste and feeling of God. 3. This doctrine occasioneth us to resolve, never
hereafter to take the name of God or Christ up into our draw out the special
use either concerning God, or our selves, which the place aymeth at: and so in
the conscionable reading of them, we shall come to a conscionable speaking of
them, as this Apostolical example enioyneth us.

Verse. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good
works. In this verse our Apostle uses another forceable argument, to urge the
denial of unrighteousness, and practice of the former virtues of sobriety,
justice, and piety; for the Gospel not only teaches these things, which
while we profess it, we must adorn, but also if we look for any benefit by
the death of Christ, we may not like ^iuen vessels, let this doctrine slip;
for to what other end did Christ so willingly give himself to death for
believers in his name, but that they should reap the double fruit of it,
mentioned in the verse. First, redemption from sin; and secondly,
sanctification: the which 1. inwardly purges believers to become the Lords
own peculiar: 2. causes them outwardly to shine out in the zealous practice
of good works. Well knew our Apostle how close sin sits unto us, and how
heavy our frailty is unto that which is good in Gods eyes; and therefore
whereas if we were wise to do well, one word were enough: he forces and
presses us with diverse arguments, and those so weighty, as even in man's
judgment, and much more in Gods, he is judged unworthy of life that shall
despise them. For suppose there be such graceless men, as by the appearing of
grace cannot be moved, or will not he be taught, when he hears that the
Son of God himself came down from heaven, to deliver the blessed doctrine
of salvation unto his Church; let such see rather then hear an argument more
weighty, let them cast their eye upon the death of Christ, who willingly
suffered such torments as are inconceivable; and all to abolish sin, and
raise sinners out of their graves of sin and death, unto the life of grace
and glory. And though some may be found so graceless, as they will have
nothing to do with this reaching of grace; yet seeing none is so desperately
gone, as to refuse his part in the death of Christ, let this be a motive unto
such, as with whom any thing in the world can prevail, to the timely taking
up the practice of the former precepts, of which we have spoken at large.

In speaking of this argument, seeing the Apostle has cast it into so
excellent an order to our hands, we will accordingly follow the branches laid
down, and they are two. First, the fact of Christ, who gave himself for us:
secondly, the fruits of it: which are two, 1. redemption, that he might redeem
us: 2. sanctification, and purge us to be a peculiar people, etc. The meaning
of the particulars we will give, as we come unto them.

In the former part of the verse, containing the fact of Christ, are three
points to be noted: 1. the giver, who. 2. the gift, gave himself, including
all that passion to which he gave himself. 3. the persons for whom, for us.

First, the giver is noted in the words immediately going before, to be Jesus
Christ our Savior. Object. How Christ gave himself for us.
But God the Father gave Christ for us, and therefore he gave not himself.
Ans. God the Father gave his Son, and Christ the Son gave himself by one
and the self same will; and one joint and inseparable operation of them both,
together with the holy Ghost: Ioh. 5.19. whatsoever the Father does, that same
does the Son. Object. But Judas, the Jews, and Pilate, gave Christ for us to
passion, and therefore not himself. Answ. They did indeed concur in the
same action with the Father, and the Son, but in a far diverse manner, and
end: they in malice, but these in admirable love: they not for us, but Pilate
for fear, Judas for covetousness, the Jews to please their Priests and
rulers; but these gave him for us, and for our salvation: neither had any of
them any power to have given Christ to the least part of passion, if it had not
been given them of the Father, and of himself, who had power to lay down his
life, Ioh. 10.18.
and none could take it from him.

Secondly, but the gift will better manifest the giver: he gave himself, the
which that we may the better understand, we must withal consider unto what
Christ gave himself, for so the consequent fruits shall be better discovered:
and that I say in one word, was unto passion. The which passion must not be
restrained to the time of his death, but extended unto the whole course of his
life: as namely, the laying down of his majesty and glory, wherein he was
equal unto his father, to become man: and being man, whereas he might have
used heavenly qualities of soul and body, his mind free from sorrow, fear,
grief; his body from hunger, thirst, wearines, etc. and at least have been
like Adam before his fall; yet he took our nature, subject to all infirmities
since the fall, only sin excepted: hence was it, that he was borne in a
stable, laid in a manger, Luke 2.7.
of poor parents that had but a pair of turtles to bring for his redemption;
brought up by the labor of his hands; and entering into his office he must
begin with strong temptations: in the execution of it, he became a servant
unto all, for himself came not to be served; he washed his disciples feet; he
went about with weariness from city to city to preach: yea more, the
lawgiuer subjected himself unto the law, that he might redeem them that were
under the law: the Lord of life gave himself unto death, not ignominious only
before men, but accursed before God: the Fathers delight and darling, became
the object of such wrath, as would have crushed all creatures in heaven and
earth to pieces. Now the bitterness of this passion in and about the time of
his death, may appear, 1. by his complaint to his Father in the garden,
testifying how heavy his soul was unto it, which if it had been but an
ordinary death, it could not have dismayed him, no more then many martyrs who
have not shrunk at it. 2. By the strange drops of water and blood that fell
from his face. 3. His sundry cries to his father, that if it were possible the
cup of death might pass from him. 4. By those most unworthy things, which
the most innocent lamb of God suffered at the hands of sinners; being taken
as a thief with swords and staves, bound and carried away, and brought as a
malefactor before the Magistrate: before whom, though he was cleared, yet must
he be scourged by the Jews; stripped of his own apparel, clothed with
scornful kingly robes, the crown of thorns, and a reed put in his hand in
stead of a scepter; lead away as a sheep to the slaughter, where between two
thieves, as the chief of all sinners, he was crucified, his joints stretched
and racked, his hands and feet dug with nails, his side peirced with a
spear: in stead of drink, he had vinegar tempered with gall reached him: all
sorts of men mocked him that trusted in his God: the high Priests scoffed, the
passengers wagged their heads, the soldiers flouted him, nay, the very theife
on the cross could with his last breath blaspheame him. 5. But all this seemed
less then nothing to that which he inwardly felt, being as one oppressed and
forsaken of God, which made him cry out, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. Thus did the Son of God make exchange of the greatest glory
above all comprehension, with the greatest infamy, and the greatest joys with
the greatest sorrows that can be imagined, even the sorrows of hell: the
which considerations notably set out the quality of this passion, unto which
our Lord gave himself.

There can be now no other Priest nor sacrifice besides Christ hi^s^lfe.
Use. In that Christ gave himself, 1. we learn, that there can be neither
other Priest, nor other sacrifice, then Christ himself: both which our Apostle
accurately notes in a diverse phrase, which at the first seem to ^ound the
self same: neither does our English so distinguish them as the Greek does.
(...).
The former is in our text, which more properly betokneth that Christ offered
no other oblation or sacrifice then himself: hence is it said, that for this
end God gave Christ a body, that in the same he might perform this part of
his fathers will. H^b 10 ^. (...).
The latter is in 1. Tim. 2.6. which implies more directly, that Christ
himself gave himself, and that there can be no other priest in this oblation
then he that is the sacrifice: neither indeed can he be offered of any other
save himself, who for this purpose sanctified himself, as the altar
sanctifies the gift, and the Temple the gold: no Priesthood, not Leuiticall,
much less Papal, Ioh. 17.19.
was ever worthy so great honor, as to offer unto God the Father his
well-beloved Son: neither any Priest can offer such a sacrifice as this is,
wherein is both the fulfilling of the law, and payment of all forfeites, who
is (...) the mediator between God and man, yea both God and man: for without
humanity can be no sacrifice at all, and without dietie no such sufficiency;
and if dietie alone, or humanity alone had been sufficient for such a work,
the Son of God had taken flesh in vain. Whence it is that the Scriptures
inseparably join these two, the mediator and the Priest of the new Testament:
Heb. 12. ye are come unto Jesus the mediator of the new Testament, and the
blood of sprinkling; etc. 1. Tim. 2. there is one mediator between God and man
-- who gave himself a ransom. Whence it is directly concluded, that if there
be but one mediator of the new Testament, there can be but one Priest; and
that if all the table of the masse-mongers be Priests properly of the new
Testament, they must be also mediators and redeemers: whereas the Scripture
says, there is but one.

Again, as the sacrifice is but one, so there can be but one Priest, and he
must be so qualified, as never any man, no not Aaron himself was; for thus the
author of the Hebrews advances this priesthood of Christ. Heb. 7.23.
1. In the Leuiticall Priesthood were many Priests, because they died and had
succession: but here is but one Priest without succession; for his Priesthood
need not, nor cannot pass from him to an other, because he lives for ever,
and is a Priest after the order of Melchizedech, without beginning of time, or
end of days: and he shows why Christ must neede^ live for ever, to make
intercession for us in heaven, namely, 2^.
by the sweet smell of his sacrifice once offered: which if no Priest but he
can do, then no man who lives not ever, can be properly a Priest of the new
Testament but he alone. 2. he is further proved the only Priest, from an
induction of many qualities, some proper to his person, and some to his office,
which cannot agree to any man or creature but himself only: It behooves us to
have such an high Priest, which is holy, innocent, undefiled separate from
sinners, higher then the heavens, 26.
who need not offer first for his own sins as they, etc.

The special things objected by the Papists against this truth, are two:
first, that Christ is indeed such a Priest as we speak of; The Popish
distinction of Priests into primarie and secondarie overthrown.
but they distinguish of Priests: Christ is the chief and principal, but
there may be secondarie and inferior Priests by whom, Christ still offers
himself unto God, and in these Christ's sacrifice is perpetuated. But as our
learned Fulke speaks; upon Hebr. 7.
If all external priesthood before Christ was but a figure of the the eternal
priesthood of Christ; and if Christ have abolished all external sacrificing
priesthood that was before, and instituted no other in the new Testament to
suceede him, then must the Popish shauelings bring forth a third Testament, to
prove their secondarie Priests and priesthood, seeing it has no footing nor
ground neither in the old Testament, nor in the new. 2. Besides, this
distinction flatly overthrows the Apostles position, who by this sacrifice of
Christ, overthrows all the sacrifices of such Priests as are mortal, and of
such as had need to offer first for their own sins, and then for the
peoples, as the legal Priests did, and the Papal do. Nay more, it
overthrows it self, for whereas the Papists say, that the sacrifice of the
mass is the very same sacrifice which was offered by Christ himself upon the
cross, and that very Christ is offered by them, this is against all reason;
seeing the sacrifice upon the cross was offered by himself alone, without the
help of any ministers, except they mean such as Pilate, Caiphas, Judas, and
the soldiers, and such ministers we will easily grant their secondarie
ministers to be. 3. The nature of this sacrifice will not admit of that foolish
distinction, seeing it cannot be offered by any but the high Priest, even he
that was the high Priest of things to come, Hebr. 9.11, 12.
who was not every year to enter once into the holy of holies with the blood
of beasts, but once for all has he entered into the holy place, and obtained
eternal redemption for us: and if eternal redemption be obtained where there
is no remission of sin, there is no more need of oblation for sin. 4.
Whereas they say that Christ indeed is the only Priest to offer a bloody
sacrifice, and that is but once done and cannot be repeated; but yet ought
daily to be offered in an vnbloodly manner by their Priests for the sins of
the quick and the dead. Mors necessarius modus oblationis, toll mortem tollis
oblationem.
The Apostle takes away that evasion, affirming that without blood there is no
remission; and that if Christ be offered any more, he must of necessity suffer
again, Heb. 9.22.26.

The second thing of any moment objected is, that although Christ by his one
oblation once offered, merited redemption, and remission of sin; The Popish
distinction of oblation of primarie, an^ commemoratiue confuted. Sess. 6. cap.
2.
yet is it necessary for our salvation that this oblation of his be applied
unto us; and this cannot be done but by a secondarie daily offering of him in
the mass by the mass priest: and hence is their second distinction of the
offering (as the former of the offerer) into primarie and commemoratiue or
significatiue. Answ. Where by the way note how they wound themselves, and
thrust their swords into their fellows sides: The council of Trent, says that
the Mass is the very self same oblation which was offered on the cross, the
difference is only in the manner and some small respect; now other Papists
teach us, that in the mass is not the very same true and real oblation, but
only a commemoration and signification of it. Now who sees not, that the
remembrance of a thing is a far diverse thing from the thing remembered? yea
necessarily argues the absence of the thing remembered. Now which of these must
we believe? truly both alike, tha^ is, neither; seeing the word one oblation,
destroys both. 2. We grant that there must be an application of this
oblation, but not by such wicked means as they have devised, namely by the
multiplication of it self; as if a man should in stead of applying one
plaster, do nothing else but make infinite plasters, whereas one truly
applied to the sore were better then they all: but he who was the sacrifice,
being the wisdom of his Father, has devised a wiser means to apply unto
believers his oblation, namely, by the outward and ordinary means of the word
and Sacraments; as also inwardly by his spirit, working by those means
effectual faith in our hearts, whereby we lay hold upon all our good unto
salvation. And if there were no means to apply Christ's merit unto believers,
then by daily offering himself with it; then were there no means to apply unto
us the fruit and benefit of his incarnation, death, resurrection, or ascension,
unless he should be borne, die, rise, and ascend every day, for the reason is
the self same.

Use. 2. In that it is said, that Christ gave himself, Christ gave himself and
therefore wholly both body and soul: and why.
we may note that Christ gave himself wholly, both his body and soul in
sacrifice, and spared neither: for we had deserved a double death, which it was
meet that Christ by a double death should destroy; by his bodily death pull
out the sting of the death of our bodies, and utterly abolish the death of our
souls, by the death of his soul; and to this purpose that our consolation
might be full, the Scripture shows, how that his soul was heavy unto the
death; and that a little before his suffering his soul was sore troubled. And
Isai expressly affirms, that his soul traveled in his death, and that he
made his soul an offering for sin, and powered out his soul unto death, and
that he made his grave with the rich in his deaths: Isa. 53.11.9.
where note that he speaks in the plural number, to note this double death
of Christ: and what other thing did himself proclaim with such a loud voice
upon the cross, when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? for
what other is the death of the soul, but to be separated from God the
fountain of life? which point helps us to understand such places of the
Scripture, as affirm that Christ suffered and died according to the flesh,
Ioh. 6.51. and that Christ offered his body, Heb. 10.10. and all those which
ascribe all our salvation to the blood of Christ. All which must be
synechdochically understood, under one kind comprehending all his suffering,
and never excluding any part of it: every of them being equivalent to this
speech of the Apostle, who gave himself: that is, both his body and soul, or
wholly unto the death: neither can the death of the cross be other, which is
joined with the malediction of God, from which we by it were wholly delivered.

Christ's death and passion was voluntary, seeing he gave himself.
Use. 3. Where it is said that Christ gave himself, it may be further noted,
that his whole passion and death was voluntary: for what is more free then
gift: and this appears in that he was wont to say before hand, that he must
go away unto his father, that he must leave the world, and his disciples; Ioh.
10.17, 18.
that he had power to lay down his life, and take it up again: and that no
man could take it from him: for who could take that life from him, whose
sinneles nature of it self was not obnoxious to death, it being the stipend
of sin. And further, it is briefly to be observed, how the holy Ghost
thorough the whole history has noted special circumstances Get thee behind
me Satan: he would not patiently hear any thing which might work the least
unwillingness in him. 2. written of me, that I am ready to do thy will. And as
he would not resist in his own person, so when Peter made a rash resistance,
and in his rescue smote off Malcus his ear, Christ immediately healed the
wound, wished him to sheath his sword, and asked him if he thought not that he
could command a legion of angels if he would: but how then should the
Scriptures be fulfilled? 4. When he was brought a good confession before
Pontius Pilate. 1. Tim. 6.13.
5. When he came to the which in likelihood was reached him, to shorten the
sense of his pain: and that his soul willingly left his body, besides that
strong cry at his death and expiration, which argued no languishing death: all
the Evangelists note that Christ sent out his soul, or gave up his spirit:
yea, in great wisdom he prevented the souldeirs violence, in breaking his
legs, or offering him while he was yet alive any deadly wound; that he might
manifest that he did not violently, but voluntarily undergo that passion, and
drink of the bitterness of that cup. By all which seuerals, we perceive the
truth of that the Apostle speaks, Philip. 2.8. that Christ was made obedient
unto the death; and this made it an acceptable sacrfice: for had it not been a
free will offering, it had not been accepted. Let us then for our comfort, hold
fast this point of our Christian faith, that look how willingly the father
offered his Son in sacrifice, so willingly did the son offer himself* and
that those who crucified him, were not more willing to do it, then he was to
offer himself, and suffer himself to be crucified; and this makes it
absolutely meritorious and effectual, for the justification of all believers,
whereas otherwise it had been no ransom.

The third and last point to be considered in this fact of Christ, is the
persons for whom he gave himself, for us. Christ gave himself for his Church,
and not for every particular man.
The which words by the latter part of the verse, must be expounded only of
believers, of which number the Apostle was; and are not to be meant of all
mankind, as though Christ gave himself for an universal salvation of every
particuliar man, or intended to save all, if they would believe, as they who
are termed the Lutheran Divines do contend. But this place plainly
restrains it to his people, his Church, such as are redeemed from iniquity,
such as are purged, such as are a choice and peculiar people, and such as are
zealous of good works; for such Christ gave himself, Reasons.
and for no other. For, 1. if the purpose of God and Christ, was not that he
should die effectually for all men, then he died not for all men. But Expiatio
and intercessio sunt parts inseparabiles sa^^rdotij Christi.
Neither was Christ's purpose so; for his purpose was to give his life for his
sheep; and purposed not so much as to pray for any other; who surely if they
have no part in his prayer, much less in his sacrifice. Secondly, If as well of
Judas, Caine, as any other; and consequently their sins must necessarily be
remitted: for satisfaction for sin, and remission of sin, are inseparable:
so the Apostle makes redemption nothing else but remission of sin, Ephesians.
1.17. By whom we have redemption by his blood, even remission of sin: and
where remission of sin is, must need^ be blessedness: Psalm. 32.1.
so as by their doctrine none should be damned. Yea further, for whom Christ
gives himself, to those he gives his spirit, to abide with them, and to
seal up their salvation to their own souls: for the spirit lets them know
the things that are given them of God. But they cannot receive him, for the
world sees him not, nor knows him, and much less can receive him* see Ioh.
14.16.17. Thirdly, ^or whom Christ gave himself, those he loved: Gal. 2.20.
Who loved me* and gave himself for me: the which is true not only in Paul,
but in every believer, Ephesians. 5.2. and Reu. 1.5. He loved us, and gave
himself for us. Now what is meant here by us? all mankind? no surely, but Gods
dear children, and Saints, as the first place restrains it self, ver. 1.3.
and those that are washed from sin, and that are made Kings and Priests unto
God; as the second: but most expressly the Apostle expounds his own phrase
in the 25. verse of the same Chapter, Ephesians. 2.25.
He loved his Church, and gave himself for it. Now the wicked know not
Christ, and he knows not them, they hate him, and he loves not them: he is a
Jesus indeed, that is a Savior, but because he his people from their sins.
Fourthly, To whom neither the ends nor fruits of Christ's death can belong, a
vain thing is it to ascribe any efficacy of his death unto them: but neither
the ends nor the fruits belong to the wicked. For, 1. the maine ends are, 1. by
his death to abolish him that had the power of death, that is, the devil: but
he still rules in the children of disobedience. 2. to conquer death it self,
2. Tim. 1.10. but they are still held under the bondage and fear of it. 3. to
destroy sin, that it may die in men, but it lives and rules in the wicked.
4. that they which live, might live to him which is dead, 2. Cor. 5.15. but
they rise against him, and attain not the first resurrection, nor the
beginnings of life eternal here, nor the perfection hereafter. And for the
frui^s of this death, which are justification, remission of sin, imputation of
righteousness, reconciliation with God, regeneration, sanctification, and life
eternal, none of these belong but to the members of Christ; Ephesians. 5.
so as we may conclude with the Apostle, he gave himself for his body, which
if the wicked be not, he gave not himself for them. How Christ is said to
reconcile the world to God.


The maine things objected and much stood upon by the adversaries of this
truth, are these two. First, such places as affirm that Christ redeemed the
world, God so loved the world as he gave, God was in Christ reconciling the
world, I give my flesh for the life of the world, etc. Ans. By the world, is
not meant every particular man in it, but the elect both of Jews and Gentiles;
for Christ and his Apostles often cross the the Jews, who conceited that they
alone were loved of God, and not so the Gentiles, and therefore to abate their
pride, were often and much in proouing, that howsoever in times past the
Gentiles were passed by, yet now they were called to the participation of grace
and salvation, as well as they; and hence sometimes the Gentiles alone are
called by the name of the world, as that opposition shows between Jews and
Gentiles, Romans 11.12. If the falling of them the Jews, be the riches of the
world, that is the Gentiles: and sometimes again only the elect of both Jews
and Gentiles; for there is a world of the elect only, as Augustine well
proves out of the place in John alleged: Tractat. 87 ^n Ioh.
and this world, is only reconciled unto God.

Secondly, they object such places as affirm that Christ died for all: How
Christ is said to die for all men.
Romans 8.32. Who spared not his son, but gave him to death for us all: 1. Tim.
2.6. who gave himself a ransom for all: Hebr. 2.9. tasted of death for all,
etc. Answ. The word all, signifies not always all the posterity of Adam,
(which if it always do not, the force of the argument is broken) but
sometime, 1. only those of the last age of the world, Act. 17.30. But now
would have all men to repent. 2. sometimes not every particular, but every
kind: as Christ is said to have healed all diseases; that is, all kinds of
diseases; and the Pharisees tythed all herbs, that is, not every parti^ular,
but all kinds: and thus is it according to the truth of Scripture, and consent
of the ancient Church, to be taken in those places which affirm that Christ
died for all, namely, for all kinds of men, but not for every several of every
kind. 3. The places of Scripture restrain themselves to believers: as 1. Tim.
2.7. God would have all men saved: but that is, 1. all kinds of men for whom we
must pray. 2. all such as come to the knowledge of the truth: so Romans 8.32.
gave him for us all, but all such, as have all things given with him, all such
as are chosen, justified, and shall never be condemned; for so it follows in
the next verse. Heb. 2.9. Christ tasted of death for all; but who these all be,
the context shows. 1. sons that must be lead unto glory, ver. 10.2.
Christ's brethren, 11.3. such children as are given of God unto Christ, ver. 13.
Lastly, with these forms of speech compare these places which say that, the
son of man came to give his life a ransom for many, Matthew. 26.28. and that
he died to make many just: Romans 5.19. and that he was offered to take away the
sins of many, Heb. 9.28. and this will justify that truth who observes,
that with Paul, all and many, are all one.

Use. If Christ gave himself for us, then suffered he not for his own sins:
2. Cor* 5.21. Christ suffered not for his own sin, for he was given for us.
for he knew no sin, being most holy in his conception, without original
sin; according to the word of the Angel, Luke 1.35. That holy thing that
shall be borne of thee; as also most innocent in all his life, for no guile was
found in his mouth, and who could accuse him of sin? of which innocence not
only his friends, the Prophets, and Apostles, but his greatest foes also by
Gods providence became witnesses. Pilates wife wished her husband to have
nothing to do with that just man: Pilate himself confessed, he found no fault
in him: The Centurion said, surely this man was the Son of God. Caiphas said,
that one man must die, (not for himself but) for the people; the thief on the
cross, this man has done nothing amiss: nay, Judas himself cried out, that
he had betrayed innocent blood: not to speak any thing of the many confessions
of the devils themselves, that he was the Son of the most high. The Papists
draw near unto that Jewish opinion, which the Prophet mentions, Isay 53.4.
We judged him plagued and smitten of God, Christus praeter ^a bona quae suis
laboribus peperit nobis, meru^t etiam sibi corporis gloriam and nominis
exaltationem Bellar. l. 5. de Chro. cap. 9.
namely, for his own sins; but he was wounded for our transgressions, and
broken for our iniquities; for they hold, that Christ by his suffering merited
something for himself. Which if it had been so, then was the Apostle mistaken
in saying, that the Just suffered for the unjust; whereas he should have said,
the just suffered both for the just and unjust. Besides, this guing of
himself, withstandeth any meriting for himself: for if it was necessary that
he should merit for himself, his obedience could not be voluntary. And what
an absurd thing is it, to think that it was necessary for Christ being God,
to descend from heaven, become man, and condescend to most bitter death, the
grave, and sorrows of hell for his own sake? For what could he merit which he
had not from his first conception, or which was not due to his manhood from
that conception, by reason of the union of it with the word, the second person?
what could it want, which had such inseparable fellowship with the deity it
self? who in the midst of his abasement, his flesh being the flesh of the
word, could not want any glory, although he was pleased to hide it for the
time of his passion. Lastly, the humane nature of Christ is a creature, and can
therefore merit nothing of the creator, to whom all obedience is debt. 2. it
was guided and moved wholly by the divine, and in that regard could not merit
any thing for it self; for a meritorious work must be in the own power of
the worker, and by himself merely performed; nay, his merit for us depends
not upon his nature, but upon his person, in which both his natures concur to
the work and efficacy of the same.

Secondly, if Christ have given himself for us, we must receive this gift and
the benefit of it, seeing a gift not received, We must receive this gift and
make our best benefit of it.
is to no purpose or profit. And the means to receive Christ, and apply him
with all his benefits is, 1. to know him, for darkness comprehends him not;
and he came to his own, but they not knowing him received him not, but
crucified him, whom had they known they would never have crucified the Lord of
glory. 2. By prizing the gift above gold, silver, pearls, esteeming the
precious blood of the immaculate Lamb, above every corruptible thing under the
sun: all which cannot redeem one soul. 3. By opening the door of the
heart, purified by faith, to entertain him, while he offers himself with
all his merits in the word and sacraments; and this not as a stranger, by
giving a nights lodging, but as our husband and head, never to be departed.
Consider that now Christ stands at the door of thy heart and knocks, and
uses reasons (as once he did, Cant. 5.) from the great pains and sorrows
which he underwent to come to thee: he waited when it will once be, that for
thine own good thou will open unto him: that he may bring his father with him
to suppe with thee, and impart unto thee knowledge, sanctification, and the
rest of the graces which accompany salvation. Oh therefore never adventure to
try what a fearful thing it is, that he should depart in displeasure, or
that thou should not know the day of thy visitation: but receive him whilst
he is near, that thou never know what an heavy thing it is to seek repentance
with tears perhaps too late; or how uncomfortable a thing it is, to seek
him when he is grieved at thy unkind delays, and will not so easily be found.

Thirdly, if Christ have given himself so willingly to such a cursed death for
us, We must give our selves to him who gave himself for us.
we must also in way of thankfulness give our selves unto him. He gave his
body, his soul, his glory, and all for us: we must not think much to part
with body, goods, name, liberty, or life it self, for his sake, when he
calls us unto it; the law of thankfulness requires that we should part
with such things as in comparison are but trifles for him, who thinks not his
dearest things too good for us: and the rather, because when we have done all
we can, we can never be sufficiently tha^kfull for this greatest gift that ever
was given to the sons of men, we can never speak sufficiently of it, nor
ever wade deep enough into the ocean of that love, that presents us with
such a gift as this is. Howsoever therefore the sight of the blood of bulls and
goats would more affect many, then this most precious blood, which they tread
under their feet, yet let those that look for part in it unto salvation,
account this precious, yea and their glory, and rejoice that the wisdom of
God has left them means by the word and Sacraments, wherein Christ is daily
crucified before their eyes, to revoke it into their memories; let them
conscionably use these means to this end; that this gift running ever in
their minds and memories, they may bethink them what they may acceptably
return for so great receipts; and when they hear their hearts called for, they
may give heart and hand, head and feet, will and affections, up to the
perpetual service of so good a benefactor.

Seeing Christ has given himself, there need no other satisfaction for sin.
Fourthly, If Christ have given himself for us, then there is no other
satisfaction for sin. If angels or men, living or dead, masses or merits,
could have satisfied the justice of God, Christ might have spared himself; but
nothing can be given to God, nothing accepted of God in way of satisfaction of
man's sin, but the person and merits of Christ himself: for if any thing
belonging to our persons could go for payment, then might he have retained his
glory in heaven, and never have left it for our sakes. If any Papist stand out
here, and say, that Christ takes our works and dies them in his blood, and
then offers them to his Father, who accepts them as meritorious not for our
sakes, nor their own, but only for Christ. I answer, that Christ indeed
dies the works of the godly in his blood, and so presents them unto his
Father, and his Father accepts them at his hands; but no way in respect of
any satisfaction of sin, or merit of salvation, but only as testimonies of
our thankfulness and duty, and not otherwise.

That he might redeem us from all iniquity,] In these words is contained the
former fruit or end of Christ's giving himself, namely, to redeem his Church
from all the bondage and slavery of sin. For by sin we became bound, 1. to
the service of it, 2. to damnation, the stipend of it: both which the Apostle
includes, in that he says, that sin reigned unto death: where is both the
reign and command of sin, Christ redeemed his church from the captivity of
sin ^wo ways.
and the wages of it, which is death. Now the Lord Jesus redeemed his Church
out of this captivity two ways. 1. By paying the price of redemption unto his
father, even the most precious blood of the mighty God gave himself to
redeem us, that is, the life of that person who was God, went for our ransom;
whereby our debt is freely (in regard of us) discharged, the bill cancelled,
and the hand writing against conquest; for he bound the strong man that had us
in his power, spoiled principalities and powers, over whom he gloriously
triumphed; and thus partly by price, and partly by power, redeemed and rescued
his people.

How so short a suffering could redeem from infinite evils.
Quest. But how could Christ by giving himself for so small a time, redeem
all his Church from such infinite evils? Answ. We must excellency of the
person who performed this work, who was not a bare man, but 1. the Son of God
by eternal generation. 2. his only Son. 3. his beloved Son. Mortem re,
non tempore infinitam tolleravit Christus.
And to show us that these be the respects which make the work so meritorious
in it self, and so acceptable unto his father; the Scriptures every where give
him such titles as declare him to be most dear unto God his Father: so Ioh.
1.14. the only begotten son of the Father, full of grace and truth: and 18.
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of his Father: and Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son: and Romans
8.32. who spared not his own Son: now if the person be so gracious, the
work cannot but be acceptable.

Secondly, consider the sufficiency of the work, being so admirable as never
was the like: for it was no simple action neither of God alone, nor th^andrike:
the operations of both these natures which concur to one person, concurring
to the effecting of the same work. Wonderful then is this work, which could
never be performed by a me^^e creature, man or angel, but by a person that must
be both God and man.

Thirdly, the largenes and extent of the price, most absolutely satisfying
whatsoever was required, and that in all voluntary obedience both active
passive. Active, for he fulfilled all righteousness, and perfectly performed
and fulfilled the whole law in our stead. Passive, for he suffered a most
shameful and cursed death, both visible, standing in the separation of soul
and body: and invisible, suffering for a time even the very torments of hell,
namely, the endless wrath of his father, under which his Church had otherwise
been subdued for all eternity. So as for the time, the Son of God, and Lord
of all, was dejected under all creatures, and held under the most accursed
death that ever was, seeing the sins of all his body lay most heavily upon
him: unto both which branches of his obedience, if you add the voluntarinesse
and freedom of both, the whole will appear most perfectly meritorious; to
which purpose (because nothing can merit, to which any man is bound) the
Scripture says, that he paid that which he never took, and so was not bound
to any such payment.

Doctr. 1. Seeing Christ must give himself to redeem us, it implies a
wonderful bondage and tyranny of sin over us before that Christ wrought our
liberty. Before this redemption we were bo^dslaues* under sin and death. 2.
Pet. 2.19.
Hence does the Scripture speak of regenerate persons, as servants of sin,
servants of unrighteousness, servants of corruption: we read also of the wages
of sin, of the hire of unrighteousness which Balaam loved: of being sold
under sin, and of wicked men selling themselves to work wickedness, as
Ahab, and others: which is nothing else, but a voluntary putting of a man's
self under the will and power of sin: and thus he that commits sin,
that is, gives himself unto it, Ioh. 8.34.
is the servant of sin. To this purpose also we hear the Apostle often
speaking of the reign and dominion of sin in the mortal body, and of the
law of sin in the members rebelling against the law of the mind, and of the
law of evil which is ever present with the best. But who is it that feels
not within himself the woeful fruits of this captivity? how are we bound
hand and foot in chains of darkness, further then the son by setting us
free has enlarged us? how are we stripped stark naked of our clothes of
innocence and holiness, further then we are wrapped in the garment of this
our elder brothers righteousness? how seruill are we, and at the beck of
every sin, every temptation, every lust and suggestion, further then the
son has rescued us out of the hands of such hard Lords? who sees not this
tyrant thrusting himself by force or fraud into his best holds, so to
shoulder out the right owners? Sin resembles a tyrant many ways. Romans 5.21.
who perceives not this tyrant seeking himself only, and cares not for
blood and murder, but reigns unto d^^th in so many as he has subdued? who
finds not this tyrant ouerturning all laws and constitutions, and making his
own will his only law, to the which whosoever are subjected, what slavery
can be compared to theirs? If we consider the Jews oppression in Egypt for
400. years together, even when their taskes were most increased: If the
unmerciful entreaty of them in Babylon, when strange Lords had rule over them
70. years: If the cruel and bloody persecution of Antiochus, of which Daniel
prophesied, that before it never was the like, nor should be after it: If the
misery of the Turkish gally slaves; yet is there no misery, no bondage to
this. For there the enemy was external, here within a man's breast and bowels:
there the loss was outward of goods, lands, liberty, or life; but here of
Gods image, his favor, the soul, and life eternal: there might they in time
look to change their Master, or to fly, or with the end of their lives at
the least to end their misery; but here no man can fly except he can fly
from himself, nor end by death, but begin rather his bondage in comparison
of what it was before. And whereas there is no other bondage wherein a man
cannot at least wish his freedom, here men will not believe they are in such
snares, but rejoice in them, and are never so merry, as when they are
strengthening their bonds upon themselves: of which thraldom if we would more
distinctly conceive, in one word thus it is; Original sin inthralls us to
actual, preceding actual sins to consequent as just punishments of the
former: present sins are presidents to other men, and so we are entangled not
only with our own, but other men's transgressions also. By all these we are
liable to death, both temporal and eternal, which entered into the world by
sin: hence comes the torment and sting of a guilty conscience; hence is
the sinner haunted with the horror of Gods dreadful judgment, and the best
fruit of the best men's sins is shame and sorrow, even where God raises up
to repentance.

Use. 1. Note hence the miserable estate of such men as are out of Christ, in
whom sin yet reigns: for these are chained in ignorance, Miserable is their
estate who a^e out of Christ, because they have no part in this redemption.
rebellion, contempt of God, and his word, are snared with manifold lusts,
bound hand and foot already, and nothing remains, but the casting of them
into the fire: for they are yet in their sins; which one word sin (says
Luther) comprehends Gods everlasting wrath, and the whole kingdom of the
devil. And yet examples there be in the world of such, who by all Gods arrows
and plagues sent against them, cannot come to see their miserable bondage to
and by sin: the which if it made Paul, who was in Christ an ancient believer
to cry out, Oh miserable man, who shall deliver me from this body of death!
what cause have such to exclame upon themselves as most wretched, whose bonds
are not loosed as Paul's, but binding them every day surelier then other over
to destruction.

Use. 2. Seeing by sin we put our selves under such slavery, as both it
self and Satan play the tyrants over us, we must take that counsel, Let not
sin reign in your mortal body, Deal with sin as with a tyrant.
but daily seek and strive to expel the tyrant; and if that will not be done,
aim at the weakening of his forces, observing these directions. 1. Take from
him his most dangerous and talk with him; but presently make resistance, for
by such degrees iniquity comes into his chair; delay to talk with sin by
reason of our inclination breeds a certain delight in it, delight begets
desire, desire works endeavor, endeavor produces the act; the act
ingendreth, and is quickly iterated, and multiplied; multiplication is the
mother to a benumbed conscience, a brawned conscience begets defense of sin,
defense rises to boasting or gloriation in it: and thus is sin brought into
the chair of estate, and the quishon is damnation. Now sin is proclaimed,
crowned, and accepted of, and has all loyalty performed unto him.

The Son having set us free great is our freedom.
Doctr. 2. Secondly, out of the words we learn what a wonderful freedom we
have obtained by Christ. By nature we are wrapped in the guilt of sin,
subjected to the stipend of sin, subdued under the curse of the law, and lie
right under the whole wrath, and displeasure of God. Our sin proclaimed us
rebels to God through heaven and earth, banished us out of our own country,
set hell gates open against us, and gave us into the hands of Satan, as an
hangman to execute Gods sentence of eternal death passed against us; yea
further, hopeless we were in this woeful condition: for Gods displeasure was
so kindled against us, as men and Angels could not reconcile him; the law was
so transgressed, as all men and Angels could never satisfy, nor make up the
breach: the sentence was so severe, as all men and angels could never have
stood under it: the execution so certain, as the very gibbet was ever
standing in our sight in the horrors of soul, and terrors of accusing
consciences, and we seemed to walk and be left in the midst of ten thousand
deaths. Now when no means was left to pacify God offended, to satisfy the
law transgressed, to revoke the sentence denounced; the Son of the eternal
Father must come from the bosom and glory of his Father, and become obedient
both to the performing of the whole will of his Father, as also to the
ignominious death of the cross: that so becoming a curse for us (as that
execrable kind of death betokened) we might have God well pleased with us, as
he is with him, we might present him his law perfectly fulfilled, not in our
persons, but in his for us, we might plead the payment of all our debts, both
the principal, and forfeiture, by this our surety, and so might sue out our
full discharge from all former claims and sentences, because the uttermost
farthing is fully paid and discharged.

Use. 1. If Christ has freed and redeemed us from all iniquity, then has he
made no partial redemption: he satisfies not for the fault, and leave us to
satisfy for the punishment: Bellarm. lib. 4. de poenit. cap. 2. Council. Trid.
sess. 6 c. 14.
neither redeemeth us from the eternal punishment, but gives us leave to
satisfy for the temporal: But if Christ have redeemed us from all iniquity:
if he said on the cross; It is finished, that is, the whole work of man's
redemption is consummate and perfect; if at one time he made one perfect
expiation, and thereby brought in an everlasting redemption; Heb. 9.12. and 26
here is artillery and gunshot against all Popery: down go all other
satisfactions for sin in this life; down go all satisfactions after this
life in purgatory: Christ's satisfaction is not partial, but freeth us from
all iniquity both guilt and punishment.
down goes their doctrine of all other merits save this of Christ: down
goes all that supply of the foolish virgins lamps with the oil of good
works of superrogation out of the Churches treasury; and with these the Dagon
of the mass, and the whole Diana their worship and religion must down also.
Did not I forgive thee all, says the parable: Matthew. 18. Isa. 52.3.
and we were sold for naught, but redeemed without money, says the Prophet.
What can the Papist say now for his mony-masses, pardons, indulgences, and such
trash, obtruded upon the world, seeing the text is so express; we are redeemed
without money. Object. But David had his sin forgiven, 2. Sam. 12.13. The Lord
has put away thy sin: And yet because he had made the enemies of God to
blaspheame, the child must surely die, ver. 14. and this was the temporal
punishment: and what are the sufferings of Gods people in this life, and in the
end of this life at their death but punishments for sin? Ans. The text
shows plainly that both the sin, and the punishment was forgiven: for so
those words show, thou shall not die, death being the just wages of sin: yet
the child must die, not to make any satisfaction for the sin, but the text
shows another end, that the enemies might cease to blaspheame, when they
should see the Lord no patron or fauorer of sin, but rather justly offended
with it. And as for the afflictions which befall Gods children for sin, and
lie often very heavily upon them, none of them satisfy, or can satisfy any
part of the justice of God for sin past; but are fatherly corrections
preventing sins to come, many ways serving for their own good, and the
warning of others, least they should conceive him a God bolstring sin in
those that are dearest unto him; but no way as a satisfaction to God, for thus
only the passion of Christ is a satisfactorie redemption from sin. And the
like may be said of death, Mors piorum est medicinalis non poenalis.
which is left to the godly to conflict withal, although they have obtained
full remission of sins; but this is not as a punishment of sin to them to
whom Christ has altered the nature and visage of death, but now it is only an
exercise of their faith, hope, and piety, yea a very passage unto eternal
life.

2. This consideration must stir us up to a love of our Lord Jesus, He has
well deserved al our love who has paid all our debt.
who has discharged us of such a debt, and ransomed us from such an
unutterable thraldom. How would we affect such a one as would pay a trifling
debt, if it were but ten or twenty pound, if our selves for insufficiency
were cast in prison? we could never forget such love. Consider now how great
those debts of thine were; how weak and small thine ability was to satisfy,
if thou had had the power of all men and angels; how ruinous and rufull thy
case was every way: and thus the more love will appear to be due unto Christ,
and the more thy sin, if thou return not love for love.

3. It must work in us a detestation and watchfulnes against all sin, which
brings such vassaladge upon us: Beware of sin which brings back the former
bondage.
for shall Christ take upon him our debts, that we like desperate prodigalls
should do nothing but augment them? shall he ransom us, and give us perfect
freedom, that we with the unthankful Israelites, should run back again
to our former bondage? shall we with Salomons fool, make but a mock of sin,
which cost Christ so dear to expiate? he never knew what this greatest
benefit of Christ ever meant, that can take his pleasure in the course of any
one sin. Christ having restored the blind man his sight, bad him go and
sin no more: and to the adultresse, go and sin no more; so the use that we
should make of his redemption is, to cease from evil, and depart from
iniquity, least a worse thing befall, and our end be worse then our
beginning. And here is it not to be omitted, how the Popish doctrine is in this
point an utter enemy to this redemption purchased by Christ; not only in
magnifying their own merits, but in extenuating sin, so as men cannot come
to a serious sense and hatred of the same: for many sins are small, and
scarce sins; many are venial, and there is no danger in them: original
sin which is the mother sin of all, is no sin at all in the regenerate.
They turn many of the commandments into counsels, which men may give ear
unto for conuenience sake, but not of necessity, and in doing these, they do
more then the law binds them unto. By all which dreams of their own
brains, as by thick clouds of darkness, they obscure the brightness of this
our sun of righteousness, and lessen the merit of his sufferings. For if so
many sins are in their own nature so venial, Christ might have spared much
of his pains; and if they were so slight as they make many, the Christian
might forbear much of that watchfulness against them, unto which we are so
often exhorted by the Apostle.

Full consolation to the godly from the former doctrine.
4. Hence also is ministered no small consolation to the faithful: for if Christ
have redeemed us from all iniquity, who can lay any thing to our charge; seeing
Christ has justified, who can condemn? Let Satan now object the greatness of
our debt, our own insufficiency, and weak estate to discharge; we may plead
that we need not greatly distract our thoughts to procure any satisfaction,
besides that which is made on Christ's part, and accepted on Gods part for us,
but all that ever we can make, in way of thankfulness, we acknowledge our
selves bound unto. Let the blinded Papist (who teaches, that he can satisfy
the whole law of God, and yet reuerseth it with the same breath, when he says,
pro hui^^ vitae statu,) work to satisfy, we will to testify our
thankefulnes, in that we are freed from so great bondage.

And purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself,] Christ by his death
purges us two ways. Christ purges his people two ways.
1. By obtaining our reremission of sins, and absoluing us both from the
guilt and punishment of them: and this is the justification of a sinner before
God, which I will power clean water upon you, and ye shall be washed from
your filthiness, and from your idols; for it is the Lord Jesus, who by the
power of his eternal spirit offers his blood as the material and meriting
cause of our cleansing, Hebr. 9.14.
without which divine and effectual power of the holy spirit, the flesh had
profited nothing. 2. Where we meet with such places, which ascribe it some^ime
to the word, as Christ to his disciples, ye are all clean, by the word which I
have spoken unto you; sometimes to the Sacraments, Act. 22.16. Be baptized and
wash away thy sins: and sometime to faith, Act. 15.9. he purified their hearts
by faith: all these speeches conspi^e together in this same truth rightly
apprehended. For Christ is the only agent in our sanctification in and by all
these: he gives faith and sanctifies by it, as by an internal mean and
instrument whereby we receive our cleansing; he sends Ministers with his
word, and sanctifies by it, as by an external mean wherein sanctification is
offered: and with his Sacraments, that by them as an other outward means, that
inward sanctification might be represented and sealed. Thus David prays,
Purge me with byssope, that is, wash away my sin with the blood of thy Son,
which is shadowed in these legal sprinklings made with byssope: and thus are
diverse other Sacramental speeches to be understood.

Doctr. Redemption and sanctification are inseparable companions: Redemption
and sanctification are inseparable companions.
none is redeemed, who is not purged: the blood of Christ has this double
effect in whomsoever it is effectual to salvation: for he is made to such of
God righteousness and sanctification. 1. Cor. 1.31. Exodus 30.18. 1. king. 7.23.
In the law we read of lauers, as well as of altars, yea and of the brazen
sea. In the Gospel we read not only of blood, but of water streaming out of
the side of Christ: and that his sweat in his agony was water and blood: The
blood signifiyng the perfect expiation of the sins of his Church; and the
water, the daily washing and purging of it from the remainders of her
corruption. So the Apostle joins these two together, Ephe. 5.26. he gave
himself for his Church, that is, his life and blood, and purged it with water
through the word: and it is clear that the Apostle John expresses both these
benefits obtained by Christ, namely, perfect satisfaction for sin, and
sanctification from sin; when he says, that this is he that came both by
water and by blood; 1. Ioh. 5.6.
and as here it is said, that Christ gave himself to redeem and purge, so
elsewhere in express terms, to sanctify his Church, Ephesians. 5.27.

Use. 1. In that the death of Christ serves for our continual cleansing while
we live in this world; There must needs be much uncleanness where is need of
continual clensing.
we are to take notice and acknowledgement of much filthiness and uncleanness
even in the best: it is no slight soil or stain that has fouled our natures,
which will easily be blown or brusht off, for it sticks nearer us then our
skins, that the very power of Christ's death it self, does not wholly
destroy it while we live; but we have cause to cry ou^ with the leper in the
law, I am unclean, I am unclean: nay, the godly see what blackamoores they
are, and how hardly they change their skins: and what leopards they are, hardly
parting with their spots. Philip. 3.12.
And this made the Apostle take such pains, that he might attain this fruit
of Christ's death and resurrection, after he had been long able to maintain
his justification against all challenges, and say, who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? and what shall separate us from the love of God? well
knew he how fast this uncleanness cleaves unto our natures, Heb. 12.1. And
this challenges a number of monsters of men, whose hearts being gulfes and
seas of iniquity, yea the common draines and sinks of all filthiness, do
stream out nothing but such as Christ speaks of, adulteries, murders,
thefts, covetousness, deceit, uncleanness, pride, the wicked eye, and cursed
speeches; and yet charge them with such filthiness, they justify themselves
with the Pharisie, they thank God they serve God as well as the best, have as
good hearts as the best, they do as well, and live as well, as the best of
them all: you cannot fasten on them any sense of their foul sins* they need
no purging nor washing: whereas the godly daily groan and grieve in the sense
of the presence of that with them, which they hate worse then death it self.

Use. 2. Hence may be noted, that wheresoever sin is pardoned, it is also
purged, Sin is never pardoned but where it is purged.
Romans 8.2. There is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ: for the
law of the spirit of life freeth them from the law of sin and of death: that
is, not only from the curse of the law, but even that law and power of sin it
self which would still hold us in the service of it. He shall die in his
sin, that dies not unto his sin: not that sin can be so dead as not
remain; but if it lie not bleeding, Romans 6.2.
by virtue of that stroke which Christ in his death has given it, if the
force of it be not abated, and thou escaped from the rule of it, Christ's blood
does thee no good. How excellently does the Lord Jesus himself in his speech
to Peter approve this truth? If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me: and
no part in Christ, no pardon of sin. Ioh. 13.
Dare any man then dream of his reconciliation with God, that finds not
holiness daily preuayling against corruption, and the endeavor of purity in
heart and life, against that foul impuritie that sticks fast and cleaves
unto both? or dare any unsanctified heart, which in that it has set it self
upon a resolved course in sin, is a rebel unto God, lay claim unto any
part of the death and merit of Christ, when Christ has said, that unless he
wash the soul, that party has no part in him? No, no, the wedding garment,
and this our elder brothers garment is wouen of holiness, as well as
righteousness; and there is no admittance to the supper of the Lamb, no
blessing without either.

Use. 3. Let both these considerations move us to be ever washing and clensing
our selves from our uncleanness, and never to be at rest till we find our
selves, although not free from blackness, yet comely, as the Church confesses
of her self. And because this is the chief use of this doctrine, I will stand
a little longer to propound in it two points: 1. the means and notes which we
must use, and by which we must discern our selves to be washed and purged. 2.
the reasons or motives, to use carefully those means.

For the former; A man that means to be neat and cleanly, Means of our
purging to be used.
1. he willingly looks himself in a glass, he is not angry with the
party that sets the glass before him, but he calls for it, that he may
see

Secondly, A man that is in this way to be purged, begins with Ezekiel. 36.
is to take away the heart of stone) so he that would have evidence of his
cleanness, must begin here, and first wash the inside: so the holy man
David, although his sins were in the eyes of the world, yet to be soundly
purged of them, he craves a clean heart, and a renewed spirit. Psalm. 51.
And thus as he that means to be clean, begins at his head, and so
washes all downward, so the pure of heart begin at the heart, and this
carries all other parts and members; they know that of the filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, the latter is more filthy, and therefore they seek first to
be renewed in the spirit of their minds; and to wash their consciences from
dead works: whereas those that mean never to be clean, begin as it were at
their feet; if they can abstain from murder, adulte^ie, drunkenness, and
such open sins in the act, which is apparent to every eye, they think all to
be clean and well, because they never see the hardness, the pride, and foulenes
of their hearts: but even this conceit that they have washed their hands in
innocence, neglecting their hearts, is a brand and mark of their uncleanness
and impuritie.

Thirdly, he that will be clean, proceeds on to the other parts of 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
etc. Where is to be observed another maine difference between the clean and
unclean: the former endeavor to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1.
and to grow up unto full holiness; but the latter can content themselves with
a supposed goodness of their hearts, and yet let loose their tongues to all
obsene and lewd speeches; and open their eyps to all wandering and lustful
spectacles; and their hearts think no ill, but are good enough for all that:
but half an eye can discern what impure wretches they are, both within and
without.

garment spotted by the flesh; even all occasions, inducements, and appearances
of evil; yea such as he cannot avoid, yet he can hate. Whereas the careless
and slouenly Christian, runs into all companies, into all courses, and
thrusts himself into all occasions of sin; because he is filthy he cares
not to be filthy still, yea and to foul and besmeare all that come in his
company.

Fifthly, The sanctified person uses all good means, whereby he may become
clean, and being so, he is careful to preserve himself purging ^ire, Malac.
3.2.
and fullers soap; without which, although he take much soap and nitre, yet can
he not be purged: this is the only fountain opened to the house of David for
sin and uncleanness, this is the only lauer of the Church. Zach. 13.1.
2. He labors in the increase and strengthening of his faith, which as an
hand apprehending the former, purifieth the heart. 3. He diligently, and
reverently frequenteth the word, and Sacraments, as the outward means
appointed by God, for the effecting, and increasing of sanctification. 4. When
he hears Christ say, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me, he
reverently falls down at his feet in fervent prayer, Lord, not my feet
only, but my hands and my head: wash me thoroughly, even from top to toe.
Thus he knows he can only become clean; and by these same means he sees he
can only be kept clean; he dare not neglect these means as the foul monsters
of the world, that had rather be wallowing in the dung of the earth, and
bathing themselves in their dirtie and sinful sports and delights, then
frequent the places where these pure waters stream in most pleasant abundance:
but their cards, dice, bowls, boules, unprofitable company, idle solitarines,
(which as so many draynes, carry with them all uncleanness, the which they power
on the heads of wicked men with full buckets) chain them with chains of
darkness, that they cannot so much as desire these clean waters, which the
spirit powers on those which thirst after them.

The second point, is the motives to become purged, and to labor in
sanctification. 1. Because hereby we resemble the Lord himself, Motives to
use carefully the former means.
by which reason we are often in the Scripture moved to the study of holiness,
Leu. 19.2. and hence we become dear unto God, when he spieth is the will of
God, that every man know to possess his vessel in holiness and in honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. 3. Hereby we distinguish our selves from the profane Esaus of the
world, whereas by nature we are as foul as they. 4. We attain to the Luke
1.71.
and have an argument that Christ's death is effectual to us, because we see
the power of the devil, and sin destroyed Without shall be dogs, and
whatsoever is filthy and unclean: and know we not, that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God? 1. Cor. 6.9. What mean men then to fear
least they should be too pure, and too holy? and to reproach others as being
so? What a fearful delusion is it for men to flatter themselves as most do,
that there need no such strictnes or precisenes, but to come to Church, and
receive Sacraments according to law, and do as other men do; and sometimes as
their leisure suffers to read or pray alone, and hear a sermon extraordinary.
But alas, what will it profit a man to be a sundaies Saint, and a work-daies
Devil? Or what great good can good moods do? are we not exhorted to the
following of holiness, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of soul and
body, to an heavenly conversation, to have no fellowship, nor touch any
unclean thing? On the other side, are we not urged to continual prayer; In
all things to be thankful; to meditate day and night in the law of the Lord;
to make the word our mark to aim at; and in all things with full purpose of
heart to cleave fast unto the Lord? And now dare any flesh except and say, but
if I shall do thus it is more then need, and I should become too precise and
too pure, and so are they that do so? we serve a God of pure eyes that will not
be thus dallied withal.

To be a peculiar people unto himself,] In these words is set down one end why
Christ underwent such pains not only to justify, but also to sanctify his
Church: namely, that it might become impropriate unto himself, and applied
unto his own best purposes. For as unclean vessels can never be used unto any
good purpose, until they be washed and sweetened; no more can sinful men
ever become vessels of honor, reserved unto the Lords own use, before they
be washed by the blood of Christ, and those pure waters of the spirit before
mentioned. The word (...), properly signifies something, on which a man for
some excellency in it, sets his affection more then other, and therefore
lays it up, and reserueth for some special use and purpose, and will not at
any hand part with it; as if a man should lay up some bright and bewtifull
pieces of gold, which he will not suffer to see the sun, as we say, or be
brought out scarce in extreme necessity. Thus although all the earth be the
Lords, Iun. in Exodus 19.5.
who being the God of nature and grace, has all power and liberty to
confer where he pleases grace above nature: yet his good pleasure was to
choose Israel, to be his chief treasure above all people, and an holy nation,
that unto them he might show his wisdom and glory; and his love and mercy
upon them. But that was but a type, Deuteronomy. 7.
the thing it self is specially apparent in the Church of the new Testament,
even the true Church of God in all ages since: unto which all those titles
justly belong which Peter gives to the believing dispersed Jews: A royal
pr^^sthood, a chosen generation, an holy nation, and a peculiar people.

Now the Church may be said to be a peculiar people, (by the Church
understanding the true and essential members of the Church) 1. Because
believers are the most precious of men, The Church is Gods peculiar sundry
ways.
even the most noble persons of the earth, descended of the blood of Christ, in
which regard Cant. 6.7.
Lords, and Ladies: and hence are believers called sons of God, brethren of
Christ, and heyers unto the crown of heaven. Secondly, In holy nation, the
spouse of Christ, the daughter of God, the choice of God, and Gods delight.
Thirdly, people dwelling alone, and numbered not himself among other nations,
that is, Num^. 23.9.
altogether different in laws, customs, manner, and condition of life. But
let us see this truth in some instances. 1. Their original are not some few
families, all the families in heaven and earth are called. 2. Their country
Ephesians. 3.15.
but heaven, to which they tend, and from whence they look for a Savior. 3.
Their King is neither borne nor created, but the everlasting King of of his
kingdom there is no end. 4. Their laws are spiritual, to govern the
conscience as well as the outward man, most perfect, war and weapons are not
carnal, but spiritual, as their chiefest enemies be: their captain was never
foiled, nor can be, and therefore before they strike a blow, Ferendo, non
feriendo.
they are sure of victory: and for their external enemies, they conquer them,
not by smiting (as others) but by suffering. language is the language of
Canaan, their speech bewrays them to be citizens of heaven; Qui in Christu^
credunt linguis loquuntur novis. Bern. de ascen. dom.
hence are they called people of a pure language; no filthy, vnsa^ourie, or
corrupt communication comes out of their mouths, but such as is holy,
tending to edification, and ministering apparel is devised and put on by God
himself, even garments of innocence, long white robes died red diet not
rising out of the earth, but descending from heaven; Jesus Christ is the bread
of life, and that Manna that came down from heaven; and that water which
gusheth out of the rock; of whom whosoever feeds and drinks, he has
tasted of the tree of life, and of the water of life, he cannot but live
everlastingly. Thus we see how the members of the Church are called a peculiar
people.

Use. 1. Hence we may note a lively description of the Church of God, namely,
that it is a peculiar people, selected and called out of all nations, peoples,
tongues, and kinreds of the earth, for the Lords own possession and use. That
which the Lord once spoke of Israel, is true of all the true Israel of God,
Israel is a thing hallowed unto the Lord, and as his first fruits: Ier. 2 3.
for as the first fruits were of all the fruits of the earth separated and
sanctified unto the Lord; so out of all the people of the earth, are a remnant
set apart and separated to become his, and belong unto him: see Hos. 1.10. and
2.23.

Use. 2. Hence is affoarded no small consolation to the members of the Church,
Many consolations to Gods people from the former doctrine.
and that sundry ways: for God will not forsake his people whom he has
chosen, whom he has made his peculiar. But 1. his protection watches over
them, Zach. 2.5. I will be a wall of fire round about he will suffer none to
do them wrong; let them be kings who will not be reproved by any other, Psalm.
105.14.
yet he will reprove them for their sakes: this was the ground of the Jews
safety, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance: he found him, he taught him, he lead him, and kept him as the
apple of his eye. Be thou then a child of the Church, and although thou may
find thy self in thy self lost, blind, ignorant, and in a thousand perils,
fear not, the Lord will find thee, lead thee, teach thee, and keep thee as
safe in the chambers of his providence, as thou would keep safe the apple
of thine own eye. Secondly, his providence is ever with them, his eyes upon
them, his ears, his hand, his treasury open unto them: yea himself becomes

Use. 3. For instruction to teach us who profess our selves the Lords
peculiar, to live unto him, to whose use we are set apart. We must live unto
the Lord whose we are.
And this is the Apostles reason, Ye are not your own, therefore glorify God
in your souls and bodies, for they are his: and that we may this do, we must
propound two rules before us. 1. We must see that the whole course of our lives
ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people; dearly beloved, I beseech you
abstain from fleshly lusts: 1. Pet. 2.9.1^.
this inference shows what a dishonorable and disgraceful thing it were,
for Christians so far to forget their nobility and dignity, to stoop to
such base services: they should rather call to mind that being set apart to
the Lords use, and like so many nobles being to attend the nearest services of
their King, they are to hear and fashion themselves according to his good
pleasure: Deuteronomy. 26.18. The Lord has set thee to be a precious people unto him,
that thou should keep all his commandments. Neither may believers frame
themselves according to the guise of the world, seeing they are called out of
the world to be the Lords peculiar. Those that are the next servants in a
princes court, live not according to the fashions of other courts, but
according to the manner of their own: so the Lord from this reason charge
his people, that they should not conform unto the heathen in their fashions;
for ye are an holy people, and the Lord has chosen you for a precious people:
Deuteronomy. ^4.1.^.
in like manner we must not conform to Romish or Italian fashions, nor the
courses of loose and profane men amongst our selves: but as we profess our
selves the Lords, so must we square and order our ways according to his word.

2. The second rule is, that as every peculiar serves to the praise of the
owner, so we must frame our lives and actions to the praise and glory Praise
the Lord, oh sing praises unto the Lord; for the Lord has chosen Jacob to
himself, and Israel for his chief treasure. Whence it follows, that
whatsoever practice would tend to the dishonor of God, ^e must resist and
withstand in our selves and others. And thus the Lord charge his people, that
they should be so far from associating themselves with the wicked people that
lived near them, in their idolatry, Deuteronomy. 7.
that they should break down their altars, and cut down their groves and
images, and resist them; even from this same ground, because he had chosen them
to be precious unto himself. So that if any sinner shall move and woo us
unto any ungodly practice, we must reason the case with our own hearts; I may
not do any such thing as may dishonor God, or my profession, let others do
thus and thus, I may not do so, I am the Lords peculiar, and must live to his
glory, which I cannot do if I withstand not such motions, as whereby his
glory is hazarded, and hindered: and thus also may thou: judge of thy self,
whether thou be the Lords; if thou seruest not the times, nor men's lusts,
nor fashionest thy self to men's humors, but live unto the Lord, thou art the
Lords.

Love the Saints because they are Gods peculiar.
Use. 4. Hence is afforded a motive to love the Church, and show all kindness
to the members of it, even because it is the Lords heritage, and because the
Lord is not unfaithful to forget the work and labor of love showed to his
Saints; yea be it but a cup of cold water, it shall not loose a reward,
seeing the Lord accounts it as done to himself. The Philippians supplied
Paul's necessities, and Paul promises them that his God should supply all
their necessities. Phil 4.18, 19.
On the contrary, woe shall be to them that wrong by word, or deed, or
wrighting the least of these little ones, Zach. 2.3.
who are so dear to the Lord as the apple of his eye. Let the scorners and
enemies of good men remember that in Ier. 2.3. Israel is as a thing hallowed
unto the Lord, all they that eat it shall offend, evil shall come upon them,
says the Lord. If the King should set himself to raise and advance some one
man whom he affects above all other; were it safe for any subject to pick and
cull out that person to wrong and disgrace above any other ^ and yet thus do
they that of all other wrong and oppress Gods Church and dear children; who
in the end shall know that the Church is an heavy stone to lift at, against
which never man heaued, but with the certain peril of his own life. Men may
dip their tongues in venom* and their pens in poison; and keep the garment of
such as stone Steven; but the Lord will avenge the cause of his poor ones, his
peculiar ones, he will not always hide his face, nor hold his peace.

Zealous of good works*] Here is another end of Christ's sanctifiyng his
Church, that every member of it should ardently endeavor in all good and
goodly conversation. Where the Apostle seems to answer a secret objection:
for it might be said, if Christ have thus redeemed, purged, and washed us, and
so made us his own peculiar, what need we more, or what further remains for
us to do? neither wanted there Libertins in those days, that from the
appearing of grace cast off all yoakes, and thought they might do what they
listed. But the Apostle tells such, that Christ never washed, redeemed, nor
powered out his grace upon any, but such as thereby were wrought to forwardnes,
and cheerfulness in all well-doing. And here (not to speak of the nature and
necessity of good works, because that treatise is to be referred to a fitter
place) three things are to be observed. cap. 3.8.


First note, that before the Apostle speak of good works, we hear of
redemption, and purging, and washing, The worker must be good before the work
can be so.
and of a peculiar people that must do them: for indeed, the best works are
so far from justifying and purging, that none can be good before the party be
justified and purged. A leper or polluted person in the law, might not touch or
attempt any thing for whatsoever he touched, became also unclean: so while the
whole man, even the mind and conscience, the fountains from whence all the
actions issue, are polluted; how can any thing streaming from thence be clean
and pure? unless we will say, that one fountain at once, can send out sweet
water and bitter: or control holy Job, who says, that no man can bring a
clean thing out of filthiness: August. epist. 120. Honorato.
Good works must begin from that we are justified, but we begin not to be
justified, because they went before. The whole scope of the Epistle to the
Romans is to prove, that no man can by works be justified before God; the
very first proof of which conclusion is fetched hence, Romans 3.10.
because all are under sin, and deprived of the glory of God; and so being
evil trees, cannot bring forth good fruit, and much less in this state of
sin, unwashed and unpurged, can be zealous of good works: without me, says
Christ, ye can do nothing; namely, no good thing: till a man therefore be set
into Christ, he cannot possibly turn his hand, to any thing that is truly,
and formally good, no more then a sient can bring forth fruit which is not set
into a stock, or a branch which is not set into the vine.

Secondly note, that whosoever are justified and sanctified, A good worker
cannot but bring forth good works.
they must needs bring forth good works: for else Christ should be frustrate
of his end in those for whom he gave himself: Ephesians. 2.10. We are his
workemanshippe, created to good works. We must first be his workmanship,
before our selves can be good workmen, but being once his new creatures, then
can we neither be idle nor (...) occupied, but conversant in such good works
as himself has ordained we should walk in. In experience we see a man
planting, good trees in his orchard, not that they should be barren, or laden
with bad fruit, but to furnish him with store of good fruit: and in the
Scriptures we see what recompense the good husbandman expects, Ioh. 15.1.
for setting, and dressing, purging, and pruning his vine, namely, that it
should bring forth much fruit. Is this the end of our redemption from the
hands of our enemies, that we should serve him that has redeemed us, in
holiness and righteousness all our days? are we purged to be a chosen
generation, and a peculiar people, that we might set forth the virtues of him
that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light? has the Lord
separated us unto his own use, not only to glorify himself in us, but after
a special manner to be glorified by us? has he called us out of the world,
which lies in wickedness, unto holiness; and so fitteth us to every good word
and work? oh what a thing were it for us to walk in such ways as are
distasteful and dishonorable to God, and no whit distinguish us from the
profane and ungodly of the Lord? needed the Lord have bin at half the cost and
labor with us for such fruits as these; or is this that return which he
expects of all his pains?

Use. Would any know, whether he be a good tree of righteousness, the planting
of the Lord, set into Christ, and living and thriuing in him: let him look to
his fruits, which be they never so good, cannot make a tree good, but can
declare it so to be. Examine then thy self, whether thou art a new creature,
whether old things be passed away, and all is become new; whether thou find
the effect of the blood of Christ purging thy conscience from dead works, Heb.
9.14.
to serve the living God: whether thou walk in the light as he is in the
light: hence it will appear, that this blood is still distilling upon thy
soul, 1. Ioh. 1.7.
to cleanse thee from all sin: there is no more conspicuous note, or evidence
that a man has escaped condemnation, and is in the state of grace, then that
which is given by the Apostle as a touchstone, Romans 8.1. Which walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. But what have they to do with Christ, who hate
the light; in whom sin rules to destruction: who walk in the ways of the
world, and in the lusts of their own hearts and eyes: who are led by the
spirit, that bears rule in the sons of disobedience; who in stead of
showing out the virtues of God, bear upon them the brand and express image of
their father the Devil; some in malice and envy against God, and good men, as
he was a manslayer from the beginning: some in uncleanness and filthiness, as he
is called an unclean spirit; others in railing, swearing, and cursing, who
have their tongues set on fire from hell; others in unrighteous words, and
deeds, as he is a liar from the beginning: some in tempting and seducing others
to their own lure, enticing to companionship, drinking, gaming, etc. as he
compasses the earth to do mischief: of all these we may say, as Christ to
the Jews, Ye are the children of your father the Devil, for his works ye
do. And others also, in whose lives such open unrighteousness breaks not out;
yet because they cannot show the fruits of righteousness, we may conclude
against them, that they were never washed by Christ. The adopted sons of God
imitate the natural Son, who when the Jews said, Tell us, art thou that
Christ, that we may doubt no longer; he presently sends them to his works,
If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not: so art thou a Christian,
and the child of God, as thou professest and beleeuest? I say if thou do not
the works of God, thou art not to be believed. Now the works of God, are 1.
to believe in his Son; 2. to endeavor to keep all his commandments; 3. to
practice the duties of repentance and invocation, and that daily: 4. to call
others, especially those that belong unto thee unto the knowledge and service
of the true God, that thou with thy house may serve the Lord: 5. to make thy
calling and every duty to man, branches of obedience unto God. These would
make thee diligent in the Ministry, for faith must be maintained, neither
can thou obey all, unless thou know all: the third would cause thee to
watch against sin in thy self, the fourth to banish it from thy family, the
last would make thee beneficial to all men, hurtful to none; and by all shall
thou adorn thy holy profession. These works of thy father cheerfully and
constantly perform, and we will believe that thou art the child of God.

Thirdly note, that the thing that God requires in a professor, is zeal,
forwardnes, and earnestnes in well doing, and that his whole course should be a
studious prosecuting of good works. The same word is used in 1. Cor. 14.1.
Covet spiritual gifts, but the word is, (...).
be zealous after, or zealously addicted unto them; and; cap. 12.31. Be zealous
after the best gifts: the same teaches the same Apostle, Gal. 4.17. It is a
good thing ever to be zealous in a good thing: and is a virtue every where
called for in the scriptures, yea such a one, as without which, good things
cannot be done well, or in good manner.

Now because every forwardnes and earnestness even in good things, is not
commendable zeal (for Peter even in Christ's defense may hastily draw his
sword, and rashly lay about him) therefore to the right ordering of it, there
must always go with it these three things. First, What virtues must attend
zeal to guide it aright.
the light of knowledge, that it may both begin and end with the word. Paul
reprooueth the Jews who had zeal, and that for the law of God, because it was
not according unto knowledge; yea, he condemns that day, who are much in
zeal, whereby they are in continual tumults (as the Ephesians) for their
Diana, Act. 19.
but ignorance must be the mother of Secondly, it must be guided by good
discretion: it must be wise as well as warm; in greater matters greater, and
lesser in lesser. A wise man will not power out all his indignation against
every trifling displeasure, nor set his whole strength to that which he can
wipe away with a finger. There must always be a fire of zeal kept burning in
the soul, as the fire on the Altar never went out, but it must be a just
zeal, proportioned according to the occasion, even as we keep the fire on our
hearths all day long, but enlarge or lesson it according to the occasions of
the house. If some great good be in thine eye, tending to the great glory of
God, and great good of his Church, stir up and add to thy zeal, till it
become a great flame; but in smaller, and minutiall matters to carry an
unbounded and unbridled zeal, were to call for a sword to kill a fly, or an
hatchet to break an egg; and yet zeal must ever fence the heart from
affecting, committing, or communicating the Thirdly, it must carry with it,
sincere affection, abandoning all by-respects, besides the glory of God,
desire of men's good, and conscience of the good duty it self. In doing any
good thing the close corners of the heart must be well searched, seeing much
deceit and guile lurketh in them; and if with the Papist, we do any thing
never so good for the matter; and never so zealously for the manner, to merit
at the hand of God; or with the Pharisie, to be seen of men, or in which our
own respects provoke our zeal, whether glory, favor, credit, wealth, or any
other by-end, verily we have already our reward.

Now what a necessary attendant this right ordered zeal is to our good
works, How necessary zeal is to a good work.
and what great reason the Lord has to require it, will appear by the fruits
and effects of it, which are such as make the works we do, not good only but
glorious. And because zeal is a mixed affection of love and anger, therefore at
one time it has respect both unto the good work it self, as also that which
is contrary, and produces effects of love to the former, and properties of
hatred against the latter. The effects of zeal against evil, are, 1. a great
hatred of it, with a care and diligence to prevent it, or if that cannot be, it
causes an inward grief and vexation of heart for the evils it cannot
reform: thus was the righteous soul of Lot vexed for that he could not
redress: and this grief gives often testimony outwardly of it self in
sighs and tears: as David's eyes gushed out with rivers of tears, because men
kept not the word: Psalm. 119.136.158. Ier. 9.2.
and Jeremy wished his head a fountain of tears, to weep for the sins of
the people: yea, it is a mark of such as are marked for the Lords, that their
zeal provoke them to mourn for the abominations of the rest. 2. As anger
pursues the object of it, Ezekiel. 9.4.
so does zeal hunt out, and reform evil where it has calling and power, and
that most earnestly: Examples we have: in Nehemiah who reproved, smote, Nehem.
23.22.
and pulled off the hair from the beards of the Sabboath-breakers. In Phineas,
who being stirred up extraordinarily slew Zimri, and Cosbi, Numb. 25.
in their filthy fact. In our Savior himself, Ioh. 2.14.17.
who in great zeal whipped out of the Temple the buyers and sellers, giving
this reason, because the zeal of his Fathers house consumed him. And although
it properly feeds upon the sin, Reu. 2.6. Thou hate the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans: Psalm. 15. I hate the works of them that fall away: yet it
disliketh even the persons so far as they are agents in sin; for thus far
this grace carried both the Prophet and the Angel of the Church in both those
places: Reu. 2.2. Thou can not forbear them which are evil; and Psalm. 15.
In whose eyes a vile person is contemned: so Solomon, Prove. 28.4. those that
keep the law, set themselves against the wicked: but yet so as it carries
with it such sympathy and compassion, that it can quickly turn it self into
prayers for the offender.

The effects of zeal for good, are, The effects of zeal about the effecting
of good things.
1. It preserves in the heart a fitness, and preparednes to every good work,
required of every believer, 2. Tim. 3.17. Secondly, it exciteth diligence and
have in the things we do; it abandoneth idleness, slothfulnes, and delays,
by which occasions Not slothful to do service, fervent in the spirit, serving
the Lord. Thirdly, zeal causes continuance in well doing, which is also
required in every good action, as well as in prayer: it contenteth Romans 12.12.
and brings the party possessing it to be rich in good works, and to shine
light somely therein; yea it makes a man hold out, and keep a constant tenor
in good courses, and that as well in adversity as prosperity, so as he is
neither choked by preferments, as very many; nor discouraged by distresses,
as not a few. Fourthly, zeal sets such an high price upon the glory of
God, and performance of conscionable duties, never so much difficulty,
whatsoever he sees himself bound unto; it hardneth the face like brass
against dangers, and losses; the loss of the world is in his judgment gain,
yea all things are loss, and dung so as he may win Christ; this alone
yields joy in the spoiling of goods; by this can a man hate father and mother
in comparison of his obedience, and be contented to be hated of all men for
well doing, in which case the loss of friends is but light. This zeal for God
makes a man's liberty small in his eye; Act. 20.24.
nay in standing out in a good cause, his life will not be so dear unto him as
the finishing of his course with joy: yea he can rejoice to be offered up upon
the sacrifice and service of the Churches faith, Philip. 2.17.
as Paul. And which is yet much more, the zeal of Gods glory will so burn in
the heart, as it can carry a man so far beyond himself, as that he shall
neglect his own salvation, and wish to be accursed, yea and blotted out of the
book of life, Romans 9.
if God may be more honored by the one then by the other. What be the things
then which zeal will not forgo for Gods honor and men's salvation; when as
things most precious are parted with, yea and cast away in comparison as vile?
will it stick to be at a little labor, or charge for the salvation of men,
when it willingly will part with possessions, friends, preferments, favor,
liberty, and life, yea body and soul for God and his Churches causes? By all
that has bin said, may be concluded how aptly the spirit of God requires
zeal to good works, which not only (as we have seen) hates, watches
against, pursues, and reformeth evil: but prepares, inciteth, continues in
good, and will not be driven from it by any means.

Sundry sorts of men bewray the want of zeal.
Use. By this doctrine many may see and challenge themselves of want of zeal
in religion, yea of religion it self. For 1. a number there are, who think it
well and enough to give a countenance, or some show to surely thou art one of
them: which imputation they would take as hainously, as the Jews did the
speech of the blind man: will ye be also his disciples? here may be wisdom of
the flesh, but little zeal or feruencie of the spirit: here is policy, of the
holy Ghost is fit, Be zealous and amend, for else the Lord will spue them out
of his mouth. 4. Some are zealous, but either without Act 23.12.
Zealous railers against God; against his word, his ministers, and servants;
against the strict observation of the Sabbath, against the most conscionable
duties of watching against sin, or of working of righteousness, unto which
they are sworn enemies themselves, and in others account it mere folly and
madness: all their zeal is against zeal. But let us whom God has taken
into his school to teach us better things, be careful to raise this grace out
of the ashes of it: and consider, 1. how zealous the Papists be in their own
inventions, and for the traditions of their fathers; and shall not we for the
truth. 2. the more resistance it has, the greater is the glory to hold it
out. 3. how that cold Christians have but cold comfort, from God, in
themselves, and from their best works; because they come short of this
precept, which requires that every C^ristian be zealous of good works.

Verse. 15. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. See
that no man despise thee. The Apostle here repeateth the precept which he gave
to Titus in the beginning of this chapter, contracting and reducing the
special offices of a faithful minister to three heads, 1. doctrine. These
things speak. 2. exhortation, and exhort. 3. reproof, and rebuke. Secondly,
he prescribes the manner how he shall perform all these, with all authority.
Thirdly, because Titus was young, and want of years might seem to deny him
that authority, which was meet for an Evangelist, he backeth him herein in
the last words, let no man despise thee. Which words although they may be
conceived as a charge to his hearers; yet I take it rather to be a precept to
himself, that he should not suffer any to contemn him. Quest. But how could
Titus, or how can any other Minister, hinder men from despising them, seeing
the world is every where so full of mockers. Answ. There will indeed always
be mockers of the best Ministers, and despisers of their persons: yet must the
Minister so carry his doctrine, with power and authority, and his life with
gravity and integrity, as he give no cause of just contempt of himself; nay
rather that hereby he get himself reverence that not the best only, but even
those which are not the very worst, who with religion and conscience, have put
off all forehead and humanity, may begin to fear and stand in awe of him,
which course seems to be closely commended to Titus: So was Timothy
commanded to free his youth from contempt, 1. Tim. 4.12. Let no man despise thy
youth: but how shall he effect this? the next words show us, But become unto
them which believe an example in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in
faith, in pureness.

Having spoken before of teaching, exhortation, and reproof in their several
places; see cap. 1.9.
we will only note in this former part, what it is that the minister is tied
unto in his teaching, exhortation, and reproves, and in the performance of
every part of his ministerial office: namely, unto the word. These things,
says our Apostle: for this purpose has the Lord in great wisdom furnished
the Scriptures to make the man of God able both to teach, instruct, and
improoue, so as he need go no further to seek for profitable things. ^. Tim.
3.16.
Which teaches such as will stand in Gods counsel, All proofs and reproves
must be fetched from the Scriptures.
to fetch from hence all their doctrines, all their proofs, all their
exhortations, and all their reproves; for so shall they be just, so shall they
be powerful to work a work of edification, and so shall they be irresistable
in the consciences of men. These things if men would tie themselves unto, they
should increase men with the encreasings of God in spiritual wisdom,
watchfulness, and the fear of God. Then should we not meet with so many
pretors for sin and liberty to the flesh, straining their wits to
legitimate bastardly broods of opinions, which the Scripture never acknowledged
hers. Nor so many who in their reproves glad the hearts of the impenitent, and
make heavy the hearts of those to whom the Lord has spoken peace; who strike
at the best things and men; and so as soon as ever they have delivered a truth
in thesi, least they should leave it while it is true, misapply it in the
hypothesis; girding at godliness as too much scrupulositie and preciseness;
accounting conscience an hypocrite, and the fear of God dissembling before men.

Hence are discovered as sinful, all reproves of sin by jesting,
enterluding, and stage representations, in which fools make a mock of sin,
and open a public school of all lewdness and iniquity; and if any devil or
sin be cast out there, it is by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils. Further,
all reproves by satyrizing, and by slanderous libells, and secret
calumniations (all which commonly wrecke themselves rather upon the persons
then sins of men) are here reproved: which although they be indeed sharp
and biting means, yet has the Lord appointed fitter and sharper arrows to
smite his enemies withal, even sound and sufficient conuictions out of the
word, which is able to wound and daunt kings themselves: and prescribed them
also to be publicly drawn, and shot in such grave, reverent, and seemly
sort, as is befitting, 1. both the persons and calling of the reproouer. 2. the
things themselves which are weighty and serious: as also 3. the presence of
God and his congregation, whose matters are debated, and whose sentence against
sin is in denouncing and executing. Small wisdom therefore it is, for men
in these cases of the salvation and damnation of men, to suffer their wits to
play upon sin so lightly and iestingly as becomes rather some vain
spectacle, or professed iester; then either the errand of the Lord, or a
messenger from the Lord of hosts.

The second point, is the manner of delivering doctrine, exhortation, and
reproof with all authority.

Doctr. The word of God must be delivered in such manner as the majesty and
authority of it be still reserved unto it, The word must be so handled as the
authority of it be preserved. Reas.
1. Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the word of God; and the
ambassadors of Christ, must speak his message even as himself would utter it.
2. The soul of the word is the presence of the spirit, which every Minister
must manifest, they may fall on their faces, and worship God, saying, God is in
this man indeed. 1. Cor. 14.25.
3. The Prophets and Apostles have gone before us, as presidents in this
behalf, I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
strength to declare Jacob his sin, and Israel his transgression. Before Isai
was sent on his message, his lips were touched with an hot coal from the
altar. Isa. 6.6.
The Apostles accordingly were not sent to witness of Christ, until the spirit
had descended upon them, and that in the form of fiery tongues; to signify
that themselves being kindled with zeal and feruencie in the Lords business,
they should also by their doctrine inflame others, and that their speech should
not light any where, but it should kindle and inflame the hearts of the
hearets. But the most perfect pattern of imitation herein we have in the
chief doctor of his Church, who not only after his resurrection could and did
make the hearts of the disciples burn within them, even in his ordinary
talk; but all the time of his humility it is truly verified of his whole
doctrine, Matthew. 7.
that he taught with authority, and not as the Scribes. Indeed never man spoke
so, nor can speak, by the confession of his very enemies: for never man spoke
so in his own name, verily, I say unto you: never man confirmed his speeches
with such powerful and proper miracles: never man spoke with such peculiar
grace, zeal, liberty and command of the spirit in the conscience: but yet all
his Ministers are to imitate him in zeal, in power, in liberty of speech and
spirit, for the glory of God, and come as near this copy as they can.

Use. Ministers must take heed of coldness in their ministry, of liueles and
spiritles preaching, of powerless and a frozen manner of delivering the word,
always preserving a fire of zeal and conscience in themselves; metals we
know will not work without fire; no more will the steely and stony heart of
man, melt or soften without the spiritual fire taken from the altar. And yet
here I must not be understood as condemning all coolness, or moderation of
speech; for doctrine may be ponderous and weighty, where the speech is calm
and treatable, still waters often run the deepest; Prove. 17.27.
and Solomon says, that a man of knowledge spares his words, but yet it
follows, that he must be of an excellent spirit: so there must of necessity
be at the least a soft fire in these distillatio^s. But the thing justly
condemned is, when men by their own default, being given over either to
pride, sensuality, or worldlynesse, have benumbed their spirits, and are
become frozen, without power or life in their ministry, and so bring forth
their doctrine, as many women do their children, stil-borne; teaching as the
Scribes only of form without zeal, or conscience, or experience of that they
speak. And before I leave this point, it must be known, that whereas I
require heat and authority in the delivery of the word, that therefore
every heat should be warrantable: for some is justly condemned, as. 1. all
heat of humane affection, proceeding from perturbation and passion. 2. all
inconsiderate heat of youth. 3. all heat not well guided (although in good
men full of godly affections) but suffered to boil over so far, as a man
loses his memory, and interrupteth his doctrine and whole discourse.

2. A flattring Ministry is an enemy to this authority, for when a Minister
must sing placebo, and such sweet songs, it is impossible for him not to
betraie the truth.

3. To withstand this authority, or to weaken it, is a fearful sin, whether
in high or low; and the Lord will not suffer his messengers feet to be cut off.

4. Hearers must, 1. pray for their Teachers, that they may deliver the word
with authority, with boldness, and with open mouth, Ephesians. 6.19. Coloss. 4.4.
2. Not deem this authority in Ministers, humor, or anger, or bitterness, and
much less madness, with Festus: and least of all to cast them in prison, Act.
26.
as men rauing, as Jeremy was, cap. 29.26. 3. Not to refuse to yield
subjection under this authority, nor be angry when it beats down some
practice which they are loath to part with: seeing it is just with God, to
reprobate and put out the light of such, as refuse the conviction of the light
offered.

The third and last precept of this Chapter and verse, A grievous sin to
despise Gods ministers. R^as^^s.
Let no man despise thee, teaches two things. First, how people and hearers
should entertain the Ministers sent them of God, seeing they cannot without
great sin despise them; for seeing the Lord, who could by himself coworkers
with him, although not in the act of conversion, 2. Cor. 3.9.
yet in the Ministry of it: who dare despise such whom the Lord so far
honors? and therefore calls them his white horses: horses, Rev. 6.2.
in that he uses them in his battles against sin, Satan, the world, and
wicked ones; and white, for the purity of their doctrine, and integrity of
their lives: yea his Angels, Rev. 1.20.
namely such as by whom he reuealeth his good pleasure unto us: and his own
voice, by whom he beseeches men to be reconciled. Secondly, how careful is
the Lord to preserve his Ministers heard your murmurings against the Lord:
Exodus 16.7.
for what are we that ye have murmured against us. Thirdly, how unnatural a
part I am your Father, says Paul: and Onesimus, yea and Titus here begotten by
him unto the faith, he calls his sons. Let no cursed Cham presume to scorn
them, which is not so hurtful to them, as dangerous to themselves, being the
next way to bring themselves under the curse. On the contrary, let the
natural children of the Church, 1. know them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. that is, both in
heart accknowledge them the Ministers of Christ, and in affection, love them as
his Ministers, accounting their feet bewtifull: 2. render them double honor,
1. Tim. 5.17. in which precept the holy Ghost has made, 1. reverence, 2.
obedience, 3. thankfulness, 4. comfortable maintenance, their due from their
people.

Secondly, Ministers are hence taught so to order their lives and doctrine, as
they lay not their pers^ns open to reproach, nor prostitute their authority
unto contempt, and so loose it both from themselves and others. For this is the
way for Ministers to win authority and reverence in the hearts of men, by
their lives and doctrine, 1. Pet. 5.3.
to become examples unto the flock: And thus shining in the purity of
doctrine and conversation, they show themselves stars in the right hand of
Christ. The point being formerly proved, Rev. 1.16.
we will only note a threefold use of it.

First, to confute the Popish teachers, who have devised another way to free
themselves from the contempt of the laytie; namely, by inuesting their Bishops
and clergy into civil authority and Magistracy: by furnishing them with
wealth and abundance, yea superfluity of state, and pomp: by distinguishing
them from other men by strange fashions of apparel, miters, crosyer staves,
rings, and bables; that if Titus had bin such a Bishop, this had been a
needless precept, for who durst have despised him, but he should soon have
heard of him. But the word teaches, that it is no politic devise that
maintains the estimation of a Minister, or Ministry; but the holy carriage
both of the doctrine and lives of the Ministers: even as the Apostle also
speaks of Deacons, that by ministering well, 1. Tim. 3.13.
they get themselves a good degree, and great liberty in the faith.

Secondly, this ground lays heavy things to the charge of the
idol-ministerie, who for any gifts for teaching, are many of them inferior to
boys and girls of seven years old: and woeful it is to think, how many
places are served, or starued rather with Ieroboams priests, who were raked out
of the basest of men, the just subjects of reproach and contempt: And others
the sons of Eli, who by the wickedness, and dissolutnes of their courses,
not only stink themselves, but make the service, and worship, and word of God,
to be abhorred: men mistake their mark, when they say, that it is often
preaching which makes it despised; but because it is so often preached by such
lewd men, it loses the grace and power of it in the hearts of men.

Thirdly, when men thus teach, and thus live purely and innocently, and yet are
despised, let them not thing it strange, nor be discouraged; for they have done
their duty, and taken the right course to get reverence and authority: Let
men at their peril now despise them, the Lord will not refuse to honor them;
and if they cannot in earth, yet are they sure to shine in heaven.

And thus by the assistance of God, have we absolved this second Chapter, to
him be therefore praise for over. Amen.

CHAP. III. PVt them in remembrance that they be subject to the principalities
and powers, and that they be obedient, and ready to every good work.
IN the former Chapters the Apostle has been careful, that Titus should in
his ministry propound the several offices, and duties of Christianity unto
several estates and conditions of men. Now in this Chapter, he will have him
teach more general, and more public duties, which concern no estate more
then other, but all Christians of what estate and condition soever they be:
wherein he takes up the greatest part of the Chapter, unto the 9. verse. II.
The second part of the Chapter warns Titus, how to carry himself more
respectively, 1. in contentious questions. 2. in dealing with heretics: both
which abounded in those days, in the 9, 10. and 11. verses. The third part
containing the third part, namely, the conclusion of the whole Epistle,
remembers some private and personal matters; which is ended with the
accustomed apostolical salutation.

Concerning the first of them: These general duties are, 1. propounded in 1.
and 2. verses: and 2. confirmed and urged in the six following. They are
propounded in this method and order. First, Titus must instruct all Christians
in their duties toward Magistrates. Secondly, in the mutual duties one
toward an other. The former takes up the first verse, wherein two things are
to be considered. 1. the manner of propounding the precept. 2. the substance of
the doctrine it self: wherein we must speak, 1. of the duties required,
which are two, 1. subjection, 2. obedience. Secondly, of the persons, 1. to
whom. 2. from whom they are due. But first we must return to the manner of
propounding this lesson; in these words, Put them in remembrance. (...).


The Apostle says not, teach them, or exhort them as before, but put them in
remembrance: wherein Titus is enjoined two things. 1. To call back into their
minds this lesson, even the old doctrine concerning authority, and subjection
unto magistracy, The doctrine of subjection must be often enforced, and why.
which is not abolished unto believers; implying that it is no new doctrine,
but renewed. 2. Often to inculcate and beat upon this point, for great and
weighty reasons. For 1. by nature all men desire liberty, and to cast off the
yoke of God* corrupt perhaps among Christians some Chore or other will be
ready to say: what, Numb 16.3.
is not all the congregation of the Lord holy? 2. The Jews in these

Doctr. 1. The scope of the ministry is to put men in mind, and keep in
them the remembrance of every Christian duty. Thus Ministers may be called
the Lords remembrancers, ^sa 62.6.
not only for putting the Lord in mind of his covenant toward his people,
and of the peoples wants: The scope of the ministry is to keep men in
remembrance of Christian duties.
but also in that they must not be silent, but restles in whetting the doctrine
of God, legal and evangelical upon the people; and so be ever putting them in
mind of their covenant and duty unto God. Paul acknowledged himself such a
remembrancer, Romans 15.15. as one that puts you in remembrance through the
grace given me. In the 2. Tim. 2.14. be gives Timothy a general iniunction,
to put all his hearers every where in remembrance of such precepts as he
delivered to him: 2. Cor. 4.17.
and sending him to Corinth, he gives him the same commandment, and makes
him such a remembrancer as here he does Titus. The Apostle Peter also knew
very well that this duty lay upon him, 2. Pet. 1.12.15. I will not be
negligent to put you in remembrance of these things: and three several times
in four verses repeateth the same thing in that place; to show how instantly
that duty lay upon him. Object. But the spirit brings all things into the
minds of the faithful, therefore the ministry is needless to this purpose.
Ans. Things subordinate fight not among themselves. The spirit indeed does it
principally, but by the word in the ministry instrumentally. Reasons.


but is wanting much in knowledge, and much more in the cheerful practice of
that which he knows, and therefore every one has need of quickening and
stirring up; and who is he that carries flesh about with him, that finds not
the heaviness and vnweldinesse of it unto any thing that is good? therefore
the Apostle Paul tells the Romans, that although they were filled with
goodness, and knowledge, and were able to admonish one another, yet he thought
it needful to put them in remembrance of their duty: and Peter writing to
those that had knowledge, and were established in the present truth, thought it
meet so long as he was in this tabernacle, to stir them up, by putting them
in remembrance: so as we need not fear in this case the spurring of free
horses, seeing no man is so free, but he needs spurs. Secondly, none are so
strong but they Heb. 2.1.
and when such things are slipped away, they had need be renewed and recalled
again.

Use. 1. Ministers must not desist from teaching and exhorting, as many that
think a little enough; nor discouraged when people forget their wholesome
doctrine; but encourage themselves in their duty, which is to keep in men's
memories the mindfulnesse of their duties. 2. When they come to teach, they may
not seek out vain and strange speculations, which were never heard of before;
but teach plain things, yea and deep mysteries in plain manner; as such who
respect the weakness both of the apprehension and memory of their hearers. 3.
An wholesome thing it is to teach the same things often, whereby things
delivered are recalled into the memory: curious men cannot abide repetitions,
nor hear common things, notwithstanding these be excellent helps of memory;
which is the cause of such gross and euery-where palpable ignorance in the
most familiar principalls of religion. But the wisdom of godly teachers will
be not too much to yield unto the nicenes of their hearers; nor to fear to do
that which is the safest for them, as Paul speaks: which if it be, let it be
to us what it will or can, it will be our part that by our practice they may
find the profit.

Doctr. 2. We learn hence also, The memory of Christians should be taken up
with godly instructions learned in the ministry. Deuteronomy. 6.
what it is that should possess and take up the memories of Christians,
namely, those lessons of Christianity which they hear in the ministry. For,
1. The commandment must be bound up upon our hearts, and we ought to make our
memories the statute book of our souls, and by diligent meditation, chain
this book unto our selves. The precept is in Prove. 4.21. Keep these words
Secondly, herein stands the sanctity of the memory, partly in retayning the
rules of life, and partly in presenting, and offering them unto the mind upon
occasion of practice, both to direct and urge the conscience to obedience. Thus
David hid the word in his heart, the blessed fruit of which was, that he did
not sin against God; and indeed holy memory preserves Psalm. 119.11.
Thirdly, forgetfulness of the word, is every where in the Scriptures taxed as
a grievous and hateful sin: Be not forgetful hearers, deceiving your own
selves, says James: have you forgotten how I fed so many thousand, etc.
says Christ to the Disciples: and the author to the Hebrews, have ye
forgotten the consolation? which interrogations are severe reprehensions, and
indeed it is the mother and nurse of most sins, as we see in Peter, who
forgot the words of Christ till he had thrice denied him; whereas if he had
remembered them, it is likely he had been preserved from the sin; for when
the cock crew he remembered the words, and when he remembered them, he went out
and wept bitterly; even so the forgetfulness of the words of Christ, makes men
so often to deny Christ in his word, and in his profession, as in many
unchristian practices it does appear: and although we account but a small
matter to forget them, yet if ever Christ look back upon us, we shall as
bitterly as Peter bewail it in the end.

Use. This serves to move the best of us to repent, and reform also this
fearful sin. Why men can not remember the good things they hear often.
Object. Some will say, I would remember the word, but I cannot, my memory is
so bad. etc. Ans. It is a great complaint and very general: but what
merueile? For 1. the most testimonies wonderful, and therefore his soul kept
them. Psalm. 119.129.
2. They come to the Church, and for fashion sit out an after they take no
pains by meditation, repetition, or conference, to make the word their own,
it is not worth any such labor: and therefore complain no longer of thy
memory, but of thy sinful security, negligence and profaneness, accuse
thy self, and bewail thy sin, who have suffered thy memory and mind to be
taken up with old worn lusts and delights, with reckonings of sums of
money, with earthly profits and commodities; and thus have spent thy days in
the forgetfulness of God. And for time to come, perform the forenamed duties
carefully, and although thou can not remember every particular thou hear;
yet God by his spirit will fasten so much in thy memory, as shall be meet for
thee to practice, and sufficient for thy comfort, especially when thou shall
stand in greatest need of it, as in temptation, danger, distress, in the day
of thy death, and judgment. But suffer now in thy prosperity the things
below to take up thy senses, it shall be just with God in the day of thy
darkness and misery, to leave thee without the comfort of any one place of
Scripture; that what thou would not take up into thy mind when thou might;
thou shall not be able, then when it is offered, and thou gladly would. So
much of the manner of delivering this doctrine, now* we come to the matter of
it.

In the matter, consider 1. the duties required: which are two, 1. subjection,
2. obedience. The difference I take to be this: The former is an
acknowledgement of subjection, under which Gods ordinance has necessarily put
a man, which therefore he cannot resist: (...) signifies necessary subjection.
for it is used in Scripture commonly, not only to note that inferioritie which
the Lord has laid on wives, servants, children, inferiors, and subjects,
which in very natural light cannot but be acknowledged Gods ordinance; but
also that powerful subduing even of such as are unwilling, and resisting: for
the same word is used there where it is said, that Christ subjected, and
subdued all things under his feet: and the Apostle, (...) signifie^h more
free, and voluntary obedience.
Romans 13.5. fastneth this necessity upon it, it is necessary to be subject.
The latter rather intends a free and voluntary obedience unto the lawful
commandments, then such necessary subjection unto the persons: which may be
considered as an effect of the former, and a branch of the same root; for
where there is a conscience of subjection, there will be cheerefulnes in
obedience.

The second point in the matter and substance of the precept, is the persons,
first to whom the duties belong: namely, all Magistrates, who are here
distributed into, 1. principalities, 2. powers. The former of which two means
those who have primarie and plenarie power under God, (...) me^o imperio
ve^^^tur.
and by their proper power and command administer within their several
dominions: such are Kings, Cesars, and chief governors in free states. The
latter signifies such as exercise delegated authority, and hold from those
higher powers: (...) qui alieno and subordinato.
such are vicegerents or viceroyes under the King, presidents of provinces,
Le^f^enants over countries, Mayors of cities or towns, etc. Thus are
Magistrates ranked into Kings, and those that are in authority; 1. Tim. 2.2.
and into Kings, and those that are sent of them, 1. Pet. 2.12. Thus subjection
and obedience is due to them both, even to the latter as well as to the former;
and because these are sometimes mean men, as the other are often bad men, the
text calls us to turn our eyes from the persons, and fix them especially
upon the ordinance of God, which makes these duties their right: for here is a
metonymie of the adiunct; it is not said, let them be subject to Princes, as
those that have power from them; but to principalities, (...) pro (...).
and powers: as though he had said, let them not look so much to the men
exercising rule and power, as unto the power and ordinance it self; and seeing
there is no power but of God, let them submit themselves unto every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake. 1. Pet. 2.13.
Secondly, the persons from whom these dues must be paid, are all Christians in
general without exception: for the Apostle includes them all in the word,
Romans 13.1. Quis vos excepit ab vniversitate^ Bernard. epist. 42.
them: and therefore clergy as well as laytie; yea every soul must be subject
to the higher powers: if every soul, then the clergies as well as others.

Doctr. 1. Christianity eats not up Magistracy, nor destroys government
and civil authority, Christianity consumes not Magistracy, but confirms
it. Reas.
but ratifyeth and confirms it; for Christians are here called to subjection
and obedience to civil authority. The reason is, 1. the kingdom of Christ is
not of this world, his authority deuideth not civil inheritances, his crown
and scepter detract not from Son any less wise a lawgiver in his Church
then was Moses a servant?

Use. 1. This doctrine meets with that wicked opinion of Anabaptists, and
Libertines, who hold that Christians need no Magistrates, Against Anabaptists.
nor ought to be subject unto any; and why so? 1. Because they are the Lords
freemen. 2. They are the just who need no laws, but are a law to themselves. 3.
They need no protection but the Lords. 4. Their badge is love, which suffers,
and covers all things, and therefore they may not revenge, nor resist evil
by carrying before the Magistrate. But for the first, the liberty of the Lords
free men in this life, is spiritual and inward: and no^ ^utward and bodily,
till the life to come. For the second, if the law be not made against them, yet
it is for them, and their good; for suppose they do no evil, yet may they
suffer much wrong and evil without defense of law; so as the old saying will
here be true, Kings were ordained for men, and not men for Kings; and
especially for good men, as the shepherd for the sheep, and not principally
for the wolves. Besides the supposition is naught, for though they be just, yet
they are so but in part, and therefore sometimes they follow their private
affections and do wrong, and need the law to urge them to do right. For the
third, although believers be under the protection of God, who suffers not an
hair to fall from their heads without his providence; yet may we not strip his
providence from the means which serve it, of which this is a special one. And
for the fourth, true it is that love covers all things: but by covering, must
be meant, 1. A favorable construction of all things, which in right reason may
be well con^^ered: for a man may not put out his eyes, and affection may not so
ouermaster sense, as to call manifest darkness by the name of light. 2. A
passing by smaller infirmities, and private offenses, as one that would not
take knowledge of them. 3. Such a covering as may cure also, for love is wise,
and herein most loving when in taking notice of an injury, it turns it self
to the discipline of the party; sometimes by loving admonition in all lenity,
and sometimes by merciful severity in sharper reprehension: yea, and if that
take no place, in proceeding further to discover the sores to skillful
surgions, according to the quality of the offense, to the bench either of the
church, or commonwealth; and this is no impreachment unto love, as we see in
God himself, who chasteneth unto amendment whom he loves. Again, Christians
may not return evil for evil, but rather bear two blows then give one, and
suffer a double injury then offer one: but yet this hinders not, but that a
Christ^an may lawfully defend himself, The Gospel forbids not law* but
teaches how to use it.
although he may not offend and hurt another; for we may not think our selves
so straightly bound to the letter, as the right sense of such precepts: for even
Christ himself having a blow on one cheek turned not the other: but was
readier and would have done it before he would have returned the wrong as he
might. Lastly, Christians may not revenge. But revenge is twofold; either
lawful, or unlawful. This latter is private revenge done by a man's self, or
by the help of the Magistrate; when a man seeks to right his wrong with the
hatred, and wreckling himself upon the person, or any other sinister end; and
this must be far from a Christian. But there is a public revenge put in the
hands of the Magistrate, Romans 13 4. 1. Pet. 2 14. (...). The malice may be
forgiven where the damage is required and recovered.
who is the Minister of God to take vengeance on the evil doers; and this may
be prosecuted in a good manner, and for a good end, without hatred of the
party offending; yea and executed according to the constant orders and laws of
the country agreeable to Gods word: and this execution is nothing else but the
manifestation of Gods vengeance and righteous sentence.

Use. 2. This doctrine further meets with all those common slanders raised by
Satan, and his instruments* against Christ, and his kingdom, and ordinances, by
which the devil has most powerfully prevailed against the Church in all ages:
namely, by persuading civil governors, that Christ's kingdom is the greatest
enemy to their states and kingdoms; and such an enchocher as will at length,
unless it be warily prevented, pull down their greatness. This imputation
has the father of lies ever laid before the eyes of great ones, to alienate
the minds of Princes and people from the same: for the evidence of which, how
has he made it go for current, that whereas all errors are easily tolerated
and countenanced, only true religion, and the professors of it, have been the
causes of all stirs and tumults? as though the doctrine and teachers of the
Gospel of peace, carried nothing else but fire and swords where they go. By
what other means did Haman incense king Ahashuerosh against the Jews, Hest.
3.8.
but by telling him of a dispersed people, dwelling apart from others, having
laws (which yet were Gods own) different from all other people: and they
would not obey the kings laws, and therefore it was not for the kings profit to
let them live? By what other means did the Chaldean courtyers, incense
Nebuchadnezzar against the three companions of Daniel, Dan. 3.12.
but by imitating their contempt of him and his edict? These men have not
regarded thy commandment, nor will serve thy gods, nor worship thy image which
thou have set up. By what other means did Rehum and Shimshai, and their
companions, hinder the building of the temple, then by writing unto Artashast,
that if the Jews had once fortified themselves within walls, they would be
rebellious as of old, and would pay neither toll, Ezr. 4.13.
tribute, nor custom; and that they wrote thus much, because they would not
see the kings dishonor? In the new Testament, how have Christians standing out
for the laws of Christ against Antichrist, been always charged, that they
were the only subuerters of the place where they lived, and the direct
contradictors of the decrees of the Caesar's under whom they lived? How often
was Paul accused, by the Stoics in Athens, by Demetrius, by Tertullus, Act.
17.18. and 19.26. and 24 5.
that he was a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition among all the Jews
thorough the world, and a sect-master. And it is no meruell if the members and
ministers of Christ be thus dealt with in the world, seeing the head himself,
Satan has ever labored to bring Christian religion into the hatred of
Princes, as the greatest enemy to their estate.
was not only accused and condemned, but executed, for that he was an enemy
to Caesar, and a moouer of sedition. Our eyes have seen and read, and our
ears have heard, how Popish spirits have ever been ready to charge the
Protestants in several countries, to have attempted to wrest the sword out of
the Princes hand: Harding charge Luther, to have animated Thomas Munzer, the
rebels preacher in Thuringia; whereas Luther plainly calls him, the preacher
of Satan: so the Rhemists call M. Calvin, one of the principal rebels of his
time, and affirm the Protestants consistories the shoppes of rebellion. This
has ever been the cunning of Satan, to prevent the accusation of others in
the things wherein himself is most guilty; for those that know Popish
doctrine, can easily discover it to be none of Christ's nor his Apostles,
because it wresteth all Princes authority out of their hands, and moves
their subjects to rebellion: and such as know the state of Rome and Rhemes,
know where the shoppes stand in which all conspiracies and rebellions have
been, and are daily forged: and then where would they lay them but upon
Protestants? who hence show themselves taught by Christ, because if Satan
himself should come to accuse, yet could he not say truly, that ever any such
thing was found in their hands. Did not Charles the ninth of France give out,
that the most bloody massacre that ever the sun saw, was done for the
conspiracy of the Protestants against him, and the kingdom? whereas it was
only a Popish and perfidious plot, long before laid against the lives of those
dear children of God. And where should the gunpowder treason have been laid,
if the blow had been given? had not Satan devised shoulders, which had borne
a many such malicious imputations before? But notwithstanding such bugbeares,
whereby Satan would scare men from the sincere embracing of the truth, and
entertaining of the ordinances of Christ, as the greatest enemies of states and
kingdoms; let us be wise hearted, and bold to give Satan the lie: seeing the
sincerest preachers and professors of the Gospel, are so far from denial of the
right of Princes, as that the doctrine which they bring establishes their
power in their hands rather: like the workmen of Solomon, who built the
Temple, and built his throne too. And let Protestant preachers, and professors
carry this garland and triumph against all Popish spirits; that although the
enemies of the truth have narrowly in all ages sifted them, to find iniquity
in them, that thereby they might justly get the civil sword drawn against
them; yet have they found no such thing in them.

Use. 3. If Christian religion confirm civil authority, then the way to
bring men to become subject to superiors, The way to bring people under
subjection to gouerners, is to plant the Gospel, and so make them subject to
Christ.
is to plant the Gospel, and take order that it may prevail amongst them. The
teaching and practice of true religion, is the conseruant cause of
commonwealths, because it is a principal means to bind unto obedience,
without which all politic courses fail, and are found by experience too
weak. It is not power, it is not policy, that will still subdue and keep
under a rebellious people, without the power of the word in their consciences:
for till obedience be willingly yielded unto God, it can never be conscionably,
and then not constantly, yielded unto his Leiftenant. This may be a ground of
our prayer, that the Lord would be pleased to put into the hearts of our
governors, that the Gospel may be thoroughly planted in Ireland; for this is
the most direct way to subdue the rebels, and bring the whole country under
willing and free subjection.

Doctr. 2. Every Christian must yield obedience and subjection unto
Magistrates and higher powers. To the explaning of which point, three things
must be opened. 1. who must must be subject. 2. wherein. 3. wherefore. The
first of these was touched before, where we affirmed that all sorts of men,
clergy as well as laietie, must be subject. Romish policy, that they might
become the absolute libertines of the world, and carry their bad matters under
a cloud, that secular eyes should not pry into them, has withdrawn the
necks of the clergy from under civil power, Every soul must be subject to
the higher powers.
and will be judged by none but their compeares; which is as if a theife should
be tried by a quest of cutpurses: and therefore when they meet with that
general conclusion, Let every soul be subject, they beat their wits as
being at a stand; but seeing something must be bolted out for a show,
Innocentius.
one Pope says, that the person of the speaker is excepted in giving such
preceps, whereupon it comes to pass, that Paul and Peter, and consequently
their successors, while they call for subjection of others, are themselves
exempted from it: a silly and weak shift; as though Christ did not pay tribute
for Peter as for himself; and as though Paul pleaded not before, and appealed
to a civil judge, Act. 25.11. Another procter of theirs; by every soul will
have meant only animal men, Origin. omnis anima, id est, animalis homo.
that is, secular and worldly; but spiritual men and the clergy, are still
exempted; as though the Popish clergy were become and all vanished into
spirits: or as if where Luke says, that there were in the ship 376. souls,
it must needs be concluded, they were all secular and animal men, among whom
Paul and Luke were: or as if they were all natural and animal men in the
Arc, because it is said, there were in all eight souls, of which Noah was
one, who was a preacher of righteousness: much like the poor proof of that
Jesuit, who because Paul would not have the Corinths go to law under the
unjust, but under the Saints, surely concludes, that this must be under the
Bishops: 1. Cor. 6.1.
for is it not likely that that Epistle was written only to Bishops, because
it was sent to the Saints: yet upon such grounds as these, has their clergy
cast off the yoke of obedience these many 100. years, clean against the
express word of Scripture, and the universal practice of holy men, yea the
Son of God in the Scriptures. Aaron the high Priest must obey Moses:
Ahimelech when wicked Saul sent for him to slay him, obeyed him, being
summoned he came, and appealed not from the unjust sentence of death: so did
Christ, so did his Apostles, and so must and ought their successors unto the
end: yet sometimes (as it is seen in all tenures which are not from God, men
know not what to hold to) after the Popish clergy has challenged their
exemption and authority by divine right from the word; being pressed, they
forget themselves, and claim it iur^ humano, that is, from the privileges,
don^tions, and exemptions of Princes, and Emperors: wherein besides that they
should not have suffered the Princes by departing from their right, to break
Gods commandment, for Princes have not power to loose him from obedience whom
God has bound; as also by flying to a privilege as their best and last
refuge, is plainly employed, what of due by the law of God and nature belongs
unto Princes from them.

The second point is, wherein and how far we ought to obey Magistrates.
Eccles. 8.2.
Answ. Every Christian is bound to take heed to the mouth of the king in all
things, and so far as he has power to command. Now because the civil
Magistrate is always bound to command in the Lord: and 2. is the father of our
bodies after a sort, and of all our outward man: hence two grounds of great
moment are concluded. The former is, that every man must obey all possible
commandments, Vsque ad aras.
which are not against the law of nature, and the law of God: for the
Magistrate in all his commandments, as well as executions must be the Minister
of God, only urging that upon his subjects, which God himself, whose place he
sustaineth, would urge. It is said of Cyrus, Isa. 44 28. 2. Chr. 19.6. Zach.
4.14. Salomons throne is called Gods throne, 2. Chr. 9.8.
that he must be Gods sheepeheard, and he shall perform not his own, but all
my desire. The judgment is not man's, but Gods: and it is the honorable style
of Princes to be assistants to the ruler of the whole earth: neither is this to
deny any supremacy to Princes, to tie them to the tables of which God has
made them the keepers; but it is to ascribe unto them such sovereignty under
God over all causes and persons Ecclesiastical and Civil, as that they may
not depose the care of Church or Commonwealth, as a thing wherein they will
not be wearied; but must provide that sincere and vncorrupt doctrine be
published in all their Churches; that the Sacraments be duly and seasonably
administered according to Christ's institution; that the whole worship of God be
purged from humane traditions, and superstitions; that the Church discipline be
executed according to the word of God; that not only thefts, murders,
adulteries, forceries, (which even heathen kings have rooted out of their
countries) be punished; but also blasphemies, cursings, atheism, heresy,
drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, etc. In a word, we yield unto the sovereign
power, sovereign authority to drive all sorts of men Ecclesiastical and
Civil, to all those duties religious or secular, which God has laid upon
them, and according to their care herein have they been commended or
disallowed in the Scriptures.

Now that Princes should not command, but according unto God, the Lord has
appointed them means: Deuteronomy. 17.18.
as, 1. The book of the law to be by them continually, to judge of all
matters according to the mouth of the Lord, and to frame and execute their
laws according to the same. 2. The ministry to explane and lay open,
Magistracy and ministry serve one another as the left hand does the right.
and put them in mind of their duty out of that book. For these two,
Magistracy and Ministry, serve one an other, as the left hand the right. But
here Ministers must take heed, that they take no more upon them, then to
advise and advertise from the Lord; seeing this is one maine difference
between Magistracy and Ministry, that although one have an eye to the other,
in that Magistracy must stablish the Ministry; Harmon of Confess. sect 19.
cap. 23.
and the Ministry direct Magistracy; yet neither of them may execute the
other. Moses and Aaron must communicate their counsels and labors, but both
must know their own standing. After them Iosuah must join with Eleazer:
David the king must take advise of Nathan, and Gad the Prophets: Josiah with
Huldas: so long as Iehoidah the Priest lives to direct Ioas, he proves well,
2. Chr. 24.2.17. 2. Chr. 26.5.16.
but after his death he waxes worse. And Vzziah will seek the Lord in the
days of Zachariah the Priest, but afterward degenerateth, and grows very
naught, and unlike unto himself. Thus as formerly we have stablished the
regal power over all persons Ecclesiastical as well as others; so now have we
also over all causes Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, with this only
exception, under Christ; who must still be acknowledged the sovereign Lord and
King of his Church, to rule it by his own word and laws: according to which
direction, while they square their government (as Moses did all in the temple
by the pattern showed in the mount) happy are the people, happy is their
government, happy are themselves in their administration, but thrice happy
shall they be in their account.

Quest. But all this while you only bind the Prince to the laws of Christ in
governing the Church; do you give him no power to make Ecclesiastical laws
and constitutions of his own? Answ. Yes, but concerning this point I thus
conceive, that Ecclesiastical laws are of two sorts. 1. Such as prescribe
both the matter and manner of the worship of God, and the whole substance of
Church government, which are all the laws of Christ himself made to his
hand. 2. Other Ecclesiastical laws which remain for the supreme power to
make, are of two sorts. 1. Either edicts for the authorizing and commanding the
excution of the former laws, for the building and repairing of the Church,
that it may be a lovely spouse of Christ. Or 2. such constitutions as are
circumstantiall, and in things merely indifferent; which may vary according
to the variablenes of times, places, and dispositions of Churches: and here he
has power to make Church-lawes of his own, so as the rules of the word be not
transgressed concerning things indifferent. And I think this a truth not
denied by any. In performing both these latter, Kings and Queens are called
nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Church.

Now follows the second ground to be laid for the resolving of the former
point, namely, that seeing Kings are of power to do what they list, although
not ever lawfully in regard of the laws of God or nature, yet safely in
respect of his subjects, who may not violently resist their persons or
proceedings: for who shall say unto him, what do thou? Eccles. 8.4.
in this regard they may, and sometimes do command unlawful and unjust
things; and inflict grievous and heavy burdens unjustly: whether must
obedience and subjection be yielded them or no? Ans. The conclusion is, It is
never lawful to resist or rebel, or use any violence against a lawful
Magistrate; for this were to rise up in arms against the ordinance of God, and
consequently against God himself. Ordinatio divina secundum substantiam:
humana secundum modum, and finem.
The Apostle Peter indeed calls it an humane ordinance, or creature; but not
in regard of the author, as if it were devised by man; but of the end, because
it is ordained of God for man as the proper subject, and for his profit as the
proper end of it. And therefore though Popish Friars and factors stand within
Corahs tents, with poisoned daggers digging out the lifeblood of Christian
Princes, and especially the Jesuits those cursed Shebaes, which make no bones
by themselves and others, most treacherously to slay their kings and masters;
yet David's heart smote him when he made but a slight assault upon the skirt of
Saul's garment, because he was the Lords anointed: teaching us by his example
another lesson, then by violence to help our selves (if we could do it) out
of the unjust commandments, and executions of those whom God has set in
eminence and authority above us.

But here we must take direction how to carry our selves toward lawful
Magistrates, commanding or imposing unlawful things. For consideration must be
had, whether the command bind us to do, or to suffer and bear any unjust
thing. If the former, enioyning us to do that whereof we have not good ground
to do it of faith, here the supreme power of all must be obeyed; and the
prince only in and for the Lord: for so Caesar must have Cesars, as God may have
Gods. Daniel and his fellows deliberated not to answer the King, but boldly
and readily professed, that they would never worship his Image, they would
submit themselves to his fury, but durst not to his commandment. The Martyrs
in Queen Mary's time, whose mention and memory is honorable, resisted not,
nor rebelled, they willingly and joyfully gave their bodies to the flames; but
still professed against the idolatrous worship and doctrine established by law.
In Ieroboams time, those which could conform themselves to the edict of the
calves, were doubtless counted obedient, and had the grace of the times: and it
went hard with others that durst not save their labor, but repaired to the
Temple still: but the Lord condemns and accursed such wicked obedience, and
brings evil upon all Israel for it. No power on earth can make the
conscience safe in the doing of a thing unlawful, although in a thing
indifferent, conformed to the rules of the word, the Princes law is a binder.
It is a weak speech therefore to say, I do this and that unwillingly, or which
I had rather not do: and if it be a sin which I do, it is the Princes sin,
and not mine: nay, whatsoever action of thine wants faith, is thy sin:
besides, although all thy external condition is in the power of the
Magistrate, yet internal things, as the keeping of faith, and obedience, and
good conscience, are not in his power, but placed by God in the will and
consent of the believer, to keep or to loose. Secondly, but if the Princes
commandment call us to suffer any unjust thing, as if he should lay
tyrannical burdens upon body, goods, and outward estate; these we must
acknowledge subjected unto him by God, and therefore the ordinary defense is
prayer and patience, by which the passion of unjust vexation will become just
and comfortable: unless for the time of the brunt of persecution, we can
convey our selves from the fury: according to that of Christ, if they
persecute you in one city, fly to another: and Act. 8.1. the Saints were
scattered by the persecution: for by this means of preserving our selves, we
preserve also the Church, which otherwise would be destroyed in us: but else we
must meekly bear all unjust vexations, Prove. 24.2^.
and in such times take heed of meddling with the seditious.

These two former grounds will become clearer, by the explaning of some
instances which we meet with in the Scripture, and therefore it will be worth
our labor briefly to inquire into some few of them. And first, whether
Mordecay did with good conscience deny subjection, yea reverence to Haman;
seeing hereby he not only made light of a great man sent by the King, but also
of the Kings commandment, who commanded Haman thus to be honored, as the
reprehension of the Kings servants noted in the text proves, Ester 3.3.
why transgressest thou the Kings commandment? Answ. Mordecay was bound in
conscience to obey neither of them in any thing contrary to the word of God,
as this required honor was: 1. Because it was more then civil: for such the
Persian Kings required as was at least mixed with that which was due to God;
else it is lawful enough to fall down on ones face before Princes. 2. If it
had been but civil honor, yet it had not been due from Mordecay to Haman,
because Haman was descended from a nation which God had cursed, and willed his
people to hate and abhor, and never to seek their peace all their days: but
especially, they were charged never to forget the inhumanitie of the
Amalekites, but utterly to destroy them, Deuteronomy. 25.17.19.
because they were the first that came out to war against them after their
coming out of Egypt. If the honor had been but civil; and Mordecay of any
other people then the Jews, to whom that commandment was directed, and Haman
of any other offspring then an Agagite, that is, of the offspring of the Kings
of the Amalekites, who were all of Agag, surnamed Agags, as it were the
Pharaohs of Egypt, and Caesar's of Rome; he would not have denied this honor,
or if he had, he had sinned.

The second instance is in Naboth, of whom it may be enquired, whether he could
justly deny Ahab his vinyard, 1. king. 21.3.
seeing the Kings has power to take feilds and vinyards, and give them to his
servants, 1. Sam. 8.14. and in outward things we must obey, although to our
detriment and loss. Answ. Naboth justly refused, because God had forbid him so
to do. In Leuit. 25. the law is express, that no Israelite might sell his
field but upon condition of redeeming it, and returning unto it in the Iubely:
but Ahab did not so require it, but either to purchase it out, because it lay
so fit for him; or else to exchange it. Now that this was the just ground of
his denial, appears in his answer: God forbid that I should give the
inheritance of my Fathers unto thee: he knew well, that if coppie-holders and
tenants unto men, may not set, let, or alienate without their landlords
consent: much less might he against the express will and covenant of his
Lord. Again, if it had bin only a loss and damage unto himself alone, he
would doubtless have yielded: but no evil of sin must be chosen at all.

The third instance, whether the people might warrantably resist Saul, when he
would have put Jonathan to death: 1. Sam. 14 45.
seeing Saul had sworn his death, and the Lord seemed by lot to design him
thereto. Answ. This was a mean whereby it pleased the Lord to deliver Jonathan
at that time. The delivering of an innocent was good, the question is of the
means. To which I add, that if it were by means of intercession, and due
respect and reverence to the Kings person and place (as the text seems to
implie by their pleading for Jonathan) the means also were good: but if it
were by mutiny, or opposition, or sedition, yet this manner of the fact shall
be condemned, but not the fact it self. As for the lot, the Lord indeed noted
thereby Ionathans fact; but thereby convicted him not of a fault, for Jonathan
heard not when his father charged the people with the oath; the whole falt
therefore rested in Saul's inconsiderate and rash oath.

2. Sam. 18.^.
The fourth instance is in Ioab, both in not obeying one commandment of David,
and in obeying another. First, whether he did well in slaying Absolon, having
such an express charge to spare him, yea to use him kindly. Answ. Absolon
justly deserved death by the law, Deuteronomy. 21.18. and justly fell in his sin:
but Ioab sinned in slaying him: for although he was the general of the war,
and had power, yet he forgate that he was a subject, and that in this one point
his power was limited by him that gave him his whole command. Meet it was that
Absolon should be punished, but by David's consent: and though Ioab thought it
in policy the safest way to put him out of the way, yet his father conceived
how fearful his death would be, if he should be cut off in his sin; and no
doubt purposed otherwise by banishment, or imprisonment to have repressed him,
if he could no way have reclaimed him. But Ioab had no power over his life
wilfully to slaie him, when David had excepted it; and put case it was a falt
to spare him, it was David's, and not his.

2. Sam. 24.1.
Quest. But whether did he well to obey David in numbering the people, being a
thing which Moses, and Ioshuah did without sin; and wherein the King was so
peremptory. Ans. He sinfully obeyed David, even as he did also in betraying
Vri^h upon David's letter: he was a courtyer that conceived himself to be at
every command, although against his conscience, as this was: he knew that God
had forbidden to number the poople, without a special commandment, or
necessary cause, or without paying the half shekel appointed for every ones
redemption at every time of numbering: his speech in 1. Chro. 21.3. shows,
Exodus 30.12.
that it was not only against the law of God, but the light of his own
conscience: are not all the people my Lords servants: wherefore does my Lord
require this thing? why should he be a cause of trespass to Israel: as if he
had said, there is no war in had, no rebellion in the land, no commandment
from God, and therefore this will be turned into trespass against Israel, yet
he did it.

Thus by these instances we have cleared the second point considered in this
doctrine, and have seen wherein and how far we are bound to obey: now we
come to the third.

The third point in this second doctrine is, Reasons why Christians must be
subject to Magistrates.
wherefore we must be subject? Answ. The reasons are sundry, First that we may
herein acknowledge the ordinance of God, which we must look unto whatsoever
the persons be; for to this the form of speech in the text calls us, as By
me Kings reign: and Daniel 4.14. The most high has power over the kingdom
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Moses praying for a successor
says, Let the God of the spirits of all flesh appoint a man. Secondly, Numb.
27.16.
the Lord has put his own name upon such whom he thus raises: I said ye are
Gods. Thirdly, he sets a Numb. 11.17.
and as we read of Saul, changes them into other men; not always the spirit
of sanctification, but of regiment and authority. Fifthly, he maintains The
Lord maintains their authority 4. ways.
whereby they may lawfully bear themselves with of courage, fearing God, and
hating covetousness: to this purpose he gave a law to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
that no bastard should be raised unto office among them to the tenth
generation; and this was, least the place should be embased by such persons.
2. Concerning their behavior in the place, it must carry with it a stately
gravity beseeming the place; and scorning to attempt any mean or base
actions, such as David intimated Saul did in persecuting and hunting him, Is
the King of Israel come out to seek a flea? To this serve such precepts as
that, 1. Sam. 26.20. Prou. 31.4.
It is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink; this were
an indigne thing, and a great blot in his high place. 3. Concerning our
behavior toward them, it must be every way humble and dutiful: hence are
such precepts, thou shall not rail, or revile the Prince of thy people: Exodus
22.28. Eccles. 10 20.
no nor curse the King in thy heart, nor the rich in thy bed chamber. Thus is
the Lord every way careful by his law to prevent God sits in the midst of
the gods: by protecting their persons, for he gives salvation unto Kings; and
strangely to this purpose by revealing the privy thoughts only imagined
against them. By all which, the Lord will have us to honor them whom himself
thus honors, and epsy his own stamp and image upon them: so as in our
subjection and obedience unto them, we may know that we have to deal with
God; and in our despising of them, make account to hear that in 1. Sam. 8.7.
They have not cast thee away, but me from ruling over them.

he is the minister of God for thy wealth; namely, both to defend from a
thousand evils, from the robber and spoyler, from him that would defile wife
and daughter: as also settle every man under his vine and figtree, that with
good hearts and cheerfulness they may serve God. A King never so bad is a
great good, and better a tyrant then no king: when there was no king in Israel,
every man did whatsoever seemed good in his own eyes; anarchie opens the
window to all licentiousness; and far better is it to bear one tyrant then
many, and to suffer wrong of one, rather then of all, and to part with a tenth,
then be stripped of the whole; for where any government is, although sometimes
the good be punished, so are the bad too, that they cannot do what villainy
they gladly would. What a rich blessing then is a religious and virtuous Kings,
from whom his people under God receive the whole benefit of religion and
justice? here is the nurse of the Church, the father of the commonwealth, Job
29 16. Dan. 4.8.
an husband to the widow, a mouth for the dumb: here is Nebuchadnezzars tree
flourishing again, the height of which reaches to heaven from whence it came;
the sight of it to the ends of the world while, it self stands in the midst
of the earth, that there might be equal access of all unto it: in it is meat
for all: it makes a shadow under it for all the beasts of the field, and all
the birds make nests in the boughs of it. Let us here cast our eyes upon our
own happiness in our noble King James; whom we have great cause to account (as
the Israelites David) the light of our Israel: yea and (as they of Josiah) the
breath of our nostrils: the serious acknowledgment whereof, 2. Sam. 21.17.
Lament. 4.20.
will not suffer us to be wanting in the cheerful performance of all submisse
and loyal duty unto him.

The third reason is drawn from the danger of resisting and rebelling Corah,
Miriam, and the murmuring Jews. Who has ever taken the sword (God not putting
it into his hand) but he perished by it? What Shebah or Adoniah ever blew a
trumpet of sedition, but they did this thing against their own lives? When
David would have spared rebellious Absolon, did not the Lord hang him by the
hair between heaven and earth under an oak? Had Zimri peace which slew his
Master? wicked Iesabel could observe the ruin of such treacherous
conspirators. Our own Chronicles are full of rare examples of Gods judgments,
our eyes have seen not a few upon such. The strange discovery of Percies
conspiracy may not be forgotten; nor let that wickedness, and the just
vengeance of God upon the actors, never be put out from under heaven. Neither
is this only an humane observation, but an infallible extract and conclusion
out of the word: Prove. 24.21. My son, fear God, and the King, and meddle not
with the seditious; for their destruction shall rise suddenly, and who knows
the ruin of them? To these reasons might be added, that it is the brand of
Libertines and carnal Gospellers, to despise government, 2. Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
and speak evil of majesty's and dignities, etc.

Use. 1. Popish religion is a flat enemy to the law of God, and nature, the
professor of which must before he be the Popes darling, The Popes vassals must
swear themselves enemies, yea rebels against lawful authority.
swear flat contrary to this subjection; every year and almost day gives
experience of this truth. Besides, their doctrine is full of traiterous
positions; and their books which they daily send in amongst us, are stuffed
with poisoned invectiues to bring our Princes and nobles into contempt: pity
it is so many of them are so openly suffered, to the offense of the good, and
the casting further back of those that be bad. It is not my duty to speak or
write what Lipsius in his posthumus epistles has foolishly bolted out against
the Lords anointed over us; but this I say, the book is too much set by: and
if a Papists tongue can stain or slander, I affirm, there are few of our
nobles whom Costerus has not lately maliciously slandered: the practice among
them I acknowledge common: but the thing among us to be lamented is, that both
that and other such books are so common.

2. This subjection is the rather to be urged upon all, because the devil
seeks by all his cunning and power to weaken this ordinance, Satan many ways
seeks to bring this ordinance into contempt.
and bring it into contempt; which is evident, in that men dare not take such
liberty of speech aginst the supreme and highest, yet how ordinary is it for
men, to weigh themselves and their worthiness with those that are sent from
the highest? yea and s^icke not to make odious comparisons with them, that lay
his office aside he is as good and better then he; but the devil has now the
hold he would have; for while the eye is upon the person, and not upon the
place, steppeth in this equality; and this equality shakes off subjection
before he come to such terms of defiance. Others break out into speeches
beseeming the authors even Chore and his company, rather then any Christian,
Ye take too much upon you Moses and Aaron, whenever the magistrate
administreth not according to their minds; and let the Magistrate when he will
set himself to reform the congregation, as Moses did, this corruption of men's
hearts will not long lie hid: which being so great, and Satan's malice no
less, Ministers must the rather be much and often in this doctrine, as Titus
was here commanded.

Ready to every good work:]

verse. 2.
That they speak evil of no man, that they be no fighters, but soft, showing
all meekness unto all men.

Now we come with the Apostle unto the second sort of those general duties
which are required of every Christian: and these be the mutual duties one
toward another, the which we may best conceive in this order. 1. generally
propounded in these words, ready to every good work: which I know some
restrain unto the cheerful performing of the Magistrates lawful commands, to
the confirming of which sense perhaps that needles copulative (and) is inserted
into our English, not found in the Greek text. But the precept is entire of it
self, and several from the other before: and as I take it both parallel unto
that general phrase, cap. 2.14. zealous of good works: and contrary to that
cap. 1.16. reprobate to every good work. Secondly, more specially, both 1. by
remoouall of the lets of concord and love, (...).
which are two, 1. evil speaking. 2. fighting or quarelling. (...).
2. by entertaining such virtues as are the nurses and cherishers of Christian
concord amongst men; of which the Apostle names two of the principal. The
former, is Christian equity, which carries the mind equally and
indifferently, freeing it from passion and perturbation, that it may conceive
the best of persons and actions. The latter, is Christian lenity, gentleness,
or meekness, which even in taking notice of the faults and vices of others,
covers so far as is good for the party: and also in the spirit of love and
meekness cures, and seeks to restore such an offender. And as the two
former vices were prohibited in regard of all men, so these two virtues are not
so nakedly propounded, but that their objects also are by the Apostle noted in
the last words: where the Apostle says that we must be equal, and mild, not
only to those in authority, who may else return our frowardnes with
intolerable displeasure; nor only to our friends and familiars, or such as by
the bond of nature or service may claim such dealing from us; neither only to
Gods friends and believers: but to all men indefinitely, even those to whom
out of the bond of Christianity we are nothing bound; those who in themselves
deserve no such thing, but the contrary at our hands: in a word, those who are
not only our enemies, but Gods after a sort; being as yet without, and not
brought unto the faith: which last words may not slightly be ouerpassed,
because they lay a notable ground, and make way unto the verses following.

For this first general exhortation, the scope is, that every Christian ought
to keep with him a propensitie, and disposition to every good work, whether
it concern God, or himself, or others: for the Apostle having called us to
give God Gods, and Caesar's to Caesar; that the body of Christ might be without
rent, as his coat was without seame; and that there might be a sweet harmony
and concent in the Christian commonwealth; he now calls to the practice of a
common principle, and law in nature, namely, to give every man that right
which God has given him: and Christians are not only debtors unto
Magistrates, but to the meanest and weakest, to whom the common bond of nature
and humanity has knit us: so as no man can say of any man, I owe him nothing.
The like practice of our Apostle we may elsewhere observe, as Romans 13. where
having in many verses required subjection and tribute due unto Princes; in the
7. and 8. verses to shut up his exhortation withal, he wishes to give to
every man his due, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear
to whom fear, honor to whom honor; but love to all men, owe nothing to any
man but love: which is such a desperate debt as a man can never discharge
himself of. The like does the Apostle Peter, who combineth all these duties in
one short verse, but a little inverting the order: Fear God, honor the King,
1. Pet. 2.^^.
love brotherly fellowship.

This precept in hand charge upon every Christian these two maine duties.
First, that he must make account with himself that every Christian duty
belongs unto him, even every good work to which the Lord gives him calling
and ability. Secondly, that he must keep himself in a fitness and
readiness thereunto.

Every Christian must make account that every Christian duty belongs unto
him. Matthew. 28.
Doctr. 1. The former is cleared by the testimony and other observations out
of the Scripture: The law curses him that continues not in all things: the
Gospel also in general requires the observation of all things: Teach them to
observe all things which I have commanded you; which precept was given when
Christ had on the cross fulfilled all righteousness Whatsoever things are
true, honest, just, pure, pertaining to love, of good report, if there be any
virtue, or any praise, think on these things. The Apostle was not content that
the Corinths should abound in every grace else, and be wanting in one: but
exhorts, 2. Cor. 8.7.
that as they abounded in every thing, in faith, in word, in knowledge, in
diligence, in love, so they would strive to abound in this grace also, namely,
of mercifulness to the distressed Saints. The same Apostle to the
Thessalonians knew what he prayed, when he wished that they were stablished to
every good word and work. 2 Thessalonians. 2.17.
2. This stands with full of goodness: Romans 15.14.
so of Dorcas we read, that she was full of good works and alms: and mention
is made of the coats and garments which she had made for the Saints. Act. 9.36.
3. As the holy Ghost in Scripture approoueth every good work. The spirit
likewise in the new Testament speaking to the Churches, takes knowledge of
many good things in the Angels of them; I know thy love, thy faith, thy
patience, Rev. 2. and 3.
thy zeal, and thy works, etc. but few of them escaped without that
exception, nevertheless I have somewhat, or a few things against thee: either
the first love was fallen from, or Balaams doctrine maintained, or Iesabels
fornications suffered, etc. but according to the truth of their condition, the
spirit is plain with them, this thou have, and this thou have no^; implying it
to be matter of just reproof before God, to be wanting in any good work,
which he has given calling and means unto. 4. The nature of grace gives
light and evidence unto this truth, the which disposes the will and powers of
the soul equally unto one good to all the commandments, and hates all the
ways of falsehood. Psalm. 119.


Use. 1. This doctrine first teaches us to learn the rule of every good
work, legal or evangelical. The former are not only such as are commonly
known and expressed in the words of the decalogue; but such also as therein
are included and implied; these must be sought out; for else ignorance of the
law excuses not from fault. Content not thy self that thou can say the
commandments, nor if thou can say that thou have kept the whole letter of
the law from thy youth: but study the whole Scripture, which is an exposition
and large commentary of those ten words, hear it, read it diligently,
meditate upon it, apply it to thy heart and life, else know thou not how to
begin any good work. Learn further the special good works required by the
Gospel, such as are faith in Christ, repentance of sin past, amendment of life
for time to come. And cursed be all that Popish doctrine, which would hide this
light under a bushel, whereby alone the Christian can discern what is a good
work, and how himself may do it well.

Use. 2. If every good work belong to every Christian, Not only the Minister
but common Christians must be ready for Christian duties.
then may not men post over the matter to the Minister; the common conceit is,
that the clergy should be holy, hospitable, and so qualified as we have heard
in the first Chapter, but for common men and unlearned, it will be acceptable
enough if they be almost Christians, that is, as good as never a whit: whereas
the Lord binds upon every Christian, of what condition soever, the practice
of every good work which is offered him within the compass of his calling,
either general or particular. For example: If a Christian be called into
public place, as of Magistracy, he may not conceive that the building of the
Church, the discountenancing of sin, the encouragement of the godly,
belongs only to the Minister; but he must set hand to these works, he must
establish, and countenance the Ministry, he must be the foreman in all good
exercises; he must be rich in works of mercy and of justice, the patron of
the poor, the shield of the oppressed: but especially a pattern of piety, he
must be a man fearing God: yea he and his house must serve the Lord. If thou
remainest a private man, the same care lies upon thee in thy proportion: thou
must procure the wealth of Jerusalem, at least by thy prayers for the peace of
the Church, for able Ministers, for the free passage of the Gosspel: and if God
further enable thee, thou must relieve such as stand for the truth of God, and
purity of his worship: Thou must do all the good thou can to others in
preserving life, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the
prisoners, and so become rich in the works of mercy. Thou must also be
diligent in duties at home, in reforming thy family, teaching them, praying
with them, examining how they profit and thrive in grace, and walking
religiously and conscionably in every good work of thy personal calling. Here
is a course which goes far beyond harmelesnsse, and good meanings, and good
words, which James saw to be the religion of many in his time; this is soundnes
in christianity, when a man can thus turn himself, as well to one good action
as an other. Some there are that seem very religious, can come to Church, go
in the count and company of Christians, and religious persons, but very
unmerciful, ouergrowne with covetousness, and in private, for a penny
advantage, discharge all religion, till Church time again. Others are
merciful enough, but careless of religion altogether; some are just in their
dealings, but unclean, or intemperate; others are temperate, but unjust,
liars, swearers, and no fidelity in them. The Apostle James meets with all
these, Iam. 1.2^.
teaching us, 1. that pure religion stands not only in harmelesnes, Non
quantum, sed de quanto and quanto animo detur. Ambros.
and keeping ones self unspotted, but in visiting the fatherles and widow;
that is, the frequent practice of works of mercy, and charity: many say, if
I were rich I would do thus and thus: but art thou a Christian, art thou
religious? then though thou be poor, thou art merciful. Paul commended the
Macedonians that being but poor, yet they were rich in liberality toward the
Saints. 2. in cap. 2.10. that he that offends in one point of the law, is
guilty of all; and he that says thou shall not commit adultery, says also
thou shall not kill; now if thou do no adultery, yet if thou killest, thou
art a transgressor of the law.

Use. 3. If a Christian must employ himself in every good work then must men
so cast and contriue their courses, The Christian course must be so wisely
contrived, as no duty may hinder another. Eccles. 8.5.
that neither duties of piety hinder the duties of their calling, nor these
stand in the way of the other. And he that has the heart of the wise to know
time and judgment, forecasteth both wisely, and knows one of these to be
subordinate, but not opposite unto the other. Hence must Christians forecast,
and remember the Sabboath before hand; and so order and husband their times and
seasons, that there may be place, and time, and opportunity for every good
work in the weekday; and especially for the best works, whether public
exercises of religion, or private prayers and exercises in the family. Which
wise managing of affairs, because men are wanting in, therefore sometimes the
Sabboath must be encroched upon, and Gods service iustled out for some carnal
matters: other times weeks exercises are neglected, because this inconvenience
or loss in the calling, was not seasonably and prudently prevented; the
private service of God also in the family, must now and then be laid down for
a time or turn, because some other domestical distraction has devoured the
time allotted for it. Let no man then separate those duties, which the Lord
has coupled; if thou be ready to the duties of thy particular calling,
forget not the duties of the general; if thou would be serviceable to men,
forget not in the mean time thy service of God. If thou can be diligent to
provide for thy self and thy family, set sometime apart to look out, to
enquire into and relieve the necessities of Gods children and family abroad.
But woe to such knots of companionship tied fast by the devil, to sporting,
gaming, or other ungodly lusts, that neither the duties of their calling on the
weekeday, nor religious exercises on the Sabboath can obtain them.

Doctr. 2. That every Christian ought to keep in himself a fitnes, and
readiness to every good work, is plain in the Scriptures. Every Christian
must pres^rue in himself a readiness to every good work.
For 1. in duties of piety, we are enjoined not only to come to the house of
God, but to take heed to our feet, and to wash our hands in innocence,
before we compass the Altar, and first to sanctify our selves before God, and
reconcile our selves to men, and then bring our gift. If we preach, do it
readily, and of a ready mind, for then we have reward. 1. Cor. 9.17. 1. Pet.
5.2. Iam. 1.19. Eccles. 4.17.
If you hear, you must be swift to hear, and ready to hear, rather then
offer the sacrifice of fools. 2. In performance of duties of love and mercy
readiness in distributing, 1. Tim. 6.18. and mindfulnesse to distribute, Heb.
13.16. 3. In private duties, when cheerfulness and good hearts, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
4. In private injuries, we must

Reasons. 1. We herein become like unto God, Reasons.
whose nature is to accommodate himself to our good; whose readiness to give
bountifully,

Use. Whosoever would find this grace in himself, Notes to try this grace
by* (...).
must try it by the companions of it. As 1. there must be a good heart,
cheerfully and willingly disposed unto, and in the doing of good; 2 Thessalonians.
2.17. The Lord must first move and persuade the heart, (for so the word
signifies as well as to comfort) and then establish his to every good word and
work. Coloss. 3.23.
Hence are we exhorted to do every thing heartily, as to the Lord. The Lord
would have none to offer any thing to the building of the tabernacle, but whose
heart encouraged him, and whose spirit made him willing. Exodus 35.29.
If thou find not thine heart accompanying thy duties, but thou do thy
religious duties for necessity, law, fashion, or for some sinister end; and
thy duties of love with a strait heart, or an evil eye, thinking any thing
bestowed too good, or too much, thou have slain thy action before the birth,
it was never quickened, it has no life, no^ continually given to every good
work: for else this readiness could not be other then an idle preparation.
Do thou continue in prayer? in all things give thanks? have thou bin
diligent in trayning up thy family in Gods fear? have thou with Onesephorus,
often refreshed the Saints? does the loins of many bless thee, and the
blessing of the poor and widow return upon thee? show me the ^oats and
garments thou have made; show me the knowledge and fear of God in thy family;
express the faith thou professest, by such fruits of faith as these are, and
then have thou profited in this precept, else thou as yet come

Now to apply the point, if we look seriously and impartially into many of our
sacrifices and oblations to God and men, may we not accuse our selves, as the
Lord once did his people? Ye have snuffed to offer the thing which was good,
Malac. 1.13.
and have offered the torn, and lame, and sick: nay many of us snuff at
these last and worst. If the best and most religious action would charge many a
one but with a matter of tweluepence, such is their readiness to any good work,
that it shall lie in the dust: and although God has given them abundance of
outward things, to the end that they might be means of performing many a good
work, yet still they plead want of ability, whereas if they were as willing
as able, they would become rare patterns of welldoing. But herein they show
themselves (what ever they profess) forgetful of this precept, and destitute
of this grace, which quickly and upon every just occasion finds it self
called into practice: and finding it self so called, stands not so much upon
abilities, but works the will to the ability, 2. Cor. 8.4.
yea and beyond in just occasion: not that we call any man to the cracking of
his estate, or to the exhausting of the fountain of his liberallitie, for we
need not; but we would have them to know, that God makes them able to give,
before they be able to cast away as much as they give and hurt them not: and
calls them to distribute, before their own pleasures and lusts be served:
seeing this precept requires the departure with, and forgoing of that which is
often sweet, precious, yea and necessary for our selves. Let unconscionable
men think well hereof, who can contentedly throw away at one cast, or game, at
cards or dice, more then willingly they would sow in pence to the poor all the
year long.

Having now seen the necessity, and notes, Rules of practice.
we will shortly set down some rules of practice, for the better setting us
forward in this duty. First, get into thy soul the conscience of this
commandment, accounting it punishment was fearful unto me, and I could not
escape his highness. Secondly, Job 31.16. ad 23
Take every opportunity of welldoing while While we have time, do good unto
all: That is, take the present occasion of doing all the good thou can, 1. in
regard of thy self, perform the principal and maine duty, know the day of
thy visitation; slack not this thy tearme-time, but get the oil of faith,
knowledge of God, and obedience to his word, that thy lamp may ever be shining
to the glorifying of thy Father, which is in heaven: in one word, forget not
while thou have time to give all diligence to make thine election sure. 2. In
regard of others, if now thou can do them good in soul or body, delaie it
not: Prove. 3.28. Say not to thy neighbor, go, and come again to morrow, and
I will give thee, if now thou have it: and what knows any man, whether this
may be the last day wherein he can do good to himself or others? Thirdly, not
only in taking, but seeking occasions of exercising the duties of mercy and
love: for there is more in it then the serving of every beggar at door; who
the most of them live in the breach of Gods commandment, and in a course
against all good order; they might bethink them of many poor and careful
Christians, some laboring under poverty, some under debt, some under
sickness, some under temptation, some under one burden, some under another,
whose necessities ought to be inquired into, and so occasions sought of
releeuing Christ himself in his members; the want of this inquiry, is the
cause of much unfruitfulness.

Here I might free our doctrine from that Popish imputation, challenging it as
an enemy to good works; but of that we shall more fully speak in the 14. verse.

Verse. 2. That they speak evil of no man,] The special precepts which are to
be performed to all Christians, are propounded, 1. negatiuely, 2. positiuely.
The negative requires the good abearing, 1. of the tongue, That they speak
evil of no man: 2. of the hands, no fighters. The affirmative lays bridle
upon the affections, but soft, showing all meeknes to all men.

The word condemns as well unbridled speeches as disordered actions.
For the first. The word is a rule not only of doing well, but of speaking well
also; and condemns as well unbridled speeches, as disordered actions, and
frames as well the tongue to every good speech, as the hand to every good
work: and therefore fitly is this precept induced upon the former: instructing
believers that as they must be ready to every good work; so also must they as
readily exercise their tongues in suitable speeches, abandoning all hurtful
language, tending to the disgrace or injury of any man: seeing these two may
not be divorced in him that would dwell in the Lords Tabernacle; who must be
both a worker of righteousness, and a speaker of the truth in his heart: and
no slaunderer of his neighbor; Psalm. 15.

Quest. The Apostle seeming to prohibit all evil speaking, whether is it not
lawful to speak the evil we know by another, so we speak nothing but truth?
Answ. It is never lawful in any uncalled to speak it. But if question be when
a man is called, I answer, that God gives a man calling in diverse cases. What
cases a man may speak of the evil he knows by an other.
1. When any man is publicly called before a magistrate, to testify of a
fact, for the clearing of some truth, and execution of justice, and now to
speak the truth, is to strengthen and advises with another, how such a man
may be recovered out of such an evil, or else admonishes the party himself;
both which are so far from intending his hurt, that they tend to his amendment.
4. For the prevention of such hurt as may arise to some other by a scandalous
and

Now all evil speaking, may be referred to two heads: Evil speaking reduced
to 2. heads.
for it is 1. either the uttering of false and evil things: or 2. of true
things falsely and euilly.

The former, 1. when men speak upon no ground, as when men present 2. Sam.
10.3.
which what mischief and blooshed it wrought, the text declares. Yet here in
more heinous offenses, if the suspicions be more vehement, a fact may be
charged by the Magistrate upon the party himself; that so he may either
clear himself, or lie guilty under his offense; but else to relate evil
upon suspicion, is altogether unlawful. 3. When men cast railing, cursing, or
reuiling speeches upon an other present or absent, openly or secretly, and
covertly Absolon, when he told the people, that there was no man to hear their
matters: 2. Sam. 15.
all these are directly evil speeches in false and evil things.

The latter kind of evil speaking is in true things: as, 1. when a man
speaks of some thing done or spoken, but destroys the sense. Thus 4. In
speaking of things evil and not so well done: 1. by uncovering He that goes
about as a slanderer, uncovers a secret, but a man of a faithful heart
concealeth a matter. 2. whereas we can excuse our own faults twenty ways, by
amplifying the faults and offenses of others, be they never so apparent, we
become evil speakers in a high degree: as sycophants who make the scapes of
men far greater then they are; affirming often that to be done of
deliberation, which was done rashly and in hot blood; or presumptuously, when
it was perhaps done but weakly; and imputing that to want of conscience, which
perhaps was want of heedefulnesse and foresight: and thus the sin is
heightened, when men so wickedly speak of that which they ought altogether to
be silent in, and not speak at all.

Now because of all sins, there is not a more manifest and general mischeife
in all the life of man, Evil speaking a most unseemly sin in a Christian.
wherein even Christians themselves are not exempted, who (not conceiving how
this little member defiles the whole body, yea disturbeth not the natural
body only, but even the Political and Ecclesiastical, that is, the Church
and Commonwealth,) carry a very world of wickedness about with them, and
yet wipe their mouths as though all were well with them; therefore will it not
be amiss, to take a little pains with this sin, scarce so accounted of, and
to show, 1. how unseemly it is for a Christian, 2. how dangerous in it self,
3. the means to repress and avoid it.

Prove. 10.18.
For the first: To utter a slander, says Solomon, is a note of a fool; and
Ephesians. 4.31. Coloss. 3.8. Phil. 2.8.
which must be cast off, makes it hence an unbeseeming thing for Christians
that profess new life, to walk in such heathenish courses, for the a tale by
the end, they are in travel, till they have delivered it to others; and with
these all opportunity of good and edifiable speech perishes. True it is, that
a good man cannot be an evil speaker, and where the speech is not good, all
religion is naught; Iam. 1.26.
If any seem religious and refraineth not his tongue, that man's religion is
vain: and yet in truth this is the most religion of our days. Which although
it have the name of bounding and binding the whole man to God, to men, Religio
a religando.
to all good offices and duties to both, yet indeed has not prevailed to the
bridling of this little member in the most. 4. Were it not most disgraceful
for a Christian to be counted a theife, or a continual robber in the high way,

The second point, is the danger of this sin, which cannot but attend it, It
is not thought so dangerous as it is.
unless we conceive no danger in breaking such express commandments as we
have, Leu. 19.16. Thou shall not go about with tales among thy people: and
Iam. 4.11. speak not evil one of an other, brethren: for this says he, is
not only to break, but condemn the law: that is, as not sufficient or
worthy to guide him in all the particulars of his life. The defense of many a
man is, I speak nothing but truth, and so long I may speak it: But if that
thou speak be a tale true or false (as it is if without a calling thou
playest the pedlar, and set to sale the name of thy brother) these
commandments cast and condemn thee. Others think it is a fault indeed, but
not so great a fault to speak the thing we know by an other: but look upon
it, not as it may seem in thine eye, but in the penalty the Scripture has
set upon it; Psalm. 15.3. it hinders the entrance into the holy mountain of
God: and 1. Cor. 6.10. raylers and reuilers shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven: and therefore it is no such small matter as many take it for. Others
reply, what are words but wind, and God is not so strait-laced: if a man
should go to hell for every word, who shall come to heaven? This indeed is
an ancient ^aturall conceit, that outward profession and ceremony, will
carry a man to heaven, although in the particulars of the life, the power of
godliness be never expressed: But mark how the Lord answers such vain
conceits, Psalm. 50.19, 20. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and speak against
thy mothers sons: these things thou do, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest me like thy self: But I will reprove thee, etc. God has his time
then to call upon old reckonings, and then thou shall not think words wind,
Prove. 18.21.
but know to thy cost, that life and death was in the power of thy tongue.

Others yet see no such danger, or if any be, it is far off: But this sin
beside the just hire of it hereafter, carries a secret plague with it for the
present: for look as thou dealest with an other man's name, so shall thine be
dealt with, and with what measure thou meatest to others, shall men measure to
thee again. But I must speak my mind, and then I have done: no, thou have
done thy speech, but thy speech has not done with thee: thou may as well
say, having stabbed a man to the heart, I gave him but a blow, and I had done,
but the blow has not done with thee, thou must before the judge for all that,
and then see if that plea will hold.

Let professors therefore humble themselves for this sin, which is so
dangerous and so common, as that it is the english of our tables, of our beds,
of our public and private meetings, to rippe up this or that old slip, or
injury done by an other: the devil does so sit in the lips of a number of
men, that no other talk can proceed from them, but such as is like arrows to
wound those that are far off, Prove. 25.18.
or hammers to knock him in the head, to whom such tales are told, or swords
wounding his own soul to the death. Beware also for time to come of the
subtilties of Satan, who that he may not appear an accuser or a devil as he
is, or so black as he is, has taught his nouices in this art to use diverse
prefaces as it were to get attention by: and then is the sin most dangerous,
and has most Satanicall subtlety in it. Sometime ye shall have some that
will begin with the praise of the party he tells a tale of: he is an
honest man, one that I have cause to love well, and one of very good parts,
etc. and yet thus will he wound an honest man, he spares not his friend, but
as a fly follows his sores. Sometimes the talebearer begins with the
profession of friendship to the party, to whom he would vent some mischeife,
and insert some seeming care of the others credit; you are my friend, and let
it be spoken between us, and go no further; tell none that I told you: But
would he have a word against his neighbor die with an other, and cannot let it
die with himself? or would he shut another man's mouth even in opening it? he
has also his friend to communicate it unto, and so it goes from hand to hand,
fretting secretly like a cank^r. Sometimes again we shall hear slanders
breathed out in a certain commiseration, as taking pity of such a one; that
as Solomon says, the words of the talebearer, are like the words of the
wounded: that is, Prove. 18.8.
are lamentably uttered, but yet they go down into the bowels, they give a
deadly stroke, and hurt him worse then he was before. Many will say, it is
great pity of the man, I speak it with grief, but the series and tenor of
the speech shows it a merciles pity. These speeches are far off from
saluing up the matter, or licensing thee to speak thy pleasure: nay, commonly
they argue a bad cause, and a guilty conscience, accusing for that evil, from
which yet thou desistest not: and whatsoever thou may premit for pretense, or
defense of thy course, thou cariest thy self liker those vermines which rise
and feed of venom, excrement, and poison, then a Christian, who, were thou
possessed with Christian love, thou could not rejoice in evil: 1. Cor. 13.6.
Love rejoices not in evil, but rejoices in the truth.

The third thing to be considered, is the means to avoid this sin of evil
speaking, which may be reduced to five rules. First, Means to avoid this sin.
look to thine heart, for if it being the fountain be corrupted, the issues
and streams The shop is furnished out out of the warehouse.
and if thou give thy self leave to think evil of any man, as accounting
the thought free, thou can not but one time or other utter it. Purge well
thine heart therefore, 1. of pride, which makes a man speak disdainfully of
those who want the things which themselves seem to have, and liberally take up
any language if he can make the detraction of another a ladder for himself to
climb upon. 2. Of envy, which greeuing at the graces and good things in
another, seeks to darken them: as Satan envying Jobs prosperity, said he
serves not God for naught. 3. Of flattery, which for favor or reward will
tune the tongue to any ear. Of anger and displeasure, malice we say never
spoke well, but there lies a secret grudge of revenge hid in it, which quickly
sets the arms on work in the strong, and the tongue in the weak. Banish
betimes these nurces and midwiues of this mischief; and contrarily get into
thy heart the love of God, and of thy brethren, which will not hastily
discover, but carefully hide and cover even a multitude of trespasses and
sins: Excellent to this purpose is that of Solomon, Prove. 11.13. A faithful
heart concealeth a matter.

Secondly, be careful to contain thy self within thine own calling; no
stones at their own faults first, and therefore they ate at good leisure to
pry into other men's, and so become the devils gunpowder for want of better
employment.

Thirdly, Beware in all thy speeches with men, of strife of words, for from
hence evil speeches arise, 1. Tim. 6.4.
and many words want not iniquity. If any man provoke thee by reuilement and
reproaches, return not evil for evil, 1. Pet. 3.9.
but rather bless, as becomes an heir of blessing. The angel durst not
revile the devil himself. Christ when he was cursed, cursed not but committed
all to him that judges righteously. What the Apostles practice was is
confessed, 1. Cor. 4.13. We are evil spoken of, but we pray. Let another
delight in cursing, it shall cover him as a garment, and run into his own
bowels as water, or like a stone thrown upward shall fall upon the head of
himself that cast it; for one clause of the covenant is, I will curse them
that curse thee: But if thou be the child of God, fear not causles curses,
which shall not come, nor be moved thereat to break thy patience; and ever
remember that of the Apostle, Romans 12.14. Bless them which persecute you,
bless I say and curse not.

Fourthly, In all companies pray to the Lord to set a watch before thy mouth,
and to keep the door of thy lips, for the tongue can no man of himself
tame, being such an unruly evil, as the Apostle James teaches it to be; yea
resolve with David, before thou entrest into any company, not to offend with
thy tongue: accustom thy self to soft answers which break wrath: Psalm. 39.1.
strike two stones together and fire will sparkle out, but take away the fuel
and the fire fails.

Fifthly, beware of consenting to this sin in an other, for as thou art bound
not to relate, so not to receive any evil speeches of thy brother: Solomon
counsels not to meddle with the slanderer, and flatterer: wise chapmen must
beware of such base pedlars. If an other will dedicate his tongue to S^^han,
thou that would free thy self from this sin, have other business for
thine ears. And because many who are loath to give their tongues liberty to
run upon others, yet conceive no danger in keeping their ears always open
(like the unclean vessels in the law) to receive any report against an other;
let such know, that the sin cleaves fast unto them, and becomes their
own, who are no^ now accessaries, but principalls in it, without whom the
sin could not be committed. For as there would be no thieves, if there were
no receivers, so if there were no hearers of false reports, there would be no
speakers. And what an unworthy thing is it, for a Christian to be a fosterer,
yea a base s^ruant to the sin of an other? besides that, it argues both want
of wisdom, and want of love in such a party: of wisdom, in that he
receives a testimony, and that from one witness; and he neither called,
examined, or sworn, and that against the credit and good name of an honest
man, flat against the rules of the laws of God and man: of love to his
neighbor, for if there were love in the heart, it would express it self in
the tongue, in the just defense of the party: as he would have his friend
defend his own name, if it were hazzarded. Further, the commandment of God is
direct against it, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not receive a false tale: and to give
heed to false lips, is a note of a wicked man: Prou. 25.23.
and on the contrary, it is made one of the ten notes of a citizen of
heaven, not to receive an ill report against his neighbor. Let us therefore be
wise to take up that wholesome counsel of the wise man, to drive away
tale-bearers with an angry countenance, as the North wind, the sharpest of
the winds purges the air, and drives away the clouds, which else would
quickly resolve themselves into showers and storms. Thus shall we make him
loath to speak, that which he sees us loath to hear; and if he will needs
speak of others, entreat him to speak of their good behind their backs, and
of their evil to their faces: if the evil be private, wish him to admonish
him between them two; if it be more known, put him in mind that in many
things we sin all, and had need beware least our selves fall; or that if he
speak in love, it requires an other manner of process: and if of hatred, his
anger were better turned against his own sins. If thou know the party
innocent, openly defend his innocence, as Jonathan did David's; if thou do
not, tell him that the law requires better proofs against a stranger, and
thou may nor give credence to so slender a testimony. I know there is too
much nicenes, and it would be thought too much inciuilitie to stay a man from
shooting his venomed arrows, by which he would both kill himself, and hurt
others he cares not how many; but he has most comfort in the end, that can
wash his hands before God, and manifest that he has not carried the devil,
neither in his tongue, nor in his ear.

No fighters,] Christians must so speak, Iam. 2.12.
and so do also as those who will be ruled and judged by the law of liberty,
that is the gospel, which is a doctrine of peac; a doctrine breaking swords and
spears into mattocks and sythes; a doctrine metamorphosing after a sort lions
into lambs, and aspes and crocodiles into harmeles children; Sundry sorts of
contention lawful, both religious, civil, and domestical.
a doctrine which cutteth off both affection and desire of contention and
strife (for we might well read after the old translation no striuers) as also
makes a man lame of the striking hand. Not that every striking and fighting is
hereby forbidden. For 1. every man is bound to contend in his place for the
faith, for religion, truth, and sound doctrine, against falsehood, error,
heresy, and superstition. 2. or injury, from Church or common wealth,
whatsoever the Manichees have doated to the contrary, August. contra Faust.
Manich. lib. 2. cap. 73.
who condemned Moses himself, because he was a man of war and shed much
blood, or the Anabaptists of our days: for if it had been altogether
unlawful, John Baptist would have advised the soldiers rather to have given
over their calling, and taken no Act. 25.10.
so Paul appealed to Caesar, and helped himself by the

But the sin here condemned is, when men suffer their lusts so far to sway,
A Christian may not be a common barrater.
as they not only not follow the things which make to Christian peace, but are
enemies unto concord and brotherly love: men of such violent affections as are
ready not only to return injury with injury, but with seauentie ^old
revenge: right Lamechs, and rough Ismaels, whose hand is against every man, men
of a word and a blow, fitter for the camp then the congregation of Christian
men.

Now what an hateful thing is it that a Christian should be endited at the
Lords bar for a common barrater, and quarreller? How unlike should he be to
God, who is a God of peace and loves peace, and the sons of peace? how far
from having any part in the merit of Christ, who has dearly by his precious
blood bought the reconcilement of all things? how unanswerable were it unto
this profession of Christianity, which cannot become a kingdom divided
against it self? how prejudicial to Christian duties, both interrupting
prayers, and withstanding the acceptance of them, when the gift is brought
without a reconciliable mind? How does this course in Cains way violence all
bonds both of nature and of grace? signing a man to be out of the communion,
out of the natural fraternity in the first Adam, and much more out of the
spiritual in the second, yea arguing such feirce men to be rather of the
serpents and crocodiles seed, between which and man God has put an enmity,
then of men, seeing they have put off all respect of creation, of adoption, of
flesh, and of faith.

Pretenses against this doctrine answered.
But because many think they have some reason, to look big, and carry
resolute stomachs, and high spirits in their breasts, and as big words in
their mouth, let us look a little into their pretenses.

First, some conceive that it is the way to get credit and become esteemed
Leniter qui saeviunt sapiunt magis.
and to come into account by making account of no man: hence is it that lawles
wretches, and masterles miscreants think themselves in sufficient credit when
they have scorned their betters, impudently ouercrowed their equals, and by a
rude behavior, made show that they care for no man. But how often for surenes
has the Lord threatened, that with the vile shall be contempt, Prou. 12 8.
and that the froward of heart shall be despised, both of God, whom they have
before hand despised, and of men also, for they shall meet with Ismaels
recompense, every man's hand shall be against them, whose hand is against every
man. And who can be won to give them any credit, for such swaggering and
contemptuous courses? men of understanding discern their folly, and pity
them; men of civil behavior, discover their vanity, and condemn them; yea
even those who are next to themselves, I mean to the worst, in their hearts
despise, yea and deride them; and here is Gods justice crossing such lewd
conceits.

Secondly, Others stand upon their manhood, and are loath to be counted Lev.
19.18. Romans 12.19.
seeing the law prohibiteth even purpose of revenge; and the voice of the
Gospel is, dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath:
and the wisdom of God tells us, that it is the glory of a man to pass by
offenses, and that the manhood of a Christian, is to overcome himself, and
master such ungodly lusts: and yet if we further mark the ends of these brave
spirited fellows, even they will show how odious such a savage course is unto
the Lord: for of those who are ready to receive every word with a stabbe; or
whose second word out of displeasure, is the pointing of the field; the former
seldom go to their graves in peace, and the Lord, says David, scatters the
people that delight in war, and suffers not the bloody man to live out
half his days; and for the latter, who in time of peace must be out in the
feilds, their ^state is miserable every way; for if he kill, he has shut
himself out of heaven, and cut himself from off the earth, having so polluted
it as it cannot be purged but by his own blood, and until Samuels sentence
against Agag be passed upon him; 1. Sam. 15.
that as his sword had made another man's mother childles, so should his mother
be made childles by the sword of the Magistrate: or if a man in such a fight be
slain, how fearful is the death of such a one, who even in thirsting after
another man's blood, has shed his own? how can we but conceive of the justice
and truth of that speech, the seeker of vengeance has found it? both of them
have taken the sword uncalled, and both have justly perished therewith.

give place to the devil, Ephesians. 4.
who inspireth such carnal pleas for so mostrous a sin as is an enemy to
all humane society. Where is now the wisdom which is from above? it is pure,
it is peaceable, it is hardly incensed. Where is now that understanding of a
man, Prove. 19.11.
which Solomon says, makes him long-suffring? and if thou professest thy
self a natural man only, why have thou so long professed thy self a
Christian; which if thou art, thou must seek peace, and pursue it, pocket
wrongs, and pass by injuries. Object. But I should never be quiet, if I should
put up every wrong. But is it the way to tame thy adversary, to become like
him? The way to have thine enemy to become thy friend, is to fear God, and
take his way that thy ways may please him: look up unto his hand, acknowledge
thine exercise from him, as David did the lashes of Shemeis cursed tongue, and
he can take him off when he sees good: and what serves the justice of God
for, or for what serves the Magistrate? is there no justice to be gotten at
the Magistrates hand? or is there none in Gods hand, that by thine own private
revenge thou will become both a Magistrate and a God to thy self? Object. But
I have long borne his abuses, I have sought to him, and it is a bootelesse
thing to seek any more, what would you have me to do? Answ. Yet seek it
still, the precept is never dated, but in full force: and has not the Lord his
heart, his hand, and his tongue to rule, and turn to thy comfort, when he
sees it seasonable for thee? surely, he that can by Saul's tongue testify
David's innocence, even when he was out in the fe^ld hunting his life, can give
thee a peaceable release from slanderous tongues, and injurious actions, when
his good pleasure sees good: and if thou never find thy outward peace, yet
by this Christian pursuit of it, thou have met with the inward peace of
conscience, and have made a good exchange.

Use. Let every Christian man strive in the practice of this precept, and
provoke himself hereunto by that promise of blessedness, which is pronounced
upon every soul, that keeps his hand from evil. If any ask, but by what
means shall I avoid this sin of contention and quarelling? I answer, the
means and rules are sundry. The first, is in the text, Isa. 56.2. Rules to
avoid the sin of quarelling and contending.
to bridle the tongue, for this is an immediate follower of evil speaking, and
it runs from the tongue into the hand. 2. Let the consideration of our
common brotherhood be a means to cut off contention: Let there be no
contention between us, for we are brethren: comely a thing is it for brethren
to dwell together in unity? whether brethren by the common bond of nature,
Psalm. 133.1.
which respect made all Israel bind themselves in covenant with David, Thou art
our flesh, 2. Sam. 5.1.
and our bone: or brethren in the profession of life, and the identitie of the
particular calling: or brethren in regard of the general calling of
Christianity, seeing such have all one father in heaven, one mother the
Church, one elder brother Jesus Christ, one spirit, one baptism, one hope, and
one inheritance. 3. Consider what a scandal it is to Popish persons, for the
Cananites and Perezites dwelled at that time in the land. Genesis 13.7, 8.
4. Get a low conceit of thy self, and be small in thine own eyes: for whence
only by pride, says Solomon, man makes contention: Prou. 13.10.
and indeed experience shows, that the most suits at this day, are not so
much for right and equity, as for victory, which is most evident by all those
trifling brablings which have filled all the seats of justice: and hence is it,
that men will trauerse law, and carry some trifling causes through all the
courts in the land, before they will sit down with the foil: and who be they
among whom suits and contentions are become immortal, that no sword either of
Gods word, nor of the Magistrate can cut off, or let out their life blood, but
rich men, who walk in many snares, and hardly can avoid high mindedness;
wealth makes men that they can hardly long dwell together. Let good men look
and see in Abraham's and Lots example, how easily their wealth may kindle and
blow up in them a flame of contention. 5. Because some in their own temper are
of more mild and their own propensitie and disposition; that rule of Solomon
is worthy noting, to take heed of part-taking, of meddling, and mingling ones
self in other men's strifes and contentions, Prou. 26.17.
for this were to take a dog by the ears, or a bear by the toothe.

If we shall now proceed to apply these things, it will easily appear how
far most men are degenerate from these rules. For how womanly have many
behaved themselves, since they were taught to govern their tongues better,
most impotently yielding their tongues in bitter and contentious speeches to
serve the distempered lusts of their hearts, and that for very trifles. And
whereas the consideration of brotherhood should ^^int dissension among men,
the case is grown with us, as with little children, among whom commonly,
brothers and sisters least agree; for as for those that are called brethren,
and so should live like brethren in the same corporation or society, what
bones may we observe cast daily in among them? what a number of tares are sown
by the malicious man, which rise suddenly to faction and hot oposition; that
sometime as the Prophet in his time observed, every man is ready to eat the
flesh of his own arm, Isa. 9.20.
Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ehpraim: and thus whereas the
unity of great ones should be as the dew falling from the mountains, to the
watring and refreshing of the valleys their inferiors, their factions are
become like Samsons foxes tied by the tails, they cannot abide to look one on
an other but firebrands are between them, which burn up all Ioabs corn
field: or like the fire which Iotham speaks of in his parable, which came out
from Abimelech, Iud 5.9.20.
and consumed the men of Sechem, and the house of Millo; and from the men of
Sechem, and the house of Millo, and consumed Abimelech. And for those that are
brethren in the same profession of personal calling; who ever see two men of
the same trade love and live together in amity, as Jonathan and David did? who
ever almost did hear them lend one an other a good word, unless it were
bought out dearly by some present private commodity; nay, he^e is disdain,
envy, suspicions, so general and frequent, that as the proverb is, one beggar
enuieth that an other should go by the door: here is supplanting,
undermining, plotting one against an other, and rejoicing one in the fall of an
other: a sin which few trades men wash their hands of, for even religion it
self can scarce tie the affections of two men of the same trade. And for the
last sort of brethren by the profession of Christianity, this is a general
title, by which men revile and mock them; and graceles men openly disclaim
them, they will be no brethren to such, no, they are hypocrites, dissemblers,
holy brethren, sermon-goers, Puritans, etc. wherein what do they else, but
disclaim the same father, and the same inheritance with them, and profess
themselves the children of the devil, in that they will not be the brethren of
the children of God: know they not, that no brother to the Saints, none to
Christ, who disdaineth not their brotherhood? and if they be brethren, why is
there such dissension among them? Lastly, professors among themselves had need
be put in remembrance to walk in such peaceable conversation, as may win
others to the Gospel: and for this purpose to make an happy exchange of the
spirit of pride with the spirit of humility and concord; and grow into
friendship with such as they are at ods, whereby they should become not the
least friends to their own estate, rather then by an vnmeekened and unsubdued
stomach, hurt both themselves and others. And here it will not be unfit, to
remember an history out of the naturalist, which I have observed applied to
this purpose; Pliny.
of two goats which met in the midst of a narrow plank, under which a swift
current ran, they could not now go by one an other, they could not turn
themselves to go backward, they could not fight it out, but to the present
dangering and drowning of both: this common danger one of them thus helped, he
laid him down upon the planke, and couched himself, so as he made himself a
commodious bridge for the other to go over him, and so both of them were
saved: how much better were a little yielding and stooping in a Christian,
tending to the good of his own, and an others estate, then dangerously to
stand out to the ruin and hurt of both. Learn to overcome thy self then, and
thou have already overcome thy adversary; The slow to anger is better then
the mighty, Prou. 16.32.
(says Solomon) and he that rules his own mind is better then he that
wins a city. And that which the heathen could say of virtue, is true of
grace, which while it suffers, Dum patitur vincit.
it conquereth.

But soft,] A soft man is a yielding or flexible man, (...). Christian equity
is necessary for all Christistians.
one that will not be so hard in his dealing, as sometime by strict law he
might, but equally and moderately carries himself in his words and deeds, as
also toward the speeches and actions of other men. The effects and fruits of
which virtue, are the very sinews and bones which tie together and underprop
all humane society, The fruits and effects of this virtue.
without which the world it self could not continue undissolved. For, 1. it
forgiueth injuries, and pardons many wrongs, even scandalous or outrageous,
this virtue corrects them with all lenity and mercy, even in the midst of
severity. 3. It gives most gentle constructions

The which that we may the more fully conceive, we must consider that howsoever
the laws of God are perfect, and admit not of any dispensation, relaxation, or
mitigation, yet the laws of men are like themselves, perfect only in part,
and in that they are devised by men, cannot possibly hold in all cases alike:
hence have wise law makers prescribed their laws in their greatest
extremity, thereby to curb the wickedness and presumption of men; the which
laws if in the execution they should be ever stretched to the furthest extent,
this extremity of law would prove extremity of injury, and be turned into
unmercifulness and cruelty it self. Then comes in this virtue, and looking
unto equity, sets up a chancerie in the conscience, and provides a remedy
for the innocent, where the common law has no provision. The thing will yet
be plainer in some examples. The law (justly warranting in some cases, some
extremities) gives thee leave to sue thy bond, and take the forfeyture of an
100. for non payment of fifty by a day: it gives thee leave to reenter into
thine house, and to take into thy hands a forfeited lease of some poor man's,
that thou may gain to his utter undoing 7.12.20. or more or fewer years,
for not payment of the quarter or years rent at the day appointed: the poor
borrower, or tenant for necessity and want, or some other accident, breaks
his day; to take here the forfeiture, were extremity of justice; to cast out a
poor man, were unmerciful extent of law: both may thou do by law, but in
doing either, thou shall do also extremity of injury, and the justice of the
law will not free thy conscience from injustice. In this case then this
Christian virtue drives thee to take thine own, namely, the principal, and
equally considering of the damage thou sustainest for want of payment,
mercifully to satisfy thy self therefore; and if further thou go, thou
sinnest against God, against thy brother, not dealing with him as thou would
have an other to deal with thee; and against the very law of forfeiture it
self, which was not appointed for thy advantage further then the securing of
the principal. Again, the law of man gives thee leave to make the most of
thine own; but if hence thou shall by racking thy rents, and hoysing thy
wares, corn, or other commodities grind the faces of the poor, and raise thy
self by the undoing of many; do thou not commit extreme wrong, even when
thou can shroud thy self under the leave of the law? Now this virtue
steppeth in and says, this is not a case wherein extremity is to be used,
thou may not by the law of God do that, which by man's law thou may do:
here is a case wherein the court of man may save thee harmless, but the court
of thy conscience, and the court of heaven, will adiudge thee justly a sinner
for it.

Object. But do you so commit these laws together, as you make these positive
laws contrary to Gods, or condemn them as wicked and unjust? Ans. No, but 1.
not the law, but thy self art unjust in claiming the strict meaning and
rigor of the law, when the rule of equity and charity requires mitigation
and moderation. 2. Even this moderation of the law, may not impair or detract
from public justice, or public peace, which are as the heart, and brain of
the common wealth, which is an other common extremity, which careless and
inconsiderate men fall into: who being called to be servants to justice, as to
iuries, fearing least in following the letter of the law, they should be
injurious, do not remit and moderate, but maime and wound the law and common
wealth, and either find and execute no forfeits, or penaltie^ upon some
outrageous offenders, against whom the law should be whetted, or such as
rather turn to the disgrace of justice then the administering of it.

Use. Let us consider then whereunto we are here called; even to the practice
of that property of wisdom, which is from above, Iam. 3.17. (...).
which is peaceable and gentle; and to buckle unto us as the elect of God,
tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering,
forbearing one an other, and forgiving one an other. The benefit will be
exceeding great. Coloss. 3.12.13. Necessity of this grace*
For, 1. this wisdom teaches us to be soft in our speeches, as they that
know how a soft answer breaks wrath: a rare example whereof we your gleaning
(says he) is better then our vintage: as though he had said, the glory of the
action belongs as much or much more to you then to us, we Abiezerits did not
half so much good by discomfiting the host, as you did by pursuing after it;
and by this soft answer the text says, their spirits were abated, ver. 3. The
like must we do in our reasonings, whether students or others, whether by
conference or disputation, by word or by writing; we must pass by some hasty
words, which flesh in the heat of it, will be casting in to the hindering of
the work of edification: for whereas men think it a point of pregnancie of
wit, to return quips nimbly, and give his adversary as good as he brings,
we must know, that heavenly wisdom teaches no such thing.



If thou take the right hand, I will turn to the left: nay as Christ himself
being God and Lord of all, yet for peace sake and to avoid offense, did pay
tribute unto Caesar.

Further, how necessary a virtue this is, cannot but appear to him that
considers how frail our flesh and blood is, how full of infirmities, how
lying open to offenses, how needful of much forgiveness at Gods hand and
man's: and yet no forgiveness at Gods hand, but on condition of our
forgiveness of men, for so is the petition in the Lords prayer: nor at man's,
for what measure ye mete out to men, shall men measure to you again. How
sweet a grace it is appears also, in that it preserves the outward peace of
a man, and especially the peace of a good conscience, that he can pray with a
good heart, and with cheerefulnes perform good duties toward God and men: in
that also it wins men's hearts to a man, and makes his good name like a
sweet smelling ointment; and in that it so much tends to the honor of Gods
name, as it does, by drawing many to the love and embracing of the Gospel of
God, which they see is so pure, so innocent, and so peaceable. And hence it is
that Paul would have this grace to be known, Philip 4.5.
and manifested to all men for this end. Let so many therefore as profess the
Gospel of peace, hereby show themselves the sons of peace: and because many
sin not only in doing, but in not suffering wrong, let us beware of pinching
and wringing men by extremity, as such as are resolved not to pocket the least
injury, nor yield an inch of ground; but if the offense be never so little,
are bent to make men hear of it again, on both sides (as we say,) here is
spirit indeed* but of pride and malice, and that spirit that bears rule in
the world, and sons of disobedience.

Some men are of ^uch malign constitution, as that they have nothing in their
hearts, ^eads, or lips, but law and justice: every tri^^le, every word,
every pe^^^e injury sends them before the Magistrate, for revenge against
such a^ perhaps are very desirous of peace, satisfaction, and agreement: and
whereas law is a kind of war, and so ought to be the last procurer of peace,
it is the first course of many distempered spirits, before ever their
adversary be advertised or warned of it. But such persons forget that justice
and mercy are sisters, and that justice without mercy is but cruelty. 2. here
is law, but no equity, for equity is the breeder of unity, and mother of
peace, but their law fills the world with brabling contentions: and 3. what
is their law for most part, but some qui^ke or trick of law, tending to
extremity of wrong, and proouing in the end but cousenage and dishonest
craftines, as may daily appear in a number of men, who (like the flesh-flies,
feed altogether upon ^esters and wounds, or like the soldier, that cannot
live by peace, but by war) not having that estate of their own, which their
great thoughts, and high conceits carry them unto, nor yet Gods blessing upon
the little they have, would gladly pray upon others, and by some quirke of law,
hook in that which equity would never affoard them; but the issue shows,
that all their pretenses are but cloakes of their iniquity.

Others plead, why it is my right, and why should I not have it, I will not
loose it if the law will give it me: and when they have a man on the hippe (as
we say) and at advantage, they follow him with all extremity, even to the
making of dice of his bones. It is true, that men that demand no more but their
right, are counted very honest men, and it is esteemed but a reasonable thing
if a man ask but his own, although he demand all that: but yet it is as
true, that he that is a strict stander for his right always, cannot but
sometimes go beyond the bounds of equity, which must yield some part of the
right; and of love, which seeks not her own, that is, not all her own. And
whosoever thou art, that can so nimbly take all advantages and forfeitures,
consider whether God deal so, or thou would have him to deal so strictly
with thee: does he strike so soon as thou have sinned, and so soon as he has
thee at an advantage? and yet he might say, I hope I do no more but justice
and law, I require but my covenant. Oh therefore let every Christian look
into this clear mirror; and say with himself, oh how softly and tenderly
does our God deal with sinful flesh? he lays not about him, nor presently
brings the forfeit of his law upon me, but has sent out his gospel a
merciful moderator of that rigor, without which every day would bring a new
deluge of judgment against all flesh: even so must I in imitation of my
heavenly father, deal with my brethren, not seek or take the forfeites which
the law suffers me to do, but by Christian softness which the Gospel
teaches me, remit of that rigor and extremity: for shall the Lord power out
a sea of mercy upon me, and shall not I let one drop fall upon my brother?
and would not I have God to deal in justice with me, and shall I stand
altogether upon justice and law with an other? And thou also that take thy
brother by the throat and castest him into prison, and there detainest him for
some debt, unto which he is altogether insufficient; here is law also, and
justice: and I think it meet that such should be punished, whether for their
oversight, or yet much more for their crafty or unjust dealing: but yet mercy
and equity must at length take place, where there is extreme insufficiency
especially. Consider how insufficient thou were if the Lord should exact all
thy debt; how he contenteth himself to correct thee with the rods of men, in
mercy, and not with scorpions, nor in wrath, above that thou art able to
bear: he might by his covenant require total obedience of his whole law, but
seeing thy state to be broken, he is contented to take as thou art able, even a
debt of ten thousand pound as it were by a penny a year; go thou now and do
the like, be merciful even as thine heavenly father is merciful.

But showing all meekness to all men,] In this precept three things must be
considered. 1. The virtue prescribed, meekness. 2. The manner how it must be
excercised, it must be showed openly. 3. The persons to whom, to all men.

The nature of this grace will appear in the description of it. Meekness is a
grace of God, whereby the heart and affections are inclined, unto a mild and
loving, a kind and courteous carriage toward our neighbor, Description of
meeknes expla^ed.
even then when they might be provoked to anger. Where three things are laid
down to be further opened, to the better knowledge of grace of God, for the
next verse will teach us, that we are borne as rough as Esau in our corrupted
nature; and therefore this strippeth and goes beyond the best nature, being a
fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.23. and 6.2.
and is called the spirit of meekness, because it is such a peculiar work
moderating all reuengfull passions, not suffering the heart to be easily
overcome with bitterness, but is as a wall or fence of the soul, receiving
all the shot of injurious and hostile actions and speeches, and yet keeping all
safe within, not permitting the possessor hastily or violently either to offer
to another, or remove from himself such injuries. The mother of it is
humility, the daughter is long-suffering, and therefore we read it set
between these two in diverse places: Ephesians. 4 2. Col. 3.12.
The next attendants or handmaids of it, are inwardly a quiet and peaceable
spirit, for these has the Apostle combined as inseparable, 1. Pet. 3.4.
outwardly, 1. soft answers, such as that of Abigail which broke the wrath of
David. 2. compassion or affliction of spirit in sight it preserves peace
within, when it is provoked to war, to anger, and return of wrongs: for then
is the chief use of this grace: which is therefore added, because many men
seem to have attained this virtue, when it is never a whit so. Let them alone,
offend them not, you shall have them gentle, courteous, affable and tractable
enough; but cross them a little, and stir their blood, oh now you must
pardon them, they have their affections, and you shall know they can be
passioned and angry as well as others; here shall you see the best nature
betraying her meeknes. But Christian meeknes must step in to overcome evil
with good when it is provoked to return evil, or else what great thing do
thou; it is no hard thing for the very Infidel and Turk to be kind to the
kind, nay the wild beast if thou go no further, will be as meek as thou,
who the most of them hurt not unprovoked.

Secondly, this meekness must be showed forth, not hid with our selves, but
it must be brought into the light; that others may have the benefit of it: for
as this grace is a sign and pawn of our election, which as the elect of God
we must put on, and araie our selves withal, Collos. 3.12. so also must it be
the ornament of our vocation, whereby we glorify God, adorn our profession,
and win others unto the liking of it. Hence the Apostle praying the Ephesians
to walk worthy of their high calling, teaches them that this they shall do,
if they put on humblenes of mind, meekness, long suffering, etc. Ephesians. 4.2.
for otherwise if men partake not in these our graces, the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace, cannot long last undissolved.

Thirdly, this meeknes must be showed to all men, believers, unbelievers,
friends, enemies, the better, and the worse, which is a special point not to
be neglected, because it is the ground of the verses following. Quest. But if
meeknes must be showed, This meeknes no enemy to true zeal.
yea all meeknes to all men, how may we warrant any anger against any man in
any sin or offense, or how may any severity be put on against any offender?
Answ. This being a grace of the spirit, it crosses not any other of them, so
as it is no enemy to that of zeal, which we have urged out of the 14. verse
of the former Chapter: and Christians mistake this grace, when they dream it
to be a bottomless charity, and under pretense of meeknes, can bear with any
evil, which indeed is nothing else but an irreligious, and mute approbation
and association in the evil. He that commands to be angry, but not to
sin, makes it a sin not sometimes to be angry: neither did the meekness
of Moses hinder, but that he might be exceeding angry at the calfe they had
made. Whence it follows, that public persons must publicly repress, and
reprove open sins, disturbing the public proceedings of religion or
justice; so David put on zeal to weed the wicked out of the land: and the
Minister has bin taught, cap. 1.13.
if he see beasts or slow bellies, to reprove them sharply. The private person
must privately also, but yet plainly reprove his brother, and not suffer his
sin upon him, or at the least by showing his indignation against sin, he
freeth his own soul from the guilt of it, as also the punishment; yea from
the suspicion of it in such as may be present, who else may think him that
holds his tongue a partner, or of consent with the sinner.

The use of this grace. Iam. 3.13.
Quest. What is then the use of this meekness? Answ. To purify our zeal, for
so the Apostle James would have a wise man to show forth his good conversation
in meeknes of wisdom. Which meeknes of wisdom, my son, when yet presently
he executed the judgment of death upon him. 2. Between Jude 22.
and others saving with fear. Thus meeknes and zeal destroy not but
strengthen one another: and thus all meekenes of wisdom must be showed to all
men, but this is such as neither impayreth the glory of God, nor the
proceedings of the Gospel, nor the edification of men.

Use. Beware of that vice, which Paul would here note in the Christians of
those days, which we may well wish they had not traduced to sundry professors
of our times; for they being converted they scorned unbelievers, and cared not
how carelessly they carried themselves toward them. Which spice of pride, I
would it brake not out only not against the godles persons, but against poor
believing brethren, as dear to God, inwardly as rich, and sometimes as far
stripping them in store of grace, as they come behind them in store of outward
things: but let this text teach us, how unbeseeming it is for a Christian to be
churlish to the worst, weakest, and most abject. And let the motives be
effectual to persuade to the general practice of this duty.

1. It is a grace very acceptable to God. Motives to meeknes.
The Apostle Peter wishes women to deck themselves herewith; which as a
precious garment, will bring them into reputation with God, as their ordinary
most costly attire Learn of me, for I am lowly and meek: 1. of heart, 2. of
speech, when he was reviled, he reviled not again, but sometime said nothing
at all; and when he spoke, how meekly received he the greatest wrongs appears,
Ioh. 18.23. If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil, but if not, why
smitest thou me? 3. of action, he was as a sheep dumb before the sheare^.
This was the Son of God, on whom the spirit lighted in the similitude of an
innocent dove; and even we to testify our selves the sons of God, must in
the practice of this grace, after a sort, manifest the lightning of Gods spirit
upon us. To this purpose the Scriptures hence denominate the righteous, and
make it a title of the just: Zeph. 2.3. Seek the Lord all the meek of the
earth. 3. The blessings intayled unto it should spiritual, God will teach none
but the meek, Psalm. 25. neither can any learn of God but the meek: and
therefore James wille^h us, to hear with meeknes the ingrafted word: without
it prayers will be interrupted, or not accepted: and therefore the meek are
commanded to seek the Lord. 2. Temporal blessings, even all outward
prosperity so far as God sees good, for this is the blessedness of the
meek, that they shall inherit the earth. And in days of distress and times
of straitness and affliction, they shall be safe; Psalm. ^7.11. Matthew. 5.5.
for the Lord has promised to hide them in the day of his wrath, Zep^. 2.3.

Verse. 3. For we our selves also were in times past, unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures, living in malitiousnesse,
and envy, hateful, and bating one an other. This verse lays down a weighty
reason whereby our Apostle would bow and bend the minds of Christian men, to
the practice of the former ^ertues, namely, of equi^ie, lenity, long
suffering, and meekenes toward all men, foes as well as friends, yea the worst
as well as the best. The reason is drawn from the consideration of the present
condition of converted Christians, compared with that estate they were in
before their conversion and calling to the faith: to which purpose he is very
large in describing, 1. our estate of corruption in this 3. verse. 2. our estate
after conversion, in 4, 5, 6, and 7. verses: from both which the Apostle thus
concludes the same thing thus. First, from the former: If we our selves were
in times past in the self same condition, which other men are not yet called
out of; then ought we to be meek and merciful even to those who are not yet
converted. But we our selves were in times past as they are, we lay in the same
puddle of corruption, were hewne out of the same pit, and though we may think
we were never so graceless, as we see some others, yet we cannot charge them
so deeply for time present, but they may come over us with the same in times
past, as this third verse will teach us: and therefore we ought to show all
lenity and meekenes to all men. Secondly, from our latter condition of
conversion, thus our Apostle frames his reason; If God have been so
bountiful a benefactor unto us, when we were so unworthy, as the former verse
describes, that his mere and alone mercy saved us; then must we in imitation
of our heavenly father, do the like to our brethren. But God has done thus,
ver. 4, 5. so as from both we may well reason, that a new condition requires
a new conversation; new men must have new manners; we being Christians may
not carry our selves so crookedly as in times past, nor so roughly toward
those who now do the same things which then we did, considering our own selves.

But before we come to the particular descriptions of these two estates, one or
two general observations are necessarily to be collected out of the scope of
the verses.

The consideration of our common condition is a ground of meeknes.
Doctr. 1. The consideration of the common condition, is a notable ground of
meeknes and moderation toward those who yet are uncalled to the faith. For 1.
whereas pride makes the heart to swell against the brother, and is a root
whence these bitter fruits arise: this consideration who separated thee? have
thou any thing above another which thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7.
and then why boastest thou as if thou had not received it? and elsewhere
disputing of the breaking off of the natural branches the Jews, and
ingrafting the Gentiles, he uses almost through his discourse no other
argument to keep the Gentile from insulting and priding himself over the Jew
but this same, The Jews now believe not, nor have obtained mercy, Romans 11.30.
no more in time past did you Gentiles believe nor had obtained mercy: Again,
the Jews are broke off; so may you Gentiles be, for of your selves you stand
no faster then they did, 20.
be not therefore high minded but fear.

Secondly, This consideration not only subdueth that violent affecti-of pity,
and compassion. 2. hope for time to come. The former of these two is our flesh
appears, Isa. 58.7. Thou shall not hide thy self from thine own flesh, but
bring the wanderer to thy house, cover the naked, deal thy bread to the
hungry: and yet much more hence must we put on the bowels of mercy toward
the souls of men, by letting their misery into our hearts, that our very
bowels may yearne, as if their condition were now (as once it was) our own.
And if we must so far pity our neighbors beast, yea our enemies, that when
we see it fail under the burden we must help it up, ought we not much more
help to bear his own burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ? This
affection would set men about other work, then talking of, jesting at, or
disgracing men for their falls and slips, which (especially in a professor) is
meat, and music to the scorners; who herein justly provoke the Lord to give
themselves up to fearful sins, and so be the just reproaches and by-words of
men. No, this compassion would cause them set hand to help them out of the
snare, to counsel, to pray for, nay set the heart on bleeding rather then
rejoicing in their sin: he were rather a monster then a man, that could see a
man take a fall to the breaking of his back or neck, and could turn it into a
jest; or a man wound himself deadly, and he make but a meriment of it: no the
least drop of humanity would help up the former, and thrust in some napkin
to stanch the blood of the latter: has nature taught thee such duties to the
body of man, and have thou no grace to take to heart the hurts of his soul?

The second affection wrought by this consideration of common condition, time
for this man, whose works and thoughts are yet against him; far he went that
never returned, he that could change Saul's heart in the midst of his rage to
make a Paul of him, can turn his heart also: he that could make of Onesimus a
runagate and fugitive servant, a faithful brother, can bring this man b^cke the
same way he is gone: he that made his heart, can mend it at his pleasure: I
must not give him over as hopeles, seeing he that had mercy on my self, may
also have mercy on him. We bear many weaknesses and toys in children,
because our selves were so once, and our hope is that time will outweare them,
even so must strong men with babes in Christ; and older Christians with such as
are in their unstaid heat. The reason is as good, our selves were such, and
they may come to be stronger and older in Christ then our selves are.

Use. 1. In seeing another man's sin ever labor to see thine own, let his
weakness be thy glass to view thine own. In another man's weakness see thine own.
Thou see another drink to excess, and drunkenness, by the wet or the dry:
say with Pharaohs butler, oh I call my sin to remembrance this day. Thou
hear another swear, curse, rail, and blaspheme: oh the time was that my
self could do no other: thou see another fall some other way, still bring
thine eyes home, and look to thine own standing.

2. Always condemn thy neighbors vices as though they were thine own, Rebuke
another sin as if it were thine own.
take up the first stone against thine own self and sin; cast out thine own
beam first; and thus considering thy self, thou will proceed by the spirit of
meeknes. Here is both the right beginning and proceeding in reformation;
whereas the forgetfulness of a man's own estate in time past, hinders the wise
respect of another for the present. The theife on the cross implies in his
reproof of his fellow, that if he had considered that himself was in the same
condemnation, he could not almost with his soul and life have breathed out
scoffs against Christ.

Let every remembrance of sin be a motive to bewail it in thy self, and
pity it in others.
3. We see hence how the Lord would have us look upon our sins and old estate:
namly, to the humbling of our selves and the good of our brethren. For the
first, every new remembrance of any sin should be a fresh bleeding wound in
our souls; a false heart it is and woe unto it, that can with new delight
think and speak of old sins, for there the self same affection and vile
lust which brought on that sin is yet alive, and unmortified. For the latter,
every such remembrance should move us to commiseration to our brethren
offending. Alas, why should not I be meek to others, if I had no reason else,
my own estate ministers a multitude: I was in times past as bad as any, the
child of wrath as well as any other. If for the present there be a change, by
grace I am all that I am, and for the time future my self may be tempted, and
am as subject to fall as any other: thus I was, and then I would have bin borne
withal: that thus I am not, it is the Lord that has separated me: and now I
see what hand it is that keeps me from being led and left in tempation. Thus
if we behold our sin we may suck, some sweet out of poison, and out of our
evil, take occasion to grow better all our days, furthering our selves
thereby to walk humbly before God, and meekly toward our brethren: otherwise
to behold sin past, and neither of these provoked, proves but an idle
beholding of it, and becomes an hurtful ^earer of the conscience in the end.

Doct. 2. Whosoever are called unto the faith, Whosoever is called unto the
faith, has experience of a change in himself.
have experience of a double estate in themselves, one in time past, and
another for the present, the one of nature, the other of grace; our Apostle
affirms it of all believers, of which there are none but he had his once, his
time past, in regard of which he may now be said to be changed into another
man, Romans 7.5, 6. The time was when the Romans were in the flesh, when
sinful motions had force in them unto death; and there was an aftertime when
they were delivered from the law, and served God not in the oldnesse of the
letter, but in the newness of spirit: Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom the Gentiles we
believers had our conversation in time past: Colos. 3.7. Wherein ye walked also
once, but now, etc. 1. Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are
washed. And good reason there is, that he that is now beloved, should see that
once he was not beloved, and that he who now is in the state of grace, should
see that he was once in the state of wrath as well as others, which will cause
him to love much: and indeed the elect could not be elect, nor justified, nor
washed, if they were always the children of God, and were it not for this
once, and time past, wherein there was no difference between them, and the
reprobate, but only in Gods counsel and possibility of calling. I add
further, that the converted may and must have experience of this change: for
the conversion of a sinner, is a miracle above all natural wonders: and
therefore (except in some Jeremy, John Baptist, and some few sanctified from
the womb) is no such insensible thing as cannot be perceived. It is no such
natural change as is effected by insensible degrees, as when he that was a
child is now become a man: but a supernatural change by the spirit of grace,
such as when a man is borne into the world, or when a blind man is restored to
his sight, or rather a dead man unto life, which are things of much note, and
manifest alteration, and that of the whole man. Again, faith it is which as an
internal instrument purges the Augian stable, and purifieth the ^oule cage of
the heart: now this we may know, and must examine whether we be in the faith or
no: know ye not that Christ is in you, unless ye be reprobates? and, 1. Cor.
3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? and, Romans 6.11. Know ye that ye are dead to sin, but are
alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.

How to come to the sense of this change.
Use. 1. Labor to find this change in thy self, and examine whether thou
can put difference between time past, and time present; for otherwise I see
not but thou must set thy self down without comfort, a^ Quest. But how shall
I come to any distinct knowledge of this change in my self? Ans. Enquire and
make search whether thou can find the life of grace in thy soul; for before
this change thou wast dead in trespasses and sins. Has then the powerful
voice of Christ called thee out of thy grave? has he breathed the breath of
life into the face of thy soul? have thou thy senses restored thee? are thine
eyes opened that thou can say with the blind man; One thing I know, that
whereas I was blind, now I am sure I see? has he said Ephata to thine ears,
that now they are become the other sense of spiritual illumination, and
understanding? do thou savor the things of God? Is the word sweet to thy
taste? do thou feel the prickings of the Law, and the lenitives of the
Gospel? surely if thou have any true sense of God, thou art not altogether
destitute motion, which is another inseparable companion of life, even in
things that want sense: namely, Heavenly motives.
whether thy cogitations, motions, speeches, actions public and private be
changed, and have a new quality upon them; whether they are now holy,
spiritual, heavenly, fruitful, whereas before thy change thou wast in all
these led by the command and instinct of the flesh. Can thou pray in faith,
and cry in assurance, Abba, Father? this is also a sign of the presence of
the spirit, which is the earnest penny of thy adoption; whereas before this
change thou fledst from the presence of God, and took him for thine enemy.
Do thou love God for himself, and thy neighbor for Gods sake? this will be
as the heat of a stone in summer, which argues the shining of the sun:
whereas before this change thou hatedst God, and loved thy neighbor either not
at all, or but in carnal respects. Is thy heart estranged from the world, the
honors, profits, and pleasures of it? this change makes the woman at the well
forget her waterpot; whereas before, thy heaven was here upon earth, thy
treasure here, and so thy heart also. Does the Church of God and the number of
Gods people acknowledge this chang in thee? for this is not to be contemned,
seeing that hardly can the child live in the womb and not stir, or stir but
the mother shall perciue it; take knowledge therefore what good men conceive of
thee, and by these notes examine thy self impartially, and thou shall come to
know, whether thou art begotten of immortal seed, borne into the Church of
God, and called to the estate both of grace and glory.

Object. Some will here say, alas, I now fear that I know not what this change
means, I have good desires to do well, to love God, to avoid sin, to do
good to good men, and yet I find little change of my self from that I was long
ago. Answ. Here two sorts of men are to be respected. The former sort are such
as are cast upon a drunken sleep, and securely pass their days in a course
which indeed abandoneth all godliness, and conceive that a civil life will
go for good payment before God, as it only carries the report of honesty
among men; and that good meanings and harmeles living, is Christianity enough:
in this delusion do they dangerously sleep on the top of the maste, not once
dreaming of the necessity of any change, although their righteousness never
came near the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. But these are to
know, that although they gallop not so fast to hell as some others before them,
yet to hell for the present they tend: it being a sure thing, that unless
they be other then they were in time past, they shall never see heaven. The
second sort are such as see indeed better things, but follow the worse; they
consent to the law that it is good, and in their inner man are delighted with
it, but by the tyranny of sin and dominion of the flesh, the law of which is
present with them, are drawn unto evil, and follow the call of manifold
lusts: yet because they hate the evil they do, and preserve in them a strife
between flesh and spirit, which spirit still resists even where it cannot
prevail, Comfort to those that truly desire to feel it but cannot.
these may epsy a change in themselves from that they were when the strong man
kept the hold, and all things were at peace. And if they find not such a
through change of the whole man as they desire, they are perhaps in the
beginnings of grace, or in the times of temptation, and must wait Gods leisure
in their further freedom: or else let them timely bewail their security and
sluggishnes, which has settled them on the lees of such corruptions, as they
ought long since to have parted from, and not so doing are justly bereaved of
their present comfort. Thus for the sakes of these, I have dissolved that
objection.

Use. 2. Hence may many a one learn, what to think of himself: Some profess
they love God with all their hearts, and have ever so done since they can
remember: they always believed in Christ, and never doubted but they were ever
dear unto God. But all this is nothing but a deceitful skinning over the
sores of their souls, with peace, peace; whereas the case that was ever so
good, was never good at all: no, if thou can not remember the time past, when
thy state was worse then naught, I can never be persuaded that it is good for
the present. An infidel once thou wast, an hater of God, an enemy to
righteousness, and if thou know no change so thou art still. The knowledge
of God, love of God, and faith in Christ, grow not in thine own grounds,
neither is our God so prodigal of these, but he that has them knows how he
comes by them: no man is borne a believer, nor an heir to heaven; neither
can any make purchase, or take possession of it without his own priuitie.
Others are so far from this change in themselves, as they cannot endure it in
others: If a man will not swear, and drink, and game, and riot, as he once in
time past could; Oh, say they, you were wont to be a good fellow, and a good
companion; and do you now begin to be precise, and to take a way alone from
all your neighbors? If he now begin to speak of a change, and they see
persuasion will not prevail with him, he had need get him a new world to live
in a part from his old companions, who will be the men they were: times, years,
and ages change, and renew upon them, but themselves are no changlings, no new
men. A third sort, have made a woeful change from that once they were, whose
lamps have died out in their hands, while as weary of the good way, they have
departed from the way of righteousness: of whom whosoever knew them, may say,
how is the gold become so dim, how is the fine gold changed? the visages of
some Nazarites are become blacker then a coal.

Use. 3. Every Christian learn hence, 1. If we see a change in our selves or
others, Bless God for it where ever thou see it.
to bless God that has made this separation, Romans 6.17. God be thanked, that
ye were such, but now ye obey the form: and, Blessed be God for this
unspeakable gift. 2. Not to deem of men as they were once in time past, when
once this change is come, the Lord esteems of men according to the present
grace received, and never casts them in the teeth with that they were in time
past; and why should we vpbraid men with sins or infirmities past, which the
Lord has covered? Paul accounted not James, John, Peter, fishermen, as they
had been in times past, Gal. 2.6.
but highly esteemed of them at Apostles of Christ, being called thereunto. Oh
say some, I knew such a man when he could have been as youthful, riotous,
intemperate, as an other: and thus commonly the devil gets within men to
traduce the Gospel, especially in professors, which makes this caveat the more
necessary.

Now we come to the description of our natural estate corrupted by sin: and
this corruption is seated in three things: 1. In the mind. 2. In the will. 3.
In the conversation of life. The corruption of the mind has our Apostle set
down in three degrees of it: 1. mente (...) 2. voluntate (...) servi. 3. toto
(...).
We were (says he) 1. unwise, 2. disobedient, 3. deceived. Secondly, the
corruption of will stands in the captivity of it, while we served diverse
lusts and pleasures. Thirdly, the corruption of conversation bewraieth it
self, in that while we lived that natural life, we lived in malice and envy,
hated and hateful. Of all which we are to speak in their order.

And first for the corruption of mind and the degrees of it, we will first
search out the true meaning of them; and then deliver some natural instruction
out of every of them.

Unwise,] This word directly shows the folly and want of understanding in
the things of God: the which that we may better conceive, (...).
we must know, that before the fall, every man had an understanding given him
of God, both natural and spiritual, both of them holy, and entire: and that
by our apostacy from God in our first parents, we lost the maine part of the
former, and every whit of the latter. All our wisdom in earthly and natural
things concerning this present life is not lost, yet that which remains is
(as reason it self) very weak and insufficient; that instance Eccles. 4.8.
teaches it: There is a man, and he is but one alone, without a second, he has
neither sons nor brother, of whose travel in getting wealth there is no end;
and yet he says not with himself, for whom do I travel? which argues a
merueilous impotencie and darkness in the understanding of natural things. But
come to heavenly and supernatural, there it is as altogether lost: we are not
able of our selves says our Apostle to think one good thought: and much less
to conceive the things of God, which are all mysteries and written in a clasped
book, and sealed with seven seals, until the Lord by his spirit open the
understanding: such foolish children are we* and and of none understanding. Nay
further, Ier. 4.22.
we have not only a deprivation of spiritual wisdom in us, but an
auersation, and untoward disposition, clean contaarie thereunto, that we can
imagine and conceive only evil continually: for what is else proved by that
we are called beasts in understanding, and willed not to be like the horse or
mule: which creatures are not only with understanding, but exceeding ^^ke and
hard to be taught, even when they are much broken and beaten. And which of us
has not experience of his own slownes of heart to conceive the things of our
eternal peace, never so plainly, never so often taught in the ministry?
neither is one nature here of better apprehension then an other, for the speech
is true not only of simple ones, but of the greatest clerks who here are not
the wisest men: the quickest natures, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, are here as
blind as moles: nay, Nicodemus a ruler in Israel, how babishly and foolishly
did he apprehend the speech of Christ concerning the new birth? there was no
way but for men to return back into the womb again. Thus sensual and
earthly is the best of our wisdom, and no sharper is our conceit in such
objects, till the Lord whet and frame them: till which time we see our selves
by this we have said, to be in the rank of those men, upon whom Paul affirmed,
that they neither knew the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14.
nor could know them.

Disobedient,] This second degree of corruption of mind, shows that we are
not only ignorant, (...).
but froward in the things of God, and such as will not be persuaded, as the
word in the original sounds: and this is nothing else but a perverse
disposition which fights against the truth. Which a little better to
understand, we must know, that before our fall, the mind of man had two
faculties about the truth of God. 1. the knowledge of it so far as was meet.
2. an assent approouing that knowledge. In stead of which are succeeded two
contrary corruptions since the fall. 1. darkness in stead of that light of
knowledge. 2. frowardnes or reasoning against it. For example, when the
understanding of man unconverted, conceiueth something of that we deliver out
of the word, whereas it should assent unto the law that it is good, and the
Gospel that it is the arm of God unto salvation; the wisdom of the flesh on
the contrary, it becomes enmity to all this; it can find euasions to shift
off the curse; it can covenant with hell, and death. And for the Gospel, it is
to one foolishness, to an other offense: Paul's preaching shall be counted
madness, or malice, or something else which shall be reason and warrant enough
to contemn it.

(...).
Deceived,] This is the third degree of corruption of mind, and a consequent of
the former. It is a word borrowed from travelers, that are in a wrong way;
that go by guess, which they must needs do who neither know the way, nor
will know it, who are out and will not be called in. And this notes a
further misery then before; namely, that men are naturally resolved in
by-pathes, delight in their wanderings, and have no delight to hear of the path
of life eternal.

Doctr. 1. Out of the first degree of the misery of our minds, we learn what
is the course of ungodly and unconverted men; The course of the unconverted is
an unwise walking.
namely, a foolish and unwise walking. That which the Lord speaks of Israel,
is true of every natural man, My people is foolish, they have not known me,
they are foolish children, they are wise to do evil, but to do well they
know not: the same confirms the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.15. walk not as unwise,
(namely, as ye did before your calling) but as wise. And if the knowledge and
fear of God be the beginning of wisdom, how can such as are without Gods
teaching ever be wise to walk in the ways of salvation? We account such as
want and are destitute of natural knowledge in outward things, no better then
fools: and shall those go for wise, who have not one sparkle of spiritual
knowledge, which ^s a far more precious wisdom then the other? If they be
deemed simple foolish men who care not to wrong and hurt their bodies, much
more may such as deprive their souls of spiritual food, raiment, yea of
eternal life it self. If those who would exchange gold for a counter; much
more such as think it a good booty to gain a small portion of the world with
the loss of their souls. If they be fools whom men so esteem, much more
whom the Lord so styles, as every where the natural and ungodly man; and this
not for one or two foolish actions, for thus the best even David himself
confesses, that sometimes he does very foolishly, but for that his whole
course is the practice of notable folly.

And that we may see this truth in some instances, we will note some maine
properties of folly, and see whether they are not most natural to every
natural man.

The 1. maine property of fools and silly bodies is, The maine properties of
folly most natural to the natural man.
that they know not the end of their lives, why God made them and put them
into this world: even so ask many men why God did inspire the breath of life
on their faces; how few would give this direct answer, that by glorifying God
in my calling I might be lead to a better life herafter. Ask many

The second property of folly is, that as fools live for the present

The third property is, fools are indocible, and incorrigible; so the
natural man put him to school, he learneth nothing by the book of

The fourth property, fools are so wise in their own conceits, as they will
abide no counsel; the natural man is wiser in his own eyes then vain man
would be wise, though man new borne is like a wild ass colt: Job 11.12.
for of such Zophar spoke the truth, though he wrong applied it unto Job; and
too much of these follyes are bound up in the hearts of Gods children
themselves, until the rods of correction drive it out.

Use. We are hence taught, how to deem and judge of the estates of men; look
into their courses, if they be wise for their souls and life eternal, making
that their maine scope and end, then are they truly wise indeed; Wise Merchants
they only are, that sell all to buy the field, and the treasure hid in it: Who
are wisest men.
wise virgins only are they, that make sure of oil of grace in their lamps,
and that in due time, whatsoever come of other things. True it is that men
esteem these of all other silly creatures, and simple men, void of all
prudence and forecast in their affairs; that contain their thoughts within
compass, and dare not stretch their wits and consciences for gain as others
can and do; but yet they have chosen the better part, they have gotten Christ,
who is made their wisdom, in whom they have all their debts discharged, and
all comfortable supplies, yea such treasures as the richest Indian mines afford
not; treasures of wisdom, of grace, of life, and happiness everlasting. Oh
thrice blessed is that Christian soul, who has attained this wisdom, happy
is that man that can say, I was once unwise, but now with thankfulness I cannot
but acknowledge the good hand of my God upon me, in whose light I see light.

2. Let this persuade every man, to break from the bands of his own folly, and
use the means to come by this wisdom: get wisdom once, thou have gotten
enough; beg wisdom of God with Solomon, thou shall have wisdom, and
wealth, and every good thing more then thou ask; for riches and glory are
in her left hand, and length of days in her right, and all her pa^hes are
prosperity: and having once attained this wisdom, Prove. 3.16.
lay her in thy bosom, and make much of this dear daughter of God. And as for
those who want it, be a means if thou can, to communicate it unto them, at
least by godly example and prayer; and forget not our Apostles scope; suffer
with meekensse the contrary minded, and wait when God will vouchsafe them the
knowledge of his truth.

Doctr. 2. Out of the second degree of the corruption of mind, A mark of a man
out of Christ to resist and reason against the word.
we learn, that it is a mark of a m^n out of Christ, not to believe and
assent to the word, but rather to stand out in reasoning against the evidence
of it: for so soon as ever a man is become the sheep of Christ, he cannot but
presently hear his voice. And hence Christ himself proves the carping
Pharisees not to be of God, Ioh. 8.43.
because they could not abide to hear his sayings: and who be they to whom the
Gospel is hid? even they that perish: and if we would have a more evident mark
to know them by, it is added, that they be such, as the eyes of whose minds the
God of this world has blinded: wherein is implied a wilful joining with
Satan, to blind themselves further by their malice, then they were by
corrupted nature.

Quest. But are there any so monstrous as will resist the word of God, it were
pity that any such should live. Answ. Yea many more then will be acknowne of:
and let us look a little nearer the thing, and we shall find too just occasion
to pronounce against many in our congregations, that which Stephen did of the
Jews, that they were resisters of the holy Ghost. For 1. whose words be these
to the almighty? Depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways; and,
who is the almighty, Job 21.14.
that Oh these be blasphemous speeches (you will say) and we abhor them in
our hearts. But howsoever men would be loath to let such speeches pass the
door of their lips, yet the thing sticks closer unto them then to be so
easily wiped off: for how many of us, who hear the word, receive the
Sacraments, and go for Christians, resolve yet not to leave our sins till
they leave us? nay the obstinate purpose of our hearts is to practice them
still: and what is this else, but with the servants in the parable, to send
word into a far country after the King, that we will not have him to rule
over us, but our own lusts shall still prescribe laws unto us? 2. Who be they
that say, the word and they not Christians that thus bless themselves in their
iniquity? for how has the Lord both denounced and executed his judgments,
and made them as clear as the light, and yet every man cries peace to his
soul. We seem in denouncing them from the Lord, as Lot to his sons in law,
even as if we mocked; and therefore the Lord takes our part, and executes as
fast on the other hand, and yet no man sets the judgment unto his heart;
Ier. 12.11.
a fearful forerunner of the whole lands desolation, if timely repentance
prevent it not. They be Christians also at least in name, that account the
glad tidings of their deliverance by Christ, as the Israelites reputed their
raising and return out of Babylon, Psalm. 126.1.
but as a dream: for whose hearts leap within them at the joyful message of
the pardon of their sin? who lean unto the promises walking worthy of them
for their life? very few assent unto the truth we teach; it hardly sinketh with
men that God should become man, that by the death of one, life should be
procured to so many: that the way to heaven should lie by hell, that by
afflictions they should be passed to glory; these things be riddles to many
professed Christians. So when we call people, as God did his, to walk in the
old way, that they may find rest to their souls: they answer us with them, we
will not walk in that way: the sound of the thing, if not of the voice
speaks: for we call men from swearing, lying, covetousness which is idolatry,
from Saboath breaking, intemperance, drinkings, and uncleanness; but men's hearts
speak by their lives; we will swear, we will drink to drunkenness, we will
by gaming or idleness break the sabboath; the ways of God are too strait
and unequal, a man had as good be in prison as in these bonds. Lastly, whereas
by the knowledge and comfort of the Scriptures, we should come to have hope,
which whosoever has, he purges himself: how do most professed Christians
pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction: God is merciful, and
therefore I may do what I list: at what time soever a sinner repents, God
will blot out all his sins, and therefore I will not repent yet. The whole
law is comprehended in these two, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, or above all, and thy neighbor as thy self: and therefore I know as
much as any Preacher can tell me, what need all these sermons? The Sabboath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabboath, and therefore what need men be so
strait laced and precise in the duties of it. He that provides not for his
wife and children, is worse then an Infidel: therefore I must and will
diligently seek the world, and set my heart upon covetousness. By all which
instances, we may see our selves as in a glass, tainted with this fearful
sin of rising up, and reasoning against that light which shines out in the
word.

Use. 1. Let all men learn hence to be humbled under that vile estate of our
nature, by which we are not only laden with simple ignorance, but even
oppressed with affected contumacie against it; such as our Savior charge
upon the Jews, Ioh. 8. and such as breaks out in many of our people, who not
seldom in hearing us teach them the truth of God, say as the Jews of Christ,
who can hear him. Alas, Ioh. 6.60.
how far better were it with us, to have been heathen or infidels, and never
have heard of Jesus Christ, that our ignorance had been simple and invincible,
then such Christians as abound not only with ignorance, but such as the
Apostle speaks of, Romans 1.24. Which is caused of the hardness of heart which
is in them.

2. Hence may we cease to wonder, why so few obey the Gospel, why after so
much teaching, there is so little fruit, so little knowledge, so little turning
to God; because the degree of corruption of mind, is beyond bare ignorance; as
to assent to the word is a further degree of grace then bare knowledge. The
Minister may hale and pull, but unless the Father draw, none come to the
Son, such is the contumacie and stubbornenes of men's hearts naturally, that
no curse can terrify, nor promise affect it: and this was it which made
Christ's own ministry unprofitable to the Jews, as we read, Ioh. 8. Let
hearers and students of the Scripture labor and pray for the sanctification of
mind, and the spirit renewing their inner man: without which they may hear,
and study, and read, but as the Eunuch, without understanding for want of a
guide. Without this teacher our report shall not be believed, nor without this
finger of God shall the arm of God be revealed. A sound of words may be heard,
and the report of truth may be so strong, as to win acknowledgment of it
self, but faith shall not be founded, nor love quickened, nor hope confirmed,
nor that change wrought, without which thou shall continue a cauiller still,
yea froward, and an enemy to God and his truth.

3. If we be such as are called out of this estate, to whom God has given
hearts to believe, assent, and obey the truth; let us not deprive God of his
glory, but acknowledging his gift, give him the honor due unto him, for here
is an exceeding great power of God put forth, if it be given thee to believe:
the work of faith is a work of great power: see 2 Thessalonians. 1.11,

Deceived,] Out of this third degree of corruption of mind, Before men be
brought to Christ their whole life is but a wandering from the ways of God.
we learn, That before men be brought unto Christ, they infinitely err, and
their whole life is but a wandering from God and his ways. For 1. Christ is the
way, the truth, and the life, and therefore to be out of Christ, is to be out
of the way that tends to life. 2. Our selves by our Moon, or star, but
walking in darkness know not whether we tend. 3. We have a wandering and
vagrant vain even after our calling, 1. Ioh 2.11.
and we have all wandered like lost sheep. The like David confesses of
himself, and even after conversion the Lord must still be seeking us up, Psalm.
119.176. oh seek thy servant, for else we have no list to return to the
shepherd of our souls Jesus Christ.

Now the reason of all this error, is a filthy flattery of the heart, and a
guilfull security of spirit, which holds men from seeking happiness where
it is to be had, while they mistaking their condition, make fair weather with
their souls, when in the mean time all is amiss, and they for truth embrace
nothing but dangerous and damnable error. We shall not need travel far to
seek instances of such vagrants out of the ways of God: and yet ask any of
them what way they travel, all of them have to heaven, and will be there as
soon as the best, if we may believe them. I might here save some labor, but
that the world swarmeth with such wanderers; and that I take it much material
to our point and purpose, to show how far many are out of the right way, how
little acquaintance many Christians have with Christ, of whom, some never saw
his face, never saluted him: others have thought it their best security to
stand a loose and follow him a far off: and others after a little
acquaintance with him, do as many disciples did, fall off from him, and walk
with him no more. But a little further to prosecute the point in particular.

The deceit of the heart putting forth it self in sundry ungodly practices.
First, what a fearful deceit is that of many ruffianly Protestants, who
strengthen themselves in their sins, sometimes putting off all the fear of
Gods justice, and growing into contempt of his judgments; sometimes absoluing
themselves from the guilt and curse of sin in hope of frozen in their
dregs: Zeph. 1.
but how came they to this setlednesse in sin? they said in their hearts,
tush, the Lord will do neither good nor evil. And did this sin die with
that age? How could it then be that men should so generally favor themselves
in their lusts, and become so violent in fulfilling them, if they did not
conceive peace in them? how could so many of our age scorn religion, contemn
godliness, outface goodness and conscience? how could it be if the Lords
silence bred not security, that we should in vain cry out so loud upon
profaners of the Lords sabbaths and ordinances, against adulterers, drunkard^*
(...), swearers, raylers, and other swarms of such sinners, all whom the
Apostle has barred from any portion in heaven; 1 Cor. 6.
and after our lifting up of our voices like trumpets against them no
reformation should follow? But what a woeful deceit it is appears, Deuteronomy.
29.20. If any man shall bless himself and say, I shall have peace, and yet
walks in the stubbornenesse of his own heart, The Lord will not be merciful
to that man, but the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke out
against him, and every curse that is written in this book shall light upon
him. And so the Lord in the forenamed Prophet has threatened, that whereas they
think to lie close from under his eye, who has put a dark cloud between
himself and them, yet he will search as with lights, Zeph. 1.12.
such frozen fellows, to bring spoil upon them, and to lay their houses
desolate: Consider this all ye that forget God, Psalm. 50 22.
least he tear you in pieces and none shall rescue.

A second and as fearful deceit as the former, is that proud conceit
deceived, and saw not themselves in a true glass, which would have showed
the^ blindness, and nakedness, and poverty. So how many civil, just dealing,
and harmeles men, every where are there at this day, who overthrow themselves
with this deceit? which arises sometimes by measuring themselves with
themselves; as the proud preachers of Corinth, seemed somewhat comparing
themselves with themselves: and otherwhiles by comparing themselves with others
whom they take greater sinners then themselves, as the Pharisees did: but
especially through ignorance, or a dead knowledge of the righteousness of the
law, they see not what strict righteousness God requires, nor their own
corruption boiling within them, and so neglect all the sense of their secret
lusts rising up against the love of God or man, and that incessantly in them.
Paul himself without the law was alive, and so are these in all
unconscionable ways, without fear of damnation, without trouble of
conscience, and sense of fearful sins, because they want the true knowledge
of the law to work upon them; while they look at themselves, they see
themselves live strictly according to humane laws* they keep their words, are
good to the poor, iollie housekeepers, hold them to old rents without racking,
their tenants pray for them, they are well thought of in their country, and
what need of further righteousness^? while they look at others, they see some
adulterers, some drunkards* some extortioners; they thank God none can charge
them with such crimes. Yea sometimes they will brave themselves with great
professors, they would not for a world be so bad as they, so covetous, so
contentious, so hypocritical, or some other infirmities shall be fathered upon
them, or imputed unto them: and thus they puff up themselves ouergrowne with
desperate diseases, while they scorn others as it were for the toothach.

Now alas what a general deceit is this? where is there a soul in town or
country, but in it own conceit is alive? which yet lives in all profaneness.
Poor people in the country especially content themselves with going to
Church, and a formal service, but without all spirit and life, yea indeed
despise the word and prayer, and yet say they serve God as well as others, or
as they need, or as himself gives them leave. They mean no man harm they
say, yet their nature must needs be angry, and revenge too, if men much
provoke them; they can ordinarily swear without touch, because they say they
hope they swear nothing but truth, or by nothing but that which is good. If
they curse or banne, they were urged unto it: they can seek out to the witch
for themselves, their children, and cattle, because God has provided a salve
for every sore: they defy drunkenness, but can sometimes in the week resort
to the alehouse for good fellowship sake: they are no common gamsters, but
after service on Sundaies (as they say) can spend away the time for good
neighborhood. Oh how has the deceitfulnes of sin ouerreached these poor
ones, and put out their eyes to destruction; if there were no law indeed there
could be no transgression, nor these could be no sins: but let that light
shine once upon the conscience, let the voice of it once awaken the soul out
of these dead sleeps, they would as fast cry out of themselves and their
courses: then would all such Pharisaicall righteousness vanish as the smoke
in the wind: then would they no longer say with the Jews, Ier. 8.8.
we are wise, the word of the Lord is with us, so we are not far from heaven:
or so far as these forward Ministers would make us believe, we come to
Church, we love a good pulpitman, and have good and fair service; no no, the
voice would be, that other which follows, we have all this while rejected the
word of the Lord, 9.
and what wisdom can be in us? and it were to be wished, that even Gods
children were wise to discover this deceit in themselves, which otherwise will
often dead their diligence in the ways of God, while they look in themselves,
or compare themselves with others who are not come so far as they: but let
them with the Saints look up unto the pure nature of God, and to the perfect
law of righteousness; the former will keep them low in their own eyes, and the
latter provoke to truth in the inward parts which the Lord by that law
requires.

A third sort of men as far deceived as the former, are secure persons, Five
sorts of men in several paths, and never one in the right.


1. Are superstitious persons, who take up a voluntary religion, which has
some show of wisdom and humbleness of mind; worship God they think they
do, but it is uncommanded, devout they are, but resist We will do whatsoever
goes out of our own mouth, we will offer to the Queen of heaven as we have
done, even we, our Fathers, Ier. 44.16.
our Princes, and our people; for then we had store of all things, and every
thing was cheap. Nay, as though the truth were impropriate unto them, they are
so zealous in their way, that if Peter or Paul should stand against their
traditions, they would think they did God good service to kill them, as Christ
foreprophecied: Ioh. 16 2.
a pregnant mark of a Popish and Antichristian spirit, to hate and cast out
the brethren for the name of Christ, and yet to say, Let God be glorified; yet
sit they down here most securely as in a good way, whereas alas, all is
deceit; this being the way which is good in a man's own eyes, but the issues
of it are death: Prove. 14.12. and 16.^2.25.
and the end of it is foreprophecied in the place of Jeremy alleged, that the
Lord will watch over such persons for evil and not for good, and consume them
with sword and famine, and sundry destructions.

2. Sort are general or Catholic Protestants, of all, any, or no religion;
the Temple, the Temple, the Covenant, Abraham's seed, etc. so these find a
religion established, and they love it because it is crowned, and brings in
abundance of prosperity with it; they hate Popery also, because the laws
hate it; but never knew, nor care to know what the power and life of godliness
ever meant; to whom the Lord may say as to them. Say not the Temple, Ier. 7.4.
the Temple, trust not in lying words: we have the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
Peace, etc. but get the power of godliness, if you would not beguile your own
souls; Amend your ways and works, execute judgment, oppress not the
stranger, fatherless, and widow, follow not after other Gods.

O vain man, says James, do thou imagine a saving faith without repentance,
and works of piety and love? do thou profess an holy religion, and by the
loosenes of thy life, make that holy way of God evil spoken of? did not the
latter end of the former Chapter teach us, that Christ died not only to set us
free from the curse of sin, but from the courses of iniquity, that we should
become zealous of goodworkes? Christ saves no other, and therefore deceive not
thy self.

The fourth sort may well carry the title of crafty Christians, as also seek
the Lord while he may be found, and to day if ye will hear his voice harden
not your hearts; and this is the acceptable time: the which gracious
inuitations while men have put off, how has the severity of the almighty cut
them off suddenly by strange deaths? and this most deservedly, in that they had
so long abused the time of his patience. Rev. 3.21. The Lord gave Iezabel a
time to repent, but she repented not: and what was the issue of it? Behold I
will cast her into a bed of sorrow and great affliction. So the Lord would have
purged the impenitent Jew, but he would not be purged, therefore says the
Lord, Thou shall not be purged till I have caused my wrath to come upon thee.

The fifth sort of secure persons may be called sensible Protestants,
affliction like other men, pride compasses them as a chain: they seek not
after God, nor sound and settled peace in him: but little knew they the end of
that fat pasture; he learned at the sanctuary, Tolluntur in altum vt lapsu
g^aviore ruant.
that they were lifted up above other, as fellons on the ladder, to come down
with a greater mischeife and breaknecke. But more merueilous it is that
corrections and afflictions should become a pillow for security in many, which
are Gods spurs in the ^^anke of the godly to prick them up, and rouse them
from their drowsinesse; and yet many determine hence, and conclude without
further ground, the Lords love toward them, because of long, and durable
afflictions, of which they could never come to make good use, nor take any
profit by them: whom God loves, say they, he chasteneth: and we are judged of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned of the world: and when they are
exceedingly crossed in the world, and indeed cursed in their counsel and
attempts, they thank God they have their punishment here in this life, and so
secure themselves from all future pains. But this is but a guile and
stratageme of Satan, to cast his poison into the Lords cup, and bane and
destroy men with that which might be a special mean of their good, even a
special provocation to make them seek reconciliation with God in Jesus
Christ: which many men who will not much murmur at affliction, but generally
can confess it a fruit of their sin, little think of; the affliction it
self is a token of love enough already, though no amendment accompany it,
nor any sorrow for sin, fear of offending, or diligence in good duties
follow it. Thus by all these means security eats up the souls of infinite
professed Christians, who are all miserably deluded, and not yet gotten out of
their natural corrupted estate, but for the present are the children of wrath.

The fourth and last sort of men who are deceived* and wander out of the good
way, are some that seem to themselves and others to be very good Christians,
at least none of the worst: and yet many of them little better then some of the
former. And these are of two sorts: some are deceived in regard of their
sins; others in regard of their graces or virtues.

before sin, are vexed at it and afraid of it, and are loath to be too bold
with it, but hating the punishment more then the sin, they go through stitch
at length as Herod against John, and Pilate against Christ. Others can avoid
sin, as swearing, drinking, uncleanness, etc. but have a false finger that
has laid hold upon some one or more, which shall be dearer then to forgo for
naught; so as all sins shall not be left: nay they will in some cases be very
commendable, even above good Christians, in repressing corruptions, and yet not
be cleansed from their filthiness. Thus Haman could a long time refrain
himself from Mordecay. 2. After sin many more can deceive themselves with a
counterfeit repentance, whereby they can feel it, cry out upon it, and
confess it with grief: d^^sembling Saul, cursed Cain, treacherous Judas, and
hard hearted Pharaoh (...) do thus much; and yet this is all the repentance of
many, who think that hereby they have received a sound cure. Hence have we
many, that after their sin with a Lord have mercy, or saying over of a
prayer, with a forced sigh, dravve a skin over their consciences, and for
the time there is peace. And others who have spent their whole lives in
oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor; every penny of whose wealth
is worse gotten then other; if about the time of their death they give a
little trifle to the poor, or be liberal for a sermon, or set apart some
small thing to some good uses; they rest herein as a sufficient acquittance
from all their unrighteousness: whereas they never think of ^^tisfaction,
and restoring again that they have robbed, according to the ^avv of
repentance. Let such punish themselves, pray, fast* give alms, and yet the
Lord will never a whit regard, for here are no bands of vvicnednes loosed.
Others by some short humiliation in a servile kind of flattery of God
proceeding of slavish fear and self-love, will come and confess their
sin, and promise they will no more so transgress, but yet they dissemble
with their double hearts: for how many have we known whose extorted
righteousness has been as the morning dew? In their sickness and distress
they have humbled themselves, but with the Jews for corn and wine: they have
howled and cried upon their beds, but they returned not to the most high; they
affected deliverance, not repentance: nor further fawned upon God then to get
out of his hands. By these wordly sorrows, infinite men deceive themselves,
and rest in them as sufficient repentance.

The latter sort are they, that deceive themselves in turning their eyes

Use. 1. All this so large a doctrine shows, what a number of men and women,
who seem good Christians, are yet in their natural condition, and have not
a^tained the first degree of their renouation; but deceived they were borne, so
they live, and so without Gods great mercy are they like to die. And ^he
misery of this condition, is like that of a man that has a thousand deadly
diseases on him, and yet is senseless of them all, whose case every man will
say is remediless. Let every man and woman enter into the narrow examination
of themselves, and never be at rest till they find themselves renewed in the
spirit of their minds.

2. If God have let any man see his error hereby, that he can truly say that
he has been deceived, but now has the path of life revealed unto him; let
him acknowledge all this to be the finger of God, and still pray with David,
open mine eyes that I may see further into thy law, for so I shall see mine
own errors the better: and* hide not thy commandments from me.

3. If thou see any man go on in any of these deceivable courses, pity
him, pray for him, counsel him, deal meekely and tenderly with him, for thou
wast also in time past deceived.

Serving the lusts and diverse pleasures,] Having spoken of the corruption of
mind in men unconverted, now we come to the depravation of their wills; the
which is lively described in two degrees. 1. In that it is a servant, and has
lost the freedom wholly. 2. In that it is a servant to lusts, and that not to
one but diverse pleasures.

(...).
The word whereby the former is expressed is borrowd from servants, who at that
time used to be sold and bought, and were mere vassals wholly at the
appointment of their Masters, without all power in themselves. Wherein we have
the true portraiture of every natural man, who in his will is a most base
servant to sinful lusts and pleasures, and cannot but obey and fulfill them:
but without the least power to will the least moral divine good. Free will
considered in the subjects.
Now that we may come rightly to conceive of the bondage of will, we must first
restrain it to the right subject, and then to the right object. First,
according to the subjects it is diversely nature, as in God himself, or by
grace, as in the good angels, and in men who are renewed in the highest degree,
that is, the Saints departed, who immutably will only good and only free to
will things below according to the corrupt nature: and as far as it is
spirit, and has a work of renovation, it is freed to will supernatural and
divine things. But all these subjects are removed as not that which our
Apostle speaks of; who not obscurely speaks of natural men, and their
wills so far as unchanged.

Secondly, for the object of this bondage. 1. We deny not in the will of
unconverted men a passive power unto good, that it can posse velle: but by this
I mean a capablenes or ability of willing that which is truly good, not by
any principle in it self, The bondage of will considered in the right object.
but when God shall send out the grace of conversion. 2. We deny not in such a
will an actual freedom from all coaction and compulsion, which the nature of
will cannot admit, Bellarmine says we have turned men into beasts, by taking
away freewill. Praefat. de lib arb. Ob. Sol.
and when it comes to will good it assenteth to the word and spirit: it is
not now purely passive as a block, nor yet forced, but works according to
the nature of will freely; for being moved by God it self moves, and
becomes not only as before a subject, but an instrument of the spirit. Where
by the way lies the answer to that Popish objection, that will cannot be free
unless it be inclinable alike to good and evil: for will is not properly free
in regard of the object, to which it is moved, but of the efficient moving
it: and what say they to the will of God? they cannot deny it to be most free,
and yet cannot without blasphemy affirm it to be equally inclinable to evil
as well as good.

3. We deny not but that the unconverted will has a more full freedom in
natural actions, as to eat, drink, walk, speak, which without changed into
an other man: but even without, as to Cyrus, Alexander, Aristides, Socrates:
but yet in the actions of these virtues this will is half dead and wounded. I
call it a maimed power and freedom, because it is a certain kind of liberty
in some external obedience and discipline toward the law of God; and yet
utterly separated from the internal and spiritual obedience of it. Which
meets also with an other chief objection of the Papists: Ob.
that many unregenerate men do and have done many good and glorious actions,
and that not by the special grace we speak of, but by the freedom of will.
To which hence is answered, Sol.
that although these things are materially good, yet are they wanting in the
formal righteousness, which the law requires, Quae eunque agimus dum ^umus
alieni a deo non possunt illi placere. Basil. de baptis. lib 2. quaest. 7.
Extra Christum omnis virtus in vitio est. Hier.
and therefore have been far from pleasing God, and properly nor good
actions, but rather, goodly and glistering sins: the defects of them being
evident. 1. The persons doing them are out of Christ. 2. The deed it self
done not of faith. 3. Not having perfection either in it self or in the
Mediator. 4. not directed to right ends, namely, the pure honor and worship
of God: Now to such incomplete actions, being no better then civil men can
perform in abundance, we deny not some liberty of will in the unregenerate.
Vbi nulla vera religio ^bi nulla vera virtus. Augustine.
5. We deny not to such a will freedom and liberty in spiritual actions,
but in such as are altogether evil, unto which as it self is most free, so
can it determine itself most freely.

secundum gratiam. Whence the conclusion arises, That in such things as
pertain to God and true godliness, the unregenerate has no power nor
freedom of will at all, no not so much as to will his own conversion. Ob.
Object. But the will of receiving grace must needs go before the action of
receiving it. Answ. But this will as it is the beginning of conversion, Sol.
in the very first moment and motion of it is from grace, and none can will and
desire grace truly but by grace.

This conclusion directly bends it self against that which is the maine of
the Controversy between us and the Church of Rome, about this point of
free will: which (not to bring down so far as from their master Lumbard, who
was Bishop of Paris about 400. years since, and the schoolmen after him,
Thomas, Scotus, Bonaventure, Byel, etc.) we will gather out of the present
doctrine of the Church of Rome, as it is avouched in the council of Trent, the
Romish Catechism, and Bellarmine himself: from whence I take out the maine
difference between us into these two positions. The former, that a man has
free will left in his nature in things pertaining to salvation, although not
without all grace. The cursed Conventicle curses those that dare affirm
free will since the fall to be lost, or extinct: and that they mean in
spiritual things, the other Canons following show. Council of Trent. sess. 6.
can. 1.
Bellarmine affirms, that men unregenerate, only by the strength of nature,
without the special aid of God, can so perform a moral good, that they sin
not in it, if they be without the molestation of some more grievous temptation.
Tom. 4. lib* 5. cap. 9.
The latter conclusion of the Romish Church is, that in the first moment of
conversion, the will of man concurreth and cooperateth with the grace of God,
by a certain kind of natural power, not wrought, but helped by the holy
Ghost. The counsel curses those that deny, that free will cooperateth with
God, and that it disposes not it self to obtain the grace of justification,
or is merely passive. Bellarmine in the tenth cap. of the former book
affirms, Co^nc. sess. 6. ca^. 4.
that where the Scriptures call us coworkers with God, so often is the faculty
of our freewill affirmed in such works, and that not as it is wrought by the
grace of God, but as it is in it self, and in it own nature. Such testimonies
out of their writers were infinite; but these as clear enough shall suffice.

We teach the clean contrary upon good grounds, of which I will give a taste
briefly. 1. If we be wholly flesh, which is flat contrary to the spirit, then
can there be no preparation to justification before regeneration. That which is
contrary makes no preparation to the contrary, Grounds drawn out of
Scripture against the Popish doctrine concerning free will.
the dead in trespasses and sins, then can we rot away dead in trespasses,
and like Lazarus dead and rotting in the grave: to which purpose we might
amplify those many phrases of our quickening, of our raising, of our new birth,
and of our new creation. I hope they will blush to say that a thing not
created, can dispose it self to the creation of it self. 3. In how many
places are these things laid out of the power of man? as where it is said, ^e
imagines only evil continually, that is, naturally. clean thing out of
filthiness? can a blackmoore change his skin, or a leopard his spots? can
evil trees bring forth good fruits? how can ye speak well being evil? I
know (says Jeremy) it is not in man to dispose his way: and we are not able
to think any thing of our selves: and much less are we able to think any
thing well: and yet steppeth out a Popish spirit and says, yes by Saint Paul's
leave, we can both think well, and will well, and dispose well, and do well,
without the special aid of God: let them believe him that prefer Romish
traditions before Apostolical writings. 4. How often is our whole conversion
for the beginning and proceeding, the first, middle, None comes to the Son,
unless the Father draw him: draw me, and we will run after thee: without
me ye can do nothing: It is he that works both to will and to do: If the
Son set you free, ye are free indeed: convert us Lord, and we shall be
converted: we are his workemanshippe created to good works: I will give an
heart of flesh: But I may not be infinite in testimonies. 5. We have heard that
the whole understanding is corrupted; Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor.
but by rebellion of will perform it not, although it want not direction
sufficient. Thus the obstinacy of the will of the Gentiles oppugned and
darkened the light of the mind in them, Romans 1.21.28.
of whom Paul speaks, that they knew God, but glorified him not as God. The
maine objections are briefly answered already, and we will spend no more time
in them, but come to the second point or degree of this corruption.

The second degree of corruption of will is, that it serves lusts and diverse
pleasures. Sins are called lusts, because they be indeed so many inordinate
desires against the commandment. And pleasures, because of the imagination of
them that commit sin, being carried away with the present pleasure and
sweetness of them. And diverse pleasures, 1. Diverse pleasures why so called.
yet some serve this, and some that, and every wicked man some. Samson will be
a slave to his Dalilah, in the lust of the flesh and uncleanness: Nabal to his
wealth, in the lust of the eye: Herod to

Use. 1. These two degrees lead us further into our misery then before, when
we see the will yet more rebellious then the mind was blind: and yet more then
so, Our misery enlarged in that the will is more rebellious then our mind was
blind.
that we naturally take delight and pleasure in our bonds and chains: what a
woeful misery is it, that men should be sold under sin, and that with
consent, yea delight? and that which is indeed sin, and inordinate lust
should be their chief pleasure, unto which they sacrifice? whereby they become
dead while they live: nay, are not only taken in these dangerous snares, but
that they wear out and spend themselves in plotting and contriuing, who should
get themselves deepest and surest in? which Paul notes in the phrase of taking
care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Romans 13 14.
Hence is it that a number will be rich, and rush into manifold snares of the
devil: Others to gain their voluptuousness and unclean lusts and pleasures,
go on as an o^e to the shambles, and spy no danger till the dart be stricken
thorough their liver. Others that have bound themselves to serve prentiships
among the pots, are so bewitched with the sorcerie of the sin, as they sleep
on the top of the mast, and are smitten, but they know not when, how, or by
whom. And thus is it in other sins, wherein although for the present, nothing
but profit or pleasure appears, and the service seems somewhat more easy
then the service of righteousness, yet mark when this master comes with his
wages, what becomes of the lovers of pleasures more then of God? consider the
fruit of sinful pleasures for a season, the best is shame and sorrow, and
what then is the worst? Solomon that tried his heart with such pleasures more
then enough, proclaimed of them all, that they were but vanity and vexation of
spirit: and truly, for who can conceive the shame, terror, guilt of
conscience, and torment of spirit, which as a shadow follow unlawful stolen
pleasures, even in those that at length escape from them? but for others that
have set down their resolution, to make it their pleasure, to live deliciously
for a season, they shall not fail to receive the wages of unrighteousness. 2.
Pet. 2.13.
Oh miserable service.

2. This doctrine shows, that such men as have not received grace to moderate
themselves, and their affections in their pleasures, are not yet regenerate. It
is a dangerous note when pleasure must take place of things of an higher
strain, even matters of Gods worship, public or private. The Apostle Peter
teaches, that where grace takes up the affection, and works effectually, 1.
Pet. 1.13.
there is a girding up of the loins with sobriety.

3. It teaches us to strive in the renewing of our selves; that seeing this
service of lusts is so deceitful and dangerous, we should never find our
selves at ease till we find a charge in our will, till these sinful
pleasures be as bitter, as ever they were sweet, till we can strive as
resolutely against them, as ever we served under them cheerfully. And because
this change is not wrought all at once, but by degrees; nor sprowteth up as the
lilies, which grow but neither labor nor spinne: we must use the means
appointed hereunto: as namely, the daily use of the word, prayer, faith,
obedience, watchfulness, combat against sin, and no grace must be wrapped
up in the napkin, or hid in the earth: but as these means work and uphold this
change, by begetting and confirming faith, which is a daily purifier; so must
they be carefully used of every one that would find this blessed work of grace
within his soul.

4. Seeing when we are most renewed in this life, we shall be changed but in
part; and the law of the members will be still rebelling against the law of
the mind, let us look up, and long after that glory wherein we shall be
totally set free from this rebellion, and have the full accomplishment of that
salvation, the beginnings of which we have here only attained unto; wherein we
shall not only not sin, but not will to sin; nay we shall as perfectly
hate and resist it, as we shall perfectly love God, and inseparably cleave unto
him for ever.

5. Especially professors must increase their skill in knowing, judgment (...)
discerning and diligence in avoiding these disordered and noisome lusts, which
otherwise will blemish the best things they have received, and darken the best
duties they attempt. It is pitiful to see how Christians and professors not
watching as they were wont, are hurried back into their old service, and
bolts, to the which they long since seemed to have bid adieu. One has his
passion and inordinate desire of malice, bitterness, sullennes, and
unquietness to which as if he had never been free borne he willingly serves.
Another serves his tooth, his appetite, his back and belly; he must be
delicate in diet, costly in apparel, and no whit abate of his superfluity
when hard times should call him to remember Joseph's affliction much more then
he does. Miserrimus est qui misero servit.
Another is servant to the lust of the eye, he is insaciable in his desire of
wealth, and sometimes he can drink a draught of stolen waters. And a rare
professor is he that can avoid an earthly mind in earthly matters, or while he
lays up in earth has a free mind to treasure in heaven. Thus ungodly and
unbeseeming lusts carry many professors away as a stream. Let them look if
Christ be learned whether he be learned as the truth is in Christ; Ephesians. 4.^^.
and know that as every thing is poisoned where these are unconquered; so the
greatest toil in Christianity is over, when these are mastered.

Living in maliciousness, and envy, hateful, and hating one another. (...).
First, to distinguish the words. The first of them malice, is an evil
affection of the heart, which properly desires the hurt of our neighbor,
(...).
and rejoices in his fall. Envy, is a contrary affection but as wicked, for
it grieueth at the neighbors good, and fretteth it self at his prosperous and
fortunate success in any thing. (...).
Hateful, may to good purpose be taken either actively as it is read, namely,
for such as are in such extremity of wickedness, as they every way are
abominable creatures in themselves: or else passively, and so may be read
hated, that is, justly execrable and odious unto others, both God and men. And
hating one another, (...)*
as full of poison and venomous hatred toward others as they could be unto us,
requiting like for like: all which although they show a most godles and
comfortless condition, yet we lived in this graceless course, that is, passed
our days, or at least a great part of them in time past before we came to know
the grace of God.

Now this being the estate of every natural man, that his whole conversation
is monstrously depraved, so as he spends his days and consumes his time in
malice, envy, hatred, and such hateful courses: it may let many a man see
how little they are escaped from the filthiness of nature. For 1. how do the
lives of most men show that the spirit which lusts after envy rules them?
Iam. 4 5^
and how does that bitter root of malice and hatred shoot forth buds and
blossoms at all seasons: both in 1. the affections, 2. speeches, 3. the
actions of men.

First, The spirit in man lusts after envy: proved.
in affection when as men greiue at the good and greatness of an other, and
cannot look upon the prosperity of a man whom they wish not so well unto, but
with an evil eye, and the more they look upon it, the sorer still grows
their eye; accounting themselves after a sort wronged 1. Sam. 18.9.
others in their hearts wish and desire the fall, the harm, and loss of some
whom in some sinister respect they cannot brook. If the name of such a one be
blotted, or his estate weakened, this fall of such a one is matter enough of
their rejoicing: he is perhaps of the same trade, or has injured him, or
stands in his light one way or other, but ^owsoeuer it is, here is a brand of
a bad and ungodly heart, to rejoice in evil: Be not glad, says Solomon, when
thine enemy falls, Prou. 29.17.
nor let thine heart rejoice when he stumbleth, which is a needful lesson in
these times wherein charity is grown so cold.

Secondly, in men's speeches, how does Satan tippe many men's tongues

3. In the actions of life, what a cloud of frivolous suites, and yet fiery
thrown down from his habitation. A vile fruit of this sin appeared not long
after in Caine, who cast down his countenance upon his brother, and slew him,
because his works were good and acceptable, and his own evil: then begun the
persecution of the Church, and has continued till this day. How this envy and
malice of unconverted hearts wrought against Christ himself, the history
makes plain: The Pharisees were ever carping at his gracious words, and
glorious works, and at the last, delivered him for envy to be crucified. And
how it is not idle at this day against his members, experience proves: Is it
not the common sin of this day, to style all the profession of religion under
the title of hypocrisy or precisenes, or brand it with the affectation of a
Saintish purity? How furiously do men breath out all manner of indignities
and contumelies against such as more carefully look toward the ways of God?
But alas what has the righteous done; for what good work do men lay such load
on them? why was Joseph hated of all his brethren, and sold and bought among
them, what had he done? surely his carriage was so wise, so dutiful, and
respective, that his father could not but love him above the rest; and his life
was a real reprehension of all the rest: so is it the very light which is
hated, because it checketh the darkness of the world, which loves her own.
But how do these men injury them selves most of all? what manner of men may we
repute them, who the better any man is, the less they can abide him? A good
man the more of Gods image he espieth in an other, the more (as he is bound)
does he love and honor him. Again, whereas every man should imitate the best
examples and so walk more cheerfully to heaven together: the malice of these
toward them will not suffer them, either to do good unto them, or take any
good from them. Which work of malice is so bold, as we may read it in men's
foreheads, and hear it from their mouths, that they will take no good neither
by the doctrine, nor by the life of that minister, whose light reprooueth their
darkness. But Ahab while he acknowledges Micha a Prophet of God, will hate
him notwithstanding, and therefore will receive no direction from him: even so
we want not such as hearing the preacher rebuke, and apply the word against
their particular sins; no sooner comes the finger to the bile, or the
quick touched, but the carnal heart begins to boil, and says, this man
means me, he has some spite at me, he has heard something of me, he
spends some of his anger against me, I will hear him no more; whereas indeed
it is the light of the word alone which ransaketh their consciences, and it is
no other but the natural malice of the heart against the truth, and bringers of
it, which hinders the entrance of the word for the time present and to come.
By this means thorough Gods just judgment a number lay the block in their
own way, whereupon they break the neck of their souls: and it is to be
doubted, that many of our meek hearers would entertain us, and our word as
courteously as Herod did John, so long as we meddle not with their Herodias,
their damsel sin: but if John shall meddle with that, there is no way but
one, he must kiss the prison, and buy his boldness dearer then so.

Secondly, this must teach us that profess our selves to be the Lords, to
abhor all the sins of this suite, and to banish such filthy fruits of the
flesh, which God gives them up unto who are of a reprobate mind; Gal. 5. Romans
1.
and have nothing to do with such wicked inmates, which are ever plotting to
set the whole tenement on fire, and which bring rottennes into the own bones
and bowels: as well said a godly man of Cain, he had half killed and consumed
himself with malice before he killed his brother. And not to urge the
multitude of reasons which to this purpose offer themselves, Professors must be
careful to banish all the sins of this suit.
I will only name those two, which are couched in the verse. 1. Because that
we profess that we were such in times past, but now are begotten unto God:
which were it not a forceable reason, the Apostle would not so often But now
put away all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, wherein
ye walked once when ye lived in them: and if we would prove our selves a new
lump, we must purge out the old sowering and swelling leaven of
malitiousnesse: 1. Cor. 5.8. So the Apostle James, 1.18. of his own good will
he begat us, wherefore lay away all filthiness, and superfluity of
maliciousness: and, Pet. 1.2.2. laying aside all guile, envy, malitiousnesse,
-- as new borne babes desire, etc. If ever thou would have evidence of thy
conversion, thou must put on as the elect of God, these bowels of mercy to
Gods people, and love to Gods image in whomsoever: for how else would thou be
known to be a disciple? 2. These hateful sins make us justly odious, The
wicked is cast away for his malice both root and fruit. 2. to man, in that
they wage battle against Christian love, which is the preservative of all
society.

Thus have we been somewhat large in discovering the nakedness of our corrupt
nature, by which not only our chief, but all our holds are taken, and we
turned naked into the curse of God. Now how few return back to the pit
whence they are dug? how few acknowledge and bewail this mother sin,
which is the root of all sins, and lays us open to all inundations, both
of sin, and the curses due thereunto? for so the Lord mentions it as the
cause of the f^ood, because hence sprung all those actual sins which were
the next causes of it. Genesis 6.5.
I know not how those Popish positions have prevailed in the practice of most
men, who are yet of an other judgment; who call this natural corruption less
then all sins, yea, then any venial sin; yea indeed not properly sin,
but a propensitie to it, as tinder not as fire; not deserving death of it
self: yea too many Christians live as though it were not in them at all, as
though they had drunk that Popish dregge, that original sin is not in the
regenerate any sin at all. But mistake not our Apostle, he says not, we were
thus or thus, as though any were quite escaped from this corrupt condition; but
it is a most fearful sin pressing down and hanging fast on the best, Romans
5.1^.
subiecting them in it self to the wrath of God, still urging them to bring
them back if it were possible into deep condemnation: such a corruption as is
contrary to all the commandments, bred in the bone, lurking close in the
soul, hardly seen, hardly resisted, never abolished in the best, while they
carry this house of clay. This is the cause why so few perceive this estate of
theirs, that so few see the necessity of being renewed in the spirit of their
minds, and that so few seek in true humility to be shrouded under the
righteousness of the Lord Jesus. But if ever thou would be raised, labor to
see and bewail the poison of thy nature; the more thou see it the less it
is; and the more thou art sanctified, the more weakness thou find; yea
little else but death and darkness in thy soul.

There is as great difference between two sorts of men, as between fire and
water. The former have always found a good disposition in themselves, they
have grace at will, they never doubted of Gods love, they have ever loved and
served God without let; yet these pitiful deluded creatures live no otherwise
then the very Stoiks, who followed nature for their guide, and never find fault
with their estate. Another sort of men such as Saint Paul can cry out of
themselves as miserable men, ouermatched with a body of sin and death; they
pray for a free spirit, and then when first the Lord has enlarged them and
loosed their bolts, they can promise to run the way of his commandments.
These would do good but they cannot; they would not do evil, but they do it;
which of these two now are more Puritanes? Again, in their falls and slippes
they differ no less. The former if he sin he lays it upon something
without himself, as the sight of some object, and beholding of some Bathsebah,
some Achans wedge; or his inward senses call to his mind some injury,
vanity, or some such occasion or other, Men are naturally possessed with this
point of Popery, that this corruption is seated in the body, senses, and
inferior faculties of the mind only.
which had he escaped all had bin well, thus he will lay his sin any where
but on himself. The other know and acknowledge that they are led away by their
own concupiscence, and that their senses, objects, and occasions are but
servants to their corruption: David being checked for one sin goes to this
root, Psalm. 51.5. and such as he, upon every occasion can set upon this sin
as the most dangerous enemy of their salvation. If they find ignorance in
themselves they presently have recourse to this darkness of mind which
naturally has deprived it self of the knowledge of God. If they come short of
doing any good as they would, or do it not so well; they can blame this inbred
evil which is present with them: when they find themselves heavy to that
which the understanding rightly conceiueth, they can groan under the rebellion
of their will, which is renewed but in part only: when they go halting, and
fall down sometimes in their course, here they can epsy their own counsels
casting them down: when they see a conquest to will and effect that which is
good, they can return the honor to the author, and glory in him who has
wrought both the will and the deed; yet so as they forget not the combat and
molestation of this their familiar foe, who continually eats, drinks, and
sleeps in his bosom, watching Dalilah-like to deliver him to his destruction.

Lastly, let every one learn timely to take in hand this crooked nature,
before he be accustomed to evil; Timely take in hand thy crooked nature.
for else as hardly as a blackmoore changes his skin, shall thou become
changed when wicked nature, and worse custom have both barred thy repentance,
and bound thy sins faster upon thee. And because much of this folly is bound
up in the hearts of children and servants, let masters and fathers seek
seasonably to drive it out; fathers especially because they helped their
children into it, must by Christian instruction, godly example, and the rod
of correction, labor to help them out, and thus do their best to make their
children a part of a mends. Zuinglius calls this corruption the disease of
nature. And herein it fitly resembles the diseases of the body, Morbus and
languor naturae.
the which the longer they continue the more incurable they are; and if they be
let go too long they bring certain death: and therefore let parents and
masters (many of whom are careful enough to prevent and seek out for help
against the diseases which threaten the bodily death of their children and
servants) take up some care to remove that everlasting death which this evil
threatens, and will certainly bring if in due season it be not repressed.
Teach thy child, and train him in the Scriptures from a child: teach thy
servant the trade of Christianity and godliness, for thou art no less bound
to deliver him the principles of this calling as the particular to which he is
bound: use good means to get them the light of knowledge, opposed against this
blindness of mind: work upon their wills to break them from the follies and
vanities of youth, opposed to this rebellion of will: bring them at least to
outward conformity in their conversation, opposed to this general deprauation
of manners: these things they will not forget in their age, or if they do, the
peril is their own, thou have done thy duty, one thing remember, thy servants,
thy children are all poisoned, and have need of some present antidote.

Verse 4. But when the bountifulness, and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared,

5. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy
Ghost,

6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior,

7. That we being justified, etc.

Our Apostle having so largely described the miserable condition of man in his
naturalls, whose whole temper we have seen to be such as carries him to all
rough and graceless courses: he now sets by it a lively description of a
new condition, unto which those who are good in Gods sight are called: and this
he does in these four verses, in this order. First, by the principal
efficient cause of it, which is the bountifulness and love of God: fitly
opposed to that hardness and unmercifulness of men, which was the ground of
feircenes in their speeches and behauiours: God was not so feirce against man,
but when we were in that miserable condition: as he is the fountain of all
goodness in himself; so his gentleness and philanthropie streamed out; and the
glorious beams of his grace shined out upon us through his Christ, ver. 4. Now
this principal efficient is illustrated, 1. by the time, when. 2. by remoouing
the contrary things, which whatsoever they may seem, are so far from being
causes, as they are rather diametrally opposed; namely the works of
righteousness which we had done, that is, the very best and flower of our
works, which indeed had no righteousness; here was no such thing concurring
to the helping of us into this estate, but his mere mercy saved us: which
assertion of Gods free mercy is inserted and repeated again, to take down
the arrogancy of some presumptuous spirits in those days. This he does in the
former part of the 5. verse.

Secondly, by the isntrumental or ministerial efficient cause, which helps
us into this change, and new condition; and this may be conceived either
proper, and that is the renewing of the holy Ghost: or typical and
sacramental, and that is the lauer of regeneration. By which some understand
Baptism in a larger sense, including all the gifts necessary to salvation; as
it is taken, Ioh. 3.5. and 1. Pet. 1.3. because the verse following casts eye
to such places of the old Testament, which speak not of the effusion of
sacramental water, but of the plentiful pouring out of such graces of the
spirit, as were prophesied to be in abundance conferred to the Church of the
new Testament: as Ezech. 36. I will power out clean waters: Joel. 2. I will
power out of my spirit, that is, the waters of grace unto a new life. But I
will not leave the high way, where I may (as I take it) more conveniently go
in it. I will speak of this lauer of regeneration, in the stricter sense,
taking it for the sacrament of Baptism: for so I shall not confound things
which the text seems plainly to distinguish; the whole former sense being
expressed in those words, and the renewing of the holy Ghost; as after in
prosecuting them we shall see.

Thirdly, this new condition is amplified by the final cause of it, and this
end is twofold: 1. nearer hand, namely our present justification, That by his
grace we being justified, that is, accounted righteous; 2. more remote and
further off, but annexed, and inseperably tied unto the former, namely our
future glorification, when we shall be manifested to be heirs of life
eternal; which yet is not so far off us, but that we have sure hold of it by
hope. So as the whole carriage and meaning of these 4. verses, seems to be
this.

Howsoever formerly we were in our old estate, lost in wandering and vagrant
courses, yet after that the most free love and good will of God our Savior
(whose sole mercy alone moved him in his son to embrace us) through the
preaching of the Gospel, did more clearly shine out; then not of any works of
righteousness which we had done, for what could we then do? but of his mere
mercy he saved us: and to this purpose he powered upon us his holy spirit to
the renewing of us, and the purging of our consciences from all the impuritie
of them: of which inward purging that lauer of Baptism is a sign and
representation, wherein he does not sparingly and drop by drop, besprinkle our
consciences with those pure waters, but abundantly and with a liberal hand
sheddeth them, and powers them ou^ upon our souls, through Christ our
Savior. All which our good God has done for us, that we might obtain
righteousness, and all spiritual graces attending it; and so might be led to
the fruition of that glory which he has already put in our hands by faith
and hope, which shall not make us ashamed.

In the principal efficient, we are to speak of three things in order. 1. of
this love, and bountifulness of God, which is the positive cause of our
salvation. 2. The time when it appeared unto us, But when the bountifulness
and love of God toward man. 3. The remoouall of a supposed cause, not by the
works of righteousness which we had done, but by his mercy he saved us.

In the first we must first distinguish these two words, bountifulness, and
love of God toward man. (...)
The former notes rather that native nesse which is in, or rather which is his
own nature, who is goodness it self, and ready to be implied to the good of
the creature. The latter a communicated and participated goodness unto others,
(...).
as a stream issuing from the former fountain; for it is said to be such a
goodness as has appeared. And whereas the goodness of God shines out in and
to all his creatures, not only in creating them all very good, but in the
daily ordering and preserving of them; this is not such a general goodness, but
more special and peculiar to mankind, which he loves better then all the
works of his hands besides, as creating him in his own image, and giving him
Lordship over the rest of the creatures; and hence he delights in the title,
He calls himself (...), not (...), or (...).
and styles himself from his love to man, and not from his love to the
Angels, or any other creature. And yet this love of God must be brought a
little lower, if we would settle it on his right object: for it is not general
nor absolute, but respective and having reference unto Christ, as the verse
implies: in whom it freeth from the misery mentioned in the former verse, and
accepts unto that especial mercy mentioned in the next. In a word, here is
a greater and more glorious love then was seen in the creation and
preservation of all things in the world: here is a love electing, redeeming,
regenerating, and glorifying miserable men; a love advancing our humane nature
in his son, who took not the seed of Angels but of Abraham; a love which
hates worldly Esaus in comparison of his Jacob, whom he calls out of the
world; not by the outward sound of the Gospel only, but by the effectual call
of his spirit in their hearts; whom he loves not as creatures but new
creatures, liker unto himself then all the other, by a restored and renewed
image: and for whom he has reserved more love in heaven when they shall become
yet liker unto him in all holiness in the holy of holyes.

How God can be so good to man, seeing so many vessels are prepared to
destruction.
Quest. But how can such love of man be ascribed unto God, seeing that so many
vessels are prepared to destruction, and so many millions are hated before they
have ever done good or evil: and secondly, of those that are dearest unto him,
many yea the most are so afflicted and distressed that they scarce see any good
day: can this stand with such a bountiful Answ. First, the goodness of God must
stand with his wisdom, which affoardeth not the same degree of goodness to
every one: it is not against the goodness of a potter to make ignoble vessels
to dishonor as well as to honor, seeing the former have also their good uses.
How could the goodness of a father appear, if he should set up hogs, and dogs
at his table as well as his children? as the Lord is good, so he is wise to be
so good to each in their degree as may make for his own honor and advantage.
2. This goodness and love of God must stand with his justice also as well as his
mercy. Hence the Apostle would have us to cast our eye on two things at once
in God, when we would be satisfied in this point. The goodness and the
severity of God: Romans 11.22.
for this goodness cannot suffer evil and sin in the impenitent unrevenged:
it cannot suffer the good and bad to be always mingled together, no more then
the good husbandmen can always suffer the wheat and chafe on the same floor.
3. This love and goodness is more seen and shining in saving one soul by his
Christ, then his severity in the deserved death of all the ungodly; the former
being mere mercy, the latter due desert. Secondly,

Use. 1. This goodness of God is a singular consolation to such as are his. It
will not suffer them to want any good thing that is good for them, but it will
most certainly and seasonably communicate it: it has given the son, and how
can it but with him give all things? remission of sins, peace of conscience,
wealth, length of days, grace and glory. Is the fountain in thy fathers
grounds? then may thou look to drink to sacietie of every good thing: shall
any good thing be wanting to him that fears the Lord: no surely, for his
goodness is entailed unto them, by promise, by oath, yea by season and
possession. But look well to the purity of thy heart, seeing God is good
especially to the pure of heart. Psalm. 73.1.


Secondly, we are taught hence sundry duties. 1. In the want of any good
thing, in confidence and affiance of our hearts to fly to this fountain of
goodness: it is a living fountain that knows not the years of drought; here
faithfully ask it, hopefully expect it, and in longer delays or denials only
know it is a wise love of a father, who neither gives his child hurtful
things, nor yet any store of good things, till he know how to use them. 2. In
the receiving or enjoying of any good thing, the praise and glory must be
returned to this well head, which is the sea from which all the rivers of
goodness flow, and to which they ought to refl^we: as every favor then
comes from the Father of lights, so let it lead us unto him again. 3. To
admire and speak often of this goodness of our God, and say with the Church,
who is a God like unto thee: Mich. 7.^^.
for he not only is pleased to take away iniquity and pass by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage; but to walk friendly and
familiarly with men: not only the worthies of the former world; such as Enoch,
who walked with God: Moses with whom he talked face to face as a man with his
friend: Abraham with whom he imparted his secret counsels: Jacob with whom he
wrastled familiarly: but even unto our selves, whom he has pleased not only
to admit unto eternal salvation in his son, but has in the mean time
revealed unto us his secret thoughts; sent out his spirit to accompany,
comfort, quicken, raise, and enlighten us, and his word to rule and direct us,
and in the ministry of it even strives with us, that he may leave us a
blessing behind him. It was his great familiarity that he should show Moses
the land of Canaan before his death: but he has showed us a far off, that
everlasting rest and receptacle of all the Israel of God. And Paul himself was
not more beholding to this goodness, when he was taken up into the third
heaven, then we are in having so many high mysteries revealed unto us, and so
many great things put into our hands by faith and hope, which we cannot utter
with our tongues, nor yet with our hearts conceive: and shall our hearts be
barren in the meditation, and our mouths mute and dumb at such a goodness as
this is? 4. To imitate this goodness of God, whose nature and image we must
put on daily: we must grow better by it, we must be led to love him more for
his goodness; and a shame it were that this bountifulness of God should not
lead us unto repentance. Besides, none are partakers of it, but such as being
borrowers become servants unto the lender: for although the Lord be boundless
in all bountifulnes, yet is he not so regardles in conferring it, as that he
looks not for answer of love for love; and if he be kind to the unkind what
is it else, but the heaping of coals on the heads of those who are in fitting
to destruction: for any man then thus to reason, God is full of goodness, and
abundant in mercy, and therefore I will do as I list; it is the abusing of
his patience, and the treasuring of wrath against the day of wrath. Let such
know, that as with the upright he will be upright, to bring on them all his
promised goodness, so with the froward he will deal as frowardly: and that there
is not a more severe plague abiding the reprobate, then to have all the
goodness of God turned to his evil and hurt by his own sin; to whom let
mercy be showed, yet in the land of uprightness he will do wickedly: let the
Gospel be preached, it is the savor of death, 2. Cor. 2.15.
yea let Christ himself be offered, the greatest gift of love that ever was
given, he will be but a rock of offense and a stone to stumble at. 5. In
regard of others we must learn to communicate our goodness even to the helping
and winning of them that as yet are not called; so also must this
bountifulness of our Master, withhold us from taking our fellow servants by
the throat; for having been forgiven ten thousand talents, we may well
forgive an hundred pence. Thus shall we manifest our selves to be the children
of our heavenly father, by resembling that goodness of his which works in the
winning and saving of sinners; and in showing mercy, and remitting of manifold
debts.

The second point in the efficient of our salvation, notes the time when God
saved us, namely, when his bountifulness, and love appeared, and shined out in
the Gospel; then came this blessed salvation unto us, when God the inexhaust
fountain of all goodness by the tidings of the Gospel, showed that he was
become our friend in Jesus Christ: when this clear sunneshine and dayspring
began to shine in our hearts, then began our salvation.

Doctr. 1. Then are we saved when we are sanctified.
Then are we saved when we are sanctified and changed by the word and spirit:
for as no sooner are we in the first Adam, but we are in the state of
damnation, so no sooner are we in the second Adam, but we are in the state of
salvation. The Scriptures are plain to this purpose, Romans 1.17. The
righteousness of faith is revealed by the Gospel, and by this faith the just man
lives: which place has relation as well unto the life eternal, at this
temporary: 1. Cor. 2.9, 10. The great things which eye has not seen, etc.
the spirit reuealeth unto us: yea more, the spirit makes us know the things
that are given us of God. Now what be these things that are given us, but
grace, justification, and salvation, reached out unto us in the ministry of
the Gospel, and received of us by faith and hope, the which also are wrought
and confirmed by the same means. But more express is the Apostle John, we
are now the sons of God: and, Ephesians. 2.7. by grace ye are saved through faith:
and, 1. Ioh. 3.2.
Ioh. 10. I give to them life eternal, he says not, I will give, but notes a
continued act begun in the present. The evidence of this truth appears also
in the contrary: for if the wicked be condemned already, as the Scriptures
affirm, namely, both in the counsel of God, and 2. the word of God which
pronounces the sentence, Ioh. 3.18.
3. their own consciences which speak bitter things against them, 4. present
execution of inward and outward plagues which are the beginnings of hell: then
it will not be hard to conceive that on the contrary the believers are saved
already, and passed from death unto life, both in the counsel of God, and in
the Gospel, which pronounces the sentence of absolution, in their own
consciences, which have peace with God through Jesus Christ; and in respect of
the beginning^ of life eternal, which make them happy men while they are yet
even absent from the Lord.

Object. If it be here said, that we cannot be said to be saved, so long as we
carry this flesh about with us, subjected and tending to death and corruption,
yea subject to become an instrument of sin: and besides, those phrases of the
Apostle, that we are now saved by faith, and by hope, seem to deny our
present salvation, seeing neither of them are of things present, but both of
things not seen, and both in the fruition of salvation must cease. Salvation
considered two ways.
Answ. We must consider our salvation two ways. First, in Christ our head, in
whom we have not attained one or more parts, but full salvation. Secondly, as it
is in our selves his members, and this in two degrees. The former, as it is
only inchoate and begun, which is, when being regenerate and adopted into the
number of the sons of God, we have attained in Christ remission of sin,
freedom from the servitude of sin, and Satan, and deliverance from the curse
and condemnation of it: so as although sin as a poison will be in our flesh
so long as we are in the flesh, yet is there no condemnation for it to those
that are in Christ: neither is there a reign of it unto death, but a ^alking
after the spirit; and as for the relics of sin which are left in their
mortal bodies, they are not deadly, no nor the last enemy that shall be
destroyed their death it self. Now in this first regard we are not as we were
before, the sons of wrath, but truly and properly may be said to be just,
reconciled, heirs of grace, and saved from wrath. The latter degree, is the
perfect consummation and final accomplishment of our salvation: which is
nothing else but a putting off of death and corruption, and the putting on of
full glory of body and soul. Now we may not conceive this another salvation
in kind then the former; but another degree of the same, which as certainly
shall follow the former, as the former is certainly begun. And thus are we
saved by hope, not that by our hope we expect another salvation then that which
now in Christ we have in our hands; but for that we certainly wait for a
further and more full degree of that we have. A man that lies sick of a
desperate disease is restored and recovered by two degrees: the former, when
the force of his disease is by the skillful application of physic broken, the
humors purged, a temperature in part procured: now the disease is not deadly,
he begins to eat, to drink, to sleep, to walk; here if we say the
party is recovered and safe, we speak truth; although he be not attained to
the second degree which is a perfect recovery of all parts to former
soundness; which shall certainly follow the former, because it is not another
recovery, but a further degree of soundness, the principles of which he has
already attained and is in possession of: even so is our case, God looking
upon us in his Christ, accepts us as perfectly saved, our selves are freed
from the imputation and damnation of sin, and so perfectly justified; our
relics of sin by the spirit of God, are daily mortified, and so our selves
in good measure sanctified: Alia est depositio pecca^i. quae donatur ex part.

Alia mortalitatis quae speratur.


it must needs be granted that our salvation is in our hands, and that sin,
death, hell, and the grave cannot hinder us from the highest degree of it: nay
rather we must certainly expect death, the grave, and the judgment day, to
set us in full fruition of our perfect glory.

Use. 1. Whosoever would be saved hereafter, must be saved here: a Saint
hereafter, a Saint here: the gate of heaven is here below, None saved hereafter
who are not saved here.
and the suburbs of that great city into which the just do enter. Christ is
the door, by him we must enter into the paradise of God. Lay hold on him with
his merits by the belief of thy soul, thou have gotten salvation already;
and in not believing in him, thou art condemned already. Fearful is the
estate of men, that never acquaint themselves with salvation before the end of
their days; and then they will be other men, and dream of another condition.
But Saints in heaven, must be the same men they are upon earth, and change not
their condition but only in obtaining a further degree of grace, glory,
holiness, life, and happiness which they had beginnings of even in this life;
they purchased heaven while they were upon earth, treasured in heaven while
they wandered in the earth, conuersed in heaven while they lived upon the face
of the earth. Alas, how few are acquainted with such a life as this, which is
the beginning of all happiness and salvation? We call men to forsake the world
in affection, as the Saints in heaven have actually done; to fly the
corruptions that are in the world through lust, as they have put off all
corruptions and sinful lusts: to have no fellowship with the ungodly ones of
the world, no more then they whose sole converse is with God and his Saints.
But how knock we (as they say) at deaf men's doors: the most have no portion,
no treasure but below, and therefore their hearts must be below where their
treasure is. As for the avoiding of sin, whereby as the elect of God, they
might shine in unblameable and undefiled conversation, and so reprove the
darkness of this evil world; they say they cannot be Saints here where all
men are sinners, and because they cannot be so, their lusts are let loose and
are at all manner of liberty. As for the society of the ungodly, they must
go out of the world if they would avoid it: it is enough if in heaven after
the final separation, they have nothing to do with them; but while they are
in earth mixed with them, they settle themselves to run with them into all
riot and excess of wickedness. Is this now a beginning of the kingdom of
heaven? or is it not rather a course that tends to nothing else but
destruction. And as we call men from earth, earthly courses, and company; so
also we call them unto the beginnings of fellowship with God, with the Saints
of God, to a perpetual Sabboath or rest from sin, and a constant and
cheerful performing before him all the parts of his worship and service both
public and private: because in the perfection of these, consists the
heavenly life of the Saints. But how unwelcome is our counsel? it seems to
seek their torment before their time. How many be there that cannot abide the
least show of heavenly life in themselves? how many scorn it in others? and
how many who think it more necessary then utterly to neglect it, yet are
content to cast the care of it into their last accounts, as if they were loath
to be saved before they be dead, or as if they would leap into the perfect
liberty of the sons of God at one iumpe? But let it be well remembered, that
he that is not saved before death, shall never be saved after death; and that
he that finds not heaven upon earth, loses it for ever. The Apostle makes
two degrees of the vision of God: the former is as in a mirror, or glass, and
that is here upon earth, in the word, Sacraments, and means of his worship;
the latter is face to face, in heaven when the kingdom in regard of these
means shall be given up to the Father: and concludes, that we must know in
part, before we can come to know as we are known.

For assurance of salvation have recourse to thy sanctification.
Use. 2. Whosoever would have assurance of salvation, let him have recourse to
his sanctification, and change of heart and life: do thou find that the
word has been powerful to subdue thy rebellion, and frame thy soul to a
sanctified condition, and thy outward man to an holy conversation in part? here
is an assurance and seal of salvation upon which thou may ground good hopes:
for this small measure of sanctification is an earnest penny confirming all
the bargain and covenant of God with thee: and it shall get daily strength and
increase until it bring thee to meet God in that celestial Sion, where shall
be no faintness; but where all the remainders of sin, and rellickes of
corruption and mortality shall be put off. In this regard is the work of our
sanctification called the first fruits of the spirit: because as the offering of
the first fruits was the sanctification of the whole field; so these first
fruits of our sanctification give assured hope of the full glorification of the
whole man both in soul and body. This blessed change is called also the first
resurrection, which whosoever have part in, have already escaped the second
death. It contracteth the Christian soul as a pure spouse unto Jesus Christ,
so as it may with boldness and much rejoicing expect the marriage of the lamb.

Where come to be controlled those blind hopes of presumptuous men; they are
persuaded of their salvation and as sure as any man can be by hope of life
eternal; yea but where is your assurance? oh no, I am not sure, nor I think
can any man be, but I have a good hope; but whence is this hope of yours?
because I love God above all, I will do no man any wrong, I will pay every
man his own, I serve God, and go to Church, am good to the poor: that a man
would verily think he had a Papist in hand, who will be saved by his good
deeds, rather then one that ever heard of the doctrine of free justification
by faith in the son of God. But the doctrine we have in hand teaches, that
there is an assurance, a seal, an earnest of salvation, on which a man may
assuredly settle his inward peace, and his hopes shall never make him ashamed.
Yea further, that this assurance is no blind persuasion, nor bold presumption,
grounded upon any thing of our own; but founded upon the work of God in us,
changing us daily, and renewing the image of God upon us: the which good work
wheresoever it is begun, Philip. 1.6.
shall be perfected unto the day of Christ. Cold is the comfort which this
doctrine can minister to a number of men, Christians by profession, who never
knew this change in themselves: the word has been too light to lift them up
to a new life; but they rotte away in the same sins and corruptions wherein
they were borne, and have since confirmed upon themselves, and cannot say
truly, I am changed, or yet am in the state of salvation.

Use. 3. See hence the blessed condition of men converted and begotten to God,
that we may never rest or be in quiet, Men converted are happy men, though the
world see it not.
until we have attained this grace of conversion: for they are already
possessed of their blessedness and salvation; which stands in pardon of
sin, covering of iniquity, freedom from the curse, liberty from the reign
of sin; as also in the purchase of victory over sin and death, of peace of
good conscience, of joy in the holy Ghost, in the certain fruition of God
himself, and all those pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore. The
worldling sees no part of this present happiness, and salvation of the
Saints; and therefore knowing no better, he never accounts himself so
blessed as when he is drowned in carnal delights, when his corn and wine and
oil is increased upon him, when his cup runs over, when all men flatter
him, when his mouth is filled with laughter; and yet in the mean time his bones
are filled with the sins of his youth and age, and are likely to be laid
down together with him in the dust, as Job speaks. Nay more, even our selves
who have our blessedness in our hands, often see but a small part of it; that
it is no marvel if others can determine against our present happiness, when
our selves are at such demurres in the matter: especially when we see the world
hating us, the earth expelling us, bonds and prisons receiving us, our country
scarce acknowledging us, our kinsfolks not knowing us, our friends forsaking
us, our enemies killing us, dangers so assayling us, as we can scarce be safe
in any corner: nay sometimes our own holds are taken, that we cannot fear
more war abroad, then we find at home, not meet with less peace without
then within. But now would it be an high wisdom to epsy and know our
blessedness, which with this change we firmly hold whatsoever our outward
condition be or can be. If now we suffer for righteousness it withstandeth
not, but makes to our happiness: If all men speak all manner of evil
against us for Christ's sake, it hinders not but furthereth our salvation: If
earth refuse us, heaven approoueth us; if men condemn, God will justify: if
our friends deny us, Christ our husband will confess us: In any misery we
shall have assured felicity, in sorrow and heaviness matter of true joy, in
outward trouble inward peace, in temptation assurance of evasion: In nothing
all things, in death and coruption, life and immortality. Thus our happiness
must not be mistaken, which is inward, spiritual, and heavenly; not depending
on man, but God, by whose assured word and pledges it is bestowed, nourished,
and perfected in us.

Now if any would try whether he has this happiness in his hands or no, Try
thy present happiness by this touchstone.
let him come to this touchstone. 1. Can thou find in thy soul a godly
sorrow for sin, which proceeds on to repentance, causing thee

A second point to be learned in that it is said, that then God saved us, when
his bountifulness appeared, is, That before this revealing of our salvation by
Christ, Before the Lord put forth his love in his Christ, it could not be
reached of man or angel.
this love and bountifulness of God was hid with himself, and could not be
reached unto by the most peircing understandings, or industry of man or Angel:
only God could invent our cure, only God could manifest the same, and make it
appear unto us. True it is, that it was given in the wise counsel of God,
before the world was, and shall be consummate and perfected when heaven, and
earth, and time shall be no more: But if we enquire the proper time and manner
of the happy appearing of it to the sons of men; then we must answer, that
it was at the revealing and appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; namely, partly
more darkly by the preaching of the Prophets unto the ancient fathers and
believers: as Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, who with the remnant of Israel
enjoyed the same promises, and precious faith with us; and partly more clearly
by the incarnation of the son of God, which was the glorious rising of this
Son of righteousness, who both by his own doctrine and miracles, life and
death; and the doctrine of his Apostles and Pastors, has brightly shined upon
all us upon whom the ends of the world are come: according to that prophecy of
Malac. 4.2. The sun of righteousness shall rise: adding also, that he
brings health under his wings. For before, we sought not our health, we our
selves could make ou^ wound wider, and grow more desperately ouergrowne in our
deadly diseases, but could not dream of a Phisician: but now the father
puts forth his love, sends forth his beloved Son, in him sets liking
upon us, covers us with his skirts, adorneth us with his graces, fitteth us
to our glory, and so daily by degrees draws us nerer him in fellowship, then
ever we were in the state of our innocence. To this purposes is it said, that
Christ brought life to light, 2. Tim. 1.10.
whereas else Adam and all his posterity had for ever laid under death and
darkness; for when Adam little thought of salvation, yea when he was running
from God, and hiding himself in his thickets, then Christ brought life to
light, in that promise of the promised seed, revealing himself to be the life
of Adam, and all his believing posterity: as afterward he both enlarged the
promise, and actually made it good in the full accomplishment. And all this, 1.
in that Christ has the right of life, and glory in himself: 2. he has it
not for himself olny, but for us also, whose head and husband by taking our
flesh he is become. In the former, he stands in the person of the Son; in
the latter, in the person of a mediator, bringing and applying to us that life
and glory which as the son he has in himself. Both these the author to the
Hebrews implies in those two phrases, Hebr. 1.3.
that Christ is the brightness of the glory, and the engraven form of his
person: both because he is the eternal Son of the eternal Father, as also
especially in that in our nature he showed forth the lively, and lovely
countenance of his Father: yea whatsoever is glorious, or gracious in the
Father, as his admirable wisdom, power, goodness, and mercy, has the
Father manifested in his Son: without whom they had never bin made known unto
us: for none ever saw the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son
reuealeth him.

Use. 1. This doctrine shows, that Christ is the only Mediator of redemption,
and intercession; Isay. 63.9. The Angel of Gods face or presence: who could
ever get a comfortable sight of God without Christ? who ever gat good speed in
any suite out of him? who could ever behold the infinite glory, or grace of
God, but through this veil? nay all the sight of God, in which any creature,
man, or angel has ever been happy, was by means of this Mediator, and never
immediate. Let the blinded Papist go to his Saints, Let the Papist go to the
nobles of the court of heaven, we must go to the Prince himself.
and Angels, as to the nobles of the court of heaven; we will repair to the
Prince the heir of all things, as having commandment to seek to no other,
and as hopeless that if he cannot speed, any other shall for us. Want thou
any grace? thou must receive it of his fullness: want thou life? he is the
life: I go away, says he, and you die in your sins: want thou peace of
conscience? he is the Prince of peace: want thou direction and wisdom to
order thy ways aright? with him are treasures of wisdom: make him thy
friend, in his love there shall be no lack.

2. Hence we may note, the surpassing love of God to us his chosen, who when we
had thrust a cloud of sin between him and us, that he could take no delight
in us, yea when we still provoked him and warred against him as his enemies;
yet then caused his mercy to break out, that all the world might see and
acknowledge it. Is it not wonderful that the party offended, should seek to
the delinquent? we think it a great thing to forgive one offense to one that
sueth for forgiveness; but to offer grace and give it to him that persisteth in
outrageous malice against us, is far above that: but how transcendent a
mercy above all these shadows in men, is that of our God, who in his Christ
advanced us from so hateful and base estate, to such an height of glory and
happiness? what is our part then but to break off sin, and break out into his
praises for such unspeakable grace.

3. Seeing God has not only so freely, but so clearly revealed his love and
favor in his Christ, which before was hid and unknown to the world; let us
manifest our selves to be such as are come to the knowledge and participation
of this rich grace, by entertaining the means in which Christ brings us the
tidings of our peace and reconciliation. For this grace appears in the
Gospel; there Christ comes to seek us; there he calls us, yea leads us
unto it: therefore whosoever have part in this grace, must give the Gospel
leave to enter, must open their eyes to see it, their mouths to taste of it,
and their hearts to feed upon it. Whence we may conclude, that surely this
grace is still an hid thing and unrevealed unto many, because the news of it is
so lightly regarded of the most: whereas if men did know this gift of God, as
Christ said to the woman at the well, they would ask and enquire after it;
they would account the feet of such messengers as could tell them tidings of it
very bewtifull; they would sell all to make purchase of it; they would rejoice
in the word, make it their song, their counselor, their portion, the which
both reuealeth, and as an instrument of God bestows upon us all our good.
Nay, it could not be but if men knew who Christ were, and did see him in the
ministry, but they would run after it as fast, as to heaven it self.

Verse. 5. Not of the works of righteousness,] The third and principal
instruction in this principal efficient of our salvation, is, That there is
nothing at all in any man, which moves or enclineth God to reach out his
grace of salvation unto him: Let it be well noted against the Papists, that
even works of justice and grace are opposed unto mercy and grace: and not works
of nature, as they would have it.
the which point the Apostle is careful to confirm sundry ways. As 1. by
remoouing whatsoever man could dream of, as the likeliest things to demerit
God: as works of righteousness, which before conversion were none at all, and
therefore could make no way to our salvation. 2. By express affirmation, that
being moved by his mere mercy he saved us: and although by nearer looking
into the text, we shall meet with sundry other motives most orderly linked
together, concurring to our salvation; yet shall we see them all in God, and
never a one in our selves: 1. we have mention of

Now because this is a maine ground of our religion, it will not be amiss to
confirm it by other parallel places, as also by some other grouds out of
Scripture: Romans 9.11. That the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not according to works, but by him that calls: and v. 16. It is not
in him that wills, or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy:
and cap. 11.35* who gave unto him first, that he should recompense? Hence, 1.
we conclude, that if God should choose to salvation Our salvation begins in
election, and not after we come to faith, knowledge, or good desires and works.
Both Augustine and Thomas urge this place to prove this conclusion.
and God should come after him: yea it would ouerturne all the order of God in
his most wise proceeding, and would place his second grace before the first:
for whereas the first grace, namely, the election of such as the Father is to
give unto the Son by him to be saved, in all good order should precede the
second, whereby such as are elected before all time, are in time given to the
Son, called, justified, graced, glorified, and so saved. The Popish doctrine
of Gods foresight of faith, or works, places this latter in Gods counsel
before the former.

Secondly, election is of grace, Romans 11.5. There is an election of grace: any
way, because not of grace every way, ver. 6. 2. that all our own rejoicing
should not be excluded, Romans 3.27. 3. that if the Apostle should ask again,
who separated us? our answer might be, we partly separated our selves.

of the world, before we had done either good or evil, or were in the world to
do it. 2. In that he makes our works effects of election and therefore
cannot be causes of it: he has chosen us in him, not because he foresaw that
we would be holy, but that we might be holy and unblameable, as in cap. 2.10.
we are his workmanship created to good works: and because it might be said,
that yet God might foresee who would receive grace, and who not, and
consequently, who would use the same aright in ordering their lives. The third
conclusion in the 5. verse affirms, that God respected nothing out of
himself, or in us, past or to come: but according to the good pleasure which
he purposed in himself (as Beza reads it) he choosed us to partake of his
grace.

themselves to justification: then our text controlleth them, which says there
was no such works at all, which could move the Lord to take any pleasure in
us. Nay, we were sinners says Paul, when God chose us; and such sinners as are
described in the former verse, blinded in mind, rebellious in will, and
disordered in our whole conversation. Which shall serve for the overthrow of
all works, either preparatorie, or foreseen, or which any other way may
obscure the free grace of God in our election and salvation.

Use. 1. To be sober minded, and wise to sobriety in the matters of Gods
counsel, inquiring into no reason further then his will, Voluntas dei occulta
esse potest, non potest esse iniusta. August. ad Paul. epist. 59.
which is ever just although the thing may seem strange and dazzle our weak
eyes: the which one point would cut off many controversies, and needles
questions of sundry divines, who in their platformes of election and
reprobation, will allow the Lord no further liberty then themselves can
devise reason of: for one, the foresight of some good, for the other, of some
evil: which cannot but bring in an universal reprobation, because all are the
sons of wrath by nature, and God sees them not out of this condition in
themselves: besides that, the Lord shall be tied to conditions, whereas he will
have mercy where he will, and whom he will he will harden.

2. This doctrine is a ground of true humility: for when all salvation from
first to last is acknowledged to be of grace, altogether out of our selves, it
shuts all presumptuous mouths, who would gladly be sacrificing to their
own nets. And this seems to be the Lords end in stablishing his free
covenant; that his people might remember, Ezekiel. 16.63.
and be ashamed, and never open their mouth any more. How careful is he to
take all such arrogant speeches out of their mouths, Deuteronomy. 7.7. and 9.5. Say
not because of mine own righteousness has the Lord given us this land (and
much less the heavenly Canaan) and tells them plainly that they were the
least and worst of all people before the Lord put the difference between them
and others. Dilexit non existentes imo resistentes. Bern.
And the whole Scripture shows how he has set his affection on such as were
still the most unlikely, and in all outward respects least commendable; the
youngest for most part when the first b^rne seemed to carry away all the
privilege: Abel before Caine, Jacob before Esau, Ephraim before Manasseh,
Joseph and David before the rest of their elder brethren: his manner was
always, and is, to hide that from the wise which he would reveal to babes, by
foolish things to confound the wise, and by weak things the mighty* and why?
1. in regard of himself, because his good pleasure was such, no other reason*
but his own will moved him. 2. in regard of us, that no flesh should rejoice
before him.

3. Hence we have also a ground of thankfulness; when we hear of such a free
choice, and that the Lord enquired not what we were, or what we were worthy of;
but loved us before we were, or the world was; when nothing could be conceived
either preventing or meeting this goodness of God. And indeed never can we come
to see the bottomless sea of this grace, unless we behold it in this gl^sse
which our Apostle sets before our eyes, of our free election and salvation
merely by grace; the which once if we come to behold, how can we but magnify
his grace, confess his name, fear to offend him, tender all obedience unto
him, yea in way of love and thankfulness give up our selves to live and die
in his service, who has so freely, so highly advanced us? undeserved loves are
great binders. It is in the mouth of every man toward them of whom they have
received undeserved good turns, I can never make such a man amends for such or
such favors; and yet this boundless love of God is seldom waighed of us.

4. Here is a ground of certentie of salvation, as which is founded in the
election of God by grace; and is therefore more firm then the frame of heaven
and earth: whereas were it founded in our selves, or put in our own hands to
keep, we could have no assurance of it; no though we were renewed to our first
innocence, as appears in Adam: but seeing our life and salvation is hid with
God, none shall take it or us ever out of his hands. Object. But if it be laid
so far out of our reach, that we neither have it in our hand, nor any hand in
it, but it is all in the mercy of God; how can we have any evidence or
assurance of it in our selves, unless we should climb up into heaven? Answ.
We must not conceive of this as such a mercy which after it is freely set upon
us has no work in us; Qui fecit te sine te, non salvat te sine te. August.
nor such a mercy as saves us without our selves; but such a mercy, as 1.
calls us by the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.9. who saved us and called us with an holy
calling. 2. moves us to answer that call, seeing the sheep of Christ hear
his voice and follow him. 3. gives and increases the grace of
sanctification, and provoke to newness of life: so as thou shall not need
to go above the clouds to get assurance of this mercy: but the word is near
thee: look how thou carriest thy self unto it, how thou hear the voice of
Christ, how thou followest it, how thou proceedest on to the fruits of a new
life, such as are the hatred of sin, and an endeavor to please God in all
things: here are the seals of thine assurance.

5. Here is also another ground of moderation and meekness toward such as are
not yet called: because the change is of mere mercy, the difference between
us is not natural nor deserved: we were in time past no better then they; they
may in time to come participate of free grace as well as we do.

By the washing of the new birth,] We are now come to the isntrumental causes
or means whereby we are set into this new condition. And these be two, First
outward, whereby we are brought into the visible Church, and that is, the
washing of the new birth or baptism. Secondly inward, whereby we are truly
set into the body of Christ, and that is the renewing of the holy Ghost; who
powers out plentifully upon our consciences pure waters to cleanse them both
from the guilt and filthiness of sin, as after we are to make manifest.

For the meaning of the former in few words to know both why baptism is
called the lauer of regeneration, as also why God is said to save us by it:
Essential parts of a sacrament three.
we must conceive that in every Sacrament there be three essential parts, the
absence of any of which destroy the whole: 1. the sign, 2. the thing
signified, 3. the analogy between them, which is the union of them both: the
first is some outward and sensible thing: the second inward and spiritual: the
third mixed of them both. As in baptism the sign is water, the thing signified
the blood of Christ: the analogy or union stands in this resemblance, that
as the former outwardly washes the filthiness of the body, so the latter
inwardly purges the soul from all sin. By reason of which relation and
near affection between the sign and the thing signified, it is usual in the
Scriptures by an improper, but Sacramental speech, 1. to call the sign by the
name of the thing signified, and contrarily. And thus baptism is called the
washing of the new birth, because it is a sign, seal, and instrument of it.
Secondly, to ascribe that to the sign which is proper to the thing signified,
and so baptism is here said to save, as also 1. Pet. 3.21. which is indeed
the propriety of the blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.7. but by the near affinity
of these two in the Sacrament it is said so to do, to note unto us, 1. not to
conceive of the Sacramental elements as bare and naked signs, so to grow
into the contempt of them. 2. as we may not conceive them idle signs, so
neither idol signs, by insisting in them as though they were the whole
Sacrament: for they are but outvvard, whereas the principal matter of a
Sacrament is spiritual and inward. 3. that then we trueliest conceive of a
Sacrament, when by looking at the one of these we see both; neither making the
sign a vain symbol, nor yet ascribing any thing to it transcending the
nature of it* such as are the peculiars and prerogatives of God: but in the
sign and action, which is outward be led to those which are spiritual and
inward. The Lord in baptism not only offers but exhibiteth grace.


Doctr. God in baptism not only offers and signifies, but truly
exhibiteth grace, whereby our sins are washed and we renewed by the holy
Ghost: for therefore is it called the washing of the new birth, both because it
seals up the washing away of sins by the blood of Christ, Act. 2.38. Be
baptized for the remission of sins, as also in that it betokens, and is a
mean of an other washing by the spirit of Christ; and this is the
sanctification of a sinner, imperfect in this life, but which shall be
perfected in the life to come.

But the doctrine will remain obscure, if we shall not open two points before
we come to make use of it. 1. how, 2. to whom baptism is the lauer of
regeneration. For the former therefore, 1. how it is not. 2. how it is.

Council. Triden. sess. 7. can. 8. si quis dixerit per ipsa novae legis
sacramenta ex opere operato non conferri gratiam, etc.
First, this effect is not ascribed to the work wrought, as the Popish doctrine
teaches. 2. Neither by any extraordinary elevation of the action, whereby it
is made able to confer the benefit of renouation: for this were both to make
every baptism a kind of miracle; as also to encroach upon the clause
following, wherein the work of renewing is ascribed to the holy Ghost. 3.
Neither that the waters of baptism have in themselves any inherent power or
force to wash the conscience, as to wash the filth of the body: they wrong
conceive it that shut up any such power in it, as is in a physical instrument,
as though it as properly washed, as an herb heals if applied. 4. Neither
because grace is tied by any promise, or means unto the action, so as God who
is most free in his gifts cannot either otherwise distribute, Grace not tied ^o
the sacrament.
or cannot otherwise but dispense it with the action. For 1. grace is not tied
to the word, therefore not to before he received the seal of circumcision:
Cornelius, Act. 10.47. the Eunuch, Romans 4.10.
Act. 8.37, 38. some after baptism, as numbers who are daily converted, some
out of Popery, some out of profanenes: Yea, whereas only two sorts of persons
were baptized, either infants, or men of years: in the latter was faith ever
required before their baptism: so Phillip to the Eunuch, If thou beleeuest
with all thy heart, thou may. And for infants, if they be of belee^ing
parents, they are holy in the root, and to them belong the kingdom of heaven,
even before they are presented to this water. 5. This opinion of tying grace 2.
the only meritorious cause of our regeneration, which is the blood of Christ
properly purging us from all sin. 3. the most powerful, next, and applying
efficient, which is the holy Ghost* to whom our renewing is here ascribed, and
not to the Sacrament of Baptism in this our first sense.

Secondly, how is baptism then the lauer of regeneration? Baptism how the
laver of regeneration.
Answ. In diverse regards. 1. As it is an institution of God signifying the
good pleasure of God for the pardoning of sin, and accepting to grace in they
save and sanctify, because they signify the good pleasure of God in saving
and sanctifying us: even as we say a man is saved by the kings pardon, not that
the pardon properly does it; for that is the mere merciful disposition of the
King, but because the pardon (written and sealed perhaps by an other) signed by
the king, is the ordinary instrument to manifest the merciful mind of the
king in pardoning such a malefactor. 2. As it is a seal or pledge of our
sanctification and salvation, as to renew, as faith is said to justify; and
that is only as it is a means or hand to lay hold on Christ our
righteousness: so Baptism is a means helping forward our renewing, by the
true understanding and conscionable and serious meditation of it. 4. In that in
the right use

The second point, namely the consideration of the persons to whom baptism is
the washing of the new birth, will more clear this difficult point: for we
must not conceive it thus in every party baptized, but in such as have the
gift of faith to receive the grace offered: Ioh. 1.12. so many as received him,
he gave them power, etc. Ephesians. 5.27. cleansed with water through the word*
namely, believed: for whence else can water have power to wash the soul? Non
quod dicitur sed quod creditur. Aug. in Johan.
It is not then the washing of the body with water, but the receiving and
applying of the promise by faith, which brings grace into the soul, without
which faith both word and Sacraments are unprofitable. This Christ we know
required in baptism, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. The
Apostle in the supper requires a worthy receiving; and who can deny but if
grace be conferred in the Sacrament, it must be received also: and if it must
be received I would know how any thing which is spiritual can be received but
by this hand of the soul. Ruccella Iudae venenum fuit non quod mala, sed quia
malus male accepit. August.
Whence it is necessarily concluded, that ungodly and unbelieving ones receive
nothing in baptism but the element, and that as a naked sign: example whereof
we have in Judas, who are the Passover, but remained a devil: In Simon the
sorcerer, who was baptized but remained chained in the bonds of iniquity, and
in the gall of bitterness: In Ananias and Saphira, who no doubt were among other
Christians baptized, but not washed from their hypocrisy; In all which neither
was grace conferred, nor wickedness weakened. And what meruell if unto ungodly
ones the Sacrament he as an empty box, without ointment, or as a dead letter
without spirit? for nothing is promised them in the word, seeing all the
promises go with condition of faith and repentance, which they want: and can
we marvel if the seal do him no good that has no name, no right in the
covenant.

Quest. But howsoever in men of years faith is required unto baptism, yet we
are most to respect it as administered unto children in whom we cannot expect
faith, and therefore unto them either faith is not requisite, or by the former
answer their baptism is unprofitable. Answ. This well is deep, and we want
wherewith to draw certentie of resolution: but will assay in some propositions
to deliver summarily that which may be extracted out of the Scriptures and
expositors, as most probable for the unfolding of this difficulty. To which
purpose let us first distinguish of infants; of whom some are elected, and some
belong not unto the election of grace. These latter receive only the element,
and are not inwardly washed: the former receive in the right use of the
Sacrament the inward grace; not that hereby we tie the majesty of God to any
time or means, whose spirit blows when and where he lists; on some before
baptism, who are sanctified from the womb; on some after: but because the
Lord delights to present himself gracious in his own ordinance, we may
conceive that in the right use of this Sacrament, he ordinarily accompanies it
with his grace: here according to his promise we may expect it, and here we may
and ought send out the prayer of faith for it.

Object. But they want faith? Answ. 1. They want indeed actual faith, which
presupposes hearing, understanding, Faith of Infants what.
etc. neither could it be that if they had at that time such an habitual
faith, that they should so utterly loose it, as never after to make show of it,
unless it be attained

Secondly, they want not all faith, Christ himself reckons them among
believers, Matthew. 18.6. whosoever offends one of these little believe in me:
in which respect circumcision which was administered to infants, was called a
seal of faith.

Thirdly, whereas some divines think that this faith of theirs is no other If
the root be holy, so are the branches; and the one parent believing, 1. Cor.
7.14. Recte dicuntur ^ideles licet nondum imbuti sunt fide. Musc. in Matthew. 18.
the children are holy: to this purpose says Musculus, that children may be
called faithful although they have no faith.

Fourthly, but because this may seem not so proper a faith, being wholly
imputed. 1. in that all children saved are not of believing parents; shall live
by his own faith: It is very probable that elected infants have a spirit of
faith, Spiritum fidei. Zanch. ad Ephesians.
that is, the spirit of God working inwardly and secretly; but diversely in
infants dying before discretion, and those which shall surviue: to the former
giving that spirit which works either faith, or something proportionable for
their justification, regeneration, sanctification, and salvation: in the latter
working the seeds or inclination of (...), which in due time shall fructify
unto eternal life. Semen fidei.
And hereunto the Scriptures give insinuation in showing how after a merueilous
and secret manner, In infan^ibus qui adhuc per aetatem credere non possunt,
spiritus sanctus in eorum cordibus fidei vices agit. Pet. Mart. in Romans 6.
Baptismus, fluminis, ^laminis, sangui^is.
the Lord can and has effectually wrought in infants even in the womb, as in
Jacob, Jeremy, John Baptist, and others: neither does it any thing hinder that
infants have no sense of any such thing, no more then it proves them not to
live, because they know not that they do so. And not only the Scriptures, but
that ancient and common distinction of baptism 1. into that of water, 2. holy
Ghost, 3. martyrdom, seems to him that well considers to give some ground
of it. Howsoever it be if we cannot attain the manner of this secret working
in infants, we know that Adams corruption is not more effectual to pollute the
infants of believing parents, then Christ's blood and innocence is to sanctify
them: and being so, his wisdom wants not means to apply it unto them,
even in their infancy, yea in the womb to make it their own, although we
cannot reach unto them. So much of the faith of infants.

What baptism serves for in them that believe already.
Here one scruple remains to be removed, namely, if men of years must
believe, and children of believing parents must be faithful and holy before
baptism, what shall baptism be good for, or what profit Answ. First, in
regard of Gods commandment which Abraham, Cornelius, Paul, believing obeyed
without reasoning,

Use. 1. Ministers must deliver this doctrine plainly, and not as we may
observe some, who either not understanding it, or not willing that others
should understand them; generally tie a certain grace to this Sacrament of
baptism, but not explaning these two points, how, and to whom; leave their
hearers laid open to many dangerous errors: of which I will give some examples.
1. To conceive of an absolute necessity of baptism, and hence cruelly and
impiously deny unto Infants dying without it, the salvation. But we must
beware of running back into this point of Popery, which at this day thrusts
the souls of such babes into a place very near hell, Limbus puerorum.
and their bodies out of Christian burial (as they call it) into an unhallowed
place: and conceive aright of the point thus. As for inward baptism which is
to be within the covenant, and regenerated; to hold it absolutely necessary
unto salvation: Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be borne again of the water and the
Spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven: but as for outward
baptism the seal of the former, to hold it necessary but accidentally, as 1.
in regard of Gods commandment, 2. of our own weakness, 3. to avoid the danger
and appearance of neglect, or contempt of so holy an ordinance: but to hold it
so necessary, as that he that steppeth not over this threshold can never get
into heaven, is directly both against the grace of God in the Scriptures; which
affirm the children of the faithful to be holy before they come to this
baptism: as also the examples, of children dead before the eight day, the day
of their circumcision; of men and children for the space of forty years
wanting circumcision in the wilderness; of David's child dying before the eight
day, the damnation of which he feared not; of the thief on the cross, who
wanted the outward baptism, although not the inward. Surely our Savior Christ
where he had good occasion, makes no such necessity of it: He that believes
and is baptized, shall be saved; but mark in the opposition he says not, he
that believes not, and is not baptized, shall be condemned: but that we should
not conceive of such a needles necessity, he purposely leaves out the latter
clause of the former sentence, only affirming that he that believes not shall
be condemned. And what an unequal thing were it, that if parents should
neglect to bring children seasonably unto baptism, that the child not
offending should for the parents fault be condemned? Let us therefore send
back this cruel opinion to the Papists among whom it was first hatched,
Durus ill^ Papista. lib 8. de Paradoxis.
and better beseems Duraeus or some such other hard hearted Papist, affirming
that God is able to save infants without baptism, but we know his revealed
will to the contrary well enough; then any Protestant minister, among whom it
were ashame that such Popish notes should be recorded.

2. The dark delivery of this doctrine, has bred up another no less Popish,
that seeing grace is so tied to the Sacrament, therefore the infant baptized,
is washed from all original sin; and that by the concomi^ant grace of the
Sacrament, every infant is so pure as there is nothing in it which God can
hate. A doctrine fearfully derogatorie from the blood of Christ; and contrary
to the Scriptures, which teach that original sin is taken away to those that
are set into Christ by baptism, Abluitur pe^catum in baptismo. (...), non
(...).
1. in regard of the form, the guilt. 2. the fruit, the punishment. 3. the
reign and dominion of it. 4. in that the remainders and relliks of it are in
daily consumption: but in regard of the matter of it, of the act of it, of the
molestation of it, it is present in the most sanctified nature the earth
bears. The Apostle says of such there is no condemnation to them, but he
says not there is no damnable thing in them.

3. From the misconceit of this doctrine, and the extolling the outward work
of baptism, the which imposters and deceivers of minds have still delighted
to dwell in, has sprung up that dangerous error of baptizing by women; as also
the private nimbling up of the matter in corners by some Priest or minister.
Whereas for the person we know that the Minister in his ministerial actions
sustaineth the person of Christ, which a woman cannot do. No woman a fit
minister of baptism.
Again, those that are called to baptize, are called also to preach, for the
Sacrament without the word is a dumb ceremony, and as a seal to a blanke. And
Paul who would not permit a woman to teach ministerially, would much less
suffer her to baptize. If any woman have been accessarie to this grievous
sin, let her seriously and seasonably humble her self for it, in that
without, yea and against the commandment of God, she has polluted such a
sacred ordinance. If any man should set the Kings broad seal to any instrument
but the Lord Keeper, his fact were no less then high treason; and shall we
think there is less danger in counterfaiting the great seals of Gods
covenant? As for the due place of baptism, it is the public assembly, as
being a part of public worship annexed unto preaching, It is against the
dignity of this ordinance to be brought into private houses.
Matthew. 28. Circumcision in the law was nothing so excellent as this the
successor of it; yet might it not be administered in private houses, but the
party must be brought before the Lord: and much more here, where after a more
glorious manner the party is to be received, not into his fathers family, but
the family of God the visible Church. And is it not a far greater indignity
for the Sacraments to be brought into private houses, then for civil
judgment, Ambrosius de obitu Valentiniani Imperatoris, ait illu^ gratia
baptismi no^ caruisse, licet non esset baptizatus, quum eius desiderio
flagrasset. Necessitate premente adulti voto saepe and voluntate solu^ fuere
baptizat^.
the nature of which is to be open and public in the gates? As for the
pretended case of necessity, there is no such as urges is to transgress the
commandment, and to make private places public. Why should we not rather with
the ancient, who even in most ignorant times could conceive that in defect of
baptism with water, if it could not conveniently (as without the debasing of
Gods ordinance) be had, a sufficiently supply might be made by the other two,
either of the holy Ghost, or of martyrdom, and that God in case of necessity
accepts the will for the deed; which also some of the ancient applied to
this purpose: and that not the want, but contempt of baptism is damnable.

Fourthly, from the doubtful delivery of this doctrine arises an other error
and opinion of falling from grace (for mark the man that staggereth in the
former, he will be nibling and fumbling at all these as far as he dare) for if
every child receive grace as a thing tied unto baptism, what becomes of that
grace when children growing in years, grow also extremely flagitious and
wicked? Falling from the grace of baptis^ a gro^^^ error.
necessarily it must be lost and vanished: which is both against the
Scriptures, and the doctrine of our Church. For if the child be borne of God in
baptism, he sins not because the seed of God is in him: and if the infant
be come unto Christ in baptism he never casts him off, Ioh. 6.37. he shall
never hunger, ver. 35. he shall not be lost, 39. he shall live for ever, 50. If
the infant be once of the Church, it remains in the Church, and can never be
a limb of Satan's synagogue.

Lastly, as all error is fruitful, so hence also is grounded that fancy of
Popish penance, which they make a Sacrament to restore such by as are fallen
from the grace of their baptism: and a second table to save such, as by virtue
of their first covenant cannot be restored; as though the covenant of God were
not eternal and unchangeable, or as if God married us not to himself for
ever: Hose. 2.19.
or as if the force of baptism lasted not beyond the action and administration
of it.

Use. 2. To teach parents, 1. to be present, to present their children with joy
unto holy baptism. What a comfort is it for a father to see his child washed
with the blood of Jesus Christ? cleansed from sin? set in to the visible
Church, yea, into the body of Christ, in the right use of this Sacrament?
wherein a parent ought more to rejoice then if he could make it the heir of
the world. 2. diligently upon the occasion of their childrens baptism to
examine themselves, whether they be in covenant with God or no, that so their
children may be entered into the same covenant: yea and seeing their often
faylings with God, to enter now a new league, and renew their covenant with
him, by renewing their faith, by making up again through true repentance their
former breaches: yea by solemn prayer and invocation to urge the Lord to call
to mind his covenant made to the just and their seed, and make it good unto
himself and his child now to be entered into the Church. But what a general
fault of Parents is it, to content themselves in bringing their children, that
the outward work may be performed upon them, spending no small time in
circumstances of solemnity, as costly banquets and feasting (which in
moderation I condemn not) but take little or no time in preparing themselves
and their children to the receiving of the inward grace of baptism? which
great error is worthy reformation in the most, in the best.

Use. 3. To the congregation, that seeing this is such a solemn ordinance, as
wherein the Lord signifies, seals, The congregation ought not to depart from
baptism. Reas.
and exhibiteth saving grace to every worthy receiver: that therefore every
on in the congregation continue together until the end of the Sacrament, and
not run out as the manner of most is. For 1. it is an ordinance not belonging
Christ. 3. Every one ought to help himself both in calling to mind his own
baptism, his promise, and ingrafting into Christ; as also to He shall go in
when they go in, and when they go forth, they shall go forth together. Let
every man make more conscience of this duty hereafter, and seeing Christ
himself disdaineth not to come to John's baptism; let us take heed of running
from Christ's.

And the renewing of the holy Ghost,] Now we come to speak of the inward means
of our salvation, whereby the Lord sets us into this new condition, here
called the renewing of the holy Ghost: wherein to understand it better, we will
consider two points: 1. what this renewing is. 2. why it is called the renewing
of the holy Ghost: and so come to the instructions.

Regeneration what.
For the former. It is a grace of God, whereby the corruption of nature in
believers, is by the power of the holy Ghost daily renewed unto the image of
God. I say, 1. it is a grace of God: 1. Pet. 1.3. Who according 2. by which
which is the proper object of it, called in Scripture the flesh, the old man:
not the substance of body or soul, which were not decayed or perished; but
the corrupt qualities, which by the fall took place in them. 3. is renewed:
this is a word of relation, and opposed new creature: in which is not the
framing of something out of something but of something out of nothing: For if
the Popish doctrine were true, that there were some power in nature, whereby
(the holy Ghost a little freeing it) it could of it self will and perform
that which is truly good; then were man but in part new, and so could not be
called a new man, a new creature, or be said to be borne again; neither raised
up from the death of trespasses and sins, but revived and recovered as out of
a swoone or some desperate disease; nor renewed, but a little repaired and
mended. But because the corruption of nature is gone over the whole man, as we
have a little before heard: so this renewing must be in the whole man, and in
the same order. 1. It must begin in the spirit of the mind, (...).
Romans 12.2. the first work in this new creation also must be to make the light
to banish the darkness and blindness of mind; under which are comprehended the
understanding, will, and affections. 2. It must proceed to the outward man and
conversation, that even the members of the body may become the members of
Christ, and obedient unto the law of the mind renewed; and so the whole may
become a lively, reasonable, and acceptable sacrifice unto God. In these two
stands the renewing of the whole man, required 1 Thessalonians. 5. The God of peace
sanctify you throughout: and I pray God your whole soul, body, and spirit be
kept blameablesse: where is mention of the spirit, as the very soul and life
of a renewed person, and is no other then the grace of sanctification, opposed
to the corruption of nature, which is seated both in soul and body. 4. I
add, In believers, because regeneration is the undivided and inseparable
companion of faith, which faith of the elect, as we have heard: 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
Chosen you to salvation through the sanctification of the spirit, and the faith
of truth: whence it follows, that as faith is not of all, no more is
regeneration; neither is this grace further tied to the Sacrament, then where
it meets with a faithful receiver. 5. I say daily, for although the believer
from faith to faith, and we are changed from glory to glory, and we walk
from strength to strength: Romans 1. 2. Cor. 3.18.
In all things growing up in him which is the head: he that is just must be
just still, and he that is holy must be daily more holy; and thus increase
until the perfect day. 6. I add, Rev. 22.
unto the image of God: Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man which after God, that is
after Gods image, is created in righteousness and holiness: see also 2. Cor.
3.18. We are changed into the same image of God: for as Adam was created in the
image of God, so must every believer be renewed unto that blessed condition. In
a word, look what the image of God was, which was given us by our creation,
unto the same must we be wrought now by the grace of the second covenant; but
that stood not in the substance of the soul and natural faculties of it so
much; such as understanding, free will, memory, etc. but 1. in the knowledge
and illumination of it, Colos. 4.10. Put on the new man which is renewed in
knowledge; 2. in the righteousness and integrity of the whole man, Ephesians. 4.24.
Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

The second point in the meaning is, why this is called the renewing of the
holy Ghost. Answ. Not that it is not wrought as well by the other persons, Opus
ad extra.
being a work without themselves: for the Father renews as being the
foundation and fountain not of the Deity alone, but of all divine actions and
good things whatsoever: and the Son renews as the Mediator and meriter of it.
But it is here ascribed to the holy Ghost, because he is the immediate and next
applyer of it to the conscience, and therefore is more properly said to renew.
And yet where I say that in regard of the other persons he does more immediately
apply this grace; it must not be so conceived, but that he ordinarily does
work it by means, unto the which also often the Scriptures ascribe the work
of renewing. As 1. the Ministers are his instruments by whom he begets men
unto God: so Paul, I have begotten you by the Gospel, that is ministerially. 2.
The word and Sacraments are outward means which the Spirit uses to the same
purpose: And the word is hence called the immortal seed of regeneration; and
baptism called the washing of regeneration in the words before, because the
Spirit in these outward means washes and regenerateth. 3. Faith is the inward
means, which the holy Ghost working and exciting in us, uses by it to bring
home to our hearts that which properly renews us: Act. 15. by faith he
purifieth our hearts. Thus we see how both the Father, the Son, the Spirit,
the ministers, the word and Sacraments, and our own faith renew us: and how in
their several senses they are to be truly and plainly conceived.

Doctr. 1. All the work of inward grace, in, or out of baptism, is from the
holy Ghost. All inward grace in baptism is from the holy Ghost.
The thing that gives force unto washing by water, is the renewing of the holy
Ghost, and this is regeneration indeed, 1. Pet. 3.21. Baptism saves, but not
the washing of water, but the interrogation of a good conscience: that is, the
answer of a believing heart, acknowledging these sacraments to be seals and
pledges of the righteousness of faith, and that inward baptism which indeed
saves: Act. 2.38. Amend your lives, and be baptized every one in the name of
Jesus Christ for remission of sins: but all this will not serve the turn,
unless the promise following be made good; and ye shall receive the gift of
the holy Ghost: 1. Cor. 6.11. Such were ye, but ye are washed, ye are justified
ye are sanctified: but by what means, by the waters of baptism? No, they will
not serve to justification or sanctification, but by the spirit of our God: and
if we would see this truth of both the Sacraments in one place, we have it
propounded, 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body:
therefore not the water but the spirit sets us into the body of Christ by
baptism: and we are all made to drink into one spirit: and therefore the
efficacy of the cup in the supper is to be ascribed to the spirit of God;
which spirit when he withdraws himself, we may truly say of the water in
baptism, as the Apostle speaks of the blood of bulls and goats, that they
cannot take away sin. The true material cause hereof, is the blood of
Christ, Hebr. 10.4.
the holy Ghost inwardly applying it unto the soul, and so inwardly indeed
baptizing and washing the conscience.

Use. 1. This doctrine further overthrows that Popish doctrine, that the
water in baptism carries in it a force and efficacy of washing and
sanctifying the soul. Bellarmins instances to the contrary refuted. De
Sacram. lib. 2. c. 4.
And as for all those figures which Bellarmine produces to this purpose, we
shall in few words see them conclude directly against himself. Out of Genesis 1.
The spirit of God moved upon the waters, he concludes, that as the waters
concurred necessarily to

2. As for that in Genesis 7.17. The waters bare up the Arc: whence grace in the
sight of the Lord, Genesis 6.8. with thee will I stablish my covenant, verse 18.
that the Lord bad him go into the Arc* cap. 7.1. that he shut him in the
Arc, 16. that he remembered him in the Arc, and brought him out of the Ark,
cap. 8.1.16. all is ascribed unto the grace, covenant, commandment, hand, and
remembrance of God, and not to the water: and if Noah had been saved by the
clemency of the waters, and their power of saving, Noah was mistaken when he
built an altar to the Lord, verse. 20. for he should have built his altar to
the waters. And if we would follow here the Jesuit, we might make him weary
of his comparison: If we should say, 1. that the waters of the flood did for
every person and creature that they saved, drown a million, therefore the
waters of baptism for one they save, drown and damn a number, which will not
stand with their devise of opus operatum. 2. Noah was found righteous before he
entered into the Arc, cap. 7.1. and therefore both children and men of years,
may be sanctified before baptism: whence will follow, that children of
believers, dying before baptism, have right both to the kingdom of heaven,
and Christian burial upon earth. 3. It is said, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah
prepared the Arc, not which saved, but to the saving of himself and his
household: and that by faith, he was made heir of righteousness; without which
faith, neither the waters, nor the Arc had done him any good; and therefore
neither without faith do the waters of baptism save or regenerate. Lastly, a
poor reason it is of a Cardinal, that because Moses or Noah is saved out of
the waters, therefore the waters save him.

A third instance is in the waters of Jordan, which (says he) truly healed 2.
king. 5.
and was no seal of the promise: and even so the waters of baptism truly
confer grace. But the truth is, that water had no such power of healing of and
in it self, but only at that time, in that institution, and from the word of
God; which appears even in Naamans indignation, who never knew any more
virtue or power in it then in Arbanah or Pharphar. Again, Naaman being healed,
acknowledged not the virtue from the water, but from God; and therefore
professed that he would henceforth never worship any other then the God of
Israel: and if it be lawful for any Sophister from every resemblance to
conclude what he pleases; why concludes he nor (for he may as well) that we
must be baptized seven times over, for Naaman must wash seven times ere he be
clean. In a word, the very scope of this washing in Jordan, directly
concludes against that Popish collection of his: for why does the Lord command
him to go and wash in Jordan, rather then (as he expected) that the Prophet
should lay his hand upon him, or by a word heal him? Surely, no stronger
reason can be given then this, that he should not attribute any power or virtue
of the cure to the Prophets hand, body, or person; but seeing he must do that
in which there is no such power at all, but is so unlikely a means of cure, as
Naaman almost scornefully rejected; the whole glory of the work might return
to the God of Israel. As unlikely, yea more, that water should wash the
leprosy of sin from the conscience, as the outward leprosy from the body
of Naaman: and indeed the work in both is from the spirit of the Lord.

Ioh. 9.
and for that place in the 5. of John, concerning the poole of Bethesda, which
healed all manner of diseases, the text says plainly, that it was the Angels
stirring of the water; and without it nothing was done, and if the power had
been proper and natural, or inseparably tied to it, it would have healed the
second and third that had stepped in as well as the first. So we say when the
spirit of God moves these waters of baptism, there follows a cure, without
which if a man were every day baptized, it would be vnavaileable to
regeneration and sanctification. Thus not to follow the rest, and wast time in
them, we may see that when men willingly blind themselves, it is just with God
to give them up to all delusions, that in seeing they might not see, nor
understand.

Use. 2. As to magnify and reverence these sanctified waters, as the outward
means in the right use of which, the spirit works and exhibiteth that which
they represent: so also to beware least wanting this inward work of the
spirit, which gives all efficacy and comfortable fruit of baptism, it become
not a barren and a naked sign: the rather, in that the Lord himself observed
this corruption among his own people, that they stood too much upon outward
institutions, as the Temple, the law, circ^mcision, the fathers, etc. and
therefore in many places charged them, not to trust in such lying words, but to
get the foreskinne of their hearts circumcised, as well as the foreskinne of
their flesh; and not to rest in the title of a Jew, which was to be one but
outwardly, and in the letter, nor that they were descended of Abraham according
to the flesh, except they were Jews within, and descended of Abraham according
to the faith also, so as by doing his works they might resemble him. So when
we see Christians stand so much upon outward baptism, and are well contented
without the inward virtue of it: when we see them glory in the bare title,
without the power of Christianity; it is our part to imitate the Lord and his
Prophets, and call our people to get the circumcision not made with hands, but
by the finger and spirit of God: Coloss. 2.^^.
which is more then to wash the foulness of the body; for it is to put off
the sinful body, even the wicked corruption of the heart: for so it is
expounded to be the resemblance of Christ in his death and burial first, and
then in the life of grace and glory, to which he rose again. 12.
Boast not then of thy baptism, without this change of thy heart and life, for
then thou boastest of a broken vow: call it not thy Christendom, unless by
it thou be set into Christ, and transplanted by it into the similitude of
his death: thou art no better before God, then an heathen o^ Turk,
notwithstanding thy body has been washed in this lauer, if thy heart still
remain foul and filthy: and as good never a whit as never the better. And
this I speak of good ground and in the language of Scripture. Do we not see
the Jews charged as not circumcised, although they had the skin of their
flesh cut? Isai. ^4.57.3. and Steven goes not, as we say, behind the door to
call them st^ff^necked and uncircumcised* Act. 7.
so why may not we speak the truth (retaining in our hearts and style the
reverence of that holy ordinance) that the water in baptism further then
joined to the word and applied to this holy end authentically to seal that
which God has engraven upon it, is no better unto the unbeliever then
ordinary pumpe water. It is too Jewish, and yet too common, that the religion
and profession of Christians stands for most part in outward show and
glory, Vis regenerandi non aquae si^plici sed Sacramentali, id est gratiae ^ei
qu^^ mediante verbo per aqua^ operaturad^^ribenda est. Pola. in Analys. Catech.
Basil.
and such things as are made by the hands of men, wanting that spirit and
truth, which is indeed the crown of Christianity: and yet alas, what will
the representation of Christ's death and resurection do good, if the virtue and
power of it be wanting in the soul. Unto thy outward baptism, get the heavens
opened (as in the baptism of Christ) and see that the spirit has descended
upon thee to the converting of thy soul, and begetting thee to a new life;
for this is the soul of baptism, without which it is a dead letter, and a
fruitless ceremony.

Use. 3. As it is with baptism, so is it with all other ordinances of God, no
outward means of salvation can be effectual, unless the inward work of the
spirit be added. We have power to come and hear the word, 1. Ioh. 2.27. Mark.
16.20.
but unless the anointing teach us, we shall remain untaught: yea let the
Apostles themselves preach, the Lord must work with them also, or nothing will
be done. These two, the spirit of the Lord upon us, and his word in our
mouths, Isa. 59.21^
make up a sweet harmony. And how is it else that men after so long powerful
preaching, and frequent hearing, remain ignorant, hard hearted, rebellious?
surely the reason is, because the Lord gives not an heart to perceive; Deuteronomy.
29.2.
and because the spirit blows not there, to give the seeing eye, and hearing
ear; which where it is wanting, a man may sit out as many summons as Pharaoh
did, and never the better, yea the more hardened. So in afflictions and
corrections, which are durable and lingering on many, why do men profit so
little, why do they not open the door of discipline, why are not the rods
of correction the tree of life to a number? surely because the spirit boareth
not the ear, he teaches not the right use of them.

Object. But what can I do withal, if the spirit teach me not? Answ. The
spirit would not be wanting, if men would come preparedly to be taught. But 1.
men come without belief and mingle not the word with faith; and so it
becomes unprofitable: or 2. without repentance, whereas the humble shall be
taught in the way only: or 3. without prayer, and the spirit powers not out
these waters of grace, but upon thirsty grounds: or 4. laden with lusts, and
then the spirit will not sow among thorns. And thus all the means of
salvation enjoyed out of their holy use are turned to greater condemnation. Who
art thou then that contentest thy self to come to Church, to hear, to pray,
to read, keep the Sabbaths, professest the Gospel, to have the countenance
of religious persons, whereas in the mean time thou want the inward master,
the spirit of supplication, the power of the Gospel? All is wrong with thee:
thou have embraced a shadow for the substance, and found a^ it were the
clothes of Christ, but the body is risen and gone. Beg at the hands of God
therefore in all thy duties public and private the presence of the spirit, who
alone can work thy heart: wait for Gods teaching, for this is the way to
become wise to salvation.

Doctr. 2. God in saving us from our misery, renews us unto his own image of
righteousness and holiness: God in saving renews men to his own image. 2. Cor.
5.17. Ephesians. 4.23.
for he saves us by giving us unto his son: and if any be in Christ he must
become a new creature: which new creature is called the new man which after God
is created, and which must be renewed on us in knowledge after the image of him
that ereated him: Colos. 3.9. The Apostle Peter teaches us that great and
precious promises, namely of life and salvation, are made unto us. But how come
we to ^nioye them? the next words show, by being made partakers of the divine
nature, and flying corruptions which are in the world through lust. 2. Pet. 1.4.
This divine nature is nothing else but the renewing of us unto the image of
God, by which being freed from the corruption of the world, we become of
earthly and fleshly, heavenly and divine like unto our Father, practicing those
heavenly qualities which God by his spirit creates in us, such as are the
hatred of sin, love of piety, the contempt of the world, and the breathing
after life eternal: by all which we seem and after a sort put on his nature
and image. The same truth have we confirmed by Zachariah in his song, Luke 1.75.
where he makes this part of Gods image standing in righteousness and holiness a
fruit of our redemption and justification.

Use. 1. This doctrine lets us see the absolute necessity of our renewing,
without which there can be no salvation. Ioh. 3.5. This necessity is not to be
conceived of the sign but of the thing signified.
Except a man be borne again of water and the spirit he cannot be saved. And
the reason is, because by it as by an inward mean, the Lord sets us into
the state of salvation. That washing of the Disciples feet was not only an
example of humility, but a symbol and representation of this washing away of
sins in this our renewing by the blood of Christ: and therefore Christ says
unto Peter, If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me. Ioh. ^3.1^*
And indeed who can have part in Christ that will not part from his foul
sins that he may be clean? which if it be true, how far do men delude
themselves, who think they can walk with Christ and have part in him, and yet
have neither hand nor foot* head nor heart washed from guile. Every Simon
Magus will think to have part in this business as well as Simon Peter, and
yet inwardly nourish a bitter gall of iniquity. But let no man henceforth
deceive himself, for the sinner that will not be washed, has no part in the
kingdom of God and of Christ.

2. It affoardeth a trial whether a man be in the way of salvation or no;
Notes to try this secret work of God in thy self.
he that is a new creature is in the way of life. Object. But this is a secret
work of the spirit, and how can we know it. Answ. First, thou must be borne
again, to which is required that God become thy

Secondly, after this birth all old things must pass away, and every Ioh. 3.10.
he that is washed is all clean. And therefore 2. Cor. 4.4.
For as the further blinding of men, is a note and brand of a reprobate; so is
it a note of one begotten to God, to be renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.9.
Secondly, there must be a hardened; Romans 9.18.
but he that is borne of God hears his words, Ioh. 8.47. he carries a
flexible heart unto the word: and 1. he that does righteously is borne of him.
Thirdly, there must be a new conversation manifesting the works and fruits of
the spirit: a life lead in the practice of reigning sin, and making show of
the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.
is a note of him that is lead by the flesh, but he that is borne of God
sins not, 1. Ioh. 3.9. he has sin in him, but not reigning, Romans 6.4. he
does sin also, but 1. it is not he, but the sin in him. 2. it is against
his heart and intention. 3. he lies no^ in his sin, but his course is
according to the commandment, and a walking after the spirit. Fourthly, There
must be new affections, as the love of God, hatred of all light: the whole
first Epistle of John bea^eth upon this point: for it is a note of one in
darkness to hate the light, to hate the brethren, etc. men think it a sound
plea, when they ouershoote themselves in affections, speeches, or actions, to
say they are flesh and blood, and they must hate, and speak their minds, etc.
but if thou be no more then flesh and blood, thou shall never come in
heaven: Christians are of the blood, and flesh, and bone of Christ, and
therefore must subject themselves in all things to be ruled by his spirit.
Fifthly, there must be means used to calls not upon God, that is he casts
off the whole worship of God. Would thou then find thy self to be a new
creature, find this change that the clouds of darkness and ignorance are
removed, that thou have an heart of flesh, that thou find an abatement of
thy sins and lusts, that thou have heavenly motions, that thou use means
carefully of thy spiritual life; that thou growest by the nourishment of the
word, Sacraments, prayer, reading, conference, and other exercises of godliness
and repentance; this is the way of life which thou have happily found; thou art
now much nearer salvation, then when thou first believed.

Verse. 6. Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. To
come to the right meaning of this verse we must explane four things. 1. the
gift bestowed, which, that is the spirit, as the former words import. 2. the
person bestowing him, he, that is, God the Father. 3. the measure of the gift,
1. powered out, 2. plentifully, or shed on us abundantly. 4. the person meriting
this gift, that is, Jesus Christ, described here to be our Savior, through
Jesus Christ our Savior.

First, the gift is the spirit, or holy Ghost. Quest. How can the spirit be
bestowed? Answ. In the spirit two things must be considered, 1. his essence and
person. 2. his gifts and effects. The former cannot be conferred, for neither
can his essence or person be concluded in the whole frame of heaven and earth,
and much less in the narrow corners of man's heart, he being an infinite God
equal with the father and the son. But the latter may, for so 1. Cor. 12.11.
the Apostle speaking of sundry operations and gifts ^aith, all these things
works the same spirit: and this phrase must be understood by an other, Act.
2.17. where Peter alleging the place out of Joel, 1.28. I will power out my
spirit, thus explaineth it, I will power out of my spirit, that is, Syn^^doche.
the saving gifts and graces of my spirit: such as here the renewing of the
spirit by justification and sanctification, of which we shall hear m^re in the
next ve^se.

The second thing is the person bestowing the holy Ghost; he: that is, the
Father, as ver. 4. who as he is the fountain of the deity, so of all good
actions and operations, Ioh. 14.26. But when the comforter shall come whom the
Father shall send. Object. But Christ says, that he will send the spirit from
the Father. Ioh. 15.26.
Ans. This makes no difference in the thing: the spirit proceeds first from
the father, as the first in the Trinity, and from the Son as from the second
in order in the Trinity; and he only expresses this order, when he says,
whom I will send from the Father: for when the Father sends the holy Ghost,
it is by the Son, in whom all our good is derived, but not as by an
instrument, but as from a principal efficient with the Father, only the
second in order from the Father.

Thirdly, the measure of the gift is noted. 1. In that he is said to shed or
power him out, he says not, he gave, or communicated, or dropped, or showred,
but powered him out, which notes the liberallitie and plenty of the thing
conferred, namely, of the graces of the spirit, called by the name of the
Spirit himself, that we might conceive of the bountifulness of our God, who
seems rather to communicate the very fountain it self of grace, Graces of
gods spirit compared to waters.
then the streams and rivers of it. In which Metaphor note by the way, that
the graces of the spirit are here compared to I will power clean water -- 2.
water has a natural quality to extinguish heat, and quench the thirst of man
and beast: so only these waters bring with them refreshing against the hot
wrath of God, which otherwise would prove a consuming fire: for he that
drinks of this water shall never thirst more, that is, he shall never Ier.
17.6.
without which we should be as the heath in the wilderness, and as a parched
land which sees not when any good comes.

But the second word whereby this immeasurable grace bestowed is signified is
the aduerb, (...) Spirit said to be powered out in three respects.
abundantly; or (if we will go nearer the original) richly: and so when the
Apostle writ this Epistle, the spirit was indeed abundantly powered out: and
that in three respects.

in greater abundance the^ ever before bestowed, such as the gifts of
illumination, outward calling, profession of the truth, common and general
faith. 2. The more especial gifts of sanctification the which our text most
aims at, as of faith, regeneration, love, hope, etc. for so the Apostle
seems on us who are renewed by the holy ghost: As both the prophet Joel, and
Peter speaking the same thing seem to do: the one mentioning my servants, my
handmaids; the other speaking of such as invoke and call upon the name of the
lord: and to this purpose we might show what a number were daily converted, and
how in those days the kingdom of God was taken by force. 3. More

Secondly, these gifts were plentifully powered out in regard of the persons
upon whom they were conferred: not now upon some few Jews or handful of
people, as before Christ's ascension, but upon all flesh, says Joel, 2.28. upon
every nation under heaven, says Peter. Now both Jew and Gentile, bond and
free, circumcision, uncircumcision, all respect and acceptance of persons
removed, have equal part and promise in these graces.

Thirdly, in regard of the means, in which the spirit now conueled Isa 11.9.
and the earth is filled with the knowledge of God, even as the waters cover
the sea. And to this our Apostle has reference, doubtless casting his eye
upon that plentiful grace of regeneration, which even in baptism was, and is
conferred unto believers.

The fourth thing in the meaning, is the person procuring this abundant grace
for us, and that is Jesus Christ our Savior: for what good thing soever can be
derived from God unto us, it must be by a Mediator, and such a one as must be
humbled for sin, and raised from sin: the former in his death and passion
for sin, the latter in resurrection and ascension from sin: and in both
these regards the Lord Christ obtains for his Church these graces, 1. as a
redeeme^ by the merit of his passion. 2. as an intercessor by the efficacy of
his requests, which now after his ascension he m^keth for the Saints: therefore
is it said, that the Father sends the Spirit in the name of his Son, Ioh.
14.26. whom the Father will send in my name: that is, the Father sends the
Spirit through the Son, both as a Mediator, and as an Intercessor: both which
works so soon as he had accomplished, it was no marvel if the Spirit
through such merit of passion, and efficacy of intercession, was so
plentifully powered out upon his body the Church; as we read accomplished,
Act. 2.2.

Doctr. 1. The graces of the spirit are plentifully powered out upon Christ was
PROMISED to the Israelites, but GIVEN unto us.
as, Isai. 11.9. Dan. 12.4. many prophesies were then sealed, and the book
shut until the term of time: but then many should run to and fro, and
knowledge should be increased. Ezekiel. 47.
still rising to increase: and of the proceedings of the new Testament,
typified in the cloud which at the first appearance was no bigger then a man's
hand, but after rise to that greatness, as to cover the whole heavens. 3. the
spirit was not given yet, because the Son was not yet glorified: that is, in
comparison he was not given before, but so sparingly, as in respect of this
pouring out, he might seem not to be given at all: so also is that place of
Peter to be understood: 1. Pet. 1.10.
of which salvation the Prophets have inquired, searching and prophesying of
that grace that should come unto you; not that themselves had no consolation of
that grace, which by the eye of prophecy they foresawe to light in abundance
upon the Church of the new Testament, but because in comparison it came to us,
and was not accomplished unto them. To this purpose Christ himself pronounces
blessedness upon his hearers, whose ears and eyes heard and saw things which
many Kings and Prophets desired to hear and see, but could not. And Paul
says, that our ministry far passes theirs in glory, who were but under
rudiments and in principles, and elements, if compared with us.

Object. But the best of us are but children in knowledge, faith, obedience, to
Abraham, and the rest of the Prophets, and sundry believers among them. Answ.
If we compare person with person, it is true in many of them; but compare
Church with Church, they were but children unto us. Object. But a number of men
have no grace at all, and others a very small measure, and the best not so
much, but they find themselves still to stand in need of more. Answ. This
preiudiceth not the general truth: for 1. God powers out his grace
abundantly, though most men let it fall to the ground to their deeper
damnation. 2. The Church of the new Testament has abundance, to which while
men will not join* themselves in soundnes and sincerity, but hang themselves
to it by outward profession alone, as a sient tied to a t^eee by a thread
rather then grafted into it; what meruell if they be empty of grace. 3. He
that receives the least drop of true grace has abundance, not perhaps in
regard of his means; but the smallest measure is in it self abundance: for
the least drop of these waters shall be as a well springing up to life
eternal; which if it kindly sink into the soul, out of such a man's belly
shall flow rivers of the water of life: which things (says John) spoke Christ
of the spirit, which they that believed in him should receive: so that although
some have more, some have less, yet he that has any, Ioh. 7.39.
he that has the least true grace has abundance.

Use. 1. If such plenty of grace be powered out upon us; Our increase must be
proportionable to the grace so plentifully poured out.
our care must be to be found answerable thereunto, that according to our
proportion our increase may be: for we may not think the return of one talent
sufficient, if we have received five or ten; seeing where much is given, much
will be required. Has the Lord so richly shed out his spirit, that whereas the
most excellent Patriarchs saw Christ only a far off, the most simple of our
age may see him in the word and Sacraments even crucified before his eyes; and
will it not be expected, that in all things we should be made rich in him? And
thus have we ministered unto us a ground of examination, whether we find the
fruits and work of these waters upon us. When Joel prophesied of the pouring
out of this spirit, mark what wonderful effects he foretold should follow:
That sons and daughters, servants, and maids, old and young should prophecy,
should see visions, should dream dreams: and accordingly at the first
accomplishment of this prediction, what understanding? what illumination? what
tongues? what miracles? what conversion to God followed? sometimes many
hundreds, sometimes many thousands won at one sermon; and how violently was
the kingdom taken? We now have the pouring out of the same spirit, and more
plentifully then they or any age or country ever since: but where be these
fruits and effects? where or to whom in comparison, is the arm of God made
bare, or shines that excellent revelation of the mysteries of salvation? where
is that faith and acknowledgement of Jesus Christ, which passes all prophecy,
tongues and miracles; yea are but dongue to that excellent knowledge of Christ,
which passes all knowledge? Phil. 3.8. Ephesians. 3.18. 2. Cor. 3.18.
We behold indeed the glory of the Lord with open face, but how few are
transformed into the same image? Look any way upon the lives of most men, and
we cannot but demurre of the truth of the doctrine. If we observe in the
multitude the high atheism, contempt of God and his word, his Sabbaths,
Sacraments, Ministers, and his whole worship, if we listen unto the cursed
oaths and imprecations, if we cast our eyes upon the injustice, pride, riot,
hatred, and earthlinesse, which dwells every where with men: can we now
conceive other, but that the wicked spirit which rules in the world of the
disobedient, is abundantly powered out, rather then this pure spirit here
mentioned? And if we behold the numbers of men who scorn and power contempt on
such as have received the smallest measure of these graces; can we think that
such abundant grace is powered upon men on earth, seeing the most seek under
the titles of schism or heresy, to hunt it and banish it from off the face of
the earth? Or yet if we further look upon men, that make show of receiving
competencie of these waters, who are yet never a whit washed, nor ever a whit
the cleaner; they come to Church and hear, they seem to like good things and
walk in civil conversation; but in regard of the soundness of their hearts,
we wash bricks, or Aethiopians, and loose all our labor: may we not now well
ask, where is the abundance of this grace we speak of? Or if we look at such
as have received true grace, howsoever the Lord will bring it to something in
the end, yet we can scarce see on them or in them any such abundance, but like
strait necked vessels they receive it but drop by drop, although it be
powered on them with full buckets. We seldom see professors like trees of
righteousness laden with the fruits of the spirit, or walking or standing in
Gods orchyard of the Church in a constant course of fruitfulnes: but now and
then in good moodes some works of piety and mercy may be found in their
hands: and the best of men come far short of their watring in their increase.
If the spirit were powered out from above, Isa. 32.15.
would it not make our wildernesses fruitful fields? oh let us bewail our
own vncapablenesse in the sense of our wants, and every man urge his own
heart. Is the spirit powered out on my soul? he is the spirit of light and
illumination, I should then be filled with all knowledge of God: he is the
spirit of grace, compunction, and compassion, I should therefore be much and
often in the exercises of repentance and a broken heart: he is the spirit of
sanctification, I should therefore abound in all holy conversation: he is the
spirit of consolation, I should therefore exceed with true and sound joy and
peace of good conscience: he is the spirit of love, and therefore I should
power out works of love and mercy abundantly, if he were abundantly powered
out on my soul. Thus should every man examine his own heart.

2. If upon this examination we feel not this plenty of grace, we must ware
of accusing God, but condemn our selves in whom all the fault is, as who
refuse and despise so great grace. We have great cause to bewail our
barrennes: whereof are 3. maine causes.
If any ask how it can come to pass that such excellent grace should be
refused. I answer, there are three maine causes of it. 1. ignorance and
blindness of mind. 2. hardness of heart. 3. security: which three destitute
us of so abundant grace as is offered. First, we see not, know not, and
therefore affect not these graces, Ioh. 4.10. If thou had known the gift of
God, thou would have asked, Water is so necessary a creature, as nothing can
be more dangerously or uncomfortably wanting to the life of man: this every man
sees by the eye of his sense: and so are much more these spiritual waters of
life unto the heavenly life, which because men cannot discern with the same
eye, they never affect, nor thirst after them: whence it comes to pass,
Tantalus.
that (as the Poet in the fable) men stand as it were up to the chinne in these
waters, and yet die for water, even in the midst of those sweet streams die
eternally for want of them. If we want them therefore it is because we thirst
not after them: for only he that thirsts is called to them, Isa. 55.1.
and Christ will give only to him that thirsts to drink of them. Enlarge
thy heart therefore, wait upon the Lord, open thy mouth wide and he will fill
it; Samson ready to die for thirst, called upon the Lord, and the Lord opened
a chawbone, and a river came gushing out: so if thou seeing the necessity, and
that there is no way but eternal death without these living waters, and thirst
after the Lord, and call earnestly, he will before thou shall want even by
miracle abundantly supply thee: but if thou esteemest of grace as a thing thou
may best want, there is good reason thou be without it.

The second let is hardness of heart, and worse then the former: for

The third let is security, joined with extreme neglect of means, wherein
the spirit usually conveieth these graces. A man that means to Art thou
minded to be rich in grace, then must thou use the means, frequent the places
and pipes, where these waters flow.

Quest. Where shall we have them? Answ. They run from under the threshold of
the Sanctuary, ^zek. 47.
and the ordinary pipes wherein the Lord in greatest abundance conueieth them,
are the word and Sacraments in their right and reverent use. The Prophet Joel
having spoken of these abundant waters, leads his hearers by the hand to the
quickspring where they rise, In that day shall all the rivers of Judah run
with waters, and a fountain shall run out of the house of the Lord, Joel 3
18.
and water the valley of Sittim, where the choice Cedars were, betokening the
trees of righteousness within the pale of the Church of God. Here then is the
place where thou may draw with joy waters out of the wells of consolation:
all in the plural number, Isa. 12.4.
waters, wells, because here is promise made of more abundant blessing. And yet
while thy plough goes abroad, thou may not be idle within doors, for the
Lord would ever have a Christian on the gathering and gaining hand; and
therefore has appointed private instruction in the family, private prayer,
private meditation, private reading and conference, (things scarce used among
Christians, though they scarce can be Christians that use them not) and has
promised, that where and when two or three be thus gathered in his name he will
be present: and he is no where empty handed: yea where one man apart shutting
his door, prays or meditateth alone, the Lord sees in secret, and repaieth
his pains with such store of grace, as all men may see him openly rewarded:
yea let a man be most alone (if in such duties) he is in most comfortable
company and fellowship with the Lord.

Doctr. 2. All the grace that is bestowed on us is by means of Jesus Christ:
Christ our Lord the fountain of all our welfare.
for with him is the fountain and headspring; yea he is the head which sends
life, sense, motion, and direction into all the members: resembled in that holy
ointment which ran down from Aarons head and beard even to the skirts of his
garment. Psalm. 133.2.
The Evangelist after he had affirmed that Christ was full of grace and truth,
adds that of his fullness we receive grace for grace: Ioh. 1.16.
so the Apostle, Colos. 2.9.10. In him dwells the fulness of the godhead
bodily, and we are complete in him. But how come we to share with him in it?
The next words declare it, which is the head of all principality and power: as
though he had said, because in himself he has the wellhead of glory and
majesty, the which becomes ours in that he is also the head of his Church.
And as here our Apostle in general concludes that all the graces of
regeneration are through him, so were it easy in particular to go through the
rest of the graces and observe them in the scriptures all ascribed to this
proper cause. As, 1. peace with God and our selves, Romans 5.1. 2. entrance and
access unto the Father through him, Ephesians. 2.18. 3. wisdom and understanding
whereby God in him purposed to enrich us, Ephesians. 1.8. 4. consolation and comfort
which abounds through him, 2. Cor. 1.5. 5. eternal salvation, which is the
gift of God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. But in such a plain doctrine we
will spend no more time. Those general places will save us that labor, Ephesians.
1.3. who has in Christ blessed us with all spiritual blessings: and Romans
11.36. for of him, and thorough him, and for him are all things: and, 1. Cor.
1.30. he is made of God unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.

Use. 1. Want we any grace? call upon God in the name of Christ, In thy want
beg grace at his hands.
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name he will give it unto you: get Christ
to be thy own, become a true believer, that thou may in him begin thy
prayer with our father, this is the way to be rich in grace. What a change was
there in Zacheus, when as once Christ came unto him? whereas before there was
nothing in him but injustice, oppression, forging, and whatsoever was naught:
now we see faith, love, justice, mercy, restitution, reformation, yea with
salvation every grace accompanying it.

2. Have thou received any spiritual grace? In thy supply be thankful unto
him.
sacrifice not unto thine own net, but be thankful unto God in Christ. This
the Apostle teaches in his own practice in the former place to the Romans: of
him, and through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever.

3. Take heed of quenching that grace, neither grieve that good spirit of God
by thy sin, for thou came hardly by it: for Christ must come down from
heaven, humble himself to the death, rise again, ascend, and now make
continual intercession, before he could procure thee the least grace. A thing
very little thought of.

Verse. 7. That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. Now follow the ends, why we are brought
into this new condition, which are two. 1. our justification before God. 2. the
purchase of life eternal. In the former are to be considered, 1. what is meant
by justification. 2. what by Grace. 3. the doctrines.

Justification is the absolution of a sinner from his sin, and the punishment
of it, by the satisfaction of Christ the Redeemer, Justification what.
apprehended by faith. 1. The absolving of a sinner: this the Apostle declares
when he opposes unto it accusation and condemnation, Romans 8.33.
It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? for seeing a man by nature, and
the cursed practice of sin, is deprived of the glory of God, and cannot but
heap up wrath against the day of wrath: before ever he can come to a
comfortable estate, he must be acquitted necessarily of the guilt and curse of
his sin, both in the high court of heaven, where God is the supreme Judge,
as also in the inferior court and consistory of his own conscience. Now if
it be asked, how the sinner shall be thus absolved; the rest of the words of
the definition declare. For 2. I add, it is by the satisfaction of Christ the
Redeemer, wherein are contained both the matter, and form of the justification
of a sinner. The matter, is Christ's satisfaction, his obedience in his life, in
his death; in fulfilling the law, and in suffering for our not fulfilling it;
and the merit of all manifested in his resurrection and glorious ascension. The
form, is the imputing of that obedience, whereby the righteousness of Christ
does now become the believers as truly and really by imputation, as it was
Christ's own in action. So as it is no legal justice, which requires
personal obedience in the straitest terms of the law; but Evangelical,
whereby the believer satisfies by the merit of a Mediator, and in the person
of a surety; which satisfaction is accepted, as though it were performed in
his own person. And thus the cure is proportionable to the disease: that look
as by the first Adam sin went over all, who are naturally borne of him,
namely by imputation and propagation; even so by the second Adam justice and
righteousness is imputed unto all which are supernaturally borne of him. And 3.
I add, that this satisfaction of Christ, is apprehended by faith, the proper
work of which grace is as by an hand to receive Christ with his merits, and
bring him home into the own heart: whence it is that to believe in Christ, and
to receive him, are put for one and the same thing, Ioh. 1.2. it is the mouth
of the soul whereby we eat and drink his flesh and blood, Ioh. 6. yea such a
special instrument to this purpose, that it is said in sundry places to
justify us, by laying hold on the merits of Christ which properly justify:
and we by it, though not for it, are said to be righteous.

Secondly, by Grace in Scripture, sometime is meant the gifts of grace, that
is, What is meant by Grace.
any good gift which proceeds from the favor and love of God toward man,
whether privative, withholding evils deserved, or good things which we would
abuse; or else positive: and these either general and more common, as given to
elect and reprobate, such as the gift of tongues, learning, prophecy,
miracles, etc. or more special, whereby only they that are to be saved are
distinguished. As namely, that first and eternal grace of election; and that
second grace whereby such as are elected and given to the Son, are in due
time by effectual vocation, justification, and sanctification, lead unto
glory and salvation. All these are of his grace, 1. Pet. 5.10.
whom Peter calls the God of all grace. But there is yet another grace of
God, which is no gift infused into us, but resideth in God himself; which is
his free favor and grace, by which he loves and accepts his elect in Christ
his beloved: and this is the first, and cause of all other subsequent graces.
Which is both to be distinguished from the former, because the Scripture does
always distinguish them in the doctrine of justification, Romans 11.6. If of
grace, then not of works; and more plainly, chap. 5.15. much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace has abounded to many. As also must be applied to
this text; not only, 1. because it is the proper sense of the word in all such
places as treat of the justification of a sinner before God: but 2. because the
Apostle by mentioning of grace again, secludeth all that prevision of works
formerly mentioned, which might be motives unto God for the bestowing of his
grace, that all causes and occasions of the free grace of God out of God might
be excluded: and 3. to free the text from that corruption which by Popish
doctrine is fastened upon it.

For how does the Papists wind themselves, when they meet with this and such
like places, that with them they may hold their blasphemous doctrine of
justification by works, and humane satisfactions? you shall have the latter
Jesuits affirm the same thing very confidently with the Apostle, that we are
justified freely by his grace, as though they were of his mind and of ours,
and as if no difference were between us in this maine matter (which I dare say
if we were agreed in, we should not long dissent in any matter of great moment)
but they speak in their own sense, and retain a trick of their mental
reservation, which both destroys the text, and overthrows the foundation of
religion. For 1. by Justification, they mean not that complete righteousness
of Jesus Christ, which the Lord imputing unto us, accepts us in; but a kind
of righteousness, which God puts into us, to make us just: which is nothing
else but a physical change of the heart from evil to good, or a motion from
injustice to righteousness, at the first imperfectly begun, and needs a
second justification to eke it out. 2. By Grace, they mean nothing less then
this favor of God in Christ, accepting his elect; but certain gifts of grace
bestowed of favor, or habitual graces of faith, hope, and charity, which are
daily perfected by the daily exercise of them. And what is this else then to say
that we are justified, that is, made just before God by the inherent
righteousness which he bestows upon us; the which righteousness (not of Christ
but) of our own infused into us (not imputed unto us) does formally justify
the sinner in the sight of God.

But this evasion, 1. offers great violence to the text, A Romish shift
avoided.
wherein as we have heard, the Apostle opposes these two, grace and good
works, as in the seat of it; and it is to be marked, that what the Apostle
here calls grace, he gives three titles unto it in the former verse: all of
them without our selves, and peculiar unto God himself: 1. bountifulness, 2.
love, 3. mercy: and not only this place, but sundry such parallel places show
plainly, that by grace cannot be meant any thing infused into us, but only a
free favor in God accepting us as righteous: 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, (mark by the
way that exclusive) but according to his own purpose and grace given us; but
when? before the world was. Let now any man of common sense say, whether this
grace whereby we are saved, be any gift of grace infused unto us, unless it
could be infused before the world was, or we were in it.

Secondly, this conceit confounds two distinct things, namely, our
justification, and sanctification: which the Apostle distinguishes, 1. Cor.
6.11. and Romans 5. are noted two things which befell us by Adams sin, 1. the
guilt of that sin. 2. the native corruption or pronenesse and propensitie to
any other sin, as a just punishment of the former: and accordingly he
distinctly notes two things, that by the second Adam are restored unto us: the
former is freedom and absolution from that guilt, which is our justification
before God: and the latter is the repairing of Gods image, which is called
regeneration, which is here imperfect, but shall be hereafter raised to that
legal righteousness from whence we fell: implying unto us, that as we must
retain the distinction between the guilt and corruption of sin, so also
must we between the freedom from the one and the other: which this popish
interpreattion confounds.

Thirdly, this interpretation of the phrase by the Romish teachers, makes
righteousness of God is made manifest without the law, Romans 3.21. this shall
be false, for the law reuealeth that righteousness which is by inherent
qualities, gifts, of grace, or the habit of love. 2. whereas the justification
of a sinner, is by a righteousness which satisfies the justice of God: such a
righteousness as this cannot do so: for our best inherent righteousness is
mingled with corruption, is very imperfect, far from that which the law
requires, and (...) from that which God accepts; who never accepts but
such as bring perfect righteousness, either of their own, or of the
Mediators. All which I have propounded for the right interpretation of this
phrase, because it nippeth in the head all that Popish devise of justification
by works, so derogatorie to this Apostolical justification by grace, as they
can no sooner be reconciled, then can fire and water, light and darkness: and
that abandoning such tricks of men's brains, we might come to conceive the
truth of this fundamental doctrine, as the Scriptures have taught us to
conceive of it.

Doctr. The righteousness of a sinner before God, The righteousness of a sinner
before God is no quality in the believer.
is not any quality in the believer, but that which the Lord imputes and
accepts through his son. For, 1. the Apostle here speaking of renewing of
believers inwardly and in truth, yet ascribes not their righteousness
thereto, but attributes it wholly unto grace. And if we speak of the
righteousness his grace; Gratia iustifica^s in solo deo subiective, in nobis
obiective tantum in est.
which is even his gracious accepting of us in his Son, and not for those
graces which he works in us, which are ours after he has once given them. 2.
Whereas the Apostle, Romans 1.7. says, that by the Gospel the righteousness of
God is revealed, by this righteousness cannot be meant that justice of his,
whereby he satisfies himself against sin: for that is more manifest in the
law, and the Gospel is a kind of mitigation of it: neither any righteousness,
though of God in man, which properly is not called the righteousness of God
being imperfect, in part, and mingled with much stain of sin: and therefore
necessarily must be meant of that righteousness which himself imputes and
accepts a sinner perfectly righteous in; which is able to acquit him before
the bar of his judgment, as no quality in the believer is able to do. 3.
This Evangelical righteousness, not having mine own righteousness, which is
by the law, but that which is by faith in Christ: which place is worthy our
further opening, as a notable decider of this maine controversy between our
adversaries and us. In which it is plain, that the Apostle speaks of two
kinds of righteousness: the one which is a man's own, not having mine own:
the other which is an others, and that is Gods, or Christ's. The former, he
calls the righteousness of the law, namely, whereby a man through
observation of the law is accounted righteous: and in this Paul would not be
found: not that he would not be found fruitful in good works, but he would
not be judged by them, they being in comparison of the laws purity and
perfection a stained clout. The latter, in which Paul would be found that he
might find acceptance in the sight of God, is not his own but an others. 2.
not obtained by any works, not excepting the best: but apprehended by faith,
which cannot be said to lay hold on any thing within us, but something which is
without us. 3. it is of God through faith, that is, such a one as God freely
through his Christ gives us, and makes ours, not by putting it into us, as
other graces, but by imputing it unto us, and by this means acquitting us: and
2. of such a person, that is God as well as man, seeing otherwise every man is
deprived of the glory of God. These two the Apostle every where so opposes,
that whosoever cleaves to the one falls from the other, and whosoever will
be justified by the righteousness of the law, is abolished from Christ: which
must not be so conceived, as that they are not most friendly and necessarily
knit in the same justified party; but that in the act of justification, they
can no more agree together to the presenting of a sinner righteous before God,
then can the most contrary things in nature be accorded in the same natural
subject.

Object. But the Papists cannot endure the word imputation, or that one should
stand righteous by another righteousness, no more then one can be learned by
another man's learning. Answ. What blindness is come on them that cannot endure
the Scriptures phrase; Psalm. 32.1. blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes
not sin; 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their sins unto them: and the phrase of not imputing sin, and
imputing of righteousness is repeated in Romans 4. ten times; so as they
must needs be strangers in the Scriptures to whom it sounds strangely.
Again, although there be in men who are singular persons, propriety of
learning, wisdom, and gifts; yet there is a common righteousness between
Christ and the believer; who now are not two, but one flesh, bone, and body.
Neither need it seem so strange as they make it, for the Lord to impute unto a
man that which is not his own: for we say that nothing is imputed to us, but
that which is our own: but a thing is ours two ways, 1. by infusion,
inherence, o^ adherence; or 2. by account or reckoning; which makes another
man's as truly ours, as if it were in our own person: as appears in paying a
debt of a thousand or hundred pounds by a surety, which as fully and freely
discharges us of it in reckoning and account, as if our own persons and hands
had paid it. And thus was he who knew no sin made sin for us, that we might
be the righteousness of God in him.

Object. But this is against the Scripture, which says that God will not
justify the sinner, Exodus 32.33. Romans 5.19.
that is, account him just, who is not so; and Paul says, that we are made
just, and therefore not reputed only. Ans. The Scripture says also, Romans 4.5.
That God justifies the ungodly: and therefore this is to pick a quarrel at
the Scriptures themselves rather then at our doctrine. The truth is, that God
justifies not the wicked while he is so, while he is considered in himself,
while he wants both inherent and imputed righteousness: but this hinders
not, but that after such a one is changed and set into Christ, who is made his
righteousness, both he is accounted as he is indeed righteous in the sight of
God. As for that of Paul, saying that many are MADE righteous, the next words
loose the knot, namely, by the obedienc^ of one; that is of Christ imputed unto
us. Neither can that which they say that by this our doctrine a man shall be
both a godly and ungodly, a just and unjust person; any way cloud and vail this
truth to an understanding acquainted with the Scriptures: for why may we not
grant what they say as true in a diverse respect? seeing the believer is by
nature the child of wrath, by the grace of regeneration renewed indeed but in
part: and yet by the gift of Christ's righteousness, of whom he is a member,
perfectly just in the sight of God.

Use. 1. Hence we learn, how to conceive such texts as wherein some infused
grace is said to justify us, as faith is often said so to do: but not for the
work, nor the worthiness of it; but only as it is a means apprehending this
righteousness and grace of God mentioned which indeed justifies. True it is,
that true faith is in it self a rare grace, Pides iustificat non absolute, s^d
relative, scil. cum obiecto. non efficiendo, sed afficiendo and applicando.
and of great prerogatives, and excellent in the fruits, effectually working by
love, hope, patience, fear of God, and such like; but yet cannot in, or for it
self, or by any of these bring us boldly into the presence of God, but only
by believing that Christ's righteousness imputed unto us, is our justification
before him. 2. Where our justification is ascribed to inherent grace and works
of righteousness; as where Abraham is said to be justified by works; such
places cannot be meant of the justification of the person himself before God,
but of the faith of the person before men: for if any work justify before
God, of necessity it must be a perfect work, and proceed from a person
perfectly justified and sanct^fied* as Abraham himself when he offered his
son was not: the true meaning of that place is this, Abraham was justified by
works, that is, he restified by his works that he was by faith justified in
the sight of God.

Use. 2. We learn hence further where our righteousness is laid up for us,
Isai. 45.24. In the Lord I have righteousness and strength, the whole seed of
Israel shall be justified and glory in the Lord. Of ou^ selves we are
desperate bankrupts, and have not one farthing to make straight withal; which
the Lord seeing, he deals with us as with those two debtors who had nothing
to pay, he forgiueth us all. Luk* 7.^^.
Behold then the Son of God, set out thy propitiatory, Romans 3.25. get the
lintels of thy soul sprinkled with the blood of this immaculate lamb, and
thou shall escape the stroke of the revenging angel: cast away thine own
rags, and if ever thou would get the blessing, wrap thy self in this
garment of thy elder brother, and when thy father shall savor the smell of thy
garments, he shall bless^ thee, and say, Genesis 27.^7.
Behold the smell of my son is (...) the smell of a field, which the Lord
has blessed* fear not to be complete in him, this long white to be needs no
eeking, ne^deth no pa^ching: say with that holy Martyr, and live and die with
it in thy mouth, only Christ, only Christ.

Use. 3. Seeing here falls to the ground whatsoever can be joined in the
work of justification with the merit and obedience of Christ, as any matter or
means demeriting the savor of God, we must beware of ever joining with the
Popish religion, who by their doctrine of merits and humane satisfactions,
abrogate the death of Christ, and are abolished from him: see Gal. 5.2.4.11. If
we can any way justify our selves, or satisfy for our selves, Christ and
saving graces are no circumstances, but the substance of all religion.
the death of Christ was vain: It is therefore as safe joining with the
Turkish religion as theirs. If it be said, the difference is not so great as
you make it; I answer, that we differ not in circumstances, but in such a
fundamental point, as if the Apostle may be judge, one of us must needs be
fallen from Christ, and have no part in him: what then will it avail to
profess the articles of faith, and to be the Church of God? unless that can
be a true Church which is abolished from Christ, and fallen from grace.

Should be made heirs according to the hope of life eternal.] In these words
is laid down the second end of that new condition into which believers are
brought. In which for the meaning two parts must be considered. 1. The right
and privilege of believers, who being once justified by faith are made heirs
of life eternal. 2. their present tenure of this their inheritance, by hope.

For the former: The word heir in the first and proper signification
betokens a lot, (...).
and is used sometimes in the new Testament with allusion unto the twelve
tribes, whose portions were divided and distributed unto them by lot, as Ephesians.
1.11. whence that people was more peculiarly called the lines and heritage of
the Lord, as whom himself made partakers of all the good things of that land:
and by proportion those also who by faith laid, or shall lay hold upon his
covenant, for all those spiritual and eternal good things shadowed out
thereby. Haereditas est successio in vniversum ius desancti.
But commonly it signifies those who after a man's death succeed him in his
goods and possessions; especially children, whose right it is to inherit their
fathers lands and possessions: and thus must we become heirs by becoming the
sons and children of God. Now whereas children are either natural or
adopted, our title to this inheritance comes in by the grace of adoption,
seeing Christ is the only natural son as we confess in our Creed; and the
phrase of the text is obseruable, which says, we are made heirs, but not so
borne: so as this inheritance belongs properly unto Christ the natural
son, the heir, and first borne of many brethren: and consequently through
him communicated unto us, who are sons by adoption: Ioh. 1.12. whosoever
received him, to them he gave power, that is, right, title, prerogative, to be
the sons of God. Now if we would distinctly know the manner and means of
our title, in a word this it is: All the right of our sonneship is by Christ,
for the foundation of it is Gods love embracing men in his beloved, The civil
law accounts the heir, and him that so makes him but one and the same
person.
who being the natural son of God, must become our brother by taking our
flesh, that therein we being united unto him, might also after a sort be
united unto the Father, and the blessed spirit: the which union, because it
could never be knit so long as our sins were in sight, necessarily in our
flesh must the Son of God give himself up unto the death to satisfy the
justice of his Father, to remove all the guilt and curse of our sin, and to
give us believing in him perfect righteousness: that thus being justified, we
might become heirs no otherwise, then if we had been borne of God himself:
and that thus by Jesus Christ being set again into the liberty of sons, the
inheritance might as certainly belong unto us, as it does to himself being
the natural Son.

Thus we see how we come to be heirs, now if we would know of what we are
heirs, the text tells us, of life eternal: which what it is, because it
stands in immediate fellowship and conjunction with God, we are not able to
conceive, for it never entered into the heart of man. This we know of it, that
being the state of the elect with God hereafter, that believers have a right
unto it, yea and by faith have entered into some part and degree of it already,
having received as it were a turfe to assure them of the possession of the
whole. It is called life, which is the most precious thing a man can desire,
far above goods, and lands, or any other comfort: Satan said, that skin for
skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his (even natural) life.
And eternal, Heb. 9.15. of the eternal inheritance: 1. Pet. 1.4. an
inheritance which is immortal, undefiled: it has indeed in regard of the
godly a beginning, but it has no end, for it fades not away, but is reserved
in the heavens: never was there such an inheritance upon earth; for as it
falls not by the death of our father as others do, so it fails not us by
our own death, but we are thereby rather put into more full state of it. And
because if it were an uncomfortable life, the continuance of it were the
greatest misery of it, therefore elsewhere the Scripture calls it Paradise,
a place of all delight and pleasure, yea where the Saints enjoy fulness of
pleasures at Gods right hand, alluding to that Paradise planted by Gods own
hand, to make it a delight for the innocent estate of man. And Abraham's bosom,
wherein the Saints receive refreshing: which is a borrowed speech, taken from
fathers, whom as they carrying and cherishing their little ones in their
bosom: even so the elect freed from the miseries of the world, are cherished
as in the bosom of the father of all the faithful. And the joy of the Lord,
into which the faithful servant shall enter: And for the glory of this
estate, Paul can scarce tell how to express it, but calls it the riches of
the glory of the inheritance: Ephesians. 1.18. Matthew. 25.34.
it is called a kingdom of the Father prepared for his children, and never was
there such a kingdom wherein all the subjects are kings and heirs of the
whole, and all of them partakers of the same incorruptible crown of glory, as
here they be. 1. Pet. 5.4.

Secondly, the present tenure of this inheritance is by hope: for our
inheritance is not so much set before our bodily eyes, as the eyes of our
faith, which is not of things present, but of things to come. And yet although
it be an estate to come, the Lord would not leave us without such graces as
being conversant about it might serve us in this life to retain our hold and
comfort therein: such as are faith, hope, and patience. Now hope signifies two
things, 1. the thing hoped for, Romans 8.24. hope which is seen is not hope.
Ephesians. 1.18. What is the hope of the calling. 2. For the gift whereby we hope and
expect good things promised: and this must of necessity here be meant, because
life eternal of which we have spoken, is the thing hoped for. This grace has
the Lord for our encouragement and comfort in and for the state of this life
only put into the hearts of his elect, that they might hereby have a certain
hold and expectation of all that good which God of his mercy through the merit
of his Christ has promised: the which shall cease when they come once to see
that which they now hope for: seeing hereafter can be no hope, not in heaven,
for the godly shall enjoy all blessedness their hearts can wish: not in hell,
for the damned can never hope for any good.

Doctr. The blessed condition which the elect are raised unto being once
absolved from sin, is, to have the privileges of Gods children, and to
become heirs of eternal glory. This honor have all his Saints, who^ he
rayseth from the dust and dunghill to set them among Princes: and the reason
is, because he has given them his Son, in with merits for their
righteousness: he has given them the gift of faith which is the very portall
of heaven: and the grace of hope which is as a staff to uphold them unto the
end of their pilgrimage. The doctrine being the very words of the Apostle
here and in so many places, we will rather labor in the excellent use, then in
the further proof of it.

Eternal life being an inheritance must needs be most free.
Use. 1. That which the Apostle specially aymeth at, is that heaven is not
merited but a free gift: here it is called eternal life, which is the gift of
God, Romans 6.23. It is called here an inheritance in that the elect are called
heirs: it is against the nature of an inheritance to come any way but by free
gift: legacies we know are most free without desert, without procurement, and
what an absurd thing were it for a child to go to his Father to offer to buy
his inheritance? it is said here further that we are made heirs, that is,
adopted, not borne to the inheritance, and therefore it is so much the more
free. And lastly, it is here called an eternal inheritance, which if it so, be
how can it be merited, being so far disproportionable to any thing we can do.
What place in the Scripture can more effectually exclude the merit of life? and
yet what part of Apostolical writing is it not most consonant unto? The
Apostle Peter speaking of this inheritance, calls it the grace of life, 1.
Pet. 3.7. The Apostle Paul through the whole Epistle to the Galatians opposes
these two, to be heirs by the law, and heirs by promise, and faith whosoever
are Christ's, are Abraham's children and heirs by promise: that is, Gal. 3.29.
we who are Gentiles must receive the inheritance no otherwise then* Abraham
did, and thus become Abraham's sons, but he was heir by promise and not by
merit, and so must we. Object. But we are Gentiles, how can we become Abraham's
sons? Answ. Christ was Abraham's son, and we being in Christ are one with
him, and so in him become Abraham's sons, and therefore must inherit by
promise as he did. The like we read Romans 4.4. Those that will be heirs by the
law, make the promise of none effect: as the Papists do by their two
iustifications, the former of mercy by grace, the latter by the merit of
works. Object. But life eternal is a reward, great is your reward in heaven.
Voluir deus ista^ connexionem vt ad bona opera sequatur beatitudo non tamen vt
effectus causam sed vt aliquid coniunctum cum illis ex de^ constitutione.
Martyr. in Romans 2.
Behold I come shortly and my reward is with me. Moses looked for the
recompense of reward. Answ. Not to stand upon that why it is so called, namely,
by resemblance, being given in the end of the life and labor, as the reward
in the end of the work: It may truly be called a reward; but 1. a free one in
regard of us, due no other way unto us then by virtue of Gods promise, for God
is no debtor further then he promises. 2. Never due to any work for the merit
of it, but unto the worker for the merit of Christ in whom he is, and through
whom the imperfection of his obedience being covered, his person first and
then his work finds acceptance.

2. It teaches us if we would have right to life eternal, to become the
sons of God, and consequently heirs: Whosoever would have right to life must
become a son.
seek to be resolved that thou have a child's part in heaven. Quest. How shall
I come to know this? Answ. A man may know himself an heir of grace by two
things. 1. by the presence of faith, for this intitleth into the Covenant, Heb.
11.7. Noah by faith was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith.
Faith in the son of God is it which makes thee the Kings son, and free
borne: this is the means of thy freedom, here comes in thy title, if thou
reliest only upon the mercy of God in Christ for thy salvation: which proper
work of faith casts out the bondwoman with all her sons, who shall not be
heirs with the sons of the freewoman: for whosoever will be justified in
whole or in part by the works of the law, as Turks, Jews, and that Romish
Agar with all her obstinate children, are by this one doctrine, if there were
no more in the Scripture disinherited. Inheritance among them that are
sanctified: by which note mocking Ismael is cast out, close hypocrites lurking
in the bosom of the Church, and open profane Esaus: the childrens bread is not
cast to such dogs. Read for this 1. Cor. 6.10.11.

3. This doctrine teaches us to set our hearts upon this inheritance: a man
that has any possibility to befall him cannot keep his mind, but it will be
running after it, insomuch as many wicked children in regard of their
patrimony, will enquire into their fathers years, and grow sick of their
mothers: and it is ordinary that such as look for windfalls by decease, will
be feeding their hearts with their hopes: so should it be with us, who may
without injury to our Father, long after our inheritance in heaven: and as we
see men take no content in any part of the earth, no nor in the whole,
comparable to that piece or portion which is their own: even so should not we
suffer our hearts so to wander after earth or earthly things, as that we settle
our contentment any where but where our inheritance, Set thine heart upon this
purchase.
and our treasure is. The which desire if it filled our hearts, three worthy
fruits of it would manifest themselves through our lives. they looked for a
better city: Hebr. 11.8.9.
when as once this took up their hearts, they could cheerfully sit themselves
down in their tents, they could dwell in strange countries contentedly, they
could receive the promises a far off thankfully, they could go on in
obedience to God, what way soever he called readily; and in all this they did
not for the present desire a better outward condition, but thought that the
best portion which their heavenly Father allotted out unto them. So we see how
men expecting reuersions are content for the time to live bare, and go near
the wind, and swallow up their present wants in hope of that to which they are
heirs: they think the time of their further enlargement is not far off, and
this helps well to put off the present. 3. It would strengthen the heart in
enduring chastisments and corrections under Gods hand, or

4. Set thy self well to keep this inheritance, and the deeds of it, lay up
the covenant safe in the closet of thy soul; Keep well the deeds of it.
hide the word which is the indenture of God passing it unto thee, in the midst
of thy heart, let not Satan or any cheater defraud thee of it. There are many
unthrifty prodigalls in the world, who no sooner can their lands or portion
come within their hands, but by riotous and unthrifty courses they soon
become their own executors: but let it be written to every child of God. Art
thou borne by thy second birth to such fair demeanes? art thou heir to such a
goodly birthright? oh prize it above all that can be given in exchange for it.
Beware of profane Esaus speech, What is this birthright to me? No, rather take
up Naboths* answer to King Ahab, who would have gone beyond him for his
patrimony; God forbid that I should sell the inheritance of my Fathers. 1.
king. 21.3.
God forbid that I should for this or that sinful pleasure, this or that mess
of pottage, or trifling commodity; or whatsoever coin having Satan's
superscription upon it, sell mine inheritance.

5. This doctrine affoardeth sundry grounds of most sweet consolation. 1. The
meanest believer is a great heir, Comfort to those that are heirs.
and that to all Gods best blessings: a truth which few see as they might and
ought, and therefore fail of that comfort which God has put into their hands.
Object. Alas, Answ. Exercise thy self in the duties of faith, repentance,
invocation, love of God and men; and thou shall not want a worthiness to bring
the inheritance home unto thee: for neither does the Lord immediately give it
thee, nor can thou immediately receive it; but by Christ the Mediator, who
has worthiness enough, at his hand thou have it. Object. But I am a weak
creature and unable to receive it at his hand. Answ. Ye^, but go on sincerely
in a good course, let it be never so weakly or faintly, he will not break a
bruised ^eede: comfort thy self, for be it thou can not as thou would know
and apprehend him, yet he can know and apprehend thee, and this will be thy
salvation. 2. Gods children being such heirs, they cannot but in the mean
time be well

Now of the tenure by which we hold life eternal, namely of hope, I have
spoken twice before in this Epistle at large, chap. 1.2. and 2.13. to which the
reader may look back: only in a word note, that it is a mark of a man set
into this new condition, to hope and wait for the blessed inheritance in
heaven: 2. Cor. 5.2. We sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house from
heaven: 2. Tim. 4.8. the description of the godly, to be those that love the
appearing of Christ. And if all creatures groan with us for the time of their
deliverance, how ought we much more for whom such things are prepared. Hence it
follows, 1. that it will not stand with a converted heart to linger after the
things of this life, or to make his heaven upon earth, or to have equal
affection to earth as heaven. 2. nor to neglect the means whereby this hope is
confirmed: whether outward offering, as the Gospel, ministry, word,
Sacraments; or inward receiving, as faith unfeigned working in obedience.

Ver. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will thou should
affirm, that they which have believed in God might be careful to show forth
good works. The first words of this verse being as it were a finger pointing
to some excellent matter, some take to be a preface making way and winning
attention to the sequel of the verse: others think it to be an epiphonema, or
grave shutting up of that matter which immediately goes before; as giving
consent and acclamation unto the most weighty and necessary doctrine of free
justification by the grace of God in Christ: which doctrine because the Apostle
by the spirit of prophecy did foresee, would be most strongly opposed, he
purposely by a vehement asseueration strengthens: as also the doctrine of
Christian hope, which although it be not of things seen, yet is it of things
so faithful and firm in respect of the promise, as the Christian soul may
without wavering and doubting, rely and lean it self upon the faithful
accomplishment of it. But I take it, the words may not unfitly be referred to
the whole doctrine propounded both before and after, there being the same
scope of both: for what new thing is the Apostle to teach which he had not
taught and urged before? and what particular is expressed in the verse, which
formerly has not been delivered to young and old, men and women, servants and
other; all which estates after their conversion unto the faith, are in special
called to readiness in every good work, verse. 1. and to what other end are
those large descriptions of our twofold estate, but to strike on the same
string, that howsoever we could not in the former attain to any fruitful
conversation; yet now in the latter it were a shame not to adorn our
profession and calling? and what other end learned we of the appearing of
grace, but that ungodliness and wordly lusts being denied, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world? So as I say, the
Apostle sets a seal unto his whole doctrine; that it is true and faithful,
most undoubted and certain in it self, and most worthy of all our credit and
faith; seeing nothing can be truelyer spoken, nothing more profitably believed,
nothing more comfortably practiced, then the truth here delivered unto us.

Quest. But are not other doctrines true and faithful, yea as true as this?
and is not all Scripture of divine inspiration? Answ. Yes, neither does our
Apostle oppose the truths of Scripture, as though one were more or less true
then another, but in more necessary or more questionable truths, he sets
here and there a mark or pointng hand, both to urge the authority and
necessity of the one, and also to force men more easily to yield unto the
truth of the other. Example hereof we have, 1. Tim. 1.15. in such a
fundamental point as is salvation only by Christ, to be opposed by so many
hundredth heretics, it is no marvel if we see some star set by it, or a
light held over it, that none may pass by it, until they have diligently
waighed, and fully resolved upon the truth of it. In like manner being to
entreat of the difficult labor, care, and work of the ministry, from which
women as not being capable of it are interdicted, and of the excellency of
the function, which no man might either rashly take upon him, or negligently
execute being lawfully called: and being further to set down a certain
rule, unto which all the lawefull callings in the Church are to be conformed.
In such a weighty matter as is the preservation of the Church and piety, he
prefixeth a worthy preface, 1. Tim. 3.1. This is a true saying, if any man
desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work. But where the
Apostle does all these things (as in this place) he could with less reason
depart from his ordinary manner.

All truths of God must be delivered, but some more dwelt upon.
Doctr. The Ministers of God must teach every truth, reveal the whole
counsel of God, and keep nothing back; but some truths must be dwelt upon
and more avouched then others, and namely, such as are either more necessary
or more contradicted. This is the wisdom of the spirit of God himself, who
by his penmen distinguishes of truths, and has neither prefixed Behold, in
the beginning of every sentence; nor affixed his Selah in every ones end,
but only in truths more observable and remarkable then the rest. Which point
may receive a general confirmation from this observation, that the penmen of
Scripture being to write the history of things past, because they were of
facts more undeniable as things running into the senses of men; they stand not
so much upon ratifications and asseuerations; yea a number of historical books
there are, the authors of which are not known to the church. But when they come
to write prophesies of things to come, and things in reason more improbable;
then the authors name, his kindred, his calling, with other circumstances of
time, place, and persons serving to confirm and convince the truth of
prophesies are registered. And if these truths were either more necessarily
then ordinary concerning the Church, or more liable to opposition and
exception, then was much more caution and confirmation used. To avoid
multitude of examples whereby this point might be strengthened, I will only
insist in that prophecy which more nearly concerns us that live now in the
new Testament; namely of the Revelation: The which book because it describes
the state of the Church from the time of John the last of the Apostles, until
Christ's coming again: and especially the proceedings, pride, and fall of
Babylon the great whore, with all the kingdoms of Antichrist: the holy Ghost
could not but foresee, what labors and travails Satan and his instruments
would take to weaken and impair the credit and authority of this above all
other books, wherein he prevailed so far, as even some true Churches called
the truth and authority of it into question: and therefore it is worth the
marking with what a number of confirmations this book above all other in the
Scriptures is backed. First, the author of it is set in the forefront or face
of it, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, who professes himself to be (...), and
(...), the first and the last, Rev. 1.1.11.
the beginning and ending, which is, which was, and which is to come, even the
Almighty: so in the several Epistles to the Churches, in several styles he
challenges them to be his; Thus says he, 1. that holds the seven stars
in his right hand. 2. he that is first and last, which was dead and is alive.
3. which has the sharp two edged sword. 4. which has eyes like a flame of
fire, and his feet like fine brass. 5. which has the seven spirits of God,
and the seven stars. 6. he who is holy and true, who has the key of David,
who opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens. 7. he who is
Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of God.

Secondly, the instrument or penman, his servant John the Evangelist, the
Apostle, the Divine; who for the further and more full authority of it
repeateth his name at least four times saying, I John.

Thirdly (to omit many) in the last chapter are five testimonies heaped
together, verse 6 7.8.
that if it were possible no man might be found so obstinately wicked as ever
to doubt of it, but that he that should stand against the truth of it might even
gainsay the shining of the sun it self: Contra solemn obloqui.
1. of the Angel 2. of God himself the Lord of the holy Prophets. 3. of Jesus
Christ, Behold, I come shortly etc. 4. of John, I John heard and saw all these
things. 5. the protestation of Jesus Christ, verse. 18. I protest -- if any man
shall add or diminish from these things of this book, God shall add all the
plagues of it against him, and take away his part out of the book of life. Now
had this book never to have bin oppugned, there had not needed such strong and
frequent confirmations: neither would the holy Ghost have bin so earnest in a
needles matter.

The like we might teach out of particular examples. How earnest is the Apostle
in the point we have in hand being the very foundation of Christianity, not
here only but elsewhere in his writings? when he saw that men would join the
law and gospel; circumcision and baptism, Gal. 5.2. Behold I Paul say unto
you, if ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing: and verse. 3. I
testify again unto you: and 4. ye are abolished from Christ, and fallen from
grace: he could not satisfy himself in his vehemency against such a doctrine
as this was. Nay, the son of God himself has left us his own example in
this point of wisdom, who was wont in his teaching unto diverse more
necessary truths to prefix his Amen, Amen I say unto you; which is in sense
all one with this of our Apostle if we consider the speech, though in the
speaker and manner of speaking was wonderful difference; himself being the
author and Amen it self, even the faithful and true witness, and all other
so far only true as they testified from him. And so he often shuts up his
speech with, he that has ears to hear let him hear: and then let him that
hears or reads consider, Greenam.
such sayings carry salt with them, and for such the Lord planted the ear
more especially.

Use. 1. To teach Ministers in matters of weight to deal so soundly, as the
conscience of the hearer may be as firmly stablished in the truth taught and
persuaded, as if an angel from heaven should come and teach an other doctrine
he may be held accursed; so as the very hearts of the hearers may say, this is
a faithful doctrine and saying: for thus as the Gospel is the word of truth,
cap. 1.1.
so shall it be held in much certenty by the professors of it. And it is a
fault blame worthy in many Ministers, who when they are occasioned by the
place in hand to speak of some controuerted or most necessary truth; either
for idleness because they will not so much trouble themselves, or for
vnfaithfullnesse avoid, by declining and shunning such truths the displeasure
of the times, which godly Ministers must swallowe, that the truth opposed may
be settled in the hearts of men: not to speak of such as are infamously guilty
of some vices unrepented of and unreformed, which makes them balke and betray
necessary truths, which in that regard they dare not mention.

Points of contro^ersie must b^ diligently heard and taught.
2. It is a great fault of hearers, and worthy amendment, who cannot well
endure to hear of points in controversy, especially between the Papists and
our selves, whereas their understandings and judgments are so far from
being stablished in the certain truth of such things, as every wind or blast
of the skulking Jesuit or Papist is able to unsettle them in great matters,
and turn them off their grounds. Now if it be the teachers part to insist
especially in such needful points as are most opposed, and hardlyest yielded
unto; it must needs be the hearers to provoke themselves to the right
discerning of such differences: for neither do the contentions of the teachers
so much concern themselves as their hearers; neither end they in themselves,
but in the hearer. See we not how if never so gross or slender a point of
carnal liberty be contended about, it will carry the applause almost of all
men with i^? Is it meet then that any Saint of God be a looker on? and not
rather according to the commandment, Jude 3.
that every one should contend for the faith once given? and can they contend
unless they be taught how, and here instructed with weapons? This admonition
is the more needful in these days so full of danger by the seduction of
Papists, separators, libertines which swarm every where: the daily increase
of all which is not more incredible then lamentable.

3. We learn hence how to conceive of the point and doctrine in hand, seeing
the wisdom of Gods spirit uses to speak to the worth of the thing, and by
such prefaces and marks of special worthiness points to some weighty and
needful point; using here another style then if he should speak of mint and
cummin, and some smaller points of religion. We meet not in every precept with
an oyes, or warnword, but where we do, we must conceive such not the motes, but
the beams of our religion, requiring our best attentions, and diligence in the
entertayment. And therefore we must yield more then ordinary audience to this
Apostolical doctrine, not passing by it as a thing which long since we have
learned out of Catechism, and so are past it; but seeing the Lord does so
solemnly recall it into our ears and understandings, we must call together and
summon our best senses and affections to hear and receive it. And the rather,
because two things are implied. 1. That it is a most true and necessary
doctrine, because the holy Ghost is so earnest in it. 2. That it is not so
soon learned as men may think; for although it be not much contradicted in
the mouths and by the words of men, yet is it exceedingly in their practice
and conversation.

And these things I will thou should affirm,] In this Apostrophe unto
Titus, and the words following, the Apostle after a sort dwells in the
commendation of his doctrine: for not contenting himself to call it a
faithful doctrine, he turns himself presently to Titus, and wishes him in
this verse to be instant in teaching i^, as in the next to be diligent and
vigilant against the contrary. And here 1. he commands, not exhorts Titus,
I will that thou teach these things, that is, both which I have formerly
delivered, and now presently follow. 2. He prescribes the manner how Titus
shall teach them, That thou affirm: that is, as it is a most true and
faithful doctrine, so do thou by all means most constantly, and undoubtedly
persuade and maintain it. The original word is a borrowed speech from those
that give or sell a thing to an other, who are bound to defend the title, gift,
(...).
or sale of it against all claims, suits, and entanglements: wherein is
insinuated, that although it be a faithful word* yet it shall not sail to be
called into question, and meet with strong opposition, and therefore Titus must
the rather bend himself to make it good, against all cauill^ and questions
that can be moved about it, or against it.

3. He enterla^^th again the sum of the doctrine which he dwells in the
commendation of, That believers be careful to show forth good works. (...)*
The Greek word is a military word, taken from such as set themselves in the
foreward or front of the battle, and manfully march before the rest, so
encouraging the whole band following to the like valor and diligence as they
see in them their leaders. This word would our Apostle translate to Christians
and conuerts to the faith, whom he would not only have fruitful in good
works, but ardent, forward, and the first in them; going before others as
leaders, captains, patrons and examples.

4. He affixeth a reason why he does so urge him to the teaching of these
things, These things are good and profitable unto men. The stream of
expositors conceive these words, as the just praise and commendation of good
works by our Apostle immediately before mentioned, including a reason why
believers should be fruitful in them: But I rather conceive them as an
enforcement of the duty upon Titus, for these reasons. 1. had the Apostle
applied them to good works, it is not likely he would have severed them from
the former words by a full point: he might sooner and aptlier in that sense
have said, which are good and profitable, or (as in the end of the next verse)
for they are thus and thus; rather then after so full a stop so suddenly have
returned to that matter which seemed absolved and finished. 2. These words in
the other sense given, seem to make an easy entrance, and beat an high way to
the next branch of Titus his duty, namely to set himself against the
contrary doctrine. 3. The opposition in the end of the next verse clearly
leads me to this exposition, which is, as this kind of doctrine is good and
profitable, so that other form of doctrine which stands upon idle questions
and genealogies is vain, and unprofitable. Thus then let us take the entire
sense: This doctrine which I have and do deliver unto thee for the use of the
Church, is a faithful word, do thou therefore affirm it boldly, and confirm
it unto believers: the which if thou do, thou shall propound things which are
good and profitable: good, that is, wholesome and sound in their own nature:
and profitable, that is, of exceeding good and necessary use thorough the
whole life of man.

A good work cannot come from any but a good man.
Doctr. 1. In that such as believe in God, must be careful to show forth good
works, we may observe from whom a good work can only proceed; namely, from
believers. For in vain had it been to have urged the doctrine of good works
upon wicked ones and unbelievers; there i^ an other doctrine more proper to
them* namely that doctrine which may strike them with sorrow for sin, sense
of damnation, prickings of heart, and terrors of conscience, so as they might
be prepared unto faith, and these works of repentance, the fruits of amendment
of life. Therefore that we might know this doctrine of good works proper to
believers, our Apostle calls for them of none other; well he knew that no
other could do them, he knew that men cannot gather grapes of thorns, and that
till the fountain were pure, the issues and streams must needs be troubled
and corrupt; he knew that first the tree must be good, and then the fruit, and
that the inside must first be made clean: In a word, that whosoever has not
his heart purified by faith, is an incapable hearer of this doctrine. Object.
But are not unbelievers as well bound to good works as believers; i^ not the
law universal, and the commandment, to do good, and abstain from evil
general? Answ. Yes, they are bound to bring forth such good works as are the
fruits of faith, which before regeneration is an impossible commandment: for
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down. Quest.
But what if an unbeliever do that which God commands, as give alms, build
Churches, colleges, hear the word, pray, maintain the ministry, etc. Answ.
We cannot here fitlier speak then with the Apostle, whatsoever is not of faith
is sin: and without faith, it is impossible to please God. Object. But then
if I be not assured that I am a believer, it is al one to do good or evil, to
sit at home or come to church, to pray or not to pray, etc. Ans. It is not all
one, seeing the action commanded is good in the matter, and may do good unto
others, and may bring some temporal blessing, or remove some temporal evil
from the party himself, as appears in that semblance of repentance in Ahab
without faith and truth: although in the doer, in the form, and in the end it
fails. But the action forbidden is every way, and out of measure sinful
and damnable. Object. But it is not all one to be condemned for doing an action
forbidden, and to be condemned for doing an action commanded not done of faith.
Answ. No, for though both be condemned, yet the judgment of the latter is
far easier, and the stripes far fewer: for it is easier for some then for
others of them who are all condemned.

Use. 1. There can therefore be no justification by works, as the Church of
Rome teaches, Opus quod qui fecerit vivet in eo non fit nisi a iustificato.
Aug. de spi^. and lit. c. 29.
if they can be only the fruits of persons already justified.

2. Never content thy self that thou do good works, of charity,
liberality, mercy, or devotion public or private; unless thou have a ground
in thy self, that they are fruits of saving faith, which has purified thy
heart, and so brought thy person and work into acceptance: for before this
time, let them seem in thine eyes never so bright and glistring, yet are they
no other in Gods then shining darkness and beautiful deformities. It is not
thy honest meaning* nor diligent devotions, nor good intents which bring
acceptance to a work; but faith working by love: deceive not thy self in that
thou have done that which thou wast commanded; for it is the presence or
absence of faith that puts a difference in the same work, done by virtue of
the same word. Caine offers sacrifice to the Lord, so does Abel: Phineas is
zealous for the Lord, so is Iehu; Peter weepeth for his sin against Christ,
so does Judas also: here is the same work, but not the same acceptance: where
is the difference now? By faith Abel offered a better sacrifice then Caine: and
if Peter's faith had failed, so had his fact too as well as Iudases. If thou
prayest, pray in faith, Mark. 11.24. Hebr. 4.2.
believe and thou shall receive. If thou hear, mingle the word with faith,
else it becomes unprofitable: and so in other duties.

3. This shows that numbers are incapable of the doctrine of good works, and
therefore Ministers must be wise to propound it in the due season of it; and
first labor in rooting faith in men's hearts, and these fruits will easily rise.

Professors of the Gospel must be the first and forwardest in every good work.
Doctr. 2. Professors of the Gospel are above all other not only called to the
practice of good works, but to be the first and forwardest, yea lights and
leaders unto others. 1. In regard of their present estate: they are the
children of their heavenly Father, and therefore must resemble him; and so
walk as they may testify themselves of this household Matthew. 5.24.
for what a dishonor were it to their high calling to be exceeded and
outstripped of Infidells? They are Gods workmanship created in Jesus Christ
unto good works. They have received the spirit of grace which only can make
them fruitful as good trees laden with the fruits of righteousness. They are
enlightened in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.8.
wherein it were a shame to be either idle or unfruitful, and not to shine out
as the lights of the world in holding forth the word of life in all godly
conversation.

Secondly, that such as believe may be blameless, and so put to silence 1.
Pet. 2.15.
for this is Satan's old policy, whereby in all ages he has turned away the
hearts of many from the truth, and whereof (though he be discovered) he
disarmeth not himself at this day; that when the Apostles themselves, and the
teachers in the Church succeeding them delivered the truth of the doctrine of
justification by faith alone without the works of the Law; he would always
thrust in some professors into the Church, that upon this occasion did ruin
the grace of God into wantonness; and then raise a general slander of the
doctrine, as though it were only a doctrine of liberty: even as at this day
the Papists slander us as enemies to good works, only because we thrust them
out of Christ's chair. Now to avoid this ordinary scandal, the professors of
this same doctrine must especially for the honor of God, and his Gospel, and
their profession of it, be careful to become patterns in their lives of the
faith they do profess. The fruit whereof shall extend it self yet further
then the stopping of the enemies mouth: even to the winning of them or others
that are yet without, who by such godly conversation shall be by little and
little inclined to like the word, and so be converted to the profession and
practice of it at the length. 1. Pet. 3.2.
Nay this fruit is not only reaped by others without, but no small benefit
redoundeth to the professors themselves, who hereby make their own election
sure: 2. Pet. 1.10.
and justify to themselves and others, that faith which justifies them before
God.

3. The danger of the neglect of this duty urges it: he that knows his
masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes. first to the
Jew, Romans 2.9.
and then to the Gentile. Why first to the Jew? because they were the
professed people of God, professors of the law, possessors of the oracles,
hearers of the Prophets, but despisers of the means of salvation: they
therefore shall be first and heauiest judged.

Use. 1. If we profess our selves by faith to be set into Christ, we may
examine the truth of it hereby, Means to help forward the former duty.
that then we cannot but be fruitful trees of righteousness, being removed
into so sound a stock, and fruitful a soil. Whosoever then are not much and
often in the works of honest, pure, just, and of good report, Philip. 4.8.
let believers think on these things, let them think that such precepts
belong properly to them: it being a truth that all, exhortations in Scripture
are first and directly made to those who in some measure are freed to
acceptable, though not full performance of the same: whereby let believers
provoke themselves to more diligence, seeing unbelievers cannot tell what way
to begin in them. 3. Carry a diligent eye and watch over thy life, and every

But how may Christ come and find a number of lazy Christians in his vinyard,
Application.
to whom he may say, why stand ye idle all day long? why, did you not promise
me you would go into my vineyard and work and do ye not? or are you in so
goodly a field, and can you want work? have ye done all your husbandry about
home in your own hearts, in your callings and several conditions of life? then
look abroad into the field of my Church, and there you shall not want wherein
to employ your strength, counsel, exhortation, mercy, love, zeal, diligence,
and all the graces ye have. Neither is it harder to set Christians on work,
then to hold them unto it. The profits and pleasures of this life call them
often from the special business of Christianity, because they enquire not
whether in such several actions they seek God or themselves: What am I a
believer? I should in every action glorify God, testify my faith, beautify
my profession, edify my brethren: I ought to win the ignorant, bring on the
weak, or at least stop the mouth of the enemy who will be ready to say,
You may see what a slight excuse will serve any of them all to miss a sermon:
what a slight profit will make them forget themselves, their father whom they
profess, and their Fathers house: what a slender business will interrupt and
break off for the time their family duties: what a trifle will make them at
odds, and suites with others, yea themselves: for they can be as contentious
as any other. Alas, am not I a Christian, a believer, am I not called to better
things, have I not promised better? should I make the devil glad, his
instruments rejoice, Gods spirit sad, his children heavy? should I occasion
profane ones through my sides to wound all my profession? should I open a
Papists mouth, or harden him against the truth? should I cast back weak ones
by such fruits in me a professor? should I cast off the care of my brethren,
and bring shame on all my fathers house? Have I faith, or are these the fruits
of it? would it not rather be fed still in the ministry? would it not upon
all good occasions be working by love? can a believer be so slack, so heavy,
so idle, so secure, so covetous, so contentious, so scandalous as I am? oh I
must look better to the matter. When I first entered into the ways of God, I
said, I promised I would look to my ways, I would not offend in my tongue, in
my hand, in my eye, in my life and conversation; and by Gods grace hereafter I
will pay these vows to the Lord, in the sight of all his people.

Now for watching opportunities and seeking occasions of doing good, we fear
them, we fly them, we avoid charitable motions, and repute it our wisdom not
to hear them: self love and self ease slaieth our profession, deadeth our
faith, and burieth our love to God, and to men: can working faith be so idle,
or believing persons so workles, or trees of Gods orchyard so fruitles? shall
green leaves make us good trees, or good words good Christians? Let us pull
out our hands out of our warm bosoms and fall to work, and leave idle
iangling. It would be more for the honor of God and his Gospel, if
professors would either do more or say less; practice something like or
profess nothing at all. Where is the communion of Saints become? when do
professors meet together to edify themselves by godly conference? when enquire
they one of an other, where is a poor christian either sick, or in other
distress, that we may gather him a little relief? were not such a fellowship
as this likest unto the purest Primitive Church in the days of the Apostles
themselves? and were it not now fitter for believers, The Popish religion was
most without for the show, whereas none was within their walls. Many
Protestants are privately religious, but little breaks out. True religion is
little beholding to either.
then live so privately minded as many? as though we could not be religious,
unless (as of old) we cloister our selves like Monks, living within our private
walls, feeding up our selves, and storing up for ours, but forgetting Joseph's
affliction. And surely, what is the cause we see not such a comfortable
communion, but because those that believe in God are so heavy unto good
works? the richer sort which should be as great wheels to set forward the
poorer, either look big upon them, or for other employments have not so much
leisure as they: their own ploughs must forward whatsoever become of Gods: and
the poorer sort want both means and example.

Doctr. 3. In that the Apostle wills Titus to affirm these things delivered,
and adds this as a reason, because they are good and profitable: we observe,
that Ministers in their teaching must have respect to these two things. 1. That
they deliver true, sound, and good matter in it self. 2. That it be profitable
for the hearers. First, it must be true and sound, else are they not of Gods
sending, for whom he sends, he furnishes with a word of truth: as on the
contrary, Satan is a lying spirit in the mouths of seducers. Now then is it
true when it is divided aright, and then divided aright when it is truly and
properly grounded on the place whence it is raised; as also when it is truly
and rightly applied. Aiming 1. to please God, and not men, or the times: 2. to
beat down sin, and not open a door to liberty or licentiousness: 3. to
comfort and encourage such as walk uprightly, Doctrine must be both true and
truly dealt with.
and not make the hearts of those heavy, to whom the Lord speaks peace. Let
the doctrine be never so true, if it be misaplied it cease to be Gods, who
always speaks to the heart of his children.

Secondly, it must be profitable as well as true. For 1. every thing in the
Church must be done to edify, and consequently spoken also. 2. All assemblies
are appointed for the profit, and for the better of the Church: 1. Cor. 11.17.
3. The commandment is, to deliver nothing but what may breed godly edifying,
1. Tim. 1.4. and not to strive about words to no profit: 1. Tim. 2.14. bounded
with a threatening, that the Lord will come against such Prophets as seek out
vain things, and such as bring no profit to his people, Ier. 23.32. 4.
examples: Paul professes of himself that he kept nothing back which was
profitable, Act. 20.20. Nay the Lord himself sets himself a worthy example
hereof to all teachers and preachers: Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which
^eacheth thee to profit, and leads thee the way thou have to go.

Use. 1. It is not enough that a Minister be a great scholar, but he must be
a true teacher too. Many a learned man is a false Prophet, whereof we have
pregnant example in the Church of Rome, in whom we see the speech true, that in
Gods matters the greatest clearks are not ever the wisest men. It is
obserueable also in the Scribes, Pharisees, and Rabbis of the Jews, that
depth of learning has not always the truth cheyned unto it: but that the Lord
(according to his accustomed manner working in and by weak things) often
reuealeth more saving wisdom to some poor, contemned, humble soul, then to
all the great clearks, who may otherwise profess that they have the very key
of knowledge: which is not spoken that any should hence be emboldned to
contemn so excellent an ornament as lea^ning is, but only to show that the
Lord tyeth not himself and truth unto it.

Object. But we have no teachers, who teach not the truth. Answ. We are to
bless God that the truth of religion is so happily taught and protected as it
is; and Satan wants of his will that it is so: and yet can we think that his
malice now toward the end is so abated; or that the state of the Church is
now above all times so privileged, as that he has not his instruments still
laboring to corrupt and deprave the truth; broaching so far as they dare
their private opinions, for which the truth is little beholding unto them? The
Prophet Jeremy speaks of Prophets who prophesied lies in the name of the
Lord, and says, they prophesied false vision, Ier. 14.13, 14.
and divination, and vanity, and the deceitfulness of their own hearts: why
what was that? in that they said, Ye shall not see the sword, and famine shall
not come, but I will give you assured peace in this place. If we shall hear
such sweet enchanting voices; all is well with us, we have the most flourishing
and most reformed Church that ever was since the Apostles days; and we may
take a nappe and rest in our peace and prosperity, what way can we be moved?
surely, these words may seem the visions of men's own hearts, the rather in
that the Lord by his own hand from heaven proclaiming the contrary, by
durable plagues, and lasting judgments, of plagues, famines, unseasonableness
of weather by years together: and for the troubles and oppositions in the
Church, when or where were they stronger since the Gospel first entered? If we
shall here voices whispering, oh men are too precise, too pure, too forward,
and what need so much teaching, so much running and trotting to sermons; and
disgracing such as frequent the means of salvation more carefully, with the
terms of sermon-gadders and sermon-mungers, and such: Is the truth, which
desires nothing more then the light, beholding to such visions of men's own
hearts: or can we here acknowledge the style of the spirit and word of truth?
If we shall meet with doctrines giving liberty to profane gaming and pastimes
on the Lords sabboath; and then having gotten in a finger, go on to make it an
indifferent thing, to keep or not to keep but only the times of Church
required by law: and further, make it questionable whether we ought to keep
this present Sabboath or devise some other; is not this as great a blow to the
truth as she can receive, and more then she looks for in the house of her
friends? which let it prevail, we shall see a poor staruen piety among men
in very few days. If we meet with other defenses justifying and approouing
every thing, and any thing to be spoken in the pulpit besides the pure word of
God, which is profitable to teach, improoue, correct, and instruct in all
righteousness: that a man may moyle himself and hearers in pudles (I speak
comparatively in regard of the pure word of God) when in the mean time the
sweet streams which run from under the threshold of the Sanctuary are
neglected: how is the truth here honored, when the Scriptures the fountain of
it, are so unequally matched? If it shall be affirmed, that whosoever shall in
name profess themselves to be Christians, the Sacraments are not to be denied
them, although they be openly wicked, because all men are subject to sin. If
men shall make a tush, and a light, or no falt, to swear by faith, or trothe,
etc. because it is but a custom of the tongue: surely, we may say if these be
the voices of Prophets, they are of such as Christ speaks of, which deceive
many, which make iniquity abound, Matthew. 24.11.
and the love to the truth grow key cold.

Use. 2. To people to pray to the Lord, 1. To give pastors according to his
own heart, What people must pray for in coming to the word.
not such as may seek out vain and foolish things, the froth of wit and
learning; but such things as may feed their souls with wisdom and
understanding. 2. For the spirit of discerning, 2. Pet. 2.1* Jude 4.
and craftily to creep into men's affections; and men more easily run after
them, because they speak something pleasing to corrupt nature, sometimes in
the matter, sometimes in the manner: and therefore such as would not be
deceived by them, must be provoked to more wariness. 3. For the spirit of
subjection, that they may receive the truth as truth: for else it will be just
with God to give them over to be seduced with false teachers, and to believe
lies. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Prou. 1.30.
For those that despise his counsel, shall eat of the fruit of their own
way, and be filled with their own devises: those that regard not to know God,
shall by God be delivered up to a reprobate sense: and those that will not
believe one Micah but hate him, shall fall into the hands of

Verse. 9. But stay foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and
brawlings about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain. Although Titus
has been in the former verse commanded to teach, and beat home such true and
profitable points of doctrine as we have heard, yet must he know, that he has
received but half his errand, and is but half way in his duty; wherein if he
would be complete, he must further circumspectly watch against and repress all
vain and fruitles teaching, especially those kinds here mentioned: either
suffering them not to break out at all; or if they do, to nippe and blast
them quickly and betimes: if he can he must stop them in the head; if he
cannot do that, he must stay them in the stream.

The verse stands on two parts, 1. a precept, to stay foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and brawlings about the law. 2. a reason of it,
for they are unprofitable and vain. For the meaning of the words we must
know, that our Apostle condemns not the moving of every question in
handling the word; for there are many necessary ones in divinity, which for
our instruction and edification we may enquire and dispute: thus we read that
Paul disputed often: and thus we are trained and furnished in the divinity
school, to defend the truth of God against the adversaries of it: and where
Solomon brandeth him with a note of folly that makes no question but
believes every thing, he shows that there is a wise inquisition into
necessary truths tending to edification. But the Apostle expresses what
questions he disaloweth in a Divine, foolish questions, that is, unnecessary,
idle, of no moment, of no good use to edification, neither in faith nor love,
in conscience nor manners. Where me thinks Paul by the spirit of prophecy
foresawe, forewarned, and forearmed the Church of that great malice of the
devil, which in after ages prevailed to the overthrow of all purity of
religion and piety it self: and that was by turning men from the comfortable
practice, and proper use of Scripture, to seek out an art of divinity
appropriat to some few: and so suddenly came to turn all the sound knowledge
of the Scriptures into a skeptike and questionarie divinity; whereby the
devil kept good wits from the knowledge and study of tongues, and the
necessary fundamental points of Christian religion; and set them on work in
the speculation of strange, frivolous, and curious questions, wherein they were
not one more against another, then all of them against God, and his truth, and
the building of his Church. And this is the quod libe^a^ie school divinity,
then which nothing is more highly magnified of many at this day, who had rather
taste leekes then Manna: and although our Apostle grants that it may have a
show of learning and wisdom falsely so called; yet as here it is called
foolish, so elsewhere he confidently terms it both foolish and unlearned, 2.
Tim. 2.23.
because it is occupied in such questions, as have neither wisdom nor
learning in them, while they make a show of both.

Such are their questions concerning their heavenly Hierarchies, Foolish
questions of Papists.
and orders of Angels, concerning the degrees of the Saints in heaven, so
definitiuely and magistrally determining, as though they had newly dropped out
of the clouds: Paul durst never utter such things who was wrapped into the
third heaven. Others of them as though at the request of the rich man they had
been sent from hell, are as confident of things done in purgatory. Others are
at read war whether things notionall or ^eall be better: some sweat in
disputing whether the world could be better made: others to be resolved whether
the Pope be more merciful then Christ, because Christ delivers none out of
purgatory as the Pope does. But about their Sacrament and consecrated host,
Proof hereof the learned have in Doct. Whitak. de Eccles. quaest. 5. cap. 8.
their tumults are such and so ridiculous; as a judicious Divine would be loath
to foul his mouth or his hearers ears with them. These are the toils of the
angelical, seraphicall, magistrall, and subtle Doctors, Scotus, Hales,
Holcoth, Durand, and such monsters of Divines; which how much true learning
they contain, the darkness of their ages in which they lived and since
sufficiently manifests. Gods righteous judgment was upon them and the whole
world since for their sakes, and that sentence verified upon them, while they
thought themselves wise they became stark fools. Romans 1.22.
Let students look how they spend time in them, for the truth is, that if a
man be devoted to them, he shall be ever learning, and yet never come to the
knowledge of the truth: nay it may be feared of some who were towardly set in
the truth, that coming into this school too timely, are now grown crooked
and out of love with the truth, and are indeed turned into the things they read.

The second thing which Titus must resist, are genealogies, which also must be
rightly taken, because there always was and yet is an excellent use of them in
Scripture. Before Christ they were so necessary, as the Jews were commanded
to keep public and private records of their tribes and families, yea and if
there were any that could not tell or find his genealogy, he was not to be
admitted; or if inconsiderately he were, was to be deposed from public office,
Numb. 1.18. Nehem. 7.62. and to this purpose some holy writers of Scripture
have set down for the use of the Church to the end whole books of
genealogies; but especially that the Jews might be able to bring their descent
from the Patriarks, as we read of Paul, who no doubt could bring his line
down from Benjamin, Philip. 3.5.

The use of these genealogies was manifold, I will note two. First, to manifest
the truth of God in the Scriptures. Use of Genealogies in the Scriptures.
1. In the accomplishment of many special prophesies to particular persons:
For example; God

Messiah unto the world. As, 1. to show that because God would be appeased in
the same nature that had sinned, therefore he was true man Adam, showing us
thereby what is the proper end of all genealogy in the Scriptures. 2. The
nobility of his birth, and

Quest. What is it then the Apostle condemns? Answ. Not any such as serve to
the edification of the faith of the Church, whereof this of Christ a public
person and Savior of the world is the chief of all; neither the keeping of
the descent, so far as serves to the preservation of right, justice, and
civil peace. In which respect Kings and Nobles, yea and other inferior
persons may enquire into that right which their ancestors have made their due:
and must so hold their genealogy, as they may hold their right against all
claims. But here is condemned all that recounting of kindred and petegree in
all sorts of men, which proceeds from a vain mind, and tends to worldly
pomp and vaineglorie. For this was the sin of the Jewish teachers, that
whereas now by Christ's appearance all distinction of families was in religious
respect abrogated: and now was no such need of genealogy as before, unless it
were before Infidells, and such as were not persuaded of the right descent of
Christ: yet they out of their pride would be much and often in extolling of
their tribes and kindred; and so not only for these accessories let go the
substance of religion, but as if they would build up that polity again which
now was abolished, to the great hurt of their hearers, would much busy
themselves in such fruitles discourses. These genealogies must Titus withstand.

By brawling and contentions about the law, are meant those hot contentions
which yet many Jews and Iudaizing teachers did trouble the purity of religion
withal; striving still to bring back again the observation of Jewish
ceremonies; such as was circumcision, differences of meats, and days, and
garments; as though Christ were not yet come, wherewith the Church in that
tender age was much molested. But now our Apostle points to another end of
the law, namely, to institute the life, contain in obedience, and lead unto
Christ; but not to shadow Christ to come as before, who by his coming has put
an end to all such ceremonies.

Of all these endless questions, idle genealogies, and brabling contentions,
the Apostle gives this censure; that although they may seem to have a puffing
kind of knowledge, and be stood for as for fire and water, as if the whole
substance of religion were placed in them: yet are they unprofitable and vain,
far from instruction and edification of men in true godliness; yea indeed
great hindrances thereto, as taking up time and labor, and wits of men which
should better be employed; which as we said, is a forceable reason to avoid and
repress them. Hitherto the meaning.

Satan seeks to corrupt the purest churches by bringing in needles questions.
Doctr. 1. The Devil is ready in the purest Churches to corrupt the purity of
doctrine, by stirring needles and endless questions, either in substance of
doctrine, or in ceremonies; wherein men will be as hot as if all religion were
placed in them: And thus shall the peace of the Church be troubled, the free
passage of the Gospel hindered, the godly teachers grieved, and all for things
unnecessary and idle: things sometimes so far from profiting the Church, as
that they much hinder it, and obscure the doctrine of true religion. All this
appears plainly in this our example. The malicious man is ever sowing tares
in Gods field, and if he cannot extinguish all the light of Christian doctrine,
if he cannot pull down as he would the substance of truth, he will do what he
can; he will make dissension in smaller matters, whereby many shall be
offended, many cast back that were coming on, and many other kept back, who
might come on in time. So when the Disciples of Christ and John consented in
the substance of doctrine; yet could he make them quarrel in washings, and
fastings, and such ceremonies. Paul and Barnabas consented in substance of
doctrine, yet for a very trifle and indifferent thing, Act. 15.39.
(the company or leaving behind of Mark) were so exasperated and divided,
that they did separate one from the other. And if he be so forceable in good
men that he takes the advantage of flesh in them, much more does he
effectually work in unconscionable men who are all flesh, and all corruption.
Easy were it in all ages to discover this eminent note of Satan's malice in
false teachers, namely, that they were ever more earnest in urging and
constraining of men in their own devises, then to the duties of the moral
law. Christ charged the Pharisees that they placed more religion in washing
potts, cups, and beds, then in keeping Gods commandments. These Jewish
teachers, Act. 15.29. are branded that they troubled the Church with words and
combred men's minds (even in the Apostles days) with things dead, and
unnecessary, with circumcision and ceremony. And is not Gods judgment come
upon the Papists at this day to the uttermost, who have called back all these
Jewish ceremonies again, and so long contended for them, that they have lost
the substance of pure religion, and the truth has betaken her to her wings?
Their school divinity is turned away from Christ's body, to his garments:
their maine disputes are taken up about works of preparation, free will, merit
of works, works super errogatorie, purgatory, differences of garments,
meats, days, vows, pilgrimages; which are such things as Christ wrapped up
together and left in his grave, when himself rose again. And their doctrinall
divinity to the people, as we read it in the postills, but school
distinctions, and legends fables; or of latter times, bitterness against the
first restorers of religion, who oppose their former false doctrines. And for
their heat in urging these things above all the commandments of God, none is
so blind but may see that they more severely punish him that fasteth not their
lent, then such as are manslayers; more him that keeps not one of their
Saints days, then him that keeps never a Sabboath thorough the year: that
they make it a greater sin for some sorts of men to marie a wife, then to
live in secret filthiness all their lives long. Thus the devil having gotten
in his head, easily thrusts in all his body; and if he get a Church or
people at this advantage, that he can comber men's minds with needless things,
and stir up brabbling contentions about unprofitable and vain devises of
men; he is in great hope and probability ere long to put out that light, which
he has al^eadie so far darkened.

Use. Let us acknowledge the work of Satan, when we see men who are all of one
sound judgment in the substance of religion, and so should be brethren; to be
at such hot strife and opposition for matter of ceremony, and for things in
comparison vain and unprofitable. 2. Let us not count it a strange or new
thing, to be too much offended at it. 3. Let us pray the Lord, who can rebuke
Satan, to dissolve such works of the Devil, least in the end too late we
lament the loss of the truth.

Doctr. 2. In Titus his example, every Minister is bound not only to teach
profitable things, but to resist the contrary. Ministers must teach things
profitable, and resist the contrary.
He that would be faithful in the house of the Lord, must behave himself in
building these spiritual walls, as Nehemiah did in building the material wall
of Jerusalem. He must be ready with his tool in one hand, and his weapon in
the other, both to build, and defend his building. He must be so far from
vain teaching in himself, as he must not suffer it in another, if it lie in
his power to hinder it. The doctrine being so plain, as it is to be read out
of the words of the text, we will spend no labor in the proof, but reserve it
to the use, which is,

1. To reprehend sundry sorts of teachers. 1. Such as weary themselves and
hearers with knotty questions, which are as parables to the people, wherein
while men exercise their wits, to get a name of profunditie, they do no little
hurt: for they fill the heads and hearts of their hearers with intricate
doubts, often leading them into such labyrinths, as they cannot wind them out
of; and then the devil has matter to work upon; for either he takes up their
minds with such needless questions, which hinder matters leading to true
piety: or else makes them waver in the truth, or brings them on to open
profannesse, when they see that every truth may be called into question, and
probably oppugned; and so they care for no truth, as having none to insist in.
Preaching is not a tying of knots to untie them again, nor a school problem,
but a building up of men in the obedience of says and repentance.

2. Such as tire themselves with curious questions, to which corrupt nature is
very prone in unsanctified teachers and hearers; and these as unprofitable and
vain as the former: teachers would find out the equality and inequality of
glory in heaven: would have us know whether we shall know one another in the
life to come; would instruct us in the year and time of Christ's coming to
judgment: would find us out the cause why God rejects Saul the King, and
electeth Saul the persecutor. But here it were good to remember the woman of
Samaria her answer to Christ, The well is deep, and I have no vessel to draw
with. Hearers likewise would feign know where Moses his body was buried; how
and whither Elias was carried: what God did before the world was made: they
will no longer stand in the outward court, but presumptuously with Pompey,
thrust into the sanctum sanctorum, to pry into Gods secret place: yea although
it be sequstered from the rest, and veiled, covered, and shadowed with the
wings of the Cherubins. But let such beware they buy not their presumption as
dear as he did his; there is danger in climbing, and our lesson given us is,
not to be ouerwise, but wise to sobriety. It is a fearful taking of Gods
name in vain, to take his word to make a ground of our own devise in things
not revealed. It is an high presumption to seek to discover that which God
has not uttered, whose glory it is to keep somethings secret to himself. In
a word, it is a point of extreme folly, whereas the Lord has delivered such
high things in the Scriptures to exercise our understandings; that (as the
ancient speak) were we elephants we might swim there; that we should leave
these and wast out our time in things not revealed. True it is that knowledge
is profitable, is sweet, and profound: But what then? although it be profitable
to warm a man's hands by the fire, it is no wisdom to thrust ones hands into
the fire* to use the beams of the sun is profitable to perfect the sight;
but unless we were eagles, to gaze upon the body of the sun is to destroy
it. So likewise honey is sweet, but we must so much the more beware we eat not
too much. And there is a knowledge too high for David himself: an humble
ignorance is an high learning where God would not have us to know.

Now the better to restrain our selves herein, Motives to the former duty.
1. Labor to see the corrupt disposition of the best in this point: the dear
children of God have had their idle and curious questions: Daniel a man greatly
beloved Dan. 12.8.
The disciples bewrayed their weakness both before and after Christ's death,
Ioh. 8.1. Master, who sinned, this man or his Parents? whereas Christ wishes
them to look at Gods scope in all his actions, which is his own glory: so
after his resurrection, Lord, will thou now restore the kingdom to Israel? and
Peter of John, Master, what shall this man do? Secondly, acknowledging it a
fruit of pride, let us compose our hearts to humility, as David, Lord I it is
a spice of pride of heart to seem to know more then others. 3. Consider the
unprofitableness of such knowledge, it puffs up, it edifieth not; one
compares such curious questions to Creuises, which Libanius Iulians
schoolmaster, who meeting with a Christian, asked him in skorne this question,
I pray thee seeing thou hold on the carpenters son, tell me how he is now
occupied, what is he doing? The Chrstian answered him, he is on his trade,
making a coffin for thy Master and scholar Julian, who shall have a cast of his
office ere long, as a little after Julian was slain in battaell, carried to
Antioch in a coffin and there buried. Note the fearful end of curiosity in
Gods matters. A third sort of teachers offend in wringing allegories so far
as in stead of milk blood comes, and in studying for quaint terms, as fit
for their message as Saul's armor for David: whereas the wisdom of a man of
God, is to speak^ things agreeable to the analogy of faith, and in the style
of the holy Ghost, unless any man think he can speak in a better, which were
to take upon him to teach the Lord to speak; or defend that the Scriptures
want light to express themselves. And indeed such teaching is in it self
like some stuffes starcht and stretched, and set out with a fair gloss, but
come to the wearing or wetting it shrinkes and shriules like cobwebs: and in
the hearers effects an admiration of the man, but no sense of the matter:
ask common people, what learned you at the Sermon? oh he is a proper man and a
good scholar, and this is all that the most have learned: a just hire of such
vain and unprofitable things, the work is consumed before it come to the fire.

People must not desire such doctrine as the Minister may not teach.
Use. 2. People must not desire such doctrine as Ministers may not teach.
Nature desires to change pasture often; and the ear so far as uncircumcised
is Athenian, itching after novelties: children would be in new lessons before
the old be half learned; so Christians cannot away to dwell in that pure
doctrine which would lead them in true godliness: whereby often by the
judgment of God, they forfeit their faithful Pastors, and in Gods wrath have
hirelings set over them that feed them with wind: they desire fine words and
profound matter, and are weary of plain doctrines; and they have a picked
language and vain speculations, they ask and have. But no sooner is Manna
loathed, but quails are rained, but with vengeance: it is flesh, but a meat
that rotteth in the mouth, even between the teeth.

Use. 3. In private conferences man with man avoid these vain questions; that
all our private communication may tend to edification: fathers must teach their
children with Abraham in Gods ways: children must depend upon their fathers,
and ask them of such things, see Psalm. 44.1. Mothers must teach their young
children the Scriptures, as Eunicha did Timothy: Masters of familyes should
make their families petty schools and nurseries of divinity: we read how
Apollos a great man proceeded a doctor in Aquilaes house: our private houses
should be Churches or Chapels; therefore such idle and vain questions should
find neither time nor place in these our private Churches.

Verse. 10. Reject him that is an heretic, after once or twice admonition.

11. Knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sins being damned of
his own self.

The fittest dependence of these words with the former, I conceive to be this.
Paul having exhorted Titus both to teach the truth according to godliness, as
also to resist all such foolish and vain doctrine as might do hurt in the
Church of God: Titus might object, This indeed is my duty wherein I entend to
exercise my self with diligence; but when I have labored and done all I can,
many there are who will not yield to the truth, nor submit themselves to this
ordinance of God; how am I to carry my self toward such? Ans. The Apostle
careful to prevent all such things as he foresaw might be hurtful to the
Church, gives direction in these two verses how to proceed in this business
also. The former giving direction and laying down the duty, and the latter
enforcing the same by moment of reason. In the former are three things to be
considered. 1. the persons against whom Titus is to deal, here called
heretics. 2. The direction how he is to behave himself toward them, reject
them. 3. The orderly manner of proceeding, after once or twice admonition. The
latter verse contains the reason of this severity, because such persons are
incurable and incorrigible: which is proved by two arguments. 1. such a one is
subverted, that is, turned or cast off the foundation. 2. he sins against
his own conscience, being damned of his own self, that is, he wittingly and
willingly spurneth against that truth of which his conscience is by the former
admonition convinced.

For the first, who is an Heretic? Answ. He that professing Christ, yet
inuenteth or maintains any error against the foundation of religion, and
that with obstinacy. For the opening of which description three things are to
be noted. First, that an heretic must profess Christ. Per verba legis legem
oppugnat. Ambr.
For Jews, Turks, or Pagans cannot properly be Heretics, although they fight
against Christ and all religion in all the foundations of it. These are more
properly called Heathens, Infidells, and Atheists without God in the world. But
the person whom Titus has here to deal withal, is one within the Church, and
cast off from a foundation upon which he seemed to stand. Secondly, he must
maintain an error in doctrine (for if men err in practice they are rather
hypocrites, and profane wretches) and this error must be fundamental, that is
ouerturning some ground or article of our faith: for it will not make a man an
heretic, not to believe the fables of Saint Francis, although Pope Benedict 4.
so determine. Nay if a man should hold something wherein the Scriptures are his
adversary, as that an oath is not to be taken, and war is not to be made by
Christians: such a one were in a gross error, but not presently sunk into
heresy. But if any man shall maintain justification by works, a daily
sacrifice for satisfaction for sin, or any other righteousness or work to
stand before God in besides Christ; the defense of this will easily prove
heresy. And hereby the Popish doctrine is clearly proved heretical.
Thirdly, this error must be wilfully and obstinatly maintained; for he must
reject admonition, and strive after conviction: and this properly makes an
heretic. Aliud est haereticus aliud h^ereticis cred^ns August de vt^l.
credendi ad Honorat.
For every one that holds an heretical opinion is not an heretic: a man may
by simplicity, leuitie or rashness, or gentleness of nature be drawn into such
an opinion: but if admonished of his error he contend not, but is ready to
yield up himself to the persuasion of truth, he is no heretic. For these
three things make up an heretic. 1. error. 2. conviction. 3. obstinacy or
weddednes to his opinion.

An heavy imputation to charge any man to be an heretic.
Hence first note by the way, what an heavy thing we charge him with, whom we
brand with the title of an heretic: for we charge him to be one who rests
not in the wholesome word, but maintains such an error as has turned him off
his foundation: one that contemns the judgment of the Church, despises
wholesome admonitions: continues in his damnable opinion against the light of
his mind, against the check and accusation of his conscience; and being
condemned of himself, heapeth up sin upon sin: All which censure if we
shall hastily pass, we shall hardly avoid rash judgment: for if every error
in divinity presently made an heretic, Errare possum, haereticus esse nolo.
the Apostles themselves had been no other then heretics, who at first were so
erroneous and ignorant in many things of the greatest moment in religion.

What a false witness then, has that Apostate Church of Rome passed against
ours, and all the reformed Churches; whose teachers in all their sermons and
writings style us by no other name then heretics? whereas they cannot show
wherein they have convinced us to have departed from the Catholic and
Apostolic faith: and much less that we have with pertinacie, and against our
own consciences maintained any falsehood. Indeed if our rule be their Canon
law (which judges him an heretic who speaks against the Romish Church, or
obeys not whatsoever the Pope decrees) we cannot avoid that name. Or if we
should teach (as they do, and that after conviction) that the Saints in heaven
are mediators by their merit and prayer: that prayer is to be made to Saints
and dead men; that we can be justified by the merit of our works, by fasting,
prayer, pilgrimage, or any such observance; that concupisence is no sin in
the regenerate, that a man can perfectly fulfill the law: that Saint Dominike
performed more miracles then Christ, and all his Apostles, and was far
greater then John Baptist: we could not avoid but be heretics indeed: because
these and a number such are contradictory to the canon of the Scriptures,
reuerse the foundation of religion, and yet are obstinatly defended by them.

To charge a man to be a Puri^ane, is to call him an heretic.
And further, let men see hence how inconsideratly they cast the names of old
heretics to the blemishing of the lives and ways of many godly and worthy
men: as when Christian and religious men are termed by the name of Puritans,
an ancient sect of heretics, with whom these have but small acquaintance. The
like may we say of that reproachful title of Scismatikes, who quickly
degenerate into heretics, who rent the coat of Christ, and make division in
the Church: sometimes for some opinion, but more usually about some orderly
rites and ceremonies in the Church. Now then to challenge men of scisme: 1. the
Church must be proved to agree, and to have the unity of truth both for
doctrine and rites. 2. men must be convinced by the word, that the doctrine is
the wholesome word, and the rites and ceremonies are edifying, orderly,
inoffensiue, and not superstitious. Object. But some are so peevish they will
never be convinced and satisfied. Answ. The reason hereof seems to be, because
the Church is sometimes a party in such a question; and therefore it were
wisdom to bring upon such parties the judgment of other reformed Churches,
to make up such a conviction. And then when all such good means are used, if
men separate from the Church, let them lie justly under the reproach of their
sin. But far be it, that every one who carries a diverse judgment
concerning some rites in the Church wherein he lives, should presently become a
scismatike; for such a one may still cleave in heart, in affection, and in
personal presence unto the Church, and be far from interrupting the unity
of the Church. Yea far be it that every departure from those that call
themselves the Church, yea in maine points of doctrine, should be scisme. Were
Elias, and Elizeus Scismatikes, because they departed from Ieroboams worship?
were our Savior Christ and his Apostles scismatikes in departing from the
doctrines of the Pharisees and Saduces? No, it was Jeroboam; it was the Priests
and Pharisees (who pretended themselves to be the Church) departing from the
truth, and so from the true unity, that were the authors of Scisme herein. And
so for rites, how can we stop a Papists mouth, if we shall say that those men
who depart from rites tending to the weakening of faith and doctrine, or
offensive and superstitious; are presently to be ranked amongst Scismatikes?
for have not we our selves thus departed from an hundred Romish ceremonies, and
yet we say they are the authors of Scisme therein. Let this rectify our
judgments, and keep us from rash censures in matters so capital, and so
difficult. If any Catholic spirit will still reproach us as Scismatikes;
surely we will rejoice herein, that we are not of them, whose canon has taught
us, that if Christ and his Apostles would not subscribe to all their decrees,
they should escape no other terms but be reputed Scismatikes at the least, if
not burnt for heretics.

Secondly, note that there have bin, and shall be to the end heresies in the
Church. Christ was no sooner ascended, There always have bin, and shall be
heresies in the Church: why.
but that blessed doctrine of his (even while the Apostles yet lived) was
oppugned by heretics: which seems to be the ground of this precept. Nay no
sooner was there a Church, but heresy the disease and corruption of it,
began to discover it self; and truth ga^e only the start, and was before
heresy; yea the ^a^es came up with the good seed in the field of the Lord. The
reasons of this doctrine are, First, so long as the causes of heresy remain,
it Secondly, the Lord in his providence suffers Ad hoc sunt haereses vt ^ides
habendo tentationem habeat and probatione^. Tertul. de praescript. advers.
haeret. cap. 1.
to prove and try them, whether they will cleave unto him or no: Deuteronomy. 13.3.
they are the Lords fan brought into his floa^e, to separate between the
faithful and unfaithful: whereby the wicked fall off, as being thrust away
from the Lord, verse. 7. and the godly, who are by Satan and his instruments
accused to be hypocrites, are manifested ^ound at the heart, and faithful to
the end. So the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies, that those who
are approved of God, (...).
may be known: he says not it is possible, but necessary that heresies be,
as fire to try and purge the gold. Thirdly, strong delusions in the believing
of lies: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
If Christ and his Gospel cannot be received, Antichrist (when he comes with
all lying wonders, and prevailing errors) shall. If the truth in Michas mouth
be contemned, 400. false Prophets shall prevail with their lie. So have we
seen that where a faithful Pastor has been lightly set by, the Lord has
one way or other removed him, and after his departure sent in some grievous
wolf or other, that has not spared the flock. Fourthly, the wisdom of God
Per eos qui ecclesiam discerpserunt, recta fidei dogmata emerserunt. Euagr.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
it being an occasion that the truth is further sifted into; that as sparkles
issue out of the striking of two flints together, so the truth discussed and
disputed, becomes more lightsome, and more victorious: yea the gold comes
no brighter out of the fire, then the truth out of the trial of opposition and
contradiction.

Use. 1. Whenever Satan according to his accustomed malice against
sincerity, stirs up any troubles to stay the course of the Gospel, to
obscure the shining brightness of Gods glory, and to bring confusion into the
most wise orders, and ordinances of God, then the Lord so ouerruleth the
matter, as that he always brings light out of darkness glorifieth himself,
purges his floare, proves his people, quickneth their zeal, and traineth
them in humility and obedience. Let us not then be discouraged, if our eyes
see many trials, and in them many fall off, if we see the truth oppugned,
doctrines of liberty broached, backed, and zealously maintained: for surely,
although the Lord herein may justly correct our manifest contempt of the truth,
yet can he not, nor will forget his own glory.

2. We ought to be so far from troubling or hindering, as that we must
affect, pray for, and to our power procure the peace of Jerusalem: yea so far
herein to strain our selves, as that only peace and truth may abide
vndiuorsed. But well says one, M Greenam.
that he who has magnified his truth above all things, Psalm. 138.2. has
also advanced it above peace.

3. Use means to avoid heresy, Means to avoid heresy.
and keep out of the degrees of such a distasteful fruit of the flesh, Gal.
5.20. The chief of these means are, 1. to lay thy ground in humility, which
only cu^^eth off contention, Psalm. 25.
but especially in If any man will do his will, he shall know whether the
doctrine be of God, and whether I speak of my self. Scripturarum ignoratio
haerese, peperit.

Chrysostom in homil. de Lazaro.


And whosoever embraces the counsel and wisdom of the word, he walks
safely, and his foot shall not stumble, Prou. 3.21.23. where note, with what
conscience any Papist dare say, that the Scriptures are the causes of
heretics. Thirdly, to grow up in the affecting and love to the truth: for so
shall thou grow in the hatred of falsehood, Patriarchae haereticorum
Philosophi. Tertul.
for thou can hardly get good This Mr. Ardesty confessed in S. Mary's was the
persuasion of the Papists, and the chief ground of his own resolution to fly
the land, and become a Priest.
covetousness and ambition

Now having cleared the first point who are heretics, we come to the second,
namely, how Titus must carry himself toward them: and that is, he must after
once or twice admonition reject them. Now because admonition is first in nature
and order of proceeding, though it be not so in the placing of the words, we
will consider of it somewhat in the first place. And first it will be demanded
what kind of admonition this is, I answer, that this is not meant of that
private admonition, whereunto both private Christians and the Minister as a
Christian are bound toward those that err, and are known so to do; but of
that public admonition in the face of the Church, which is a servant and
makes way to the public censure of excommunication. For it makes way to the
Churches reiection of such a one, as the next verse shows incurable, both
because he is cast off the foundation, as also is condemned of his own
conscience. Further, this admonition must be once or twice, namely, when the
Pastor has privately conferred with him for the conviction of his conscience,
and admonished him to the reuoking of his wicked error: if now he still stand
out, then general warning is to be given two several sabbaths, of such an
offender in the congregation, not yet naming the person, or cause in
particular, but threatening the sentence of excommunication, unless the
delinquent come in in the mean time, and yield himself unto the truth. And
thus shall he see that all gentle and good means are used with him, before the
Church descend to such a grievous censure.

Object. But Christ requires three admonitions, Matthew. 18.17. why does the
Apostle urge but two: yea Paul himself admonished the the Curch of the
Corinths three times, 2. Cor. 13. 1. this is the third time. Answ. Those places
speak of the process of private persons in private offenses, which goes
before the public notice and proceeding of the Church. 2. Paul deals by
Epistle in a loving and fatherly manner, and prescribes not to the Church how
to proceed in their public censures. 3. In such questions of fact, for the
manner of process, much is left to the wisdom and judgment of the Church;
which may so proceed as may make most for the good of the party; and may use
two or three admonitions at their discretion: but so as admonitions must not be
multiplied (as we say) toties quoties, nether on the other hand must be under
the number of two, for two must be the least.

Doct. Hence we learn that even heretics and enemies to the church, must be
tenderly and lovingly dealt withal, ^uen heretics and enemies to the Church
must be lovingly dealt with.
so long as there is any hope that they may be gained and won. Neither must
they be severely or suddenly proceeded against by the Church, but upon due
warning and the commandment is, that those that are spiritual must ever
labor to restore offenders by the spirit of meekenes: Gal. 6.1.
and never to remove till all means of restoring have been assayed: so that
severity at first in those that are spiritual were mere cruelty. 3. This
softness in the proceeding rod, so long as the spirit of meekness can
prevail: 2. Cor. 13.2.
yea of our Lord Jesus, who pronounced not his woe against Corazin and
Bethsaida, till other great means used with them were rejected by them.

Use. 1. Hence may we gather the meaning of sundry places in the Scripture:
as Romans 16.17. Brethren, I beseech you mark them diligently which cause
divisions and offenses among you, and avoid them: 2. Io^. 10. If any come and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not: these and such like places must be
understood by this our text, namely, after admonition, and good means used for
their reclaiming, they must be avoided and rejected, and not before.

2. If heretics must be thus dealt with, How much more friends and brethren.
how much moree are we to deal lovingly with brethren, who fall not wilfully,
but of frailty? how careful should we be to set them in joint again
tenderly; covering the bitter pill of reproof with sugared persuasion? how
should the spirit of Moses cool and moderate the spirit of Elias toward
brethren? surely here must be loving admonition, not once not twice, but so
often as they offend, so as it be not with contempt and scorn of religion and
discipline.

Reject him] There is a twofold rejecting of a man; the one more private,
whereby every Christian is bound to forbear the familiar conuersing with such
as are openly wicked and scandalous in doctrine or life: but especially the
Minister or Pastor, whose life is more remarkable and exemplarie must be more
careful to avoid the company of such. And this is by some thought to be here
meant, as if they advised Titus, that when in his course he should meet with
such a person, who after admonition and good means of reclaiming him, should
still add pertinacie to error; he should thenceforth leave such a one to
himself: neither familiarly conversing with such, least he should occasion
others also so to do: nor yet to neglect the Church in striving against the
stream with such a one: for all that labor were but lost; which were it taken
against weakness and ignorance, it were hopeful; but being against malice and
obstinacy, is desperate; and therefore avoid him, make not nor meddle with
him, let him alone to Gods judgment; what hope is there in washing an
Ethiopian? to build one that is cast from his foundation, were to hang an house
in the air; and therefore unless thou can hope that he who will not yield
unto the voice of the Prophets and Apostles, will yield to thy private
persuasion, meddle not at all with him. But as I noted in the former point,
there is more included in the precept; which is to be extended to a more
public reiection of an incurable person who will receive no good; but is
likely to do much harm in the Church by infection if he be suffered. (...).
And this the word notes, which properly signifies to be drawn out of a
city as an outcast: and translated to the Church to betoken the casting out of
a man by excommunication; or a cutting him off from the society of the Church.
And whereas there are two degrees of excommunication; the former separating
from all brotherly society with the members of the Church: and the latter
cutting off from the body of Christ: Ioh. 9.22. (...).
which is nothing else but that fearful anathema, and curse pronounced by the
Church against him, who is discerned to have sinned against the holy Ghost. The
former of these two is here meant, called of old, a thrusting out of the
synagogue; and is a casting out of an obstinate sinner out of the company and
communion of believers, who are the members of Christ: and this is the censure
which heretics are liable unto.

Quest. Who must avoid them? Ans. The whole Church, but especially the
Pastors, least their remissness or familiarity with such make the people more
bold with them: for it is meet that the whole Church should have knowledge,
approbation, and consent in that which concerns the whole.

Quest. But how far must they be avoided? Answ. Our Savior shows in
general, Qui neque in svnedria recipiebantur religionis obtent^; quod cum
incircisis (...) vitae cons^etudinem haberent. Beza.
Matthew. 18.7. when he commands us to account such as will not hear the
admonition of the Church, as Publicans who were known by the name of sinners
and wicked men, Luke 15.2. or as Samaritanes, with whom the Jews meddled not,
Ioh. 4.9. and the reason was because they were heretics 2. King. 17.33. unto
this day they do after the old manner they neither fear God, nor do after
their ordinances, Josephus explaneth the cause of this contention between the
Jews and Samaritane^; which was most ^ote about 140. years before Christ. lib.
an^iquit. cap. 6.
nor after their customs, nor after the law, nor after the commandment which
the Lord commanded. The Apostles more especially in sundry particulars
express the nature of this censure, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6. withdraw your selves from
every one -- 1. Cor. 5.11 with such eat not: 2. Ioh. 10. receive not such into
house, nor bid him good speed. In which places although it seem, that such
persons are to be utterly cast out of every Christians affection; as those who
are justly to be hated and rejected, and to whom common humanity seems not to
be due from Christians; yet must we observe herein sundry cautions, if rightly
we will conceive of it.

For 1. this censure infringeth not any of the bonds of civil right and
society; Excommunication how far it stretches.
but that an excommunicate Magistrate remains a Magistrate still, and must of
all Christians be so acknowledged, and all such offices performed him as are
due to a Magistrate. Thus Ambrose obeyed Theodosius whom and when himself had
excommunicated: Yea Christ himself and his Apostles willingly obeyed the
heathenish and persecuting Emperors. This censure then may make them as
heathens, and no Christians; but not as no Magistrates.

2. An excommunicate person is not loosed from the bond of common If thine
enemy hunger, give him meat, and if he thirst, give him drink. Hence is it
lawful to sell him commodities, and consequently to buy of him, and bargain
with him: and if he be before a partner with us in any civil business, as in
matter of inheritance, trust, or commodity, we are not by this censure loosed
from that fellowship, which is no nearer then we may and do contract with very
strangers. I say not now we may contract familiarity with him as a friend, but
fellowship as being a man of our own mold. Object. 2. Job. 10. Bid him not good
speed, (...).
which is the least courtesy we can show any man: and, 1. Cor. 5.9. Paul
wishes the Corinths not to mingle themselves with fornicators. Answ. In the
former place it is no part of the Apostles meaning, that Christians should show
themselves any way uncivil or inhumane, whose carriage must be such toward
offenders as may win them, rather then set them further off: but would not
have them so courteously to salute such a one as a familiar or friend, but
rather as a stranger, least they should seem any way to give the least
approbation unto their error. The latter place is to be understood of private
and familiar contracts also in freindly society, which such open sinners are
to be debarred of, least they be made more obstinate in their sin: and thus
in the verses following the Apostle expounds himself, with such a one eat
not. And if we should stretch the place to more necessary public contracts
in bargains (besides many other inconveniences which we might name) we should
hereby come too near that Popish position; that faith, promises, and oaths
are not to be kept with heretics; who have right to all civil equity from us,
for although they remain not brethren, yet remain they citizens.

3. This censure loses not the bands of natural right; but such as are of
the family in consanguinitie or affinity must perform all duties to such a
one, which such a relation has made his due. The husband to the wife, and the
wife to the husband: the child to the father, and the father to the child; Ius
diuinum quod est ex gratia, non tollit ius humanum quod est ex naturali
ratione. Thom. Aquin. 2.2. quest. 10. art. 11.
the servant to the master, and the master to the servant: the kinsman to the
kinsman: nay in these nearer societies, even that entire familiarity, which
the ancient ascribed to the identity of three things, namely the house, the
bed, and the table, must not be denied of those from whom it was due before
this censure: for he that was a brother before, remains a natural, although
not a Christian brother.

Exco^municatio est gladius non hostis perimentis, sed medici sanantis.
we may and must 1. love the excommunicate in the Lord. 2. admonish and rebuke
him. 3. pray for him, though not with him. 4. upon his repentance, receive him
like a brother as before.

Quest. 1. Wherein then stands this separation? Answ. 1. From all One chief
end of the Churches censures is to preserve holy things from contempt.
as the word, sacraments, prayer; for these are holy things, and the
privileges of the faithful, out of whose society the other being cast out,
they are as swine, to whom such holy things may not be cast, and as dogs, to
whom the childrens bread belongs not. Object. But if you shut them from the
word, you bar them from the means of their repentance. Answ. Both the word,
and the nature of the censure shuts them out of the congregation of Gods
people, and the practice of the ancient Church, which suffered them not to
enter within the doors, of the Church. The Jews permitted not the Publicans in
their sinagogues, but accounted them as Heathen; neither would Ambrose suffer
Theodosius the Emperor while he was excommunicate, to enter into the Church of
Milleyne. But that now such persons are admitted to hear the word, it is by an
indulgence of the Church, which I will not now stand to examine.

Epist ad Florin. and Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 19.

Reasons to avoid excommunicate persons. ^^ in regard of the party.


who as Irenaeus testifies, would fly from the place where the heretic stood
or sat, as fast as he could, least he should here any heretical speeches.

Now the reasons why we are thus to avoid the excommunicate, are these. 1. That
the offender may be brought to soundness of repentance; given to edification
and not for destruction, 2. Cor. 10.8. And therefore such an offender must, 1.
have his conscience terrified, by being delivered unto Satan: that is, cast
out of the Church: out of which Satan rules, and sets up his throne. 2.
Another end in regard of the party, is to shame him, both by the public
rebuke of the Church in Withdraw your selves -- that he may be ashamed. 3. To
work sorrow in him for his sin, for the destruction of his flesh, and
fleshly corruption, which is the ground of true repentance: see his

2. There are other reasons in regard of the church. First in general, 2. In
regard of the Church.
that it hear not ill, as a maintayner of vile persons: and much less as if
it self were a sink or stie of filthy swine; who profess themselves washed
by the justification of Christ, and the sanctification of the spirit. The
Apostle Paul aymeth at this, 1. Cor. 5.1. It is certainly heard that there is
fornication among you: and makes this bad report the first ground of their
proceeding against the incestuous person, as though he had said, these things
ought not to be heard amongst you: Ephesians. 5.3.
no not once named among Christians. Secondly, in respect of the special
members. 1. That they may be safe from the infection of such open and obstinate
wicked ones: which is also the Apostles reason, 1. Culpae contagio.
1. Cor. 5.6. A little leaven, sowreth the whole lump: a little sparkle
kindles an unquenchable flame: a little pitch defiles the whole man, yea
their very word, 2. Tim. 2.17.
(and much more their conversation) creeps and corrupts as a gangreene.
Worthy is it here worth our remembering, how when the Emperor Theodosius senior
was desirous to confer with Eunomius the Arrian Bishop; Zozom. lib. 7. c. 7.
his wife Placilla the Empress very earnestly dissuaded him, least he being
perverted by his speeches, should begin to like of his heresy. 2. Least
partaking with his sin, 2. Poenae communio.
he should also partake of his punishment; as all Israel did for Achan: one
rotten membe^ not cut off endangereth the whole body, and threatens peril to
the whole. The iniunction of Moses has here place, Depart from the tents of
these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye perrish in all their
sins. Numb. 16.26.
3. For examples sake, least any of the rest grow to the like boldness, and
obstinacy in sin; 3 Exempli monitio.
but rather by such separation be terrified therefrom: 1. Tim. 5.20. Them that
sin openly, rebuke openly, that the rest also may fear. All which ends
being so necessary, as by the Scriptures they appear to be, we see what a
maime it is in any Church, when this rod is either not used, or not aright.

Quest. But whether may private Christians avoid an open notorious sinner, How
far private Christians are to avoid open sinners not excommunicate. 1. Cor.
5.11.
before the Church have rejected him? or what must we do while the Church
winketh, and will not do her duty in casting them out? Answ. We may and ought
to avoid the familiar society of scorners, and open wicked men for the former
reasons, even before the Church have cast them out: but not as excommunicate
persons, or members cut off; that we abstain from the word and sacraments
because of such, until the Church have cast them out: for else a way is easily
beaten and paued to Scisme and rash separation. And if the Church do not (as
she ought) cut off such rotten members; yet is no door opened to personal
excommunication, seeing this censure is the common action of the whole Church,
and not of any private person, or persons. We must then bear them as we do
festered members with pain, and sorrow, yea and complaints to such as can
help us: but not break our patience for that which our selves cannot, and
others will not cure for us. ^^pp. polit. eccl^s. l. 1. c. 19.
And thus (as one very well answers the like case) shall we be blessed even
in hungring and thirsting after righteousness; and the sin shall not lie at
our doors, but where it is committed, and abetted.

Quest. But it seems if heretics must only be avoided, that it is not
lawful to put them to death. It is lawful to put heretics to death.
Answ. This being a matter of fact, is most properly belonging to the Civil
Magistrate: who wisely considering both of the quality of the person
offending; as if he be a leader, a seducer, or wilful in his error; as also of
the degree of his offense and error, as if it be a direct overthrow of the
foundation, or an high blasphemy, or such as may turn to the overthrow of
pure religion established, or the disturbance of public peace, or otherwise
according to the nature of the fact, may and ought to proceed to a
proportional degree of punishment: whether by mulcts, or imprisonment, or
banishment, yea in the extremity of evil, to the extreme remedy, even of
death it self: for there is no remedy but if a soar prove a gangreene it
must be cut off.

^rrores intersiciendi non homines. August.
True it is, that the charity of the Church must aim at the cutting off of
errors, rather then men's persons. but if the nature of the error so require,
even the last punishment by death, as it is in the hand of the Magistrate, so
will it be most just and proportional. That it is in the power of the
Magistrate to cut off incurable and invincible heretics is clear: Duritia
vincenda non suadenda. Tertull.
1. by precept, Deuteronomy. 13.5. of slaying the false Prophet: and Deuteronomy. 17.5. of
stoning the idolater. 2. by example: of Moses, Exodus 32.35. slaying 3000. of
the Levites for the idolatry of the calfe: of Helias, 1. Kin. 18.40. who slew
400. of Baals Priests when there was no Magistrate to do it: so of Josias, 2.
King. 23.6. of Iehu, 2. King. 10.25. yea wicked Nebuchadnezzar made a decree,
that whosoever blasphemed Daniels God should die the death. The same might
easily be proved out of Imperial constitutions and judgments of Fathers and
Councels.

Now that this is the fittest punishment for some heretics, Vetus Christiana
ecclesia contra Samo^aten^ haereticum open and auxilium A^driani Imperatoris
quamvis ethnici imploravit.
we may gather by the instance of Arrius, whom Constantine the great banished
indeed: but how much better had it been for the world, if he had taken such a
monster from the face of the earth? how much better had that sparkle been with
himself extinct, before it had come to set the whole world on fire? and if he
that reuileth his Prince deserves death as a traitor, how much more he that
blasphemeth the name of God, or any part of his truth.

Object. But Christ bids us beware of false Prophets, but not to slay them,
yea wishes to suffer both to grow together till the harvest. And Paul never
gives other commandment concerning them then to avoid them, and withdraw our
selves from them. Non dicit vt tolleretur e medio, sed e medio vestrum. Muscul.
And Musculus expounding the place, in 1. Cor. 5. concerning the incestuous
person, has these words, he commands not to kill him, but to remove him
from among them.

Answ. 1. Some such places are such precepts as are di^ected unto the Churches,
whose weapons are spiritual, Apostolum informat quomodo se gerat in officio
erga haereticum deploratum: si ad S^igium Pa^lum aut praesidem aliquem
scripsisset, and hinc procul dubio praescripsisset officium. Bulling. decad. 2.
sermon. 8. In regimine humano aliqua mala recte tollerantur, ne vel aliqua bona
impediantur, vel mala pe^ora incurrantur. Aquin. 2.2.4.10. art 11.
and has no such power of life and death over the body or outward man. 2.
Some other institute and inform the Pastors of the Churches how to carry
themselves toward such offenders as this in hand, and the like to Timothy,
but intend not to speak any thing of the Magistrates duty. So Bullinger
affirms that here Paul enformeth Titus, and not Sergius Paulus, how to carry
himself toward an incurable and desperate heretic. 3. These precepts were
delivered when there was no Christian Magistrate to perform the duty, and
therefore the Chuches were more carefully urged unto theirs. 4. They must all
be understood with respect, 1. of the quality of the persons and offenses
which must be distinguished. 2. of the Church, as whether such tares can be
plucked up without apparent hurt of the Church; for else they must be let
stand; and so must that place be meant, least ye also pluck up the good wheat:
and this is agreeable also to the doctrine of the ancient; who advised rather
to tolerate some lesser evil, then that a greater good should be hindered, or
a greater evil occasioned.

Use. 1. Seeing excommunication is such a grievous censure, Excommunication
must not be inflicted for tri^^es.
it is not to be inflicted rashly, or for trif^les; but delibe^ately in matters
of weight and much moment; yea heavily, and not without inward grief, that the
Church is urged to such severity. For, 1. if it be a greiuous thing to be
disfraunchized and cast out of a well ordered common wealth; how much more to be
cast out of the church and the commonwealth of Israel. Which made some of
mind, that this censure is not to be used but in such cases as wherein the
Jewish law condemned to the death: the which strictnes (in that it may seem
to confound the Jewish Judicial law, with Evangelical discipline) howsoever
I will not maintain; yet surely as Musculus well notes, I think it ought not
to be used but in such cases as more expressly shut out of the kingdom of
heaven, and such as the Apostle mentions, Declaratio occultioris facti in
coelo. Beza de praesbyt. and excom.
1. Cor. 6. because it is a declaration of that which is by God done in heaven,
who for a non appearance, or not payment of a trifling fee thrusts not out of
heaven. Secondly, it must be used as a last and desperate remedy; even as the
Surgeon tries all gentle means before launcing, 1. Cor. 5.2.
This is a fitter affection then anger, covetousness, or any other such sordid
and base self seeking In ecclesia Genevensi toto decen^io non plutes duobus
proprie excommunicati. Beza de Praesbyt.
and wisdom of the Pastors in restoring offenders by the spirit of
meekness; that in the space of whole ten years (as M. Beza himself
confesses) only two persons were stricken with this censure. Now of the
fearful abuse of this censure; whereby it is daily turned into an idle
scarecrow, sold and bought at a vile price, I need not speak any thing,
seeing the thing it self speaks so loud: would God it were as well reformed,
as it is by a number of the godly learned discovered.

Use. 2. If heretics must be avoided then it follows, that Protestants ought
to avoid all communion and mixture with heretical Churches and persons: and
namely with that heretical and Apostaticall Church of Rome and the members of
it. To prove it an heretical Synagogue I shall not need to spend time after
those two famous lights, our learned D. Whitakers, De eccles. qu. 6. cap. 3.
and Reynolds: the former of whom has proved that the present Church of Rome
is no particular Church, but heretical, and ouerturning the foundation and
grounds of faith, as by eighteen several points he instanceth, Recens Romana
ecclesia laborat pestiferarum haeresium gangrena, pernagante nuper quaqua
ver^um latius and long plurimorum fidem subvertent^ page 134.
and concludes that whosoever would be saved, must necessarily forsake her as
an antichristian and Satanicall synagogue. The other in his fifth Thesis of his
learned book defends, that the Roman Church is neither Catholic, nor a
sound member of the Catholic Church: in explaining the terms whereof, he
says that the new Roman Church is tainted with a gangrene of most pestilent
heresies, which every way spreads further and further, and subverteth the
faith of very many: and concludes, that no otherwise then the contagion of
the most mortal diseases, as the plague or leprosy or such like, Periculosa
est vna habitantibus, idcirco and fidelium castris exterminanda. page 193.
even so the infection of Popery is as diligently to be shunned of all the
faithful. This truth out of the mouths of such two worthy witnesses we may
the better believe, not only for the strength of arguments they have used, as
yet vngainesaied by any adversary; but also in that we have some of her own
children confessing her the mother of all heresies. I will not light a candle
to the sun in the former point, but briefly show wherein especially they are
to be avoided; and that for more perspicuitie in two questions.

Quest. The former, whether Popish religion may be tolerated in a country
professing the truth of Christian doctrine, as ours by Gods blessing does? I
answer, No, Toleration of a diverse religion is unlawful in a country which
can cast it our, and consequently of Popery. Reas.
if by any lawful means it may be banished. For being an heresy which 1.
disannulleth the death of Christ. 2. abolisheth the humane nature of Christ. 3.
destroys the substance of the Sacraments. 4. takes away the solace of the
elect of God. 5. the honor of the son of God sitting at his Fathers right
hand. 6. almost all religion, (all these being the express words of D.
Reynolds, and proved in that thesis) it follows that it may not be suffered
in a country which can abolish and cast it out. For, The tabernacle of God had
the censer, s^^ffers, and besome to purge and sweep away the filth of the
sanctuary: all which have their truth in the Church of the new testament.


1. Every worship must be suitable to him that is worshipped. If he be divine,
so must it: if he be civil it must also be civil: if he be simple, pure,
without mixture, so must that worship which is or can be acceptable unto him.
2. We know out of the word that Samaritane worship (when men will fear God but
worship him according to the rites of the country; 2. King. 17. vlt.) was ever
hateful to God; who will not have his field of the Church sown with diverse
seeds, nor plowed ad sin. But whereas others, otherwise good Kings, are
reproved and blemished, because either they left the high places standing, and
proceeded not to a through reformation; as As^* ^. Kin. 15.14. Or if they did
fully reform their country, yet that they did not so zealously hate
Idolatry, but that they would enter into league and affinity with Idolaters:
2. Chr. 17.6.
as Iehoshaphat Asas son, Who lifted up his heart unto the ways of the Lord,
and took away the high mountains and groaues out of Judah. But yet Iehu is sent
to reprove him for his society with wicked Ahab, cap. 19.2.
saying, Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? A
worthy commendation was it of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, that he could
not bear them which were evil, Rev. 2.2.

The Lord will have the dross taken from the silver that there may be a pot
for the siner.
1. It is a breach of Gods commandment, Deuteronomy. 29.18. There shall not be among
you, man, woman, nor family, nor tribe, which shall turn his heart from the
Lord, to go serve the gods of these nations: There shall not be among you any
root that brings forth gall and 2. This mixture lays open to Gods
revenging hand, and Rebellion, Josh. 22.17. 3. There is most leaven, and a
gangreene: and here also consider the weakness of flesh, which is as ready to
be plucked away with every error of the wicked, as the most dry tinder is to
receive the sparkle of fire cast into it. Hence also are Idolaters called
stumbling blocks, snares, thorns, whippes, and destruction: know better where
to begin then to make an end: and should dwell too long on the question,
which I purposed rather to point at, then fully to handle; as more largely out
of the Scriptures, Fathers, and counsels I easily might. But from them all as
they lie, in one word may be concluded, that the toleration of Popery in a
reformed country, where it may be cast out, is utterly unlawful.

The second Question is, whether Protestants may marry with Papists? Answ. For
the right resolving of this question, two things must be considered. 1. Whether
the person that now professes Popery, will yield to be won to the embracing
of true religion: which if he do, then caseth such a one to be a Papist, and
may be married withal. ^hus Isaac married Rebecca the daughter of Bethuel; and
Jacob the daughters of Laban, who was an Idolater as appears, Genesis 31.53. On
the same condition Boaz married Ruth a Moabitisse woman, but who was first
converted to the Jewish religion. And thus the Lord himself yielded unto the
marriages with Heathnish women taken in war, but heavily after a sort, and by
indulgence, Deuteronomy. 21.11.
but on no hand unless they would first entertain the true religion, as by
those many ceremonies enjoined might more specially appear: and by Jacob we
may judge of the other Patriarchs, who would not give Dinah to Hemors son,
unless the whole family were circumcised.

Secondly, it must be considered, whether the party be an absolute Papist, or
only Popishly affected in some points; as namely, whether he or she err in
maine and fundamental points of faith; or in less dangerous opinions. If the
party prove tractable and err only in smaller points; as suppose some
superstitious observations of days, meats, foolish and rash vows, or such
like, sucked in by reason of corrupt education; although I would wish a man to
make a better match for himself, yet I cannot condemn it as utterly
unlawful, neither in this question comes such a one under this commandment
of the Apostle. But if the party be a limb of the Pope, drinking in with
greediness the poisoned cup of his heresies; and such a one as is turned off
the foundation, by holding justification by works, freewill to good, A
Protestant may not marry a limb of the Pope. Reas.
Popish traditions of equal authority with Scripture, and such like: here the
precept holds. A Protestant may not marry with such a party: The reasons
are these.

1. The nature of marriage (much more then of friendship) is a communion Primum
amoris vinculum cum pectora coniugium in Deo copulata sunt.
Now what communion can be between truth and falsehood?

Secondly, Gods example, who in the beginning joined not two of diverse
religions: besides, the commandment is, not to be unequally yoked: to marry
always in the Lord, not against him. 2. Cor. 6. 1. Cor 7.39.
And if a Christian may not by bodily conjunction become the member of an
harlot, much less of an idolater, (...), coni^gium.

Quam male inaequales vent^t ad aratra invenci. Ezr. 9.2.


who goes an whoring from God after many lovers.

Thirdly, marriage is called the covenant of God, both because he makes it in
heaven, and watches how it is entered and carried by married persons in the
earth. Now how can he think his marriage to be made by marrying the daughter
of a strange God? Malac. 2.11.

Fourthly, there is certain danger of seduction by such a party, and Longum
divor^ium mandat Deus, ab id^lolatria, in nullo proxime agendum. Tertul. de
cor. milit.

Ne nubat femina non suae religionis viro, vel vir talem ducat vxorem Iubet
deus, docet Apostolus v^runque praecipit testamentum. August lib. 1. ad
Pollent. c. 21. 2. Chr. 21.6.

Nemo diu tutus periculo proximus. Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 11.


to match with ^^ch a one. And can there be a stronger reason given then this
which is the Lords own for the strengthening of his own prohibition? Deuteronomy.
7.3. Thou shall not make marriages with them; for they will cause thy sons to
turn away from me: and the same reason is rendered in renewing the precept,
Josh. 23.11. Plentiful is the Scripture in examples to this purpose: Solomon
to whom the Lord appeared many times, fell by means of his outlandish wives to
idolatry: and who thinks himself wiser then he? Ioram at the instigation of
his wife forsook the Lord; he had the daughter of Ahab to wife, and he did
evil in the sight of the Lord. But most pregnant is that example of Israel,
who marrying with Moab, was presently joined to Baal Peor, and for this sin
were slain in one day four and twenty thousand, Number. 25.9. And let him that
thinks himself to stand on the surest ground, consider whether his
disposition be not such, as stands in need of such a companion, as may
rather further him in piety, then any way alienate him from the ways of God.

Fifthly, ordinarily the Lord follows such matches with visible cut off
master and servant that shall do this. Malac. 2.12.
A public execution hereof we see in the flood, which for this sin drowned
the old world, Genesis 6.2. and Ezra confesses with weeping, mourning, and
ren^ing his hair, that for this sin especially (Master and servant) We, our
Kings, and our Priests have been delivered into the hands of the Kings of the
lands, Ezr. 9 7.
unto the sword, into captivity, into spoil, Quomodo potest congru^re
charitas si discerpit fides. Ambros.
and into confusion of face. And within the family by Gods justice it often
comes to pass, that the wives of Esau, the daughters of Heth, were not more
grievous to Jacob and Rebecca, then the persons so unequally yoked are between
themselves.

fear of God, and practice of piety; which only has the promise of
prosperity. Psalm. 128.
2. That they want that godly affection which delights in the godly, and
abhors the familiar converse (and much more marriage (...)* Plat. de legib. 4.
and proclaim to all men (howsoever they would seem to be) what indeed they
are. 3. That they are destitute of godly zeal, which professes hatred to
idolaters and idolatry: yea of all usually spiritual and; let him blame
himself, Homil. against peril of idolat. p. 1. pa. 16.
who finding unfaithfulness in the covenant of marriage, did not duly consider
whether ever that party would be true to him, who plays false with God: or
whether the faithfulness and love to God should be the breeder and nurse of
true love and faithfulness to himself.

Object. But all this while you compare the Papists with the heathen or
Cananites, between whom there is no comparison. Answ. The Popish idolatry is
as gross as ever was any: for they worship the wodden cross, and pieces of
bread with religious worship: and why is Rome called Egypt, Sodom, Babylon,
but because it is a source into which all heathenish idolatry runs: and why
is it called an hibitation of devils? if any thing can be spoken worse of any
heathenish idolatry, it shall not be the worst. 2. Our danger is more from
them, then any or all the heathen. 3. The ends of avoiding them are the same
with any other heretic, namely, to prevent infection and seduction. Object.
But the Papist professes the same faith with us. Answ. In word he does, but in
deed he renounceth the whole foundation of religion, and this is a more real
denial. Object. But so do many hypocritical Protestants, and yet you dare
not say but we may match with them. Answ. Many there are who (as we have heard)
profess they know God, but in their deeds deny him, but this is not that
which is in our question; which is of diversity in religion, and not of
infidelity or hypocrisy where the same religion is professed: the former is a
bar of marriage, but not the latter. Object. But then you will say, that such
marriages made, ought to be dissolued^ I answer, 1. that marriage is an
external thing and properly hinders not faith and salvation of it self: and
2. that it is not against christianity to keep contracts made with Turks and
heathen. 3. Besides in the Apostles days, the faithful being married to an
infidel, he was not to put her away, 1. Cor. 7.12. if she would abide with
him. But as M. Zanchius after he had learnedly discussed this question,
Indicium esto ecclesiae.
and propounded reasons out of the Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and civil
law, that such marriages ought to be disanulled, yet doubtfully leaves it to
the judgment of the Church: so will not I be too bold in defining this great
question.

Verse. 11. Knowing that he that is such, is perverted, and sins, being
damned of his own self. Having in the former verse, showed both the persons
to be proceeded against, (called heretics) and the manner of proceeding
against them; namely, after once or twice admonition to avoid them; Now in this
verse our Apostle discendeth to give some reasons of this severity; which are
two in number. First, he is such a one as is subverted or turned off the
foundation. Secondly, he wittingly and willingly, spurneth against the known
truth, sparkling, and shining in his conscience, and therefore is remediless
and desperately incurable.

2. Tim. 2.19.
For the former. By being perverted, or turned off the foundation, is not to be
meant any falling off from the foundation of Gods election, which abides so
sure, as that not any one of Gods elect shall ever fall away, as Hymencus and
Philetus did: but a falling off from some fundamental points of Christian
religion, held and maintained by the Church, whereof this party yet seems a
member. As for example: The maine foundation aimed at in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles is, to teach; that Jesus Christ, God and man, is the
alone and perfect Savior of his Church: and whosoever teaches or holds any
doctrine tending to overthrow, either of his natures, or any of his offices;
he is truly said to be turned off that foundation. Again, the maine grounds
of all our religion, for matter either of faith or manners, are the
commandments of the law, and promises of the Gospel: and whosoever either
directly, or by direct consequent overthrows any of the commandments of God,
or articles of our faith, he is truly said to be turned off the foundation. Now
this cannot every error in religion do. For (to keep our Apostles allegory,
comparing the profession of religion to the building of a great house) some
errors are lesser, and as it were besides the foundation; such as may be
thought as the breaking down of some window; some greater as the breaking
down of some side of the house, and yet the house stands, although much
defaced. But some are such as ouerturne the whole house, and raze the very
foundations of all: such as is the doctrine of justification by works, which
point alone puts men quite out of their estate in Christ; and shuts them
out of the kingdom of heaven. Gal. 5.2.4. Whence might be observed, how
needful a thing it is for every one to be well grounded in points of
Catechism, which is a thing most dangerously neglected by the most: and being
so grounded, to look well to themselves, least they be turned off from them,
and so depart from the holy commandments: for thus the end of such would be
far worse then the beginning. But we will come to the latter degree of this
sin. He sins, being damned of himself, that is, he wilfully sins or
adds sin to sin: not only by maintaining an error, but 1. against the
light of the word shining in his conscience. 2. against the wholesome
admonition of his faithful pastor, Quia omne sanum iudicium in terris and
monitiones ecclesiae recusat. Cypr. epist. lib. 1.3. idem Fulg. de Christ.
sacrific. ad Mon.
yea and of the whole Church, the voice of which he will not hear. 3. even
against (besides other convictions) that of his own conscience; whereby he is
resolved to take part with the wickedness of his heart, and persist an
heretic in his heresy. This man if he had no other judge, is judged and
condemned of himself, and shows that he is damned of himself.

Object. But there is no man so monstrous and graceless, that will persist in
error against the light of his conscience. Answ. Yes; and this comes partly
by the natural impuritie of conscience; Tit. 1.15.
which can excuse not only intentions unwarrantable, but even sins committed
against the law. As in the young man, Mar. 10.20. who boasted that he (though
he had lived in the breach of all) had kept all the commandments from his
youth: and 2. partly by the increase of that corruption through a senseless
numbednesse, and vnfeelingnes, which springs from a custom of sin: and 3.
especially by the just judgment of God, who strikes them with a reprobate
sense; by withdrawing even the very light of nature from those who would feign
put it out, or deteine it in unrighteousness: and by delivering them up to
strong delusions, Romans 1.28.
that they might believe lies, who would not embrace the truth in the love of
it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.


Now he that is such a wilful offender, and known so to be, must be avoided.
But it is hard (will some say) to know any man thus to sin. Answ. Because we
speak not now of the judgment of certainty which is proper to God, whereby
he alone can judge of the final estate of a man, but only of the judgment of
humane wisdom, which is given to the Church, who judges only for the present
by the present fruits, it is not so hard to do: for such a man has been
brought to conference, to the trial of the Scriptures, to the analogy of
faith, and to the admonition of the Church: by which his reasons have bin
refelled, his judgment informed, his conscience convinced, himself forewarned
of his danger; but he obstinately has refused all these good means, and
persisteth in his error. Where note,

The Lord uses great patience even to the worst.
1. What patience the Lord uses in his just proceedings, even against the worst
men, whom he will not have condemned, nor cast out of the Church upon
suspicions, or surmises; no nor presently after an open sin is committed: but
their must be a time between, wherein the Church must rightly inform her
self, that she may know the nature, and degree of the sin, before she turn
her to any censure or sentence. Yea and further, the sin being apparent, she
must not reject any, till all good means of reclaiming have been in vain
used. Which may teach us, that to heap or hasten excommunications ipso facto;
or (as it is often) before the party can come to the knowledge or suspicion of
any such proceeding, So must his children.
is to swerve from the rules of the word, and those

2. Note, that when a sinner is known to sin of obstinacy, the best way is
to avoid him, Open and obstinate sinners must be avoided.
and cast him out. For 1. labor is but lost on such a one. 2. He does but
tread holy things under his feet; of which holy Let him alone, he is
incurable. Object. But if he be thus left unto himself, am not I accessarie to
his condemnation; or might not I by still following him, be a means of his
conversion at length: and ought not I to wait still when God will give
repentance. Answ. No, he so sins as the text says, himself condemns
himself; and his sin is upon his own head, who wilfully and laboriously
destroys him. 2. As the ordinances of God are dear unto himself, so ought
they to be also unto us, so as we may not expose them to the contempt of a
scorner. 3. Thou have not left him till he be apparently desperate, no
otherwise then a Phisician has left a desperate patient; whose disease is not
worse then his froward disposition in refusing all means of health and
safety. 4. Even the neglect of him may (by bringing him to enter into
himself) prove a nearer way of winning him, then any familiar course or
converse with him.

3. Note hence also, The Lord makes good use of the most wicked conscience.
what use the Lord makes of a wicked conscience, even in desperate sinners. It
shall be the accuser, witness, and judge to pronounce the sentence of death
against his own soul; and so shall make way unto the Lords most righteous
judgment. Judas himself being surcharged with conscience of his sin, read
the sentence against himself (there being no other to do it) saying, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood: and then went and hanged himself. For this
purpose the Lord has put into the soul not only a knowledge, whereby
naturally even the wicked can discern between that which is honest, and
dishonest; yea between good and evil so far as to make them excuseles; but
also an application of that knowledge unto the several actions of life. From
which two issue two other faculties, which are the very nature of conscience:
1. A testification that such an action is done or not done, yea although a man
would not have it so to testify. 2. A judgment after trial, whether it be
well done or no: the fruits of which judgment are either, joy, peace, and
glorying in things which the conscience says are well done: or else horror in
soul, as in Caine: trembling in body, as in Faelix: fearful dreams and
visions, Genesis 4.14. Act. 24.26. Dan. 5.4.
as in Baltazer: or despair, as in Judas in the sense of sin committed. To
this agrees that of Solomon, Prove. 20.27. The light of the Lord is the spirit
of man, and searches all the bowels of the belly: in which words man's
conscience is compared to the Lords lantern, that discovers things to a
man's self, which are as secret as his own bowels. This observation
affoardeth us sundry special uses. As,

Use. 1. It lets us see what an intolerable torment a wicked conscience is,
even a gibbit, and a rack set up within the wicked to vex and torment them
withal: and as a fearful hue and cry every where ouertaking them; that let
them run or ride where they will, they follow themselves with a writ of
apprehension; which draggeth them will they nill they, before the face of the
judge. No sooner was Adam fallen, but his conscience heard the voice of God
ringing through Paradise; which made him fly from God, and hide himself. No
sooner had Cain slain Abel, but the voice of the blood filled heaven and
earth, and made his countenance fall. Act. 24.26.
No sooner did Paul dispute of justice, temperance, and judgment to come, but
Felix trembled. And whence is that fearful looking for of judgment, and
violent fire, which shall devour the adversary; Heb. 10.27.
but from the work of conscience, fitting the wicked for the judgment of the
great day? What marvel is it then, if the wicked would feign stifle and choke
the noise of their conscience? but that they cannot still do it. Which being
so, let every one fear to sin against the light of his conscience, and not
dare to venture upon, or foster the least sin: for howsoever we may for the
present think some sins light and little; if the Lord never so little touch
the conscience (as the time comes apace when he will awaken it) we shall
feel every sin (even the smallest) to lie as heavy as a mountain upon our
souls: little do we think that that sin which now we account as light as a
feather, should prove so heavy upon our shoulders, as that our hearts shall
not be able to sustain us from oppression under it. And further, howsoever men
may think to carry their sin so close, as the eye of the kite cannot pry
into it; yet know whosoever thou art, that thy conscience is Gods book, take
heed what thou writest in that book: for it carries a light in it self
whereby it shall be read and discovered.

Use. 2. This further teaches us not to neglect the checks of conscience, nor
our own hearts reproouing us of our ways; as those men who are resolved to
hold on their lewd courses, let the word and spirit, yea, their own spirits
suggest what they will or can against it. For the time comes when thou can
not set the voice of thy conscience so light: and then that conscience which
has checked thee shall judge thee, and that heart which has reproved thee,
shall torment thee; and thou shall never be able to turn off the charge of it,
but shall by it be accused and convicted to have been a wilful chooser of
thine own destruction. This is that which is secretly employed in the text,
that if these heretics had listened but to the checks of their own
conscience, they had never run on so far into such an incurable condition.

Act. 23.1. and 24.16. Good conscience is a sweet companion.
Use. 3. This consideration also teaches us to look that in every thing we
keep good consciences before God and all men: the use of which will be
manifold. 1. To keep us from errors and heresies, and contain us in the
profession of the true faith: for let good conscience be shipwreck of faith:
as is to be seen in all heretics. 1. Tim. 1.19.
Hence are we counseled to make pure conscience as the coffer to keep faith
in, 1. Tim. 3.9. keep faith in pure conscience: neither indeed will it be
kept without: For by the just judgment of God punishing sin with sin; it
comes to pass, that corruption of judgment and practice, of doctrine and
manners go hand in hand, An evil conscience the mother of heresies.
and for most part vndiuorsed. 2. In doing any action lawful in it self, a
good conscience only makes it good to the doer: for to do even the will of
God against my conscience is sin to me; be the same in it self never so
materially a dry with peace of heart, Prove. 17.1.
is better then an house full of sacrifices with strife and war within. In
outward afflictions there is inward rejoicing, for let the heart be pacified in
God, it can rejoice in tribulation. Rom 5.3.
The disciples can go away rejoicing from the Council, that they were counted
worthy, to be beaten, and suffer rebuke for Christ, Act. 5.41. The Martyrs can
kiss the stake, embrace the fire, and sing in the midst of the flames. 5. Yea,
it does not only through the whole life minister joy and comfort even in the
remembrance of death, as 2. Tim. 4.7.8. but it follows a

Verse. 12. When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to
come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter. Our Apostle
having finished all such common precepts as respected the whole Church in
Creta, he now passes to some private business, which more specially respected
the person of Titus, and commended to his practice: and it stands of two
branches: the former touching Titus his coming to Paul, in this 12. verse. the
latter touching the loving intertainement which he should show toward Zenas,
and Apollos, in the next verse. Concerning Titus his journey to Paul, he is
directed both for the time, when I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus:
as also for the place where, to Nicopolis: with a reason rendered why he must
come thither, because Paul had a determination there to winter.

First, Titus is enjoined to come to Paul, who as he had power to place or
displace him at his pleasure, so he wanted not sufficient reason at this time
to call him unto him. 1. that he might visit Paul whose affection longed to see
him, and to be refreshed by him. 2. that he might further instruct him in the
doctrine of faith, and the discipline of the Church. 3. that he might elsewhere
send him to preach, and confirm some other Church planted by the Apostle.

2. As for the place Nicopolis, whether Titus must come: we read of three
cities called by this name; but this was in Thracia near Macedonia: and the
reason added is not needlessly affixed to the Apostles iniunction, but to
encourage Titus unto so long a journey; for else he might conceive with
himself, that the Apostles calling being to go from place to place to plant
Churches; he might happily miss of him there, and so loose his journey:
therefore Paul tells him, that if God let his purpose stand, he shall be sure
to find him there; seeing he had determined there to winter. And from both the
precept and reason it is plain, that Paul was not now at Nicopolis, nor writ
this Epistle there, nor sent it thence (howsoever the subscription of the
Epistle boldly, but heedelesly affirms it) for then he would have said, be
diligent to come to me hither: and I have determined here to winter: and not;
come to Nicopolis for I have determined there to winter: the mistaking of this
adverb in the text was the cause of the erroneous subscription added by the
scribe who copied out the Epistle: the like whereof in sundry other Epistles
is confessed both by Protestants and the Papists themselves.

3. But when must Titus come: not before Artemas or Tychicus were sent from
Paul, to supply his place in Creta. Of Artemas we read not so much as of
Tychicus, who accompanied Paul into Asia, Act. 20.4. and by whom the Apostle
sent his Epistles to the Ephesians, 6.21. and to the Colossians, 4.8. in both
which he is called a beloved brother, a faithful Minister, and fellow servant
in the Lord: and every where very respectively spoken of. But yet seeing he
is here mentioned before Tychicus, and set apart for the work and service of
the Church by the Apostle himself, it is certain he was a faithful and
sufficient man: for else would not the Apostle have committed a matter of such
trust and charge unto him.

Doctr. Out of this provident care of the Apostle for the Church we learn, It
is dangerous for the Churches to be left destitute of their teachers though for
a short time.
that it is very dangerous and hurtful to the Church, to be left destitute of
their Ministers and teachers, although for a very small time. Paul had an
earnest desire to see Titus; and as is likely some other special work more
commodious for the Church to employ him in elsewhere: and yet he must not come
til an Artemas or Tychicus come in his room to take charge of his people: he
says not, come thou to me, and I will shortly send Artemas or Tychicus; but
come not till I send them. Well knew the Apostle, 1. the weakness of faith
without continual support; and that if there be not watering as well as
planting, whatsoever is best begun will easily decay, and being once decayed
is hardly recovered. 2. the subtlety of Satan, together with his malice, who
incessantly seeks reentry; who if he cannot hinder the gathering of the
saints he will do what he can to hinder their building up; that so the Lord
may come short of a great part of his glory, and his people cut short of a
great part of their comfort. 3. how naked people lie without vision to all
errors and dangers, and how easily the sheep are scattered, when the Pastor is
smitten or removed.

Use. 1. This doctrine especially directs it self against that fearful
sin of nonresidencie, or ordinary absence of the Pastor from his people.
Against which not only this example, but other reasons drawn out of the
Scripture are very express. As, 1. the authority of Gods commandment, Act.
20.28. binding all Pastors carefully to attend unto the flocks of which the
holy Ghost has made them overseers: and this not at the quarter or half year
day to gather in the profits and to feed themselves, but to feed the flock,
the Church of God which Christ has purchased with his blood. I would know
whether this precept requires the personal presence of the Pastor or no: If
any man say, that he is as good as present in his sufficient substitute: I
answer, that the most do not provide so sufficiently, but some rakeshame of
men, some Ieroboams Priest of the basest of the people, that cannot tell
otherwise what to do with himself. But if they did; the text is not
satisfied, which requires his own attendance, neither inioyneth a Pastor to
see his people fed, but to feed them. I would further here demand whether
that commandment given to Archippus belong not to all the Pastors of the new
Testament, Take heed to the ministry that thou have received in the Lord,
that thou fulfill it: which if it do (as no forhead can deny it) then with
what face can any man take a ministry upon him that an other may fulfill it.
The like commandment is given by Solomon, Prove. 27.23.
be diligent to know the sta^e of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds:
which not obscurely implies the presence of the Pastor, who must not only
teach, but teach aptly, and apply not only true, but fit doctrine according to
the state and condition of his people.

2. The excellency of the object tieth the Pastor to more then ordinary
attendance: his calling is to watch over men's souls: Heb. 13.17.
were it but to watch over men's bodies or goods, it were no less then
capital, for any man to leave his station at his own pleasure wherein his
captain has set him: and how then can this unfaithfulness in them who are
set in the Lords watch towers, but be by so much the more perilous then the
other, by how much the soul is more precious then the body, and the loss of
the soul infinitely surpassing the loss of the body?

3. The straitnes of the account that is to be made for the people, cannot but
bind him that has any conscience left in him to ordinary residence and
attendance in his own person. Hence the Apostle to the Hebrews says, they
watch over men's souls as they that must give account. And the Apostle Peter
wishes them so to feed the flock depending upon them, 1. Pet 5.4.
that when the chief sheepeheard shall appear, they may give up their
accounts with joy.

Now with what joy can he give up his accounts, who with the hireling has left
his people to the wolf: who never knew their estate, who never came but as a
stranger among them: never or seldom known by voice unto them: yea scarce
known by face to many of them: That which will die, let it die, Zachar. 11.9.
he is none of his brothers keeper. Slender is that account which that Captain
can make to his Prince, who having received his pay to guide and train such a
number of Soldiers, Negligenter pascens convincitur non amare summum pastorem.
Damas. epist. 4.
leaves them in the plain field to the spoil and violence of the enemy: or
at the best, sets a base fellow over them, fitter to guide cattle then to
train men up to such services; such another account must needs here be given
up, but neither of them will go for payment. 4. The love of Christ were it
present, would constrain men to feed his sheep: Peter, says Christ, love
thou me? feed my sheep. Were there love to the flock, it would not suffer
them to run into ruins, nor to fall away from their zeal, faith, virtue:
neither should the Pastors absence open the door to wolves and deceivers, to
Priests and Jesuits, who faith present to rule the heart, it would extinguish
the drought of the world, and would be working by love toward Christ, and his
people; accounting obedience contentation were there, Cle^^^s ne connu^neretur
in d^^bus eccle^^^^^ ^egotia^^onis (...) hoc est, (...) lucri proptium, and ab
ecclesiastica consuetu^^^^ peni^us (...) Synod* p. cap. ^5.
such an appearance of evil would be avoided as covetousness is, which is a
filthy vice wheresoever, but especially in a Minister, who is as the eye in the
body, wherein such a blemish or rather such a beam is not more perspicuous
then scandalous: and yet is the root, as of all evil, so of this ordinary
nonresidencie. If true humility were present, it would not suffer the
impostume of pride to grow upon a man by multiplying of livings: which
experience teaches, to be like a collection of many bad humors into one
member, which make it to fidelity took but for Gods family: as a good
Physician, he would be ministering to the sick and diseased souls, he would be
binding up the broken spirits, he would be seeking and saving that which is
lost, yea he would go before the sheep of Christ and lead them in and out;
for all this he has promised before God and his people, and undertaken it in
his own person. If equity and justice ruled him, he could not suffer the
people who sow 1. Cor. 10.23.
who reap the Lords feilds; neither could he live of that altar which he does
not serve, 1. Cor. 9.13. Lastly, if right reason ruled him, he would easily
discern Pastoris nomen significat p^rsonalem actionem sicut nomen medici.
Maldonat. ex Hier. and August.
that either sundry bodies and congregations should have but one eye, or else
that this eye should be ordinarily and for most part many miles distant from
the body. Right reason would also show him how impossible a thing it is* for
one shepherd to keep more flocks then one: how unreasonable a thing it is,
for any man to perform service in one place, and take wages in another. What a
shameful thing it were to marry a wife in hope to beget children by another
man's help: what an equal thing it is, that he who does not his duty in his
own person, but by a deputy, should also go to heaven by a deputy, but not
in his own person; as merrily and wittily, Iodocus a famous French preacher,
witnessed by Espenceus. From all which I may conclude this reason with the
words of a Papist, Perald. 2. tom. tract. 4. in avar. part. 2. cap. 11.
that seeing neither nature is the principle or ground of nonresidencie; for
that is contented with a little; nor yet grace, which is contented with less;
therefore the corruption of the heart of man is the chief counselor and
perswader unto it. Neither is his reason to be neglected: for though a man
(says he) dare live a nonresident, yet would he not willingly die one. And as
for the matter of substitution whereon the whole frame of nonresidencie is set,
as on a foundation; he says, he sees not why one man might not have as well
an hundredth livings as one by this plea, for he might get substitutes enough:
neither does he see any reason but women might also be capable of Church
livings (by this plea) as well as men, for they also might perform the duties
by substitutes. But I remit the reader to the author, as also to other of our
later Divines, D. Willet in 1. Sam. cap. 14. v. 28.
who have largely and learnedly handled the same argument.

5. We may add hereunto the example of the Priests under the law, who were
fixed in their courses near the Temple, and had their chambers and rooms
adjoined unto the Temple, that they might wait on their offices, 1. Chr.
28.12, 13.
and be ready for their services: and there is no reason why the Ministers of
the Gospel, should not now as diligently wait on their office as they under
the law: unless we will say, that the standing Ministry of the new Testament
is not so necessary, not so certain as that walking Ministry of the old.
Let Ministers therefore see, that the occasions of leaving their flocks for a
time, be urgent and weighty; not pretenses proceeding from covetousness, nor
ambition, nor any other sinister respect: neither let them dare to remove
themselves (no not for a while) but for some occasions which are more
necessary then the attending of the flock: for howsoever they may shroud
themselves by the protection of humane laws, yet in the court of conscience
only such necessary and weighty occasions will bear plea, and give a man leave
for a time to be absent.

2. As it must not be a small matter, that must draw a Minister from his
charge, so if such weighty occasions fall out, as require the gifts of some
men to be otherwise employed for the time for the greater good of the Church,
then in his private charge; then we see what must be our rule. If Titus be
removed, an Artemas, or Tychicus, a faithful and furnished man must be sent
in his room; that while the whole body is cared for, no particular member be
lost or neglected. Where also great and noble men may be put in mind, what a
grievous sin they bring upon themselves, when they call Ministers from their
charges into their houses, or unto the seas, or any such employment, and in the
mean time neglect to provide sufficiently for their flocks: and the sin is
the greater, in that they might be ordinarily better served by such as have no
charges; and why should they not rather send to the Universities, then to the
Churches, if they did not choose to wrong them both, when as yet no necessity
urges or forces them hereunto?

Verse. 13. Bring Zenas the expounder of the law, and Apollos on their journey
diligently, that they lack nothing. In this verse is contained the second
private business which is enjoined Titus, commanding him that he should set
forward on their journey, both Zenas set out by his profession, an expounder of
the law, and Apollos: and this he should do, 1. by accompanying them in some
part of their way: and 2. by providing that they wanted no necessary for their
long journey being to sail from Creta in Grecia. For the persons of Zenas and
Apollos, they were Apostolic men, of notable gifts for the Ministry. The
former is here said to be by profession an expounder of the law, that is, of
Mos^s law, (as is most likely) rather then the civil law: but howsoever, he
was not like our lawyers, he joined himself with Apollos, and was a poor man,
and had wanted but for the churches contribution: For Apollos we read of him,
Act. 18.24. that he was borne at Alexandria, that he was an eloquent man,
mighty in the Scriptures, and fervent in the spirit: yea so powerful in his
doctrine, as that of some he was accounted not inferior to the chief
Apostles: for as some said they were Paul's, so some cleaued to Apollos, as
other some to Cephas: 1. Cor. 1.12.
and therefore both of them were worthy to be respected by Titus, who therefore
must perform unto them this part of Christian courtesy, to lead them forth on
their way.

Doctr. Whence note that Christianity hinders not, Christianity enioyneth
all kind of courtesy.
but commends and enioyneth civil courtesy and all kind of humanity. For
1. whatsoever pertains to love and good report, that must believers think on
and do, Philip. 4. Secondly, the wisdom which is from above is gentle,
peaceable, full of mercy and good fruits, James. 3.17. Thirdly, those many
commandments, that Christians should salute and greet one an other, and that
with an holy kiss, 1. These. 5.26. called by Peter the kiss of love; usual in
those East countries, 1. Pet 5.14.
by which outward testimony they declared mutual love and kindness.
Fourthly, outward courtesy is a necessary virtue even for the maintaining of
the bond of Christian peace: yea avails much for the nourishing and
increasing the communion of Saints, and society with Gods people. Fifthly, how
disgraceful a thing were it for the profession of Christ, that such as
profess faith in the Lord Jesus, should show themselves inhumane or hoggish;
who should be as lambs, and little children, for such are they who have entered
into the kingdom of Christ, as the Prophet witnesses. Let this point
therefore be well thought of, that as faith and love cannot be separate; so
must good conscience and good manners go together.

Now for this special branch of courtesy, to bring the servants of God and the
Church on in their journey; it is from an inferior to a superior a duty of
honor: as we see in Barzillai, 2. Sam. 19.36. who would go over Jordan with
king David, and set him so far on his way to Jerusalem, and then return back
to Gilead. And of the equal to the equal it is a duty of kindness; and
toward the teacher of both: and as it seems, was very common among
believers in the Apostles times. Thus we read how the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus accompanied Paul to the ship, Act. 20.38. so the disciples whom he
found at Tyrus, with their wives and children accompanied him out of the city,
Act. 21.5. yea so ordinary was this custom among them, that he makes full
account of it before hand: Romans 15.24. When I shall take my journey into
Spain, I will come by you, for I trust to see you, and be brought on my way by
you: and commends as a semely duty among the Saints, 3. Ioh. 6. Gaius having
received believing strangers the Apostle speaking to him of them faith, Whom if
thou bring on their journey (as it beseems according to God) thou do
well.

Such as are in the Lords work must be carefully provided for that they want
nothing. 1. Cor. 9.11.
The second duty enjoined Titus concerning them is, that he suffer them to want
nothing. They were employed in the Lords work, and therefore must be cared for
so much the more. For 1. what can be more equal then that he that labors in
the Gospel should live of the Gospel? or that those who sow spiritual things
should reap temporal? The law of nature binds to relieve the parents in
time of want. The law of God charge in more places then one, never to forsake
the Levite all the days of thy life. The laws of all nations allow their
Captains and standart bearers a liberal and honorable stipend: and suffer
not any common soldier to go to warrefare upon his own charge. And very
unequal were it that any should feed a flock and not eat of the milk, or
plant a vinyard and not taste of the fruit. And how much more are these
spiritual Fathers to be relieved? how much less should the Ministers who are
the Lords Soldiers, Captains, and Standart bearers go to war of their own
costs? how much more should the Lords shepherd eat of the milk of his
flock? and the laborers in his vinyard eat of the fruit? 2. If we go from
the men to their tidings, these be such as ought to bring their persons into
acceptance with us: That as David said of Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and
brings good tidings: so because of their good tidings we must entertain Gods
Ministers as good men. Hence the Apostle commands us, to receive such, and
have them in singular love, for their works sake. Phil. 2.29. 3. The godly who
profess love unto the truth, may not neglect such as are the publishers of it,
but cheerfully minister unto their necessities, to the end that thereby
themselves may be helpers to the truth. 3. Epist. Ioh. 7. But especially if any
suffer for bearing witness unto any part of Gods truth; toward such Gods
people must enlarge their bowels, and even stretch their best abillitie to
help up that part of the truth, which Satan and his instruments seek with
violence to obscure or suppesse: and the rather, because these sufferings are
endured for the truth; and for them, who have as good a right in it, as their
teachers themselves. 4. For this cause also ought the faithful to comfort and
encourage the messengers of God; that therein they may reap a sweet fruit of
their labors, and may rejoice in them, not in there gift so much; as in that
it is a fruit which furthereth their own reckoning. Phil. 4.17.

Now all these reasons are such as suffer not any professor to shut up his love
in his own Pastor (although he is first bound unto him) but call for the duty
in general to every one that works in the same work, according as their
necessity and occasions shall be: not only our own Titus, but even Artemas,
and Tychicus (suppose strangers which for his names sake go forth, 3. Ioh. 7.)
must be kindly dismissed, and not sent away empty. This is a doctrine which is
much neglected of too many which profess love to the truth even in these
days, which more lowdly call for it, then in many ages before.

Verse. 14. And let ours also learn to show forth good works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful. The Apostle having enjoined Titus to make
so frank a supply for Zenas, and Apollos, that they should not want any thing
for their journey; Titus might demand, but where should I have to provide for
them; (for it is certain, that Titus was not now a man of such state and
wealth, Si non habes provideant subditi tui. Aquin. in locum.
as those who say they are like him:) the Apostle therefore answers that
secret objection in these words, Let ours learn to show forth good works the
fruits of their faith, especially for such necessary uses of the Church as
this is: strain them not in unnecessary things, but for such necessary uses
let them strain themselves; that they may be rich in good works and not
unfruitful. The verse stands of a precept, and a reason. In the precept
three points are to be considered, 1. what are these good works meant. 2. who
are bound especially unto them, Let ours learn. 3. what are the necessary
uses of these and such like good works.

First, by good works are not properly here meant, all such actions in
general as are thus styled in the Scripture: but in special those of
bountifulnes and beneficence: both because those former were called for in the
8. ver. of this Chapter, as also in that these are especially suited unto this
argument. Now these are commended to the practice of the faithful by the title
of dignity, in that they are called good works: not that they are so
absolutely and perfectly good, as that there is no sin in them; Bellarm. de
justice. l. 4. c. 15.17.
(as the Papists contend) for the best works are good only in part so far as
they proceed from the spirit, and from grace: and in part corrupt as they come
from flesh and corrupt nature: of which two (namely, flesh and spirit) every
regenerate man consists: and therefore every action cannot but savor of the
fountain from whence it streameth. If it be said, that God is the author of
every good work; who because he is perfectly good, cannot effect any thing
which is not perfectly good. The answer is, that howsoever every work of God
is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
which he does in and by himself, yet such as he does in and by man, who is
another author, and actor of them, cannot but draw imperfection from him. And
whereas it is said, if good works were sinful, then ought we not to do
them: the answer is, that we must not therefore refuse to do them, because they
are not simply evil: but in themselves good, and partly good in the doer:
commended to our practice by God, of whom they are reputed good works; and in
his Christ pardoning the defects of them for our encouragement, accounts of
them as if there were no sin at all in them. Whence note, that good works
are so far from justifying, as that we are not able to answer one for ten
thousand of them: and that it is the mercy of God, and not the dignity of
them, which brings this style upon them.

Secondly, of whom good works are called for; Let ours, called in the 8. verse
believers in God. Ours, who are converted and confirmed in the faith by thy
labor and mine; of these call for good works. For this is the first condition
of any good work, that the worker must be a believer in Christ. Vbi Christus
non est fundamentumibi nullum est boni operis aedificium. Gregor. decr.
For 1. make the tree good, and then the fruit will be good: he must be a man
that has learned by the doctrine of the Gospel to do a good work, as the
words of the verse imply. 2. the heart, the fountain of all actions is
naturally corrupt with original sin, and the members are weapons of
unrighteousness: and therefore before the heart be purified by faith, the best
actions passing through our understandings, wills, affections, and parts, can
no more avoid tainture and pollution, then can the sweetest water running
through a muddie channel, or the purest liquor standing in a fustie vessel.
3. He that being an unbeliever has not the son; neither has the spirit of
the Son; and consequently cannot send forth any fruits of the spirit: the
Son has not set him free, but he is bound hand and foot, and not able to
move in any one action of spiritual life. 4. He that cannot pray by the
spirit, cannot bring forth any work truly good; nothing can be done without
prayer; the Lord must give strength, the will, and the deed: he must teach us
to work, set us in, and hold us on in working: he must give it success and
blessing, and make it fruitful to our selves and others: and without the
prayer of faith, nothing of this is obtained. Romans 14. Heb. 11. Faith does five
actions to make any work good.
5. Without faith it is impossible to please God* for to every good work are
required many actions of faith. For 1. general faith must make and warrant it
good in the matter; and know it to be commanded or allowed in the word: for
that is a good work which God will worker renewed in part, and accepted in
Christ; who covers the spots and imperfections of the work: for the Lord
first respects the person, and then the work; first Abel, and then his
sacrifice. 3. Faith looks ends of it; a bad end spoileth the best action.
Now the right ends of a good work are, 1. Gods glory: for as all rivers go
out of the sea, and return again into the sea; so all good actions as they
come from God, so they tend unto him again: be they the least and lowest, even
eating, drinking, or what soever else, all must be done to the glory of God.
2. The good of our brethren, and edification of men: for this end Christians
must make their light to shine abroad before men: and the whole law is
fulfilled in this one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. 3. The
exercise of our own graces, Gal. 5.14.
by doing our own duties to God and man: not selfe-pleasing, profiting,
praise, fear, shame, or such other sinister ends, as sway with the
unregenerate: but as is the end of the commandment, so must it be of our
obedience, which is love out of a pure heart, and faith unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5.
4. Faith will provide that good actions be compassed by good means: we may not
do evil that good may come of it. Romans 3.8.
It was Genesis 19.
and the Lord by an ouerruling power bring light out of darkness, yet is
there always just matter of mourning and humiliation. 5. Faith will
righteousness which is by faith in him, Phil. 3. And therefore as for all
other, so for this good work of beneficence and love to the Saints, the
Apostle wishes Titus to go to believers, with whom he might be bold: as who
had received a spirit of effectual faith, working in obedience to God, and
love to Gods people, and could not suffer them to be either idle, or
unfruitful in the work of the Lord. Nemo computet bona opera sua ante fidem,
vbi fides non erat bonum opus non erat. in Psalm. 30. praefat.
Well knew the Apostle that to have sent him elsewhere on this errand, it had
bin but the loss of both their labors; here he knew he should speed or no
where. So as we may conclude this point with that speech of Augustine, where
faith is not, no good work can be.

The third point in the precept is, that these good works must be showed forth
for necessary uses: why Christians should show forth good works I have
formerly showed in handling the 8. verse of this Chapter, and therefore will
come to declare what are the necessare uses in general of such good works as
are here called for. And here we must know that the Romish Church has not more
boldly then blasphemously pretended many necessary uses of good works, which
the Scriptures (never intending to set them up in the place of Christ) are far
from acknowledging: a taste whereof I have given in a few positions which are
stiffely defended by the pillars of that Church. As, 1. That good works
prepare a man to his justification, whereas the former point showed, that a man
must be a justified person before he can do a good work. 2. That they do
justify the person of the worker before God: notwithstanding the Apostle
says, that by the works of the Law no flesh can be justified. 3. That they
make men more just by a second justification: Gal. 2 16. Loquitur Apostolus de
omnibus operibus tam ceremonialibus quam moralibus. Aquin. in cap. 3. ad Gal.
lect 4. Tollet. instr. sacer. lib. 6.21. Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 32. Rhem. on
Matt. 6. sect. 2. Bellarm. lib. 5. de iustif. cap. 7.
which distinction of the first and second justification is a dream of their
own, not grounded in the Scriptures, nor once heard of in the Church, at the
least fourteen hundred years after Christ and his Apostles. 4. That they
satisfy Gods justice for temporal punishment. 5. That they merit heaven, yea
a greater degree of glory in heaven. 6. That they purge away sins, 7. That
they apply Christ's merit to purge them. 8. That they merit at Gods hand for
ones self and others. 9. That they free from purgatory pains. 10. That a man
may raise his trust in God from them. All which with many other blasphemous
tenures of this kind, directly thrust Christ from his throne, and make him but
half a Savior at the most, and consequently no Savior at all. It would draw
this point further then would well fit a commentary to dispute here these
positions with them, and therefore intending our business in hand, and taking
the mention of such heretical blasphemies in this auditorie to be no small
refutation: we come to those necessary uses which are warranted by express
Scripture, yea and thence commended unto us both in regard of 1. God, 2. our
neighbor, 3. our selves.

Necessary uses of good works. 1. In respect of God.
First, in regard of God good works have their necessary uses. As, 1. that his
name may be glorified by the professors of it; for it tends greatly sweet
smelling sacrifices as these be, Heb. 13.16. Philip. 4.18. these are the
myrrh, and the spice which Christ gathers when he comes into his garden,
Cant. 5.1.

2. Of our neighbor.
Secondly, in respect of our neighbor these good works of mercy and
beneficence have their excellent and necessary uses; for every Christian is a
fruitful branch of that vine, whereby both God and man is cheared. And whereas
our neighbor is either unconverted or converted, they want not their special
use in regard of them both.

First, for the unconverted, they are either elect or reprobate. If they be
elect, they may hence be prepared to their conversion, and woone even without
the word, to the liking of the word and profession, which they see so holy, so
charitable, and so plentiful in good works. Thus says the Apostle, that
unbelieving husbands may without the word be won by the godly conversation of
their wives: 1. Pet. 3.1.
and the same Apostle exhorts the scattered and converted Jews, to have
their conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they which now did speak
evil of them as evil doers, might by their good works be provoked to
glorify God in the day of their visitation. But if they be wicked and belong
not to God, 1. Pet. 2.12.
yet by the godly lives of professors they shall be, 1. restrained, that they
cannot so boldly rush into and tumble in their sins as they would: no more
then Herodias could quietly enjoy her sin so long as John Baptist was alive,
Mark. 6.19. 2. they shall have their mouths stopped and put to silence, when
they would gladly open them wide against the truth, and the professors of it:
And this is the will of God that by weldoing we put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. 1. Pet. 2.15.
3. they shall be convinced and condemned in their consciences, and so prepared
for the judgment of God: and thus the Queen of the South condemned the Jews;
and Noah by building the Arc condemned the old world, Heb. 11.7.

Secondly, If the neighbor be converted, he is either weak, and then he is
hereby confirmed, strengthed, and brought on: or else he is strong, and then he
is further provoked, yea his heart is gladded, and further knit to such a one,
as in whom he sees such sparkles of Gods image to shine. And thus was Titus
his inward affection more abundant toward the Corinths, when he remembered the
obedience of them all: 2. Cor. 7.15.
so was Paul's also by the faith and grace of the Philippians, 1.5.

Thirdly, in regard of our selves, 3. Of our selves.
they have many necessary and profitable uses: As, 1. to make our election
sure to our selves, 2. Pet. 1.10. Iam. 2.16.
loves God and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, 1. Ioh. 2.3. for that
love of God or men is unsound which is in tongue and word, but not indeed and
truth, as witnesses the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 3.18. 3. by these Opera non sunt
causa quod aliquis sit iustus apud deum sed potius executiones and
manifestationes institiae. Aquin in Gal. 3. lect. 4. Iam. 2.18.
for although good works cannot justify the person before God, yet they must
justify the faith of the person before men: and therefore James says, show
me thy faith by thy works: and of Abel is said, that he obtained witness that
he was righteous, in that he offered a better sacrifice then Cain, Heb. 11.4. 4.
They do our selves good both in this life, and in the life to come. 1. In this
life they profit us in our outward estate and inward. They bring blessing to
our outward estate: for God has promised, that he that waters shall have
rain, and that the merciful man shall not want: yea, they draw upon us not
only the blessing of God, but of men also, who bless the merciful man by
many prayers, which Job made no small account of; when in the depth of his
distress, hereby he comforted him self, that the blessing of the poor came
upon him. Thus Onesiphorus his mercy toward Paul, being at Rome in trouble,
brought the fervent prayers of so great an Apostle upon himself and his house,
2. Tim. 1.18. Besides this they do our names good, and help to purchase a
good report, Prove. 22.1.
which is better then a precious ointment. Abraham by his works was commended
that he was just, Iam. 2.21. and of the good and merciful man it is said, that
his name shall not be put out. As for our inward estate, they make that far
more thriuing, for every grace is strengthened by the execrcise of it, as no
talent was used but to increase; for as prayer is increased by praying, and
knowledge by instructing, so is love by alms, and mercy by distributing;
without which exercise all would rust, and become as a sword kept in the
scabbard, till the heart become like the sluggards field, ouergrowne with
thorns and briars, but most unready to any good work.

2. In the life to come they are profitable, for they procure a merciful
reward: and being a sowing to the spirit, we shall reap of them in the
harvest life everlasting: yea and more, they procure a proportionable measure
of glory; for according to the measure of faith and grace in the work, the
recompense may well be thought to be: a cup of cold water shall not loose the
reward; but yet he that sows more liberally shall more liberally reap. And
as in hell are degrees of torments, for some shall be beaten with more stripes,
some with fewer: and it shall be easier with some then other, and yet both
condemned: so is it probably held that in heaven shall be degrees of glory,
Dan. 12.3.
(for some shall shine as the firmament, some as the stars, in which is
greater light; yea one star differs from another in glory) and this
according to the gayning of talents, 1. Cor. 15.
for he that gains five talents shall rule over five cities, and he shall
rule over ten cities that has gained ten talents. Not that the gayning of
the talents meriteth any such recompense; no more then a cup of cold water
given to a disciple in the name of a disciple, or a mite cast into the
treasury: neither of which shall loose their reward; but because faithful is
he which has promised.

Use. 1. This doctrine meets with that slanderous imputation of the Church of
Rome against our doctrine: who bear the world in hand that our religion is a
destroyer of good works, and an enemy unto all charitable actions: whereas we
call for them as fruits of the Gosspel, as ornaments to our calling, as pledges
of our election, as witnesses of our sound faith and graces, and as the very
way which God has appointed to walk to heaven in. Our religion permits not
any to stand idle in the vinyard; we say let him not eat that will not work;
yea we teach a necessity of good works i^ believers, as well as the Papists
do: Necessitas haec est praesentiae, non efficientiae.
howsoever not as causes of salvation and justification, yet as inseparable
companions of lively and saving faith: only let Christ hold his place, and they
shall not set them higher then we; and let them give them no more then the
Scriptures do, and we will give them never a whit less.

Use. 2. Seeing by good works we glorify God, edify our brethren, and do
our selves so much good, let us be provoked to the diligent practice thereof.
Neither let any man think himself exempt from this doctrine, be he never so
poor: for we are not of the Popish* belief, who think that only such great
and glorious works, as building Churches, Colleges, highways, or giving
goods and Lands to the Church, or alms deeds, and such like, deserve the name
of good works: but every man has a double calling, namely, the general
calling of a Christian, and the special calling of life wherein God has set
him; and there is never a duty of either of these (be it never so base or
seruill) if performed in says and obedience, but it is a good work, and
pleasing unto God. But what shall we say of them, who by open wicked life,
profess contempt of God and his word, hatred of the light and the bringers of
it? that cast back, yea pull back many others who might be brought on: and so
accustom themselves to graceles courses, as they can no more change them then
the Ethiopian his skin? certainly these although they also will brag of a
good faith to Godward; yet is it no better then the devils have; who shall as
soon be saved by their faith, as these by this, if timely they repent not.

That they be not vnfruitfull] These words contain in them the reason of the
former precept, wherein by an excellent metaphor, or borrowed speech, he
provoke Christians, to the practice of good works. The metaphor implies
that as the Church is Gods orchard or garden, Cant. 4.16.
and his Ministers are his planters and waterers; so the faithful are the
trees, even trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, and planted by
the rivers of waters, 1. Cor. 3.6. Isa. 61.3. Ier. 17.8.
that they might bring forth their fruits in due season. And teaches, that
true Christianity is not a barren but a fruitful profession, Doctr.
Christianity is no barren and fruitless profession.
unto which Christians are every where called. In Ezech. 47.12. we have a
notable resemblance of those manifold fruits, which by the power of the Gospel
should be by believers produced in the Church of the new Testament. The vision
was of waters which run from the Temple, and from under the threshold of the
sanctuary. And wheresoever these waters should run, they should cause
admirable fruitfulness, in so much as on both sides of the river shall grow
all kind of fruitful trees, whose leaf shall not fade, and their fruit shall
not fall. These waters are the Gospel which issue from under the threshold:
that is, from Christ the door, typified by that bewtifull gate of the Temple;
from the Temple at Jerusalem these waters were with swift current to run not
only over Judea, but all the world in a short space: hence was the Church
mightily increased, for though these waters run into the dead sea, wherein
(if we believe Histories) abides no living thing: Plin. not. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 103.
yet such a quickening power they carry with them, as even there every thing
shall live: such as were dead in trespasses and sins, are hereby quickened,
and become trees of righteousness green and flourishing, yea and constantly
fruitful in all godly conversation. And this is the same which our Savior
notes, Ioh. 15.1. that his Father is the husbandman, himself is the vine,
Christians are the branches of that vine: who if they be sound, his Father
purges that they may bring forth more fruit: teaching us hereby, that it is
the Lords scope and aim, that Christians should be abundant in fruits
beseeming their profession. The Apostle Paul accordingly exhorts the
Philippians to be much in goodness, to abound in love, in knowledge, Philip.
1.11.
and in all judgment; yea to be filled with fruits of righteousness which are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. And the same Apostle calls
rich men to be rich in good works. 1. Tim. 6.18.
Now this being so necessary a duty, to which every Christian is every where
called, we will for the further clearing of it, consider these three points. 1.
The conditions of this fruitfulness: 2. the reasons to provoke unto it: 3. the
hindrances of it: unto which we will add and annex some profitable use.

Conditions of fruitfulnes 5.
First, the conditions of this fruitfulness are these. 1. Every Christian must
be fruitful: for every fruitless branch is cut down and made every branch,
admits of no exception, but is as a bush which stops every gap.

2. Every Christian must bring forth good fruit, Matthew. 7.17. Every and every
tree which brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into
the fire: and therefore the fruits which are called for at our hands, are
called in respect of the efficient fruits of the spirit; in respect of the
instrument fruits of faith* and in respect of their quality, good fruits,
acceptable to God, and profitable to men.

3. This fruitfulnes must proceed from good causes: for first the tree must be
good, for men gather not grapes of thistles. 2. he must have a abide in me, --
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self unless it abide in the vine. 3. he
must draw thence good sap and juice, through the fellowship and communion of
Christ his death and resurrection, without which we can do nothing. Ioh. 15.5.
4. he must have the spirit of the Son to be a principal agent in the
setting and ripening of these fruits: for they must be fruits of the spirit.
5. he must have the love of God within him, constraning him, which will be as
the sun helping on these fruits to their perfection. 6. he must have good
ends in his eye, namely, Gods glory, and man's good, Philip. 1.11.

4. Every Christian must bring forth much fruit, and not for clusters scarce
berries: trees of righteousness are laden with the fruits of the spirit: ye
bring forth fruit, Ioh. 15.8.

5. Christians must continue fruitful, and grow daily more fruitful; Psalm
92.14.
that their works are more at last, then at the first, Rev. 2.19.

The second point, is the consideration of the reasons to move Christians to
this fruitfulness. The principal are these; Reasons to fruitfulnes 4.
1. Gods pains and costs with us: he has bought us at a dear ra^e from our
vain conversation*

2. If we consider our time, we shall confess it more then time to yield up
our fruits: our Master has suffered us our first year already, yea and our our
day is, even the day of our visitation. Oh let us therefore consider, how much
time we have already lost, and how little remains behind, and this cannot
but be as loud voice in our ears unto fruitfulness.

wisdom which is from above, is full of good fruits: which if it have taken
up our hearts will bewray it self, Iam. 3.17. Galat. 5.
in love, in joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, and such like: and as naturally we rejoice to see
every thing about us fruitful, our fields, our cattle, our orchyards; even
so this supernatural wisdom would make it the delight of our souls, to see
our hearts and lives laden with the best fruits.

rejects them: Isa. 5.6.
for if the Lords labor be not answered, he will pull down the fence, break
down the wall, leave his own vineyard to wast, own it who will: and what can
be more fearful, then for a man to be left by God, to become a lodge for
devils, and lusts, and wasting sins; which yet is the state of many a man,
who is utterly unfeeling and sensles of it. withering, which presently
follows their casting forth: Ioh. 15.6.
and this the Lord brings on them two ways; sometimes by remoouing means of
fruitfulness; and so having laid his vineyard wast, he threatens in the next
place, that the clouds should not rain upon it, Isa. 5.6. And sometimes by
blowing upon the gifts he had given; he shall loose his sap and greennes he
once had: the unprofitable servant after conviction must have his talent taken
from him: Luke 19.
and this curse is so eminent upon many men, that comparing them with
themselves not long since, a man may say as the disciples of the fig tree,
against which the curse was passed from the mouth of Christ, Matthew. 21.20.
how soon is the fig tree withered? 3. An other degree is, that the heath in
the wilderness, Ier. 17.6.
which shall not see when any good comes. Now the heath it has good coming
upon it, the rain falls, the sun shines, the spring and summer season
returns upon it, but it sees none of this good, but remains a dry and
parched heath still: even so is it with a barren soul, which God has begun
to curse, the rain, the sun, the season, the word, Sacraments, days of
grace, Jesus Christ himself do him no good; he sees no good toward him in
all those: nay, the word judges him, the Sacraments are poison unto him, and
Christ himself is a rock of offense to him, on whom he breaks the neck of
his soul. Hence was it, that after the Lord had rejected his vineyard, he
sends his Prophet with his word among them, but to what end: Go, make the
heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, Isa.
6.10.
least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert, and I heal them: so as the good means of
salvation do such persons no good. And let no man think that this message
only concerned the Jews; for it is repeated six times in the new Testament,
that we should not slightly pass it over, but fear the like judgment, if we
be found in the like sin. 4. After all these comes the heavy sentence,
unto which by all these this sinner has been

The third point is the hindrances of this fruitfulness, Hindrances of this
fruitfulnes three.
the chief of which are these. 1. superfluity of lusts, and inordinate
desires which are as dead branches, and therefore must be lopped off before
fruit can be Has God spared thee the second and third year, and art thou
still fruitles, he must now needs call for the axe; and this is that which thou
must expect. 2. Another says, oh but I am a member of the Church, and what
talk you to me, I hear the word, receive the Sacram^nts, and though I be not
so forward and strict, I hope I shall do well enough. Which is all one, as if a
fruitles tree should reply to the master and say; I hope master, thou will not
cut me down, I am in thy orchard, and stand near thy house; if I were in the
wast I should think thou should care less for me: but will not the master
reply and say, that thou must rather go down becase thou stand
unprofitable in mine orchard, I cannot endure thou should keep any part of
that ground barren: if thou were in the wast thou mighst have stood longer; but
mine eye is next my house; if thou will be still unprofitable get the into thee
wast, here is no more place or room for thee. 3. Others reply and say, oh but
we are not so fruitless as you take us, and what desire you more? whereunto I
say, that such have great need to desire better evidences to allege for
themselves then this, if this be all: it is not enough if a tree could say, I
bring no bad fruit as thistles, and thorns; and therefore must needs be a good
tree: no, for a good tree constantly brings much good fruit. So is it not
enough for thee to allege what thou have not, or what thou art not; thou must
not be a private but a positive Christian laden with the fruits of the spirit,
else have thou lost all thy labor.

Use. 1. It is not sufficient to be harmless men, which many rest in as sound
fruits of religion; seeing that for all this they shall be cast out as dry
branches, and men shall gather them to the fire: there go two things to the
being of a good Christian, Psalm 34.
1. to eschew evil: and 2. to do good; and the sentence of condemnation in
the judgment day shall run against not only those that have done evil, but
those also who have done no good: see Matthew. 25.

2. It will not go for payment to be a Christian by profession if fruitless:
it is the constitution, and I may say the destynie of the Church to have in it
painted sepulchers, such as the Prophets in their times were troubled with, who
had nothing in their mouths but the Temple, the Temple; and yet remained in
their lives most wicked men: and others there were that pretending outward
holiness above others, would join fasting to their prayer, but yet rotten and
withered branches: such were they that were Jews without, in the face, and in
the lette^: But the sound Christian is discerned not by leaves but fruits of
the spirit: and they are the true Israelities who are so within, whose praise
is of God and not of men. The fig tree had leaves enough; and by the
flourishing and greennes seemed to promise great store of fruit: but when
Christ drew near, looked for fruit and found none: he said, never more fruit
grow upon thee. Let us take heed in time of such a woeful sentence.

3. Every man must by this doctrine take occasion to enter into the examination
of himself by the fruits of his faith and profession: and by impartial
sifting of themselves. Some will doubtless say; I find some fruits in my
self (I praise God) but so much corruption as utterly dismayeth me, that I
know not what I may think of my estate. But let such be of good cheer, seeing
the promise is, that if there be any fruit at all God will purge that branch,
and help it against corruption, Ioh. 15.2.
so as it groan still under corruption, and after grace; the least bud of true
grace shall shoot up to ripeness and fruit in due time: the smoking flax
shall not be quenched, but dressed to clearnes. Others by ex^mination shall
find that they have had better fruits then now, that they are become copper
Christians, now compared to their former golden times; and being fallen from
their first love, may say with shame in their faces, and sorrow in their
souls; alas I was thus and thus. But let such be advised to look well to
their standing; for sure it is that either such were never ingrafted into the
stock by effectual calling, but rather tied (as a science to a tree) by a
thread of outward calling and profession: or else a dangerous disease has
seized on them, which threatens the death of the soul, if it be not timely
prevented. True grace is not as nature which being past the vigor decays:
but a man in grace is still growing and can be a child no more. Others by
examining shall find themselves laden with bitter clusters of covetousness,
pride, contention, and sundry other lusts; who notwithstanding they profess
the Gospel are resolved to grow sowrer and sowrer, more loathsome to God, and
loathing goodness; but these are strange fruits of their profession, and argue
them to be but sear and rotten wood already, and are not far from burning.

Verse. 15. All that are with me salute thee: Greet them that love us in the
faith. Grace be with you all, Amen. This verse (containing nothing but mutual
salutations, and the Apostolical conclusion) has nothing in it but what we
meet withal almost in all the Epistles; we will therefore imitate our Apostle
in the brief winding up of the Epistle therewith; contenting our selves to
observe some short grounds of further meditation from them as they lie.

All that are with mee] In these words our Apostle would have Titus to know,
that all the Christians that were with him, embraced him with all Christian and
loving affection, and would have their mindfulnesse of him witnessed by a kind
and familiar salutation. The use whereof was, 1. to testify their love toward
him. 2. to knit the bond of it more firm and closely. 3. to encourage Titus in
his godly course; when he should hear from the Apostles mouth, that for the
same all good men approved him and wished him all good proceedings. And hence
we may note, 1. what is the use of this most ancient and approved custom of
saluting one another by writing; namely, to signify a loving remembrance of
the party saluted, with an earnest desire of their good and welfare: for that
is a common affection to all salutations to signify such a desire. And yet
there is great difference between one salutation and an other, which rises
from the difference of the persons saluting. Whereof some are merely civil
men without all religion; and these could not reach to wish their friends the
best blessings, although they wished them the best they could reach; as the
ordinary forms both of the Greeks and Latins testify. (...). Grae.
Salutem. lat.
Others have more in them then humanity, in that they apprehend the higher
graces of God in his Christ revealed in the Gospel; and having their own parts
therein, they most freely and feelingly in their salutations wish their friends
to partake with them; first in such graces as may accompany their salvation,
and then in all that outward prosperity that shall make for their good: and
these are the salutations of the Apostles, and of good Christians; they be no
court holy water; nor salutare libenter, from teeth outward: but hearty and
unfeigned testimonies of love, much making for the increase of mutual love, yea
and the strengthening of the bond of the communion of Saints. Now if this be
the use of salutations; we may see how grossly the Papists are besotted in
martyring (that I may use Luthers word) the Angels salutation to Marie. For, 1.
whereas a salutation is a civil thing, they have turned this into a devout
prayer. 2. not to Marie whom the words concerned alone, but unto God at whose
hands the repeating of it meriteth pardon of many sins. 3. whereas salutation
is to be done to a party present among us, this saluteth one absent. 4.
whereas it was the angels duty to carry this message once to Marie; they
thrust every man and woman into the Angels office, to carry the same message
every moment; as if it were a thing not already accomplished. 5. what further
good can they wish to Marie now in heaven: But they have despised the wisdom
of God; and what wisdom can be in them?

2. Note what a great encouragement and comfort it is for the godly to have the
hearts, the commendations, the good words and wishes of them that fea^e God: it
is an excellent support against the disgraces of the times, and reproaches of
ungodly men, when Gods people reach unto a man the right hand of fellowship:
little need he care for the causles curses and reproaches of the wicked; that
has the blessing of the Saints with him: although therefore we have another
rule to walk by then the judgment of men, and in doing our duty we may say
with the Apostle, I care not for the judgment of any man: yet it will be good
for a man to conceive how he is esteemed of the best, to whom ordinarily God
gives a spirit of discerning; that if it be possible with a good conscience he
may join a good name, which is not only sweet as a precious ointment, but
will supple and assuage such wounds and strokes as the ^^icked will be still
inflicting: Neither can these two things be easily disioyned, the approouing of
the heart unto God; and of the ways unto Gods people.

3. Note from the Apostles example, what a good office it is to be a
peacemaker, and to knit the members of the body of Christ close together:
this argues men to be endued with that wisdom which is from above, the
properties whereof are to be pure, peaceable, full of mercy, Iam. 3.17.
and good fruits: especially the Ministers of God must account it a part of
their office, not only to reconcile man to God; but even man to man. And let
every man conceive and remember, that our Lord Jesus makes it one of the
paths and rules of true happiness, when he says, Matthew. 5.9.
blessed are the peacemakers.

4. Note, how the Saints of God ought to embrace one another, and especially
such as are of the best desert in the Church for their labors and gifts; even
as the Saints with Paul did Titus: many of whom doubtless had never seen his
face, but had heard of his faithfulness: even such should be our love to the
godly, as we should affect them that are absent as well as present; and wherein
we can testify that affection to those whom we have heard well, although by
face we never knew them.

Greet them that love us in the faith.] Quest. May we not salute any but
believers? Answ. There is a common salutation, which is due from every man to
every man; and that is a civil courtesy and kind of honor which is to be
showed to all men: 1. Pet. 2.17.
our Savior Christ commanded his Disciples whenever they entered into an
house they should salute the same, Matthew. 10.12. and gave them a form of
salutation which they must use whether the son of peace were there or no,
saying, peace be to this house. Luke ^0.5.
Yea if men be our enemies and will not vouchsafe to salute us again, yet we
must not omit this branch of courteous behavior toward them, Matthew. 5.47. If
ye be freindly to your brethren only, what singular thing do ye? do not
even the Publicans the same. The word translated be freindly, (...).
is the same with this here, and signifies such freindship as was in those
countries testified by salutations, and embracings; which even the worst could
well enough perform to their friends: but Christ shows that we must do
more, we must not expect to see whether we be saluted first, but kindly salute
our enemies, although we be not saluted again. And the reason is, because it
was counted a sign of hatred not to salute a man. 2. Sam. 13.22. Absolon said
neither good nor bad to his brother; for Absolon hated Amnon. Whereas
Christians on the contrary must think on such things as may prevent offense,
procure love, and win if it may be even estran^ed affections. Philip. 4.^.
But yet howsoever this salutation is generally due from equal to equal; yet
there are some excepted cases in the Scripture. 1. such a one as lies in some
open sin, and hates to be reformed; not yielding to godly counsel out of
the word: a superior here may forbear to speak to such a one by way of
correction; but so as he must have care that he aim at the fault, and not at
the person, and make it so known to the person, that he testifies not the
hatred of his person but of his sin. 2. Sam. 14.24.
Thus David banished Absolon from the court for killing Amnon.

2. There are open enemies of God, and of his truth, and of his Church, who
have sold themselves to malign it; such sworn enemies we may not thus
embrace: 2. Ioh. 10. If any man bring not this doctrine, bid him not God
speed: and 2. King. 3.14. Elisha tells Iehoram an idolatrous king, that had
it not been for the good king Iehosaphat, he would not have looked upon him,
nor seen him. And yet this hinders nothing but that we must salute our own
private enemies, though we may not the open enemies of God.

3. If any have sinned the sin unto death, we may not pray for them, and
therefore not salute them, 1. Ioh. 5.16. This is the former kind of salutatio^
but not that which the Apostle speaks of in the text, but the latter: which
is a more inward and entire affection between such as are of the household of
faith; who are straitlye^ knit together then by the bonds of humanity and
civil conversation: for besides these, they are tied by the bond of the
spirit, of faith, of a most holy profession, and are brethren not in the flesh,
but in the faith, yea heirs of the self same inheritance in glory. These are
said to love one another in the faith. If they therefore be to be kindly
saluted which hate us, much more they which love us; and if they which love us
in the flesh, much more they which love us in the faith; and that with a most
hearty and large affection.

Hence note, 1. that religion binds man to man in the straitest bond: for 1.
the spirit is the tye^ of it: Religion the strongest binder of man to man. Ephesians.
4.3.
and hence is it called the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: and
indeed it must be a wonderful bond that can reconcile such deadly enemies as
men are before they come into the kingdom of Christ, Isa. 11.6. 2. Gods image
wheresoever it is, is exceeding beautiful, and a great binder; especially
where renewed and repaired; which being once espied, let the outward condition
be what it can be, a religious heart sees sufficient matter of love, and will
knit the soul unto the soul of such a one. 3. It adds strength and
firmness to all other bonds of nature, affinity, desert, etc. and makes
them more natural. What a true friend was Jonathan to David, because he saw
that God was with him, his soul claue unto him; though the kingdom was to be
rent from him for it, yet could he not rent his heart from David. If Joseph had
not had more then nature; he could not but have revenged such infinite wrongs
upon his brethren; whereas the grace of his heart made him say, It was not you
my brethren, but God sent me before you. Consider also of the example beyond
all imitation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself to the death for us
when we were yet his enemies. 4. This love must needs be most lasting; 2. Ioh.
2.
for being love in the truth for the truths sake, it shall continue so long
as the truth does: but the truth abides with us, and shall abide with us for
euer^ and this is the cause, that whereas the love of nature dies with it, and
the love of wicked men dies with their persons, this love lives in death, yea
when goes to heaven with a man, 1. Cor. 13.
and gets strength and perfection then faith cease, and hope vanishes
away.

Use. 1. Whence we are taught most familiarly to embrace them that love us in
the faith, and to make most account of their love. Verus amicus qui vere and in
Deo diligit.
Many love in the face, many in the flesh, many in nature, only the love of
Christians is a fruit of faith, a work of the spirit, and therefore a surer
bond then they all. Well knew the Apostle that none was in comparison worth
having but this, he calls for no other, he cares for no other, he mentions
no other.

2. Such as set into any society with others; if he would have it comfortable
unto him, let him strengthen all other natural or civil bonds by this bond of
religion, let him labor to begin his love in the faith, or if he have begun
elsewhere already, let him reform the same hereby if he look for any sound
comfort in his estate: for this is the cause that men often have so little
return of love from their wives, so little obedience from their children, so
little duty from their servants, so slender respect from their equals,
because they begin their love and duties at a wrong end: and have for other
respects affected those with whom they live, but the least if at all for grace
and religion, which of all is the soundest, most profitable, and most
comfortable.

Quest. But how may I know whether I love an other in the faith o^ no? Answ.
By these notes, 1. If thou love him because he is a member of Christ: for this
love must be a fruit of faith; and knitteth him that has it to the members, as
faith does to the head. 2. If thou love his soul first, and will not suffer
sin upon it. 3. If thou spyest, and do reverence the image of God in him,
and love him that is begotten, because of him that begat, and preferrest the
grace of his heart above all other outward parts and respects. 4. If thou above
all other things wish him, yea if it be in thy power, help him to a further
part in the better part which shall never be taken from him. 5. If the more
thou see grace to grow in him, the more entire thy love grows toward him.

3. This point shows their fearful condition, that make religion the very
cause of their hatred and malice against the godly: an apparent mark of the
devil is stamped upon them, who for this cause compasses the earth, that if
it were possible, he might chase the image of God from off the face of it.

Secondly, in that the Apostle saluteth such as loved them in the faith, we may
note what a mighty power the Gospel carries with it where the Lord will have
it effectual. These Cretians had been a vile people, and of most brutish
behavior, as we have at large heard in the first Chapter: but now there were
amongst them such as loved Paul, and such as claue unto him in the faith: the
Gospel had tamed and subdued them, had turned them out of their savage and
cruel natures: had made them tractable and docible, and of evil beasts, had
reduced them to Christian affection and conversation: but of this we have
spoken before.

Grace be with you all, Amen.] This is Paul's ordinary farewell, written with
his own hand in all his Epistles, whereas the Epistles themselves were written
out by some of his Scribes: And it is added, 1. as the mark of his own
Epistle, that he might prevent counterfeit writings: for well knew he how
nearly it concerned the Church to cleave unto those writings which were
indicted by the holy Ghost, inspiring the Prophets and and Apostles, and not to
have any other bastard writings obtruded upon her, in which practice the devil
was restless even in those times. 2. As a testimony of singular affection and
good will, which can be by no better means expressed then by frequent and
earnest prayers: and indeed his bowels were not straightened toward Titus and the
Church committed unto him; seeing he wishes the very fountain of grace, to
be opened unto them: for this word (as we showed in the beginning) signifies
both the free love and favor of God toward us in Christ, as also all other
spiritual blessings flowing from that fountain: such as are remission of
sins, reconciliation with God, justification, sanctification, life eternal,
and all the means tending thereunto. 3. That being an Apostolical prayer, it
might also be a means of obtaining, and conuaying upon them the grace
requested: and although he had made the same request for them before, yet it is
no vain repetition; for partly he prays for the increase and further feeling
of this grace for them: and partly teaches us thereby that it is the only
blessing to be prayed for, the chief, if not only grace, which our selves are
to labor for; and which we must by all means endeavor, that others may have
their portion in with us. 4. To show that all our greeting must begin and end
in grace, and that our forms of salutation should favor of grace, and not be
profane, graceless, or formal as the most are. 5. Being a Minister of grace,
he begins and ends with it: and teaches Ministers that their first and
last action of the day, and of their Ministerial duty should be the
commending of their people unto the grace of God in their prayers; and besides,
if ordinary letters, much more other more weighty actions of men, must be
undertaken and performed with prayer and praise.

Secondly in that he says, Grace be with you: he shows that howsoever this
Epistle was inscribed to Titus alone, yet was it intended to be of common use
to the whole Church: Scribit vni sed propter totam ecclesiam. Aquin.
and therefore we have not unfitly applied the most of the doctrines to the
use, not of Ministers only, but of all sorts of men so far as they concerned
them.

Last of all, in that he says, grace be with you all, he means all the
elect, and only they: for only they are effectual partakers of this saving
grace, called often elsewhere the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the treasury
and fountain of it. The wicked are indeed endued with excellent gifts of Gods
spirit; but they want this grace of God in Christ, which is the only foundation
of our election to the grace of life, of our effectual vocation to the grace
of God wherein we stand, and of that assured hope of that heavenly inheritance
which he has purchased of his grace. By this grace we are happily reconciled
unto God, and adopted to be heirs of grace: hereby also we have received the
word of grace, which is made fruitful to the planting and watering of all
other saving graces in us, and so to the furthering and finishing of the whole
work of our salvation in glory.

This grace be ever with us, and all them that love the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ to their immortality. Amen. So shall it be. And so be it.

To God the Father of lights, and to Jesus Christ that eternal word, together
with that annoynting even the blessed spirit, the only, one, true and wise God
(who has happily led us through these labors) be all praise and glory in all
the Churches for evermore. Amen.

A SHORT VIEW OF SVCH Doctrines as are enlarged with their reasons and uses.
A Man may sometimes lawfully change his name. Page 4. Such names are to be
given to children as may put them in mind of some good duty. Page 4 The name
of a servant of God is full of honor. Page 6 The chief offices in the Church
are for the service of it. Page 10 God has some who are elect, and other are
not. Page 11 The elect have a faith by themselves. Page 13 The faith of the
elect is ordinarily wrought by the ministry of the word. Page 16 The doctrine
of the Gospel is truth it self. Page 18 The knowledge of the truth is the
ground of faith. Page 19 The truth entertained in truth frames the heart unto
godliness Page 21 The end of the ministry is to draw up men's minds from
earth to heaven. Page 24 True faith never goes alone, but as a Queen attended
with many other graces, especially with hope. Page 27 Life eternal is the
believers by free promise. Page 30 God is truth itself and cannot lie. Page 33
The free love of God appears, in that whatsoever he does for his elect in
time, the same he decrees before all time. Page 39 The doctrine of salvation
is more clearly manifest then in former times. Page 43 The Lord effects all
his purposes and promises in due season. Page 44 Salvation is to be sought for
in the preaching of the word. Page 48 The office of preaching is an office of
trust. Page 52 Whosoever enters into the ministry, must find himself
pressed by the calling and commandment of God. Page 53 Ministers may be more
or less in the commendation of their calling, as the disposition and
necessity of their people require. Page 55 Gods calling to grace is free and
powerful. Page 56 Ministers ought to be spiritual fathers in begetting
children to God. Page 58 Faith is one and the same in all Gods elect. Page 62
Every man must be careful, 1. whom, 2. to what, 3. how far he commends
an other. Page 65 All are not natural sons that are so accounted. 66 The
free and everlasting grace of God, is the foundation of all blessings
spiritual and temporal. Page 69 True peace is the fruit of Gods grace and
mercy. Page 71 Whosoever is called to labor in the Church must by all his
care further the work of the Lord. Page 75 He that would Christianly and
comfortably carry himself through his calling, must ever have the end of it
in his eye. Page 76 Churches must not be condemned as no Churches for want of
some laws or government, if they join in the profession of the truth. Page 80
No Church is hastily brought to perfection. Page 81 There is continual bending
of good ordinances even in the best estate of the Church. Page 83 Such an
absolute necessity of a settled ministry there is where a Church is planted,
that without it religion cannot possibly thrive or continue. Page 86 The
ordering and governing of the Church is not left arbitrarie, no not to an
Evangelist, but Apostolical direction must guide him. Page 89 How able soever
a man is to teach, if he be of a scandalous life, he is unfit to be chosen a
Minister. Page 92 Marriage of Ministers is a lawful and holy ordinance of God.
Page 97 Polygamie was ever blameworthy even in the best. Page 103 He that would
reform others abroad must begin at home. Page 110 To have the blessing of
gracious children thou must begin at religion. Page 111 The carriage of a
man's children is a great credit or disgrace to his profession: especially of
the Minister. Page 113 Riot is an hateful vice to be avoided. Page 114
Children ought to be obedient to their parents. Page 117 Lewdness of children
is often from want of government in parents. Page 118 Every Minister ought to
keep the Lords watch over his flock. Page 121 A Bishop over others must first
watch over himself. Page 123 Every Minister being Gods steward must have a
fit calling, and properties answerable to that office. Page 124 The nearer a
man is to God in place, the more careful must he be of his carriage. Page 129
Frowardness is every where of evil report, but in a Minister intolerable.
Page 131 Hastiness to anger a foul blot in a Minister. Page 134 To be given
to wine odious in all, especially in a Minister. Page 140 A Minister of all men
may not be a quareller, or a man of a word and a blow. Page 145 Covetousness
in a Minister is a most base sin. Page 148 There is much filthy lucre in the
world, which every Christian must abhor. Page 152 The very phrase of
Scripture speaking of riches should pull our hearts from them. Page 155 The
Minister for the honor of his place, must not only be free from common vices,
but also shine in positive virtues. Page 159 The poorest minister must and may
be harborous. Page 163 Wisdom most necessary to a minister. Why. Page 172
Righteous dealing, a shining ornament in a minister. Page 175 Ministers must be
arraied with roabes of holiness. Page 176 A temperate and equal course
necessary to a minister. Page 179 The word of God is most certain and
infallible. Page 182 The word is every way fitted for the instruction of the
faithful. Page 188 Every man ought to be a learner of holy doctrine. Page 194
The men of God in speaking of the word have ever set some mark of excellency
upon it. Page 196 Ministers must set an edge on their doctrine by exhortation.
Page 197 Exhortation is then powerful when it is grounded on wholesome
doctrine. Page 198 Ministers must resist resisters of the truth. Page 199 A
Minister ought to be a man of knowledge. Page 201 The Scriptures fully furnish
the man of God to every ministerial duty. Page 203 Error in life is commonly
a ground of error in doctrine. Page 206 They spend much labor in vain who
are disobedient to the doctrine themselves teach. Page 207 The greater the
danger is the playner must reproof be. Page 215 The Arch-seducers of the world
are they of the circumcision, who join faith and works in the act of
justification. Page 217 Faithful teachers must timely oppose themselves
against seducers. Page 220 Seducers secretly infect and creep into houses.
Page 227 Error is exceeding infectious. Page 229 An heart set upon gain will
feed it self by falsehood. Page 230 A minister may be plain in his reproves.
Page 233 A minister must join wisdom to playnes in reproouing. Page 234 The
Gentiles had their Prophets so called to witness against their impiety. Page
238 It is not simply unlawful to allege the saying of a profane man in a
sermon. Page 242 Falsehood in word or deed is condemned by the very light of
nature. Page 245 The Scriptures call brutish men by the name of beasts. Page
249 Many men are so degenerate that they have cut themselves from the account
of men. Page 250 A life led in idleness is condemned by the light of nature,
and of the Scriptures. Page 253 Idleness and intemperance are seldom
disioyned. Page 256 Every truth is Gods, and must be received whosoever is the
instrument of it. Page 258 Ministers must not be discouraged though they be to
deal with a wretched and brutish people. Page 259 No reproof may be
ungrounded, but the cause must be just, and known so to be. Page 261 Every
reproof must be tempered to the nature of the sin. Page 263 The sharpest
censure in the Church must aim at the recovery of offenders. Page 265
Christians must not content themselves with spiritual life, unless it be
attended with health and soundness. Page 267 A special means of soundness
of faith, is to shut the ears against fables and fancies of men. Page 274 A
fearful judgment of God it is to be turned away from the truth. Page 277 The
Scriptures account Christians pure, but not Puritans. Page 283 All indifferent
things must be used in 1. faith, 2. love, 3. sobriety. Page 291 Divinity of
Scripture is proved by discovering the inward thoughts of wicked men. Page 309
A wicked man is every way a most odious person. Page 311 Before natural
uncleanness be purged away every thing is unclean to a man. Page 313 There
will be ever hypocrites in the Church. Page 317 There be many characters by
which hypocrites may be known and discovered. Page 320 No example of man must
turn us out of a godly course. Page 331 Ministers must feed their people with
wholesome doctrine. Page 333 Wholesome doctrine must be applied to the several
ages and conditions of men. Page 339 Old men must first be taught their duty,
why? Page 342 Sobriety especially enjoined unto old men. Page 345 Elder men
ought to carry a seemly gravity through their course. Page 346 Moderation of
lusts and passions is a most seemly grace in an old man. Page 347 Soundnes of
faith especially required in the Elder. Page 351 Every man must learn to
repair the decay of nature with soundnes of grace. Page 352 Soundness of love
is justly called for of old men. Page 355 Sound patience is more especially
commended to the elder sort. Page 358 Women are as straightly bound to the means
of their salvation as men. Page 362 The general rule for women's behavior is,
that it must become holiness. Page 365 False accusing specially forbidden to
women. Page 368 Drunkenness in elder women a most hateful sin. Page 370 It
is a note of corruption to yield our selves servants to the creatures made to
serve us. Page 371 Every Christian woman must call on others with her self to
a godly course. Page 373 The fruits of the Christian carriage of the Elder
women, must appear in the younger. Page 375 Christian women must love their
husbands. Page 377 Women ought to love their children, and how. Page 382 A
discreet carriage is a beautiful grace in a young woman. Page 384 Chastity is
an essential marriage duty. Page 385 Women ought to keep their own houses. Page
389 Goodness is required in women, what it is, and how. Page 390 Women must be
subject to their husbands, wherein, and why. Page 391 Profession without
practice causes the holy name of God to be blasphemed. Page 398 Young men must
order their ways by the word. Page 404 The Pastor must sometimes entreat
where he may command. Page 408 Sobriety is a virtue fitly commended to young
men. Page 410 Consent of good life and holy doctrine make a sweet harmony in
a Minister. Page 413 It is possible for a man by grace to live unblameably.
Page 416 Faithful Ministers shall not want withstanders. Page 417 Resisters of
godly Ministers lade them with reproaches. Page 419 Every Christians care must
be to stop the mouths of the wicked. Page 421 Servants ought to be subject
to their masters. 423 Theft of servants never so colored is condemned. Page
429 Servants are bound to show all good faithfulness. Page 431 The meanest
Christian may and must bring glory to the Gospel. Page 433 The Gospel is the
doctrine of Gods grace. Page 437 The doctrine of the Gospel, is a saving
doctrine. Page 440 The Gospel is a bright and shining light. Page 446 The
Gospel is a schoolmaster as well as the Law. Page 453 The doctrine of grace
truly received teaches to deny all ungodliness. Page 458 A Christian must
deny all lusts whatsoever may seem to plead for them. Page 463 The doctrine
of grace teaches both to eschew evil, and do good. Page 465 The Gospel
looks for some answearable return for the salvation it brings. Page 467 The
doctrine of the Gospel teaches sobriety of life, wherein it stands, and
rules of practice. Page 468 The Gospel calls for just and righteous dealing
at professors hands. Page 471 The Gospel inioyneth a godly life, the proper
work of piety, and rules of practice. Page 473 Godliness must be exercised in
this present world. Page 478 The Gospel received in truth lifts up the heart
to wait for Christ his second appearing. Page 482 The expectation of Christ his
second coming is a notable means to provoke to Christian duties. Page 491
Christ his glory shall shine out in full brightness at his second appearing.
Page 494 We ought never to speak of God, but in a weighie matter, and
reverent manner. Page 496 Christ gave himself for his Church, but not for
every particular man. Page 505 Before Christ redeemed us we were miserable
slaves under sin and death. Page 511 The Son of God having once set us free
great is our freedom. Page 514 Redemption and sanctification are inseparable
companions. Page 517 The members of the Church are Gods peculiar people. Page
523 The worker must be good before any work can be so. Page 527 Justified
persons must needs bring forth good works. Page 527 The thing that God
requires in every professor is zeal in weldoing. Page 529 All proofs and
reproves must be fetched from the Scriptures. Page 534 The word of God must be
so handled as that the authority of it be preserved. Page 535 To despise Gods
Ministers is a grievous sin. Page 537 The doctrine of subjection to Magistracy
must be often enforced, and why. Page 539 The scope of the Ministry is to put
men, and keep them in remembrance of Christian duties. Page 540 The memory
ought to be taken up with godly instructions learned in the Ministry. Page 541
Christianity consumes not Magistracy but confirms it. Page 544 Every soul
must be subject to the higher powers. Page 548 Every Christian must make
account that every Christian duty belongs unto him. Page 559 Every man ought
to preserve in himself a readiness to every good work. Page 563 The word
condemns as well unbridled speeches, as disordered actions. Page 566 Evil
speaking is a most hateful sin in Christians. Page 568 A Christian may not
be a common barrater. Page 574 Christian equity is a beautiful grace in
Christians. Page 579 Christian meekenes beseems every Christian. Page 584 The
consideration of our common condition is a notable ground of meekenes. Page 588
Whosoever is called unto the faith has experience of a change in himself.
Page 591 The whole course of an unconverted man is an unwise walking. Page 596
A mark of a man out of Christ is to resist and reason against the word. Page
599 Before men be brought to Christ, their whole life is but a wandering from
God. Page 601 The spirit that is in man lusts after envy. Page 617 Then are
we saved when we are sanctified. Page 627 Before the Lord put forth his love
in Christ it could not be reached of man nor angel. Page 632 Works of
righteousness are excluded from justifying us before God. Page 635 The Lord in
baptism not only offers, or signifies, but truly exhibiteth grace. Page
639 All the inward grace of baptism is from the Holy Ghost. Page 650 God in
saving men renews them to his own image. Page 655 The graces of the spirit
are plentifully powered out upon us in the new Testament, as not of a full
mercy. Page 660 Christ our Lord the only fountain of all our welfare. Page
664 The righteousness of a sinner before God is not any quality in the
believer. Page 669 The honor of the Saints is, that they are heirs of life
eternal. Page 674 All truths must be delivered, but some more stood upon,
and urged then other. Page 680 A good work cannot come but from a good man.
Page 684 Professors of the Gospel must be the first and forwardest in every
good work. Page 686 Doctrine must be true and truly dealt withal. Page 689
Satan seeks to corrupt the purest Churches, by bringing in needelesse
questions. Page 696 There have been always, are, and shall be heretics in
the Church of God. Page 703 Even heretics and enemies of the Church must be
lovingly dealt with by the Church. Page 706 It is dangerous for the Churches to
be left destitute of their teachers though for a short time. Page 726 The Lord
makes good use of the most wicked consciences. Page 723 Christianity
enioyneth all kind of civil courtesy. Page 731 Such as are in the Lords work
must be carfully provided for that they lack nothing. Page 732 Christianity
is no barren or fruit less prof^ssion. Page 739 Religion is the strongest
binder of man to man. Page 748
OTHER PROFITABLE NOTES which besides illustration of Doctrines, lie either in
the explication of the sense, or in application of the uses.
RVles to be observed in changing of men's names, in number three. 4 Cases in
which a man may forbear to set his name to his writings, 3. 5 Reasons to
stir up ministers to diligence, 5. 7 Reasons to stir them up to
faithfulness, 4. 7 Comforts for ministers in their service, 4. 8 Privileges
of the Apostle above the ordinary Pastor, 3. 9 Men may be called elect of God
3. ways. 11 Difference of saving faith from all other, 3. 14 Truth of faith
discerned by 4. notes. 15 Gospel called Truth for three reasons. 18 Notes
showing the heart drawn upward toward heaven, 3. 26 Infallible properties of
Christian hope, 8. 28 Reasons why we must freely love our brethren, 4. 41 The
doctrine of the Gospel called the common faith for 5. reasons. 58 Duties to
spiritual fathers, 5. 61 Differences of the Apostolical faith, from the
Romish Apostaticall, 4. 63 Letters testimonial not rashly to be given for
four reasons. 65 The first person called father for 3 reasons. 68 Christ
called Lord for 4 causes. 68 Men are called Saviors, 3. ways. 69 The wickeds
peace crazy in 3. respects. 73 The power of the Magistrate and Minister do
differ in three respects. 79 Some wants in the Church to be borne with for 3.
causes. 83 Rules whereby a man may be kept unreprovable, 6. 94 Why the Popish
Church resists the marriage of Ministers, 3. reasons. 97 Rules to be observed
in beholding the examples of the Saints, 2. 108 In designing men to offices,
the first respect must be had of the place and then of a fit person. reas. 3.
123 Ministers called Gods stewards for 3. causes. 124 Faithfulness of
Ministers stands in 3. things. 125 The wisdom of the Minister stands in
2. things. 126 Such as come near unto God in profession must be careful to
bewtifie it for 3. reasons. 130 Great scholars must be taught by meaner then
themselves for 3. reasons. 132 Meditations to bridle rash anger, 4. 138
Practices to the same purpose. 4. 139 Arrows of Gods wrath shot against
drunkards, 4. 143 Directions to avoid covetousness. 151 Filthy lucre brought
to 3. heads. 152 Symptoms of an heart infected with covetousness, 4. 156
Meditations to bridle covetous desires. 4. 158 Practices to the same purpose,
3. ibid. Reasons to be hospitable to strangers, 3. 164 Reasons to be ready to
distribute, 4. 166 Means of temperance, 2. 180 How some things are difficult
in the Scriptures, 3. Rules. 192 Rules to know whether we have been as fit to
learn as the word to teach, 3. 195 Notes of him that resists the truth, 3.
200 False teachers deceive men's minds 4. ways. 209 Properties of error 3.
210 Professors not so well fenced against error and seducers proved by 4*
reasons. 211 Sundry uses of circumcision both Civil and Divine. 213 Three
sorts of plain reproouers condemned. 216 Popish teachers the right successors
of Jewish, proved by three reasons. 217 Why God suffers seducers in the
Church, 2. reasons. 228 Seven witnesses whereby the Lord condemns the wicked
and hypocritical professors of the Gospel. 240 Cautions in using humane
allegations in sermons, 3. 243 Truth in speech urged by sundry reasons. 247
Reasons to move to diligence in our caling, 4. 254 An honest calling a school
of Christianity, 3 reas. 255 Reasons against intemperance, 3. 257 Rules of
direction against intemperance, 3.ibid. Ministers must patiently bear a
froward people for three reasons. 260 To be kept from spiritual sickness,
three means. 268 Reasons to use those means, 4. 269 Jewish fables what, and
why so called, reasons. 272 Rules to preserve us from being turned from the
present truth, 4. 280 Men sanctified in part called pure for 4. reas. 282
Reasons to move to purity in heart and life although the world scoff at it,
5. 284 Every thing good in the creation 4. ways. 286 All impuritie in the
creature comes two ways. 287 A thing in it self good or indifferent is
spoiled in the doing three ways. 288 A thing good in it self is rightly used
by the presence of 3 virtues. 291 No man may use any of Gods creatures without
leave and thanksgiving. 297 Sundry rules to discern how men offend against
the 3. former virtues, in 1. meats 299 2. Garments. 301 3. Riches. 302. 4.
Sports. 303 A man may not ask more wealth in prayer then necessaries, reasons
3. 303 Rules of direction by which a man may comfortably turn himself to the
use of any creature. 305 Seven maine differences between the godly and the
wicked. 314 Four marks of an hypocrite laid down in the text, and largly
prosecuted. 320 The hypocrite fitly resembles a stageplayer from whom he has
his name, in 4 properties. 327 Trial of such as profess they know God but do
not, by 4. notes. 327 Two sorts of hypocrites. 329 Word called wholesome
doctrine for sundry causes. 333 Duties of hearers of the word prosecuted, 4.
335 Means of practice of the former duties. 339 Soundness of faith stands
in 4. things. 348 Soundness of Love stands in 5. things. 355 Soundness of
patience stands in three things. 358 Patience necessary for every Christian,
but commended specially to old men, for 4. reasons. 358 Four points for women
to meditate upon. 365 False accusing committed four ways. 367 Rules to avoid
the sin of false accusing, 4. 369 Men yield themselves slaves to the
creatures 4 ways. 371 The husbands duty toward the wife, wherein it stands.
380 The offices of motherly love* 4. 382 Means of preserving chastity. 388
Reasons to move us to the care of not stayning our profession. 399 Rules to be
observed that we stain not our holy profession, 6. 402 Reasons moving young
men timely to order their ways, 4. 405 Four helps to further young men in
the former duty. 407 Reasons to enforce young men to sobryetie, 4. 410 Means
of practice of the former grace of sobriety. 411 Reasons to stir up the men
of God to the care of their lives* 4. 415 Means to attain an unblameable life.
416 Sundry motives to servants to show all good faithfulness. 432 The Gospel
called the doctrine of grace, 4 reasons. 433 The holy doctrine of God adorned 2
ways. 434 Maine differences between the law and Gospel. 437 A man may know
whether he receive the grace of God in vain or no, by three notes. 438 How to
entertain the Gospel aright. 443 The light under the Gospel far clearer then
theirs under the law, 4. reas. 446 A trial whether we receive the light by*
3. notes. 449 Motives to entertain the light whilst it is with us, 6. 450
Five sorts of men that refuse the light. 451 Lusts called worldly for two
reasons. 456 The Commandment is possible to the believers 3 ways. 457
Ungodliness is branched into 4 heads. 458 Lusts are to be resisted for sundry
reas. 463 Rules and motives for the practice of sobriety, 469. Righteousness,
471. Piety, 473 Hope called a blessed hope, 3. reasons. 480 Christ called a
mighty God, 3. reas. 481 To the true waiting for Christ 3. things required.
484 The qualities of the sound expectation of Christ 4. 485 The effects of the
same expectation 4. 486 Motives unto it, 4. 489 Circumstances gathered out of
the history that Christ's passion was voluntary, 5. 504 To receive Christ and
his merits, we must do 3. things. 509 Christ redeemed his Church from the
captivity of sin 2. ways. 510 Sin must be dealt with as a Tyrant in 4.
resemblances. 513 Christ purges his people 2. ways. 517 Means of our purging
5. 519 Motives to use the former means 6. 521 The Church is Gods peculiar
sundry ways. 523 Rules to be set before their eyes that intend Gods glory 2.
525 Three virtues must attend zeal to guide it aright. 529 Effects of zeal in
the effecting of good things are many. 531 Five sorts of men discovered to want
zeal. 532 Why men remember not good things heard 3. causes. 542 The Lord
maintains the Magistrates authority 4. ways. 555 Notes of him that is
ready to every good work 3. 563 Rules of practice to set us forward in
every good work 3. 565 Cases in which a man may speak the evil he knows
by his brother, 4. 566 Evil speaking ranged into the sundry ranks of it. 567
Means to avoid evil speaking in 5. rules. 571 Cases wherein a man may
contend and strike, 5. 573 Rules to avoid the sin of Quarelling, 5. 577 The
fruits of Christian equity, 4. 579 Necessi^ie of Christian equity in sundry
points. 581 Three things in the description of Christian meekensse. 584 The use
of Christian meekness in three points. 586 Motives to meekness 3. 587 Notes
to discern the change of a man's self by. 592 The corruption of the mind
stands in 3 degrees. 594 Four main properties of folly most natural to the
natural man. 597 The deceit of the heart puts forth it self in sundry
ungodly practices. 602 Five several sorts of men in several paths, and never
one of them in the right. 605 Grounds out of Scripture against the Popish
doctrine of freewill, 5. 613 Notes to try a man's present happiness by. 632
Essential parts of a Sacrament three. 639 Baptsme the lauer of regeneration
four ways. 641 Baptism has 4. uses in them that believe already. 644 The
congregation must stay the Baptism for four reasons. 647 Six things
considered in the description of regeneration. 648 Notes to tr^e the truth of
our regeneration 5. 656 Graces of the spirit compared to waters in three
things. 658 The spirit is said to be powered out in three respects. 658 Of
barrennes of heart three maine causes. 663 Sundry consolations to those that
are heirs of life. 677 Rules to help us to forwardness in good works, 5. 687
People that come to hear the word must pray for 4. things. 691 Uses of
Genealogies in the Scriptures. 694 Reason to avoid curiosity in Gods matters,
4. 699 To make an heretic 3. things required. 701 Means to avoid heresy, 5.
705 Two degrees of Excommunication. 707 Excommunication how far it stretches
in 4. points. 709 Reasons why we are to avoid excommunicate persons. 710
Excommunication must not be inflicted for trifles, 4. reasons. 713 Gods
children must imitate their heavenly Father in using great patience even to the
worst for 4. reas. 721 Open and obstinate sinners must be avoided for four
reas. 722 The benefit of a good conscience in 5. particulars. 725 Non
residencie condemned by many reasons. 727 Faith does five things to the
producing of a good work. 734 Many necessary uses of good works referred to
their several heads. 736 Conditions of Christian fruitfulnes, 5. 740 Reasons
to provoke Christians to fruitfulness, 4. 741 Lets and hindrances of
fruitfulnes. 743 The ordinary salutation added to every Epistle for 5.
reasons. 750
An other brief Table of the most of the Questions resolved in this
Commentary.
HOw and why Paul's name was changed. 3 Why Paul's name is prefixed before his
Epistles. 5 How far a man is bound to set his name to his writings. 5 How a
man may know that he has faith. 15 How could God promise any thing before the
world began. 30 Whether God can change his will. 33 Whether there he chance or
fortune. 45 How Christ is a Lord, seeing he is every where called a servant. 68
How Christ is called a Savior, seeing the Father, and holy Ghost save also,
and we read of sundry other Saviors. 69 Whether the wicked have more peace
then the godly. 73 What power Titus had to redress disorders in Creta. 78 What
and wherein consists the difference between Civil and Ecclesiastical power.
79 How it is in the power of ministers to have fait^full children. 109 Why in
the care of the family the first precept concerns the children and not the
wife. ibid. How far anger is forbidden in a Minister. 134 How far it is
lawful or unlawful for a Minister to use wine. 140 Whether good men only
must be loved and not evil. 168 Whether the Scriptures be perfect without
tradition. 190 Whether the Scriptures be obscure. 192 How false teachers use to
deceive men's minds. 209 How may the mouths of heretics be stopped. 220
Whether a man can be saved that erreth in a fundamental point. 225 Why God
suffers seducers among his people. 228 Why Paul calls Epimenides a Prophet.
235 How the Prophets of God were distinguished from those of the Gentiles. 236
How the knowledge of God is ascribed unto the natural man. 239 How far we may
allege humane testimonies in sermons. 242 Whether any kind of lie be lawful.
246 What are meant by Jewish fables. 271 Who are meant in the scriptures by
pure persons. 281 How any thing may be said to be pure or impure. 287 How all
things are pure to the pure. 291 Whether recusant Papists may be compelled to
Church, seeing it does offend the^. 293 Whether a man with safe conscience may
eat flesh at times prohibited by the Magistrate. 294 Whether can any Magistrate
make laws to bind conscience. ibid. How we can stand to our Christian
liberty, if we suffer the Magistrate (...) restrain us in it. ibid. Whether a
man may pray for more wealth then necessaries. 303 How any Minister may attain
the end of his calling. 334 Why it is no needeesse precept to exhort younger
women to love their husbaands, and children. 376 Whether the wife may dispose
of her husbands goods without his consent. 399 How may a man carry himself
that the word of God be not evil spoken of. 402 How servants must please their
masters, and yet not be man pleasers. 426 How far Christ is said to die and
give himself for all men. 507 How the short death of Christ could free from
infinite and eternal evils. 510 Whether Magistracy be now lawful, against
Anabaptists. 545 Whether Mordecai did well in denying Haman reverence. 553
Whether Naboth did lawfully deny king Ahab his vineyard. ibid. Whether the
people might warrantably resist Saul in rescuing Ionatha^ his son from death.
554 Whether Ioab did well in numbering the people at David's commandment. ibid.
Whether he did well in slaying Absolon against his commandment. ibid. How God
can be said to be so good, and a lover of man, seeing so many vessels are
prepared to destruction. 624 How we can be said to be saved already, seeing we
carry about us the body of sin and death. 628 Whether grace (...) tied to the
sacrament. 640 What is the ^aith of infants. 643 Whether the water in baptism
carrieh in it a (...) and efficacy of washing the (...): where Bellarmines
instances are examined. 650 What is meant by justification, and what by grace
in the controversy between the Papists and us. 665.666, etc. How faith is
said to justify us. 671 Whether there be any teachers among us that teach any
thing save the truth. 690 How the Apostle condemns genealogies of which is
such necessary use in the Scriptures. 694 Whether private Christians may
avoid an open notorious sinner before the Church has cast him out: or what
they must do in this case whilst the church winketh at such a one. 712 Whether
heretics may be put to death, seeing the Apostle only commands to avoid
them. ibid. Whether Popish religion may be tolerated in a country professing
the truth which can cast it out. 715 Whether Protestants may marry with
Papists. 717 Whether Popish idolatry be any whitte less dangerous and odious
then that of the heathen. 719 Whether any man be so monstrous or graceles as to
persist in error against the light of his conscience. 721 Whether we may greet
any but such as love us in the faith. 747
Many other things worth observation might have enlarged these Tables; but I
contented my self with these brief collections, which with the text of the
Epistle will easily lead the Reader unto them.

FINIS.
J entreat the courteous Reader to pass over some lesser escapes in the
printing; and among others to amend these which I have observed, most altering,
or hurting the sense.
Page 5. in the margent for quiddam, read quidam. p. 40. line 7. for eternal.
r. internal. p^ 59. l. 26. f. first, r. fifth. p. 79. l^ 31. f. God, r. Gad.
p. 99. in the margent, f. fidem, r sedem. p. 112. l. 20. wants when. p. 135.
l. 39. f. world, r. work. p. 121. margent. f. superioris, r. superius. p. 144.
l. 2. f. Noah's, r. Lots. p. 142. l. 9. f adoring, r. adorning. p. 143. l. 36.
f. members, r. memory. p. 148. l. 32. f. heart, r. heat. p. 151. marg. f. sui
aliter, r. ^in aliter. p. 163. ^. f. ha^bourles, r. harberous. p. 213.25. f.
they might* r. they might not contract. p. 210.1. f. pace, r. pale. p. 217.11.
f. them, r. Cham. p. 300. l. 24. f. argues, r. aims at. p. 326.23. f. forte,
r. foot. p. 327.36. f. persons, r. purses. p. 328.^0. f. him, r. them. p. 329.
l. 5. f. others, r. oaths. p. 343* marg. f. (...), r. (...). and f* (...). r
(...). p. 350.5. put in hold on Christ. p. 354.18. f. desolation, r.
dissolution. p. 362.6. f. cannot, r. can. p. 366.31. wants, to utter.


