THE TRVE HISTORY OF THE late and lamentable adventures of Don Sebastian King
of Portugal, after his imprisonment in Naples, until this present day, being
now in Spain at Saint Lucar de Barrameda.

ROMANS. 13. There is no power but from God.

AVT NVNC AVT NVNQVAM
printer's device of Simon Stafford and James Shaw

AT LONDON Printed by Simon Stafford and James Shaw. 1602.

THE TRVE HISTORY of the late and lamentable adventures of Don Sebastian King
of Portugal, after his imprisonment in Naples, until this present day, being
now in Spain at Saint Lucar de Barrameda.
THis unfortunate King, Don Sebastian, having been brought from Florence to
Naples, was put in the castle of Oeuf, in a chamber, without any other
furniture in it, then a halter and a long knife of the length of half the
arm: Where for the space of three days, they neither gave him ought to drink
or to eat, nor whereon to lie: Which space, he spent in continual prayers,
enduring his crosses with an incredible patience. On the fourth day after, the
Auditor General, accompanied with two Notaries, came to visit him, and found
him, for his life, of good disposition, and maruailed exceedingly at him (for
all of them did verily believe, that seeing himself so ill entreated, he would
in despair have hanged himself, or with one of those two instruments have
ended his days, which for that purpose were prepared and placed in that room,
or at least incur thereby some grievous malady) and said unto him, that if
he would not deny, and cease to maintain, what he had avouched and maintained,
in reporting himself to be Don Sebastian King of Portugal, he should never
have either drink, meat, or lodging. To whom the king made answer:

Do what you will; for I shall never sing any other song: and I beseech God
omnipotent, of his infinite goodness and divine mercy, that he will stretch out
his powerful hand, and assist me in these my troubles, and that he will not
suffer me to commit so foul a fault, or to fall into so great a mischief, and
so contrary to mine own soul, that for fear and terror of men, I should
come to deny the truth, and to confess a falsehood. God defend me from it. I
am that self same Don Sebastian, king of Portugal, which in the year 1578.
passed into Affricke against the Infidels, and the very same, who, to augment
the name and power of the Christians, put my life in hazard: and am that
unfortunate Prince, who for the punishment of his sins lost a battle, which
loss begat so many misaduentures, and occasioned so many changes in
Christendom. This is the very truth, neither can I say any other. With this
answer, the Auditor and his Notaries went their way. After this they began to
give him for his nourishment some bread and water: and some few days after,
he was allowed five crowns a month, and a man to wait upon him. The Viceroy
of Naples last deceased, came to visit him, and there passed between them
that which has bin published by so many hands, and set forth in so many
languages. Now, as soon as it was bruted abroad, and that fame had run and
told it through the world, that he remained prisoner, and that all men had
leave to see him, many persons, of diverse, both qualities, and nations, made a
voyage unto Naples, only to see him, and to speak unto him: And amongst the
rest, many Portugals, some out of Portugal, and some from other places of their
being, past into Italy, that they might with their own proper eyes behold so
admirable, and so rare a wonder. Many of the Portugals, especially the elder
sort, who had seen him, and knew him; and some also of Castile, and other
strangers besides, having seen him, and discoursed with him, confessed and
maintained, that he was Don Sebastian, the true King of Portugal. During the
life of the said Viceroy, his imprisonment was not so austere nor so strict as
it was afterward, when his son succeeded in the said government, who kept
him exceeding close, and double guarded, suffering him notwithstanding to go
abroad on the Sundays, and other festival days, for to hear mass in a
Chapel within the said Castle. He lived in perpetual prayers and fastings.
Every Friday and Saturday, he fasted with bread and water. He did the like
sometimes also on other days, as on Mundayes, and Wednesdayes. He often
frequented the Sacraments, and used much confession; and all the Lent long fed
nor ate of any thing save only herbs and pulse.

The seventeenth of April last past, within a year after that he was
delivered to the Castilians, the said Viceroy, who also is County of Lemos,
son to him that was deceased, married with the daughter of the Duke of Lerma,
who now at this day is a governor in Spain: At that time it was demanded of
him, that he should suddenly make answer, without any other proceedings or
diligence in his cause, unto that which on the fourth day was proposed by the
Auditor general, accompanied, as before we mentioned. To who^ he replied.

That it was no lawful nor direct course, to take upon them to examine and
judge him without process: but rather that they should present him to the
Portugals, who had both nourished him, known him, and served him. For on their
relation and their testimony, ought to depend the true proof and approbation
of his business: Affirming, that if it were possible for him to live a
thousand years longer, he would never answer otherwise: And that if they
should determine to do justice on him, without any other order or proof, he
must take God for his only Judge, who knows the truth of this matter, and that
he is the proper and true King of Portugal, Don Sebastian. Wherefore, if you
are so disposed, take your course in effecting that, upon which heretofore you
purposed.

The officers appointed for this affair, being gone from him with this
answer, he went incontinently and threw himself down on his knees before the
Crucifix, and began to dispose and prepare himself for death. He fasted the
space of three days with bread and water: He made his general confession, and
received the holy Sacraments. As he thus attended his latest hour, before the
said month of April was ended, they sent again unto him for his final
answer. To which message he made the like answer as before. And upon these
his last words, he was judged and condemned by the Castilians, to be led in
ignominy through the streets of Naples, and from thence to labor in the
Galleys all the rest of his life.

The last day of the said month, they brought him out of the Castle, and
mounted him on an Ass, and led him openly through the streets of the City,
three Trumpets marching before him, with a Crier, who cried with a loud voice,
This is the justice which his Catholic Majesty has commanded to be
executed. He has commanded this man should be thus shamefully led up and
down, and that be should perpetually be doomed to the Galleys, for naming
himself to be Don Sebastian King of Portugal, being no other then a
Calabrian. And still before the Crier began, the Trumpets sounded, and so
continued to the end. And when they named King, he would cry alowd, Why, so I
am. And when they said, Being no other then a Calabrian: he would answer,
That is false. Yet notwithstanding in the repetition of these words, all the
while that they were pronounced by the Crier, he no whit hindered the course of
justice, nor once moved himself against it.

Now must you note, that the Castilians not knowing how to verify that he was
the said Marcus Tullius Cartizzone, as they endowed him withal at the first,
when he was delivered unto them, they proclaimed him at that hour, by the
indefinite name of a Calabrian.

This act brings an extreme amazement to all the whole city, and ingenders a
great sorrow, and causes much compunction in the hearts of all men; insomuch,
that they went away stricken with wonder, and full of astonishment. They looked
one upon another with a silent strangeness, and were unable to utter so much
as one word one to another, the greatness of their grief stopping the passage
of their speech. And if any amongst them were heretofore persuaded, that he was
a Calabrian, after they had now beheld his own proper person, and this so
strange a spectacle, they were confirmed in this belief, and did certainly
assure themselves, that he whom they thus reprochefully led up and down upon
an Ass, was the very right and true Don Sebastian, King of Portugal; and they
were touched with such great compassion and remorsefull fellow-feeling, in
beholding this his miserable estate; and the injustice wherewith they did
entreat him, that they were not able to refrain from tears: the sighs and
lamentations of one, inciting the rest to the same, who mourned and bewailed
his misery, whilst the King himself cried out in this pitiful manner:

I am in the hands of mine enemies, who work what themselves will upon this my
body, but my soul I recommend unto God, who has created it, and knows the
truth, and can witness for me, that I am the same, whom I profess and say I am.

After they had carried him thus throughout the City, they brought him to the
Kings royal Galleys, whereinto he was no sooner entered, but they presently
pulled off his own apparel, and put upon him a flauish attire, and placed
him at the prow of the Galley, where he remained a whole day: and the next day
following, they put him with a guard, in a little Bark that was linked to the
Galley, whither there repaired a great concourse of people of diverse nations:
Amongst the which, were present, a great number of noble personages, and of
very honorable houses, who steadily viewing his visage, and marking him with
an especial attention, and a most searching eye, Without doubt (said they)
this is that true D. Sebastian, King of Portugal.

The sift day, they rankt him in the Galleyes, and shaued off the hairs both
of his head and beard, the which were gathered up, and kept by those that stood
by, as a most precious thing, and of great esteem.

This being done, they fettred him with chains, signifying unto him, that he
should not be bound to row. Some French Lords were present at most of these
proceedings: and amongst the rest, a son of Monsieur de Berault (who is now
at this day nominated for to be Ambassador of Castile) and a Gentleman, who is
a follower of his, with some others of the same suit.

In these days of so great affliction, the King ceased not to continue in his
daily prayers and fastings, with such admiration of those that beheld it, that
they held him for a Saint: and by the means of his patience, modesty, and
other apparent demonstrations of his virtues, he gained so much reputation
amongst those with whom he lived, that they were enforced to confess, that the
truth of this matter was covered and hidden, by the inventions and subtilties
of his enemies, and maintained, that he was the rightful Don Sebastian King of
Portugal.

Many of very good qualities have writ out of Naples into diverse parts of
Europe, touching the success of this affayre, according to the truth thereof,
and in such forcible manner, that as many as are either in the Court of Rome, or
in Italy, are persuaded to believe, and do hold most constantly for true, that
this miserable Prince, is the same person he professes himself to be.

But some will happily say, that he does deserve far more grievous
chastisement, because he escaping alive from the battle of Affricke, so much
famoused in the world, and coming afterward unknown into his own kingdom
of Portugal, he did not demand it again, leaving it as a prey to his
enemies; which has occasioned so many men's deaths, so many and so diverse
misaduentures, so many mischiefs, afflictions, and miseries, as have happened
thereby, and have crossed those Christian people these 22. years: as one, who
should have preferred the public good, before his own particular imaginations,
and private fantasies. But whosoever shall take knowledge of his pure virtue,
piety, fear of God, wisdom, and understanding, will sing another song, and
only say this: Sic erat in fatis: and that God would have it so, to the
intent, that in the law of grace, there should be found another Job, like unto
him in the law of nature.

These Galleyes passed from Naples into Spain, where some do report, that they
saw him at Barcelonne, in one of the Kings royal Galleyes, and that he sat on
the third seat, and that they used him very well, and served him with very much
honor, and with great respects.

We believe well the former, but not the latter, as it shall appear by that we
shall manifest hereafter: for they are but tales and fables, divulged by his
enemies, who have published it so abroad, for to cloak their malicious
wickedness, and their treasonable intents, and to conserve the good love and
favor of such as love him with all their hearts, and who with all the art
they can, with all their soul, and with all their power seek to regaine him,
and to acknowledge him for their Lord and Master: whereas the other, preferring
their own particular interest, and forgetting wholly the common good, have
quite lost both the remembrance of their loyalty, and the Obligation, wherein
they stand bound to their Country.

From Bercelonne, the Galleys entered into the Ocean sea, where they remained
till the beginning of the month of August, at the port of Saint Lucar de
Barrameda.

A Currier from his Catholic Majesty recounted to the thrice Christian King,
the cause why the foresaid vessels past forth of the Mediterranean sea into the
Ocean, which was a rebellion in Angra, a City in the I Will of Tergere, which is
the chiefest of the Isles, which they call by the name of Assores, which is the
key of all the Ocean sea: for those that come out of Affricke, out of Asia and
America, are constrained to pass that way, as to the principal But of their
navigations. The I Will is situated in 39. degrees, and some minutes, between the
Septentrion, and the Meridian.

The certainty of this insurrection, is not yet to this day made fully known.
Some say, that the Portugals did rise against the Catholic King, a Noble man
of Spain being a party with them. Others, that the Governor of the I Will, being
by nation a Castilian, did mightily bastenado a Captain of his regiment; who
weighing with himself, that he could not challenge his superior the field, and
that he remained in an I Will environed round about with the sea, and 300. leagues
from Lisborne, he resolved to take some other course to satisfy his vengeance
upon him. For effecting of which revenge, he discovered his intention to his
soldiers, and especially to the Portugals of the said I Will: whom he finding
propitious, and fully bent to yield him their best assistance, for to make
himself satisfaction for the wrong he was offered, he determined to kill the
Governor, and to rise with the whole I Will, in favor of the Portugals: which
was effected after the same manner, as it was resolved on.

This revolt was the cause that his Catholic Majesty caused his Galleyes to
come from Naples into the Ocean.

Yet for all this, will I not deliver neither the one nor the other cause for
curra^t: for they are but fables, framed out of the forge of the enemy, whose
custom it is to sow such false tales, to see how the world will stand affected
with it, and to discover the hearts, as well of the nobler, as the vulgar
sort. It is rather to be thought, that his Majesty commanded the said
Galleyes to come out of Naples into the Ocean, upon the rumor of those forces
that were raised in England, being designed (as some say) to enter Portugal.

But whatsoever they say, so it was, that his Galleyes came down thither: and
it shall suffice us for our purpose, to know for certain, that the Royal
Galley of Naples, in which Don Sebastian, King of Portugal was put, rides at
Saint Lucar de Barrameda, and that the said Don Sebastian is within her in the
manner aforesaid.

On the twelfth or thirteenth day of the said month, there arrived in France
in a Ship of the Rochelers, two French merchants, well known to be men of
credit and of truth, who did assure, as well by word of mouth, as by letters
written to persons of Honor in Paris,

That they have seen the foresaid prisoner at Saint Lucar de Barrameda, within
the Royal Galley of Naples: And that they spoke unto him: And that they saw
him in chains poor and miserable: And that they offered him Lynnen, and
Silver, and other commodities, which he would by no means take, but refused
their kindness, and returned them thanks: And that he brooked his affliction
with wonderful patience: And that all they of the Galleyes did acknowledge him
to be the same that himself had said he was, and did generally call him King:
And that he is served by two Galley-slaues that are Turks: That he labors
not at the Oar; But in all things else is used like the rest of the slaves:
And that the Duke of Medina Sidonia and his wife, had a desire to see him; who
having talked a long time with him, the King demanded of him, if he had that
sword still which he gave him, when he embarked himself for Barbary.

The Duke made answer, that indeed Don Sebastian King of Portugal presented
him with a sword, which he bestowed upon him before his imbarking, which he had
caused to be kept in his Armory amongst the rest.

Since that you have it then (replied the King) I pray you let me entreat
that it may be brought hither: for although it be now four and twenty years
since I gave it you, I doubt not but I shall know it full well. The Duke had
commanded some douzen to be brought: the which the King having severally
viewed, told him, Mine is not amongst any of these. Then the Duke willed they
should bring all the rest. And the King espying it in the hands of him that
brought them, Lo, Duke (said he) behold the sword which I gave you, when I
past into Affricke.

There was in the company of the Duchess, a Negro, whom the King knew, and
said, that he had served him for the washing of his lynnen, being one of his
Launderers, when he reigned in Portugal. The Duke seeing these things to be
so apparent, and so probably true, that they seemed miraculous unto him, blessed
himself with many a cross, and was seen to go from him with a heavy and a
sorrowful countenance, and weeping, as it were, through compassion and mere
pity, to see so miserable a Prince, in so wretched and unhappy an estate. And
the most part of the Castilians themselves, subjects to King Philip, amazed
with these so many signs and testimonies of truth, (howbeit they dare not
speak it openly, yet notwithstanding in their private discourses) they will not
stick to say, That it is impossible, that this man should be any other, the^
the true Don Sebastian; And that it is to be feared, that God will swallow them
all in hell, if the Catholic King restore not all that unto him, which of
right appertains unto him. But those, who do not look on these great
miracles, with the eyes of pity, say that he is possessed with a devil.

This Duke (if I am not deceived) was called D. Alphonse de Guzman le Bon, the
tenth County of Niebla, and the seventh Duke of Medina Sidonia, who in the
year 1578. the King Don Sebastian arriving at Cales, for to go into Affricke,
received him with great royalty, magnificent feastings, with Tilting, and
Tourning, with Bul-bayting, and other sportes and pastimes, such as the I Will
could afford.

The said King continued eight days with the Duke, who (they say) took much
travail with him, to dissuade him from passing into Barbary in his own person.

This considered, men need not to think it strange if the Duke had a desire to
see him, and also to speak with him: Nor that likewise which the Rochelers
report, touching the sword, and the Negro, since that the wife and Lady of the
said Duke, is Dame Anne de Silua, daughter to K. Gomes de Silua, a Portugal,
and Prince of Eboli, who governed the kingdom of Castile for many years, who
might very well retain the said Negro in her service, by reason he had been
brought up in the Princes house of Portugail.

We have diverse letters written from Cales, into many places round about,
which we find to be as follows:

There arrived out of Spain, six or seven Merchants, Inhabitants of this
town, men of the most credit and wealth amongst them, who reported they had
seen Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, in the Kings Galley of Naples, at Saint
Lucar de Barrameda; and that they saw him chayned as a prisoner, and entreated
as the rest of the slaves, but served with more respect, and free from the
oar: which favor, it is thought, was obtained for him by the Popes favor.

They added moreover, that many old men, Portugals of diverse sorts, in great
abundance, came thither to see him, and that all of them did confess and
maintain, that this was the true Don Sebastian King of Portugal; and that the
Castilians cried with alowd voice, in these terms, which we have here above
mentioned, touching the wrath of God hanging over Spain.

And if we shall but weigh all the successes of this King, his peregrinations
through the world, his imprisonments, his deliverance out of Venice, the manner
of his coming from Florence unto Naples, his sentence, and execution upon it,
it makes the case appear in our sight, miraculous and full of wonder: But
above all, his imbarking and arrival at Saint Lucar de Barrameda. And yet
beside all these, this is a rare and extraordinary thing, that the Galleys,
coming down from Naples into the Ocean sea, did suit in such conformity, and
correspondencie with the ancient old prophecies, which touch these adventures.

The reuer end father, Dvctor Eampayo, a religious and holy man, of the order
of Preachers, being at Paris the last year, has assured many men, that he
had seen in the Library of S. Victor, in a certain book, a prophecy, which
we will openly deliver unto you: to wit, That the King, Don Sebastian, should
come out of Naples, upon a horse of wood, which out of the Mediterranean sea,
should enter into the Ocean, and that his horse should rest at Saint Lucar de
Barrameda.

See, what father Sampayo has trucly recounted to these persons touching this
Prophecy: the same is confessed and confirmed anew, by the religious men of
that Monastery: For it has been communicated and declared to diverse of them.
Also, they have writ the very same, to some of his friends. And within the
self same Library they have showed the prophecy to some such secular
Gentlemen, as stand well affected to the liberty of this unfortunate King. And
for as much as the said father Sampayo is far from hence, we cannot cite the
very words of the prophecy, nor the Author of it. Yet notwithstanding, it shall
make very well for that we have in hand, if we shall but know that which is
found written touching the adverse, and prosperous haps of this unhappy Prince,
by men of great learning, and holiness of life: which if we do, we may the more
easily be excused. Saint Isioore, a very wise and learned man, and of the blood
royal, as being the son of Thtodora, and of Seuerian, son to Thierry, King
of the Ostrogothes and of Italy, who flourished about the year 580. has left
unto us in writing: Occultus Rex, bis pie datus, in Hispaniam veniet in equo
ligneo, quem multi videntes, illum esse non credent, etc. Which is as much to
say, A secret and unknown King, exceeding devoutly given, shall come into
Spain upon a wooden horse, which many men seeing, shall not believe it is he,
etc.

This here, is found to be published in a strange adventure lately imprinted:

A Shoemaker of Portugal, named Bandarra, borne in the town of Trancoso,
who lived here about some 300. years since, has left unto us in writing in
Portugal verse, very many Prophecies upon diverse and sundry subjects: Amongst
the which, there are found some, which entreat Del Incubierto: videlicet, Of
the concealed and hidden Prince; in one part whereof, we have observed the
accomplishment in the person of King Don Sebastian. And if those which remain
behind, shall prove but so true as those that are past, doubtless we shall
see this King seated in his Royal throne.

The poor laboring people of Portugal retain this as an old tradition:

That a time shall come, wherein a King, whose name shall be as it were De
Bestia, shall disappeare for a time; and that after that he and his Realm
shall have suffered many afflictions and calamities, the very self same King,
whom all the world holds for dead, shall rise again, and gain his throne
with incredible happiness. In which tradition, we are to note one thing,
concerning the name of Bestia: For the Pesants of Portugal, in stead of
saying, Sebastian, pronounce Bestiam: so that, taking away the last letter of
the word, there remains Bestia. Moreover, we may also persuade ourselves, that
this tradition of those base, rusticke, and barbarous men, shall have his full
accomplishment in the person of this Prince, hitherto so unfortunate. It is no
such strange and unusual thing, to see God permit, that we behold his secrets
in the mouth of ignorant persons, since that his Son has taught us,
Abscondisti ea a sapientibus, and reuelasti ea parvulis. And we may as well, by
the permission of God, see this rusticke prophecy fulfilled, as they did that,
which runs thorough the mouths of the laborers of Beaulse, in these latter
years of the King that was, which was by tradition delivered still from the
father to the son.

The year one thousand, five hundred, eighty nine,
Anew King unto the throne of Portugal shall clime.
The year one thousand, five hundred and ninety,
Far more hares, then sheep shall you see.
We have also elsewhere, an other old fellow, who has composed a book in
Castilian verse, which serves as an explication of those prophecies of Saint
Isidore, and of some other, who have writ of the Incubierto. In which book I
have read some 45. years since, many curious things, which if I could remember
them, would at this time stand me in good stead. But because I read them in my
youth, without any notice of things to come, or imagining of any changes or
reuolutions to happen in the world these 24. years past: and besides, being
then incapable of understanding them, made me the more negligent in the
apprehension of them: only my memory has in a confused manner, furnished me
with a Poem of seven lines, very fit for our present purpose. And not long
since, a Gentleman of Portugal, a faithful servant to his King, and very
desirous of his countries liberty, gave it me in writing.

Vendra and Incubierto,
Vendra cierto.
Entrera en el huerto,
Por el puerto.
Qu'esta mas a ca del muro.
Y lo que paresce escuro,
Se vra claro, yabierto.
Which is as much to say:

The unknown shall come:
He shall come for certain, and shall enter at the garden,
By the gate, which is nearest to the wall.
And that which seems dark and obseure,
Shall appear full clear, and be discovered.
For the better understanding of these verses, we are to understand what this
garden, and what this wall is: for the exposition and understanding of these
two words, shall give us light to the rest, and shall lay open to our view,
those admirable things, which a simple Poem prophecieth unto us.

We are then to understand, that this garden may be taken for the country,
which extends it self beyond the Mount Calpe, which is in Spain, at the mouth
of the Straight of Gibraltar, fronting on Mount Abyla, which is situated on the
other side of the said Straight, in Affricke, which are the two Mountains,
which are named by the Ancient, Hercules Pillars, as far as the river, which
the Latins call Baetis, and is named now at this day, by the Inhabitants,
Guadal quiber, a name, imposed by the Moors, after they had made themselves
Lords of Spain, which signisieth in our language, Great-water: for Guad, in
the Arabian tongue, is as much as water, and Quiber signifies great.

The I Will of Cales is in that country, and was once far greater, then now it
is. All this country is very sertill, plentiful, and delightsome.

Ancient Authors do report of it, that if their sheep should go but thirty
days without letting of blood, they would die with fatness.

In this country did Homer dwell before he grew blind, which was in the year
1;07. after the flood, and 255. before the foundation of Rome, and a thousand
before the incarnatiou of Christ. In those days they called it Melesegines.
They that have seen the fruitfulness and good temperature thereof, affirm,
that these were the Elisian fields, whither the gods sent the souls of the
blessed. Whence we see clearly, that this country is the garden of Spatne,
and so we likewise call it.

Yet there are some Authors, notwithstanding, who maintain and approve with
very strong and evident reasons, that Lisborne is the garden of Spain, with
the appurtenances thereunto belonging: For as much as it is a very pleasant
Territory, large, fertile, plentiful, fair, and delectable, wherein grow
great abundance of all fruits, the most excellent, and the most perfect that
Europe affords.

Your elder writers affirm, that the mares that live thereabout, will be
impregned by the wind, and that the coltes which come of them, seem rather to
fly then run, so swift they are of foot.

Ulysses (whom writers allot unto us, as sounder of the said City) and his
companions, arrived after his shipwreck, in these quarters, and entering into
the Ocean sea by Tagus, moved by the fertilnesse of the Territory, with the
waters, and the abundance of fish, that were bred in the said river, being so
deep, and so marvelous fit for all kind of commodities, besides the great
store of Gold, which seemed to be in those sands, he named it Theodora, which
in the Greek tongue, signifies Gods gift. So that the garden of Spain is
that country, which we affirm to be between the mount Calpe, and the river
of Guadiana: Or else the town of Lisborne, with her Territories.

The King Don Sebastian having entered some of these parts with prosperity, it
imports us a little for the verification of this Prophecy, whether the one
or the other be the garden of Spain.

Touching the wall, all they that are well seen and practiced in the ancient
Histories of Spain, confess, that it is the I Will of Cales, which they call
Gades, and by reason of the affinity of the G. with the C. is converted into
the name of Cades.

And for the better declaring from whence this name came, it is necessary that
we here allege some ancient Histories, who teach us, that there are six men
that bear the name of Hercules: whereof, two of them have stifled each others
reputation. One was son unto Jupiter and Alcmena: the other, son of the
same father, and of Asteria sister to Latona. And this Hercules is adored with
great reverence at Tyr.

The Histories do report, that he commanded the Gaditanes by a dream, who
were the Inhabitants of that City, that they should pass into Spain, and
build a Temple unto him in Cales, where his name should be held in veneration.

For to accomplish this commandment, the Gaditanes embarked themselves in the
year two hundred thirty five, after the foundation of Rome; and sailing by the
Mediterranean sea, they entered the Ocean: and not far from the mouth of the
Straight, they landed at Cales.

There began they to build a town, observing the customs and Ceremonies of
the Hetruscians, who did (as M. Varro mentions) couple a Bull and a Cow
under one yoke, and so made a deep furrowe with their plovv-share, in a
circular or round figure, whose circuit they drew as large as the City should
be, which they intended to build. The plowe share made the furrow, and the
earth they threw up, formed their wales. So did Romulus, when he undertook
the foundation of Rome: as it is storied by Dionisius Halicarnesseus. So did
Aeneas also, according to the testimony of Virgil.

Interea Aeneas orbem designat aratro. And thus in this manner, was the said
place held afterward for a thing holy, and religious.

As soon as the building of this town and temple was bruted in the world,
great multitudes out of Europe, Affricke, and Asia, came to see it. And in
after years, the Garthaginians, considering that the inhabitants thereof, as
being all of one country, (for they and the Gaditanes came both out of Tyr)
would continue still friends unto them, determined to undertake the conquest of
Spain.

And for the better effecting their design, they cloaked their ambition, with
piety and religion, as I shall show you: giving the Spaniards to understand,
that it was not fit, since so many out of all parts of the world came to visit
this City, and the temple belonging unto it, and to do sacrifice unto the God
thereof, of whom they had received such exceeding benefits, that the said God
should be worshipped in so poor a temple, and of so base a structure, the
walls thereof being no better then dirt and earth: And therefore would entreat
them, that they might have leave to build a greater, a richer, and more
sumptuous temple.

The Spaniards, not suspecting any ill that might succeed, nor any way being
ielous of the Carthaginians at that time, did easily condescend to their
request, suffering them to obtain whatsoever they desired.

Presently hereupon, the Carthaginians began, with incredible haste to build a
mighty huge temple of squared stone, and so strong, that it might serve them
in stead of a castle, for the effecting of this their intention.

There were also all along the temple some strong buildings, saying they were
to scrue for the Priests, the officers, and the servants of the said temple.

Not content with this, acquainting the Spaniards with the bad entertainment,
which those received which came with such great devotion, and undertook such
long iournies for to visit the house of this their God, that they might have
where to retire themselves, and to shelter themselves for all seasons, that
they would permit them to build a greater number of houses, for to lodge and
receive these poor pilgrims.

In a word, the Carthaginians obtained all that they would: and joining one
house to another, they made a very strong place, by means whereof, they grew
great Lords in Spain. And the same report is now at this day very common also
in the mouths of many. When the Earl of Essex took the said town by force,
the Inhabitants trembled, and cried out, Is it possible that the walls of
Spain should be taken by the enemy? O God, what shall we do?

Out of this, which has bin said, you may clearly see, that this is that
wall, and that garden, which the Author of these Prophecies has spoken of in
his verses. So that in knowing this, we may easily have knowledge of the gate
which is on the hither side of the wall, which must be that of Saint Lucar de
Barrameda, which is on the other side in the Ocean sea, some five leagues
distant from Cales.

God grant that this virtuous and holy Prince, Don Sebastian, King of
Portugal, fulfilling all that which is prophesied of him, may enter into the
possession of his kingdom, for the peace and tranquillity of his countries,
and the common good of all Christendom. Amen. Farewell, the last of August.
1602.

AFter I had ended this present discourse, news came out of diverse places, and
letters sent by many persons worthy of credit, who confirm all this that has
been spoken of D. Sebastian: Adding withal that the Duke of Medina Sidonia
sent afterward aboard the Galleys, four men, which had both seen, known,
spoken, and served the said King all the time he lay at Cales, before he past
into Affrike, which were eight days, for to see, and examine, whether he were
the very same or no. These men saw him, spoke to him, and demanded him many
things, himself not knowing to what end they thus examined him: VVhorenurning
to the Duke, did avouch with many oaths, That this man, was that very self
same right and true Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, whom be had received at
Cales, with such great joy and feasting, in the year 1578. Some say that the
Duke writ letters of all this that had passed unto the Catholic King: And
besides, that with these his letters, and ratification of what he had seen,
and heard, he sent the said men for to testify the tru^th of it.

God grant for his mercies sake, and for our delivery out so many troubles and
miseries, that those Prophecies set down in the two last lines of those verses
in the Castilian tongue, before recited, may quickly be fulfilled, to wit:

Y lo, que paresce escuro
Se vra claro, y abierto.
GEntle Reader, there are many more proofs and testimonies of this miserable
King, which shall ere long be published, with a declaration of all his time
employed, since the battle in Affrike, 1578. till the month of September last
past. 1602.

FINIS.

