TAILORS REVENGE OR THE RYMER WILLIAM FENNOR Firkt, Feritted, and finely fetched
over the Coals. WHEREIN His Riming Raggamuffin Rascallity, without
Partiallity, or fear of Principallity, is Anagramatized, Anotomized, and
Stigmatized. The occasion of which Inuectiue, is briefly set down in the
Preface to the Reader.

Revenge does Gallop when it seems to creep,
For though my wrong did wink, it did not sleep.
PRINTED At Rotterdam, at the sign of the blew Bitch in Dog-Lane, and are to
be sold, almost any where. AND Transported over sea in A Cods belly, and cast
up at Cuckolds Haven the last Springtide. 1615.

To Any that can Read.
BE thou either Friend or Foe or indiferent, all is one, Read, Laugh, like or
dislike, all the care is taken: The chiefest cause why I wrote this, was on set
purpose to please my self. Yet to show thee the meaning of this little
Building, Imagine this Epistle to be the door, and if thou please come in and
see what stuff the whole Frame is made off. Be it therefore known unto all
men, that I John Tailor Waterman, did agree with William Fennor, (who
Arrogantly and falsely entitles himself the Kings Majesty's Riming Poet) to
Answer me at a trial off Wit on the seventh of October last 1614. on the
Hope stage on the Bank-side, and the said Fennor Received of me ten shillings
in earnest of his coming to meet me, whereupon I caused 1000 bills to be
Printed, and douulg'd my name 1000 ways and more, giving my Friends and diverse
of my acquaintance notice of this Bear-garden banquet of dainty Conceits, and
when the day came that the Play should have been performed, the house being
filld with a great Audience, who had all spent their moneys extraordinarily:
then this Companion for an Ass, Ran away and left me for a Fool, amongst
thousands of critticall Censurers: where I was ill thought of by my friends,
scorned by my foes, and in conclusion, in a greater p^zzell then the blind
Bear in the midst of all her whip broth; Besides the some of twenty pounds in
money, I lost my Reputation amongst many, and gaind disgrace in stead of my
better expectations. In Revenge of which wrongs done unto me by the said Ryming
Rascal, I have written this I^^ectiue against him, chiefly because the ill
looking Hound does not confess he has injured me, nor has not so much
honesty as to bring or send me my money that he took for earnest of me: but on
the contrary part, he Railes and Abuses me with his callumnious tongue, and
scandalizet^ me in all Companies where he hears me nominated. But in a word,
Reader when thou have read this that follows, I think thou will Judge me
clear ^f the many false Imputations that are laid upon me. So I leave thee to
thy Con^iderations, and I proceed to my Exclamations.

Thine as thou art mine, JOHN TAILOR.

WILLIAM FENNOR.
Annagrama. NV VILLAINY For me OR For me NV VILLAINY.
NV VILLAINY For me, Nue fresh and New,
Or Form NV VILLAINY, Come Turk, come Jew,
Come who dares come, for I have found a Theme,
That ouerflowes with matter like a stream.
And now stand clear my masters, ware your shins,
For now to kick and fling my Muse begins.
How fit his name is Annagrammatiz'd,
And how his Nature is Annotomiz'd,
It Would make a horse with laughing break his bridle
But to the purpose, long delays are idle.
Tailors Revenge.
TO WILLYAM FENNOR.
COme Sirrah, Rascal, off your clothes, Sr. strip,
For my Satyrrick whip shall make you skip:
Thou Had better to have dealt with all the Devils,
They could not plague thee with so many evils.
Nay come man, never whine, or crooch or kneel,
My heart cannot one jot of pity feel,
I'haue squeezed the Gall from out the Lernean Snake
With which, Reuengefull Ink I mean to make,
Which I with Aquafortis will Commix,
Yblended with the loathsome Lake of stix,
And with that Marrow-eating hateful Ink
I Will make the^ (more then any Ajax) stink,
A Scritch-owles quill shall be my fatal pen,
That shall emblaze thee basest slave of men.
So that when as the pur-blinde world shall see
How vildley thou have played the Rogue with me,
They shall perceive I wronged them not ^or pelf
And thou shall (like a Rascal) hang thy self.
What damned Villain would forswear and swear^
As thou did, against my Challenge to appear,
To Answer me at Hope, upon the stage
And thereupon my word I did engage,
And to the world did publish printed Bills
With promise that we both would show our skills.
And then your Rogue-ship durst not show your face
But Ran away, and left me in disgrace.
To thee, ten shillings I for earnest gau^
To bind thee that thou should not play the Kna^^.
Curr, had thou no man's Creddit to betray
But mine, or could tho^^^nde no other way,
To Shark, or Shift, or Co^y-catch for money
But to make me thy Ass, thy Fool, thy Coney?
Could not thy Squire and thee, (a brace of Varlots)
Ri^de, F^old, and Pip'd, among pocky Whoores and Harlots
For twopence in some drunken Bawdy-booth
To please thy Doxy-dells sweet stinking tooth,
Whereas thou might (as thou have often done)
Some scrapps and broken beer, for wages wone,
Which to maintain thy state had been some means
Amongst thy fellows, Rascals, Rogues, and Queanes.
Thou scuruie squint-eyd brazen-faced Baboon
Thou damned Stiggmaticall foul Pantaloon^,
Thou Tavern, Alehouse Whoorehouse, Gig of time
That for a Groate wilt Amongst Tinkers Rhyme.
I Will hale from Hell Grim visag'd Nemesis
Whom I will Scull over silver Thamesis,
Which to and fro, shall still torment and towze thee
And none but Runagates (like thee) shall howze thee.
Thine own ^^gue (trumpet like) each where proclaime^
Thy self a servant to my Soueraign James,
When as thy service to the King is such
As Atheists unto God, and scarce so much.
It may be (Graceles) thou have Graced bin
And in the Presence did Admittance win,
Where some stolen Rimes, and some things of thine own
To please the ears of Greatness thou have shown.
Which (at the first has won thee some Applawse
Although perhaps not worth 3 barley strawes,)
And you forsooth, must presently give out
Amon^st your Kitchinstuffe whoor-hedge bird rowt,
What Nobleman your scuruines did bring
Into the Court, and how our Gracious King
(As on a man most worthy to bestow it)
Entitled you his Highness Riming-Poet.
How dares thy ouerweening saucy tongue
Presume to do a Poets name that wrong?
How dare thou (being altogether vile)
Attribute to thy self that Sacred style?
Shall that Rare Art (which Gods and (...) admire
Polluted be by such a scuruie Squire?
Shall Heau'n-bred Poesy that so long has lasted
With thy contagious breath be Bussard-blasted?
Then Homer from thy Toomb, with speed return
And Maro Rouse thee from thy peaceful Vrne.
Brave Naso to the world again Retire,
And Repossesse that Rare Pr^methean fire
Which erst inspird you, here you may behold
The face of Impudency ouer-bold,
That dares put on that sweet Poetique name
Which has eternized your Immortal fame.
Revenge you Muses, up, awake, awake,
Or ever sink to the Lethean Lake.
And you brave Modern Poets whose sweet lines
All Heavenly earthly Harmony combines,
Can you, O'can your Senses be stupidious
And see your selves abused thus perfidious.
Oh if the Case were mine, as it is yours
I would Rain vengance in reuengefull showers,
Which furi^^s storm for ever should disperse
And dash to pieces these base Grooms in verse.
An Ass in Cloth of Gold is but an Ass,
And Riming Rascals may for Poets pass,
Amongst misiudging and illiterate Hynds
But Judgment knows to use them in their kinds.
My self knows how (sometimes) a verse to frame
Yet dare I not put on a Poets name,
And I dare write with thee at any time
For what thou dare in either Prose or Rhyme,
For thou of Poesy art the very Scum
Of Riff-Raff-Rubish wit the total sum,
The loathsome Glaunders of all base abuse
The only Filch-line of each labring Muse,
The Knave, the Ass, the Coxcomb and the Fool
The scorn of Poets, and true wits Csose-stoole.
But all your Tavern and your Alehouse prate
Is how your entertainment was in State,
With this Great Lord and that embrodered Knight,
With that fair Countess, and that Lady bright,
Though where thou come thou shift and lie and lurch
As welcome as a Dog into a Church.
Do think the King and's Courtiers does not see
And know that nothing good Can come from thee!
Can Swine yield sweet perfumes,
(can Swannes breed Crows?
Can flattering Rogues have but dissembling shows?
Can health be hidden in the plague or pox?
Can men take pride in fetters, bonds or stocks?
And more impossible then are all these
It is that thou should any wise man please,
Except it be a flash, a spark, a spurt,
Soon in, soon out, and then as sweet as dirt,
Or like a candl's snuff, for pleasing scent
Thou leau'st them deeply pleased with discontent,
For thou (like stinking Fish) art grown so stale,
A whole days Rhyme not worth a pot of Ale.
But shortly I do hope to see brave sport,
To have thee soundly whipped from out the Court,
For well I know my King will not allow
His house to harbor such a Rogue as thou.
I vow to G^d, my Inkhorne i will not shut,
Or sleep shall not mine eyes together put
Before each night I write some scourging vearse
That in Revenge thy Iadish heart shall pierce.
For I whose creddt nere before was tainted,
Nor ever was with Cheating tricks acquainted,
To be by thee thus basely vsd and crossed
And in the world my Reputation lost,
And all by thee, that merit'st naught but banging
For sure I think, thou wilt nere be worth the hanging.
Yet rather then thou should a Hanging want
I Would trusse thee up for naught, were Hangmen scant,
Nay I Would do it freely, and for nothing,
And give thy Wife again my fee and clothing:
Which Courtesy of mine, no doubt would move
The creatures kindness to require my love.
On her thou laidst the fault: thou said that she
Did force thee basely Run away from me.
Thou Dolt, thou Dunce, more blockish then a M^le,
None but a Wittall gives his wife the Rule.
No it was thy Coward heart, full fraught with fear
It Was nothing else that made thee not appear.
Had thou the Conquest got, I had not cared
So thou-vnto thy word had had regard,
Then sure the Players had not played a play
But thou or I had borne away the day.
And now to give the world a little taste
Of the strange brunts and puzzells that I past,
I will not write a word shall be untrue
That men may know, thou used me like a (...)
And that I do not Rail on the so fore
But that my wrongs does urge me to do more.
The house was filld with Newters, Foes, and Freind^
And every one their money frankly spends,
But when I saw the day away did ^ade
And thy looked for Appearance was not made,
I then stepped out their angers to appease
But they all Raging like tempestious Seas:
Cried out their expectations were defeated
And how the wall were Cony caught and Cheated,
Some laughed, some swore, some star'd and stamped and cursed
And in confused humors all out burst.
I (as I could) did stand the desp'rat shock,
And bid the brunt of many dangerous knock.
For now the stinkards, in their Irefull wraths
Bepelted me with Lome, with Stones, and Lath^,
One madly fits like bottle- Ale, and hisses,
Another throws a stone, and cause he misses
He yawnes and baules, and cries away, Away:
Another cries out John begin the Play,
I think this Baebell of confused Action
Would sure have made thee stink with fears distraction,
One swears and storms, another laughs and smiles,
Another madly would pluck off the tiles.
Some Runs to'the door to get again their Coin
And some do shifts and some again purloine,
One valiantly stepped out upon the Stage
And would tear down the Hangings in his rage.
(God grant he may have hanging at his end
That with me for the hangings did contend,)
Such clapping, hissing, swearing, stamping, smiling,
Applauding, scorning, li^ing, and Reuiling,
Did more torment me then a Purgatory,
Yet I (in scorn of windy pomp stage glory)
Did stand it out, unconquered, vnsubdude,
Despite the Hydra-headed multitude.
Now Goodman dog a halter catch your muzzell,
Your not Appe^rance brought me in this puzz^ll,
But I (to give the Audience some content)
Began to Act what I before had meant:
And first I played A maundering Roguish creature
(a part thou could have Acted well by nature)
Which act did pass, and please, and filled their Iawe^
With wrinkled laughter, and with good Aplawse.
Then came the Players, and they played an Act
Which greatly from my Action did detract.
For it is not possible for any one
To play against a Company alone,
And such a Company (I Will boldly say)
That better (nor the like) e're played a Play.
In breife, the Play my Action did Eclips
And in a manner sealed up both my lips.
Suppose it were a black Cimmerian night
And that some 12 or 16 Torches light
Should make night seem an Artificial day,
And them suppose these torches past away,
Whilst dismal darkness straight resumes the place,
Then after all comes in with Glimmering pace
A silly ^aper. How would that alone
Show when the flaming torches all were gone?
Eu'd so seemed I, amidst the Guarded troop
Of Gold laced Actors, yet all could not droope
My fixed mind, for where true Courage roots:
The Proverb says, once over shoes or ^ boots.
It Were easier to subdue wild Bears or Bores,
Or row to High-gate with a pair of Oars,
Or to make thee an upright honest man
(Which sure God will not, nor the Devil can)
It Were lesser labor to blow down Paules-steeple
Then to Appease, or please the raging people.
The Play made me as sweet in their opinions
As Tripes well fried in Tarr, or Eggs with Onions.
I, like a Bear unto the stake was tide,
And what they said, or did, I must abide.
A pox upon him for a Rogue says one
And with that word he throws at me a stone,
A second my estate does seem to pity,
And says my Action's good, my speeches witty.
A third does screw his chaps awry, and mew,
His self conceited wisdom so to show.
Thus does the Third, the Fourth, the Fifth and Six
Most G^lliemawfrey-like their humors mix.
Such Motley, Medley, Linsey Wolsey speeche^
Would sure have made thee vilify thy breeches.
What I endured, upon that earthly hell
My tongue or pen cannot discribe it well.
And rather then I Will do the like once more
I would be married to an Arrant Whore.
And that's a Plague, I could wish well to thee
For it would worser then a Hanging be.
And let ^e say my best in my excuse,
The Audience all were wronged with great abuse,
Great cause they had to take it in offense,
To come from their Affairs with such expense
By Land and Water, and then at the Play
So extraordinarily to pay,
And when the thing should be which they expected
Then nothing to their likings was effected.
Their mirth to Madness, liking turned to Loathing
For when all came to all, all came to nothing.
Thus have thou had a little slender taste
Of my designs, and ^ow I was disgraced,
For which I am beholding to you Sir,
For had you come, there had been no such stir,
Not cause the people longed thy self to see
But that they looked thou should disgraced be,
To see us two the people did repair,
And not to see or hear, or Play or Player.
Why what a faithless Rascal art thou then
Dare thou to look^ upon me once ag^n,
Which if thou do, were it not for ^ear of Laws
I Would stab my Dagger through both thy laws.
But much I scorn my fingers should be foul
With beating such a durry (...)-Owl.
But I Will Rib-roast thee, and bum-bast thee still
With my enraged Muse, and angry Quill.
And so I leave thy Carkas and Apparel
Unto the Hangman, who shall end our quarrel,
My full opinion of thee sure is this
In no Church-booke thy name Recorded is*
But that thou wast begotten in some ditch
Betwixt a Tinker and a (...) Witch,
And sure thy birth did equal thy beg^tting,
I think thy Mother in the Sunshine sitting.
Basking herself close to ^ome hedge of Thorn
And so without a Midwife thou want borne.
And there the Sun with his Illustrous Light
Screwd quite Awry the Wind^wes of thy sight.
Then afterward the Ma^^o^e thought it meet
To wrap thee up within some hedg-stolne sheet.
And making thee his sweet unchristian pack
Some six or seau'n year bare thee on her back,
Instructing thee in the brave Canting tongue
And how in Pedlers French to sing a song.
And Ryme for Butter-milk for Curds and Whay
And in a Barn at night thy bones to lay.
This I do think of thee, I Will not say so*
Thou know it best if it be so or no.
This (by thine own Report) some few years since
Thou Rym'st at Gr^^^send for so^e fourteen pence
In The street, from seauenteen people unrespected
This Graund Collection, Justly was Collected.
As I do hope for bliss, I hate thee not
For any Goods or Creddit thou have got
In Court or City. But thy praise I Will sing
If any way thou did delight the King.
So many tedious Cares are daily thrown
Upon the Royall-head that wears a Crown,
That into Action I would melt my spright
Thereby to give my Sovereign some delight.
For such things I do love and wish thee well
But that I think no such in thee does dwell.
Therefore I hate the^, as thou do be^aue
Thy self like to a couzening paltry Knave.
What here I write, upon thee I Will make good
And in the hazard I Will engage my blood.
But as I said before, again I Will say
I scorn on such a Rascal, hands to lay,
For the old Proverb is Authentical
(Who touches pitch shall be defilde witha^^.
Thou have a pate can forge a Mint of lies,
Else how is it possible thou could devise
At once to flap me and the world in the mouth
That thou wast Rid, East, West, and North, and South.
That day thou should have met me on the Stage
Thou wentst three me ways at once on pilgrimage,
Thou sent'st ^e word tho'wast sent for to the Court,
Thy wife said thou with speed must make resort
To fetch her portion out of Warwickshire,
And the day after it was my chance to hear,
How thou for begging of a Fellons pardon
Wast Rid down into Kent to fetch thy Guer^^^n.
So that the Portion that thou wentst to fet
Thou from the Gallo^^es (thy best frei^d) did get.
But though thou rob the G^llowes of his fee,
It will (at last) for principal catch thee.
Where (for thou Guld'st me at the Hope) I hope
Thou will conclude thy Rogu'ry in a Rope,
Three Trees, two Ram^ant, and the other Crossant,
One halter Pendant, and a ladder Pass^^t,
In a field Azure, (clouded like the ^kye)
Because 'twixt Earth and Air I hope thou'^t d^e.
These Arms for thee, my Muse has Heralldiz'd,
And to exalt thee, them she has deuisd.
Then when thou bidst the world thy last goodnight
Squi^t upward, and cry Gallows claim thy right.
To whose protection, thy Estate I tender,
And all thy Rights and Titles I surrender,
Thy Carkas and thy Manners (that are ^uill)
To Tyburne, Hangman, and (thy ^ire) the Devil.
Thine as thou have deserved, John Tailor.

To the Reader.
NOw honest Reader, (if thou be so) tell
Have I not Ca^uas'd this same Rascal well?
Me thinks I hear some say I am to bitter
And if I were more mild they hold it fitter.
Let such men Truly but conceive my wrong,
And think the Case did to themselves belong.
When such a F^llow with me shall agree
And take my money for an ernest see,
And make me Print a thousand Bills and more,
And daily on the Posts to clap up store,
For thousand Readers as they pass the way
To see my name engaged to play a Play
Against William Fennor my Antagonist,
And then, for me each hour to persist
(Upon his word) to studdy and to write
And scarce in six weeks rest or day or night.
And when the time is Come the play should be
My opposite should Run away from me.
And leave me to be made a wondering ^^ock
A scorn, a Bye-word, for the world to mock.
To make me loose my Credit, and my name
To be or'c^ouded with perpetual shame.
Judge if this would not move a man to spleen^
To be thus basely vsd as I have been.
Thus to the Censure of the World I send
This sharp inuectiue, which my Anger pend.
And as my wrong was public, so will I
Revenged ^e upon him Publicly.
And for him I have worser Rodd^ in piss
If he but dare to Write and Answer this.
But if he durst no better play the Knave
Then Answer me, he would not Go so bra^e.
But yet here is one thing was almost forgot
Which till this time my Muse remembered not,
And sure it must his Fool^ ship needs, m^lest,
This has been Read and Laughed at by the best,
That when he dares but to the Court to come
His entertainment will be like I^ck Drum.
To my spightfull Foes.
Like Guests vnbid, you might have brought your stools
For as you came, you went away like Fools.
The purpose which my study did intend
Was by no means any to offend,
And therefore whatsoever that they be
That enuiously do Rail and snarle at me,
I can no less do, but with word and pen
Inform them that they are malicious men.
Against no man in particular I write
But gen'rally to all that bear me spite.
I pray for them, (to make their fury madder)
God turn their hearts, or Hangman turn the ladder
Which turning sure will either mend or end them
To one of which my daily Prayers commend them.
FINIS.

