A Verry Merry VVherry-Ferry-Voyage: OR York for my Money:

Sometimes Perilous, sometimes Quarrellous, Performed with a pair of Oars, by
Sea from London, by JOHN TAILOR, and JOB PENNELL.

And written by I. T.

LONDON. Imprinted by Edw: All-de. 1622.

As much Happiness as may be wished, attend the Two hopeful, Impes of
Gentility and Learning, Mr. RICHARD and GEORGE HATTON.
YOu forward Pair, in Towardly Designs,
To you I send these sowsde Salt Water Lines:
Accept, Read, Laugh, and breath, and to it again,
And still my Muse, and I, shall yours Remain.
John Tailor.
Prologue.
I Now intend a Voyage here to Write,
From London unto York, help to Indite
Great Neptune! lend thy Aid to me, who pa^
Through thy tempestuous Waves with man^ a blas^
And then I^^ true describe the Towns, and me^
And manners, as I went and came again.
A very Merry Wherry-Ferry-Voyage, Or, York for my Money.
THE Year which I do call as others do,
Full 1600. adding Twenty The year of our Lord
two:
The Month of July, that is for ever famed,
(Because 'twas so by July was named so by Caesar.
Julius Caesar named,)
Just when six days, and to each Day a Night,
The dogged The Dog-dayes were 6. days entered.
Dog-dayes had began to bite,
On that day which does blessed Remembrance bring,
The name of an Apostle, and our King,
On that remarkable good day, Saint James
I undertook my Voyage down the Thames.
The Sign in I observe signs, winds, Tides, days, hours, times,
Scituations and manners.
Cancer, or the Ribs and Breast,
And Eolus blewe sweetly West Southwest.
Then after many farewels, Cups and Glasses,
(Which oftentimes has made men worse then Asses)
About the waste or Noone if you will take it so.
Navel of the Day,
Not being dry or Drunk, I went my way.
Our Wherry somewhat old, or struck in age,
That had endured near 4. years Pilgrimage,
And carried honest people, Whores, and Thieues,
Some Sergeants, Bayliffes, and some Boats are like Barbars Chairs Hackneyes or
Whores: common to all estates.
vnder-Shrieues,
And now at last it was her lot to be
Th'aduent'rous bonny Bark to carry me.
But as an old Whores Beauty being gone
Hides Natures wrack, with Artlike painting on:
So I with Colors finely did repair
My Boats defaults, and made her fresh and fair.
Thus being furnished with good Wine and Beer,
And Bread and Meat (to banish hungers fear)
With Sails, with Ancker, Cables, Sculs and Oars,
With Card and Compass, to know Seas and Shores,
With Lantern, Candle, Tinder-box and Match,
And with good Courage, to work, ward, and watch,
Well manned, well shipped, well victual'd, well appointed,
Well in good health, well timberd and well joynted:
All wholly well, and yet not half Fox'd well,
Twixt Kent, and Essex, we to Grauesend fell.
There I had welcome of my friendly Host,
(A Grauesend Trencher, and a Grauesend Tossed)
Good meat and Lodging at an easy Rate,
And rose betimes although I lay down late.
Bright Lucifer the messenger of Day,
His burnisht twinkling splendor did display:
Rose cheek'd Aurora hid her blushing face,
She spying Phoebus coming gave him place.
Whilst Zephirus, and Auster, mixed together,
Breathed gently, as fore-boding pleasant weather.
Old Neptune had his Daughter Thames supplide,
With ample measure of a flowing Tide,
But Thames supposde it was but borrowed goods,
And with her Ebbes, paid Neptune back his Floods.
Then at the time of this Auspicious dawning,
I rowz'd my men, who Scrubbing, stretching, yawning,
Arose, left Grauesend, Rowing down the stream,
And near to Lee, we to an Ancker came.
Because the Sands were bare, and Water low,
We rested there, till it two hours did Flow:
And then to travel went our Galley foyst,
Our Ancker quickly weighed, our sail soon hoyst,
Where thirty miles we past, a mile from shore,
The water two These star Sands are called the Spi^s.
foot deep, or little more.
Thus past we on the brave East Saxon Coast,
From 3. at morn, till 2. at noone almost,
By Shobury, Wakering, Fowlenesse, Tittingham,
And then we into deeper water came.
There is a crooked Bay runs winding far,
To Maulden, Esterford, and Colchester,
Which cause 'twas much about, (to ease men's pain)
I left the Land, and put into the main.
With speed, the crooked way to escape and pass,
I made out straight for Frinton, and the Nasse.
But being 3. Leagues then from any Land,
And holding of our Maine sheate in my hand,
We did espy a coleblacke Cloud to rise,
Forerunner of some Tempest from the Skies;
Scarce had we sailed a hundred times our length,
But that the wind began to gather strength:
Stiff Eolus, with Neptune went to Cuffes,
With huffes, and puffes, and angry counter-Buffes,
From boyst'rous Gusts, they fell to fearful flawes,
Whilst we 'twixt wind and water, near Death's jaws
Tossed like a Cork upon the mounting maine,
Up with a whiffe, and straight way down again,
At which we in our minds much troubled were,
And said God bless us all, what Wethers here?
For (in a word) the Seas so high did grow,
That Ships were forced to strike their topsailes low,
Mean time (before the wind) we scudded brave,
Much like a Ducke, on top of every wave.
But nothing violent is permanent,
And in short space away the Tempest went.
So farewell it; and you that Readers be
Suppose it was no welcome Guest to me:
My Company and I, it much perplexed,
And let it come when I send for it next.
But leaving jesting, Thanks to God I give,
It Was through his mercy we did escape and live.
And though these things with mirth I do express,
Yet still I think on God with thankefulnes.
Thus ceast the Storm and weather began to smile,
And we Rowed near the shore of Horsey I Will.
Then did Illustrious Titan seem to steep
His Chariot in the Western Ocean deep:
We saw the far spent Day, withdraw his light,
And made for Harwich, where we lay all night.
There did I find an Hostess with a Tongue,
As nimble as it had on Gimmols hung:
Twill never tire, though it continual toiled,
And went as yare, as if it had bin Oiled:
All Is one for that, for ought which I perceive,
It is a fault which all our Mothers have:
And is so firmly grafted in the Sex,
That he is an Ass that seems thereat to vex.
Apolloes Beams began to guild the Hills,
And West Southwest the wind the Welkin fills.
When I left Harwich, and along we Rowed
Against a smooth Calm flood that stiffly flowed,
By Bawdsey Haven, and by Orford Nasse,
And so by Aldbrough we at last did pass.
By Lestoffe, we to Yarmouth made our way,
Our third days travel being Saturday,
There did I see a Town well fortifide,
Well governed, with all Natures wants supplide,
The situation in a wholesome air,
The Buildings (for the most part) sumptuous, fair,
The people courteous, and industrious, and
With labor makes the Sea enrich the land.
Besides (for aught I know) this one thing more,
The Town can scarcely yield a man a Whore:
It is renownd for fishing far and near,
And sure in Britain it has not a Peer.
But noble Nash thy fame shall live always,
Thy witty Pamphlet, the red It has not a fellow in England for fishing.

A Book called the praise of the red Herring.


Herrings praise
Has done great Yarmouth much renowned right,
And put my Artlesse Muse to silence quite:
On Sunday we a learned Sermon had,
Taught to confirm the good, reform the bad;
Acquaintance in the Town I scarce had any,
And sought for none, in fear to find too many,
Much kindness to me by mine Host was done,
(A Mariner And a ship Carpenter.
named William Richardson)
Besides mine Hostess gave to me at last
A Cheese, with which at Sea we brake our fast,
The Gift was round, and had no end indeed,
But yet we made an end of it with speed:
My thanks surmounts her bounty, all men sees
My Gratitudes in Print: But where is the Cheese?
So on the Monday, betwixt one and twain,
I took my leave, and put to Sea again.
Down Yarmouth Road we Rowed with cutting speed,
(The Wind all quiet, Arms must do the deed)
Along by Castor, and Sea-bord'ring Towns,
Whose Cliffes and shores abide stern Neptunes frowns,
Sometimes a mile from land, and sometimes two,
(As depthes or sands permitted us to do)
Till drawing toward night, we did perceive
The wind at East, and Seas began to heave:
The rolling Billows all in fury Roares
And tumbled us, we scarce could use our Oars:
Thus on a Lee shore, darkness began to come,
The Sea grew high, the winds began hiss and hum:
The foaming curled waves the shore did beat,
(As if the Ocean would all Norfolk eat)
To keep at Sea, was dangerous I did think,
To go to land I stood in doubt to sink:
Thus landing, or not landing (I supposed)
We were in peril We were in a puzzell.
round about enclosed;
At last to Row to shore I thought it best,
Amongst many evils, thinking that the least:
My men all pleased to do as I command,
Did turn the Boats head opposite to land,
And with the highest Wave that I could spy,
I bad them Row to shore immediately.
When strait we all leaped ouer-boord in have,
Some to the knees, and some up to the waste,
Where suddenly t'wixt Owle-light and the dark,
We plucked the Boat beyond high water mark.
And thus half sowsde, half stewd, with Sea and sweat,
We land at Cromer Town half dry, half wet.
But we supposing all was safe and well
In shunning We were like Flounders alive in a frying Pan, that leaped into the
fire to save themselves.
Silla, on Caribdis fell:
For why some women, and some children there
That saw us land, were all possessed with fear:
And much amazed, ran crying up and down,
That Enemies were come to take the Town.
Some said that we were Pirates, some said Thieves,
And what the women says, the men believes.
With that four Constables did quickly call,
Your aid! to Arms you men of Cromer all!
Then straitway forty men with rusty Bills,
Some armed in Ale, all of approved skills,
Divided into four stout Regiments,
To guard the Town from dangerous Events;
Brave Captain These were the names of the cumbersome Cromorian Constables.
Pescod did the Vantguard lead,
And Captain Clarke the Rereward governed,
Whilst Captain Wiseman, and hot Captain Kimble,
Were in the main Battalia fierce and nimble:
One with his squadron watched me all the night,
Least from my lodging I should take my flight:
A second (like a man of special note)
Did by the Sea side all night watch my Boat,
The other two, to make their names Renownd,
Did Guard the Town, and bravely walk the Rownd.
And thus my Boat, my self, and all my men,
Were stoutly Guarded, and Regarded then:
For they were all so full with fear possessed,
That without mirth it cannot be expressed.
My Invention does Curuet, my Muse does Caper,
My Pen does dance out lines upon the Paper,
And in a word, I am as full of mirth,
As Mighty men are at their first sons birth.
Me thinks Moriscoes are within my brains,
And Heyes and Antiques run through all my veins:
Heigh, to the tune of Trenchmoore I could write
The valient men of Cromers sad affright:
As Sheep do fear the Wolf, or Geese the Fox,
So all amazed were these senseless blocks:
That had the Town been fired, it is a doubt,
But that the women there had pist it out,
And from the men Reek'd such a fearful sent,
That People three People did come thither 3. or 4. miles about, to know what
the matter was.
miles thence mused what it meant,
And he the truth that narrowly had sifted,
Had found the Constables, had need to have shifted.
They did examine me, I answered than
I was John Tailor, and a Waterman,
And that my honest fellow Job and I,
Were servants to King James his Maistie,
How we to York, upon a Mart were bound,
And that we landed, fearing to be drowned:
When all this would not satisfy the Crew,
I freely opened my Trunk, and bad them view,
I showed them Books, of Chronicles and Kings,
Some Prose, some verse, and idle Sonnettings,
I showed them all my Letters to the full,
Some to Yorkes Archbishop, and some to Hull,
But had the twelve Apostles sure been there
My witnesses, I had been nere the I had as good to have said nothing.
near.
And let me use all Oaths that I could use,
They still were harder of belief then Jews.
They wanted faith, and had resolved before,
Not to believe what e're we said or swore.
They said the world was full of much deceit,
And that my Letters might be Diligent Officers.
counterfeit:
Besides, there is one thing bred the more dislike,
Because mine Host was known a Catholic.
These things concurring, people came in Clusters,
And multitudes within my lodging Musters,
That I was almost wooried unto death,
In danger to be stifled with their breath.
And had mine Host took pence a piece of those
Who came to gaze on me, I do suppose,
No Jack an Apes, Baboone, or Crocodile
'Ere got more money in so small a The dancing on the Ropes, or a Puppet play,
had come short of his takings, accounting time for time.
while.
Besides, the Pesants did this one thing more,
They called and drank four shillings on my score:
And like vnmanner'd Mungrells went their way,
Not spending aught, but leaving me to This was more then I could willingly
afford.
pay.
This was the household business, in mean space
Some Rascals ran unto my Boat apace,
And turned and tumbled her, like men of Goteham,
Quite topsie turuy upward with her bottom,
Vowing they would in tatters piece-meale tear,
The cursed Pirates Boat, that bred their fear;
And I am sure, their madness (to my harm)
Tore a Board out, much longer then mine arm.
And they so bruised, and split our Wherry, that
She leak'd, we cast out water with a Hat.
Now let men judge, upon these truths revealing,
If Turks or Mores could use more barbarous dealing,
Or whether it be fit I should not write,
Their envy, foolish fear, and mad despite.
What may wise men conceive, when they shall note
That five unarmed men, in a Wherry Boat,
Naught to defend, or to offend with stripes
But one old And the sword was rusty with Salt Water, that it had need of a
quarters warning ere it would come out.
sword, and two Tobacco Pipes,
And that of Constables a Murniuall,
Men, women, children, all in general,
And that they all should be so valiant, wise,
To fear we would a Market Town surprise!
In all that is writ I vow I am no liar,
I muse the Beacons were not set on fire.
The dreadful names of Talbot, or of Drake,
Never made the foes of England more to quake
Then I made Cromer, for their fear and dolor,
O brave sent.
Each man might smell out by his Neighbors Collor.
At last the joyful morning did approach,
And Sol began to mount his flaming Coach,
Then did I think my Purgatory done,
And rose betimes intending to be gone;
But holla, stay, 'twas otherwise, with me
The mess of Constables were shrunk to three
Sweet Mr. Pescods double diligence
Had horst himself, to bear intelligence,
To Justices of Peace within the land,
What dangerous business there was now in hand,
There was I forced to tarry all the while,
Till some said he rode four and twenty mile,
In seeking men of worship, peace and quorum,
Most wisely to declare strange news before vm.
And whatsoever tales he did recite,
I Am sure he caused Sir Austine Palgraue, Knight,
And Mr. Robert Kempe a Justice there
Come before me, to know how matters were.
As conference twixt them and I did pass,
They quickly understood me, what I was:
And though they knew me not in prose and looks,
They had read of me in my verse, and books,
My businesses account I there did make,
And I and all my Company did take,
The lawful Oath of our Allegiance then,
By which we were believed for honest men.
In duty, and in all humility
I do acknowledge the kind courtesy
Of those two Gentlemen: for they did see,
How much the people were deceived in me.
They gave me Coin, and Wine and Sugar too,
And did as much as lay in them to do
To find them that my Boat had torn and rent,
And so to give them worthy punishment.
Besides Sir He would have had us to have stayed 3. or four days with him.
Austin Palgraue, bad me this,
To go but four miles, where his Dwelling is,
And I and all my Company should there
Find friendly Welcome, mixed with other Cheer.
I gave them thanks, and so I Will give them still,
And did accept their Cheer in their goodwill.
Then 3. a Clock at afternoon and past,
I was Discharged from Cromer at the last.
But for men shall not think that Enuiously
Against this Town I let my Lines to fly:
And that I do not lie, or scoff, or fable,
For them I will write something Charitable.
It is an Ancient Market Town that stands
Upon a lofty Cliffe of mouldring Sands:
The Sea against the Cliffes does daily beat,
And every tide into the Land does eat,
The Town is Poor, unable by Expense,
Against the raging Sea to make defense:
And every day it eats further in,
Still wasting, washing down the sand does win.
That if some Course be not taken speedily,
The Towne's in danger in the Sea to lie.
A goodly Church stands on these brittle Grounds,
Not many fairer in Great Britains Bounds:
And if the Sea should swallow't, as some fear,
It Is not Ten thousand pounds the like could Rear,
No Christian can behold it but with grief,
And with my heart I wish them quick relief.
So farewell Cromer, I have spoke for thee,
Though thou did much unkindly deal with me,
And honest Mariners, I thank you there
Laboriously you in your arms did bear
My Boat for me three furlongs at the least,
When as the tide of Ebb was so decreast,
You waded, and you launched her quite a floate,
And on your backs you bore us to our Boat.
Th'vnkindnes that I had before, it come
Because the Constables were troublesome:
Longed to be busy, would be men of action,
Whose labors was their travels satisfaction,
Who all were borne when wit was out of Town,
And therefore got but little of their own:
So farewell Pescod, Wiseman, Kimble, They longed for employment, and rather
then be idle, would be ill occupied.
Clarke,
Four sons of Ignorance (or much more dark)
You made me loose a day of brave calm weather,
So once again farewell, fare ill together.
Then longst the Norfolk Coast we Rowde outright
To Blakeney, when we saw the coming night,
The burning eye of day began to wink,
And into Thetis lap his Beams to shrink:
And as he went stained the departed sky,
With red, blew, purple, and vermillion dye.
Till all our Hemispere laments his lack.
And mourning night puts on a Robe of black,
Bespangled diversely with Golden sparks,
Some moveable, some Sea-mens fixed marks.
The milky way that blessed Astrea went,
When as she left this earthly Continent,
Showed like a Crystal cawsey to the Thrones
Of Jove and Saturn, Pau'd with precious Stones.
Old Occeanus, Neptune, The God of Rivers, Springs, Brooks, Foords, and
Fountains.
Innachus,
And two and thirty huffecapt Eolus,
Had all taken truce and were in League combined,
No billows foaming, or no breath of Wind;
The solid Earth, the Air, the Ocean deep
Seemed as the whole world had bin fast asleep.
In such a pleasant Even as this came I
To Blackney, with my Ship and Company:
Whereas I found my Entertainment good
For welcome, drinking, lodging, and for food.
The morrow when Latonaes Sun began rise,
And with his Light illumines mortal eyes:
When Cocks did Crow, and Lambs did bleat and blea,
I mounted from my Couch, and put to Sea.
Like Glass the Oceans face was smooth and calm,
The gentle Air breathed like Arabian Balm:
Gusts, storms and flawes, lay sleeping in their Celles
Whilst with much labor we Rowed over the Wells.
This was our greatest We Rowed above 100. miles that day.
Day of work indeed,
And it behoou'd us much, to make much speed,
For why before that Day did quite expire
We past the dangerous Wash, to Lincolnshire.
And there in 3. hours space and little more
We Rowed to Boston, from the Norfolk shore:
Which by Report of people that dwell there,
Is six and twenty mile or very near.
The way unknown, and we no Pilate had,
Flats, Sands and shoales; and Tides all raging mad,
Which Sands our passage many times denide,
And put us sometimes Sands lying crookedly in our way, making us go 3. or
four miles about at low water.
3. or four miles wide,
Besides the Flood Runs there, with such great force,
That I imagine it out-runnes a Horse:
And with a head some 4. foot high, that Rores,
It on the sudden swells and beats the Shores.
It tumbled us a Ground upon the Sands,
And all that we could do with wit, or hands,
Could not resist it, but we were in doubt
It would have beaten our Boats bottom out.
It has less mercy then Bear, Wolf, or Tiger,
And in those Countries it is called the It is so called in Mr D^aytons second
part of Polyalbion, in his treatise of Humber.
Hyger.
We much were unacquainted with those fashions,
And much it troubled us with sundry passions:
We thought the shore we never should Recover,
And looked still when our Boat would tumble over.
But He that made all with his word of might,
Brought us to Boston, where we lodged all night.
The morrow morning, when the Sun began Peep.
I waked and rubbed mine eyes, and shak'd off sleep,
And understanding that the River went,
From Boston, up to Lancolne, and to Trent,
To Humber, Owse, and York, and (taking pain)
We need not come in sight of Sea again.
I liked the motion, and made have away
To Lincoln, which was 50. mile, that day.
Which City in the 3. King Edwards Reign,
Was the only Staple, for this Kingdoms gain
For Leather, Lead, and Wool, and then was seen
Five times ten Churches there, but now fifteen,
A brave Cathedral Church there now does stand,
That scarcely has a fellow in this Land:
It Is for a Godly use, a goodly Frame,
And bears the blessed Virgin Maryes name.
The Town is Ancient, and by Course of Fate,
Through Wars, and Time, defaced and Ruinate,
But Monarchies, and Empires, Kingdoms, Crowns,
Have rose or fell, as Fortune smiles or frowns:
And Towns, and Cities, have their portions had
Of time-tost Variations, good and bad.
There is a Proverb, part of which is this,
They say that Lincoln was, and London is.
From thence we past a Ditch of Weeds and Mud,
Which they do (falsely) there call It is a passage cut through the land 8.
miles from Lincoln into Trent, but through either the peoples poverty or
negligence it is grown up with weeds, and mud, so that in the Summer it is in
many places almost dry.
Forcedike Flood:
For I Will be sworn, no flood I could find there,
But dirt and filth which scarce my Boat would bear,
It Is 8. miles long, and there our pains was such,
As all our travel did not seem so much,
My men did wade, and draw the Boat like Horses,
And scarce could tugge her on with all our forces:
Moyl'd, toiled, myr'd, tired, still laboring, ever doing,
Yet were we 9. long hours that 8. miles going.
At last when as the Day was well nigh spent,
We gat from Forcedikes floodles flood to Trent.
Even as the Windows of the Day did shut,
Down Trents swift stream to Gainsborough we put,
There did we rest until the morning Star,
The joyful doors of Dawning did vn-barre:
To Humbers churlish streams, our Course we framed,
So Named, for Drowning of a King so named.
And there the swift Ebb tide ran in such sort,
The Wind at East, the Waves brake thick and short,
That in some doubts, it me began to strike,
For in my life, I never had seen the like.
My way was up to York, but my intent
Was contrary, for from the fall of Trent
I fifteen mile went downwards East Northeast,
When as my way was upward West Southwest.
And as against the Wind we madly venture,
The Waves like Pirates board our Boat and enter,
But though they came in fury, and amain
Like thieues we cast them ouer-boord again.
This Conflict lasted two hours to the full,
Until we gat to Kingstone upon Hull:
For to that Town I had a Proved friend,
That Letters did and Commendations send
By me unto the worthy Maiestrate,
The Mayor, and some of's Brethren, in that State.
Besides I had some Letters, of like Charge
From my good Friend, the Master of the Barge
Unto some friends of his, that they would there
Give me I went 15. mile out of Trent, down Humber, on purpose to see Hull,
when my way was quite contrary.
Hull Cheese, and welcome and good Cheer.
Sunday at Mr. Majors much Cheer and Wine
Where as the Hall did in the Parlour Dine,
At night with one that had bin Shrieue I Supped
Well entertained I was, and half well Cup'd:
On Monday noone, I was invited than
To a grave Iusticer, an Alderman,
And there such Cheer as Earth and Waters yield,
Showed like a Harvest in a plentious Field.
Another I must thank for his Goodwill,
For he Pressed Hull Cheese, is much like a loaf out of a Brewers Basket, it is
Composed of two simples, Malt and Water in one Co^pound, and is Cosen germain
to the mightiest Ale in England.
on to bid me welcome still.
There is a Captain of good Life and Fame
And, God The meaning of those marks are only known to the Townsmen there.
with us, I often have called his Name:
He welcomed me, as I had bin his fellow
Lent me his silken Colors, Black and Yellow,
Which to our Mast made fast, we with a Drum
Did keep, till we to York in Triumph come.
Thanks to my loving Host and Hostess Pease
There at mine Inn, each Night I took mine ease:
And there I gat a Cantle of Hull Cheese
One Evening late, I thank thee An ingenious man named Machabeus.
Macabees.
Kind Roger Parker, many thanks to thee,
Thou shewedst much undeserved love to me,
Laid my Boat safe, spent time, Coin and endeavor,
And made my money counted Copper ever.
But as at Feasts, the first Course being past,
Men do reserve their Dainties till the last,
So my most thanks I ever whilst I live
Will to the Mayor, and his Brethren give,
But most of all, to shut up all together
I give him thanks that did Commend Mr. I.I.
me thither,
Their Loves (like Humber) ouer-flow'd the banks,
And though I Ebb in worth, I Will flow in Thanks.
Thus leaving off the Men, now of the Town
Some things which I observed I Will here set down:
And partly to declare it is praise and worth,
It is the only Bulwark of the North.
All other Towns for strength to it may strike,
And all the Northern parts has not the like,
The people from the Sea much Wealth have won,
Each man does live as he were Neptunes Son.
Th'Antiquity thereof a man may Reed
In Reverend Cambdens works, and painful Speed:
How in King Edwards Reign first of that Name
Then called Wike. Then did they Kingston frame,
And then the Townsmen cut a The River of Hull is 20. miles in length, cut
with men's labor to the infinite Commodity of the Country.
River there,
An exc'lent Haven, a Defense or Peer:
Built with excessive Charge, to save it from
Fierce Humbers Raging, that each Tide does come.
From time to time, more Greatness still it gained,
Till lately when the Eight King Henry Reigned,
He made it greater, by his often Resort,
And many times kept there his Royal Court,
He Walled it well, built Battlements, and Gates,
And (more with Honor to augment their States)
He built two Blockhouses, and Castle strong
To Guard the Town from all Inuasiue wrong.
He gave them much Munition, Swords, Shafts, Bows,
And Brazen Ordnance, as the world well knows,
Which Guns he gave them for the Towns defense,
But were in 88. all borrowed thence,
With promise they again should be sent back,
But the performance ever has bin slack.
Now in this Iron age, their Guns I see,
Are mettle like the Age, and Iron be:
And glad they would be if they could obtain,
To change that mettle, for their own again.
Four well built Gates, with bolts, and locks and bars
For ornament or strength, in Peace or Wars:
Besides to keep their Foes the further out,
They can Drown all the Land 3. miles about.
It Is plentifully served with Flesh and Fish,
As cheap, as reasonable men can wish.
And thus by Gods grace, and man's industry,
Dame Nature, or men's Art does it supply.
Some 10. years since Fresh water there was scant,
But with much Cost they have supplied that want:
By a most exc'lent Water-worke that is made,
And to the Town in Pipes it is conuay'd,
Wrought with most Artificial engines, and
Performed by Thou Art of the Industrious hand
Of Mr. He built another fair Waterwork, at York, of Freestone, which does
the City exceeding service.
William Maltby, Gentleman,
So that each man of Note there always can
But turn a Cock within his House, and still
They have Fresh Water always at their will,
This have they all unto their great Content,
For which they each do pay a yearly Rent.
There is a Proverb, and a Prayer withal,
That we may not to three strange places fall:
From Hull, from Hallifax, from Hell, it is thus,
From all these three A Proverb
Good Lord deliver us.
This Praying prouerb's meaning to set down,
Men do not wish deliverance from the Town:
The Towns Named Kingstone, Hulls the furious River
And from Hulls dangers, I say, Lord deliver.
At Hallifax, the Law so sharp does deal,
That who so more then 13. Pence does steal,
They have a Iynn, that wondrous quick and well,
Sends Thieues all Headless unto Heaven or Hell.
From Hell each man says, Lord deliver me,
Because from Hell can no Redemption be:
Men may escape from Hull and Hallifax,
But sure in Hell there is a heavier tax,
Let each one for themselves in this agree
And pray, From Hell good Lord deliver me.
The Proverb and the Prayer expounded plain,
Now to the Orders of the Town again:
I think it merits praise for Government,
More then all Towns in Britains Continent,
As first their Charity does much appear,
They for the Poor have so Mark, for all is true.
provided there,
That if a man should walk from Morn till Night,
He shall not see one Beggar; nor a Mite
Or any thing shall be demanded ever,
But every one there does their best endeavor
To make the Idle work, and to Relieve
Those that are Old and past, or Sickness grieve.
All Poor men's Children have a House most fit
Whereas they Sow, and Spin, and Card, and Knit,
Where all of them have something still to do,
As their Capacities will reach unto,
So that no Idle person, Old or Young
Within the Town does harbor or belong.
It yearly Costs Five hundred pounds besides,
To fence the Town, from Hull and Humbers tides,
For Stakes, for Bauins, Timber, Stones and Piles,
All which are brought by Water many miles,
For Workmens labor, and a world of things
Which on the Town excessive Charges brings.
All which with peril, industry and sweat,
They from the bowels of the Ocean get.
They have a Bridewell, and an exc'lent skill
To make some people work against their will:
And there they have their Lodging and their meat,
Clean Whips, and every thing exceeding neat,
And thus with fair or foul means always, they
Give idle persons little time to Play.
Besides for every Sea or Marine cause
They have a House of Trinity, whose Laws
And Orders do Confirm, or else Reform
That which is Right, or that which wrongs deforme.
It is a Comely built well ordered place,
But that which most of all the House does grace,
Are Rooms for Widows who are Old and poor,
And have bin Wives to Mariners before.
They are for house-roome, food or lodging, or
For firing, Christianly provided for,
And as some dye, some do their places win,
As one goes out, another does come in.
Should I in all things give the Town it is due,
Some fools would say I flattered, writ untrue:
Or that I partial in my writings were,
Because they made me welcome, and good cheer:
But for all those that have such thoughts of me,
I rather wish that them I hanged may see,
Then that they justly could report, that I
Did Rhyme for victuals, hunger to supply.
Or that my Muse, or working brains should beat,
To flatter, fawn, or lie, for drink or meat:
Let Trencher-Poets scrape, for such base vailes,
I Will take an Oar in hand when writing fails;
And 'twixt the Boat and Pen, I make no doubt,
But I shall shift to pick a living out,
Without base flattery, or false Coined words
To mowldy Madames, or unworthy Lords;
Or whatsoever degree, or Towns, or Nations
I ever did, and still will scorn such fashions.
Hearesay, I write not by hearsay.
sometimes upon a lie may light,
But what I see and know, I dare to write.
Mine eyes did view before my Pen set down,
These things that I have written of this Town.
A new built Custom House, a fair Town Hall,
For solemn meetings, or a Festival:
A Mayor, twelve Aldermen, one Shriefe, Recorder,
A Towne-Clarke, altogether in one order,
And uniformity do govern so,
They need not flatter friend, or fear a foe.
A Sword, a Cap of maintenance, a Mace
Great, and well Guilt, to do the Town more grace:
Are borne before the Mayor, and Aldermen,
And on Festiuities, or high days then
Those Maiestrates their Scarlet Gowns do wear,
And have six Sergeants to attend each year.
Now let men say what Town in England is,
That truly can compare it self with this:
For situation, strength, and government,
For charity, for plenty, for content,
For state? and one thing more I there was told,
Not one Recusant, all the Town does hold,
Nor (as they say) there is not a Puritan,
Or any nose-wise fool Precissian,
But great and small, with one consent and will,
Obey his Majesty's Injunctions still.
They say that once therein two sisters dwelt,
Which inwardly the prick of Conscience felt,
They came to London, (having wherewithal)
To buy two Bybles, all Canonical,
The Apocripha did put them in some doubt,
And therefore both their Books were bound without,
Except those two I never did hear of any
At Hull, though many places have too many.
But as one scabbed sheep a flock may mar,
So there is one man, whose nose did stand a jar:
Talked very scuruily, and looked ascue,
Because I in a worthy Townes-mans Pue,
Was placed at Church, when (God knows) I never thought,
To sit there, I was by the Owner brought.
This Squire of low degree, displeased than,
Said, I at most was but a Water-man.
And that they such great kindness setting forth,
Made more a'th flesh, then e're the broth was worth:
Which I confess, but yet I answer make,
'Twas more then I with manners could forsake:
He sure is some high minded Pharisie,
Or else infected with their Heresy,
And must be set down in their Catalogues,
They loved the highest seats in Sinagogues.
And so (perhaps) does he, for aught I know
He may be mounted when I sit below:
But let him not a Water-man despise,
For from the water he himself did rise,
And winds and water both on him has smiled
Else, the great Merchant he had n'ere been styled:
His Character I finely will contriue,
He Is scornful proud, and tatling talkatiue:
A great Ingrosser of strange speech and news,
And one that would sit in the highest Pues,
But bate an Ace, he will, hardly win the game,
And if I list, I could rake But I was ever better with forks to scatter, then
with Rakes to gather, therefore I would not have the Townes-men to mistake
chalk for Cheese, or Robert for Richard.
out his name.
Thanks Mr. Mayor, for my Bacon Gammon,
Thanks Roger Parker for my small fresh Sammon,
'Twas ex'lent good, and more the truth to tell ye,
Boiled with a fine Plum-pudding in the belly.
The sixth of August, well accompanide
With best of Townes-men to the waters side,
There did I take my leave, and to my Ship
I with my Drum and Colors quickly skip.
The one did dub a dub and rumble, brave
The Ensign in the air did play and wave:
I launched, supposing all things had been done,
Bownce, from the Block-house, quoth a roaring Gun,
And wauing Hats on both sides, with content
I cride Adieu, adieu, and thence we went.
Up Humbers flood that then amain did swell,
Winds calm, and water quiet as a Well:
We Rowde to Owse, with all our force and might,
To Cawood where we well were lodged all night.
The morrow, when as Phoebus began to smile,
I forwards set to York, eight little mile:
But two miles short of York I landed than,
To see that reverend At Bishopsthorpe, where the Right reverend Father in God,
Toby Matthew Archbishop of York his Grace, did make me welcome.
Metropolitan,
That watchful Shepherd, that with Care does keep,
The Infernal Wolf, from Heavens supernall Sheep:
That painful Preacher, that most free Almes-giuer,
That though he live long, is too short a liver:
That man whose age the poor do all lament,
All knowing, when his Pilgrimage is spent,
When Earth to Earth returns, as Natures debtor,
They fear the Proverb, Seldom comes the better.
His Doctrine and example, speak his due,
And what all people says, must needs be true.
In duty I most humbly thank his Grace,
He at his Table made me have a place,
And meat and drink, and gold he gave me there,
Whilst all my Crew in the Hall were filled with cheer:
So having dined, from thence we quickly past
Through Owse strong Bridge, to York fair City last,
Our drowning escaped, more danger was ensuing,
'Twas Size time there, and hanging was a brewing:
But had our faults been never so Capital,
We at the Vintners bar durst answer all.
Then to the good Lord Mayor I went, and told
What labor, and what dangers manifold,
My fellow and my self had past at Seas,
And if it might his noble Lordship please,
The Boat that did from London thither swim
With us, in duty we would give to him.
His Lordship pawsing, with a reverend hum,
My friend (quoth he) to morrow morning come,
In the mean space I Will of the matter think,
And so he bad me to go near and drink.
I drank a Cup of Clarret, and some Beer,
And sure (for aught I know) he There is some odds between keeping and
spending.
KEEPS good ch^ere.
I gave his Lordship in red gilded leather,
A well bound Book, of all my Works together,
Which he did take Here I make a full point, for I received not a point in
exchange.
.
There in the City were some men of note,
That gladly would give money for our Boat:
But all this while good manners bad us stay,
To have my good Lord Majors yea, or nay.
But after long demurring of the matter I thought it my duty (being we had
come a dangerous voyage) to offer our Boat to the chief Maiestrate. For why
should not my Boat be as good a monument as Tom Coriats everlasting
ouertrampling land-conquering Shoes, thought I?
,
He well was pleased to see her on the water,
And then my men Rowde half an hour or more,
Whilst he stood viewing her upon the shore.
They bore his Lordships Children in her there,
And many others, as she well could bear.
At which his Honor was exceeding merry,
Saying it was a pretty nimble Wherry:
But when my men had taken all this pains,
Into their eyes they might have put their gains.
Unto his Shop he did And forgot to say, I thank you good fellows.
perambulate,
And there amongst his Bars of Iron sat.
I asked him if he would our Boat forgo,
Or have her, and his Lordship answered, No.
I took him at his word, and said God buy,
And gladly with my Boat away went I.
I sold the Boat, as I supposed most meet,
To honest Mr. A substa^tiall worthy Citizen, who has been Shriefe of York,
and now keeps the George in Cunny street.
Kayes, in Cunny street:
He entertained me well, for which I thank him,
And gratefully, amongst my friends I Will rank him.
My kind remembrance here I put in paper,
To worthy Mr. Hemsworth there, a Draper,
Amongst the rest he is one that I must thank,
With his good wife, and honest brother Frank.
Now for the City, It Is of state and Port,
Where Emperors and Kings have kept their Court, 989. year, the foundation
Was laid, before our Saviors incarnation,
By Ebrank was the 5. K. of Britain, after Brute.
Ebrank who a Temple there did rear,
(And placed a An Arch-Flammin which was as an Idolatrous high Priest to Diana.
Flammin to Diana there,
But when King Lucius here the Scepter swayde
The Idols level with the ground were laid,
Then Eleutherius, Romes high Bishop placed,
An Archbishop at York, with Tytles graced.
Then after Christ, 627.
Was Edwin Edwin and his whole family were baptized there on Easter day the 12.
of April 627.
baptized by the grace of heaven,
He plucked the Minster down, that then was wood,
And made it stone, a deed both great and good.
The City often has known the chance of wars,
Of cruel foreign, and of homebred iarres.
And those that further please thereof to read,
May turn the volumes of great Hollinshead.
Yourkshire the greatest Shire in England, and 308. miles about. Speed.
It Is large, it is pleasant and magnificent,
The Norths most fertile famous ornament:
It Is rich and populous, and has indeed
No want of any thing to serve their need.
Abundance does that noble City make
Much abler to bestow, then need to take.
So farewell York, the tenth of August then
Away came I for London with my men.
To dinner I to Pomfret quickly rode,
Where good hot Venson stayed for my abode,
I thank the worshipful George Shillito,
He filled my men and me, and let us go.
There did I well view over twice or thrice,
A strong, a fair, and ancient Edifice: Pomfre^ Castle.

Reedifide, where it was ruined most
At the high and hopeful Prince Prince Charles.
of Wales his cost.
I saw the room where Exton Sir Pierce of Exton Knight.
and his rowt
Of Traitors, Royal Richards brains beat out: King Richard the second
murdered there.

And if that King did strive so many blows,
As hacks and hewes upon one pillar shows,
There are one hundred slashes, he withstood,
Before the villains shed his Kingly blood.
From Pomfret then, unto my noble friend,
Sir Robert Swift at Doncaster we wend,
An ancient Knight, of a most generous spirit,
Who made me welcome far beyond my merit.
From thence by Newarke, I to Stamford past,
And so in time to London at the last.
W^^^ere friends and neighbors, all with loving hearts,
Did welcome me with pottles, pintes, and quarts.
Which made my Muse more glib, and blyth to tell
This story of my voyage. So farewell.
An Epilogue.
Thus have I brought to end a work of pain,
I wish it may requite me with some gain:
For well I wot the dangers where I ven^ered,
No full bag'd man would ever durst have entered:
But having further shores for to discover
Hereafter, now my Pen does here give over.
FINIS.

