A LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TWENTY SELECT PSALMS, Performed by W. TEMPLE.

A man in honor, and who understands not, is made like to the beasts that
perish.

Psalm. 49.21. Life is in the way of righteousness, and the pathway thereof
leads not unto death.

Prou. 12.28. Imprinted at London by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Thomas Man, and are to
be sold at his shop in Paternoster row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1605.

TO THE MOST NOBLE PRINCE, HENRY PRINCE OF WALES.
MOst noble Prince. It succeeds with the Art of Logike, as it does with a
drug of rare virtues: which resting confined within the limits of the
Apothecaries shop, wins not any opinion or credit with men: but being taken
out and skilfully applied, discloseth her value and merit. So this art resting
imprisoned within the lists of the school and the cabinets of the learned,
finds no grace or regard: but being drawn forth as it were into the field
of employment and service, it does then manifest to the world the proportion of
worth and respect, that is due unto her. For to be able, first to contriue and
perfect the frame of a discourse: and then again to discover and lay forth in
the pure naturals not only the several members, but the particular structure
and conformation of the same: what estimation does it not deserve? And this is
it which Logike does undertake and perform. Out of the former employment this
worthy art furnishes unto us variety and choice of arguments for clearing
the cause in question: and directs us to hold that, which is true and
justifiable: to disclaim that, which is inconsequent: to marshall each thing
in his proper rank and place. Out of the other use and service it yields
unto us a benefit of no less moment and advantage: we being guided by her
address in the examination and trial of the work made: to the end we may not
be deceived with any outward luster and show, but be exactly informed how sound
and warrantable it is, that is propounded. Hereupon answerably to the direction
in this behalf, in the first place we consider what the proper subject is,
that is deduced and handled: the inobseruation whereof being the original of
an erroneous and misguided course in judging. For as we cannot judge with what
commendation and credit, either the Canonier discharges his shot, being
ignorant of the mark whereat he leuelled: or the Nauigator performs his
course, being not made acquainted to what cape or port he would arrive: so in
case it be unknown unto us what is the peculiar different and position debated
in any tractate or speech, we cannot discern with what soundnes and wisdom
the dispute is managed: we cannot challenge ought as impertinent: nor take
exception to inconsequences. Having found and observed the question, we are in
the second place to examine the quality of the proofs alleged, and how
iudiciously the illustration thereof is carried. Wherein if we shall proceed by
the square of this art: whatsoever is base or fine in the metal of any
discourse, this artificial touchstone of Logike will upon application and
trial immediately detect. It will in particularitie show whether the wit has
failed in the search of allegations: and whether error in liew of truth,
inconsequence in steed of an vncensurable conclusion, disorder in place of
methodicall proceeding has been entertained. Neither must we apprehend that in
this employment she is like the unskillful Painter, who cannot with his pensill
represent other form than of a fish. This may I truly avouch, that as there is
no object visible, which the well affected eye having the concurrence of a fit
and rightly disposed mean seeeth not: and no magnitude which the learned hand
of the Mathematician measures not: so there is no subject of what nature
soever, falling within the reach of natural reason, which by Logike the
express image thereof cannot be disputed. Out of this large extent it is, that
the said art is of excellent and meritorious service in deliberations and
resolutions of State, in courts of equity and justice, in the field and
consultations military, yea in all questions of humane and civil
consideration. That matters divine and Theological are not excepted, but that
in the handling and judging of them also Logike serves for a singular light
and help: I appeal to the Divines of this and all former ages. For a further
proof whereof and by way of instance in this behalf: though I am not of that
reverend and worthy profession, having been employed in services of a different
quality: yet have I of late in this time of my idleness, under hope of pardon
at the hands of our professed Theologians, attempted by the direction of the
said Art an Analysis of certain choice Psalms. This Analysis I have presumed
(most noble Prince) to dedicate unto your Highness, not only that it might
serve as a pledge of my indisguised and perpetual devotion to your service:
but for that also the subject analyzed is a meditation performed by a great
Prince, and for the nature thereof no argument of vulgar and humane conceit,
but surpassing and divine: and therefore a Prince in either respect the fittest
person for a dedication of this kind. To tender the work of a great Potentate
unto one of an inferior representation and rank, would be liable to the
exception of disparagement. Neither does it cease in regard of the unfolding
and exposing thereof to view, to be the act of a Prince: no more than admirable
excellencies leave to be such, when they are discabineted and presented to the
eye. And whereas it is an inspired and sacred work, it is upon this ground also
not unmeet to be exhibited unto Princes. For they holding their royalties and
honors at the will and pleasure of the Lord of Lords, cannot otherwise assure
their inuestiture and interest in them, than by a course of obedience unto his
will. This obedience is not performable without information taken of what is
pleasing. This information is taken from the voice only of the Lord in
Scripture. This voice is the precept there delivered, or the justifiable and
recommended practice of sanctified persons. Now this subject, whereof I make
tender unto your Highness in a Logical Analysis (whereby it is stripped as it
were of all outward habit, and laid forth in the first and natural
lineaments) is able to supply unto the greatest Princes special direction
both out of precept and president, how to please him who has thus advanced and
honored them. Would your Highness be informed what person it is, who only is
capable of a blessed and prosperous estate? The first Psalm will resolve you
that the person of a Prince, as he is a Prince, is not the seat of this
blessedness and felicity, but so far forth as he is a person whose delight
is in the law of the Lord. And therefore the Prophet in the Psalm following,
out of a desire that Kings and Princes should partake in the glory of this
happiness, earnestly persuades them to the doing of homage and worship unto
Christ Jesus: which is a course of piety, wherein besides their presenting in
private of all spiritual service unto him, they profess withal in public
their allegiance and ready obedience to the royal authority and laws of
his kingdom. Would your Highness be advertised what sort of people they are,
whom you ought specially to respect and esteem? The Psalmist will tell you out
of his own practice, Psalm. 16. that they are the worthies and excellent of the
earth. Would your Highness understand what love and regard you are to bear to
the Sanctuary and place of the Lords worship? It may please you to take notice
hereof out of the 84. Psalm: where King David imparteth with us his passionate
longing to return unto the house of the Lords public service, recommending it
by way of admiraiton as most worthy of al respect and affection on our part:
and valuing his participation there with the godly in the said service above
all the regalities and honors in this world. Would your Highness be presented
with a picture of the miseries whereto both Prince and people are subject? This
picture the 90. Psalm with the 39. affoordeth unto us. There Princes may
learn that our fairest and best days are vexation and grief: that Man, and
whatsoever is of strength and excellency in man, is for weakness and brittlenes
like a moth: that our life for length is as a spanne, as nothing, as a day
past, a watch in the night, a dream, a word, a thought. Would your Highness
behold as it were in a glass the singular advantages and privileges of
depending on the Lord? This glass will the 91. Psalm furnish unto you. To be
short: if your Highness desire to see a president how a Prince should demean
himself, either in the case of any his capital transgressions against the
Lord, or in the case of blasphemy committed by others: the carriage of this
worthy King David will in either case serve for a most worthy president. In
the 51. Psalm, whereas he had by misgouernment of his person mightily
transgressed, being admonished hereof by Nathan one of the Lords faithful
remembrancers, he performs two remarkable duties: the one of humbling
himself before the Lord out of a repentant heart: the other of earnest
mediation, that the Lord would be pleased not to interpret his transgression to
the prejudice of the Church and Commonwealth of Israel. In the 94. Psalm,
finding himself disabled to proceed in justice against some, who being not
contented to tyrannize the Lords people, did withal disgorge blasphemy
against the Lord himself, he does first solicit the Lord to a real execution
of his wrath against them: and then by a quick and pertinent apology he
cleereth the glorious and fearful name of the Lord from all imputation and
dishonor. You see hereby (most worthy Prince) the ground and inducement of
this my dedication: which if it may in these your tender years be of any use
unto your Highness, either for instruction in the knowledge of that eternal
Lord, who will honor Princes in case they honor him, or for admonition of
duty in your carriage toward him: I shall attain to the scope of my deseigne
herein. The almighty King so bless your Highness in the course of your
education, that it may be a mean to supply your noble heart with all princely
virtues, and draw upon your person all honorable happiness.

To your Highness service most affectionatly devoted, W. TEMPLE.

TO THE READER.
THE author of this Analysis, where he differs either in the translation of
any Psalm, or in the exposition thereof from others (besides the particular
direction affoorded him for his choice from the proper nature and course of
analyzing) has for his warrant in this behalf some interpreters of the best
note and quality. And whereas he has in the carriage of the said Analysis
sequestered in a manner all terms of art and school, some few only excepted
which the pen and pulpit have allowed: howsoever happily he could have
proceeded therein after a more Logical formalitie, and so in likelihood have
better satisfied as well others who have tasted the University, as himself:
yet has he judged it meet to hold this popular and plain course: least in an
argument divulged for the use of all, he should out of a care of yielding
satisfaction to a few, give occasion unto many of just exception and challenge.

A SVRVEY AS WELL OF THE POSITIONS AND QVESTIONS BOTH PRINCIPAL and occasional
disputed by the Prophet in the Psalms analyzed, as of other important matters
handled by way of declaration.
THat the godly man only is blessed: disputed Psalm. 1. page 2. lin. 8. That
the condition of the wicked is always unprosperous and wretched: handled Psalm.
1. page 5. lin. 1. That both Prince and people ought to renounce their
proceedings against Christ: and so to do worship and homage unto him:
persuaded Psalm. 2. page 8. lin. 2. That all proceedings against Christ will
prove vain and succeslesse: argued page 9. lin. 4. That such as oppose
against Christ shall suddenly perish: argued page 13. lin. 27. That the Lord
has anointed Christ to be king over his Church: disputed page 11. lin. 14.
The Lords decree touching the choice and ordaining of Christ to be King over
his Church, set forth page 12. and 13. where the publisher and parts of the
decree are declared. That the Lords dear children are they, unto whom the
Prophet is to do good: declared page 16. lin. 32. That the Lords dear
children are they, in whom the Prophets whole delight and love is: showed page
18. The Prophets detestation of idolatry: declared page 18. lin. 12. That the
Lord only is unto him perfect happiness: showed page 20. lin. 1. That he shall
never fall from the favor of God: proved p. 21. l. 19. Sanctification and the
parts thereof: declared page 20. lin. 34. The assurance of our resurrection,
and the excellency of eternal life: declared page 21. lin. 36. and page 22.
lin. 13. The Prophets profession of dependence on the Lord: disputed page 24.
lin. 29. and page 25.26.27.28. and page 120. and 121. and page 31. lin. 23. The
Prophets grateful acknowledgement of the Lords gracious proceedings, handled
page 34. lin. 18. and page 35. lin. 30. and page 194. and page 19.163.171.184.
The Prophets exhortation unto others to concur with him in the duty of
magnifying the Lord: handled page 35. lin. 23. and page 180. lin. 25. and page
184. page 185.186. That we ought to meditate on the goodness of the Lord, to the
end we may thereupon be moved to trust in him: argued page 37. lin. 11. A
persuasion to fear the Lord. page 38. lin. 3. Wherein the fear of the Lord
consists, showed page 39. lin. 21. A persuasion to practice certain
particulars of obedience required by the Lord in his law. page 40. That the
Lord does minister a supply of his gracious favors to the practisers of the
said obedience. page 40. lin. 10. In what sort the Lord does execute his wrath
upon the wicked. page 41. lin. 1. That the godly are without grieuing at the
prosperity of the wicked to rest upon the Lord, and to walk obediently before
him: disputed page 44. lin. 30. That the Lord proceeds with the wicked to
their ruin, and with the godly to their good: disputed page 46. lin. 5. and
page 117. lin. 27. and page 118. That by the practice of dependence on the Lord
and holiness of life, it shall succeed well with us in all our affairs:
handled p. 47. lin. 34. The objections made against the Lords favorable
proceeding with the godly, refelled and answered page 49. lin. 25. That the
plotting of the wicked against the just is without success: showed page 50.
That the little pittance furnished by the Lord unto the godly man, is of great
use and comfort unto him: showed p. 51. lin. 26 That the Lord supplieth unto
the godly continual relief and maintenance: disputed page 53. lin. 5. That
relief shall not fail unto the godly in the time of famine: debated page 53.
lin. 31. That the wicked in the time of famine shall perish for want of
relief. page 54. lin. 9. That the godly are enabled to be helpful unto others
in the time of famine: argued page 54. lin. 21. That the Lord does settle and
fortify the estate of the godly: showed page 55. lin. 22. That the fall of the
godly is a recouerable fall. page 56. That by resting upon the Lord, and
walking obediently before him, the godly shall enjoy a long, safe and
comfortable life: debated page 57. lin. 17. That by this course of depending on
the Lord and walking obediently before him, the godly man shall obtain this
favor, as to be an eye witness of the Lords justice executed upon the wicked:
showed page 59. lin. 20. That the godly man ends his days in peace and
happiness: handled page 60. lin. 12. That the godly are they, whom the Lord ever
helps in the time of affliction: argued page 60. lin. 22. A relation of the
combat the Prophet had betwixt the spirit and the flesh, together with the
issue thereof. page 62. and 63. and page 197. lin. 16. That our life is by the
Lords ordinance exceeding short and subject to vanity: handled page 64. lin.
5. and page 69. lin. 15. and 26. also page 70. lin. 5. and page 136. lin. 15.
and page 137. lin. 1. and lin. vlt. That no man is of sufficient strength to
endure the Lords afflicting hand: showed page 68. lin. vlt. That the godly
should not fear the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the
strength of them: disputed page 73.75.76.77.78.79.80. That the wicked,
notwithstanding their wealth, die in their own persons: in the memory and
honor of their names: in the persons also of their posterity: handled page
76. lin. 7. That hell shall eternally torment the wicked: but the righteous
shall eternally reign in heaven over them: showed page 79. lin. 17. and 30.
That the wicked shall at their death rest naked and stripped of their wealth
and glory, and so be in a most miserable case: proved page 80. lin. 24.
Whether the true worship of the Lord consist in the ceremonial action of
sacrificing, or in the spiritual conformity of the heart to the Lords will:
propounded page 83. and defined page 90. lin. 13. and page 93. lin. 30. A
description of the Majesty accompanying the Lords coming into his most royal
court, to determine the controversy he had with the Israelites touching his
worship. page 84. lin. 8. A refutation made by the Lord of the colorable
pretenses and allegations wherewith the Israelites would justify their formal
and outward sacrificing. page 87. That the outward profession of piety and
obedience disaccompanied with the sincere affection of the heart, is odious
unto the Lord: argued page 91. lin. 32. and page 89. lin. 30. The cause and the
event of that impious conceit of the wicked, who imagine the Lord to be an
allower of their wickedness. page 92. lin. 17. The Prophets humble confession of
his sin: handled page 98. lin. 14. That by the Lords remission of our sins
we shall subsist before him in a condition and estate of righteousness: declared
p. 99. lin. 31. and page 100. The Prophets profession of glorifying the Lord,
and magnifying his fidelity in keeping promise with his children: handled page
105. and 106. also page 180. lin. 25. and page 184. The discourse of the flesh
upon this question, whether God be good to Israel: the several effects of the
said discourse: the inducement and ground of holding the negative of the said
question. page 111.112.114.115. That the wicked enjoy prosperity. What are the
parts and effects of their prosperity: declared page 112. lin. 5. and page
113. A lively description of the wicked. page 113. lin. 13. and page 114.
A LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF TWENTY SELECT PSALMS.
THE PSALMS ANALYZED are these, namely: Psalm. 1. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 16. Psalm.
27. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 39. Psalm. 49. Psalm. 50. Psalm. 51. Psalm.
73. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 90. Psalm. 91. Psalm. 94. Psalm. 103. Psalm. 104. Psalm.
107. Psalm. 116. Psalm. 139.


PSALM. 1.
BLessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked: nor
stand in the way of sinners: nor sit in the seat of the mockers:

2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and in his Law does he meditate
day and night.

3 For he is like a tree planted by the rivers of waters: which brings forth
her fruit in due season: whose leaf fades not: so (...) soever he shall do,
shall prosper.

4 (...) wicked are not so: but as the chafe which the wind (...)

5 Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment: nor sinners in the
assembly of the righteous.

6 For the Lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the wicked
shall perish.

ANALYS. PSALM. 1.
The question disputed by the Prophet in this Psalm is this: That the godly
man only is blessed, verse. 1, 2.


THe scope of the Psalmist in clearing this question is to rectify our conceit
and judgment touching the person who is capable of blessedness: and so
consequently to persuade unto holiness of life. For if, contrary to the opinion
of the wise in the world (of whom some have seated felicity in persons ciuilly
virtuous, some in the honorable and rich, some in the outward grace and
pleasures of the body) the sanctified person only be blessed: we ought, in
case we desire to be happy, to reform our judgment herein, and betake our
selves to a course of piety. For so we are to apprehend of the Prophets
intention in this Psalm, as if in direct terms he reasoned with us thus: If
the godly man only be blessed, then in case we desire to be blessed, we ought
to betake ourselves to a course of piety. But the godly man only is blessed.
Therefore in case we desire to be blessed, we ought to betake our selves to a
course of piety.


The Proposition or first sentence is a particular consequent of a principle in
common reason: namely, That in case we would be possessed of a thing, we must
be made capable thereof, and use the means tending thereto.

The Assumption or second sentence is the question and subject of this whole
first Psalm.

The Conclusion or last sentence is the body and substance of all the Psalms
following: each of them being as it were a Sermon to preach and persuade
courses of piety.

Now before the Psalmist disputes the said question by force of argument, he
describes unto us this godly man by his carriage: the parts whereof are two: 1.
His forbearance of sinful actions, verse. 1. 2. His employment in actions of
piety, verse. 2.
The profane and sinful actions, which the godly man forbeareth, are of three
degrees: into which they are distinguished by their efficients and authors,
thus: 1. To deliberate and resolve in heart upon the committing of sin at the
persuasion of others, as the wicked does. This action, with the efficient
thereof, is expressed by this phrase of walking in, or according to the
counsel of the wicked. 2. After resolution taken of sinning, to hold a
constant course therein in the train of our life, as the sinner does. This
action, with the author thereof, is noted by our standing in the way of the
sinner. 3. Out of an habit of sinning in heart and in the course of life, to
make open profession of impiety, and as it were to read a Lecture thereof, as
the Mocker does. This action, with the committer thereof, is signified by
sitting in the seat of the Mocker.
The actions of piety, wherein the godly man imployeth himself, are, by
naming a part for the whole, implied to be all the actions and duties of
obedience required at our hands. Only two of them are here specified: namely,
1. Taking delight in the Law of God, verse. 2. in the beginning. 2. Meditating
in the same Law day and night, verse. 2. in the end.
Having thus described the person, who is the subject and seat of
blessedness, he proceeds to clear the question in hand by light of
argument, thus: With whom it succeeds prosperously in this and the future
life, he is blessed. With the godly man only it succeeds prosperously in
this and the future life. Therefore the godly man only is blessed.


The Proposition is omitted, as a known and clear description of a blessed
man.

The Assumption is verse. 3. in the end. That the words in the end of the said
third verse carry the sense comprised in the Assumption, may appear by
conference of them with the 4. and 5. verse. In which verses the wicked (whose
state by way of illustrating the state of the godly is declared by the Prophet)
are made as chafe and incapable of an happy and prosperous condition in this
and the future life. So as if the Prophet would notify unto us the nature of
the condition allotted to the godly, by setting down the difference and
unlikeness which the state of the wicked has therewith: then if he show that
the state of the wicked is unprosperous and wretched in either life: we are
proportionably to conceive that he would thereby make it known, that it
succeeds prosperously with the godly in either life.

The Conclusion is verse. 1. and 2.

Of the said Assumption the Prophet yields us an illustration, first from
comparisons: and then from the efficient cause of the said prosperous success.
Of the comparisons the one is a Similitude or a comparison of things like; the
other a Dissimilitude or a comparison of things unlike betwixt themselves.

The Similitude used by the Prophet is this: As a tree, which being planted by
the rivers of waters, yields her fruit in due season and withers not in
her leaf, always in her kind prospers, verse. 3. So the godly man, whose
piety is fruitful and never withering, does always prosper, verse. 3.


The Dissimilitude is this: The condition of the wicked man is always
unprosperous and wretched, verse. 4. in the beginning. But the state of the
godly man is ever prosperous and flourishing, verse. 3.
The former part of this Dissimilitude is cleared unto us, thus: Who are liable
to utter reiection by the power of Gods wrath, their condition is always
unprosperous and wretched. But the wicked are such as are liable to utter
reiection by the power of Gods wrath. Therefore the wicked are those whose
condition is always unprosperous and wretched.


The Proposition is omitted.

The Assumption is folded and closed up in a short comparison, verse. 4. in the
end: where it is said, that the wicked are as chafe which the wind drives
away. This short comparison being unfolded and distinguished into his parts,
will represent unto us both the said Assumption and a declaration thereof by a
Similitude, thus: As chafe, a thing contemptible and of no use, is readily
dispersed with every blast of wind: So the wicked being of no regard with the
Lord and of no good use in life, rest exposed to utter reiection by the breath
of the Lords wrath.


The Conclusion, as it is verse. 4. in the beginning: so is it repeated and
expounded more at large, verse. 5. Where in express terms it is avouched, that
(because the wicked are as chafe, that is, subject to utter reiection from the
face of the Lord) therefore they shall not stand in that judgment, nor in the
assembly of the just: that is to say, they shall not be partakers of the
prosperous state allotted to the godly in this and the future life: but it
shall succeed with them vnprosperously and miserably in either. By judgment
therefore I understand the prosperous condition of the godly in this life,
ensuing upon the reformed and upright carriage of all proceedings on the Lords
part: and by the assembly of the just, their happy state in the future world.

Hitherto of the comparisons used for the discussing of this point, That with
the godly it succeeds prosperously in either life. The truth hereof is
further manifested and enforced by noting unto us the efficient cause of this
prosperous success, thus: Whose way the Lord approoueth and likes, with him
it ever succeeds prosperously. But the godly man is he whose way the Lord
approoueth and likes, verse. 6. in the beginning. Therefore the godly man is
he, with whom it ever succeeds prosperously. verse. 3.


The Assumption (namely, that the Lord approves and likes the way of the
godly) is amplified by setting down a contrary action of the Lords, thus: The
Lord does dislike and hate the way of the wicked, verse. 6. in the end. Whereas
the Prophet says, that the way of the wicked shall perish: we must understand
as meant thereby the efficient cause of this perishing, namely, the hatred
conceived by the Lord against the wicked. Therefore the Lord does approve and
like the way of the godly man: that is, his person and holy carriage of life,
verse. 6. in the beginning.


PSALM. 2.
WHy do the nations rage, and the people plot vain things?

2 Why do the Kings of the earth band themselves, and the Princes consult
together against the Lord, and against his Christ?

3 Saying: Let us break their bands, and cast their cords from us.

4 He that sits in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in
derision.

5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and confound them in the heat
of his displeasure.

6 He shall say: Even I have anointed, and set my King upon Sion mine holy
mountain.

7 I will declare the decree thereof. The Lord said unto me, Thou art my Son:
this day have I begotten thee.

8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shall crush them with a scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like
a potters vessel.

10 Be wise therefore now ye Kings: be learned ye Judges of the earth.

11 Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice with trembling.

12 Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when his
wrath shall burn never so little. Blessed are all that trust in him.

ANALYS. PSALM. 2.
THis Psalm contains an exhortation to all estates and degrees of men both
Prince and people, to forbear plotting and attempting against the kingdom of
Christ, and consequently to do worship and homage unto him. For what David
speaks here of himself, we must take it spoken of him as he is a type and
figure of Christ. And it is true that the ten tribes of Israel with their
Princes and Governors, that the Philistims also, the Ammonites and others
warred against David with intention to deprive him of the imperial crown and
scepter, which he had received from the Lord: so is it true likewise that the
Princes and people of the Jews, the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees
together with Herod, Pilate, and their associates, conspired the ruin of
Christ and his kingdom. Which conspiracy of theirs was under a type shadowed
forth and signified by the combination entered against David and his temporal
sovereignty.

The Question then deduced in this Psalm is this: That both Prince and people
should renounce their former proceedings against Christ, and so, as becomes
loyal subjects, do worship and homage unto him, verse. 10.11.12.


AS I take this to be the question handled here by the Prophet: so I apprehend
the sense of those three verses, wherein the said question is contained, to be
such as I have set down. First, in the tenth verse the Prophet does under
general terms of being wise and learned, advise both Prince and people to be
informed of the Lords pleasure in this particular of forbearing all deseignes
and practices against Christ. Then verse 11. he exhorts them to do worship
unto him, setting down the manner and form how this worship is to be
performed, namely, with all reverence and with a full joy of heart, accompanied
with a special humbling and trembling at the consideration of Christ's Majesty
and their former rebellions. Thirdly, in the 12. verse he moves them to the
doing of homage unto Christ: where by kissing the Son, (namely, the eternal
Son of God mentioned in the seventh verse) is noted the public
acknowledgement and profession which both Prince and people are to make of
their subjection unto Christ. Amongst the ancients a kiss tendered by an
inferior to a superior, was a sign and testimony that the inferior
publicly acknowledged and professed the other to be his Lord. So as it is
required at the hands of all Potentates and their subjects, that they should
not only present in private a spiritual worship unto Christ, but also
publicly profess their allegiance unto him, and obedience to the royal
authority and laws of his kingdom.

Now to persuade both Prince and people to this duty and conformity, the
Prophet uses three several arguments: the first whereof is this: Arg. 1.
If your proceedings against Christ will prove vain and succeslesse, forbear
them, doing worship and homage unto Christ. But your proceedings against Christ
will prove vain and succeslesse, verse. 1. and 2. Both these verses carry this
sense, that their mutining, their plots and endeavors against Christ will not
take effect. Therefore forbear your proceedings against Christ, doing worship
and homage unto him. ver. 10.11.12


Touching the Assumption: the Prophet, before he acquaint us with the
demonstration thereof, describes the nature of the said proceedings mentioned
in the Assumption, by noting unto us, 1. The authors and contriuers of them,
verse. 1. and 2. which were in the time of David, the Princes, and people of the
ten tribes: the Philistims, Ammonites and Moabites: but in the time of
Christ, the Princes and people of the Jews, with Herod and Pilate. 2. The
several degrees of them, which are: 1. Their tumultuous mutining and raging,
verse. 1. in the beginning. 2. Their plotting and contriuing of the courses they
are to hold for the accomplishment of their deseignes, verse. 1. in the end. 3.
Their presenting of themselves in open field and in actions of public
hostility, verse. 2. in the beginning. 4. Their consulting upon all occurrences
and devising of stratagems, that may any way advance the execution of their
proiects, verse. 2. in the midst.
3. The persons against whom the said proceedings are: they being intended not
only against Christ, but in the person of Christ against God the Father, the
author and erector of Christ's kingdom, verse. 2. 4. The maine scope and end of
them: which is the subversion of Christ's kingdom, verse. 3. Where under these
terms of breaking their bands and cords, we are to understand the endeavors
and attempts of the said Princes and people to supplant the government and
laws, whereby the kingdom of Christ is ordered and managed. Now this end,
which these mutinous leaguers propound unto themselves, is amplified by
imparting with us the action of their mutual encouraging themselves to a
resolute and speedy compassing thereof. For the Prophet produces them,
speaking by way of instigation and encouragement thus: Let us break their
bands, etc.


Now the demonstration of the said Assumption is this: If the Lord hold no
account of your deseignes and attempts, but will proceed to the confounding of
them: then can you not prevail by them against his Christ. But the Lord
holds no account of your deseignes and attempts, but will proceed to the
confounding of them, verse. 4. and 5. In the fourth verse it is said, that the
Lord will laugh and mock at them, that is, make no reckoning of them, in
regard of any possibility in them to prevail. In the fifth verse is set down
the Lords purpose to frustrate and disappoint them: which purpose is implied
under the terms of speaking unto them in his wrath: and more clearly
signified in the words following, of confounding them in the heat of his
displeasure. Therefore can you not prevail against his Christ, ver. 1. and 2.


Here least any of these rebellious leaguers might apprehend in the Lord either
a defect of power to disappoint their enterprises against his Christ, or a
purpose to te^porise with them in this cause: the Prophet amplifieth the
Assumption of the said Demonstration by noting unto them: 1. The Lords power,
whereby he is able to defeat them, verse. 4. in the beginning. Where under that
description of the Lord by the place where he sits, is implied the Lords
Majesty and power. 2. The circumstance of time when he will do it, verse. 5.
in the beginning. Where by the particle (then) is noted that point of time,
which the Lord has appointed and determined for the execution of his wrath
upon them.


Hitherto the frustration of the plots and conspiracies against Christ has
been handled and proved. Now the Prophet proceeds to a further inforcement of
his general exhortation to all Princes and people, by an argument concluded
thus: Arg. 2.
Whom the Lord has anointed King over his Church, against him you must not
combine, but do worship and homage unto him. But it is his Son Christ
prefigured by David, whom the Lord has anointed King over his Church, verse.
6. What is said in this verse, may be understood both of David and Christ. By
Sion, which is the siege of the temporal kingdom, we must understand the
whole tract of Judea in regard of David: and the whole Church of God, in regard
of Christ. Therefore against Christ you must not combine, but do worship and
homage unto him, verse. 10.11.12.


Touching the Assumption: because the Princes and people of the world may take
exception thereto, as being not persuaded of the truth thereof: the Prophet
undertakes to prove and clear the same by a double uncontrollable
testimony: the one from the Lords own mouth, verse. 6: the other from an
authentical evidence under the great seal of heaven, namely, the Lords decree
made in that behalf, ver. 7. He concludes and reasons thus: If the Lord
himself affirm that he anointed Christ for King over his people, and if he
has made a solemn decree in that behalf: then is it true that the Lord has
anointed Christ king over his people. But the Lord himself affirms that he
has anointed Christ for King over his people, verse. 6. and he has made a
solemn decree in that behalf, ver. 7. Where it is said, I will declare unto
you the decree: that is, I, who am the eternal Son of God, will for your
satisfaction herein make known unto you the decree made by the Lord touching
the choice and ordaining of me his Son Christ to be King over his Church.
Therefore it is true that the Lord has anointed Christ for king over his
people. verse. 6.


The decree mentioned in the Assumption the Prophet sets forth unto us, 1.
By the instrument, who publishes the same. 2. By the parts thereof.


The instrument used in the publication of the said decree, is Christ Jesus.
For unto him, who is to publish the same, the Lord says, Thou art my Son,
etc. Now the Lord cannot properly speak this to any but to Christ: as it is
expounded by the Apostle, Heb. 1.5.

The parts of the said Decree are three: The first is, the designing of the
person of the King, and the notifying of the choice and consecration made of
him, verse. 7. The person of the King is designed and noted in these words: Thou
art my Son: and so consequently King of heaven and earth. The notifying of
the choice and consecration made of this person, is in these words: This day
have I begotten thee. As by the generation here mentioned, we must conceive
and understand the manifesting to the world that Christ was consecrated the
Savior and King of his people from all eternity: so these words (this day)
are to be understood of the time when the said manifestation was reallie
performed: the first degree of that time being at the Nativity of Christ: the
second, at his baptizing.
The second part of the said decree concerns the kingdom given unto Christ,
verse. 8. Where this kingdom is described unto us: 1. By the means whereby it
is obtained, namely, the intercession of Christ, in these words: Ask of me. 2.
By the kind and nature of it: it being not an estate determinable at a
certain time, but an inheritance to be possessed for ever. 3. By the largenes
thereof: it being not closed up within the limits and precincts of Judea, but
extendable to all the Nations of the earth.
The third part of the said decree, is touching the administration of this
kingdom of Christ, verse. 9. Where under one part of Christ's administration,
the whole is implied and meant. For as Christ does crush the wicked with an
iron rod, that is, with the execution of his justice upon them, and that with
as great facility as one may break an earthen vessel: so does he govern and
guide his children with the scepter of his word in the way of happiness,
rendering unto them in the end, the reward of eternal glory.


It being now apparent that the Lord has anointed Christ King over his
people: the Prophet returns to the pressing of his general exhortation by a
third argument, thus: Arg. 3.
By opposing against Christ you shall suddenly perish, verse. 12. Where by
perishing in the way, is meant the suddennes of this event, they being to
miscarrie even in the midst of their course, before they can arrive to the
compassing of their designs. Therefore see that you do worship and homage
unto him, verse. 10.11.12.


The first part of this reason is amplified: 1. By the efficient cause of their
ruin, namely, the justice of God whereby he punishes the wicked, signified
under the name of Gods wrath, which being kindled consumes the ungodly. 2. By
an argument taken from the contraries, thus: Who subject themselves unto Christ
shall be blessed, verse. 12. in the end. Where by one part and duty, namely,
confidence and dependence on the Lord, our whole subjection and obedience unto
him is signified. Therefore who oppose themselves against Christ shall perish.
verse. 12.



PSALM. 16.
Mictam of David.
Preserve me, O mighty God: for in thee do I trust.

2 O my soul: thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my well doing
extends not unto thee:

3 But to the Saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent, all my
delight is in them.

4 The sorrows of them who endow another God, are multiplied: their offerings of
blood will I not offer: neither make mention of their names with my lips.

5 The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my
lot.

6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea I have a fair heritage.

7 I will praise the Lord, who gives me counsel: my reins also teach me in
the nights.

8 I do set the Lord always before me. Since he is at my right hand, therefore
I shall not slide.

9 Wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices: my flesh also does rest
securely.

10 For thou will not leave my soul in the grave: nor suffer thy well-beloved to
see corruption.

11 Thou will make me know the path of life: in thy presence is the fulness of
joy: and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

ANALYS. PSALM. 16.
THe title of this Psalm, namely, Mictam of David, is by the Prophet premised
thereto, partly to advertise us who is the author and inditer thereof, and
partly to recommend unto us the excellency of the Psalm, it being such as
contains a doctrine more to be valued than a jewel of the purest gold.

There are of this Psalm two parts: 1. The one an effectual request unto God:
in the four first verses. 2. The other a thankesguing: in the rest of the
verses following.


The request is this: That the Prophet might be preserved in the whole train
of his life.


To induce the Lord to yield hereto, the Prophet uses three arguments. The
first is concluded thus: Arg. 1.
Who trust and rest upon thee, let them be preserved by thee. I am one who does
trust and rest upon thee, verse. 1. in the end. Therefore let me be preserved by
thee, O Lord, ver. 1. in the beginning.


The Proposition though it be omitted, yet must we conceive of it as the ground
and foundation of this motion made by the Prophet. For it does remember unto
the Lord his gracious promise and the condition thereof: which is a precedent
acting of this duty of resting upon the Lord, required by him.

The Assumption does tender unto the Lord a real accomplishment on the
Prophets part of the said condition: he having acted that which the Lord
requires, which is a confident reposing on him.

The Conclusion out of a regard to the condition thus accomplished, does
challenge at the Lords hands an actual and ready performance of the said
promise.

The second argument, whereby David does solicit Gods preservation of him, is
this: Arg. 2.
If thou be my sovereign Lord, and I thy servant, let me be preserved by thee.
But thou art my sovereign Lord, and I thy servant, verse. 2. Albeit the Prophet
does not in distinct terms set down that he is the Lords servant: yet,
forasmuch as his acknowledging God to be his Lord, does necessarily implie that
he is the Lords servant, we are to conceive it as set down. Therefore let me, O
Lord, be preserved by thee, verse. 1.


The Assumption has an illustration from the testimony of his soul and
conscience, verse. 2. in the beginning: where the speech addressed to his soul
carries this sense: Thou, O my soul, do avouch and profess that the
Eternal is my Lord and Master. And therefore I do acknowledge him for my
sovereign Lord, and my self for his servant.


The third argument, wherewith he would persuade the Lord to preserve him, is
drawn from the consideration of the end of his preservation, and is this: Arg.
3.
If upon thy preservation of me, I shall be ready to do good unto thy dear
children: let me, O Lord, be preserved by thee. But upon thy preservation of me
I shall be ready to do good unto thy dear children, verse. 3. Where the
Prophet makes profession of extending his well doing to the Saints and the
excellent of the earth: that is, to Gods children. Therefore let me, O Lord, be
preserved by thee, verse. 1.


The Assumption is amplified: 1. By a description of Gods dear children. 2. By
noting the persons, who have no part in the Prophets well doing. 3. By setting
down the motive inducing him to the doing of good unto the Lords children.


The description of Gods dear children is by two titles given unto them:
whereof. 1. The one styles them with the name of Saints: they being such whom
the Lord by his spirit has sanctified and set apart to the duties of
holiness, verse. 3. 2. The other honors them with the name of the excellent
and worthies of the earth: which is an effect of the former, verse. 3.


The persons who have no part in the fruits of the Prophets well doing, are of
two sorts: 1. The Lord himself: who is alsufficient, and can no ways be
aduantaged by any man's well doing, verse. 2. in the end. 2. The profane and
wicked of the world. The exclusion of these from communicating in the good he
is ready to do, is implied in the profession he makes to extend his well doing
to the Saints: and therefore not to the profane and wicked: of whom he does
verse. 4. protest his hatred and detestation. So as by noting the persons unto
us, who have no part in his well doing, we may understand him as if he reasoned
thus: The persons that are to have part in the fruits of my well doing, are
either thou O Lord, or the wicked, or thy dear children. Not thou O Lord, who
can not be aduantaged thereby: nor the wicked, whom I hate and detest.
Therefore they are thy dear children, whom I love, that are to have part in
the fruits of my well doing.



The motive inducing the Prophet to the doing of good unto the Lords dear
children, is this: In whom my whole delight and love is, unto them I am ready
to do good. The Lords dear children are they in whom my whole delight and
love is, verse. 3. in the end. Therefore the Lords dear children are they unto
whom I am ready to do good, verse. 3. in the beginning.


Touching the Assumption: the delight and love therein mentioned, he does
notify unto us by drawing into consideration the contrary affection he
bears unto such as are the opposites of Gods children, namely, the Idolaters
and wicked of the world. He concludes thus: I detest and hate the Idolaters
and wicked of the world, verse. 4. Therefore I do with special love and
delight embrace Gods dear children, verse. 3. in the end.


The former part of this conclusion touching Idolaters, and the Prophets
detestation of them, is set out unto us: 1. By a description of Idolaters,
verse. 4. in the begin. 2. By two actions of the Prophets, whereby he
discovers and professes his hatred of them, verse. 4. in the other part of
the verse.


The description of Idolaters, 1. Is from a comparison: wherein they are
resembled to men who marry wives and confer dowries upon them. For so
Idolaters do in the inward worship and devotion of their hearts, as it were
marry themselves to Idols, and endow them with their goods: as may appear in
that at their great charge they erect Churches, Altars, and Images unto them,
and withal do honor them with holy days, solemn feasts, and oblations of
worth. 2. It is from the effect and issue which follows upon this course held
by Idolaters. For thereby they multiply anguish and troubles unto themselves:
that is, they draw upon themselves by the justice of God, both inward and
outward calamities and vexations: as appears by Deuteronomy. 31. verse. 16.17.


The actions of the Prophet whereby he discloseth and professes his
detestation of the said Idolaters, are these: 1. His renouncing all
communication with them in their sacrifices. 2. His protesting against all
future mention of their names in his mouth.


Hitherto of the Prophets request for preservation. His thanksgiving follows
from the beginning of the fifth verse to the end of the Psalm: so as the
subject handled in these verses, is this: I will magnify the Lord with my
heart and tongue, verse. 7. and 9.


In the 7. verse he professes that he will praise the Lord: and this he
repeateth verse. 9. though in other terms: for he says; Wherefore my heart is
glad, and my tongue rejoices: and my flesh does rest securely: that is, My
whole person has cause of special rejoicing and comfort in regard of the
Lords blessings bestowed on me. What is said in either of these verses has
reference to the benefits as well recorded after them, as mentioned before
them. And the 9. verse may aptly serve to interpret more at large the
profession of magnifying the Lord in the 7. verse.

Now let us see upon what inducement the Prophets profession of magnifying the
Lord is grounded. The inducement is this: The Eternal has bestowed sundry
benefits upon me, verse. 5.6.7.8.10.11. In these verses the Prophet does
particulate the several benefits he has received from the Lord. Therefore will
I magnify him with my heart and tongue, verse. 7. and 9.


The former part of this reason is not set down in these express and formal
terms, but necessarily collected from the enumeration of the benefits
conferred upon the Prophet. The benefits are propounded, 1. First in general.
2. Then in particular.


The benefits in general are mentioned verse. 5. and 6: where under rhetorical
and borrowed forms of speech, he shows that the Lord only, and none other,
is unto him absolute and perfect happiness: whether we respect 1. The giving of
the said happiness: which he does significantly implie, by glorying that the
Lord is the portion of his inheritance and of his cup: that is, the author and
supplier unto him of all comfort and blessedness both for this and the future
life, verse. 5. in the beginning. 2. The preserving thereof being given unto
him. For verse. 5. in the end, he honors God for the maintenance and support
of his lot: that is, the state of happiness allotted unto him. 3. The pleasure
accompanying the same, verse. 6. Where he likewise glories, that the lines are
fallen unto him in pleasant places: and that he has a fair and goodly
heritage. By lines and the heritage he speaks of, he means the estate of
happiness, which by the free mercy of God is befallen unto him: and that it
is in pleasant places and most fair. Whereby he notes the pleasure
accompanying the said estate. The name of lot and lines seems to be taken by
the Prophet from the ancient manner of surueying and dividing lands and
inheritances: as we find observed and practiced by Joshua in the division of
Canaan amongst the Israelites.


The benefits propounded in particular, are comprised by him in the verses
following: in which he magnifieth the Lord, 1. For the sanctification of his
heart. 2. For two future benefits, namely, his resurrection, and life eternal.


His Sanctification he declares by noting unto us the parts thereof: which are
these: 1. The illumination of his understanding, verse. 7. in the beginning.
Where he shows that the Lord advises and counsels him: that is,
inlighteneth and informs his understanding by his holy Spirit. 2. Direction
of his thoughts and affections, verse. 7. in the end. Where he shows that his
reins instruct him: that is, his will and affections are ordered and guided by
the Lord in the choice of the way he ought to hold. This part of sanctification
is set forth unto us, by noting the time when it is performed, namely, in the
nights: that is, always both night and day. For by one part of time he
means and signifies the whole time of his life. 3. Perseverance in faith and
dependence on God, verse. 8. Where he says, that he ever sets the Lord before
his eyes: that is, he does ever by faith rest upon the Lord. And hereupon he
deduceth in the same verse this most comfortable conclusion: I do by faith
ever rest upon the Lord for his help, verse. 8. in the midst. Where by saying
thus; Since the Lord is at my right hand, he does advertise us that with the eye
of his faith he ever beholds the Lord ready to help him: which is in effect
as if he should say: I do ever by faith look unto God, and rest on him for
help. Therefore shall I ever stand in the favor of the Lord, and never so be
shaken as to fall from it, verse. 8. in the end.



Having honored God for his Sanctification, he proceeds to a further
glorifying of him for the said future benefits: 1. Of his resurrection. 2. Of
the eternal life.


Of his Resurrection he speaks verse. 10. thus: Thou will not leave my soul
in the grave* (meaning by soul the subject or place wherein his soul
resideth, which is his body) nor suffer thy well-beloved to see corruption. This
is first and principally to be understood of Christ, as it is at large
expounded in the 2. of the Acts, verse. 25. etc. for Christ's body, though for
some time it remained in the grave, yet never was corrupted in any part
thereof, but rose a most sound and perfect body. Whereas the body of David
never yet rose from the grave, but was in the same reduced to putrefaction and
dust. But secondarily this is to be understood of David, and likewise of all
others the members of Christ: who in regard of the strict union betwixt the
head and the members, must of necessity participate in the resurrection of the
head Christ Jesus.

The blessing of eternal life is mentioned verse. 11: where the Prophet
honoreth the Lord for the same in these words: Thou will make me know the path
of life: that is, After thou have raised my body from the grave, I shall then
really and in mine own experience enter both body and soul together into the
path and enioyance of life eternal. Touching this blessing of eternal life,
the Prophet does set forth and recommend unto us the worthiness and
excellency thereof, in that it is accompanied 1. With fulness of joys. 2. With
an eternal continuance of the said joys.
Of both these the efficient cause is specified, namely, the face and presence
of God.

PSALM. 27.
THe Lord is my light and my deliverance: whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life: of whom should I be afraid?

2 When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell.

3 Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be afraid: though
war should be raised against me, I would trust in this.

4 One thing have I desired of the Lord: the same I do require, even that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

5 For in the time of trouble he hides me in his Tabernacle: in the secret
place of his pauilion he hides me: he sets me upon a rock.

6 And now is my head lifted up above my enemies who are round about me. I will
offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of joy: I will sing and praise the Lord.

7 Hearken unto my voice (O Lord) when I cry: have mercy also upon me and
hear me.

8 Mine heart says unto me as from thee: Seek ye my face. O Lord, I seek thy
face.

9 Hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure: thou
have been my succor, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my deliverance.

10 For my father and mother forsake me: but let the Lord gather me up.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me through the right path, because of
such as observe me.

12 Deliver me not unto the lust of mine adversaries: for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as breathe violence.

13 I should have fainted, except I had believed that I should see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the living.

14 Wait on the Lord: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart: yea wait
on the Lord.

ANALYS. PSALM. 27.
The Subject of this Psalm is an humble suit presented by the Prophet unto the
Lord, namely: That the Lord would be pleased to deliver him from his enemies,
verse. 7.9.11.12.


The Prophets suit is first set down, ver. 7: and then repeated, verse. 9.11.
and 12. Whereas he says, Hear me and have mercy on me, verse. 7. Again, Hide
not thy face from me, and forsake not thy servant, verse. 9. Again, Teach me
thy way, and guide me through the right path, verse. 11. Again, Deliver me not
to my enemies, verse. 12. All these speeches, which he has in this variety of
terms expressed, carry this interpretation and sense: Abandon me not, O Lord,
to mine enemies, but deliver me from them. The hearing desired, verse. 7. is an
hearing to deliverance: and the mercy to be showed, is mercy in the act of
deliverance. So verse 9. Gods not hiding his face from the Prophet, and his not
forsaking him, is Gods favorable countenance toward him and readiness for his
deliverance. So verse. 11. the way he would be taught, and the right path he
would be guided through, is the way and path of his deliverance: neither must
we conceive that he desires a bare knowledge of this way, but an actual
setting of him in the path of preservation and liberty. So verse. 12. not to be
delivered to the appetite of his enemies: what does it import but a motion for
his deliverance from them?

Now to persuade the Lord to a gracious regard of his suit for deliverance from
his enemies: first he makes profession of his secure dependence upon him in
the six former verses of the Psalm: And then in the verses following unto the
13. he soliciteth the grant of his said suit by sundry other arguments.

Out of the profession of his dependence on the Lord, he concludes thus: Arg.
1.
Who rests securely on thee, O Lord, for deliverance: it may please thee to
deliver him from his enemies. I am one who does rest securely on thee, O Lord,
for deliverance, verse. 1. Where the Prophet twice sets down this sentence
under an interrogatorie form of speech, thus: Of whom should I be afraid? As
if he should say: I fear not man, but rest securely upon the Lord. It may
please thee therefore, O Lord, to deliver me from mine enemies, verse. 7.9.11.12.


The Assumption he cleereth, 1. By acquainting us with the ground of his secure
dependence upon the Lord. 2. By a comparison from the greater to the less. 3.
By answering an exception that may be taken against the said Assumption.


The ground of his resolute dependence on the Lord, is the experience he has
had of the Lords gracious proceeding with him heretofore in delivering him from
trouble. Upon which ground he reasons thus: The Lord has in former times
delivered me from trouble, verse. 1. Where under the terms of light,
deliverance, strength of life, he ascribes unto the Lord the honor of
delivering him from trouble. As by darkness the Scripture notes adversity: so
by light it notes deliverance from the same. Therefore do I securely rest
upon the Lord, verse. 1. in these words: Of whom should I be afraid?


The former part of this reason, which contains the said experience of the
Lords special favor toward him in the time of his trouble, he does make
apparent unto us by giving this instance thereof: When mine enemies were upon
the point of ruining me, the Lord confounded them, and delivered me from them,
verse. 2. Therefore the Lord has in former times delivered me from trouble,
verse. 1.


The Comparison, whereby the said Assumption is further illustrated, is
delivered in the 3. verse, thus: If mighty armies should enuiron me and
conspire my destruction, yet would I rest securely upon the Lord, verse. 3.
Where he expresses his secure dependence on the Lord, first by these words:
Mine heart should not fear: Secondly, by this form of speech: I would trust
in this: that is, in the Lords readiness and power to help and deliver me,
whereof he has had experience. Therefore in the case of a lesser peril, such
as this is wherein I am, I will not fail to rest securely upon the Lord.


Now touching the Exception that may be taken against the said Assumption, we
are to consider 1. What the exception is. 2. What is the answer thereto.


The Exception is not comprised and set down severally by it self in a
formal and distinct speech, but is left to be conceived and gathered by us
out of the Answer thereto. The Answer implies the said exception to be this:
If (notwithstanding thy request unto the Lord out of a confidence in him for
thy return unto his Sanctuary) thou remain as yet banished from the same:
thou do then in vain rest upon the Lord. But, notwithstanding thy request
unto the Lord out of a confidence in him for thy return unto his Sanctuary,
thou remainest as yet banished from the same. Therefore thou do in vain
rest upon the Lord.


In answer to this exception: The Prophet does speak first unto the
Assumption: and then to the Proposition.

Touching the Assumption, he acknowledges 1. His tendering of the said
request. 2. His present separation from the Lords house.


The said request for his return unto the Lords Sanctuary, he sets forth
unto us, 1. By comparing it with a like request of his made at other times,
verse. 4. in the beginning, where he says thus: As I have at other times
desired this one thing of the Lord, namely, that I might enjoy the opportunity
and comfort of being in his Sanctuary all my days: So at this present I do
crave the same favor.
2. By imparting with us the ends, for which he makes the said request. The
ends are these: 1. That he might be at rest, and not compelled to any longer
peregrination and wandering, verse 4. in the midst. Where by dwelling in the
Lords house, he acquaints us with this his desire of being at rest, and freed
from further wandering. 2. That he might employ himself in the exercises of
the Lords worship, verse. 4. in the latter part. Where under the terms of
beholding the Lords beauty and visiting his temple, he lets us understand
the desire he has to perform unto God in his Tabernacle the several duties
of his worship there. The beauty of the Lord, that is, his power, wisdom,
mercy and iustie, we behold in the word of the Lord read and expounded in the
Sanctuary, as also in the sacrifices of the Law and Sacraments of the Gospel.

His present separation and banishment from the Lords house, which together
with the said request the Prophet acknowledges, as it was then apparent to all
Israel, so is it implied and signified under these words: The same do I
require, verse. 4. Now the favor required by him, is his return unto the Lords
house. But this he would not have required at the Lord hands, had he not at
that time stood deprived thereof.
The Prophet having thus spoken to the Assumption of the said exception: he now
takes in hand to answer the Proposition thereof: which he accordingly
performs, verse. 5.6. His answer is founded upon a denial of the said
Proposition. Which denial, though it be not delivered in express and distinct
terms: yet out of that which is set down, we are to conceive it to be to this
effect: Howsoever, notwithstanding my said request, I remain confined from the
Lords house: yet does it not thereupon follow that I rest upon the Lord in
vain.


This his denial of the said Proposition he does justify in this sort:
Notwithstanding my enforced discontinuance from the Sanctuary: I have been
ever protected by the Lord: I do participate in the Lords solemn worship,
though not personally, yet by faith and affection of heart: And I shall
actually hereafter and in person communicate in the same. Therefore howsoever I
remain in body debarred from the Sanctuary, yet I rest not in vain upon the
Lord.


The former part of this the Prophets answer for conuincing the said
Proposition, consists of three several branches. Whereof 1. The first
concerning the Lords daily protection of the Prophet, is set down verse. 5.
Where by auouching, that the Lord in the time of trouble hides him and sets
him upon a rock, he shows, that notwithstanding his absence from the
Sanctuary, he is ever protected by the Lord: the Lord being unto him as it
were a place of sure retrait and a rock of defense. 2. The second touching his
present participation in the Lords solemn worship by faith and affection of
heart, is in the former part of the sixth verse: where by glorying, That now his
head is lifted up above his enemies, he plainly testifies, that he is (though
not personally, yet by reach of his faith and affection of heart) present in
the Lords house, howsoever his enemies enuiron and oppress him. 3. The third
concerning the certainty of his future and personal communication in the
Lords worship performed in the Sanctuary, is in the latter part of the sixth
verse: where by glorying in like sort, That he will offer in his Tabernacle
sacrifices of joy: that he will sing and praise the Lord: he does tell us that
he shall hereafter, notwithstanding the malice of his enemies, be in person
actually partaker of the Lords solemn worship in his Tabernacle.


Hitherto has the Prophet insisted upon the profession of his secure reposing
upon the Lord: to the end he might persuade and induce him to yield unto his
humble suit for deliverance from his enemies. He does now further prosecute the
same his suit by other perswasiue arguments: of which one is set down, verse.
8. thus: Arg. 2.
Who call upon thee for help against their enemies out of an obedience to thy
commandment in that behalf: it may please thee to give a gracious ear unto
such for their deliverance. But I call upon thee for help against mine enemies
out of an obedience to thy commandment in that behalf, verse. 8. In the former
part of this verse, the Lords commandment for seeking his face, that is, for
calling upon him in the time of trouble, is distinctly and particularly
expressed. And to prove that the Lord commands the seeking of his face, the
Prophet produces the testimony of his heart: My heart (says he) tells me
thus much from God, That we should seek his face. In the latter part of this
verse, the Prophets obedience unto this commandment is recorded: where he
says: O Lord, I seek thy face. Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to give
unto me a gracious ear for my deliverance, verse. 7.


In the ninth verse he does press the grant of his said suit, thus: Arg. 3.
Thou have heretofore bin mine aid and deliverance from mine enemies, verse. 9.
in the midst. Therefore now likewise (O Lord) deliver me from them, verse. 9.
Where this conclusion is expressed four times in a several and different
phrase.


In the tenth verse he persuades the Lord to a favorable consideration of his
petition, by propounding unto him the present state and condition wherein he
was. His persuasion is in this form: Arg. 4.
If I rest altogether helpless on the part of man, I pray thee let me find
help and protection at thy hands against mine enemies. But I rest altogether
helpless on the part of man, verse. 10: where he says, That his father and
mother forsake him: that is, he is utterly destitute of all help for his
deliverance on the part of man. Wherefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me find
help and protection at thy hands against mine enemies, verse. 10. in the end.
Where (as Tremellius translates it) the Prophet says: Let the Lord receive me,
or gather me up. Which words do contain the Prophets suit unto the Lord for
protection against his adversaries.


In the 11. verse he pleades for his deliverance, by presenting unto the Lords
remembrance what discouragement will grow unto the godly by his remaining in
trouble: and how occasion will thereupon be offered unto the wicked to triumph
and blaspheme the Lord, as if he were not faithful in his promises. For this I
take to be the meaning of these words in the end of the said verse: Because of
such as observe me: as Tremellius translates it. The Prophet did discern that
the Lords proceeding with him was observed both by the godly and by the wicked:
the godly observing to their discouragement the continuance of an heavy
affliction upon him: the wicked observing it with joy and triumph. And
therefore he pleades with the Lord for deliverance by an argument taken from
the issue, which his continuance in trouble will draw with it: Arg. 5.
My remaining in trouble will discourage thy people, and occasion the wicked to
triumph and blaspheme, verse. 11. in the end. Therefore deliver me (O Lord)
calling unto thee for help against enemies, verse. 11. in the beginning. Where
he prays the Lord to make known unto him the way of his deliverance, and to
set his feet actually in the direct path thereof.


In the 12. verse he grounds his mediation with the Lord for this favor of
deliverance, upon the end and intention of his enemies: Arg. 6.
My enemies would deprive me of my good name and of my life, verse. 12. in the
end. Where by distinguishing his enemies into slanderers and murderers, he
notes their end to be the overthrow of his good name and life. Wherefore
suffer me not (O Lord) to rest exposed unto their malice, but deliver me from
them, verse. 12. in the beginning.


The Prophet having hitherto with so many important motives accompanied his
humble petition unto the Lord for deliverance: he does in the two last verses
of the Psalm (out of an assured persuasion to prevail with the Lord)
encourage himself to rest confidently upon him: and so returns to a further
enlargement of the first argument alleged by him to persuade his deliverance.
He reasons thus: If my confident persuasion touching the accomplishment of
the Lords promised blessing toward me before my death, has hitherto supported
and entertained me in breath and life: then ought I still to depend securely on
the Lord. But my confident persuasion touching the accomplishment of the Lords
promised blessing toward me before my death, has hitherto supported and
entertained me in breath and life, verse. 13. Therefore ought I still to depend
securely on the Lord, verse. 14. Where this conclusion is delivered by way of an
exhortation unto himself.


The Assumption is set down verse. 13. in these terms: I should have fainted,
except I had believed that I should see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living. Where by the goodness of the Lord, he means his deliverance from
trouble, and the enjoying of a successor to his Crown out of his own loins.
By the land of the living, he understands this present life.

The Conclusion (as has been noted) is verse. 14: where it is further enforced
to improoue and advance his dependence upon the Lord, by showing what effect it
works on Gods part: If the Lord will supply all grace and comfort to the
hearts of such as rest confidently upon him: do thou (O my soul) rest
strongly and confidently upon the Lord. But the Lord will supply all grace and
comfort to the hearts of such as rest confidently upon him, verse. 14. in the
midst. Wherefore do thou (O my soul) rest strongly upon the Lord, verse. 14.
in the beginning and end of the verse.


PSALM. 34. A Psalm of David, after he had changed his behavior in the
presence of Abimelech, and departed, being expelled by him.
I Will at all times give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall be in my
mouth continually.

2 My soul shall glory in the Lord: the meek shall hear it and be glad.

3 Praise ye the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together.

5 I sought the Lord and he heard me: and he delivered me out of all my fears.

6 They shall look unto him, and flock unto him: and their faces shall not be
ashamed.

7 This poor man cried and the Lord heard him: and saved him out of all his
distresses.

8 The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

9 Taste ye and see how gracious the Lord is. Blessed is the man that trusts
in him.

10 Fear the Lord ye Saints of his. For nothing wants to them that fear him.

11 The young lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they who seek the Lord,
shall want nothing that is good.

12 Come my sons, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

13 What man is he that desires life, and loves long days to see good?

14 Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile.

15 Eschew evil and do good: seek peace and follow after it.

16 The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to
their cry.

17 The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from the earth.

18 The righteous cry and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of
all their distresses.

19 The Lord is near unto them that are broken in heart, and saves such as
are bruised in spirit.

20 Many are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
all.

21 He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.

22 But malice shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall
perish.

23 The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants: and none that trust in him
shall perish.

ANALYS. PSALM. 34.
We are first to consider of the title of this Psalm: and then of the Psalm
it self.

The title does acquaint us, 1. With the author of the Psalm: who is the
Prophet David. 2. With the time of the inditing thereof: which was upon his
escape from Achis King of the Philistines: who is by a name common to the Kings
of that people entitled Abimelech. 3. With the occasion of inditing the said
Psalm: which was the Prophets safe escape and deliverance from so capital an
enemy as King Achis. This his escape is set forth by noting unto us the mean
used for effecting the same: which was David's changing of his ordinary carriage
and behavior, that is, his counterfeiting the loss of his wit and sense. For
the Lord did by his providence so order the Prophets disguising in this
behalf, that it made way for his deliverance.


The Psalm it self is a thankful acknowledgement on David's part of the Lords
gracious deliverance of him from the imminent peril wherein he was, being in
the Court of Achis, and within the reach of his authority. The history hereof
you may read, 1. Sam. 21.

This grateful acknowledgement of his deliverance, the Prophet propounds and
testifies: 1. By his own personal magnifying the Lord for the said
deliverance, verse. 2. and 3. 2. By a double exhortation unto others. For he
inuiteth others 1. To concur with him in this duty of magnifying the Lord,
verse. 4. 2. To hold a course Partly of meditating on the Lords goodness, verse.
9. Partly of fearing the Lord, verse. 10.




The Prophets personal magnifying the Lord for his deliverance is amplified,
by noting unto us: 1. The time, when he will do it, verse. 2. where he says,
that he will at all times magnify the Lord. 2. The instrument, wherewith he
will perform this action of magnifying the Lord, verse. 2. I will praise him
(says he) with my mouth. 3. The affection, wherewith he will accompany this
duty of extolling the Lord, verse. 3. My soul (says he) shall glory in the
Lord: that is, I will with a sincere and unfeigned affection extol the Lords
goodness toward me, and not with my tongue only. 4. The effect wrought in
others by performing this duty of praise unto the Lord, verse. 3. For (says
the Prophet) the meek, that is, the children of God hearing this my thankful
acknowledgement of the Lords mercy to me, will thereupon rejoice and be
occasioned to praise the Lord with me. This rejoicing and praising the Lord, is
the effect wrought in others by David's performing this duty of magnifying the
Lord.


The second point, whereby he testifies his grateful acknowledgement of the
Lords mercy toward him in his deliverance, is his exhortation unto others,
that they would concur with him in this duty of magnifying the Lord. He
persuades them hereto in this sort: If God has delivered me from the imminent
peril wherein I was, being amongst the Philistines: praise him together with me
for this blessing. But God has delivered me from the imminent peril wherein I
was, being amongst the Philistines, verse. 5. and 7. where he says, that the
Lord has delivered him from all his fears and distresses: meaning the fears
and distresses in which he was, during his abode in the presence of King Achis
and the Philistines. Therefore praise ye ye Lord with me for this blessing, v. 4.


The Assumption is cleared by declaring unto us: 1. The Lords gracious
proceeding in general with his children. 2. The effect, which the observation
of the Lords mercy in the deliverance of David works in others.


Out of the consideration of the Lords gracious proceeding with his children in
general, he cleereth the said Assumption, thus: Such as call upon the Lord out
of an heart fearing him, are protected and delivered by him, verse. 8. Where for
a further manifesting of the truth of this sentence, he specifieth the
instruments used by the Lord in working the deliverance of his children. These
instruments are the Angels: by whose action of incamping about us, he does
implie and signify all other services done by them in favor of Gods children.
But I David called on the Lord out of an heart fearing him, verse. 5. and 7. In
the 5. verse he says: I sought the Lord, namely, out of an heart fearing him.
In the seventh verse, changing the person (which is a form usual in
Scripture) he repeateth his seeking and calling unto the Lord under these
terms: This poor man cried unto the Lord: that is, I David who was in a poor
and distressed case, cried unto the Lord for help against the peril wherein I
was. Therefore was I protected and delivered by the Lord, verse. 5. and 7.


The effect growing from the observation of the Lords mercy in the deliverance
of David, is, The recourse that others shall make unto the Lord by humble
petition in the day of their trouble, verse. 6. where he says: They shall look
unto the Lord and flock unto him: that is, They observing how mercifully the
Lord has proceeded with me in delivering me from the danger of death, shall
thereupon be moved in the day of trouble, as it were to run unto the Lord
for help by way of supplication. Now this their recourse unto the Lord by way
of humble petition, is recommended unto us by noting the blessed issue
following thereupon. The issue is, that upon such their recourse unto the Lord
for help, their faces shall not be ashamed: that is, they shall find favor in
the Lords sight for grant of their requests.

The Prophet having thus exhorted others to a concurrence with him in
magnifying the Lord: he now persuades them to a performance of two other
duties: 1. The one of meditating on the goodness of the Lord, to the end they
may repose upon him, verse. 9. 2. The other of fearing the Lord, verse. 10.


The former duty is recommended and pressed by this argument: If they be
blessed who trust in the Lord: then ought we to meditate on his goodness, that
we may thereupon be moved to trust in him. But they are blessed who trust in
the Lord, verse. 9. in the end. Therefore ought we to meditate on the goodness
of the Lord, that we may thereupon be moved to trust in him, verse. 9. in the
beginning. Where by tasting and seeing how gracious the Lord is, we must take
to be meant not a bare knowledge of the Lords goodness, but a serious
meditation accompanying the same, and such as may persuade our hearts to a
confident dependence on him. Which point of dependence and trust in the Lord,
howsoever it be not mentioned in the first part of this 9. verse, which
presents unto us the exhortation of meditating on the goodness of the Lord:
yet must we conceive it to be there in effect and sense: as if the Prophet had
said, Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, that thereupon you may be drawn
to trust in him. For blessed is the man who trusts in him.


The other duty, whereto the Prophet persuades us, is this: That we should
fear the Lord: that is, that we should serve and honor him in the carriage of
our life.


This duty is enforced and persuaded in this sort: Such as fear the Lord want
nothing, verse. 10. in the end. Therefore fear the Lord ye Saints of his, verse.
10. in the beginning.


The first part of this reason is handled by a comparison: wherein is showed
the different proceeding held by the Lord toward such as fear him, and
toward such as being of a proud spirit and reposing on their own strength
have rejected all fear of the Lord: and these he calls young lions. The
comparison is this: Young lions are in want and hunger, verse. 11. But such as
fear the Lord, want no good thing, verse. 10. and 11. Here in the 11. verse,
such as fear the Lord are noted unto us by a particular action of theirs:
which is, To seek the Lord by prayer.


Now in the 12. verse, the Prophet by way of prevention offers to satisfy a
question that may be demanded touching this fear, namely: What this fear is,
whereto the Prophet persuades, and which is accompanied with the happiness
spoken of in the 10. and 11. verse. Before he resolve this question: he does
(because the matter is of moment, and draws with it an happy life) solicit
his auditors to an attentive hearing of him: 1. By an argument drawn from a
circumstance of their persons: in that he calls them by the sweet title of
Sons: a title which the Prophets bestowed upon their disciples, to testify
their special love and kindness unto them, verse. 12. in the beginning. 2. By
noting unto them the worthiness of the subject, in the knowledge whereof he would
inform them: which is, the fear of the Lord, verse. 12. in the end. 3. By
remembering unto them, the desire that is in every of them of an happy life,
verse. 13. Where by way of an interrogation he aduertiseth them that this
desire of enjoying happiness is in every man. For the Prophet demanding this
question, (What man is he that desires life?) does in effect and sense speak
thus: Sure I am that there is no man who does not affect and desire an happy
life.


These motives, whereby he induces his auditors to an attentive and careful
hearing of him, are concluded thus: You are my disciples whom I love as my
sons: the point of doctrine, wherein I will inform you, concerns the fear
of the eternal God: and every of you desires the happiness which does
accompany this fear, verse. 12. and 13. Hearken therefore unto me, who am
ready to instruct you in this point of doctrine, verse. 12. in the beginning.


Having solicited his disciples to this attention in hearing him, he proceeds
to resolve them what this fear is, whereto he exhorts them. To perform
this, he sets down the particulars, wherein this fear of the Lord
consists. He shows that it consists, 1. In a religious use of the tongue,
verse. 14. Where forbidding the abuse thereof, he does withal prescribe the
lawful and holy use of the same. 2. In forbearance of sinful actions, and in
doing of that which is just and good before God and man, verse. 15. Where in the
end of the verse, that general of doing good, is declared by mentioning two
special actions that are to be done: whereof The one is, the seeking after
peace and concord with men. The other is, the intertaining of it when it is
found and procured.



Now to raise up in his said disciples a care to practice the above mentioned
particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Prophet presses them with
an argument taken from the consideration of the Lords gracious proceeding
toward those who in the carriage of their life do labor to put in practice the
said particulars. The argument persuading hereto, is this: If to such as
practice the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Lord
ministers a continual supply of his gracious favors: then ought you to
practice the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord. But to such
as practice the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Lord
ministers a continual supply of his gracious favors, verse. 16. Where the
Prophet by particulating these two actions of the Lord, namely, His beholding
of the righteous with the eye of his providence for their protection: and, His
hearing of their cry with the ear of commiseration for their deliverance from
trouble: the Prophet (I say) under the name of these two special actions, does
implie and signify the Lords gracious proceeding in every respect with the
righteous, that is, with such as perform obedience to his law. Therefore ought
you to practice the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, verse.
14. and 15.


Touching the Assumption: To the end it may appear what special
acknowledgement we owe unto the Lord in regard of this course of favor he
holds with us for our protection and deliverance: the Prophet sets upon
the said Assumption an illustration taken from the different and unlike
proceeding he holds with the wicked. The illustration, wherein the Lords
favorable course with the righteous is set forth by his different proceeding
with the wicked, is this: The Lord does execute his wrath upon the wicked,
verse. 17. and 22. But the godly he does protect from perils, and delivers
the^ from all their troubles, verse. 16.18.19.20.21.23.


The former sentence of this illustration is presented unto us by the Prophet
under these two particular actions of the Lord: whereof, The one is, the Lords
rooting from out the earth the memory of the wicked, verse. 17. which is an
evident execution of his wrath upon them. The other is, the Lords ordering of
the wicked to be instruments of their own destruction, verse. 22. which is
another real and apparent execution of his justice upon them.


The second sentence of the said illustration, to the end we may rest assured
of the Lords favor, and ever depend upon him, is in variety of terms
expounded and iterated in so many verses, as I have quoted: in each of which
verses the Lords action of protecting or delivering is mentioned.

In the 16. verse, both actions are noted, as has been declared. In the 18.
verse, his action of deliverance is signified by his gracious hearing and
delivering of them out of distress. In the 19. verse, his action of
deliverance is not only recorded, but improoued also and magnified by noting
the extremity of the distress, from which the godly are delivered. For it is
said in this verse to this effect: That the Lord is near unto the godly, and
saves them even then, when they faint and are as it were at the last gasp
through the greatness of their affliction. In the 20. verse, his action of
deliverance is specified and recommended by aduertising us that the number of
the troubles, out of which the just is delivered, is great. Which argues the
greatness of the mercy and power of the Deliverer. In the 21. verse, his action
of protection is remembered: it being there said, That the Lord has that care
of preserving the just, that he cannot receive hurt in any one bone without his
providence and will. In the 23. verse, his action of deliverance is comprised
both in the beginning and end of the said verse. In this verse the godly are
described: 1. Under the title of being the Lords servants. 2. By their
dependence on the Lord.

PSALM. 37.
A Psalm of David. Fret not thy self because of the wicked men: neither envy
at the evil doers.

2 For they shall soon be cut down like grass, and shall wither as the
green herb.

3 Trust thou in the Lord and do good. Thou shall inhabit the earth and be
fed assuredly.

4 And delight thy self in the Lord: and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

5 Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him. For he shall bring it to
pass.

6 And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy right as
the noone day.

7 Wait patiently upon the Lord and hope in him: fret not thy self for him
who prospers in his way: for the man (I say) who brings his enterprises to
pass.

8 Cease from anger and leave off wrath: fret not thy self, at least to do
evil.

9 For evil doers shall be cut off: but they that wait upon the Lord, shall
by inheritance possess the earth.

10 Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not appear: and thou shall look
after his place, and he shall not be found.

11 But the meek shall by inheritance possess the earth: and shall have their
delight in the multitude of peace.

12 The wicked practices against the just, and gnasheth his teeth against him.

13 The Lord laugheth him to scorn: for he sees that his day is coming.

14 The wicked have drawn their sword, and have bent their bow to cast down
the poor and the needy: and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

15 But their sword shall enter into their own heart: and their bows shall be
broken.

16 A small thing is better unto the just man, than great riches to the wicked
and mighty.

17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord vpholdeth the just
men.

18 The Lord knows the days of upright men: and their possession shall be
perpetual.

19 They shall not be confounded in the perilous time: and in the days of
famine they shall have enough:

20 Whilst the wicked perish, and the enemies of the Lord as the fat of
lambs: as this consumes vanishing into smoke, so they consume.

21 The wicked borrows and cannot repay: but the righteous is merciful and
gives.

22 For such as be blessed of God, do by right of inheritance possess the
earth: but they that be cursed of him, shall be cut off.

23 The steps of the man, with whose way the Lord is delighted, are established
by him.

24 When he falls, he is not utterly cast down: for the Lord vpholdeth his
hand.

25 I have been young, and now am old: yet I never saw the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread.

26 He is ever merciful and lends: and his seed enjoys the blessing.

27 Depart from evil, and do good: and thou shall dwell for ever.

28 For the Lord loves righteousness, and forsakes not his Saints: they are
preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked is cut off.

29 The righteous man shall by right of inheritance possess the earth, and
dwell therein for ever.

30 The mouth of the righteous speaks of wisdom, and his tongue talks of
judgment.

31 The law of his God is in his heart: and his foot slideth not in his steps.

32 The wicked watches the righteous and seeks to slay him.

33 But the Lord will not leave him in his hand: nor suffer him to be condemned
when he is judged.

34 Wait thou on the Lord and keep his way: and he shall exalt thee that thou
may by inheritance possess the land: thou shall see the destruction of the
wicked.

35 I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green bay
tree.

36 Afterward he passed away: and lo, he is no more: and I sought him, but he
could not be found.

37 Mark the upright man, and behold the just: the end of that man is peace:

38 Whereas the transgressors be destroyed together: and the end of the wicked
is cut off.

39 The deliverance of the righteous is from the Lord: he is their strength in
the time of trouble.

40 And the Lord helps them and delivers them: he delivers them from the
wicked, and saves them, because they trust on him.

ANALYS. PSALM. 37.
The Prophet in this 37. Psalm imparteth with us a direction how to carry our
selves in the case of the prosperity of the wicked and our own particular
distress: and consequently, a remedy against such temptations as do grow
from the consideration of the said prosperity and distress. To which purpose
he disputes this question: That the godly are without grieuing at the
prosperity of the wicked to rest upon the Lord, and to walk obediently before
him.


Before we proceed to lay forth the Prophets demonstration of this question:
forasmuch as the branches of it be diverse and dispersed into sundry verses, in
some of them jointly, and in some of them singly: it shall not be amiss to
observe briefly how and where they be set down.

There are (as we see) three branches of the said question: 1. Not to grieve at
the prosperity of the wicked. 2. To rest upon the Lord. 3. To walk obediently
before him.


The first branch is verse. 1.7. and 8.

The second and third branch are jointly and clearly comprised, verse. 3. in
the beginning, and verse. 34. in the beginning. It is said, verse. 3. Trust in
the Lord and do good. So is it said, verse. 34. Wait on the Lord and keep his
way. In which verses, by doing good, and by keeping the Lords way, is meant an
obedient and holy walking before him.

All three branches are in the 4. verse, though somewhat obscurely, noted under
this form of speech: Delight thy self in the Lord. Whereby is meant, that we
should without grieuing at the Lords proceedings rest satisfied with his good
pleasure declared by them, and so conform our will to his will by depending on
him, and by pleasing him in the train of our life. To do this, is to take
delight and contentment in the Lord.

In some other verses one of the said branches only is specified: as, Verse. 5.
and 7. Our resting on the Lord is mentioned. Verse. 27. Our walking obediently
before him is remembered.


But forasmuch as these branches are in other verses joined together, and made
the principal and maine scope of the Prophets dispute in this Psalm: we must,
where we find them severed, conceive notwithstanding that by noting one part,
the other parts are implied and signified.

Now the demonstration of the said question, comprising in general whatsoever
is in this Psalm deduced by the Prophet, is this: If the Lord proceed with
the wicked to their ruin, and with the godly to their good: then ought the
godly without grieuing at the wicked to rest on the Lord, and to walk
obediently before him. But the Lord proceeds with the wicked to their ruin,
and with the godly to their good. Therefore ought the godly without grieuing at
the wicked, to rest upon the Lord, and to walk obediently before him.


The Proposition is omitted: but being thus supplied, it will the better
inform our judgment in discerning and waighing the conclusion.

Of the Assumption there be two parts: namely, The Lords proceeding with the
wicked to their ruin. The Lords proceeding with the godly to their good.


The first part of the Assumption concerning the Lords proceeding with the
wicked to their ruin, is declared in the second verse, by observing the
circumstance of the short time that they are to flourish: The wicked shall
(says the Psalmist) be quickly cut down.


This their short flourishing and speedy fall is made evident unto us, by
comparing it to the speedy withering of grass, and any other green herb.
The comparison is this: As grass and any other green herb does quickly
wither and vanish: So shall the wicked speedily fall and be reduced to naught.


This part of the said Assumption touching the ruin of the wicked, is repeated
verse. 9: and the circumstance of the short time allotted to their flourishing,
rementioned v. 10.

The second part of the said Assumption, which concerns the Lords proceeding
with the godly to their good, is not in these general terms delivered by the
Prophet, but may sensibly be collected from the consideration of the particular
blessings, which the Prophet has sprinkled in sundry parts of this Psalm, to
the end he might by showing how gracious the Lord is toward his children,
thereby induce them to a dependence on him, and to a course of piety in their
life. Let us see then what these particulars are, and how by them he disputes
this question of resting upon the Lord, and walking obediently before him,
without grieuing at the prosperity of the wicked.

His first argument for the persuading hereof is this: Arg. 1.
Thou shall by thy dependence on the Lord, and by walking obediently before
him, enjoy for a long time a safe and comfortable estate of life, verse. 3. And
repeated verse. 9. and 11. And verse. 27. and 34. Therefore rest upon the Lord,
and walk obediently before him, verse. 3. Also verse. 27. and 34.


The former part of this reason is delivered in the third verse under these
words: Inhabit thou, or, Thou shall inhabit the earth and be fed assuredly.
And in the 9. and the 11. verse under these terms: They shall by inheritance
possess the earth. Hereby is promised unto the godly man that he shall be
preserved on the earth a long time, and supplied with the comforts of this
life, as being by the gracious ordinance and favor of God in Christ, the right
owner and Lord of the earth.

Further, this reposing on the Lord and this sanctified carriage of life, is
solicited by the Prophet in this sort: Arg. 2.
Thou shall by this religious course of life obtain at the hands of the Lord
the requests of thine heart, verse. 4. in the end. Wherefore rest on the Lord,
and live obediently before him, verse. 4. in the beginning. That this is the
interpretation and sense of these words: Delight in the Lord: is showed before.


His persuasion to the said dependence and holiness of conversation, is in the
5. verse framed and tendered after this form: Arg. 3.
By this course of dependence on the Lord and holiness of life, it shall
succeed well with thee in all thy affairs, verse. 5. in the end. Where it is
said: The Lord shall bring it to pass: that is, Bless and prosper thee in thy
proceedings. Rest therefore on the Lord, and walk obediently before him, verse.
5. in the beginning: where under the name of one part of the question, both
parts of it are to be understood.


The former sentence of this persuasion being such as may be excepted unto, the
Prophet does in the 6. verse prevent and satisfy the exception that may be
taken against it. The exception is not in distinct terms expressed, but by the
answer thereto we may conceive it to be this: The life of the godly man does
rest exposed to sundry calumnies and oppressions. Therefore it succeeds not
well with him in all his affairs.


The Prophets answer to this exception is such, as if he should directly say:
That, howsoever the godly man is exposed to calumnies and oppressions, yet it
follows not, that therefore it succeeds ill with him in his particular.
This denial of the sequel presented in the said exception, as if it were
expressly set down (as it is out of congruitie to be understood) the Prophet
does justify by acquainting us with the Lords proceeding in this case on the
behalf of the godly. For he gives us to understand in the 6. verse, That
howsoever the innocence of the godly be at sometime covered as it were with a
thick and dark mist of slander and oppression, yet the Lord will in his good
time scatter and dissolve this mist, and so make the innocence of the godly
apparent and clear to the world. For thus says the Prophet touching this
point: The Lord will bring forth thy righteousness: that is, make thy
innocence known to the world, notwithstanding any mist of slanders cast upon
it. And therefore it follows not, that in the case of slanderous imputations
laid upon thee, it succeeds ill with theee in thy affairs.


Now the cleerenes which the Lord will set upon the innocence of the godly
man, is notified unto us by a double comparison. For it is compared first in
general with the light of the Sun: then in particular with the light of the
Sun at noone day. As if he said: The light of the Sun is great: but the
light and cleerenes which the Lord shall set upon the innocence of the godly
man shall equal it: nay, which is more, it shall equal the brightness of the
Sun at noone day.


These verses following ( viz. the 7.8.9.10.11.) do repeat that which has
bin before delivered. In the 7. and 8. verses the general and maine question is
contained. The first part of the 9. verse, with the whole tenth, pertain to
the first part of the general Assumption, which concerns the Lords proceeding
with the wicked to their ruin. And ye second part of the 9. verse, together
with the 11, do remember unto us that, which is propounded in the end of the
third verse, as the first particular argument persuading dependence on the
Lord, and a sanctified carriage of life.

Thus you see how the Prophet has concluded the maine question by three
particulars, importing the Lords gracious proceeding with the godly to their
good. Before he proceed further: he incountreth and refelleth three objections
made against this favorable proceeding held by the Lord toward his children.

The first objection is verse. 12. thus: Obi. 1. v. 12.
The wicked are suffered by the Lord to plot and practice against the just.
This is declared by noting unto us the cause of this plotting, namely, their
malice: which is implied and signified by that effect of gnashing their teeth.
Therefore it seems that the Lord proceeds not so graciously with the
godly, as has been remembered.


The answer to this objection is verse. 13. by imparting with us the
frustration and dissuccesse of the said plotting, thus: Answer. v. 13.
Their plotting against the just is vain and without success, verse. 13. in
the beginning. Where the Prophet ascribing unto the Lord the action of
laughing, does thereby show that the Lord holds such proiects and practices,
at which he laugheth, for succeslesse and vain. For, were they to take effect,
it could not with any congruity be said, that the Lord laugheth at them.
Therefore the plotting of the wicked against the just hinders not, but that
the Lord may be said to hold notwithstanding a gracious proceeding with ye just.


The former part of this answer touching the miscariage and failing of the
wicked in their plots and practices, is cleared by aduertising unto us the
cause of the said failing: which is, a determination on the part of the Lord,
to dispatch the wicked ere they execute their designs. The conclusion is this:
The Lord does by the eye of his providence direct to a real issue his
determined dispatch of the wicked, ere they execute their design against the
just, verse. 13. in the end. Where it is said: The Lord sees the day, that is,
the appointed and decreed ruin of the wicked to be at hand. By the Lords
seeing the approach hereof, we are to understand not an idle beholding, but an
actual directing to issue on the Lords part of the said determined dispatch and
ruin of the wicked. Therefore the plotting of the wicked against the godly is
vain and without success, verse. 13. in the begin.


The second objection is verse. 14. thus: Obi. 2.
The wicked attempt the destruction of the godly: which the Prophet signifies
by two particular actions of theirs: the one of drawing their sword: the other
of bending their bow against the just. And therefore it may seem that the Lord
suffering this attempt against the godly, proceeds not so graciously with
them, as has been mentioned.


The answer hereto is verse. 15: where the Prophet, though not in formal and
express terms, yet in sense and effect denies the sequel deduced in this
objection. For he tells us that howsoever the wicked attempt against the
godly, yet his attempt is such as is not to be regarded: it being in the issue
thereof not only frustrated and disappointed, but of a fatal and pernicious
consequence to the utter overthrow of himself. As if the Prophet should frame
his answer to the said objection, thus: Answer. v. 15.
The attempts of the wicked are frustrated by the Lord, and made the means of
their own destruction. Therefore notwithstanding their attempts suffered by
the Lord, it may justly be said that the Lord proceeds graciously with his
children.


The third objection is not set down, but prevented by an answer thereto in
the 16. verse. The objection is this: Obi. 3.
The godly has little: whereas the wicked abound in wealth. And therefore it
seems that the Lord is not so gracious in his proceeding with the godly, as
is remembered.


The answer to this third objection is comprised in the 16. and 17. verse. The
Prophet in the 16. verse tendreth this answer: Ans. v. 16 and 17
The little pittance which the Lord furnishes unto the godly man, is of great
use and comfort. And therefore it cannot upon any such regard as is noted in
the objection, be inferred, that the Lord proceeds not graciously with his
children.


The former branch of this answer is cleared unto us, 1. By comparing the
little pittance of the godly with the wealth of the wicked, in the quantity of
the present use and comfort yielded by each of them, verse. 16. 2. By comparing
the said little pittance with the wealth of the wicked, in the point of lasting
and continuance incident to each of them, verse. 17.


The first comparison is this: The wealth of all the wicked in the world heaped
together, may be of great comfort and use to any one of the wicked: But the
little pittance furnished by the Lord unto one godly man, is to the same man of
far greater use and comfort.


The second comparison is this: The wealth of the wicked does vanish and
perish, ver. 17. in the beginning: where the Prophet expresses and delivers
this sentence by saying, that the arms or strength of the wicked (which
consists in their wealth) shall be broken. But the substance and relief of
the godly does last and remain, v. 17. in the end. Where by these words: The
Lord vpholdeth the just: we are to understand the supporting of the substance
and intertainment allotted to the just. For there being in this 17. verse a
comparison, wherein things are compared in a different and unlike quality: the
analogy betwixt the first and latter part of the comparision will not hold
good without some such interpretation. The first part of the comparison does
touch the perishing not of the wicked man's person, but of his wealth. And
therefore the second part of the said comparison, must proportionably concern
not the just man's person, but his intertainment and substance. Besides, this
17. verse being an answer to an objection, which imports the substance and
relief of the godly to be very little: the sense of it cannot be suitable with
ye objection, unless it be expounded as has been said. This exposition is
likewise confirmed by that which is delivered in the 18. verse: where the
Psalmist proves that the possession of the just remains for ever: that is,
That the just shall never fail of intertainment and relief.


The Prophet having in this sort answered the said third objection, he does
thereupon take an occasion to dispute and determine this excellent and
comfortable question: namely, That the Lord supplieth unto the godly continual
relief and maintenance, verse. 17. and 18.


The said question is set down in the end of the 17. and 18. verses. In the
17. it is said, That the Lord supporteth the just: that is, has that regard to
their substance and relief, as it never fails them. In the 18. it is
avouched that their possession lasts for ever: that is, the Lord does always
relieve and feed them.

Let us now see how the Prophet does handle and justify this his assertion.
The first argument for the clearing thereof, is concluded thus: Arg. 1.
Of whom the Lord has a special regard and care, to them their intertainment
and relief never fails. But of the godly the Lord has a special regard and
care, verse. 18. in the beginning: where it is said: That the Lord knows the
days of the upright men: that is, The Lord is careful that it succeed well
with them. Therefore to the godly their intertainment and relief never
fails, verse. 17.18.


The second proof used by the Psalmist for the deciding of the question in
hand, is a comparison of this nature: Arg. 2.
If relief fail unto the godly at any time, it will in all likelihood fail
them in the time of famine. But relief shall not fail them in the time of
famine. verse. 19. Therefore relief shall not fail unto the godly at any time,
verse. 17.18.


The Assumption is set out unto us by three several illustrations: whereof 1.
The first serves to distinguish betwixt that which in the time of famine
befalls unto the godly, and that which happens not unto them. The argument
of distinction is this: The godly shall not be distressed with want in the time
of public famine, verse. 19. in the begin. But in such a time they shall be
filled and satisfied, verse. 19. in the end.
2. The second is a comparison, wherein is showed how differently in the time
of famine it succeeds with the wicked and the godly: thus, The wicked shall
perish in the time of famine for want of relief, verse. 20. But to the godly
relief shall not fail in such a time, verse. 19.


The former part of this comparison is thus declared: Even as the fat of tender
lambs in sacrifices consumes away, verse. 20. in the midst: So the wicked
waste and perish in the time of famine, verse. 20. in the beginning and end.


3. The third illustration of the said Assumption is this: The godly man does
in the time of famine give unto others for their relief, verse. 21. in the end.
Therefore the godly man has at that time wherewithal to relieve himself,
verse. 19.



The former sentence of the said third illustration is made manifest unto us,
by noting 1. The different course held by the wicked in the time of famine:
thus, The wicked borrow for their relief in the time of famine, and repay not,
verse. 21. in the beginning. But the godly give and are helpful unto others in
that time, verse. 21. in the end.
2. By noting the cause and means whereby the godly are enabled to give and to
be helpful unto others, thus: Who by the blessing of the Lord do possess the
earth with the commodities of it as the right owners of the same, they are
enabled to give unto others in the time of famine. But the godly by the
blessing of the Lord do possess the earth with the commodities of it, as the
right owners of the same, verse. 22. Therefore the godly are enabled to give
unto others for their relief in the time of famine, verse. 21.



The Assumption is amplified by a comparison of things different and unlike
amongst themselves, thus: The wicked being accursed of the Lord, shall be cut
from the earth and the commodities of it, verse. 22. in the end. But the godly
being blessed of the Lord, do and shall possess the earth with the
commodities of it, as the right owners of the same, verse. 22. in the beginning.


Hitherto the second argument, to prove, That the godly shall never want
relief and intertainment, has been handled. The third follows under this
form: Arg. 3.
The Lord does settle and fortify the state of the godly, verse. 23. Where
these words (The man with whose way the Lord is delighted) contain a
description of a godly man. Therefore the godly cannot want relief and
intertainment, verse. 17.18.


To the Antecedent of this third argument the Prophet has added by way of
anticipation, an answer to an objection, which may be made against the said
Antecedent. The objection is this: The godly falls from his condition. How
therefore can it be said that his condition stands established and fortified
by the Lord?


The answer to this objection is from a distinction of falls, verse. 24: where
the Prophet distinguishes betwixt falls, thus: The fall of the godly is not
an utter deiection, but a recouerable fall. And therefore notwithstanding a
fall of this kind, it may truly be avouched that he is of a settled and
fortified estate and condition.


This answer importing the fall of the godly to be recouerable, is amplified
from the cause of this recovery, thus: The Lord does hold the godly from utter
deiection, and raises him from the fall wherein he is, verse. 24. in the end.
Therefore when the godly falls from his estate, he recouers himself again
thereto, verse. 24. in the beginning.


The fourth reason, whereby to clear the question of the perpetual relief
and intertainment supplied to the godly man, is drawn from a testimony of the
Prophets particular experience and observation: which is double: the one, of
never seeing the godly man go from door to door a begging, verse. 25: the
other, of observing him to be helpful unto others, and blessed in his
children, verse. 26. The conclusion grounded on these two particular
observations, is this: I have not at any time seen the godly man, or any of
his posterity beg their bread from door to door: but I have observed him
to be helpful unto others, and blessed in his children, verse. 25. and 26.
Whereupon I may reasonably infer that the godly man endures not want of
relief and intertainment, verse. 17.18.


Touching the Prophets observation in this behalf: we must understand that
the profession and state of begging was prohibited by the law of God and
accursed by him. Whereupon it is credible that no godly man would so carry
himself as to be forced to offend against the said law, and so to incur the
curse of the Lord: who is always at the right hand of his children to guide
and support them.

Hitherto the Prophet has disputed and cleared three objections made against
the favorable and gracious proceeding held by the Lord toward his children.
To which dispute he has likewise added the discussing of this worthy and
comfortable Assertion, concerning The Lords supplying of relief from time to
time unto the godly.

Now therefore having showed not only in the former part of the Psalm, but in
handling the said objections and Assertion added thereto, That the Lord
proceeds with the wicked to their ruin, and with the godly to their good: he
does return in the 27. verse to his maine and principal exhortation of
resting upon the Lord, and walking obediently before him.

To persuade hereto, the Prophet verse. 27. repeateth and again presents unto
us the conclusion propounded in the 3. verse. The conclusion is this: By this
course of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, the godly
shall enjoy a long, safe and comfortable life, verse. 27. in the end. Wherefore
rest on the Lord, and walk obediently before him, verse. 27. in the beginning.
Where the later branch of this conclusion which concerns holy obedience of
life is only mentioned: but under the name of this, we are to conceive
likewise of the former as set down.


Now to make it appear unto us that this repetition of the said conclusion is
not idle and out of want of other matter, but of special moment and use: the
Prophet draws into discourse and consideration the doctrine comprised in the
Antecedent of the said conclusion, amplifying and clearing the same by sundry
arguments: namely, 1. By noting unto us the cause of enjoying so happy and
comfortable an estate of life, thus: Whom the Lord loves and never forsakes,
they shall enjoy a long, safe, and comfortable life. But the godly are those
whom the Lord loves and never forsakes, verse. 28. Therefore the godly shall
enjoy a long, safe, and comfortable life, verse. 27. in the end, and verse. 28.
in the midst, and verse. 29.
2. By imparting with us by way of comparison, the Lords unlike and different
proceeding with the wicked, thus: The wicked are cut off by the Lord from the
enioyance of this happy and comfortable life, verse. 28. in the end. Where by
an argument from the greater to the less, he shows, That not only the
wicked, but their seed also and posterity shall be cut off. But the godly
shall enjoy the said happy life. verse. 27.28.29.
3. By describing unto us a just and godly man, verse. 30. and 31. The
description is this: He is a godly man who conformeth himself to the law of the
Lord, 1. In his speech, ver. 30. 2. In his heart, ver. 31. 3. In his life and
actions, verse. 31. in the end.

4. By answering an objection made against the enioyance of the said happy
life promised to the godly man, in the antecedent of the above named
conclusion. The objection is this: The wicked watches the righteous and
seeks to kill him, verse. 32. How therefore shall the godly man enjoy the
happy life promised unto him?



The answer hereto is this: The Lord delivers the righteous from the hand of
the wicked. This action of the Lords is in the 33. verse noted by these two
particulars: the one, of not leaving the just in the hands of the wicked: the
other, of not suffering him to be iudicially at the appetite of the wicked
condemned. Therefore howsoever the wicked seek the dispatch of the just, yet
shall the just enjoy the happy life promised unto him.


Thus we see how the Prophet to press his maine exhortation, of resting on the
Lord, and walking obediently before him, has in the 27. verse not only
repeated the conclusion delivered in the 3. verse, but has also set upon the
antecedent part thereof four worthy illustrations from the beginning of the
28. to the end of the 33. verse. Now in the 34. verse, before he fall to a
fresh prosecution of the said exhortation, he does (out of a purpose to
imprint in our hearts and memories a doctrine of so excellent use and comfort)
recommend again unto us the said conclusion offered in the third verse. And
then in the end of the 34, he urges and inforceth the said exhortation of
resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, by this argument: which
is in number the fourth, whereby the principal question of the Psalm is
concluded: Arg. 4.
By this course of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, thou
shall obtain this further mercy at his hands, as to be an eye witness of the
execution of the Lords justice upon the wicked, verse. 34. in the end. Wherefore
rest upon him, and walk obediently before him, verse. 34. in the beginning.
To the former part of this reason the Prophet has added a declaration from
two comparisons.

1. The first is this, carrying with it a testimony of experience: I observed
and discerned the wicked to vanish and perish, verse. 36. Wherefore observe and
thou also shall see him vanish and perish, verse. 34.38. The first sentence of
this comparison is amplified by the like observation made of the wicked man's
contrary estate, thus: I saw the wicked flourish, verse. 35. Where this
flourishing of the wicked is resembled to the spreading and flourishing of a Bay
tree. So I observed and discerned him to vanish and perish, verse. 36.


2. The second comparison, whereby to show that the just shall see with his eye
the ruin of the wicked, and wherein is noted unto us the observation of a
contrary event in the godly, is set down in this sort: Observe the godly man,
and thou shall see how he ends his days in peace and prosperity, ver. 37.
Observe in like manner the wicked, and thou shall as well see how he ends in
misery and destruction, verse. 34.38.

That part of the second comparison which concerns the peaceable and
prosperous end of the just, is thus argued: Whom the Lord ever helps and
delivers in the time of affliction, their end must needs be peaceable and
happy. But the godly are they whom the Lord ever helps and delivers in the
time of affliction, verse. 39. and 40. Therefore the end of the godly men must
needs be peaceable and happy, verse. 37.


The Assumption is made known and evident by this reason: Who so repose their
trust in the Lord for deliverance in time of affliction, them the Lord ever
helps and delivers at such time. But the godly are they who repose their
trust in the Lord for deliverance in time of affliction. Therefore the godly
are ever helped and delivered by the Lord at such time.


The Proposition is omitted, as being the Lords known promise.

The Assumption is verse. 40. in the end.

The Conclusion is verse. 39. and 40.

PSALM. 39.
TO Ieduthun the Master of the Quier, a Psalm of David.

2 I said: I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I
will keep my mouth brideled while the wicked is in my sight.

3 I was dumb and spoke nothing: I kept silence even from good: but my sorrow
was more stirred.

4 Mine heart was hot within me: and the fire kindled in my meditation.
Whereupon I spoke with my tongue saying:

5 Lord, let me know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is: let me
know how long I am to live.

6 Behold: thou have made my days as an hand breadth: and the time of my life
is before thee as nothing: surely every man is altogether vanity, though never
so strongly settled. Selah.

7 Doubtless man walks in a shadow: doubtless he makes great ado for
naught: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

8 But now Lord, what wait I for? mine hope is in thee.

9 Deliver me from all my transgressions: and make me not a reproach unto the
foolish.

10 I hold my peace: I open not my mouth: because thou did it.

11 Remove from me thy wound: for I faint by the stroke of thy hand.

12 As Soon as thou do chastise man, rebuking him for his iniquity: thou
do dissolve his excellency as a moth. Surely every man is merely vanity.
Selah.

13 Hear my prayer O Lord, and hearken unto my cry: be not deaffe unto my
tears. For I am a stranger before thee, and a seiourner as all my fathers.

14 Stay thine hand from me, that I may refresh my self, before I go hence
and be not.

ANALYS. PSALM. 39.
The Prophet being under the afflicting hand of the Lord, does in this Psalm
relate unto us: 1. The combat he had betwixt the spirit and the flesh. From the
beginning of the second verse, to the end of the seventh. 2. The issue of the
said combat. From the beginning of the 8. verse, to the end of the 14.


The combat is described by setting down, 1. The actions of the spirit, verse.
2.3. 2. The encounter of the flesh, verse. 3. in the end, and verse. 4.


The actions of the Spirit in the Prophet David, are two: 1. His resolution not
to let fall any passionate words, verse. 2. 2. The performance of this
resolution, verse. 3. in the former part thereof.


His resolution to be silent and to forbear all distempered and impatient
speeches, is set out unto us by implying the end he aymeth at therein: which
is to prevent and take from the wicked, who observed the carriage of the Lords
children, al occasion of traducing and reproching the profession of fearing the
Lord. This end is not in distinct and express terms particulated, but
necessarily and sensibly implied in the second verse under these words: While
the wicked is before me: that is, while the wicked observes me and watches an
occasion to deride and scandalize the carriage and profession of the godly. Now
what the wicked would observe and traduce, to prevent that the Prophet voweth
silence. But the carriage and profession of the godly is that which the wicked
would observe and traduce. Therefore to prevent and disappoint the wicked
herein, the Prophet resolved with himself to refrain his tongue.

The performance of the said resolution to be silent, is amplified by a
comparison in this sort: I spared to speak that which would have served to my
special advantage and good, and which I might justly have pleaded in my
defense, verse. 3. in the midst. No marvel then if I spared my tongue
otherwise, verse 3. in the beginning.


The encounter of the flesh is likewise set forth unto us by these two actions
of the flesh: whereof, 1. The one is a further provocation and increase of the
Prophets passion, growing out of the endeavor used by him to suppress the
same, verse. 3. in the end: and verse. 4. in the beginning. 2. The other is an
actual interruption of the said resolution to be silent: which the flesh
wrought in him by stirring and provoking his passion, verse. 4. in the end. For
his passion, the more he endeavored to qualify and restrain it, being so much
the more inflamed, he does out of an impatient humor and to show the greatness
of the misery he endured, break his resolution of silence by tendering unto
the Lord this passionate and inconsiderate request: namely, That the Lord would
be pleased to take him presently out of this life, verse. 5.



This request for present death is delivered in these terms: Let me know my
end: and the measure of my days what it is: and how long I am to live; that is
to say: let me by an actual experiment of death in mine own person feel and
discern the utmost period and reach of my days: which in effect is naught
else than a request, That he may die. Now he does not only propound this suit,
but to the end he may obtain at the Lords hands a grant thereof, he does
accompany it with certain motives concluded thus: If my life by thine own
ordinance be exceeding short and likewise subject to vanity: I pray thee,
verify on my person the truth and effect of this thy ordinance in cutting off
this my life. But my life by thine own ordinance is exceeding short and
likewise subject to vanity, verse. 6. and 7. Wherefore (O Lord) execute on my
person the truth and effect of this thine ordinance in cutting off my life,
verse. 5.


The first member of the Assumption concerns the shortness of the Prophets
life. That his life is exceeding short, he shows by two comparisons: 1. In
the one he compares the length of his life to the length of a spanne, verse. 6.
in the beginning. 2. In the other he resembles his life to that which is
nothing, verse. 6. in the midst.


The second member of the Assumption, which imports the vanity of his life,
is not in particularity expressed: but in liew of it, the Prophet has set
down this demonstration thereof: Every man, though never so strongly founded
in his estate, is a mere vanity: and likewise all his endeavors and travels
are merely vain. And therefore, considering I am a man, my life can be naught
else but a mere vanity.


The former part of the Antecedent is verse. 6. in the end.

The later part of the said Antecedent, which concerns the vanity of all the
endeavors and travels of man, is verse. 7. in the midst. Where it is said,
that man makes great ado for naught: that is, he spends his endeavors and
travels in vain. Now this general, namely, That man spends his endeavors
and travels in vain, is amplified: 1. By a comparison, in the beginning of the
7. verse. 2. By allegation of a particular instance, in the end of the 7. verse.


The comparison, wherein the vanity of man's endeavor and travel is showed,
being laid forth in her parts, is this: As a bare show or vanishing image is of
no substance or use: So neither are the endeavors or travels of man, verse. 7.
in the beginning. Where it is affirmed that man walks in a shadow: that is,
imployeth himself about that, which is naught else but a bare show and
vanishing image.


The particular instance alleged to argue and witness the vanity of man's
endeavors, is this: Man gathers riches he knows not for whom, verse. 7. in
the end. Upon this instance (it being supposed by the Prophet that all other
actions and employments of man are in nature and use like to the said instance)
it may be inferred, that all the endeavors of man are vain.


Hitherto of the Combat, which the Prophet sustained betwixt the spirit and the
flesh: the flesh prevailing so far with him, as that it drew from him, being
not able to contain himself within limits of patience and moderation, the
making of an unadvised motion unto the Lord for present death.

The issue of the Combat follows in the rest of the verses of this Psalm:
namely, from the beginning of the 8. ver. to the end of the 14. The said issue
is (as shall appear) a plain and absolute defeat given in this combat by the
Spirit unto the flesh. For after the Prophet had for a while out of his
passionate and impatient humor solicited the Lord to retire him out of this
life: he does upon better aduisement suggested from the Spirit, correct and
check himself by calling to mind the folly and vanity of the motion he
tendered unto the Lord for death. And therefore he reclaymeth himself thus in
the 8. verse: But now Lord, what wait I for? As if he should say: It is in
vain that I present this inconsiderate request unto thee: I cannot expect
ought from it.


Now hereupon, the Prophet changing his former note (the Spirit having obtained
victory against the incounters of the flesh) he becomes an humble suter unto
the Lord, namely: That the Lord would be pleased to remove from him his present
affliction, verse. 11.13.14.


This suit for the remove of the affliction presently upon him, is the issue of
the combat above mentioned and described.

To persuade the Lord to give him satisfaction by the grant of the said suit,
he pleads by sundry arguments. The first is this: Arg. 1.
My hope and confidence for mercy and deliverance is in thee O Lord, verse. 8.
in the end. Therefore withdraw, I pray thee, thy afflicting hand from me, verse.
11.13.14.


The sequel of this reason has for the warrant and ground thereof, the Lords
promise to deliver those who rest upon him: which promise is the proposition of
this first conclusion: but omitted by the Prophet, as a matter already being
in the public knowledge of all.

Here, before the Prophet proceed to a further pressing of his humble suit:
forasmuch as his conscience tells him that his sins have originally drawn
upon him his present affliction: least the consideration of them should on the
part of the Lord be a bar to his said suit; he does for this regard humbly
entreat, in the 9. verse a remission of all his transgressions: justly
apprehending that the cause being removed, the effect also will determine. This
motion does carry with it a confession of his sin against God, and an
acknowledgement of the desert thereof: which is a reason of moment to induce
the Lord to remit sin. As this clause of the said 9. verse, Deliver me from
all my transgressions, does aptly receive the exposition and sense I have set
down: so may it not unfitly and with good warrant be expounded of the remove
of the present cross which the Prophet endured as a punishment due to his
transgressions. Which interpretation being allowed of, the said clause must
then serve as a conclusion to the first argument, and to all other the motives
presented unto the Lord by the Prophet, for deliverance from the present
trouble wherein he was.

The second argument, whereby he mediateth with the Lord the remove of his
present affliction, does remember unto the Lord the event and inconvenience
that will ensue upon the said affliction, in case it be continued: Arg. 2.
If the affliction that is presently upon me, will expose me and my profession
of thy name as a scorn unto the wicked: I pray thee (O Lord) remove it from
me. But the affliction that is presently upon me, will expose me and my
profession of thy name as a scorn unto the wicked, verse. 9. in the end. Where
it is said: Make me not a reproach unto the foolish: that is, withdraw this
affliction from me, least the continuance thereof occasion the foolish and
wicked to traduce and reproach my profession of thy name. So as in this later
clause of the ninth verse, there is folded up and included as well the Prophets
suit as the argument to persuade it. Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) remove the
said affliction from me.


The Prophet having presented unto the Lord, who is jealous of his own honor
and ever ready to give proof how highly he does value it, the remembrance of
the imputation and scandal, that may be thrown upon the profession of his
name, in case of the continuance of the said affliction: he does in the 10.
verse add hereto a special inducement grounded upon the Lords gracious nature
and promise to help those who with patience submit themselves to his good
pleasure. The inducement is of this sort: Arg. 3.
I do now in all patience and reverence humble my self before thee,
submitting my self wholly to thy good pleasure, verse. 10. in the former part.
It may please thee therefore O Lord to have mercy on me, and to deliver me
from my present trouble, verse. 11.13.14.


The former sentence of this reason, which concerns the Prophets submittance
of himself in all humility and patience unto the Lords good pleasure, is
amplifyed by drawing into consideration the principal efficient and author of
the affliction laid upon the Prophet, thus: I do acknowledge that it is thou (O
Lord) who have laid this present affliction upon me, verse. 10. in the end.
Therefore do I in all patience and reverence humble my self before thee, and
submit my self wholly to thy good pleasure, verse. 10. in the beginning.


The Prophet giving the Lord no rest till he find rest from his trouble, does
by a fourth argument solicit his prevailing with the Lord in his suit: thus,
Arg. 4.
I quail and faint under the burden of this my affliction, it being far
surpassing my strength, ver. 11 in the end. It may please thee therefore (O
Lord) to remove it from me, verse. 11. in the beginning. Where the Prophet
makes his request in these words: Remove from me thy wound: that is, the
affliction laid upon me, which is to my person and state, as a wound unto my
body.


The ground of this fourth reason is a consideration of the Lords most wise and
gracious proceeding: who does proportion out afflictions to the measure of
strength in his children: and will not suffer the rod of the ungodly to rest
on his Saints, least they also should reach out their hand to iniquity.

To the Antecedent of this fourth reason the Prophet has yielded this
illustration: If no man be of sufficient strength to endure thy afflicting
hand, then must I needs faint under it. But no man is of sufficient strength
to endure thy afflicting hand, verse. 12. Where the Prophet shows, that man is
no more able to bear the burden of affliction, than a moth is able to endure a
bruise offered unto it by ones hand. But as soon as the Lord afflicts him for
his sin, he melts and dissolueth as being of no strength to bear it.
Therefore must I needs faint under it, verse. 11. in the end.


The Assumption is amplified by three several arguments: namely, 1. By noting
the efficient cause moving the Lord to inflict punishments: which is the
iniquity of man, verse. 12. in the first part thereof. 2. By a comparison:
wherein man and whatsoever is of strength and excellency in man, is compared
in weakness to a moth, thus: As a moth is so exceedingly brittle, as that with a
touch of the finger it is presently dissolved: So man and whatsoever is of
strength and excellency in man is so weak, that it cannot endure the touch of
the Lords afflicting finger, without being reduced to naught, verse. 12. in the
midst.
3. By imparting with us the nature and condition of man: he being in his
nature and condition naught else but a mere vanity. Out of which
consideration he thus concludes: Nothing merely vanity is of sufficient
strength to endure the afflicting hand of God. Every man is merely vanity,
verse. 12. in the end. Therefore no man is of sufficient strength to endure the
afflicting hand of God, verse. 12. in the former part of the verse.



The Prophet having thus dilated upon the fourth argument, he returns to
solicit his maine suit, remembering unto the Lord the quality and condition of
his life, as a reason whereby to draw the Lord to a merciful regard of his
said suit. His conclusion is this: Arg. 5.
If my abode in this life be very short, I pray thee whilst opportunity is
offered of showing mercy unto me, show it in delivering me from my present
trouble. But my abode in this life is very short, verse. 13. in the end.
Therefore whilst opportunity is offered of showing mercy unto me, show it in
delivering me from my present trouble, verse. 13. in the beginning.


The Assumption is not expressed in these very terms: but in steed of the said
Assumption, the illustration thereof is set down thus: I am a pilgrim and a
seiourner here upon earth, as my predecessors were, verse. 13. in the end.
Therefore am I of a short abode here upon earth and in this life.


The conclusion of the 5. argument being in the beginning of the 13. verse, is
there amplified by acquainting us with the manner and form of offering unto
the Lord this petition for deliverance from the said affliction. The manner and
form here used, is The petitioners extraordinary vehemency and earnestnes in
pressing the Lord to a grant of the petition offered. This extraordinary
vehemency in the petitioner, is expressed in this sort: 1. By iterations of
calling upon the Lord to hear him. For he does thrice call on the Lord to
hear him, verse. 13. in the beginning and midst. 2. By the petitioners crying
unto the Lord, verse. 13. in the midst. 3. By effusion of his tears, verse.
13. in the midst.


This vehemence and earnestness of the petitioner with the Lord, expressed by
the particulars mentioned, may serve for a motive whereby to prevail with the
Lord in this suit for deliverance. For this earnestnes and importtunacie in our
prayers proceeding from a true sense of our wants and accompanied with faith in
the Lords promises, is a thing commanded by him and such as wherein he takes
special contentment: and for that regard of great force with the Lord.

The Prophet having bin thus extraordinarily earnest with the Lord in the 13
verse: he does in the 14. and last verse close up and conclude his suit, by
propounding unto the Lord the end for which he beggeth deliverance from the
present cross which lies so heavily upon him. His persuasion is this: Arg. 6.
If thy afflicting hand continue upon me, I shall have no time before I die of
refreshing and fitting my self to do thee honor and service. But I would
most willingly have some time before I die of refreshing and fitting my self
to do thee honor and service, verse. 14. in the later part of the verse. Where
unto these words (That I may refresh my self before I depart hence) I take the
exposition, which I have set down, to be most agreeable, and suting with the
Prophets intention in this last argument. Therefore I pray thee let not thy
afflicting hand continue upon me, verse. 14. in the beginning. Where the Prophet
entreats the Lord to stay his hand from him: that is, to desist from
afflicting him any longer.


PSALM. 49.
TO the Master of the Quier amongst the sons of Corah, a Psalm committed to
be sung.

2 Hear this all ye people: give ear all ye that dwell in the world:

3 As Well low as high, the rich as well as the poor.

4 My mouth shall deliver manifold wisdom: and the meditation of my heart
manifold knowledge.

5 I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will utter my worthy sentence on
the harp.

6 Wherefore should I fear in the evil days, when the wicked shall compass
me about, as at my heels?

7 Namely, such as trust in their goods, and boast in the multitude of their
riches.

8 A man can by no means redeem his brother: he cannot give his ransom to
God:

9 (For the redemption of their life is over dear: and shall never be
compassed.)

10 That he may live still for ever, and not see the grave.

11 For it is seen that the wise do die: and likewise that the ignorant and
foolish do perish: and leave their riches for others.

12 Their intention is that their houses and their habitations shall continue
for ever, even from generation to generation: in that they call them by their
names upon earth.

13 Yet man shall not continue in honor. He is like the beasts that die.

14 This their way shows their folly: yet their posterity do greatly
approve their course.

15 Like sheep they shall lie in the grave: death shall devour them: and the
righteous shall have dominion over them in the morning: and hell shall consume
their form being raised from out the house thereof.

16 But God will deliver my soul from the power of the grave: and he will
receive me to himself.

17 Be not thou afraid therefore, when one is made rich, and when the glory
of his house is increased.

18 For he shall take nothing away with him when he dies: neither shall his
pomp descend after him:

19 Though he blessed his soul in his life: and men praise thee, in that thou
make much of thy self.

20 Howsoever they come even to the age of their fathers: yet shall they never
enjoy the light.

21 A man in honor having no understanding, is made like to the beasts that
perish.

ANALYS. PSALM. 49.
The position debated by the Prophet in this Psalm, I take to be this: That
the godly should not fear the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying
in the strength of them, verse. 17.


That this is the position handled here by the Prophet, may appear by
comparing the 17. verse with the 6. and 7: where the Prophet professing this
much, that there is no cause why himself should fear the wicked, namely, such
as repose on their wealth and boast in the multitude of their riches, though
they beset him on each side, and be as it were at his heels ready to surprise
him. After he has at large from the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of
the 16. set down an illustration and proof of that which he so professes of
himself: he does in the 17. verse direct his speech to all godly men in
general, concluding by way of exhortation out of the argument and profession
delivered in the said 6. and 7. verse, That none of them ought to fear the
wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the strength of them. This
particle of the position, which concerns the glorying of the wicked in their
wealth, is not in the 17. verse expressed in formal and distinct terms: but
forasmuch as it is added by the Prophet to the argument used in the 6. and 7.
for proof of the 17: we must conceive it to be a part of the position couched
in the said 17. verse.

Now before he proceed to a real discussing of the said position: forasmuch
as it contains no vulgar and mean point of knowledge, but such a doctrine as
is worthy of all regard, howsoever it may seem in the eye of the carnal man
a contemptible paradoxe: the Prophet has thought meet to honor it with a
preface.

In the preface, the Prophet 1. Summoneth such as are to be his auditors. 2.
Soliciteth audience and attention at their hands.


The summons is performed by him, 1. In general, verse. 2. 2. In particular,
verse. 3.


In the general summons, all people and inhabitants of the earth indistinctly
are cited. But least any should think themselves privileged and exempted from
tendering their appearance upon this general summons: he does in the 3. verse
particulate the several estates and degrees of persons, that are cited to
appear: namely, The vulgar people, the noble, the rich, and the poor. And
these, as they are all equally and without partiality summoned: so are they
all indifferently and without personal regard bound to become auditors of the
doctrine to be propounded.

His soliciting of audience and attention at the hands of all people of what
degree and quality soever is performed by presenting unto their consideration:
1. The excellency and worthiness of the said doctrine, verse. 4. Where to note
the singular value of it, and the instruction it does minister, it is entitled
by the name of wisdom and knowledge: and in the 5. verse, by the name of a
parable and sentence most worthy to be observed. 2. His readiness to concur
with them in a serious meditation thereof, ver. 5. in the beginning. Where he
professes that in regard of the excellency of the said doctrine, he will
incline his ear thereto, that is, withal care and reverence meditate thereon
together with them. 3. The manner and form of tendering and publishing the said
doctrine, verse. 5. in the end. Where he says, that he will deliver and publish
it on his harp, that is, in such form and manner as is very pleasing and
delightful.


These particular motives used by the Prophet to solicit and draw all the
inhabitants of the earth to an attentive hearing of the said doctrine, are thus
concluded: If the doctrine I propound, contain matter of excellent wisdom:
if my self shall in person readily concur with all men in the serious
meditation of it: if I shall publish it in a pleasing form and sort: then let
all men attentively hear the said doctrine. But the doctrine I propound,
contains matter of excellent wisdom: my self shall in person readily
concur with all men in the serious meditation thereof: I shall publish it in
a pleasing form and sort. verse. 4.5. Therefore let all men attentively hear
the said doctrine, verse. 2.3.


The Prophet having thus summoned and solicited each condition and sort of
people to the hearing of the said doctrine: he does now proceed to a
particular and actual demonstration of the same. The doctrine to be
demonstrated, is the position above remembered, namely: That the godly man
should not fear the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the
strength of them, verse. 17.


The demonstration of this position is twofold: The one from an instance in the
Prophets one person, delivered in a comparison of paritie, verse. 6. and 7. The
other is from the consideration of the wretched condition whereto the wicked
are subject at their death. verse. 18.


The instance taken from the Prophets own person for clearing the said
position is concluded thus: I the Prophet fear not the wicked, though
abounding in wealth and glorying in the strength thereof, ver. 6.7. Therefore
let no other godly man fear them, verse. 17.


The former part of this reason, which contains the instance taken from the
Prophets own person, is cleared thus: If the wicked notwithstanding their
wealth dye in their own persons: in the memory and honor of their names: and
likewise in the persons of their posterity: then is there no just cause why I
the Prophet should fear them, though glorying in the strength of their wealth.
But the wicked, notwithstanding their wealth, die in their own persons: they
die in the memory and honor of their names: they die also in the persons of
their posterity. The first branch of this Assumption is verse. 8. and 10: the
second is verse. 12. and 13: the third is verse. 15. Therefore there is no just
cause why I the Prophet should fear the wicked, though glorying in the
strength of their wealth, verse. 6. and 7.


The first branch of the Assumption, which concerns the dying of the wicked in
their own persons, notwithstanding the strength of their wealth, is expressed
ver. 8. and 10. Where it is confidently auerred, that out of the strength of
riches there cannot be presented unto God a sufficient price whereby to deliver
the wicked from death into a state of immortality in this life. Which in sum
and effect is all one, as if it were said: The wicked are undoubtedly to dye in
their own persons, notwithstanding the strength of their wealth wherein they
trust. Now this first branch of the said Assumption is proved by two several
arguments: whereof The one is set down, verse. 9. The other is delivered, verse.
11.


In the 9. verse, the argument proving that the wicked, notwithstanding their
riches, die in their own persons, is concluded thus: If it be impossible out
of riches to present unto the Lord a sufficient value whereby to deliver the
wicked from death: then are they, notwihhstanding their riches, assuredly to
die in their own persons. But it is impossible out of riches to present unto
the Lord a sufficient value whereby to deliver the wicked from death, verse. 9.
Therefore the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, are assuredly to die in
their own persons, verse. 8. and 10.
In the 11. verse, the proof that the wicked, notwithstanding their riches,
are to die in their own persons, is this: All men, as well the wise as the
foolish, do in person die, verse. 11. The wicked are in the number of the wise,
or the foolish. Therefore the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, do in
person die, verse. 8. and 10.

The proposition is confirmed: 1. By a testimony from common experience and
observation, verse. 11. in the beginning. Where it is said, That it is seen and
observed, that the wise and the foolish die: and therefore it is out of
question that they die. 2. By a special act of leaving their goods to others
either by testament and gift, or by way of other conueiance. The conclusion is
this: They leave their wealth to others by way of testament, or other
conueiance, verse. 11. in the end. But in case they had an immortality on
earth; they would not leave or abandon that, which is the intertainment of
their life and the strength they repose on. Therefore it is apparent that they
are subject to death, ver. 11. in the beginning.



The second branch of the above mentioned Assumption importing the dying of the
wicked in the memory and honor of their names, is recorded in the beginning of
the 13. verse. Where it is said: Yet man shall not continue in honor: that is:
he cannot make the memory and honor of his name immortal: but the memory of
his name shall perish. In this exposition, as being most suitable with the sense
of the 12. verse immediately proceeding, I follow the French.

That the wicked die in the memory and honor of their names, the Prophet
shows: 1. By an argument of Diversity: wherein he imparteth with us, first
the end which the wicked propound unto themselves, namely the immortality of
their names amongst men: secondly, the means used by them for attaining to
this end: which is the building of magnificall houses, and intitling them with
their names. Now the said argument is thus set down: The intention of the
wicked is to eternize the memory of their names, by building fair houses and
calling them by their names upon earth: that is, amongst men in the world, v.
12. Where by particulating this means of giving immortality to their names,
he understands all other means to this purpose. Yet shall they not make
their memory and honor of their names immortal, verse. 13. in the beginning.
2. By a Similitude: which being laid forth in her parts, is this: As brute
beasts perish, and together with the^ the remembrance of the^, ver. 13. in the
end. So the wicked who glory in their riches shall perish, without leaving any
memory of their names, verse. 13. in the beginning, and end also.



The third and last branch of the aforesaid Assumption, concerning the dying of
the wicked in the persons of their posterity, is delivered in the 15. verse:
where it is avouched that the posterity of the wicked shall lie in the grave
and be devoured by death. But before he proceed to a particular declaration of
this point, he brandeth their posterity in the 14. verse with a note of
extreme madness: in that discerning the folly and vanity of their ancesters
proceedings, they do notwithstanding approve and follow them. Hereupon in the
15. verse the Prophet infers that it succedeth with them as with their
predecessors. For death seazeth upon them and consumes them. The truth of this
third branch the Prophet makes evident.

1. By a Similitude, thus, verse. 15. in the beginning. As death seazeth upon
cattle and consumes them to naught: So death seazeth upon the posterity of
the wicked, and consumes the^ in the grave to dust.
2. By a comparison from the greater, thus: Hell shall seize upon them and
eternally torment their persons raised from out the grave: that is, in the day
of judgment, verse. 15. in the end. No marvel then if corporal death seize
on them, and consume them in their graves, v. 15 in the beginning.

The first part of this comparison from the greater, is amplified by a
Dissimilitude, wherein the condition of misery prepared and reserved for the
wicked in that day of the general resurrection, is set forth unto us by
notifying the different estate ordained for the righteous in the said day. The
Dissimilitude is this: The righteous shall in that day of the general
resurrection eternally reign in heaven over the wicked, verse. 15. in the
midst. Where the said day is called the Morning. But hell shall eternally
torment the wicked at the same day, verse. 15. in the end.


To the former sentence of the said Dissimilitude there is yielded this proof:
Undoubtedly I the Prophet shall in the last day by the mighty power of the
Lord, both rise and be received into heaven to reign in glory over the
wicked, verse. 16. Therefore all other righteous men likewise shall in that day
both rise and reign in glory over the wicked. For what appertains unto the
Prophet in regard of his faith in the Messiah, whereby he is righteous: the
same belongs to each other man that has the same faith, whereby he is
justified.


The Prophet having hitherto from the beginning of verse. 6, to the end of the
17. demonstrated the maine position of this Psalm by propounding and debating
an instance taken from his own person: he does now in the 18. verse proceed
to a further illustration of the said positio^, by drawing into consideration
the wretched condition whereto the wicked are subject at their death. He
reasons upon this ground after this sort: If the wicked shall at their death
rest naked and stripped of all their wealth and glory, and so be in a most
miserable case: the godly ought not to fear them though they abound and glory
in their wealth. But the wicked shall at their death rest naked and stripped of
all their wealth and glory, and so be in a most miserable case, verse. 18.
Therefore the godly man ought not to fear them though they abound and glory in
their wealth, verse. 17.


The Assumption is amplified, 1. By an argument of Diversity, thus: Though
they live an happy life in the world, both in their own flattering conceit,
and in the opinion of others who do applaud them, verse. 19. Thus does this
verse (according to the French) cohere with the 18: and is thus expounded by
Calvin and Marlo. It is said, that the wicked blesses his soul in his life:
that is, he flattereth himself with a conceit that he enjoys an happy life
in following his pleasures and commodities: yet shall they at their death rest
naked and stripped of all their wealth and glory, and so be in a most wretched
case, verse. 18.
2. By a comparison from the greater, thus: After this life, though never so
long, they shall be excluded from eternal life, verse. 20. So I expound this
verse according to Tremell. No marvel then if at their death they rest naked
and stripped of their wealth and glory, verse. 18.



The first part of the said comparison, which concerns the exclusion of the
wicked from eternal life, is cleared by a Similitude: wherein, touching this
point of vncapablenes of eternal glory, they are resembled unto brute beasts.
The said Similitude distinguished into her parts, is this: As the brute beasts
die and rest incapable of eternal life, verse. 21. So shall the wicked die and
rest incapable of eternal life, verse. 20.21. Whereas in this 21. verse it is
said: A man in honor having no understanding: we must take it for a
description only of the wicked, which have bin spoken of throughout this
Psalm. But withal it contains the cause that makes the wicked incapable of
eternal life: which is the want of the knowledge and fear of God: which being
in the wealthy and honorable wicked, is a bar betwixt heaven and them.


PSALM. 50.
A Psalm delivered to Asaph. The mighty God, the God Iehoua has spoken and
called the earth from the rising up of the Sun, to the going down thereof.

2 Out of Sion a place of most perfect beauty God shines.

3 Our God will come and will not keep silence. There shall be a devouring
fire before him, and a mighty tempest round about him.

4 He calls upon the heavens above, and on the earth, that he may deliver
unto his people what is law, saying:

5 Gather unto me those who are my well-beloved, who have made a covenant with me
by sacrifice:

6 When the heavens declared his righteousness, and God to be a sovereign Judge.

7 Hear O my people (says he) and I will speak: hear O Israel, and I will
contest with thee: I am God, even thy God.

8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings, though
they were not continually before me.

9 I will take no bullock out of thine house, nor goats out of thy foldes.

10 For all beasts of the forest are mine, and the beasts on a thousand
mountains.

11 I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field
are mine.

12 If I should be hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and
all that therein is.

13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

14 Offer unto God praise: and pay thy vows unto the most high:

15 And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, that thou
may glorify me.

16 But unto the wicked, says God: What have thou to do to declare mine
ordinances, and to take my covenant in thy mouth?

17 Seeing thou hate correction, and have cast my words behind thee.

18 When thou see a thief, thou runnest with him: and thou art partaker with
the adulterers.

19 Thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit.

20 Thou sit and speak against thy brother: and slanderest thy mothers
son.

21 Thou did these things: and because I held my tongue, thou thoughtest
that I was like thee. But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thine eyes.

22 Consider now this, ye that forget God: least I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you.

23 He that offers praise, does glorify me: and who composeth his way, him
will I cause to enjoy the salvation of God.

ANALYS. PSALM. 50.
The Prophet in this Psalm represents unto us the Lord our God in the
quality of a Judge sitting in his throne of Majesty, and assisted with a most
solemn assembly and presence of all creatures in heaven and earth: before whom
as witnesses of his upright and equal proceeding, he disputes and
determines a cause in controversy betwixt himself and his people of Israel.
The controversy is this: What that is, wherein the true worship of the Lord
consists: whether it be the ceremonial action of sacrificing, or the
spiritual conformity of the heart to the Lords will.


That we may the better conceive what is delivered in this Psalm, we are to
consider that there be two parts thereof: The one, a preface: from the
beginning of the first verse, to the end of the seventh. The other, the Lords
contestation with his people about the said controversy: from the beginning of
the 8. verse, to the end of the 23.


Touching the preface: the scope thereof is to show, that there is just cause
why the Israelites ought with all attention and reverence to hear the Lord,
while he debateth this question of his worship with them. To induce them to
this duty of all careful and respective hearing, there are exhibited in the
said preface two arguments: 1. The first is, a description made by the Prophet
of the Majesty, wherewith the Lords coming into his most royal Court to
define of the said controversy, is accompanied verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6. 2. The
second is, a motive propounded, ver. 7. by the Lord himself, taken from the
consideration of the singular mercy showed by him unto the Israelites.


The Majesty of the Lords coming into his judicial Court for the purpose
mentioned, is by the Prophet set forth unto us by sundry particulars, namely:
1. By a summarie report of his nature, verse. 1. Where he, who comes as Judge
in this cause, is said to be, The mighty God, the God Iehoua: and therefore of
infinite Majesty. 2. By his action of summoning the solemn assembly that is
to be present at this judgment, ver. 1. Where by these words, The Lord has
spoken and called the earth, the Prophet implies that the Lord himself does as
it were in person solemnly summon the said assembly. 3. By noting the
greatness of this assembly, verse. 1. and 4. Where it appears that all
creatures on earth and in heaven also are summoned to furnish this solemn
presence: that they might be witnesses of the Lords proceeding with his people.
4. By the magnificencie of the place, where the Lord is to sit as Judge, and to
shine in his glory. This place is Sion, verse. 2. Where it is said: That out of
Sion God shines: that is, Sion is the place, out of which he speaks, and
where he shows himself for the sentencing of the cause in question. That
Sion is a place of magnificencie, it appears by this, in that it is called, a
place of most perfect beauty: that is, a place which had the word and
ordinances of the Lord, in which the beauty of his holiness, power, wisdom,
mercy and justice was discerned and beheld. 5. By the end of his coming as
Judge in this cause, verse. 3. and 4. In the third verse it is said, The Lord
will come and not be silent: that is, will reprove his people, and deliver unto
them (as it is said ver. 4.) what is law in the cause controuersed. 6. By the
glory of his power, verse. 3. Where, by these words (there shall be a devouring
fire before him and a mighty tempest) is expressed the mighty power of the
Lord, whereby he is able to revenge himself upon the contempt of his Majesty,
and to frustrate all opposition against him. 7. By imparting with us the
formal course, which the Lord holds in citing the parties, namely, the
Israelites, with whom he is to deal in this controversy. The course he takes
for citing the said parties, does consist: 1. In the summons made by himself
of the apparitors, whom he is to employ in this proper service of citing the
said parties. The apparitors employed in this service, are the creatures in
heaven and earth, verse. 4. 2. In the charge and commission given by the Lord to
the said apparitors for the service they are to perform, verse. 5. Where their
commission and charge is noted to be this, namely: to cite and draw together
his people to an appearance before him. And least the said apparitors should
fail in the performance of their charge by mistaking and citing one people for
another: the Lord does describe unto them, verse. 5. the people that are to be
cited. The description is this: 1. They are such, whom the Lord has honored
with the title of his well-beloved, verse. 5. 2. They are such, as made a covenant
with the Lord, and confirmed it by interposing and offering of sacrifice, verse.
5. Now these actions of making and confirming the said covenant, are verse. 6.
declared and distinguished by noting the time when they were performed: which
was forthwith upon the publication of the law: When the heavens did yield unto
the Lord this testimony, that he was a righteous God and the sovereign Judge
of the world, verse. 6.




Thus you see the Description made by the Prophet of the Majesty of the Lords
coming to sit in judgment upon the cause in controversy betwixt him and his
people. And this is the first argument whereby to raise up in the Israelites
all attentive and reverent hearing of the Lord.

The second argument for this end and purpose, is a motive propounded by the
Lord himself, and concluded thus: I who speak unto thee (O Israel) am be, who
has couenanted with thee to be a God of infinite mercy and favor unto thee,
verse. 7. in the end. Where it is said: I am God, even thy God. Which words do
import, that the Lord has couenanted with his people to bestow upon them the
blessings of this and the future life. Therefore thou ought in duty to
hear me with all attention and reverence, while I contest with thee and decide
the cause in question betwixt us, ver. 7. in the beginning.


Hitherto of the preface of this Psalm. There follows now to be considered,
The Lords contestation with the Israelites about this question of his worship.
Of the Lords contestation in this behalf there be two parts: The one, a
refutation of their colorable pretenses and allegations. From the beginning of
the 8. verse to the end of the 13: and then from the beginning of the 16. verse
to the end of the 21. The other, a pronouncing of sentence upon the cause in
controversy: first interlocutorily, verse. 14. and 15: and then definitiuely,
verse. 23.


Touching the refutation made by the Lord of their colorable pretenses and
allegations in this question of his worship by sacrifices: to the end we may
the better discern and judge how the Lord manageth the same: we must unfold
and lay to open view the said allegations and pretenses: they being not here
expressed, but implied and left to our collection by the answer that is made
unto them. The first pretense on the part of the Israelites for the justifying
of the worship they perform unto the Lord in offering of sacrifices, is this:
If the worship we tender unto thee in offering our sacrifices be hypocritical
and worthy of censure: thou will not reprove our failing to offer them as
often as is in thy law prescribed. For the omission of a sinful act is not
reprouable. But thou will reprove our failing to offer sacrifices as often as
is in thy law prescribed. Therefore the worship we tender unto thee in offering
our sacrifices, is not hypocritical and worthy of censure.


The Lords answer hereto is delivered in the 8. verse: where by way of
contradiction he does publicly protest against the Assumption of this their
first pretense, in this sort: I will not (says the Lord) reprove thee for thy
sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings, though they were not continually before me:
that is, as often as is prescribed, verse. 8.


This his protestation against the Assumption of the Israelites first pretense,
the Lord by force of argument does make good and justify after this manner: If
I should reprove thy failing in this behalf, it might seem I had need to
demand and take sacrifices at thy hands. But I have no need to demand and
take sacrifices at thy hands, verse. 9. That of this ninth verse the sense is
such as I have set down, may appear by the proof thereof added in the two
verses immediately following. Therefore I will not reprove thy failing in this
behalf, verse. 8.


The Assumption contained in this answer made by the Lord, is cleared by him:
1. First by this conclusion: Who is the Lord and owner of each sacrificeable
creature in the world, he needs not to demand and take sacrifices at thy
hands. But I Iehoua am the Lord and owner of each sacrificeable creature in the
world, verse. 10.11. Therefore I need not to demand and take sacrifices at thy
hands, verse. 9.
2. Secondly, by preventing and refelling an exception that may be taken by the
Israelites to the said Assumption. For whereas the Lord professes, that he
has no need to demand and take sacrifices at their hands, they may reply upon
him, thus: Thou desire sacrifices, and take contentment in them. Therefore
it is probable that thou would be supplied with them at our hands.



The Lord in answer to this exception and reply of theirs, 1. First, shows
the inconsequence presented by the Israelites in the said reply. 2. Secondly,
he does utterly disclaim the antecedent part of the said reply.


Touching the inconseque^ce: the Lord discovers and lays open the same by
an argument of Diversity, propounded in the beginning of the 12. verse, thus:
If I desired sacrifices and took contentment in them: yet should I not need to
demand and take a supply of them at thy hands, v. 12. Where by the word,
hungring, is signified the affection of desiring sacrifices: and by saying, I
would not tell thee, is implied a resolution on the Lords part not to demand
any sacrifices of them. So as he makes the Israelites see hereby, that
howsoever he should desire sacrifices, yet it follows not that he would
demand any at their hands. But now to make this evident, that the Lord, though
he desired sacrifices, yet need not to demand them of the Israelites: he
adds and repeateth verse. 12, the reason which was before mentioned in the 10.
and 11. verse. The reason is this: The sovereign Lord of the earth and
absolute commander of all the creatures therein, need not take a supply of
sacrifices at thy hands, though he desired them. But I am the sovereign Lord
of the earth, and absolute commander of all the creatures therein, verse. 12. in
the end. Therefore I need not take a supply of sacrifices from thee, though I
desired them, ver. 12. in the beginning.

Touching the Lords disclaiming the Antecedent part of the said reply: he
performs it in the 13. verse under this interrogatorie form of speech,
delivered with a show of disdain and detestation: Will I (says he) eat the
flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? In which words, the Lord styleth
and calls his supposed desire of sacrifices and taking contentment in them,
by the name of eating bullocks flesh, and drinking of goats blood: showing
hereby, that he does no less abhor the desire of sacrifices and taking
delight in them, than he does the eating of bullocks flesh, and drinking the
blood of goats. And thus he peremptorily denies and renounceth the antecedent
part of the said reply and exception made by the Israelites, as a most
profane and gross conceit of him.
The Lord having from the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of the 13
refuted some part of the Israelits allegations in defense of their sacrificing:
he does in the 14. and 15. verse. deliver and pronounce his interlocutorie
sentence: showing what that is, wherein his true worship consists: which in
general is The Spiritual conformity of our heart and life to the Lords will.
The parts thereof here specified are these: 1. An acknowledgement of the Lords
blessings, made 1. By tendering praise unto him, verse. 14. in the beginning. 2.
By performance of vows, verse. 14. in the end.
2. A calling upon the Lord in the day of trouble, verse. 15. Now to this
particular duty of invocation, the Lord persuades us by his sweet and
gracious promise of help and deliverance, concluded thus: If by calling on me
thou shall receive deliverance from thy trouble: then fail not to call upon
me. But by calling on me thou shall receive at my hands deliverance from thy
trouble, verse. 15. in the midst. Therefore fail not to call upon me, verse.
15. in the beginning.



The Assumption, which contains the Lords comfortable promise of deliverance,
has an illustration by noting the end of this deliverance: which is this: That
the person delivered may (to testify his grateful acknowledgement of so great
a blessing) praise and magnify the power, wisdom, mercy and fidelity of
the Lord showed in his deliverance. This is it which is meant by that action of
glorifying the Lord, verse. 15. in the end.


The interlocutorie sentence being thus pronounced: the Israelites
notwithstanding, as if they rested yet unsatisfied in the question of the Lords
worship; reply again upon the Lord in the behalf of their sacrificing, thus:
Who allows our profession of obedience and piety, must needs allow our
sacrifices whereby the said profession is made. But thou can not but allow
our profession of obedience and piety. Therefore thou must needs allow our
sacrifices whereby the said profession is made.


In answer hereto, the Lord disavoweth the Assumption of this reply and
rejects it as absolutely untrue, protesting unto the hypocritical Isralites,
v. 16: That their profession of piety and obedience is very odious in his
sight. And this I take to be the true meaning of the expostulation delivered in
the said 16. verse: where the Lord does by way of detestation reprove the
Israelites, in that they being of a profane and impious heart, do
notwithstanding in words and in the outward obseruances of sacrificing pretend
great piety: speaking with such respect and reverence of the Lords word and
covenant, as if their hearts were free from all thought of impiety, and their
actions of sacrificing conformable to the law of the Lord. Now why their
profession of piety and obedience should be odious in his sight, the Lord
renders this reason: Who carries himself wickedly in the train of his life,
his profession of piety is odious in my sight. But thou, O Israel, carriest
thy self wickedly in the train of thy life, verse. 21. Where it is said: Thou
did these things: that is, thou have employed thy self in these wicked
actions. Therefore thou art he whose profession of piety is odious in my
sight. verse. 16.


The Assumption is cleared by the Lord, by laying forth in particularity sundry
wicked actions committed by this hypocritical crew of Israelites: Thou can
not (says the Lord) endure reproof: and thou contemnest mine holy word, verse.
17: Thou do consort with thieves and adulterers, partaking in their sins,
verse. 18: Thy speech is wicked and deceitful, verse. 19: Thou do not spare
to slander even thine own brother, verse. 20: Thou imaginest me the eternal
Lord to patronize and allow this thy wickedness, verse. 21. in the midst.
Therefore thou carriest thy self wickedly in the train of thy life, verse. 21.
in the beginning.


The last particular sin, wherewith in the antecedent part of this reason, the
Lord charge the said hypocritical crew, being set down in the midst of the
21. verse, is there amplified, 1. By noting the cause of that impious
imagination in the wicked. Now the cause which moves the wicked man to imagine
that the Lord favors and allows his wickedness, is the Lords long patience
and delay of punishment, verse. 21. in these words: Because I held my tongue:
that is, because I spared thee a long time and forbear to punish thee:
therefore thou thoughtest that I was like thee: that is, concurring with thee
in the approbation of thy wickedness. 2. By setting down the event and issue,
which the said imagination and this abuse on the part of the wicked of the
Lords long sufferance, draws with it. The said event and issue is this:
namely, The Lords proceeding in his good time to a real punishment of their
wickedness. This action the Lord expresses by threatening unto the wicked such a
reproof and visible detection of their sins, such a representation and
ranking of them before their eyes, as they shall be forced to acknowledge them
without replying ought in their defense. This is then performed, when the Lord
does actually execute his justice on the wicked.


Hitherto from the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of the 21. (the 14.
verse and 15. only excepted, where the said interlocutorie sentence is
recorded) has the Lord delivered his refutation of such colorable pretenses
and allegations, as the Israelites used in defense of the worship they
performed in offering sacrifices.

There follows now the Lords proceeding to definitive sentence. But before
the pronouncing thereof, he addresseth unto the Israelites an exhortation to
observe and consider seriously both what has been already delivered, and what
the determination is he makes of this question touching his worship. The said
exhortation is enforced by the Lord, thus: You shall perish, in case the
carriage of the worship you are to present unto me be disagreeable to the
sentence pronounced thereon by me, ver. 22. in the end: where their perishing
is expressed under these terms: Least I tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver you. Therefore observe and consider seriously the determination I
make of this question touching my worship, verse. 22. in the beginning.


This exhortation being premised: the Definitive sentence follows in the 23.
verse, in these words: He that offers praise, does glorify me: and who
composeth his way, him will I cause to enjoy the salvation of God. verse. 23.


This definitive sentence comprizeth a declaration of the particular, wherein
the true worship of the Lord consists. To the end therefore that none might
pretend ignorance in this question of the said worship: the Lord does here as
clearly distinguish and define wherein the said worship stands, as if he
should pronounce and deliver his definitive sentence under this formal
conclusion: Whereby the Lord is truly worshipped, and whereto he promises
eternal happiness, in that the true worship of the Lord consists. But by the
sacrifice of praise the Lord is truly worshipped, and to the conformity of our
heart and life unto his will eternal happiness is promised, verse. 23. Therefore
in the sacrifice of praise, and in the conformity of our heart and life unto
his will, the true worship of the Lord consists. This is it, whereto the Lord
aims in his whole dispute with the Israelites in this Psalm.


Whereas in the definitive sentence it is avouched and notified, that the Lord
is truly honored by the offer and sacrifice of praise: we are under the name
of this one part of the Lords worship, to conceive as meant, each other part
and duty of spiritual obedience unto God, whereby we do him this honor, as to
confess and acknowledge to the glory of his name that he is the God, by whom
all things in heaven and earth are disposed and ordered in wisdom, power,
mercy and justice: and that in regard thereof we owe unto him all reverent
acknowledgement and service whatsoever.

PSALM. 51.
1 TO the Master of the Quier, a Psalm of David:

2 When the Prophet Nathan had been with him, after his entrance into
Bathshebah.

3 Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to
the greatness of thy compassions, blot out mine iniquities.

4 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

5 For I acknowledge mine iniquities: and my sin is always before me.

6 Against thee, against thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight:
that thou may be known to be just in thy speaking, and pure when thou
iudgest.

7 Behold, I was formed in iniquity: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

8 Behold, thou love truth in the inward affections: and thou have taught me
wisdom in the secret of mine heart.

9 Purge me with hyssope and I shall be clean: wash me and I shall be whiter
than snow.

10 Make me to hear joy and gladness: that the bones, which thou have broken,
may rejoice.

11 Hide thy face from my sins, and raze out all mine iniquities.

12 Create in me a clean heart, O God: and renew a constant spirit within me.

13 Cast me not away from thy face: and take not thine holy spirit from me:

14 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: and support me with thy free
spirit.

15 I will teach thy ways unto the wicked, that sinners may be converted unto
thee.

16 Deliver me from blood O God, the God of my salvation: and my tongue shall
sing joyfully thy righteousness.

17 Thou shall open my lips O Lord: and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

18 For thou delightest not in sacrifice: otherwise would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering.

19 The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and broken heart, O
God, thou despisest not.

20 Be favorable unto Sion according to thy good will: build the walls of
Jerusalem.

21 Then shall thou take pleasure in the sacrifices of righteousness, the burnt
offering and oblation: then shall they offer calves upon thine altar.

ANALYS. PSALM. 51.
The inscription of this Psalm does particularly advertise us, 1. Of the
author thereof, namely, David: and of the person, unto whose charge it was
committed to order the singing of the same, verse. 1. 2. Of the time when the
said Psalm was indicted. occasion whereupon the said Psalm was indicted.



The time of inditing the said Psalm, was shortly after the Lord had addressed
the Prophet Nathan unto David, to reprove and convince him of his adultery
with Bathshebah, and of his murder in the person of Vriah.

The occasion of inditing it, was the reproof and conviction performed by the
said Prophet. For David being drawn thereby to a serious consideration of the
said sins: to the end he might leave to the Church of God a testimony of his
repentance, and a direction both to Prince and subject how to demean
themselves in the case of any their transgressions against the Lord: thought
meet to indite and divulge this most worthy Psalm.

Now in the said Psalm the Prophet David tendereth unto the Lord his humble
suit: 1. For himself. From the beginning of the 3. verse to the end of the 19.
2. For the Church and commonwealth of Israel, verse 20.21.


The suit he makes for himself, is partly 1. For pardon of his sins, verse.
3.4.9.11.16. 2. For restitution to his former estate Of inward grace and
sanctification, v. 12. Of outward favors and prerogatives, v. 13.14



These several suits he makes for himself, he tendreth first singly, and
soliciteth each of them in a peculiar sort: then he propounds them jointly,
and pleads in common for the grant of them all, verse. 15.16.17.18.19.

The request he makes for pardon of his sins, is expressed in these
different forms of speech: 1. Be merciful unto me in blotting out mine
iniquities, as it were out of the book of debt and account, wherein thou have
recorded them, verse. 3. 2. Wash and cleanse me from my sin, verse. 4. to note
that sin is merely pollution and filthiness. 3. Purge me from my sin with
hyssope, verse. 9. that is, by the blood of the Messiah: the sprinkling whereof
upon us for the purgation of our sins, was represented by the ceremonial
sprinkling of hyssope. 4. Hide thy face from my sin, verse. 11. 5. Deliver me
from blood, verse. 16. that is, from the guilt of my bloody sins, and from
the particular punishment due unto them.


Howsoever it has pleased the Prophet to deliver his suit for the remission of
his iniquities, in this variety of phrase: we must know that he does in each
of them comprehend this sense: Be merciful unto me for the pardon of my
sins, verse. 3.4.9.11.16.


Let us now see how he pleads with the Lord for the grant of this pardon.
To persuade the Lord hereto, he uses sundry arguments. The first whereof is
this: Arg. 1
Thou art O Lord of a nature gracious, and abounding in compassion, verse. 3. in
the midst. Therefore accordingly thereto be merciful unto me for the pardon
of my sins, verse. 3. in the beginning and end.


Having remembered unto the Lord the exceeding goodness and gratiousnesse of his
nature, with request that the Lord would answerably thereto proceed with him:
now least some exception might be taken against him for impenitencie and
disacknowledgement of his offense: the Prophet does acquaint the Lord how he
demeaneth himself in this behalf: namely, that he does with grief of heart
humbly confess and acknowledge his iniquities. Which confession he makes as
having a special eye and regard to the Lords promise of mercy in the case of
our return unto him by unfeigned confession and humiliation. Out of this
argument he pleads thus with the Lord for remission of his sins: Arg. 2.
Who with a sensible feeling and grief for his sins does humbly confess and
acknowledge them: unto him (O Lord) it may please thee to be merciful in the
pardon of his sins. This is the Lords promise in effect. But I with a sensible
feeling and grief for my sins, do humbly confess and acknowledge them, verse.
5.6. Therefore it may please thee to be merciful unto me in the pardon of
them, verse. 3.4.


The Assumption is by the Prophet amplified diversely: 1. By noting the end of
this his confession: which is, that it may thereby appear how justly the Lord
has proceeded with David, both in reproouing him for his sin by the Prophet
Nathan, and in punishing him by the death of his child, verse. 6. in the later
part: where it is said: That thou may be known to be just in thy speaking,
that is, in thy reproof of me made by Nathan: and pure when thou iudgest: that
is, found upright in thy proceeding with me, when thou did punish me in the
person of my child. 2. By setting down the very root and spring of the
sins confessed by him: namely, the original corruption of his nature:
whereof he confesses himself guilty, even then when he was formed and
cherished in the womb of his mother, verse. 7. 3. By declaring the form and
manner of committing the sins confessed: which was wittingly and with
knowledge, verse. 8. Where the Prophet to aggrauate his sin, acknowledges,
That the Lord not only requires at his hands an upright carriage of life, as
things which he loves and delights in (which is expressed by saying, that
the Lord loves truth in the inward affections, that is, he loves and
requires the integrity of the heart, and a carriage answerable thereto.) But
had also acquainted him with the knowledge of that which he loves and
requires. For the wisdom which the Lord taught him in the secret of his
heart, was the knowledge hereof: namely, that the Lord required at his hands a
forbearance of all sinful actions, and particularly of murder and adultery:
as also a performance of such holy duties as are commanded in the law. Now
the Prophets confession of his knowledge in this behalf, does necessarily
implie a like confession of committing wittingly and wilfully the sins, for
the pardon whereof he is an humble suter.



David having added to the acknowledgement of his sins in general, a
partticular confession of the end, for which he acknowledges them: of the
root and fountain, from whence they issued: of the form and manner also of
committing them: does further in all humblenes enforce his suit for the
remission of the same, thus: Arg. 3.
If by thy remitting of my sins I shall subsist before thee in a condition
and estate of righteousness: I pray thee let me find favor at thy hands for
the remission of them. But by thy remitting of my sins I shall subsist before
thee in a condition and estate of righteousness, verse. 9. Where in saying, that
being purged and washed from his sin, he shall be clean and whiter than
snow: he notes the estate and condition that succeeds and follows the
remove and pardon of our unrighteousness. And this estate in the account of the
Lord, who unto the true believer imputes no sin, but holds him for righteous
in Christ, is an estate of righteousness. Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me
find favor at thy hands for the remission of them, verse. 3.4.9.


To the Assumption there is yielded this declaration: 1. From the efficient
cause both of the pardon desired, and of the righteousness ensuing thereupon:
which is the sprinkling of the blood of the Messiah, figured by the ceremonial
sprinkling of hyssope, verse. 9. in the beginning. 2. From a double comparison:
for in the said 9. verse: First, he compares the righteousness spoken of, to
the purity and beauty that follows upon purging and clensing. The
comparison being in her parts laid forth, is this: As he that is purged and
washed becomes clean and fair: So I the Prophet being purged from my sin,
shall become righteous.
Secondly, he compares the said righteousness to the whitenes of snow, verse. 9.
in the end: where he makes the degree of perfection in the said
righteousness to exceed the perfection of whitenes in snow. The comparison is
this: The perfection of whitenes in snow is in a very high degree: But the
perfection of the righteousness, which will befall unto me upon the remove of
my sin from me, will be in an higher degree and measure.




The Prophet being exceedingly afflicted as well with grief in that he had
displeased the Lord, as with the consideration of the judgments denounced by
Nathan against his sins: and being desirous to be relieved in this behalf
out of some special knowledge and assurance in his heart, that the Lord is
reconciled unto him: does by way of amplifying the suit for remission of his
sins, accompany the same in the 10. verse with interposing this request: That
the Lord would be pleased not only to be reconciled unto him, but assure him
likewise hereof, verse. 10.


This motion for some assurance in his heart, that the Lord has remitted his
iniquities, is propounded and delivered in these terms: Make me to hear joy
and gladness. As by hearing, he means such a knowledge as may assure him: so
by joy and gladness, he understands the pardon and reconcilement it self,
whereof he is desirous to be assured. This reconcilement he calls by the
name of joy and gladness, to note the comfortable effect, which it works in
the heart of an humbled and penitent sinner.

Now this motion for assurance in his heart of pardon and reconcilement on the
Lords part, he enlarges and urges in the 10. verse by a consideration taken
from this particular end thereof: namely, That as he has been dejected and
broken both with grief for his sin, and with fear of the judgments
denounced against him: So he may upon assurance in his heart of the Lords
reconcilement with him, take special joy and comfort in his ancient love and
favor toward him, verse. 10. Where the Prophet resembles the breaking of his
heart with grief, to the breaking of his bones by any force and violence.


Hitherto from the beginning of the 3 verse to the end of the 11, the Prophet
has by sundry reasons mediated with the Lord the pardon of his sins. Now
follows the humble motion he makes for restitution unto his former estate:
1. Of inward grace and sanctification. 2. Of outward favors and prerogatives.


For restitution unto his former estate of sanctification, he delivers his
motion under these terms: Create in me a clean heart O God: and renew within
me a constant spirit, verse. 12.


The thing requested in this motion, is a reviving of his former holy desire
and care to serve the Lord ever after in obedience of heart and life. This
reviving of the said desire and care he calls the creating of a clean heart
in the first part of the verse: and the renewing of a constant spirit in the
latter part thereof. David had upon his fall so little sense and feeling of the
grace of sanctification, as that he speaks as if he had utterly lost it, and
so stood in need of a new infusion and creation thereof: whereas it was not
utterly extinguished, but exceedingly impaired and decayed only: as may
appear in that by way of interpretation he calls it in the latter patt of
the verse, a renouation and raising thereof to the same degree wherein it was
in former time.

This reviving of his former holy desire and care to serve the Lord, the
Prophet describes unto us: 1. By noting the principal efficient and author
thereof: who is God. 2. By declaring the subject, wherein it is: namely, the
heart. 3. By implying the form and manner of working it: which is, by a course
of purging and clensing the heart. 4. By showing, that he would have this grace
of renouation (which he calls a constant spirit) permanent and firm, not
subject to alteration. So as here withal is implied the end of the said
renouation: namely, That he may ever without defection honor God.


His petition to be restored unto his former estate of outward favors and
prerogatives, is contained verse 13. and 14. in these words: Cast me not away
from thy face: and take not thine holy spirit from me: but restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation, and support me with thy free spirit, verse. 13.14.


It seems that in presenting of this motion, the Prophet had a reference to
the Lords proceeding with Saul, who^ he cast off, and from whom he retired the
graces of his spirit. And therefore by these words ( thy face, thy holy spirit,
the joy of thy salvation) I take to be meant the outward testimonies and
prerogatives of the Lords kind and favorable proceeding with David, in which
he was wont to rejoice: namely, 1. The place of the Lords worship, whereto he
resorted. 2. The continuance of the Scepter in his person and the line of his
posterity. 3. His ability to manage the duties of his calling in the said
Scepter. 4. The love and obedience of his subjects toward him. 5. Good
success in the courses held by him. 6. The Lords protection of him.


These graces and favors are the Lords face, the Lords spirit, the joy of the
Lords salvation: which the Prophet by desert on his part, and by the rule of
justice on the Lords part, had forfeited and lost: howsoever in act and by the
Lords most gracious sufferance, he enjoyed them as yet. And therefore
discerning in his heart of the forfeiture he had made in this behalf, prays
the Lord in the thirteenth verse: That neither himself may be removed from
them, nor they withdrawn from him: But that the Lord would be pleased (as he
prays, verse. 14.) to restore and confirm unto him his former title and
interest in them: and so by the power of his spirit support him in the
comfortable and free enioyance of the said prerogatives.

Hereby we plainly discern what is the subject of the Prophets petition in
this place: namely, That whereas in desert on his part, and by the law of
justice on the part of the Lord, he had forfeited the said favors and
prerogatives: The Lord notwithstanding would be pleased to reconfirme unto him
his former title and interest in them, and support him in the enioyance of the
same, verse. 14.


This suit he handles and amplifieth: 1. By an argument of Diversity, thus:
Remove me not from the said favors and prerogatives, nor retire them from me,
verse. 13. But reconfirme unto me my former interest in them, and support me in
the enioyance of them, verse. 14.
2. By noting the efficient cause, whereby this reconfirmation and support is
to be performed: namely, the free, cheerful, and comfortable spirit of the
Lord: which does infranchise us into the state of the Lords children, and does
intertaine us therein.


The Prophet having singly and in several made tender unto the Lord of his
humble suit, first for pardon of his sin: and then, that he may be restored and
reinuested into his former estate as well of inward grace and sanctification, as
of outward favors and prerogatives: he does now jointly and in common plead
for grant of the whole suit he makes for himself in this Psalm. His suit
for himself considered jointly in all the parts thereof, is now this: That the
Lord would be pleased to grant him both pardon of his sin, and restitution
also into his former estate as well of inward grace as outward favors, verse. 16.


This joint suit for these three particulars I take to be specially meant and
delivered in the 16. verse. For whereas he says: Deliver me O God from blood:
his suit may well be interpreted to be this; That the Lord would not only
remit unto him his sin: but remit likewise this particular punishment due
unto his sin: namely, the forfeiture he has made as well of the measure he
had of inward grace, as of the outward prerogatives above remembered.

To persuade the Lord to yield him contentment herein; the Prophet acquaints
him with a double resolution he has in his heart, whereby to glorify him. For
upon grant of this whole suit, he professes: 1. That he will further the
instruction and conversion of others unto the Lord, verse. 15. 2. That he will
publish and magnify the Lords fidelity in keeping promise with his children,
verse. 16.17.


The first duty which he professes to perform for glorifying the Lord, is
concluded thus: If upon obtaining mercy at thy hands for pardon of my sin,
and for restitution into my said former estate, I shall be drawn to glorify
thee by furthering the instruction and conversion of others unto thee: it may
please thee (O Lord) to grant unto me the pardon and restitution desired by
me. But upon obtaining mercy at thy hands for pardon of my sin, and for
restitution into my said former estate, I shall and will glorify thee by
furthering the instruction and conversion of others unto thee, v. 15. Where the
conversion of others to the profession of the Lords name is set down as an
end: and the instruction of others as a special mean whereby to attain unto
the said end. Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to grant unto me the pardon
and restitution desired by me, verse. 16.


The second duty he professes to perform, and by performance whereof he would
move the Lord to a compassionate regard of his suit, has this conclusion: In
case thou show mercy unto me for the pardon of my sin, and for restitution
into my said former estate: thou shall thereby open my lips to publish and
magnify thy fidelity in keeping promise with thy children. verse. 16. and 17.
Wherefore (O Lord) it may please thee to show mercy unto me for the pardon of
my sin, and for restitution into my said former estate, verse. 16. in the
begin.


The Antecedent part of this reason, which contains a profession on the part
of the Prophet, of setting forth the praise of the Lords fidelity in keeping
promise with his children, is handled and enlarged thus: I will, in case thou
show unto me the mercy desired, offer unto thee either sacrifice or praise.
But I will not offer sacrifice unto thee, verse. 18. in the midst. Where he
says: Otherise would I give sacrifice unto thee: that is, Forasmuch as thou
delightest not in sacrifice, but do reject it, I will offer no sacrifice
unto thee. Therefore will I offer praise unto thee, verse. 16. and 17. In the
16. he affirms that his tongue shall sing the Lords righteousness and
fidelity in keeping promise. In the 17. he professes that he will open his
lips and set forth the Lords praise in this behalf.


The Assumption is cleared by this argument: Sacrifice is not pleasing unto
thee, verse. 18. in the beginning and end. Therefore I will not offer it, verse.
18. in the midst.


To the Antecedent of this reason there is yielded this evidence: That which in
thy service is pleasing unto thee, is accompanied with an humble and contrite
heart, ver. 19 Where this sentence is twice expressed: thereby to assure us
that a contrite heart is pleasing unto the Lord. And whereas it is called, The
sacrifices of God: it is to note the worthiness thereof, and the excellent
measure it has of pleasing God. But sacrifice is not accompanied with an
humble and contrite heart. This sentence is not here set down: but omitted as a
sin known and observed as well out of the practice in those days on the
part of the profane and hypocritical Israelites, as out of the public
reproof and reiection made by the Lord of the ordinary sacrifices presented
unto him, as being odious in his sight. Therefore sacrifice is not pleasing
unto thee, ver. 18.


Hitherto from the beginning of verse. 3. to the end of the 19, the Prophet has
been an humble and affectionate petitioner for himself. Now he becomes an
earnest suter unto the Lord for the Church and common wealth of Israel. The
effect of his suit is this: that whereas the heinousnes of his transgressions
had justly occasioned the Lord in justice to withdraw his favor from the
people under David's government: The Lord would be pleased, notwithstanding his
sins, to advance the public good of the Church and common wealth of Israel,
verse. 20. in the beginning and end.


Whether this public good desired by the Prophet under these forms of speech
( be favorable unto Sion: build the walls of Jerusalem) be the raising up and
furnishing of a settled place for the Lords worship, or a gracious protection of
the Church and common wealth, or a supplying of either of them with careful
officers, is not agreed upon. It shall be sufficient to know that the Prophet is
in general a suter that the state of the Church and common wealth may prosper
and flourish, through a supply made by the Lord of all needful blessings. To
induce the Lord hereto the Prophet alleges two arguments:

The first is this: Thou art of a nature gracious, and abounding in mercy
toward thy people, verse. 20. in the midst; and in these words: According to
thy good will: that is, Forasmuch as thou art in nature most graciously and
favorably disposed: therefore be gracious unto Sion. Wherefore (O Lord)
advance the public good of thy people both in the Church and commonwealth, v.
20. in the beginning and end. Where by Sion we may understand the Church, and
by Jerusalem the Commonwealth.


The second argument, whereby to persuade the Lord in this behalf, is drawn
from the consideration of the effect, which will ensue upon the Lords gracious
proceeding with the Church and common wealth. And it is indeed a profession
and vow on King David's part, to take order that the people under his
government shall present unto the Lord such worship and service, as shall be
pleasing and acceptable in his sight. His mediation with the Lord by force of
this argument is concluded thus: If upon thy advancing of the public good of
the Church and commonwealth, the honor and worship of thy name shall withal
be promoted: then it may please thee (O Lord) to advance the public good of
the Church and commonwealth. But upon thy advancing of the public good of the
Church and commonwealth, the honor and worship of thy name shall withal be
promoted, verse. 21. Where the said honor and worship is called by the name of
righteous sacrifices, burnt offerings, oblation, offering of calves. Now when
this honor and worship is such as the Lord is pleased and delighted therewith:
it is apparent that then the service and worship of his name is greatly
advanced. So as, where the Prophet says that the Lord shall then take pleasure
in sacrifices, accompanied with the vprightnes and integrity of the heart: his
purpose thereby is to notify unto us, that then the Lords worship and service
shall be much promoted. Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to advance the
public good of the Church and common wealth. v. 20.


PSALM. 73.
1 A Psalm of Asaph. Yet God is good to Israel: even to the pure in heart.

2 As for me: my feet were almost gone: my steps had well near slipped.

3 For I fretted at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

4 For there are no knots even unto their death: but they are lusty and strong.

5 They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they beaten with other men.

6 Therefore pride does compass them as a chain: and cruelty covers them
as a garment.

7 Their eyes stand out for fatnes. The thoughts of their heart do pass
throughout.

8 They are pernicious: and speak maliciously of oppressing: they speak as
from on high.

9 They set their mouth against heaven: and their tongue walks through the
earth.

10 Therefore his people come to this point, when waters of a full cup are
wrung out unto them:

11 That they say: How? does the mighty God know this? or is there knowledge
in the most high?

12 Behold these wicked men: how being at their ease in this world, they
increase in riches.

13 Certainly, in vain have I cleansed my heart and washed my hands in
innocence:

14 Since I am daily punished, and chastned every morning.

15 But if I say: I will thus speak thereof: behold, I shall be found
disloyal to the generation of thy children.

16 If I endeavored to know this: it seemed unto me a very hard thing:

17 Until I entered into the Sanctuary of the mighty God, and there
understood their end.

18 Surely, thou have set them in slipperie places: thou do cast them down
into desolation.

19 How suddenly are they destroyed, perished and consumed fearfully?

20 They are as a dream when one awaketh. O Lord, when thou awakest, thou
contemnest their image.

21 When my heart was vexed, and I tormented my self in my reins,

22 Then was I foolish: when I was ignorant, I was as a beast before thee.

23 Therefore will I be always with thee. Thou have held me by my right hand.

24 Thou will guide me by thy counsel, and after receive me into glory.

25 Whom have I in heaven but thee? and I delight in none on earth besides thee.

26 When my flesh and my heart fail, God is the strength of mine heart, and my
portion for ever.

27 For behold: they that withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish: thou
cuttest off all those that go a whoring from thee.

28 As for me: to draw near unto God, it is my happiness. I do put my trust in
the Lord, that I may declare all thy works.

ANALYS. PSALM. 73.
The Prophet does recount unto us in this Psalm the issue of a conflict and
dispute he had betwixt the Spirit and the flesh. The question disputed was
this: Whether God were good to Israel: that is (as it is verse. 1. expounded) to
such as out of a sanctified heart desire to honor him.


The issue of the said conflict and dispute, is a double conclusion inferred by
the Spirit: The one: that God is good to Israel, verse. 1. The other: a
profession of perpetual dependence on God in regard thereof, verse. 23. where
it is said: Therefore will I be always with thee: that is, I will in regard of
thy gracious proceeding with thy children, ever rest upon thee.


Touching the former conclusion: The Prophet does grace the very front of this
Psalm therewith: And afterward he sets down the reason and ground thereof.
But before he impart with us the ground of this first issue and conclusion; he
reports unto us: 1. The discourse of the flesh: from the beginning of the 2.
verse unto the 15. 2. The course held by him, whereby he was resolved touching
the point in question, verse. 15.16.17.


In the discourse made by the flesh, he delivers unto us these two effects
thereof: 1. That himself was almost drawn to hold the negative of the
question above mentioned. For showing verse. 2. that his feet had almost slipped,
he means that his heart had almost slipped into this profane conceit, that the
Lord was not good to Israel: which is the negative of the question. 2. That
many of the Lords children did actually hold the negative of the said question:
namely, That God was not good to Israel, verse. 10.


Concerning this point: That himself was almost drawn to hold the negative of
the said question, we are to consider: 1. How the Prophet expresses his ready
inclination thereto. 2. The ground and inducement of his holding the said
negative.


His ready inclination to apprehend, that the Lord is not good to Israel, he
expresses by certain borrowed forms of speech carrying a comparison, which
being unfolded and distinguished into his parts, will be this: Even as he who
treads on a slipperie place, hardly staieth his steps from slipping: So in
this question of the Lords kindness and regard to his children, my heart had
almost slipped into this impious apprehension, That he was not gracious and good
unto them, verse. 2.


The ground and inducement of holding this negative, That the Lord does not in
mercy regard his Israel, is this particular discourse entertained by the
flesh, and concluded thus: If the wicked always enjoy prosperity, and the
godly endure affliction: it may hereby appear that the Lord is not good unto
his children, howsoever they honor and serve him. But the wicked always enjoy
prosperity, and the godly endure affliction, verse. 3.4.5. As in each of these
verses the prosperity of the wicked is noted: so in the 5, together with the
prosperity of the wicked, there is set down the affliction of the godly: who
are there said to be in trouble and to be beaten: whereas the wicked are free
from this lot. Therefore it may hereby appear that the Lord is not good unto
his children, howsoever they honor and serve him. This conclusion is implied
in the second verse. For that conceit whereinto the Prophet had almost slipped,
which was, that God was not good unto Israel, is the conclusion made and
deduced by the flesh in this place.


The Assumption of this discourse, namely the former branch thereof which
concerns the prosperity of the wicked, is diversely amplified: 1. By noting
the effect, which the observation of the said prosperity wrought in the
Prophet. The effect was, the Prophets grieuing thereat, verse. 3. 2. By laying
forth the parts of the said prosperity, which are these: 1. The perpetual
tenor of health in the wicked to their last gasp, verse. 4. Where this part of
prosperity is represented unto us by a comparison included in this word, knots
or tyings. The comparison is this: As a web or thread drawn into length by the
weauer without knot or breach: so is their health carried unto the end of their
days without any interruption by diseases.
2. The vigor and strength of their body joined to their health, verse. 4. in
the end. 3. Their freedom from the discomforts and miseries, whereto the godly
are subject, ver. 5. Hereby is implied their enioyance of all other parts of
prosperity, viz. worldly peace, reputation amongst men, honors and offices,
plenty of wealth and delicacies.
3. By relating the effects, which the said prosperity has wrought in the
heart of the wicked: by particulating whereof there is presented unto us a
lively description of the wicked: 1. In general, by noting their excess in
pride and cruelty. 2. In special, by declaring the effects of their pride and
cruelty.



Their excess in pride and cruelty is recorded v. 6. and in the first part of
the 7. In these verses their excess in these two great sins is laid open
unto us by several comparisons: First, the greatness of their pride is noted by
comparing it to a chain of gold or precious stones, partly in the point of the
exceeding luster and glittering the chain has: and partly in regard of the
large reach and compassing that the chain is able to make. Secondly, the
greatness of their cruelty is noted, by comparing it to a goodly garment that
couers the whole body. Thirdly, the swelling of their heart with pride and
cruelty, is compared verse. 7. to a face swollen and puffed with fatnes.


By these comparisons the Prophet would make it appear that the pride and
cruelty of the wicked is in so great a measure, as that a man can discern
naught else in them but pride and cruelty.

The description of the wicked in special from the effects of their pride and
cruelty, is this: 1. In their thoughts and wishes they embrace and appropriate
to themselves the whole world, verse. 7. in the end. 2. They work ruin unto
others, verse. 8. in the beginning. 3. The subject of their speech is, how they
may maliciously plot the oppression of others, verse. 8. in the midst. 4. They
speak bigly and pontifically, as if they would terrify all men with their
thundering orations, verse. 8. in the end. 5. They disgorge blasphemies against
God, and contumelies against men, as if they would domineere over heaven and
earth, verse. 9.


Hitherto from the beginning of the 2. verse to the end of the 9, the Prophet
has showed that himself had almost slipped into this profane conceit of the
Lords disregard and neglect of his children, being led thereto by the discourse
entertained by the wisdom of the flesh.

He is now verse. 10. to advertise us of that other effect, which the discourse
of the flesh has wrought in many other the Lords children, who also are drawn
thereby to apprehend and hold, That the Lord is not gracious to Israel, but
has cast off all care and regard of such as sincerely worship him. For in the
10. and 11. verse it is said to this effect: The Lords people also are come to
this point (when they drink of the cup of affliction that is reached unto them)
that they say: The mighty God takes no knowledge or care how it succeeds
with men.


The ground of this apprehension in the Lords children, the Prophet sets
down to be this discourse of the flesh: which in effect is the same with the
discourse above remembered: If the Lord took notice and care how it succeeded
with us, the wicked who hate him should not enjoy prosperity, nor the godly
who love him lose their labor in serving him. But the wicked who hate him
enjoy prosperity, verse. 12: and the godly who love him lose their labor in
serving him, verse. 13. Therefore the Lord does not take notice or care how it
succeeds with us, verse. 11: where this conclusion is delivered by way of an
interrogation.


The latter part of the Assumption, which concerns the supposed loss of
labor in serving the Lord, is manifested thus: Whom the Lord does daily
afflict, they lose their labor in serving him. But the godly are daily
afflicted by the Lord, verse. 14. This is touched likewise in the end of the 10.
verse. Therefore the godly lose their labor in serving him. verse. 13.


The Prophet having from the beginning of the second verse to the 15, delivered
unto us ye discourse of the flesh, together with the effect wrought thereby
as well in himself as in sundry other the Lords children: does now verse
15.16.17. acquaint us with the course he held, whereby to resolve himself
touching the maine point in question, namely: Whether the Lord were good unto
his children.

The course held by the Spirit for resolution in the said maine question of
the Lords affection to his people, was the Prophets recourse unto the
Sanctuary: that is, to the Lords holy word laid up and reserved in the
Sanctuary, verse. 17: where he does apparently confess these two things: the
one, his entrance into the Sanctuary: the other, the information received
there how the Lord stood affected both to the wicked and to the godly: to the
wicked as a severe Judge: to the godly as a kind and gracious father, ever
regarding their good. Of this nature and reach must we conceive the said
information to be (as may appear by the verses going before and following)
howsoever it seem to concern the wicked only, in that they alone are
mentioned in the 17. verse.

Now this course of repairing unto the Sanctuary, there to be resolved in the
said question of the Lords affection to his people, had this discourse in the
heart of the Prophet for the ground thereof: I must judge of the Lords affection
to his people either by his outward proceedings with them, or by the light of
his word in the Sanctuary. But not by his outward proceedings with them, v.
15.16. Therefore by the light of his word in the Sanctuary, verse. 17. Upon
this discourse as upon a good warrant and ground, he repaireth unto the
Sanctuary for the purpose aforesaid.


In liew of the Assumption, the Prophet has in the 15. and 16. verse
substituted the proof thereof by two several arguments, whereby this course of
judging is disclaimed and found unworthy to be held, as well in regard of the
prejudice and wrong which would ensue thereupon to the Lords children, as in
respect of the lost labor therein or impossibility to attain thereby unto the
true and certain knowledge of the Lords affection toward his people. He
concludes thus: If to judge of the Lords affection to his people by his
outward proceedings with them would be both a wrong to the profession of his
children, and likewise a lost labor: I will forbear to judge of the Lords
affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them. But to judge of
the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them, would
be both a wrong to the profession of his children, and likewise a lost labor,
ver. 15. and 16. In the 15. verse he says, that in case he should thus speak
thereof: that is, thus interpret the Lords affection to his people by the
outward events of prosperity and adversity, he should betray the profession
of his children, by exposing it to disreputation and contempt. For if it be
once apprehended, that the Lord regards the wicked as well as the godly: who
will hold in any recommendation and account this profession of worshipping the
Lord? In the 16. verse affirming that it seemed unto him an hard thing to be
resolved in the said question: he means that the difficulty was such as all
endeavors to that purpose became vain and fruitless. Therefore will I
forbear to judge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward
proceedings with them.


Thus you see what the direction and course is which the Spirit held for
resolution in the said maine question of the Lords affection toward his
people: so as the dispute betwixt the Spirit and the flesh touching this
question, was drawn unto this issue and conclusion: That the Lord,
notwithstanding his prospering of the wicked and his afflicting of the godly,
is good unto Israel.


We are now to understand from the Prophet being thus particularly and soundly
informed out of the Sanctuary, the ground and reason of the said issue and
conclusion: which in sum is this: If the Lord has ordained for the wicked,
howsoever they flourish, judgment and destruction: and for the godly an happy
issue from out their trouble: then is God good to Israel. But the Lord has
ordained for the wicked, howsoever they flourish, judgment and destruction: and
for the godly a blessed issue from out their trouble. From the 18. verse to the
end of the Psalm. Also this blessed issue is implied verse. 1. Therefore God is
good to Israel, verse. 1.


The first part of the Assumption concerning the destruction of the wicked, is
by the Prophet cleared and set forth unto us, thus: 1. By comparing their
deiecting with their setting up. verse. 18. As thou have placed them in a
slipperie estate: So do thou deiect them from the same into utter desolation.
2. By noting the manner of their destruction, which is sudden and fearful,
verse. 19. Where is implied also for clearing this point a testimony from
experience and observation: as if the Prophet should say: Behold, we see with
our eyes how they are in a moment dejected and destroyed. 3. By resembling
their vanishing to a dream, verse. 20. As a dream vanishes when we awake: So
vanish the wicked and their prosperity.
4. By declaring the efficient cause of their destruction, ver. 20. in the
later part. Where the Lords awaking: that is, the displaying of his power to
do justice on the wicked, is noted to be the cause, by the force whereof,
their image, that is, their outward flourishing estate is made contemptible and
brought to naught.


The second part of the said Assumption which importes the happy issue of the
godly from out their trouble, is not in these distinct terms expressed. But
forasmuch as the Word which discloseth the Lords justice to the wicked, does
withal discover his love and compassion to the godly, we must conceive it as
set down in express terms: as indeed we find this point of happiness on the
part of the Lords children, insinuated and comprehended as in the first verse,
so likewise in the latter part of the Psalm, which contains the Prophets
solemn profession of perpetually depending upon the Lord. Which profession of
his begins verse. 23. and so continues to the end of the Psalm.

The ground of the said maine issue and conclusion being thus laid forth: the
Prophet has verse 21. and 22. added thereto a confession and censure of the
brutish conceit whereinto he was ready to slip, touching the Lords affection
to his people. His censure is propounded thus: When I grieved at the
prosperity of the wicked, and at the affliction of the godly, I was foolish
and senseless, verse. 21. and the first part of verse. 22. When I was ignorant
of the Lords affection to his people, I grieved at the prosperity of the
wicked, and at the affliction of the godly. Omitted. Therefore when I was
ignorant of the Lords affection to his people, I was foolish and senseless,
verse. 22. in the later part. Where he expresses this imputation and mark of
foolishnes, by comparing himself unto a beast.


Hitherto the first and maine issue of the dispute betwixt the Spirit and the
flesh has been, together with the reason and ground thereof, related unto us:
namely, That God is good to Israel. Now the second issue being a conclusion
deduced upon the former, is to be imparted with us.

This second issue of the said dispute, is the Prophets profession of his
perpetual dependence upon the Lord, ver. 23. in the former part. Where the
Prophets protestation of ever being with the Lord, I interpret as meant of
adhering and cleaving always unto him by a lively and constant faith in his
promises: it being faith which first works and after intertaineth our
spiritual and real union with him. Besides, it was a defect in the Prophets
faith which made ouerture to this dispute betwixt the Spirit and the flesh: and
therefore to show how he has profited by the victory of the Spirit, and how
ready he is to eschew hereafter the like fault of distrust in the Lord, he
solemnly professes that he will ever rest and rely upon him. Lastly the
nature of the arguments alleged to persuade and confirm his perpetual being
with the Lord, does best suit with the said interpretation and point of
perpetual dependence upon the Lord.

This second issue then of the conflict above remembered, being a consequent of
the first and maine issue, is by the Prophet inferred thus: I find in the
Sanctuary that as God is a severe Judge to the wicked, so he is gracious and
good to Israel, verse. 1. Therefore I profess that I will ever depend upon him.
verse. 23.


But for a further encouragement of his heart herein, and that it may appear he
has other good warrant for this his profession, he does to the reason already
alleged add sundry excellent inducements, whereby to persuade the withdrawing
of his confidence from al worldly means, and the reposing thereof wholly upon
the Lord. His second reason therefore to this purpose is this: Thou did
support me in this temptation and conflict by the direction and power of thy
spirit and word, verse 23. in the end. Therefore having this experience of thy
assistance and favor toward me, I will ever depend upon thee, verse. 23. in
the beginning.


The third inducement of this his profession, is of this sort: Thou will guide
me, in case I depend upon thee, by the address and light of thy word in the
way to eternal glory, verse. 24. Therefore will I ever rest upon thee, verse.
23.


The fourth argument persuading this dependence, is concluded thus: If I will
depend upon any other besides thee, then is there some in heaven or earth whom
I honor and serve besides thee. But there is none in heaven or earth whom I
honor and serve besides thee, verse. 25. Therefore will I not depend upon any
other besides thee, verse. 23.


The Prophet stays not here, but proceeds on to a fifth reason, thus: Who is
ever unto me, in whatsoever my distresses, a complete sufficiency of all
comfort, strength and happiness: on him will I ever depend. But the Lord is ever
to me, in whatsoever my distresses, a complete sufficiency of all comfort,
strength and happiness, verse. 26. Therefore the Lord is he, on whom I will ever
depend. verse. 23.


He yet cease not: but to advance his confidence and reposing upon the Lord,
he draws into muster a sixth motive, disputed thus: If they who leave and
abandon thee, to rest upon others, shall certainly perish: then will I (O Lord)
ever depend upon thee. But they who leave and abandon thee, to rest upon
others, shall certainly perish, verse. 27. Therefore I resolve ever to depend
upon thee, verse. 23.


For a further warrant and reinforcement of the profession he makes to rely
only and wholly upon the Lord, he tendereth unto us this conclusion: If my
happiness consist in resting only and wholly upon the Lord, I profess and
resolve ever to rest upon him. But my happiness consists in resting wholly and
only upon the Lord, verse. 28. in the beginning. Therefore I profess and
resolve ever to rest upon him, verse. 23: and verse. 28. in the end.


To close and shut up this his profession, he does in the last period of the
last verse of this Psalm, acquaint us with the end of his perpetual
dependence upon the Lord: which is this: That he may (the Lord honoring this
his dependence with continual favors and blessings upon him) have always
cause to declare and magnify the Lords gracious proceedings toward him, verse.
28. in the end.


PSALM. 84.
1 TO the Master of the Quier amongst the children of Corah, a Psalm delivered
to be sung upon Gittith.

2 O Lord of hosts: how amiable are thy Tabernacles?

3 My soul longs, yea faints also for the courts of the Lord: mine heart
and my flesh cry out with longing to come to the mighty and living God.

4 Yea the sparrow finds an house, and the swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young. But thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my
God.

5 Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, who praise thee continually.
Selah.

6 Blessed is the man, who has in thee power to go in thy paths according to
his heart.

7 They going through the vale of Mulberies, make it a fountain. The rain
also of blessings covers them.

8 They go from strength to strength, that they may appear before God in Sion.

9 O Lord God of hosts hear my prayer: hearken O God of Jacob. Selah.

10 O God our shield, behold me and look upon the face of thine anointed.

11 For one day in thy courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. I had rather
be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of
wickedness.

12 For the Lord God is a Sun and shield unto us: The Lord gives grace and
glory: no good thing does he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

13 O Lord of hosts: blessed is the man that trusts upon thee.

ANALYS. PSALM. 84.
The inscription names not the author of the Psalm: it notes only the
person to whose charge it was committed to be sung: and the instrument called
Gittith on which it was to be sung.

Touching the Psalm it self: the argument is this. The Prophet David being
through the practice and tyranny of his enemies barred from all access unto
the place of the Lords public worship and service (which place is called verse.
2. by the name of Tabernacles: in the 3. verse the courts of Iehoua: in the 4,
Altars: in the 5. and 11, the house of the Lord) makes this humble suit unto
the Lord: That he may find favor with the Lord for his return unto the place
of his public worship. verse. 9.


That this motion here set down, is the particular solicited and urged in this
Psalm, may appear by conferring the 9. verse with the 3. and the 11. For what
he longs for in the 3. and magnifieth in the 11: the grant of that he does
without doubt earnestly sue for and press in the 9: there being in the whole
Psalm no other subject, wherewith his intercession can properly sort and
agree. But in the 3. he longs for his return unto the Courts of the Lord:
and in the 11, he esteems his presence in them, though it were but for a day
and in the quality of a door keeper, a matter of the greatest happiness. It is
therefore his repair again unto the place of the Lords public worship, for
which he is an humble suter.

Now the grant of this suit the Prophet does persuade by sundry arguments: the
first whereof does represent unto the Lord how passionatly the Prophet does
long for his return unto the tabernacle: out of a persuasion on the Prophets
part, that the Lord will not suffer to rest unsatisfied so holy and religious a
longing of his poor servant. The conclusion is this: If I do passionatly long
to repair again unto thy Tabernacle, I pray thee (O Lord) let me find favor
in thy sight for my repair thereto. But I do passionatly long to repair
again unto thy tabernacle, verse. 3. Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me
find favor in thy sight for my repair thereto, verse. 9.


The Assumption is delivered and recorded by the Prophet in the third verse:
where he protests in express terms, that his desire to return unto the
place of the Lords worship (which place he there calls the courts of the
Lord, and likewise by the name of the Mighty and living God) is such as is
very passionate and accompanied with an extraordinary fainting of his soul:
yea such as draws his heart and flesh, that is, his whole person into an
extremity of inward and outward crying unto the Lord for obtaining contentment
in the suit he makes.

The said Assumption is amplified: 1. By recommending the Lords Tabernacle by
way of admiration, as most worthy of all love and regard: it being the place
of his presence, and where he acquainted his people with his mercy to them in
the Messiah, and with his justice against sin. From this argument he
reasons thus: Thy Tabernacle (O Lord) is most worthy of all love and regard,
verse. 2. Therefore do I exceedingly long to return unto it, verse. 3.
2. By noting two effects, which do accompany this his passionate longing to
return. With these he acquainteth the Lord, the rather to procure from him
satisfaction in his request: The one, is a fainting and consuming of his heart
with grief during his discontinuance from the Lords house, verse. 3. in the
former part. The other, is the crying of his whole person unto the Lord, as well
inwardly with his heart, as outwardly by his voice and some humble gesture of
body for obtaining a grant of his suit, verse. 3. in the later part.
3. By imparting unto the Lord the misery and unhappiness of his present
condition: the consideration whereof wrought in the heart of the Prophet a
longing for some change and alteration in his present estate, by repayring
again unto the holy assemblies. As if he should thus say: My present
condition is altogether unhappy and miserable. No marvel therefore if I long
for a change thereof by my return unto the Lords house.



The former part of this reason is not in direct terms expressed by the
Prophet: but in steed thereof he has yielded and set down a clear proof of
the same, containing such a description of happiness as is incompatible with the
Prophets present estate. The proof containing the said description is this:
They are happy who have the liberty of access to thy tabernacle, verse. 5.
and 6. These two verses afford unto us from the consideration of the
particularities comprised in them this general sense and description of
happiness. In the 5. verse, they are held for happy who have the liberty of
dwelling in the Lords house. In the 6. verse, he is reputed happy who has in
and by the Lord the power and liberty of treading and walking in those paths
which lead unto the tabernacle. Which paths are called the Lords paths:
because they are the way to the Lords house. But I have not the liberty of
access to thy tabernacle, verse. 4. in the end. Where I expound that
interrupted speech (Thy altars O Lord) in this sort: Thy altars: that is, by
naming one part for the whole, Thy tabernacle is the place from whence I rest
banished, and whereto I have not liberty of access. Which exposition does
fitly answer the comparison of little birds (as after shall appear) delivered
in the said verse. Therefore I am not happy. This conclusion is omitted as a
matter so apparent and palpable upon the setting down of the premises, as it
needs not any particular expressing thereof.


Of this syllogism, which contains the Prophets deploration of his present
unhappy and distressed condition, the Assumption is first handled: and then the
Proposition. The Assumption is cleared by a comparison of Dissimilitude:
wherein is showed how the present estate of the Prophet is different and unlike
to that of the little birds who are allowed liberty to fly unto the
tabernacle, there to rest and breed. The Dissimilititude is this: The sparrow
and the swallow find by thy providence liberty of access to thy tabernacle,
there to rest and breed, verse. 4. in the former part. But thy tabernacle is
the place whereto I can have no access, but rest banished from it, verse. 4. in
the later part. You may see hereby how aptly the said interrupt speech serves
as a reddition to the comparison delivered in the former part of the verse.
Neither need we fear that any absurdity will follow, in case the former
part of the said 4. verse be interpreted as is set down. For the tabernacle
being spacious and large, and the composition thereof such as it was
distinguished into sundry parts: no marvel if little birds did find the
commodity of resting and breeding in some parts thereof, though not in the
Sanctuary or near the Altar.


The Proposition of the said syllogism is amplified, by noting two several
kinds of persons to whom the said description of happiness does agree: The
first kind is of Priests and Levites: who verse. 5. are defined to be such as
daily reside in the tabernacle, and are there employed in the service of
worshipping and praising the Lord. The second is of the Israelites, who
repaired out of the country to appear before the tabernacle, v. 6: where it
is said, that they have liberty according to their hearts desire to tread the
Lords paths, that is, the paths which lead unto the Lords house.


These country Israelites, who tendered their appearance before the Lord,
according to the statute enacted in that behalf, Exodus 23.17. and Deuteronomy. 16.16:
these Isralites (I say) are by the Prophet described by setting out unto us, 1.
Their resolute enduring of all the difficulties and incommodities that
accompanied their repair unto the tabernacle: as namely the incommoditie. 1.
Of thirst. That they endured this, appears hereby: in that they passing
through the valley of Mulberies, a valley very dry and destitute of water,
dug and serched for fountains, whereby to relieve their thirst, verse. 7. 2.
Of showers and storms of rain, ver. 7. in the end. Where the rain which
falls on the passengers is called the rain of blessings: because it
communicates the blessing of fertility to the earth. 3. Of wearines and
faintnes, verse. 8. Where the enduring of this incommodity is implied hereby, in
that it is said, They go from strength to strength: that is, with an
affectionate desire and courage to entertain themselves in some measure of
strength, and to encounter with patience all sense of wearines. This
interpretation, considering the question is of travelers and of difficulties
endured by them, seems most notable.
2. The end, for which they did so resolutely endure the said incommodities.
This end was that they might present themselves before God in Sion: Sion being
the appointed and designed place, wherein they were to perform worship and
service unto the Lord, verse. 8.


Hitherto has the Prophet amplified and pressed the first argument, whereby he
would persuade the Lord to a grant of his fate for return unto the tabernacle.

The second argument to this purpose, and the third also follow in the 10.
verse comprehended in these words: O God, who art our shield, behold me, and
look on the face of thine anointed: That is, Thou (O God) who have heretofore
protected and delivered me from trouble: and thou who have anointed me King
over thy people, and therein to be a type of thy eternal Son, behold me with
all favor and mercy for my return unto the place of thy public worship.

This 10. verse, as you see, contains a double conclusion: the first whereof
is grounded upon a comparison of paritie accompanied with a testimony of
experience. The conclusion is this: Thou have (O Lord) heretofore protected me,
and delivered me from a condition of misery into an estate of comfort, verse.
10. in these words: O God who art my shield. Wherefore show me now the like
favor for my return from the misery wherein I am unto the comfort of thy
tabernacle, verse. 10. in these words: Behold me: namely, with thy favorable
eye for my return unto the place of thy public worship.


The other conclusion is grounded upon a comparison from the greater to the
less, thus: Thou (O Lord) have out of thy love toward me vouchsafed unto me
this great honor as to annoint me King over thy people, and withal to be
therein a type of thy eternal Son, verse. 10. in the end. Therefore I pray
thee refuse not unto me this lesser favor for my return unto thy tabernacle,
verse. 10. in these words: Behold me and look upon the face of him.


The Prophet cease not here: but pleads with the Lord by a fourth argument
for his return unto the Tabernacle. In this argument he does magnify the
happiness that does acco^panie such who have the liberty of access unto the
Lords house, there to present unto him the service and worship required. From
hence he concludes thus: To be partaker of thy public worship at thy
tabernacle, though but for a day and in the quality of a doore-keeper, I
esteem the greatest happiness, verse. 11. Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) refuse
me not this favor of returning thereto, verse. 9.


The Antecedent part of this fourth reason is diversely amplified and cleared:
1. By two comparisons, from the less to the greater, verse. 11. The former
comparison is this: To spend the whole term of my life in the palaces of the
profane and mighty in the world, I may account a matter of great honor and
happiness. But to spend one day of my whole life in thy tabernacle I hold for a
more honorable and happy condition.
The other comparison is this: To enjoy an estate and place of eminent dignity
amongst the mighty in the world, I may repute it a matter of honor and
happiness. But to hold the meanest room in thy tabernacle and Church, I account
it far more honorable and happy.

2. By noting the particulars wherein the greatest happiness consists. This
argument is thus deduced: Who enjoy at the hands of the Lord, prosperity,
protection, spiritual grace and eternal glory, theirs is the greatest
happiness. But who sincerely worship at the tabernacle, they enjoy at the hands
of the Lord, prosperity, protection, spiritual grace and eternal glory,
verse. 12. Where as the two last particulars are set down in plain terms: so
the two first are expressed by two metaphors: each whereof implies a several
comparison: the one from the Sun, by whose light and influence the earth does
prosper and flourish: the other, from a shield, whereby the body is protected
against hurts. Therefore who sincerely worship at the tabernacle, theirs is the
greatest happiness, verse. 11.


The Assumption has this proof: Upon the true worshippers at the tabernacle
the Lord does confer all good blessings. verse. 12. in the end. Therefore he
bestows on them prosperity, protection, spiritual grace and eternal glory,
verse 12. in the beginning.


3. By laying forth the essential and proper quality of the sincere
worshippers at the tabernacle: namely, their faith and dependence on the Lord.
Out of this argument he infers this conclusion: Who by a true faith rest on
thee (O Lord of hosts) they are in a state of the greatest happiness, verse. 13.
But the sincere worshippers at the tabernacle do by a true faith rest on thee.
Therefore the sincere worshippers at the tabernacle are in a state of the
greatest happiness, verse. 11.



PSALM. 90.
1 THe prayer of Moses a man of God. O Lord thou have been our habitation from
generation to generation.

2 Before the mountains were made, and before thou had formed the earth
and the world: even from everlasting to everlasting thou art our God.

3 Thou reducest man to this point of being brayed into powder, saying: Return
ye sons of men.

4 For a thousand years are in thy eyes as yesterday when it is past, and as a
watch in the night.

5 Thou cariest them away as it were by a flood: they are as a dream. In the
morning they are as an herb which changes:

6 Which florisheth in the morning and waxes green: but is cut down in the
evening and withers.

7 We are consumed also by thine anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled.

8 Thou have set our iniquities before thee: and our secret sins before the
light of thy face.

9 For all our days pass away through thy great anger: we consume our years
as a thought.

10 The days of our life are threescore years and ten, or (in case we be of
strength) fourscore years: and the best of them is but trouble and grief: yea
it is suddenly cut off, and we flee away.

11 Who acknowledges the power of thy wrath, and of thy great indignation
according to thy fear?

12 Teach us so to number our days, that thereby we may have an heart of
wisdom.

13 Return O Lord: how long? and be pacified toward thy servants.

14 Fill us with thy mercy every morning: so shall we rejoice and be glad all
our days.

15 Comfort us according to the days that thou have afflicted us, and
according to the years wherein we have seen evil.

16 Let thy work appear upon thy servants, and thy glory upon their children:

17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and direct in us the
work of our hands: direct (I say) the work of our hands.

ANALYS. PSALM. 90.
In the front of this Psalm there is set an inscription to inform us of these
two circumstances: 1. Of what kind this Psalm is. 2. Who is the author
thereof.


The former circumstance does advertise us that this Psalm is in the nature of
an humble petition, as may appear by the 12. and 13. verses: and so by the
rest to the end of the Psalm.

The other does notify that Moses was the author of the said petition. And to
the end we might hold it in extraordinary account and recommendation: Moses the
inditer thereof is set forth unto us under this worthy and honorable title,
That he was a man of God: that is, A man both employed by God as a great
Prophet and Commander amongst his people, and likewise pleasing the Lord in
the execution of his charge.

Touching the Psalm it self: as it is thought to have been then indicted, when
the Lord had passed sentence of death against the Israelites, in regard of the
coffeehouse and murmur they fell into upon the relation made concerning the
land of Canaan, by such as were employed in the service of discovering it: So
it is probable that the occasion thereof grew, in that Moses discerning the
real execution of the said sentence, and the peoples anxietie and languishing
thereupon, did out of a commiseration of their present estate, and withal that
he might furnish unto them an address how to demean themselves in an
affliction of this quality, deliver and recommend unto the people this form
of prayer. The subject and drift whereof what it is, may appear by drawing
into consideration the 12.13.14. and 15. verses.

Verse. 12. Having in the precedent verses first remembered unto the Lord his
former gracious proceeding with his people: and then deplored the misery
whereto they were subject: he does in the 12. verse entreat at the hands of
the Lord such grace and direction, as whereby they may make a special and wise
use of the said misery. And this he calls numbering of our days, and the
having of an heart of wisdom. Now this numbering of our days is then
performed and this wise heart attained unto, when we seriously examine and
calculate all parts of the misery incident to our days: and so grow to
repentance of heart and dependence on God. So as this is one part of the suit
made here by the Prophet: namely, That the Lord would teach the people to make
a wise use of their misery. Verse. 13. In this verse he compriseth an apparent
deprecation of the Lords displeasure: as if he should say: Whereas (O Lord)
thou have in displeasure against our sins auerted thy loving countenance from
us: I pray thee, let it now return again and shine on us: change the nature
of thy proceeding with us by desisting from further afflicting us, and by
supplying unto us a comfortable condition of life. And this is the other part
of the suit exhibited by the Prophet in this Psalm. Verse. 14. He prays that
the Lord would show himself good and gracious to his people in some great
measure: which he calls a filling of us every morning with his goodness.
Now this great measure of goodness on the Lords part, consists in removing
their present cross, and in supplying unto them such an estate of life as is
comfortable. So as this 14. verse contains also the second part of the said
prayer and suit. Verse. 15. He soliciteth at the hands of the Lord a present
recomforting and reioying of his people. Which is one and the same in sense
with that which is sued for in the 13. and 14. verse. For he means that
comfort and joy of estate, which is to follow upon the Lords retyring of his
afflicting hand, and yielding unto the people other testimonies of his goodness.
So as this verse likewise comprehends the second part of the Prophets prayer.
By examining therefore and weighing the sense of the said verses, it appears
that the prayer comprised in this Psalm by the Prophet Moses, is in sum
this: That the Lord would teach the people to make a wise use of their misery,
verse. 12: and withal supply unto them a comfortable condition of life, verse.
13.14.15.


The whole suit is first solicited from the beginning of the Psalm to the end
of the 12. verse: and then, the later branch thereof to the end of the Psalm.
The Prophets mediation with the Lord for grant of the whole suit, is grounded
upon two several inducements: the first whereof is taken from a comparison of
parity, accompanied with a testimony of experience, and concluded thus: Thou
have heretofore from age to age successively been gracious unto our
predecessors and us, verse. 1. Where by this word, Habitation, the Prophet
means the gracious comfort and protection yielded unto them by the Lord.
Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) be now likewise gracious unto us, namely in
teaching us to make a wise use of our misery, and withal in supplying unto us
a comfortable condition of life, verse. 12.13.14.15.


The antecedent part of this reason has a double amplification: the one from a
Similitude: the other from a comparison of the greater to the less.

The Similitude is folded and closed up in that word, habitation: but being
disclosed and laid forth in his parts, will be this: As the house, wherein man
dwells, does yield unto him a place of comfort and rest, as also protection
against outward injury and extremity. So thy favor (O Lord) toward our
predecessors and us, who have had no place of habitatio^, but have lived in the
quality of Pilgrims, has ever furnished both unto them and us, special comfort
and protection against trouble and distress.


The Comparison from the greater to the less is in the second verse: and
discovers unto us the very original and root of the Lords favorable
proceeding with his people. The Comparison is this: Thou have been gracious
unto us thy people before the creation of the world, verse. 2. Where by a
gradation from the less to the greater he expresses the creation of the
world: naming first the hills, then the earth, and lastly the whole world. No
marvel then if since the creation successively thou have so kindly proceeded
with us, verse. 1.


The second inducement, whereby to draw the Lord unto a commiseration of the
people, in whose favor Moses is become an humble suter, is such as wherein he
does by way of deploration of their present misery, represent unto the Lords
view as it were a picture of the condition, wherein they were. His deploration
does particulate the several parts of the said misery, and is framed in this
sort: We thy people are subject to death: to exceeding shortness of life: to
suddennes of vanishing: to great calamities: to a senselesnes of apprehending
thy powerful wrath. It may therefore please thee (O Lord) to have a gracious
commiseration of us, in teaching us to make an holy use hereof, and in
supplying unto us a comfortable estate of life.


The Antecedent part of this Deploration has 5. branches: the first is verse.
3: the second verse 4: the third verse. 5. and 6: the fourth verse. 7.9.10: the
fifth, verse. 11.

The first branch, namely that which concerns the mortality of the
Israelites, is declared: 1. By noting the efficient of this mortality: namely,
The Lord and his ordinance enacted to that purpose, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art,
and into dust thou shall return. This statute and the author thereof are
signified verse. 3. 2. By a Similitude implied in this word, Return. For hereby
it appears that the passing of our life is verse. 3. resembled to the wheeling
of a thing about from the first point of the circuit, till it return to the
same again. The comparison therefore being unfolded and distinguished into his
parts, will be this: As that which has wheeled about from the first point of
the circuit to the same again, has fully ended his revolution: So man taking
the beginning of his circuit in this world from dust, as from the first point
thereof, does by returning to the said first point determine his revolution.



The second branch touching the shortness of our life, as it serves aptly to
resolve the question of our mortality: so to assure us that we delude and
flatter our selves when we imagine a length in life, it is by the Prophet
cleared by a Comparison, thus: A thousand years are in all true and just
calculation a time of no length or a matter of nothing, verse. 4. No marvel
then if the ordinary term of man's life be exceeding short.


The first sentence of this Comparison is made known unto us by two several
Similitudes, verse. 4: In the former, the length of a thousand years is
compared to the length of a day already past, thus: As yesterday, which is
past, is a space of time for the length thereof not worthy the naming: So are a
thousand years for length as yesterday, and not worth the naming.
In the later, the space of a thousand years is resembled to that which is
far shorter in length than a day, namely to a watch in the night, which
consists only of three hours. So as if a thousand years be for length like
unto a watch in the night, the life of 1000. years must run in account for a
matter of nothing.


The third branch of the said deploration imports the suddennes of our
vanishing together with the shortness of our abode here. The manifesting whereof
is taken from three Comparisons, verse. 5. and 6: In the first: the suddennes of
our vanishing, with the shortness of our life, it resembled to the sudden
transporting of things by a torrent or land flood: the force whereof does
presently carry away whatsoever it incountreth. In the second: our sudden
vanishing is likened to a dream, which vanishes in a moment. In the third: it
is compared to green grass, which is cut and withers almost as soon as it
shows it self out of the ground.


The fourth branch is of the crosses and calamities incident to our life. v.
7.8.9.10. In the 7. and 9. verse the Prophet sets out our crosses and
calamities under the name and title of the Lords consuming wrath, noting by the
efficient the effect wrought thereby: and in the 10. he sets them out by
acquainting us with the trouble and grief that accompany our best and
happiest days. So as, in case the wrath of the Lord, that is, the affliction
laid upon us consume and wast us: if also the excellentest and best of our
days be naught else but vexation and trouble: it is evident hereby, that our
life is wasted through continual crosses and calamities. And this is it, which
is likewise deplored by the Prophet. Now this consuming of our days through
daily afflictions, is expressed unto us: 1. By laying forth the cause thereof:
namely, our sins both secret and apparent, verse. 8: where the Lord is said to
set our sins before him: that is, to take notice of them and punish them. 2.
By noting the sudden vanishing of our days and the shortness of them. This
point the Prophet does illustrate and make plain. 1. By a Similitude, verse. 9.
in the end, thus: As a thought as soon as it is conceived, does presently
vanish: So do our days pass in a moment.
2. By answering an objection: which is this, as may appear by the answer
thereto: Obi. Man lives many years, as to 70. or 80: And therefore is not in
likelihood subject to such wasting crosses, nor to that shortness of days, or
sudden vanishing, as is pretended.
Ans. The Prophet granting verse. 10. the antecedent of this objection: namely,
that a man by the ordinary course of nature may attain to the term of 70.
years, yea of 80, in case the constitution of his body be vigorous and
strong: denies the consequence deduced thereupon in the said objection. As if
he should thus say: Let it be true that man lives to 70. or 80. years: Yet I
deny it as following hereupon, that he has either an immunitie from trouble
and vexation, or any long and constant abode in this life.
His denial of either point the Prophet does justify and clear by a several
comparison. His denial of immunitie from trouble is warranted in this sort:
The excellentest and best days of man's life are vexation and grief, verse. 10.
in the midst. No marvel then if the ordinary days of his life be days of
wearines and tribulation, verse. 7.9.
His denial of man's long and constant abode in this life has this ground: The
best days of man's life do quickly come to their period, and vanish suddenly,
verse. 10. in the end. No marvel then if the ordinary and weak days of his
life do quickly and suddenly determine, verse. 9. in the end.




There remains the 5. and last branch of the misery deplored by the Prophet,
contained in the 11. verse: where Moses by way of an interrogation does
acknowledge and admire the spiritual dulnes of heart in the people, that
(considering the misery wherein they were, and the course held by the Lord to
reclaim them from wickedness) yet to fill up the measure of their misery,
and as it were in contempt of that fear of his Majesty which the Lord
labored to work in them, they added thereto the sin of not apprehending how
great the force and power of the Lords wrath is, when he does execute it upon
man.

Now this dulnes and senselesnes of the people in this behalf, is in the end
of the said 11. verse amplified and made heinous, by aduertising unto us the
means used by the Lord* whereby to work in them a reverent and sensible
regard of his Majesty. These means Moses calls the Lords fear: because
they were used by the Lord as instruments to work a fear of his Majesty. Of
this nature were the Lords promises and comminations: his signs and wonders:
his proceedings in mercy and justice. Answerably to these means used by the
Lord to draw the people to a fear of his Majesty, the people feared him not:
and therefore the Prophet wondreth thereat, and confesses that none
acknowledges the power of the Lords wrath according to his fear, that is,
answerably to the means used to work in the people a fear of his Majesty.

Hitherto from verse 1. to the end of of the 11, the Prophets whole suit has
been solicited, partly by remembering unto the Lord his former gracious
proceeding with his people, and partly by a deploration of the peoples misery.

He now proceeds to a several solicitation of the second branch of his suit,
which concerns the deliverance of the people from their present affliction
into a comfortable condition of life. To procure favor and mercy herein, he
draws his plea from the circumstance of the time, wherein they have endured
calamities: We have (says he) a long time endured affliction and trouble,
verse. 13. Where in that interrogatorie speech of How long? the Prophet
complains that the people has felt the Lords afflicting hand a long space.
Wherefore O Lord commiserate our estate, and supply unto us some comfortable
condition of life, verse. 13.14.15.


The Prophet stays not here, but presses the grant of his petition from this
consideration which the people propound unto themselves upon their prevailing
with the Lord: If upon thy gracious commiseration of us in this behalf, we
shall honor and magnify thee with joy and cheerfulnes all our days: it may
please thee in regard hereof to commiserate our estate, and to afford us a
comfortable condition of life. But upon thy gracious commiseration of us in
this behalf, we shall honor and magnify thee with joy and cheerefulnes all
our days, verse. 14. in the end. Therefore it may please thee in regard hereof
to commiserate our estate, and to afford us a comfortable condition of life,
verse. 13.14.


In the 15. verse he repeateth the argument delivered in the 13: but sets on
it a new force and strength from a comparison of parity: Thou have afflicted us
many years, verse. 15. in the midst and end. Let us therefore O Lord
proportionably thereto see some days of comfort, verse. 15. in the beginning.


Lastly, he does in the 16. and 17. verse ground his intercession with the Lord
for the people upon these two particulars: whereof, the one is, the glory that
the Lord shall gain by showing the favor desired: the other is, the fitnes
and disposition that will upon grant of the suit in hand be wrought in the
people to acknowledge the Lords goodness, and to respect the honor of his name
in all their proceedings. The Prophets conclusion upon the said particulars is
this: If upon thy gracious deliverance of us from trouble into a state of
comfort, thou shall thereby glorify thy goodness upon us and our children: and
withal direct and fit us to an acknowledgement thereof, and to a respect of
thy honor in all our proceedings: it may please thee O Lord not to refuse to
show mercy unto us, in delivering us from our afflictions into a condition of
joy and comfort. But upon thy gracious deliverance of us from trouble into a
state of comfort, thou shall thereby glorify thy goodness upon us and our
children: and withal thou shall direct and fit us to an acknowledgement
thereof, and to a respect of thine honor in all our proceedings, verse. 16.17.
Therefore it may please thee O Lord not to refuse to show mercy unto us, in
delivering us from our afflictions into a condition of joy and comfort, verse.
13.14.15.


Touching the Assumption: the 16. verse imparteth with us that particular which
concerns the glorifying of the Lords goodness upon the people and their
children. This goodness is in the said verse called the work of the Lord, and
his glory also. But in the beginning of the 17. verse this goodness is termed
the beauty of the Lord. For as the Lords goodness is a most excellent work, it
being that which procures unto him great glory, and that whereby we enjoy
the admirable blessings of this and the future life: So, because in it the
excellency of the Lords nature does gloriously shine, and for that by it we
are allured and drawn to a special love of him, it is not without just reason
called the Lords beauty. This particular then of the said Assumption which
imports the glorifying of the Lords goodness upon the people and their
children, is delivered in the 16 verse, and repeated in the beginning of the
17. The other particular of the said Assumption, which concerns the
disposition and fitnes that will be wrought in the people to acknowledge the
Lords goodness, and to respect his honor in their proceedings, is comprehended
in the midst and end of the 17. verse, in these terms: Direct or dispose the
work of our hands: that is, thou shall (the future being meant by the
imperative) upon thy conferring on us the blessed comfort desired by us,
thereby direct and fit us to a grateful acknowledgement of this thy goodness in
all the duties and actions of our life.

PSALM. 91.
WHo so dwells in the covert of the most high, shall lodge under the shadow of
the Almighty.

2 I say: The Lord is my retrait and fortress: he is my God on whom I trust.

3 Surely, he will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence.

4 He will protect thee with his wing, when thou shall come under his wings.
His fidelity shall be thy buckler and shield.

5 Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of night, nor of the arrow that flies
by day:

6 Nor of the pestilence that walks in the darkness, nor of the plague that
destroys at noone day.

7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: yet
shall it not come near thee:

8 Only with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.

9 Since thou have set the Lord, the God of my retrait, the most high to be thy
dwelling place:

10 There shall none evil come unto thee, neither shall any plague come near
thy tabernacle.

11 For he will give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways.

12 They shall bear thee with both hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against
a stone.

13 Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe: the young Lion and the Dragon
shall thou tread under foot.

14 Because he rests on me, I will deliver him, says the Lord: I will exalt
him, because he acknowledges my name:

15 When he shall call upon me, I will hear him: I will be with him in
trouble: I will deliver him and glorify him:

16 With long life will I satisfy him, and cause him to see my salvation.

ANALYS. PSALM. 91.
The position insisted upon and disputed throughout this Psalm, is this: That
they, who rest upon the Lord, shall be delivered from all hurts, and made
partakers of all comfort.


The drift of the Prophet in handling this position, is to persuade a confident
dependence upon the Lord: as if he should reason in this sort with us: If by
resting upon the Lord we shall be delivered from all hurts and discomforts, and
made partakers of al comfort: then ought we to rest upon the Lord. But by
resting upon the Lord we shall be delivered from all hurts and discomforts, and
made partakers of all comfort. Therefore ought we to rest upon the Lord.


The Assumption is the position above remembered, and the only subject argued in
this Psalm. Of it there be (as you see) these two members: The one: That by
resting on the Lord we shall be delivered from all hurts. The other: That by
resting on the Lord we shall be partakers of all comforts.


The first member which concerns our deliverance from all hurts and
discomforts, is set down in the 1.4.9. and 10. verse.

Verse. 1. It is said, that who so dwells in the covert of the most high* that
is, he who depends upon the Lords favor: shall lodge under the shadow of the
Almighty, that is, shall be secured against all perils and discomforts. Here
our depending is resembled to dwelling: the Lords favor to a covert: our
protection against hurts to our lodging under a shadow. Verse. 4. It is
affirmed, that who so comes under the Lords wings, that is, he who has by a
true faith recourse unto the Lord: shall be protected with the Lords wing, that
is, shall be defended by the gracious and favorable providence of the Lord.
Verse. 9. and 10. In these verses our protection against hurts and discomforts,
in the case of our resting on the Lord, is in plain and express terms
delivered.
Let us now see how this first member of the said position is handled. The
illustration thereof is from the beginning of the first verse to the end of the
thirteenth: and is performed by sundry arguments: 1. By a comparison, ve^s. 1.
thus: As he who lodges under a shadow or covert is relieved and protected
against the parching heat of the Sun: So by resting upon the gracious favor
of the most high, we shall be secured against all perils and discomforts.
2. By a testimony of experience handled as a comparison of paritie, thus: I
have found that upon my confident resting upon the Lord, I have received from
him comfort and deliverance, verse. 2. Where he does in an holy sort glory,
that the Lord is his retrait and fortress, that is, he who has reached unto
him his hand of protection and deliverance, upon his reposing on him: as is
noted in the end of the verse. Therefore thou also shall find that upon thy
like confident resting upon the Lord, he will afford thee the like comfort and
deliverance, verse. 1.
To the former part of this reason there is yielded from out the second verse
this amplification: As a fortress or place of retrait protecteth him who
retireth thereto: So the Lord protected me when out of a trust in his mercy I
retired unto him.
3. By an induction of the particular hurts and discomforts, from which the
Lord will deliver such as depend on him. The induction is this: The Lord will
deliver thee from surprises in secret and open violences, verse. 3: from sudden
terrors in the night, and sudden perils in the day both spiritual and
corporal, verse. 5: from each kind of pestilence and plague, verse. 6. And
therefore in case thou depend upon him, thou shall be secured against all hurts
and discomforts, verse. 1.4.9. and 10.
4. By a Similitude yielded from out the 4. verse, thus: As an hen spreads
her wings, and therewith protecteth her tender chicken in case they retire
thereto: So the Lord relieueth and protecteth such as have their recourse unto
him and rest on him, verse. 4. in the beginning: where together with this
sentence the said similitude is folded up.
5. By setting down the ground on the Lords part of the deliverance which he
affoordeth unto his children reposing upon him. This ground is the Lords
promise of deliverance, and his fidelity in keeping this promise, verse. 4. in
the end: where the Prophet notes this later: and by naming it does implie and
mean both it and the former. He reasons thus: The Lord has made promise of
deliverance to such as rest on him, and he is faithful in the performance
thereof. Therefore in case thou rest on his promise of deliverance, he will not
fail to protect and shield thee against all hurts and discomforts. Either part
of this reason is in the end of the fourth verse wrapped up in these terms: His
fidelity shall be thy buckler and shield. Which sentence is so to be resolved
and understood, as containing both the argument and conclusion deduced
thereupon: and likewise yielding withal unto us a declaration of the said
conclusion, which is the question in hand, from a similitude, thus:
6. As a shield or buckler, in case we use it, does defend our bodies from
hurt: So the Lord, who is faithful in keeping promise, in case thou rest upon
his promise, will accordingly protect thee.
7. By an argument of diversity: wherein answer is made to this objection:
Obi. If many thousands may on each side of thee perish by the plague and other
means of destruction: it is altogether improbable that thou should escape
in this common mortality. But many 1000 may on each side of thee perish by the
plague and other means of destruction. Therefore it is altogether improbable
that thou should in so common a mortality escape.
Ans. The answer to this objection is to the proposition thereof, thus: Though
thousands should perish by the rage of the pestilence and other means of
destruction, verse. 7. in the beginning. Yet shall thou, in case thou rest on
the Lord, be spared and as it were priuileged against all means of
destruction, verse. 7. in the end.



This answer to the proposition of the said objection the Prophet does warrant
and justify by noting unto us the end, for which the faithful man is thus
spared and privileged in a common mortality. The end is this, verse. 8.

That he may in his own particular experience and observation discern and
acknowledge the truth of this most comfortable doctrine: namely, that the Lord
punishes the wicked who renounce all dependence on him: and spares in common
calamities such as rest confidently upon him. For thus the Prophet speaks of
the faithful man, That he shall be a spectator only of the punishment laid
upon the wicked: himself shall not partake therein: he shall only witness and
acknowledge the truth of this doctrine concerning the Lords proceeding in
justice with the faithless, and in mercy with the faithful dependers on him.
The Prophet having in the ninth and tenth verse comprised the question
hitherto disputed by him, does withal, verse. 9. afford us an illustration
thereof,

8. By a Similitude, thus: As a place of retrait and dwelling house do yield
unto us comfort and protection against outward injuries: So the Lord, in case
of thy dependence on him, will furnish unto thee relief and protection against
hurts and discomforts.
9. By noting the means and instruments used by the Lord for our preservation
and deliverance from discomforts and hurts, verse. 11. and 12: where these
instruments are said to be the Angels. Now this point, which concerns the
Angels, who are appointed by the Lord to be instruments of our preservation, is
amplified: 1. From the efficient cause of their employment in this behalf:
namely, the commission and charge they have from the Lord to perform this
service of preserving the faithful in all their ways and proceedings, so
far as they are lawful and justifiable by the word of the Lord. For these
only are called the ways of the faithful. 2. From the consideration of their
extraordinary care to discharge the Lords commission they have for this
service. This care in them the Prophet notes by resembling the action and
service they perform, unto the action of a careful and provident Nurse: who
in the case of peril to the infant whom she nurseth, will take him into her
arms, and carry him so long as shall be fear of danger. And so by the Lords
commandment and direction the Angels proceed with us in this point of
preserving us from hurts and discomforts. 3. From a comparison of the greater
to the less, verse. 13. thus: By this service of the Angels in protecting thee,
thou shall gain this further advantage, as to conquer and triumph over the
greatest perils and mischiefs. For this is meant by marching upon those cruel
beasts, which are mentioned verse. 13. No marvel then if the Angels protect
thee in cases of less peril and mischief.




Hitherto the first member of the position, which the Prophet handles in this
Psalm, has been debated: namely, our deliverance from all hurts and
discomforts in the case of our dependence upon the Lord.

The second member of the said position is in sense and effect this: That by
resting upon the Lord, we shall be made partakers of all comforts and
blessings, verse. 14.15.16.


This point of doctrine the Prophet disputes and cleereth by an argument
drawn from a testimony that is above all exception. He concludes thus: The
Lord himself does profess under most gracious promises, that in case we rest
upon him, he will communicate unto us all comforts and blessings. Therefore by
resting on the Lord, we shall undoubtedly be made partakers of all comforts
and blessings.


Touching this profession on the Lords part, of communicating unto us all
comforts and blessings, in case we depend upon him: we are to observe how the
Lord sets it forth in those three last verses of the Psalm.

Verse. 14. The Lord does twice infer and conclude his communicating of all
blessings unto us, upon the reason of our dependence on him. His first
conclusion is this: He rests on me, says the Lord. Therefore will I deliver
him. Here under the name and title of delivering us, we must understand the
supplying of al other blessings, as it is expounded by the Lord himself in the
end of the fifteenth verse, and throughout the sixteenth.
His second conclusion is in the later part of the 14. verse: and is in sense
the same with the former: He acknowledges my name, says the Lord. As if he
should say: He does out of an acknowledgement of my power and promise to help
him, and of my fidelity in keeping promise, rest upon me for help and comfort.
Therefore will I exalt him: that is, advance him from out of trouble into a
place of safety, and likewise furnish unto him all other blessings.

Verse. 15. The Lord does express and amplify his said profession by a
Logical proceeding from the less to the greater. For first he says, That he
will hear the faithful petitioner: then (which is a greater favor) that he
will be present with him in his trouble to comfort him: thirdly, that he will
deliver him from it, which is a further degree of favor: and lastly, which is
the highest degree of favor, that he will glorify and honor him. Verse. 16.
Whereas the Lord in the end of the 15. verse has promised to confer glory
and honor upon the faithful and confident petitioner: he does in the 16.
verse illustrate this general by setting down the parts of the glory and
honor, which he will bestow on him. These parts are the blessings of this
life, and the comforts of eternal life. The Lord concludes thus: I will
bestow upon the faithful and confident petitioner the blessings of this life,
and the comfort of eternal life, verse. 16. Where under the promise of length
of days, is implied the promise of all prosperity and comfort in this life.
Under the promise of seeing the Lords salvation, the promise of enjoying the
happiness and blessings of eternal life is signified. Therefore will I bestow
upon him glory and honor, verse. 15. in the end.

PSALM. 94.
O Lord, who art the mighty God the auenger, the mighty God the auenger, show
thy self clearly.

2 Exalt thy self, thou who art Judge of the world: render to the proud their
reward,

3 Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?

4 They belch out and speak rough words: all the workers of iniquity extol
themselves.

5 They crush thy people O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.

6 They slay the widow and the stranger: and murder the fatherless.

7 And they say: the Lord sees not: neither does the God of Jacob regard it.

8 Understand, O ye most unwise among the people: and ye fools, when will you
be wise?

9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? Or he that formed the eye,
shall he not see?

10 He that chastises nations, shall he not correct? He that teaches man
knowledge* shall he not know?

11 The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

12 Blessed is the man, whom thou chastisest O Lord: for him thou teach in
thy law:

13 Thou do give him rest from the days of evil, until the pit be dug
for the wicked.

14 Surely, the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance.

15 For judgment shall return to justice: and after it, all the upright in
heart shall return.

16 Who has risen up with me against the wicked? Or who has taken my part
against the workers of iniquity?

17 If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had quickly dwelt in the place of
silence.

18 When I said: My foot slideth: thy mercy (O Lord) stayed me.

19 When I had a multitude of thoughts within me, thy comforts rejoiced my
soul.

20 Has the throne of iniquity fellowship with thee? which forgeth wrong
against law.

21 They gather together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the
innocent blood.

22 But the Lord is my refuge, and my God is the rock of my confidence.

23 He turns upon them their iniquity: and destroys them by their own
malice: the Lord our God destroys them.

ANALYS. PSALM. 94.
The Prophet discerning the godly exceedingly oppressed by the malicious
proceedings of the wicked, who in the state, where he lived, managed the
places of greatest power and authority: And being carried with an affectionate
desire to relieve and comfort them in this case of their distress, has
hereupon indicted this worthy Psalm. Wherein, 1. He presents on the behalf
of the godly an humble motion unto the Lord against these wicked and proud
tyrants, verse. 1.2. 2. He does impart with the godly for their comfort, that
(notwithstanding the proceedings of the wicked against them) they rest in a
condition of blessedness, verse. 12.13.14. and so to the end.


The Prophets humble motion is set down verse. 1. and 2. In the second verse
that which is sued for, does direct us to the true interpretation of the motion
made in the first. He prays the Lord in the second, to advance himself into
his throne of Justice, and to proceed with those proud tyrants, who oppressed
his people, according to their deserts. This justice he sueth for in the first
verse also under these terms: O Lord, show thy self clearly, or cause thy
brightness to shine. The Lord shows himself clearly and causes his
brightness to shine, when the glory of his justice is made manifest in the
execution of punishment upon the wicked. We see then that the motion tendered
by the Prophet unto the Lord against the wicked, is this: That the Lord would
be pleased to execute justice against these proud tyrants, who oppressed his
people, verse. 1. and 2.


This motion of the Prophet against the wicked, is 1. Solicited by propounding
some inducements for the grant thereof. From verse. 1. to the end of the 7. 2.
Accompanied with a defense of the Lords glory against the blasphemy of the
said tyrants, verse. 8. and so to the end of the 11.


The solicitation of the said motion is performed by presenting unto the Lords
consideration and remembrance, 1. The office, which he challenges as proper
unto himself, of executing vengeance upon the wicked, ver. 1. and 2. 2. The
circumstance and length of time, wherein the wicked have tyrannized over the
godly, verse. 3.


Upon the former ground and inducement he pleads with the Lord, thus: If it
be thou only (O Lord) who art by office the auenger of all iniquity, and the
Judge of the earth: it may please thee according to this thy office, to execute
justice upon these wretched tyrants, who oppress and vex thy people. But it
is thou only (O Lord) who art by office the auenger of all iniquity, and the
judge of the earth, v. 1.2. It may please thee therefore according to this thy
office to execute justice upon these wretched tyrants, who oppress and vex
thy people, verse. 1. and 2.


Upon the other ground and inducement which is taken from the circumstance or
length of time, he uses this persuasion with the Lord: These proud wretches
have now a long space tyrannized over thy people, verse. 3. Where this their
tyrannizing is expressed by a word importing their rejoicing and triumphing in
the oppression of others: so as the Prophet brandeth them with a note of
extraordinary tyranny. Wherefore (O Lord) give an end to this their tyranny,
by executing justice and revenge upon them, verse. 1. and 2.


The antecedent of this reason is confirmed by particulating the several sorts
of tyranny practiced against the Lords people: thus, If they have now a long
space persecuted thy people both in word and fact: they have a long time
tyrannized over them. But they have now a long space persecuted thy people both
in word and fact, verse. 4.5.6. Therefore have they now a long time tyrannized
over them, verse. 3.


Touching the Assumption: first the several parts thereof are handled: and
then the whole is illustrated. The former part, which concerns the persecution
performed by words, is declared by these two particular instances: They deliver
out threats of violence and oppression against thy people: and they speak also
contemptibly of them, extolling themselves far above them, ver. 4. Therefore
it follows that they persecute thy people in word and speech.


The other part, which concerns the persecution performed in fact against the
Lords people, is cleared likewise by certain instances: in the setting down
whereof the Prophet proceeds by a logical gradation from the less to the
greater, thereby to amplify the greatness of the persecution and tyranny
executed upon the persons of the godly. The instances, whereupon the said
persecution by way of fact is concluded, are these: They vex and oppress thy
people by sundry unjust courses, verse. 5: they murder also the widow, the
stranger, and the orphane, verse. 6. Here you see the said gradation. To vex
the godly by unjust courses is a great sin. To murder them is a greater. But
to vex and murder the widow, the stranger, and the orphane, is a wickedness
far more heinous and capital. Therefore they persecute thy people by way of
fact.


Now the said whole Assumption jointly with these her parts has an
illustration from this comparison: These tyrants persecute the Lord himself by
disgorging blasphemy against him, charging upon him the imputation of
ignorance and carelesnes how it succeeds with the godly, verse. 7. No marvel
then if in word and fact they persecute the Lords people, verse. 4.5.6.


Thus far has the Prophet solicited his suit with the Lord, concerning the
execution of justice upon these bloody tyrants.

There follows the Prophets Apology in the behalf of the Lords glory
against the said blasphemy. The blasphemy is this: That the Lord neither
knows nor regards the proceedings held against the godly, verse. 7.


The wicked having breathed out against the Lord this blasphemous position;
whereby they strip and deprive him of the office which is proper unto him of
governing and judging the world: the Prophet does hereupon take an occasion to
accompany his humble motion with a defense of the Lords glory. The course he
holds in his Apology for the Lord, is this: First, he premiseth, verse. 8. a
direct contradiction to the said blasphemous position: which contradiction is
implied hereby, in that he charge these Machiuilian gallants with extreme
senselesnes for such their apprehension of the Lord: as if he said unto them
thus: It is a most gross untruth which you affirm of the Lords ignorance and
carelessness touching your proceedings against the godly: so to apprehend of
the Lord, argues in you an exceeding blockishnes. Secondly, having thus
censured and contradicted in general these barbarous Machiuilists, he
disputes against their blasphemy, and refelleth it by two arguments. The
first whereof is this: The Creator of each instrument, faculty, and act of all
knowledge both in the outward sense and mind, and he who is the punisher of
whole nations, does know and take to heart your tyrannous proceedings against
the godly, ver. 9. and 10. The Lord, whom you thus blaspheme, is the creator of
each instrument, faculty, and act of all knowledge both in the outward sense
and mind: and it is he, who is the punisher of whole nations. The Lord
therefore, whom you thus blaspheme, is he who does know and take to heart your
tyrannous proceedings against the godly. verse. 8. and 11.



In the Proposition are comprised (as you see) these several branches: 1. The
discerning of all proceedings by him, who has made the ear and the eye: that
is, the instrument, faculty, and act of hearing and seeing, verse. 9. 2. The
knowing of all proceedings by him, who has formed the mind, verse. 10. in the
end. Where by that one particular of the Lords teaching knowledge unto men, we
must understand likewise his creating the instrument, faculty, and act of this
knowledge. 3. The taking to heart all proceedings against the godly by him, who
is the punisher of whole nations, verse. 10. in the beginning. And this carries
a comparison from the greater to the less. For if the Lord be the punisher of
whole nations: what question can be made of his power and will to do justice
upon a few tyrants in the commonwealth of Israel?


The Assumption is omitted by the Prophet as a point unquestionable.

The Conclusion is apparently implied, in the 8. verse: where the Prophet under
a bitter censure and imputation of brutish dulnes laid upon the wicked for such
their phranticke conceit of the Lord, does contradict and reject the said
blasphemy as a most gross absurdity.

The other argument used by the Prophet in this his Apology for the Lords
glory, is a comparison from the greater, concluded thus: Who knows the very
thoughts of the wicked and the vanity of them, he cannot but know their
outward proceedings against the godly. The Lord knows the very thoughts of
the wicked and the vanity of them, verse. 11. Where under this knowledge
attributed unto the Lord, we must understand as meant also his taking to heart
such thoughts and plots as the wicked conceive and devise against the godly.
Therefore the Lord cannot but know their outward proceedings against the godly,
verse. 8.


Hitherto has been handled, first, the Prophets humble motion for justice
against these impious oppressors of the godly: secondly, his defense of the
Lords glory against their blasphemy.

His imparting of comfort unto the godly, does follow. For whereas the godly
may object, that in case they be thus afflicted by the hand of the said
tyrants, it may seem that they rest in a miserable condition, such as may
occasion them to doubt of the Lords providence and to divert their thoughts
from the rule of piety: the Prophet in answer to the said objection does to
the exceeding comfort of the godly, dispute this position: That the godly man,
though afflicted by the hand of the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed, verse.
12. in the former part thereof.


This position the Prophet does clear and determine by two arguments: whereof
The first is concluded thus: Whom the Lord by affliction teaches his law, and
fashioneth to patience till the ruin of the wicked, he, though afflicted by
the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed. But the godly man is he, whom the Lord
by affliction teaches his law, and fashioneth to patience till the ruin of
the wicked. The former effect is verse. 12. in the end: the other is verse. 13.
Two excellent effects of a sanctified affliction. In the exposition of the 13.
verse I follow Beza. Therefore the godly man, though afflicted by the hand of
the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed, verse. 12. in the former part thereof.
The second is of this sort: To whom the Lords love is constant and
unchangeable, he, though afflicted by the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed.
The godly man is he, to whom the Lords love is constant and unchangeable, verse.
14. Therefore the godly man, though afflicted by the wicked, is notwithstanding
blessed, ver. 12. in the former part thereof.



To the Assumption of this later Syllogism, which concerns the
unchangeableness of the Lords love to the godly man, the Prophet has yielded
this confirmation: If the carriage of all proceedings shall in the Lords good
time be so uprightly ordered, as that the godly man shall receive thereby what
is right and due unto him by the Lords covenant and promise: then is the Lords
love unto him constant and unchangeable. But the carriage of all proceedings
shall in the Lords good time be so uprightly ordered, as that the godly man
shall receive thereby what is right and due unto him by the Lords covenant and
promise, verse. 15. Where, first it is said, that judgment shall return to
justice: that is, the government and carriage of matters shall be reformed and
reduced to a course of right. Secondly, that after it, the upright in heart
shall return: that is, after this reformation once made, the godly shall
return, that is, partake in the fruit and benefit of the said reformation,
they being to receive thereby according to the Lords gracious promise,
deliverance from trouble, and such other blessed comforts. Therefore the godly
man is he, to whom the Lords love is constant and unchangeable, verse. 14.


The Assumption of this syllogism (wherein it is said that the godly man shall
communicate in the benefit of the Lords reformation, receiving thereby such
comforts as by the covenant and promise of mercy are due unto him) has a
double amplification: 1. From an instance in the Prophets own person handled
by a comparison of paritie, thus: The Lord has given to me deliverance from
trouble and special comforts otherwise, when I was pressed with the distresses
of my heart, verse. 17.18.19. In the 17. he says: he had died, had not the Lord
delivered him. In the 18, that the Lord vpheld him when he was slipping into
destruction. In the 19, that he received comforts from the Lord, when anguish
and distress of heart pressed him. Therefore the Lord will in his good time of
reformation give likewise deliverance from trouble and special comforts to
other the godly, verse. 15.
The former part of this reason is proved and enlarged thus: No man affoorded
unto me this deliverance and comfort when the wicked practiced against me,
verse. 16. It was therefore the Lord only that did it, verse. 17.18.19.
2. From the consideration of the Lords most just nature and proceeding.
Hereupon the Prophet deduceth this conclusion: If the Lord should not so order
all procedings, as that the godly man may thereby receive what is due unto him
by the Lords promise: he should allow the committing of injustice upon the
godly. But the Lord will not allow the committing of injustice upon the godly,
verse. 20. Where under an interrogatorie form of speech it is said, that the
throne of tyranny and oppression has no fellowship with the Lord: that is,
the Lord does renounce and detest all unjust proceedings, such as judicial
thrones of that quality do yield. Therefore the Lord will so order al
proceedings, as that the godly man may thereby receive what is due unto him by
the Lords promise of mercy, verse. 15.



The Assumption, wherein the Lords upright proceeding and detestation of
injustice is recommended, is made evident and cleree by a comparison: wherein
is laid forth the difference betwixt the proceeding held by tyrants and iniust
Judges, and that which is held by the Lord. The first part of the said
comparison is a description of the injustice committed by tyrannous Magistrates
upon the godly and innocent thus: They forge and contriue all wrongful means
whereby to defeat the course of law, verse. 20. in the end: they assemble
themselves to consult and conspire upon the ruin of the just: they pass
sentence of condemnation on him, verse. 21. But the eternal Lord does protect
the godly and the innocent: and he does execute his wrath upon the wicked,
verse. 22. and 23. In the 22. verse the Prophet by a particular instance in his
own person, and by naming one for all of the same kind and nature, does imply
and note the Lords protecting of the godly and innocent in general. For what
the Lord is unto David, as David is a godly and innocent man, the same the Lord
is to al innocent and godly men. In the 23. verse, the Lords proceeding in
justice to the destruction of the wicked, is delivered in express terms: and
to assure us thereof, it is thrice set down: and to make it the more admirable
and glorious, it is avouched that the Lord so orders his proceeding with
them, as that they become the ministers and instruments of their own
destruction.


PSALM. 103.
MY soul: praise thou the Lord: and all that is within me, praise his holy
name.

2 My soul: praise thou the Lord: and forget not any of his benefits.

3 Who forgiueth all thine iniquities: and heals al thine infirmities.

4 Who redeemeth thy life from the grave: who covers thee on every side with
mercy and compassions.

5 Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: who renews thy youth as the
youth of an Eagle.

6 The Lord does justice and right to all that are oppressed.

7 He has made his ways known to Moses: and his works to the children of
Israel.

8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness.

9 He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.

11 For how high the heavens are above the earth: so great is his mercy to
them that fear him.

12 As far as the East is from the West: so far has he removed our sins
from us.

13 With what compassion a father is carried toward his children: the same
has the Lord toward them that fear him.

14 For he knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust.

15 The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he.

16 When the wind has passed over it, it is gone: and the place thereof
knows it no more.

17 But the loving kindness of the Lord is from all eternity, and endures for
ever upon them that fear him: and his righteousness upon their childrens
children:

18 Upon them that keep his covenant: and who remember his commandments to
do them.

19 The Lord has established his throne in heaven: and his kingdom rules
over all.

20 Praise the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, and do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his word.

21 Praise the Lord all ye his hosts, who are his ministers performing his
pleasure.

22 Praise the Lord all ye his works in all places of his dominion. My soul
praise thou the Lord.

ANALYS. PSALM. 103.
There are of this Psalm two parts. In the former the Prophet does excite and
provoke himself to the magnifying of the Lords name: from the beginning of the
1. verse to the end of the 18. In the later he inuiteth all other things to a
concurrence with him in this duty of praising the Lord: from the beginning of
the 19. verse to the end of the Psalm.

The subject then handled in the former part is this: That David ought with his
whole heart to magnify the name of the Lord, verse. 1. and 2.


This subject the Prophet does propound under a form and figure of speech
addressed to his soul and to all the faculties thereof: thereby stirring up
himself to this worthy duty of honoring the Lord, not in part or remisly, but
most affectionatly and with each faculty of his mind and will. The ground and
motive inducing him to perform unto the Lord this acknowledgement and service
of glorifying his name, is (as may appear by the latter member of the 2.
verse) a survey made by him of the Lords blessings bestowed on himself in
particular, and on the whole Church in general. Out of this consideration he
reasons and concludes thus in honor of the Lord: Who has blessed David in
particular, and the whole Church in general, his name ought David with his
whole heart to magnify. But it is the Lord who has blessed David in
particular, and the whole Church in general. Therefore the Lords name ought
David with his whole heart to magnify.


The Prophet first sets down the conclusion verse 1. and 2. Then he
proceeds to the Assumption: which consists of two branches: The first
whereof is verse 3.4.5: the second is from the beginning of the 6. verse to the
end of the 18. verse.

The first branch of the Assumption concerning the blessings bestowed upon
David in particular, is declared by an induction, consisting partly of
spiritual blessings, viz. Justification and Sanctification, verse 3: and
partly of temporal favors, verse 4. and 5. The induction is concluded thus:
The Lord has bestowed on David pardon of sins and sanctification of heart:
he has delivered him from extreme perils: he so compasses him on every side
with his favor, that being delivered he shall not miscarrie by any accident at
any time or place: he does furnish unto him in plentiful sort all needful
provisions for this life: he intertaineth him in vigor and strength of body
for the lengthning of his days. Therefore the Lord has blessed David in
particular.


The first member of this induction is verse. 3. Where the pardon of sins is
first mentioned: and then under the phrase of healing thy infirmities, is
implied the curing of the diseases which are in the understanding and will:
which being spiritual diseases, the cure is performed by the Spirit of
sanctification. For it is the Spirit of the Lord that works upon the
understanding to inlighten it with the knowledge of the Gospel, and upon the
will, to conform it to some measure of obedience unto the Gospel.

The second is verse 4. in the beginning: where I take it he means a
temporal deliverance, having in the former verse recorded his spiritual
deliverance from sin and the punishment thereof.

The third is verse. 4. in the end. Where he notes the continuance of the
Lords extraordinary care and favor toward him being delivered, which is such
as covers him on every side, so as he can not miscarie.

The fourth and fifth are verse 5: which verse I do with the French and M.
Beza so interpret as I have set down. The said fifth member of the induction
has an illustration from a Comparison of Similitude, thus: As the body of an
Eagle is entertained in vigor and strength, whereby it lives long: So the Lord
intertaineth David in vigor and strength to the lengthning of his age.


The Prophet having handled the first branch of the said Assumption concerning
the blessings bestowed on himself in particular, does now in like sort by an
induction specify the benefits bestowed on the Church in general. The
induction is this: The Lord relieueth and righteth the cause of the oppressed:
he has delivered unto Moses the laws and statutes wherein his people are to
walk: he has honored his people by his sundry deliverances of them: he is
merciful unto them in the pardon of their transgressions. Therefore the Lord
has blessed his whole Church in general.


The first member of this induction is, verse. 6.

The second and third are verse 7. This verse is so expounded by the French and
Beza.

The fourth is verse. 8.9.10. where the Prophet with variety of phrase does set
out the excellency and greatness of the Lords mercy in remitting the offenses
of his people. That this is the maine scope of those 3. verses, may appear,
first by the terms and forms of speech used by the Prophet. Secondly, by
comparing the 8. verse with that which is set down Exodus 34.7: Numb. 14.18:
Nehem. 9.17. Thirdly, by the illustration, which the Prophet in the verses
following has yielded unto this point of the excellency and greatness of the
Lords mercy.

Let us now see how the Prophet does handle this last member of the said
induction. His purpose is (as I have said) to make known unto us this sweet
and comfortable position, viz.

That the Lords mercy in pardoning the sins of his people is exceeding
great.
This point he cleereth: First, by three comparisons of equality, thus: 1. How
great the distance of the highest heaven is from the earth: so great is the
Lords mercy in being reconciled unto those who fear him, that is, unto his
people, verse. 11. 2. As far as the East is from the West: so far has the
Lord removed from us our offenses, verse. 12. 3. With how great and tender
compassion a father is carried toward his children: with so great and tender
mercy the Lord embraces his, verse. 13.
Secondly, by noting unto us a motive inducing the Lord to the showing of this
exceeding mercy: which is an acknowledgement and consideration on the Lords
part of the condition allotted unto man by creation, verse. 14. A condition, in
regard of the matter whereof man was formed, not only base and contemptible,
but most brittle also and apt to dissolution. By the consideration whereof the
Lord is the rather moved to proceed with us, not according to our desert in
provoking him, but according to that course which is most suitable to the glory
and excellency of his gracious nature: that thereby he might the more magnify
the riches of his mercy, being showed upon so contemptible and brittle a worm
as man is. Thirdly, by remembering unto us the eternity of this mercy. Which
argument is concluded thus: The Lords mercy to his people for the pardon of
their sins has been from all eternity, and does endure for ever toward
them, verse. 17. Therefore it is exceeding great. verse. 8.9.10.



The Antecedent is amplified in this sort: 1. By a Dissimilitude, thus: Man
quickly passes away, verse. 15. and 16. Of this sentence there is added an
illustration from a double similitude: the one of grass: the other of a flower
of the field. Man is resembled to either of them in this point of his speedy
withering and vanishing. But the Lords mercy to his people is eternal, v. 17.
2. By a comparison from the greater: wherein the object of the Lords mercy is
noted, that thereby we might see the reach thereof. The comparison is this: The
Lords mercy is extended for ever to many generations of the posterity of his
people. No marvel then if he extend it for ever to the persons of his people.



The first part of this comparison is verse 17. in the end. Where the Prophet
says that the Lords righteousness is upon their Childrens children: meaning by
righteousness the Lords fidelity in keeping his covenant of mercy: and
consequently the mercy performable by this covenant: which not determining in
the persons of parents, but being extended also and presented to their
posterity, it does thereby discover it self to be very great and excellent.

Now whereas it may be objected that by this course of extending mercy to so
many generations, it will fall out to be extended to hypocrites and impious
wretches: the Prophet verse 18. does clear this point by a description of
those, to whom the said mercy is by the Lords covenant extendable. The
description of them, is 1. From an effect on their part: viz. their observing
of the Lords covenant made with them: which consists in dependence on God,
and in obedience to his statutes. 2. From their perseverance in this care and
endeavor to glorify the Lord by their faith and obedience of life. Which I
take to be meant by this clause, of retaining always in memory the Lords
statutes to do them.


Hitherto concerning the first part of the Psalm. The second follows,
wherein he inuiteth a concurrence with him in this duty of praising the Lord:
so as the subject handled in this second part is this: That all things
whatsoever ought to concur with David in praising the Lord, verse. 20.21.22.


The argument to persuade this concurrence is concluded thus: If the Lord does
by his imperial scepter and sovereign power govern all things in heaven and
earth: then ought all things to concur with David in praising the Lord. But
the Lord does by his imperial scepter and sovereign power govern all things
in heaven and earth, verse. 19. Where under these words (He has established his
throne in heaven) is meant the Lords settled and absolute authority of
commanding and ruling in heaven. Therefore ought all things to concur with
David in praising the Lord. In liew of this general conclusion, there is set
down an induction of the particulars which are invited to this duty of
praising the Lord. The particulars are these: 1. The Angels: which are
described verse. 20. 1. By their exceeding strength. 2. By their action of
executing with all readiness the Lords commandments.
2. All other creatures in heaven and earth: which are described verse. 21. 1.
By comparing the^ to Armies. 2. By their imployme^t in the Lords service.
3. All the Lords works of mercy and justice in any part of the world
whatsoever, verse. 22.



PSALM. 104.
MY soul, praise thou the Lord. O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great: thou
art clothed with glory and majesty.

2 Who covers himself with light as with a garment: who spreads the
heavens like a tent.

3 Who lays the beams of his high chambers in the waters: who makes the
thick clouds his chariot: who walks upon the wings of the wind.

4 Who makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flaming fire.

5 He has set the earth upon her foundations: so that it shall never be
removed.

6 Thou had covered it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood
above the mountains.

7 At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.

8 They ascended by the mountains: they descended by the valleis, into the
place which thou have established for them.

9 Thou have set them a bound which they shall not pass: they shall not
return to cover the earth.

10 He sends the springs into the valleis, that they might run between the
mountains:

11 That they may give drink to all the beasts of the field: and that the
wild asses may therewith quench their thirst:

12 That by these springs the fowls of the air may dwell, singing amongst the
branches.

13 He watreth the mountains from his high chambers: and the earth is filled
with the fruit of thy works.

14 He causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the use of man,
making nourishment to come from out the earth:

15 As wine that makes glad the heart of man: oil to make the face to shine:
and bread that strengthens man's heart:

16 The high trees are therewith satisfied, the Cedars of Libanon which he has
planted:

17 That the birds may make their nests there: the Storke dwells in fur
trees.

18 The high mountains are for the Goats: the rocks are a refuge for the
Conies.

19 He has appointed the Moon for seasons: the Sun knows his going down.

20 Thou bring darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest creep forth.

21 The young lions roar after their pray: and seek their meat of the
mighty God.

22 When the Sun rises, they retire and couch in their dens.

23 Then goes man forth to his work and to his labor until the evening.

24 O Lord, how great are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

25 It is this great and wide Sea, wherein there are things creeping
innumerable: small living creatures with great.

26 There walk the ships: and that great Leuiathan whom thou have made to play
therein.

27 Al these wait upon thee, that thou may give them their food in due
season.

28 Thou give it unto them, and they gather it: thou openest thine hand, and
they are filled with good things.

29 If thou hide thy face, they are troubled: if thou take away their breath,
they die and return to their dust.

30 If thou send forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renuest the face
of the earth.

31 Glory be to the Lord for ever: let the Lord rejoice in his works:

32 Who looking upon the earth, it trembles: and who touching the mountains,
they smoke.

33 I will sing unto the Lord all my life: I will praise my God, while I live.

34 My meditation will be acceptable unto him: I will rejoice in the Lord.

35 The sinners shall be consumed from out the earth: and the wicked, till
there be no more. O my soul, praise thou the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.

ANALYS. PSALM. 104.
This Psalm has a correspondence in argument with the former. For as in the
former the Psalmist provoke himself and others to magnify the Lord: so in
this he inuiteth himself and others to the same duty. The difference of the
one from the other is in the quality of the inducements upon which the
performance of the said duty is grounded: they being such in the former Psalm
as concern the Church principally: and such in this as concern all mankind:
yea all living creatures. The subject then of this Psalm is this: That out of
a reverent and due acknowledgement of the Lords glory, we ought to magnify
him, verse. 1. in the beginning, verse. 31. and verse. 35. in the end.


In the beginning of the first verse the Prophet addresseth personally unto
himself his exhortation to praise the Lord: and in his person, to all others:
as may appear as well by the nature of the motives to this duty alleged by
him, they being such as concern all, as likewise by that, which is set down
verse 31. and 35. In which verses he stirs up others to second him in this
service of tendering praise and honor unto the Lord. The principal and maine
ground of the said service is this: If the Lord has in the creation of things
and conservation of living creatures set forth and published to the view of
the world, the glory of his power, wisdom and goodness: then out of a due
acknowledgement of this his glory ought we to magnify him. But the Lord has
in the creation of things and the conservation of living creatures set forth
and published to the view of the world, the glory of his power, wisdom and
goodness. From the beginning of the second verse to the end of the 30: and more
summarily, verse. 24. where the Prophet speaks thus: How great are thy works?
in wisdom thou have made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. In the
first member he notes the power of the Lord: in the second, his wisdom: in
the third, his goodness in the number of the said works. Therefore out of a due
acknowledgement of this his glory, ought we to magnify him, verse. 1.31.35.


The Assumption is handled by the Prophet first in the whole, by an argument
drawn from the general: then in the several parts thereof. In the whole, the
handling is thus: All thy works do represent and notify to the world thy
majesty and glory, verse. 1. Where the Prophet affirming, that the Lord is
exceeding great, and that he has clothed himself with glory and majesty,
does thereby mean that his works are this garment wherein he has as it were
imbroidered and visibly represented this his glory. And so it is expounded by
Call. Marlo. Beza. Therefore thy works of creation and conservation do
represent and publish the same. From the beginning of the second verse, to the
end of the thirtith: and more summarily, verse. 24.


Touching the handling of the said Assumption in the several parts thereof:
whereas the said Assumption consists of two parts: the one concerning the
creation of things: the other, the conservation of living creatures: the
Prophet first disputes that branch of creation, proouing by an induction that
in the creation of things we may behold as in a mirror this glory of the Lord.
The induction is concluded thus: In the works of the superior part of the
world, as in the light, the heavens, the clouds and winds, the Angels:
likewise in the works of the inferior part of the world, as in the earth and
the water, the Lord has set out and proclaimed unto us his glory. From the
beginning of the second verse, to the end of the ninth verse. What particulars
are omitted in this induction, for as much as they are of the same stamp, and
serve to the same purpose of representing unto us the Lords glory, they are to
be conceived as set down to make the said induction perfect. Therefore has the
Lord in his works of creation published and proclaimed unto us his glory,
verse. 24.


The first member of this induction concerning the light, is verse 2. where it
is amplified by a comparison of Similitude, thus: As a garment does adorn and
set forth the person who wears it: So the light does discover and set out
the glory of him who created it.


The second touching the Heavens, is also verse 2: where it is handled likewise
by a comparison of similitude, thus: As the extending of a princely Tent does
set out the magnificencie of him whose it is: So the extending of the heavens
sets out the majesty of him who made them.


The third is of the clouds, verse. 3. where the clouds are described by the
service they yield unto the Lord. This their service consists: 1. In that
they serve as it were for lodgings and chambers, in which and from whence the
Lord does manifest the glory of his power, justice, and mercy. The Prophet,
Psalm. 18.12. calls the clouds the Lords tabernacles. And in the 1. of Kings*
chap. 8.12. the Lord is said to dwell in the clouds. In these clouds the
Psalmist affirms that the Lord has laid the beams of his chambers: that is
to say, that he has as it were built unto himself lodgings and places, from
whence to show his glory. 2. In that they serve also for instruments of his
executions both in the way of mercy and in the way of justice. And upon this
ground they are called the Lords chariot, out of an allusion to the ancient use
of chariots in the battles of Princes.


The fourth is of the Winds, verse. 3: where they are described: 1. By their
swiftnes: which is noted in that wings are attributed unto them. 2. By the
Lords employing of them in his services of expedition and speed: which is
implied hereby, in that the Lord is said to walk upon their wings.


The fifth member of the said induction concerns the Angels, verse 4. where
they are described: 1. By the simplenes of their essence: they being called
spirits, that is, essences free from all corporal and material composition.
2. By the strength and agilitie of their essence (they being called a flaming
fire:) which is declared by a comparison, thus: As a flaming fire is of
strength to consume, and of a quality speedily piercing: So the Angels are of
strength to frustrate all opposition: and they do with all nimblenes and
speed pierce every where.



The sixth is of the earth, verse 5. where we may observe two particulars noted
by the Prophet, wherein the Lord has imprinted a visible testimony and mark
of his glory: The one, the founding of the earth upon the seas: which the
Prophet calls the bases of the earth. The other, the stabilitie and
vnmoueablenes of the earth.


The seventh is of the waters, verse. 6.7.8.9. Where the Prophet observes these
two things touching the waters: 1. Their place in the beginning of the
creation, viz. the first day. 2. Their place in the process of the creation,
viz. the third day.


Touching their place in the beginning of the creation: it is verse. 6. said to
be the outward superficies and face of the whole earth. Which covering of the
earth by them is illustrated by two comparisons: 1. The one, a Similitude,
thus: As a garment covers the body: so the waters covered the earth. 2. The
other, a comparison from the greater, thus: The waters covered the highest
hills: no marvel then if they covered lower places.


Concerning their place in the third day of the creation: the Prophet notes it
verse 8. to be that which the Lord had assigned unto them, viz, the sea: within
the receptacle and limits whereof they are shut up and confined: as may appear
Genesis 1.10: and Job. 38.10. This retyring of the waters from the face of the
earth into this their place, is described: 1. By the efficient thereof: viz.
the thundering voice and commandment of the Lord, verse. 7. 2. By their
speedines in retyring, verse. 7. which is noted, in that they are said to fly
and to hasten away, forthwith upon the sense and knowledge of the Lords
commandment. 3. By their effect of frustrating and ouercomming whatsoever
might give impediment to their retyring, v. 8. where it is said, that they
ascended by the hills, and descended by the valleis: as if the Prophet should
say, That neither hills nor valleis, nor any obstacle whatsoever, could hinder
their retyring into the place assigned unto them. 4. By their perpetual
residing in the place, whereinto they are retired. verse. 9.


Hitherto of the first branch of the said Assumption concerning the creation of
things, and the induction used for the demonstration thereof.

There follows the second branch of the said Assumption concerning the
conservation of living creatures: from the beginning of the 10. verse to the
end of the 30. Here then to prove that the Lord has not only in his works of
creation, but in other actions of his providence sensibly represented the
glory of his name to the eye of the world: the Prophet has undertaken to
dispute this worthy position, viz. That the Lord by his providence does
conserve and intertaine all living creatures in the state of nature allotted
unto them, verse. 28.


For the clearing of this position, the Prophet uses three several arguments.
The first contains the means and isntrumental causes, whereby living
creatures are conserved and entertained. Which means are every of them so many
excellent works in particular comprehended under that general action of
conservation. The Prophets conclusion by virtue of this argument is this: Arg.
1.
The Lord has for the use of living creatures furnished unto them the benefit
of springs and rivers, the service of rain water, the commodity of the night
and day, the opportunity of the sea. From the beginning of the 10. verse, to
the end of the 26. Therefore the Lord does by his providence conserve and
intertaine living creatures in the state and condition of nature allotted unto
them, verse. 28.


The first particular of the said means concerning springs and rivers derived
from them, is set down verse. 10.11.12. In which verses the said springs and
rivers are described: 1. By their efficient: who is the Lord himself, verse.
10. 2. By the place of their current, viz. the valleis, verse. 10. 3. By their
use and end, viz. that they might yield the commodity of drink: 1. To the
beasts of the field, verse. 11. 2. To the birds of the air, verse. 12. Where the
birds are noted unto us partly by their sitting near unto the springs and
rivers for the purpose of drinking, partly by their action of singing as it
were in praise of the Lord for this their refreshment by drinking.



The second particular is of the supply yielded by the Lord of rain water,
verse. 13.14.15.16.17.18. This particular of the rain water is described: 1. By
the place, from whence it is sent, viz. the clouds, which are called the Lords
high chambers, verse. 13. 2. By the places, on which it falls, viz. the
mountains and other parts of the earth, verse. 13. 3. By the effect it works,
viz. the making of the earth to yield plenty of fruits, verse. 13. in the end:
where it is said, that the earth is filled with the fruit of thy works, that
is, with the fruits growing and produced by thy works: which are the showers
and dewes wrought and caused by the Lord to distill from the clouds.


That the earth by virtue of this rain water yields plenty of fruits, is
showed by particulating the kinds of fruits produced: which are these, viz. 1.
Grass for the use of cattle, verse. 14. in the beginning. 2. Sundry herbs
and plants for the use of man, verse. 14. in the midst. Where this use which
man receives, is expounded to be the nourishment which the Lord causes to
come from out the earth, that is, from the herbs and plants produced by the
earth. Now this nourishment, which the Lord causes the herbs and plants of
the earth to produce, is noted in particularitie to be: 1. Wine, verse. 15:
where it is recommended by the effect of rejoicing the heart. 2. Oil, verse.
15: where it is commended by the effect of making the face to shine. 3. Bread,
verse. 15: where it is commended by the effect of relieuing and fortifying the
strength of the body.
3. All goodly and high trees, as Cedars and Fur trees for birds to breed
and rest on, verse. 16. and 17. 4. Nourishment in the barrennest and roughest
places for the creatures that live in them, viz. for goats and conies, verse.
18. These barren and rough places are called by the Prophet high mountains.
Here we must understand that of the high mountains, which is verse. 16. said
of the high trees: namely, that they are satisfied with the rain, which
falls from the clouds: and so are enabled to yield nourishment to the
creatures living on them.


The third particular of the means used by the Lord for the conseruing and
intertaining of living creatures, is concerning the night and day. The night
and day are described unto us: 1. By noting the isntrumental causes of the
distinction of the one from the other, viz. the Moon and the Sun, verse. 19.
where it is said, that the Lord has appointed the Moon for seasons, that is,
to distinguish the season of the night from the day: And, that the Sun
knows his going down, that is, keeps a constant course of setting and
rising, whereby the day is distinguished from the night. 2. By the use and
opportunity they yield by this distinction of the one from the other, unto
wild beasts and unto men. The use of the night for wild beasts, is the
opportunity of traveling abroad for their pray, verse. 20.21. The use of the
day for them, is to keep retired and to rest, verse. 22. The use yielded to man
from the day, is the opportunity of employing himself abroad in the duties of
his calling from morning to evening, verse. 23. The use of the night for man,
though it be not distinctly expressed by the Prophet, yet forasmuch as it is
said that man is to labor from morning to evening, we may by good collection
conceive this use to be the refreshment and rest of man.


The fourth and last particular is of the sea, verse 25. where there is a
double use thereof noted: 1. The one, to be a receptacle for fishes, verse. 25.
2. The other, to be the subject of Navigations, verse. 26.


The second argument, whereby to prove that it is the Lord who does conserve
and intertaine living creatures, is of this conclusion: Arg. 2
At whose hands living creatures are by nature directed to attend their
intertainment at all times of need: he it is by whom they are entertained and
conserved in the state allotted unto them. But it is the Lord at whose hands
living creatures are by nature directed to attend their intertainment at all
times of need, verse. 27. Therefore it is the Lord who does conserve and
intertaine them in the state allotted unto them, verse. 28.


The third Argument alleged by the Prophet for a further demonstration of the
position in hand, is concluded thus: Arg. 3.
By whose power and virtue the perishing and reviving of living creatures in
their kind, is disposed of: by him they are entertained in the state of nature
allotted unto them. But it is the Lord by whose power and virtue the perishing
and reviving of living creatures in their kind, is disposed of, verse. 29.30.
Therefore it is the Lord by whom they are entertained in the state of nature
allotted unto them. verse. 28.


Thus we see how the Prophet has disputed this action of the Lords providence
in conseruing and intertaining of living creatures in the condition of nature
allotted unto them. And thus we see how he has hitherto proved that the Lord
in the creation of things and in the conservation of living creatures, has
disclosed unto the world the glory of his power, wisdom and goodness:
whereupon must be inferred this conclusion, That in due acknowledgement thereof
we ought to honor and magnify him.

Here the Prophet stays not: but for a further provocation to the tendering
of this duty unto the Lord, he uses two other arguments: the former whereof is
concluded thus: If we ought so to carry our selves as that the Lord may take
delight in his works, then ought we with praise to acknowledge the glory of
his name in them. But we ought so to carry our selves as that the Lord may
take delight in his works, verse. 31. in the end. Therefore ought we with
praise to acknowledge the glory of his name in them, verse. 31. in the
beginning.


The Assumption is persuaded by the Prophet thus: The Lord is able by his power
in a moment to confound whatsoever is offensive and indelightfull unto him:
though it were as immovable as the earth, and as strong and high as any
mountain, verse. 32. Therefore ought we so to carry our selves as that the
Lord may take delight in his works, and not repent him that he has made them,
verse. 31. in the end.


The last argument used by the Prophet to enforce this duty of magnifying the
Lord, is a comparison of equality: wherein is offered to our consideration an
example and profession on the part of the Prophet, that himself during life
will not fail to perform the said duty. His conclusion is this.

As for my self: I profess that while I live I will magnify the Lord, verse.
33. Therefore let all other likewise magnify and honor him, verse. 31.
The Antecedent of this reason is enlarged thus: If this my endeavor to
magnify the Lord, will be a service pleasing and acceptable unto him: while I
live will I magnify him. But this my endeavor to magnify the Lord will be a
service pleasing and acceptable unto him, verse. 34. in the beginning. Therefore
while I live will I magnify him, verse. 33.


The Assumption is in this sort amplified: 1. From the efficient of this
acceptance concluded thus: Whose endeavor to magnify the Lord proceeds from
an heart rejoicing in him, his endeavor cannot be but a service pleasing and
acceptable unto the Lord. But the endeavor on my part to magnify the Lord,
proceeds from an heart rejoicing in him, verse. 34. in the end. Therefore this
my endeavor cannot be but a pleasing and acceptable service unto the Lord,
verse. 34. in the beginning.
2. From the consideration of the Lords proceeding with such as will not honor
him, thus: The Lord will cut off from the earth such as refuse to honor and
magnify him, verse. 35. Therefore will he accept my endeavor to magnify him as
a pleasing service, verse. 34. in the beginning.



PSALM. 107.
PRaise the Lord, because he is good: yea because his mercy endures for ever.

2 Let them report, who have been redeemed by the Lord, and whom he has
delivered from distress:

3 And whom he has gathered from the regions of the East and the West* of the
North and the South.

4 Who wandered in the desert and wilderness, finding no city to dwell in,

5 Both hungry and thirsty, so as their soul fainted in them:

6 When they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them from their
distress:

7 And led them forth by the right way, that they might come to a city of
habitation.

8 Let them therefore magnify before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men.

9 For he satisfied the thirsty soul, and filled the hungry soul with
goodness.

10 Such as dwell in darkness and in the shadow of death, bound in misery and
iron,

11 Because they rebelled against the words of the mighty God, and despised
the counsel of the most high:

12 Whereupon he humbled their heart with heaviness: they fell down and there
was no helper:

13 When they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them from
their distress:

14 He brought them out of darkness and out of the shadow of death, and brake
their bands asunder.

15 Let them therefore magnify before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men.

16 For he has broken the gates of brass, and has cut the bars of iron
asunder.

17 Fools, who by reason of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted:

18 Whose soul abhors all meat, and they are brought to deaths door:

19 When they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them from
their distress:

20 He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their graves.

21 Let them therefore magnify before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men:

22 And let them offer sacrifices of praise, and declare his works with
rejoicing.

23 They who go down to the Sea in ships, traffiquing upon the great waters:

24 They who see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep:

25 How he commanding raises the stormy wind, and lifts up the waves of
the sea:

26 How they mount up to the heavens, and descend to the deep: their soul
melts through trouble:

27 They stumble and stagger to and fro like a drunken man, all their cunning
being gone:

28 When they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of
their distress:

29 He turned the storm into calm, and the waves became still:

30 And the waves being quieted, he brought them rejoicing unto the haven
where they would be.

31 Let them therefore magnify before the Lord his loving kindness, and his
wonderful works before the sons of men:

32 And let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the elders.

33 He turns the floods into a wilderness, and the springs of water into
dryness:

34 A fruitful land into barennesse, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

35 He turns the wilderness into pooles of water, and the dry land into
springs of water.

36 There he places the hungry: and they build a city to dwell in:

37 And sow the fields and plant vineyards, which bring forth fruitful
increase.

38 He blesses them, and they multiply exceedingly: and he diminishes not
their cattle.

39 Afterward they are diminished and brought low by distress, evil and
sorrow.

40 He powers contempt upon Princes, and causes them to err in desert places
out of the way.

41 He raises up the poor out of misery, and makes him families like a
flock of sheep.

42 Let the upright see it and rejoice: and let all iniquity stop her mouth.

43 Who is wise, let him observe these things: that they may understand the
loving kindnesses of the Lord.

ANALYS. PSALM. 107.
The subject of this Psalm is this: That the Lord is to be magnified, first by
all men in general, verse. 1. Secondly, by certain sorts of men in particular.
From the beginning of the second verse, to the end of the 42. verse.


That the Lord is to be magnified by all men in general, the Psalmist shows
by this argument: The Lord is good, verse. 1. in the midst. Therefore all his
people ought to magnify him, verse. 1. in the beginning.


The Antecedent of this reason is amplified by a comparison from the greater,
thus: The Lord is good: yea (that which is a matter of greater moment and
excellency) this his goodness does never determine, but endures eternally,
verse. 1. in the end.


Having declared that all men in general ought to praise the Lord: he
proceeds to show that certain sorts of men are tied, some of them by a
proper obligation of an extraordinary mercy, and some by the regard of a common
blessing, to a special and praisefull acknowledgement of the Lords goodness
toward them.

Let us see upon what particular motive these several sorts of men are to
ground this their action of magnifying the Lord.

The first sort is of such as have wandered out of their way in deserts
fainting through hunger and thirst, verse 2. to the end of the 9. The
inducement for the performance of this duty of praise by them, is concluded
thus: Whom the Lord has delivered from distress, reducing them to places of
habitation, and relieuing them against the extremity of hunger and thirst:
they ought to magnify the Lord for this his mercy both privately and
publicly, verse. 2. and 3. But such as have wandered out of their way in
deserts, fainting through hunger and thirst, the Lord has delivered from
distress, reducing them to places of habitation, and relieuing them against
the extremity of hunger and thirst, verse. 4.5 6.7.9. Therefore such as have
wandered out of their way in deserts, fainting through hunger and thirst, ought
to magnify the Lord for this his mercy both privately and publicly, verse. 8.


The Proposition is verse 2. and 3. In these verses the whole sense of the
proposition is comprehended. In the second, the action of reporting, that is,
of magnifying the Lord is enjoined unto those who are redeemed by him from
distress. In the 3. verse the particular blessings of reducing them to places
of habitation and relieuing them against hunger and thirst, are noted under
that action of gathering them from the East and West, North and South. For this
gathering of them from these regions, is a gathering of them unto villages and
cities: where they might find a double comfort and relief: the one, against
wandering in deserts by the opportunity of houses and lodgings: the other,
against hunger and thirst, by the commodity of sustenance suppliable in
villages and cities.

The Assumption is verse 4.5.6.7.9. In the 4 verse their wandering out of their
way in deserts is noted: in the 5, their fainting through hunger and thirst: in
the 6, their deliverance from distress: in the 7. their reduction to places of
habitation, and consequently their relief against hunger and thirst: in the 9,
this supply against hunger and thirst, is expressed in distinct terms.

The said Assumption is in the 6. verse, enlarged by imparting unto us one of
the causes which moved the Lord to this compassionate regard of these
distressed Pilgrims: viz. their humble supplication and crying unto the Lord.

The conclusion is verse. 8. where is enjoined a magnifying of the Lords
goodness, not only in private, which the Psalmist calls a magnifying thereof
before the Lord: but also in public, which he calls a magnifying thereof
before the sons of men.

The second sort of persons, who are obliged to this duty of acknowledging the
Lords mercy in all grateful manner, is of prisoners whom the Lord has
enlarged from out of prison. The reason inducing them to offer unto the Lord
this sacrifice is this: By whom prisoners enlarged from out of prison have
recovered their liberty, him they ought to praise for his goodness both
privately and publicly. But it is the Lord by whom prisoners enlarged from out
of prison have recovered their liberty, verse. 13.14. Therefore it is the Lord
whom prisoners enlarged from out of prison, ought to praise for his goodness
both privately and publicly, verse. 15.


The Assumption is amplified by setting forth the greatness of this favor and
act performed by the Lord in restoring prisoners to their liberty. The
amplification is: 1. From the consideration of the contrary, viz. the quality
of their imprisonment: which is noted to be accompanied with extreme misery,
in regard 1. Of the place thereof: it being a dark dungeon, and as it were the
house of death, ver. 10. in the beginning. 2. Of the rigor they endured in that
representative dungeon of death: they being there chained with bonds and
fetters of iron, verse. 10. 3. Of the cause, for which they suffered: it being
no less than rebellion against the Lord, and a wilful contempt of his
gracious purpose to bless them: a crime of so capital a nature, as might
justly have occasioned their perpetual restraint, verse. 11. 4. Of the anguish
they endured in mind, by reason of this so sharp affliction, verse. 12. in the
beginning. 5. Of their utter destitution and desperate case, there being none
to help them, verse. 12. in the end.
2. From the consideration of the motive inducing the Lord to bestow this
blessing of liberty upon them, viz. their humble supplication and crying unto
him, verse 13. in the beginning. 3. From the consideration of the
extraordinary course and manner of their enlargement: which by breaking the
gates of steel and bars of iron is implied to be such, as if without this
extraordinary power and force there had been an impossibility of their
deliverance. verse. 14. and 16.


The third sort of men, who rest bound to honor the Lord for his goodness
toward them, is of such as the Lord has recovered from the extremity of
sickness. The argument to persuade them to tender this service of thanks unto
the Lord is this: By whom the sick delivered from sickness have recovered their
health, him they ought to magnify for this mercy both privately and publicly.
But it is the Lord by whom the sick delivered from sickness have recovered
their health, verse. 19.20. Therefore it is the Lord, whom the sick delivered
from sickness ought to magnify for this mercy both privately and publicly,
verse. 21.22.


This blessing of health mentioned in the Assumption, is set out by making
known unto us, 1. The quality of the sickness endured by them. To which purpose
their sickness is described: 1. By the cause thereof, viz. the sins of the
sick: in respect whereof they are called fools, v. 17. 2. By the extremity
thereof: which appears by two effects: 1. Their abhorring of sustenance, verse.
18. 2. Their neerenes to death, verse. 18.

2. The motive which drew the Lord to the showing of this mercy, viz. their
humble suit and crying unto him for compassion, verse. 19. 3. The manner and
course held by the Lord in restoring health to these sick, viz. the Lords
curing of them without ordinary means by his absolute will and pleasure,
verse. 20.


The fourth sort of persons, who owe unto the Lord the sacrifice of praise for
his extraordinary mercy toward them, are travelers on Sea (described verse.
23. by their sailing on the sea, and by the end thereof) who being delivered
from great distress in their voiages on sea, have recovered the port of their
safety. That these ought to extol the mercy vouchsafed unto them herein, is
proved thus: By whom travelers on sea being delivered from distresses on sea,
have recovered the port of their safety, him they ought to magnify for this
mercy both privately and publicly. But it is the Lord by whom travelers on
sea being delivered from distresses on sea, have recovered the port of their
safety, verse. 28.29.30. Therefore it is the Lord whom travelers on sea being
delivered from distresses on sea, ought to magnify for this mercy both
privately and publicly, verse. 31.32.


The blessing of deliverance from perils on sea (whereof the Assumption
speaks) and of recovering the port of safety, is amplified by relating unto
us: 1. The greatness of the distress whereto the said travelers were subject
in their voyages on sea. This greatness of their distress is first mentioned in
general, verse. 24: where by seeing the works of the Lord and his wonders in
the deep, is meant a visible and present subjection to the dangers growing
from the violent winds, raging waves, and strange tossing of the ships: which
are the Lords works and wonders in the deep. Then, the said greatness of their
distress in being exposed to present loss of life, is set forth in the three
verses following, by noting unto us, 1. The isntrumental causes thereof, viz.
1. The breaking forth of violent winds and storms at the Lords commandment,
verse. 25. in the beginning. 2. The swelling and raging of the waves by means
of the winds and tempests, verse. 25. in the end. 3. The mounting on high of the
ships, and their sudden precipitation occasioned by the fury of the winds and
waves, verse. 26. 4. The extremity of sea sickness, enforcing them in a manner
to render up the ghost, verse. 26. in the end.
2. The desperate terms, whereto they are reduced: they failing in all means
to help themselves, viz. as well in strength of body as in skill and direction
by the art of Navigations, verse. 27. Where in this point of utter disablement to
help themselves, they are compared to a drunken man: who discouers by his
staggering to and fro, his impotencie and inabilitie to help himself.
2. An inducement moving the Lord to reach unto them his hand of protection,
viz. their humble supplication and crying unto him, verse. 28. 3. The manner of
their deliverance, viz. the Lords calming of the winds and his suppressing of
the waves. verse. 29. 4. The joy of heart conceived hereupon by the said
travelers, verse. 30.


The conclusion is amplified by noting more distinctly than before, the
circumstance of the place and persons, where and before whom this grateful
acknowledgement of the Lords mercy is to be presented. The place must be such
as is appointed for public meetings: the persons, as well such as are of
honorable rank and employment in the state, verse. 32. in the end: as such as
are of meaner quality and degree, verse 32. in the beginning. This serves
likewise to set out the greatness of the blessing bestowed on these distressed
travelers on sea.

The fifth and last sort of men invited to magnify the Lord, is of such as by a
common obligation are tied unto this duty: and they are such as hold a sound
opinion of the Lords providence. For these I take to be meant by the Psalmist
verse 42. in the beginning: unto whom are opposed in the same verse, such as
deny the providence of the Lord in the whole or in part. Now the argument
whereby such, whose apprehension of the Lords providence is upright and
warrantable, are drawn to offer unto him this duty of praise, is taken from a
survey made of certain changes incident to some things and persons. Out of
this argument added to the consideration of the Lords proceedings above
mentioned in the other parts of this Psalm, the Prophet deduceth first a
double conclusion: then, an exhortation. Of the conclusions: the one, which is
the principal, concerns directly the said fifth and last sort of men, viz.
such as acknowledge both the general and particular providence of the Lord:
the other, is touching Atheists who deny the same. The Psalmist reasons thus:
The Lord, besides the events and proceedings above mentioned, works and
ordreth all changes in things and persons, as namely, barrennes and fertility
in the earth, wealth and poverty in private men, deiection and advancement in
persons of state, verse. 33. to the end of verse. 41. Therefore out of an
observation of these proceedings, such as hold a sound opinion of the Lords
providence, ought with joyful hearts to acknowledge and magnify the same: and
such as are Atheists, to surcease all further dispute and reply against it,
verse. 42: where the full meaning of this double conclusion is set down in
express terms.


The Antecedent of this reason compriseth six several instances, whereby to
prove that it is the Lords hand that works and disposes al changes in
things and persons.

The first instance is of a fruitful soil reduced to barrenness, verse. 33.
and verse. 34. where by floods, and springs of waters he means the soil,
which by the irrigation of waters has grown to a quality of fruitfulnes. Now
this change is set out by the cause which moved the Lord to the effecting
thereof: which is noted verse. 34. to be the wickedness of the inhabitants.

The second instance is of a barren and fruitles region made fruitful and
commodious for habitation. verse. 35.

The third is of the poor raised to a condition of wealth. verse. 36.37.38. In
these verses the Prophet sets forth 1. The isntrumental causes of this
wealthy condition, viz. their travel and industry In building cities, for
habitation and commerce, verse. 36. In plowing and sowing fields, verse. 37. In
planting of vineyards, verse. 37.
2. The principal cause of the said condition of wealth, viz. the blessing of
the Lord, as well upon their persons for the multiplication of children, as upon
their stock for increase thereof, verse. 38. Where by that particular of not
diminishing their cattle, we must understand in general the abundant increase
of their whole stock.


The fourth is of the rich reduced to a poor and miserable estate. verse. 39.
Where the isntrumental causes hereof are noted by these three words, viz.
distress, evil, and sorrow. Which words do imply and signify the crosses
and calamities, whereby as by means and instruments the Lord works this
change of estate.

The fifth instance is of persons dejected from an high degree and state, verse
40. Where the Psalmist makes known unto us this deiection by two particulars
of abasement: whereof, 1. The one is the Lords withdrawing from them all
reputation, affection and duty on the part of the people: which is an ouerture
and mean to the degree of abasement following. 2. The other is the Lords
abandoning of them to all discomfort and misery: which is implied by this, in
that they are forced to wander in deserts, as not finding so much favor in the
world as the commodity of a place to rest in.


The sixth and last instance is of men advanced from a condition of affliction
and baseness, to places of reputation and dignity: and that which is more, the
Lord does honor them being thus exalted with a mighty dependence: which the
Psalmist does insinuate under the blessing of such an issue and posterity as
shall grow into a multitude of families. verse 41.

Now the exhortation deduced upon this argument of the changes wrought by the
Lords providence in some things and persons, is an exhortation addressed unto
the students of true wisdom, to observe the Lords proceedings. The Psalmist
persuades them to this duty in this sort: If the students of true wisdom
may in the Lords proceedings as in a mirror behold his mercy and justice,
then ought they to observe them. But they may in the Lords proceedings as in a
mirror behold his mercy and justice, verse. 43. In this verse the Prophet
mentions only the Lords mercy and goodness: but by a form of speech we are
to understand also his justice: as may appear by considering the instances
above mentioned: which are instances as well of the Lords justice as mercy.
Therefore they ought to observe them, verse. 43. in the beginning.


PSALM. 116.
I Love the Lord: because he has heard my voice and my prayers.

2 For he has inclined his ear unto me, when I did call upon him in my days.

3 The snares of death compassed me: and the distresses of the grave caught me:
I found anguish and sorrow:

4 Then I called upon the name of the Lord, saying: I beseech thee, O Lord,
deliver my soul.

5 The Lord is merciful and righteous: our God is full of compassion:

6 The Lord preserves the simple. I was in misery and he saved me.

7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul. For the Lord has bin beneficial unto
thee.

8 Forasmuch as thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling:

9 I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

10 I believed, and therefore did I speak. When I was exceedingly troubled,

11 I said in my haste, All men are liars.

12 What shall I render unto the Lord? All his benefits are upon me.

13 I will take the cup of deliverance, and set forth the name of the Lord.

14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord forthwith in the presence of all his
people.

15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his beloved.

16 Behold Lord: for I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaid. Thou have broken my bonds.

17 I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise: and will set forth the name of
the Lord.

18 I will pay my vows unto the Lord forthwith in the presence of all his
people:

19 In the courts of the Lords house: in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.
Praise ye the Lord.

ANALYS. PSALM. 116.
The Prophet in this Psalm has delivered a profession of his thankfulness unto
the Lord for his gracious mercy showed in freeing him from the distress and
peril of death whereto he was subject being pursued by Saul. This his
thankfulness he does express by two several duties: the one, of loving the
Lord, verse 1: the other, of testifying this love by a public acknowledgement
of the Lords mercy toward him in his deliverance, verse. 13.14. The subject
then of this Psalm is this: I love the Lord, and will testify as much by my
grateful acknowledgement in public of his mercy toward me in my
deliverance from death. verse. 1.13.14. and repeated, verse. 17.18.19.


The Psalmist does express his profession of acknowledging the Lords mercy
toward him, under a variety of phrase and several forms of speech. In the
13. verse he calls it, the taking of the cup of deliverance. For under the
law, those whom the Lord had delivered from some extraordinary distress, did
use in a solemn banquet to take the cup and drink, making a public and
thankful acknowledgement of the deliverance, which they had received by the
hand of the Lord. In the same 13. verse, it is termed, the extolling of the
Lords name. In the 14. verse, it is called the paying or performing of vows:
which performance was an apparent testimony that the author of them being
delivered, did out of a grateful heart confess the Lord to be his deliverer.
In the 17. verse, it is named the offering of the sacrifice of praise: So as
these several forms of speech are so to be conceived of, as interpreting and
importing one and the same action of acknowledging with a thankful heart the
Lords mercy. Which the Psalmist professes to perfome in public. For
affirming that he will perform this duty before all the people, in the courts
of the Lords house, in the midst of Jerusalem: what else can he mean but the
performance of the said duty in publke?

Let us now see the ground and inducement of this grateful and worthy
profession made by the Prophet: which is this: When I called upon the Lord in
my distress, he heard and delivered me, verse. 1.2. Therefore I love him, and
will testify as much by my grateful acknowledgement in public of his mercy
toward me in my deliverance, verse. 1.13.14. Also verse. 17.18.19.


The whole Psalm consists of these two sentences: in the Antecedent whereof
the Prophet has comprised these branches: 1. His calling upon the Lord in his
distress. 2. The Lords hearing and delivering of him.


The first branch is handled and verified by relating unto us, 1. The
greatness of his distress* verse. 3. 2. The prayer he presented unto the Lord
for deliverance from the same, verse. 4.


The greatness of his distress is verse 3. described by the causes thereof:
which are 1. His neerenes to death, and the impossibility to avoid it by any
help of man: death and the grave having beset him on every side, verse. 3. in
the former part. 2. The anguish and grief, which had seized upon his heart,
verse. 3. in the end.


The prayer presented unto the Lord by the Prophet in this extremity, is set
out by noting unto us, 1. The particular sued for and solicited. 2. The cause
inducing him to make this prayer, viz. the confidence he had for obtaining the
grant thereof.


The particular sued for, is deliverance from the distress wherein he was,
verse. 4. in the end.

The cause inducing him to make this suit, being the confidence he had to
obtain the grant thereof, is mentioned, verse. 10. in the beginning. Where the
Prophet avouches in express terms, that his prayer for deliverance proceeded
from his faith and the confidence he had to prevail thereby. I believed (says
he) and therefore I spoke: that is, I believed that the Lord would in his
mercy deliver me from my present distress: and therefore I tendered unto him
this prayer for deliverance.

This his faith and confidence he discovers unto us by making known 1. The
grounds thereof, and the several conclusion made upon each of them. 2. The
combat he had against it through his contrary distrust in the Lord.


The grounds of the confidence he had to prevail in his suit with the Lord,
are: 1. A consideration of the Lords ready nature to relieve the distressed.
2. A remembrance of the course of mercy held with him by the Lord heretofore
for his deliverance from trouble.


Upon the first ground this conclusion was deduced by him: The Lord is ready
to help the distressed who trust in him, verse. 5. and verse. 6. in the
beginning. This sentence the Prophet exemplifieth by giving us an instance in
his own person. The instance is this: The Lord has in former times delivered
me the Prophet David from distress, verse. 6. in the end: so as thereby it
appears that he is ready to relieve the distressed who trust in him, verse.
5. and 6. in the beginning. Therefore, O my soul, be not discomforted, but
attend patiently upon the Lord, verse. 7. in the beginning. Where the said
instance is repeated for an amplification of this conclusion: the Prophet
reasoning thus: The Lord has in former times been beneficial unto me in
delivering me from trouble, verse. 7. in the end. Wherefore, O my soul, be not
discomforted, but attend patiently upon the Lord, verse. 7. in the beginning.


Upon the second ground, viz. the Lords delivering of him heretofore from
trouble, he formed by a comparison of parity this conclusion: The Lord has
heretofore delivered me from death, and the discomforts accompanying the same,
verse. 8. Therefore I shall not at this time perish, but he will likewise
protect and deliver me from the peril wherein I am, verse. 9.


Touching the combat he had through distrust against his said confidence, he
declares it by setting down, 1. The cause of this distrust, viz. the passion
which transported and astonished him upon the sense of his present affliction,
verse. 10. in the end. Where the Prophet speaks thus: When I was exceedingly
troubled, that is, when passion and grief proceeding from the feeling of my
present distress and desperate case, possessed my heart, etc. 2. The time when
he fell into it, viz. when he fled in all haste from the presence of Saul,
verse. 11. in the beginning. 3. The effect wrought by the said distrust, viz. an
inconsiderate and scandalous censure of the promise delivered unto him by
Samuel, verse. 11. in the end. Where by affirming in general that every man is
a liar: we must understand that in particular he charge the Prophet Samuel
therewith: and so means that the promise, which Samuel delivered touching his
advancement to the Scepter and Crown of Israel, was delusorie and vain.


The Prophet having hitherto, namely from the 3. verse, to the end of the 11,
handled that branch of the said Antecedent, which concerns his calling upon
the Lord in his distress: he does now proceed unto the second, viz. the Lords
hearing and delivering of him. This branch he handles thus: Who are the Lords
beloved children, their life, as being dear and precious in his sight, he
delivers from death, verse. 15. But I the Prophet am one of the Lords beloved
children, verse. 16. in the former part of the verse. Therefore I am one, whose
life, as being precious in the Lords sight, he has delivered from death, verse.
16. in the end.


Thus far concerning the said Antecedent and the several branches thereof. The
conclusion inferred upon the said Antecedent is (as has bin showed) David's
profession of loving the Lord, and of testifying so much by his grateful
acknowledgement in public of the Lords mercy toward him. Now to yield unto
this worthy conclusion some ornament and amplification, that is to say, to set
forth the greatness of the Lords favor unto him in this case of his
deliverance, and withal his own readiness to acknowledge it: he has entied a
dispute with himself what course he is to hold of requital unto the Lord. His
dispute is this: I must acknowledge the Lords kindness either by way of praise
and thanks unto him, or by some real satisfaction and offer. But I rest
unable to acknowledge the Lords kindness by any real satisfaction and offer,
verse. 12. in the beginning. Where by an interrogatorie speech of what he should
render unto the Lord, he confesses his disabilitie and insufficiency in that
behalf. Therefore I will acknowledge it by way of praise and thanks, verse.
13.14. and verse. 17.18.


To the illustration of the Assumption the Prophet has added the reason of his
disabilitie to perform an acknowledgement of that nature. The reason hereof
he concludes thus: The favor thou have showed me in my late deliverance is
infinitely great, v. 12. in the end. Where the Prophet says: All thy benefits
are upon me. As if he said, I value thy favor in this my late deliverance at
so high a rate, as if thou had conferred upon me all the blessings in the
world. And therefore I rest altogether unable to acknowledge it by any real
satisfaction and offer, verse. 12. in the beginning.


The verses following are already analyzed and dispatched.

PSALM. 139.
1 TO the Master of the Quier a Psalm of David. O Lord: thou do thoroughly
search and know me.

2 Thou know my sitting and my rising: thou understand my thought a far
off.

3 Thou compassest my going and my lying down: and understand all my ways.

4 Before there is any word in my tongue, behold (O Lord) thou know it wholly.

5 Thou do besiege me behind and before: and laiest thine hand upon me.

6 Thy knowledge is more wonderful than that I can deceive it: it is high: I
am not able to prevail over it.

7 Whither should I go from thy spirit? or whither should I fly from thy face?

8 If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: if I lie down in the grave, lo
thou art there.

9 If I take the wings of the morning and would lodge in the utmost limits of
the sea:

10 Thither also will thy hand guide me: and there will thy right hand lay hold
on me.

11 If I say: happily the darkness will hide me: lo, the night will be as the
light about me.

12 Yea, the darkness will not hide me from thee: but the night shines as the
day: the darkness and light are to thee both alike.

13 Thou do possess my reins: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

14 I do magnify thee, in that thou have made me after so strange and
wonderful a manner. Marvelous are thy works: and my soul does greatly
acknowledge it.

15 The fashioning of my bones was not hid from thee, when I was made in a
secret place, and artificially fashioned in the low parts of the earth.

16 Thine eyes did see me when I was without form: and in thy book were all
these things written, and the days also wherein they were formed, even then
when none of them was.

17 How precious therefore are thy thoughts unto me? O mighty God. And how
great is the sum of them?

18 If I should count them, they are more than the sand. When I awake, I am
still with thee.

19 Oh that thou (O God) would slay the wicked: to whom I say, ye men of
blood, depart from me.

20 Who speak wickedly of thee: and who causelessly extol thine enemies.

21 Should not I hate them (O Lord) that hate thee? and should I not be
incensed against those who rise up against thee?

22 I hate them with a perfect hatred: I count them for my enemies.

23 Try me (O mighty God) and know my heart: prove me and know my thoughts.

24 And consider whether there be in me any purpose of molesting any man. And
guide me through the way of the world.

ANALYS. PSALM. 139.
David having made protestation that he hated and pursued his enemies, not out
of humor and passion, but out of a respect to the Lords glory: and being now
charged by them with the odious imputation of hypocrisy, as if under the
pretext of piety and zeal he conveyed the sting of malice and revenge, does
for his clearing in this behalf, appeal unto the Lord, humbly submitting his
said protestation and the carriage of himself toward his enemies to his
impartial examination and trial. His appeal is delivered in the two last
verses of the Psalm: and is in effect this: That the Lord would be pleased to
examine and judge whether his carriage toward his enemies be such as wherewith
they charge him, verse. 23.24.


In the 23. verse he desires that his thoughts, that is, the affection of his
heart and the proceeding which has issued from thence may be examined, whether
in this question of hating and pursuing his enemies, they be of such quality
as is objected. In the 24. verse, he does more particularly expound his
appeal, in that he prays examination may be taken, whether in the carriage of
his affections toward his enemies he has had any deseigne and purpose of
wronging and molesting them. As the French interprets it. And so closes up
his appeal with this suit, viz. That the Lord would guide him in the way of
the world: that is, that the Lord would guide and support him amongst the
troubles and crosses of this world. For so the way of the world may answerably
to David's present condition be expounded.

Now in this appeal the Prophet holds this course: 1. He renders the reason
of his appeal unto the Lord: from the beginning of the first verse to the end
of the 18: interlacing in two several places his acknowledgement and praise of
the Lords wisdom and power. 2. He does exhibit a summarie declaration of his
cause, thereby as it were to inform the Lord. From the beginning of the 17.
verse to the end of the 22. And then (as has been observed) he tenders his
said appeal in the two last verses.


The reason of tendering his appeal unto the Lord is this, and concluded by
him thus: O Lord: the whole carriage of my life is perfitly known unto thee,
verse. 1. Wherefore I pray thee examine and judge whether my carriage toward
mine enemies be such as is charged, verse. 23.24.


The first part of this reason is illustrated first by an induction: thus, My
outward actions, my inward thoughts, my words are known unto thee, verse.
2.3.4. Therefore the whole carriage of my life is in every respect and perfitly
known unto thee, verse. 1.


The first member of the said induction concerning the Prophets outward
actions, is set down verse 2. in the beginning: and repeated verse 3. In which
verses under the terms of sitting, rising, going and lying, every outward
proceeding held by the Prophet is noted: which in the end of the third verse
is implied by this general: Thou understand al my ways, that is, all my
actions and courses. Or, thou art accustomed to all my ways: which is in sense
all one with the former.

The second member of the induction touching the Lords knowledge of the
Prophets thoughts, is verse. 2. implied under a comparison of the greater, thus:
Thou know my thoughts before they be conceived and formed in my heart, verse.
2. in the end. Where it is said: Thou know my thought a far off: that is,
thou know my thought, and thou know it long before it be formed. No
marvel then if thou know my thoughts being conceived once and formed in my
heart.


The third member of the induction concerning the Lords knowledge of the
Prophets words, is likewise implied under a comparison from the greater: Before
I form and pronounce my words, thou do perfitly know them, verse. 4. No
marvel then if thou know them being formed and pronounced.


Secondly, the Lords knowledge of the Prophets whole carriage of his life is
further declared by this argument: If by any thing I may deceive and disappoint
thy knowledge of the carriage and train of my life, it is by some thing that
can hide me from thy sight and presence. But nothing can hide me from thy sight
and presence: verse. 5. In the 5, this sentence is expressed by these two
particular forms of speech. The first is, that the Lord does besiege or
compass the Prophet on every side, behind, before, above, below, etc. As if
he should say: Howsoever I dispose of my self, or whither soever I turn, I
remain always within thy sight and presence. The second is, that the Lord
lays his hand upon the Prophet: as if he said: Thy hand, or thy providence,
is ever upon me to hold me within the compass of thine eye, so as I can in no
place and at no time escape thy sight. Therefore I can by nothing deceive and
disappoint thy knowledge of the carriage and train of my life: so as it is in
every respect perfitly known unto thee, verse. 1. and 6. In the translation and
exposition of the 6. verse I follow Tremellius, who reads it thus: Thy
knowledge is more wonderful (or greater) than my ability is to deceive it: it
is high, or excellent: I am not able to prevail over it, or go beyond it. And
this translation does best fit the argument in hand.


To the Assumption the Prophet has yielded this proof: No place or time of
darkness can hide me from thy sight and presence, verse. 7. and verse. 11.12. In
the 7. verse it is said in plain and express terms, that no place can hide
him from the Lords spirit and face: that is, from the Lords knowledge and eye.
In the 11. and 12. verse he confesses likewise, that no darkness whatsoever
can keep him from the Lords sight. Therefore nothing can hide me from thy sight
and presence, verse. 5.


The first member of the Antecedent, namely, that no place can hide him from
the Lords eye, has this illustration: If I can retire into no place of the
heaven, of the earth, and of the sea, wherein thou art not present: then no
place can hide me from thee. The Prophet in particulating these places, does in
general mean any place of the world whatsoever. But I can retire into no
place of the heaven, the earth, or the sea, wherein thou art not present, verse.
8.9.10. In the tenth verse, the Lords presence and knowledge is noted by an
action attributed unto him of guiding and laying hold upon the Prophet, in case
he retired into the utmost limits of the sea. Therefore no place can hide me
from thee, verse. 7.


Touching the Assumption of this later syllogism: Whereas verse 8. the Prophet
speaks thus: If I lie down in the grave, thou art there: we must by the
grave understand the most secret and hidden part of the earth: and consequently
any place of the earth whatsoever. So likewise verse 9. by the utmost limits of
the sea, we are to understand the most retired angle of the sea: and
consequently any place of the sea whatsoever. And in the same 9 verse by taking
the wings of the morning, we must understand the running of that course which
the Sun runs. The morning is an effect proceeding from the light of the
Sun: and so by a form of speech is taken for the Sun, or the beams of the
Sun. The Prophets meaning is this: If I should run the course of the Sun and
lodge in the utmost parts of the sea: thither also shall thy hand guide me, and
there shall it lay hold on me.

The second member of the said Antecedent, namely, That no darkness can hide me
from thy sight, is brought in by the Prophet in the beginning of verse 11,
under the form of an objection: and has this confirmation: If darkness will
serve thee for the discovery of all things as well as the light, the one and
the other being for this use all one unto thee: then no darkness can hide me
from thy sight. But darkness will serve thee for the discovery of all things
as well as the light, the one and the other being for this use all one unto
thee, verse. 11. in the end, and verse 12. in the end. Therefore no darkness can
hide me from thy sight, verse 12. in the beginning: and this is also implied in
the objection set down verse. 11. in the beginning: where the Prophet speaks
thus: If I should say: happily the darkness will cover and hide me: meaning
hereby that it were madness so to conceive of the darkness, and to make this
objection thereupon.


Thirdly, the Lords* knowledge of the Prophets whole carriage of his life is
disputed thus: Thou do by thy sovereign and effectual providence dispose
of my heart, v. 13. in the beginning. Whereas in this verse the Lord is said to
possess the reins of the Prophet: as we are by the name of reins to
understand the Prophets heart: so by the Lords possessing himself of them we
are to understand the Lords absolute power in governing them, and his perfect
knowledge of them. Therefore the deseignes of my heart and the carriage of them
must needs be exactly known unto thee, verse. 1.


The Antecedent is demonstrated thus: Thou art he who has formed me in my
mothers womb, verse. 13. in the end. In reading this whole verse I follow the
Geneuian translation: taking this later part of the verse as serving both to
prove the former: and to occasion the Prophet to fall into an action of
magnifying the Lord. Therefore thou art he who disposes of my heart by thy
sovereign and effectual providence, verse. 13. in the beginning.


Here the Prophet, before he proceed further, does out of an admiration of
the Lords infinite power and wisdom showed in forming him, break forth into
an acknowledgement and extolling thereof, verse. 14. In the interpretation of
which verse I follow the French. The Prophets magnifying of the Lord in this
behalf, is concluded thus: Thou have showed thy self in forming me to be of
an admirable wisdom and power, verse. 14. in the midst. Where it is said: Thou
have made me after a strange and wonderful manner. I do therefore in this
regard honor and magnify thee, verse. 14. in the beginning.


The former part of this reason is enlarged thus: I do observe and also
acknowledge with my heart that thou show thy self to be of an admirable
power and wisdom in all other thy works, verse. 14. in the last part of the
verse. Where it is said: Marvelous are thy works: and my soul etc. Therefore
I marvel not if thou show thy self alike admirable in this particular work
of my formation, verse 14. in the midst.


The Prophet having upon the occasion remembered, published his acknowledgement
and praise of the Lords singular power and wisdom showed in the forming of
him, does now return to a further demonstration of the Lords knowledge
touching the carriage and proceedings of his whole life. He reasons from a
comparison, thus: I was known unto thee when my body was fashioning into a
distinct form and proportion: nay, when I was a mass vndistinguished and
formelesse: and which is more, from all eternity, verse. 15. and 16. Where I
follow the French. No marvel then if now thou know the carriage of all my
deseignes and proceedings.


The Antecedent contains (as you see) a gradation from the less to the
greater.

The first branch of the said gradation is verse 15. where the Prophet sets out
the Lords fashioning of his body into a distinct form: 1. By the place where
it is fashioned, viz. in the mothers womb: which is resembled to an hidden
place, and to the lowest parts of the earth. Under this particular of
fashioning his bones, we must conceive to be meant the forming of his whole
body. 2. By the admirable workmanship thereof, such as no skill or industry
of imbroderer, or other artificer can attain unto.


The second branch of the said gradation is verse 16. in the beginning. Thine
eyes saw me when I was a lump or mass without form.

The third is in the other part of the said 16. verse. Where the Prophet
affirms that all these things were written in the Lords book, and the days
wherein they were formed, even then when none of them was. That is, as Beza
expounds it, this my fashioning and the time assigned thereto, were set down
in the book of thy eternal decree and providence, before that any part of
this workmanship of my body was made. By this it appears that the Lord did
from all eternity know the work he was to make.

Here again, verse. 17. and 18. the Prophet out of an observation made of the
Lords knowledge of all things from all eternity, as likewis^ of his admirable
wisdom and power showed in the course of his providence toward man, breaks
forth into an action of magnifying the Lords proceedings in general. The
arguments used by him to this purpose do note unto us two several adjuncts of
his proceeding, viz: 1. Their incomparable excellency, verse. 17. in the
beginning. Where it is said: How precious or excellent are thy thoughts unto
me? That is I do reckon and esteem of thy proceedings for such as are most
worthy and excellent. 2. The infinitenes of their number, verse. 17. in the end.


That the Lords proceedings do exceed in number, is showed 1. By a comparison
from the less, thus: verse. 18. in the beginning. The sands of the sea are
innumerable. But the proceedings of thy providence are more in number.
2. By an effect which every new meditation of the Lords proceedings does
work: Every new and reiterated meditation of thy proceedings does yield new
matter and argument of thy praise, verse. 18. in the end. Thus do Calvin and
Beza expound the last clause of the 18. verse: When I awake, I am still with
thee. Therefore thy proceedings must needs exceed in number, v. 18. in the
beginning: and v. 17. in the end.



Hitherto the reason of the Prophets appealing unto the Lord has bin disputed
and handled by four several arguments.

Now follows his exhibiting of the declaration of his cause, thereby as it
were to inform the Lord. The declaration of his cause, wherein he shows what
he has to plead for himself against the slanderous charge of his enemies,
is comprised by him in this syllogism: Who are thy professed enemies, those I
may justly hate and hold for mine enemies, ver. 21. Where the Lords professed
enemies are noted under the title and name of such as hate him and rebel
against him. But the wicked (who slanderously charge me) are thy professed
enemies, verse. 19. and 20. Therefore these wicked men are those whom I may
justly hate and hold for mine enemies, verse. 22. Where the Prophet says, that
he hates them with a perfect hatred, that is, with a just and sincere hatred,
an hatred not grounded upon sinister and malicious respects, but free from
them. This exposition agrees with the drift of the Prophet: who was charged to
hate and pursue the wicked out of an humor of malice and spleen.


The proposition and conclusion of this syllogism are (as you see) clearly
set down.

The Assumption likewise, though it be not in these distinct terms expressed:
yet is it by the Prophet in effect and sense evidently proposed: there being in
liew of the said Assumption delivered a very apparent proof and illustration
thereof under a description of the wicked: which is such as does plainly detect
and discover them to be the professed and capital enemies of the Lord. The
description is this: 1. These wicked wretches deserve utter destruction, verse.
19. in the beginning. Which judgment the Prophet would not wish unto them,
unless they were the Lords enemies. 2. They are oppressors and murderers of
thy people, v. 19. in the midst, where they are called men of blood. 3. They
are such whose society is to be renounced and abhorred, as of men unworthy to
tread on the earth, verse. 19. in the end. 4. They deliver wicked speeches of
thee, v. 20. in the beg. 5. They do magnify (though causelessly) thy enemies
proceedings, verse. 20. in the end. Where it is said, they extol the Lords
enemies, that is, their deseignes and proceedings: which cannot be without a
special approbation of them and concurrence with the plotters thereof.


You see now by these five particulars how the Prophet has painted out these
wicked wretches (of whom the question is in this Psalm) for such as are the
mortal and malicious enemies of the Lord: so as the full and perfect meaning
of the said Assumption is plainly and sensibly delivered.

There rests the close of this Psalm: which is an humble suit wherewith the
Prophet does accompany his appeal. The suit is this: That the Lord would be
pleased to guide and support him amongst the troubles and crosses of this
world, ver. 24. in the end.


The occasion of this motion is the course held by the wicked in pursuing the
Prophet with scandalous and malicious imputations. This motion is propounded
only, and not urged.

FINIS.
The errors of the print are thus to be amended.
Page 7. lin. 23. for and, read as, in some copies. page 21. l. 34. after of,
put out the. p. 27. l. 18. for iustie, read justice. p. 32. make the title of
the 34. Psalm, the first verse thereof. p. 31. lin. 5. after against, put in
mine. p. 50. l. 21. for sees the day, read sees that his day is coming.
page 73. lin. 12. after these words, surprise him, make the point a colon,
thus: and not a full point. page 74. l. 11. after of, put in the. p. 75. l. 24.
for one, read own. p. 78. l. 4. for proceeding, read preceding. p. 91. l.
25. after obseruances put out the point comma, and make it after the word
sacrificing. p. 99. l. 2. for as things, read as a thing. p. 101. l. 6. after
verse. 10. add thereto in the beginning. page 101. lin. 19. after these words,
the 10. verse: add and read in the end thereof. p. 102. l. 15. for pat, read
part. p. 127. lin. 28. for notable, read suitable. p. 153. lin. 13. for
against, read upon.

A Table of the Contents.
That we ought so to carry our selves as that the Lord may take delight in
his works: showed page 180. lin. 7. That wanderers in the deserts reduced
home, prisoners set at liberty* persons recovered from sickness, travelers on
sea delivered from distress in their voyages, and lastly such as hold a sound
opinion of the Lords providence, ought to magnify the Lord: disputed page 184.
lin. 17. page 185. etc. That the Lord, besides all other events, works and
orders all changes in things and persons: handled page 190. lin. 25. and page
191.192. That we ought to observe the Lords proceedings. page 192. lin. 17 The
Prophets appeal unto the Lord from the censure of his enemies, praying that
the Lord would examine and judge whether his carriage toward them be such as
wherewith they charge him. page 201. That the whole carriage of our life in
thoughts, words, and actions is perfitly known unto the Lord: disp^ted page
202.203.204.205. That nothing whatsoever can hide us from the eye of the Lord:
proved page 203. lin. 10.
A PARTICVLAR OF THE SVTES AND MOTIONS PREsented unto the Lord by the Prophet
in the Psalms analyzed.
A Suit to be preserved in the whole train of his life: solicited page 15.
lin. 6. A suit to be delivered from his enemies. page 23. lin. 32. An
inconsiderate and passionate suit, To be taken presently from out this life.
page 63. and 64. A suit for the Prophets deliverance from his present
affliction. page 66. lin. 3. A suit for pardon of sins. page 97. lin. 23. and
page 104. lin. 21. A motion for assurance of pardon and reconcilement on the
Lords part. page 101. lin. 5. A petition for restitution unto his former estate
of inward grace and sanctification. page 101. lin. vlt. A petition for
reintegration into his former estate of outward favors and prerogatives. page
102. lin. 32. A suit for the advancement of the public good of the Church and
commonwealth. page 107. lin. 7. A suit for the Prophets return unto the place
of the Lords public worship. page 123. and page 26. lin. 25. A suit that the
Lord would teach his people to make a wise use of their misery, and withal
supply unto them a comfortable condition of life. page 134. A suit for the
execution of justice upon the oppressors of the Lords people. page 153. The
course and discourse held by the Spirit for resolution in this question,
whether God be good to Israel. page 115. lin. 24. That we must not judge of
the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them, but by
the light of his word in the Sanctuary: handled page 116. and 117. What the
issue and conclusion is of the dispute betwixt the spirit and the flesh
touching this question, whether God be good to Israel. page 110. and 117. lin.
15. The ground of this issue and conclusion, That God is good to Israel, showed
and debated. page 117. lin. 27. and page 118. The Prophets passionate longing
to return unto the place of the Lords public worship: propounded page 123.
lin. 3. and debated page 124. The end why the Prophet desires to return unto
the Lords Sanctuary. page 26. lin. 36. That they are happy who have liberty
of access unto the place of the Lords public service. page 125. A description
(under the person of the country Israelite) of such as love to present
themselves at the place of the Lords public worship. page 127. To be partaker
of the Lords public worship, though but for a day and in the quality of a
doore-keeper, esteemed by the Prophet the greatest happiness: handled page 129.
and 130. A deploration and picture of man's misery, set forth page 135. lin.
12. That they who rest upon the Lord shall be delivered from all hurts and
discomforts: disputed page 143. and 144. lin. 28. That the Angels are used by
the Lord as instruments of our preservation from perils and hurts. page 148.
lin. 7. and page 36. lin. 10. That the faithful depender upon the Lord shall
be spared in a common mortality. page 147. That by resting on the Lord we
shall be made partakers of all comforts and blessings: handled page 149. lin.
13. also page 31 in the end, and page 32. The oppression and persecution
executed upon the Lords people by the proud tyrants of the world, set forth
and argued page 154. and 155. The Prophets apology for the Lords glory
against this blasphemous position of the wicked, who hold that the Lord neither
knows nor regards their proceedings against the godly: handled at large
page 55.156.157. That the godly man, though afflicted by the hand of the
wicked, is notwithstanding blessed: disputed page 158. That the Lords love is
constant and unchangeable to the godly man: debated page 158. lin. 30. and
page 57. lin. vlt. That the carriage of all proceedings shall in the Lords good
time be so uprightly ordered, as that the godly man shall receive thereby what
is right and due unto him by the Lords covenant: argued page 159. The
difference betwixt the proceedings held by the Lord, and such as are held by
tyrannous and unjust Magistrates. page 161. That the Prophet ought with his
whole heart to magnify the name of the Lord: disputed page 163. That the Lords
mercy in pardoning the sins of his people is exceeding great: propounded
page 165. and cleared page 166. and 167. That the Lords mercy to his people
for pardon of their sins has been from all eternity, and does endure for
ever: argued page 166. lin. 28. That all things whatsoever ought to concur
with the Prophet in praising the Lord. page 164. That the Prophets continuing
in trouble will discourage the godly, and occasion the wicked to triumph. page
31. and 67. lin. 3. and page 114. lin. 22. That such as call upon the Lord are
protected by him. page 36. lin. 9. also page 90. lin. 20. and page 150. lin.
16. That out of a reverent and due acknowledgement of the Lords glory, we
ought to magnify him: disputed page 171. lin. 14. That the Lord has in the
creation of things set forth and published to the view of the world the glory
of his power, wisdom and goodness: argued page 172. lin. 30. That the Lord by
his providence does conserve and intertaine all living creatures in the state
of nature allotted unto them: disputed page 176. lin. 6.

