A CONTINVATION OF THE LAMENTABLE AND ADMIRABLE ADVENTVRES OF DOM SEBASTIAN
KING OF PORTVGALE.

With a declaration of all his time employed since the battle in Afric
against the Infidels 1578. until this present year 1603.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed for James Shaw, and are to be sold at his shop near Ludgate.
1603.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, in the entrance of this Discourse which follows, you shall
find three letters written by an ancient man called Doctor Texere a Portugal,
directed to a Bishop this fathers very friend, which I have here compiled and
expressed among other proofs to verify the unfortunate accidents this
disasterous King has sustained, since he was taken prisoner by the great Duke
of Tuscane, until the last day of the year past 1601. You may also find
within this Pamphlet two Letters translated: one written by D. Raimond
Marqueti, a Knight of the order of S. John, borne in Messina in Sicile to Dom
Sebastian; the other sent from the said King to D. Prospero Baracco, dwelling
in Padua. By the two last letters it will evidently appear unto you, that the
prisoner detained now in Naples, is not that Marco Tullio Catizone, whom the
Spaniards in their libels have so falsely proclaimed; but the very true King of
Portugale Dom Sebastian. Immediately after these letters follows a discourse,
in the beginning whereof there is a Preface written by father Texere,
manifesting the natural disposition of Portugals, and witnessing how
constantly they address themselves in loyalty toward their Governors that
reign over them, according to the sincere word of God, and the infallible
rules of honor.

You may also behold a most ample declaration, about the end of this discourse,
ministering four several points, worthy the reading and observing; to prove
unto you assuredly, that the prisoner for whom we travel so industriously with
perseverance, is the true and lawful King of Portugale Dom Sebastian, whom God
of his divine mercy will (I trust) restore to his former Crown and dignity,
for the good and propagation of the peace and welfare of all Christendom:
which the eternal God effect, if it be his blessed will. Amen. The 26. of Feb.
An. 1602.

A Letter sent from father Fr. JOSEPH TEXERE to a Bishop.
POst accepta^ benedictionem. I wrote to your reverend Lordship from Paris, to
signify unto you the cause of my return from Lions, where I received a letter
from your L. dated the 20. of March. In the which you gave me in charge that if
I had occasion to travel into Laly, I should give you special intelligence of
all the occurrents that should be presented to my understanding in my journey:
the 16. of April in the same year I departed from Paris, toward these parts,
passing through Campaigne: the very first day the gout began to assail me, and
ceased not, but accompanied me to Chalons, which was wednesday being holyday;
where I remained in my covent until the wednesday after Easter.

The same day, after dinner (having urgent occasion) I was compelled by means
of my sickness to use the benefit of a coach, and came the Friday following
to Nance. On Saturday following I undertook to walk fair and softly with
much pain, to visit his Highness, and the Lady sister to the King, and her
husband, the Cardinal, the Count of Vandemont, and the Princess his sister.
Believe me I cannot express in words the consolation I conceived, in beholding
the inseparable bond of love and amity, wherein these noble Princes seemed to
be united and conformed: from whom like one laden and charged with honorable
benefits, gifts, graces, and favors, I departed to Basil on monday being the
seventh of May. Notwithstanding the great confort my entertainment gave me
occasion of, yet bitter spell of coffeehouse wounded me inwardly; for that
the friday before, I had particular intelligence by the post, that the
Calabrian, the false and counterfeit Dom Sebastian, as they termed him, the
pretended King of Portugale, was rendered into the custody of the governor of
Orbetelo, a town in Tuscane bordering upon the Mediterranian sea, being a part
of the King of Spaines territories, from thence to be conveyed to the Viceroy
of Naples: so swift were those bloody Spaniards in their cruel expeditions.
The poor Prince departed from that town the 13 of April, at eleven of the
clock at night, passing by Siene the four and twentieth, and was delivered
the six and twentieth. The manner of diuulging these news, was by
intelligence that came to Nance by Milan in less then eight days. The
eleventh of May I came to Basil: the thirteenth I entered Soleurre, where
because I was ill at ease, Monsieur de Vic (your Lordships dear friend) and
worthy Ambassador of his most Christian Majesty in affairs to the Swissers
and Grisons, enforced me to stay and repose my self with him, until the
sixteenth day: wherehence after the fruition of infinite courtesies I departed,
passing by the Swissers, Grisons, Valtoline, and Valcamonica, I entered into
Italy: the first town I lodged in was Bresse, the next Verona, Vicence, Padua.
The second of June I came to Venice, where without delay I hasted to visit
Monsieur Villiers Ambassador of his excellent Majesty. This noble gentleman I
found in all respects as your Lordship had commended him to me, most reverend
for honor, virtue, and wisdom, as the world can justly testify. From thence
I retired my self in his Gundelo to a friend of mine, an honorable gentleman,
by whom with diverse other of my friends that came to see me, I was confirmed in
my former knowledge, concerning the mishaps before rehearsed; understanding in
like manner, how grievously the nobles and citizens of Venice, took the
troubles of the worthy distressed King, ascribing the blame to the negligence
of the Portugals, that undertook the managing of his liberty, into whose
hands they had committed him safe and sound: for as much as in those Lords
presence, they seemed to acknowledge him, under which pretense they preased
before the Senate, to signify unto them a truth, beseeching them to allow him
some other solemnity in proceeding, then they use to a common or private
person, and to respect him as a King. The fourth day I returned to Padua: the
seventh I was at breakefast in Mantua, where I was well entertained by the
reverend and virtuous Prelate, the rare and honorable Lord Fr. Francis
Gonzaga, Bishop of the said city. And soon after I had been in my covent, and
received the chief Prelates benediction, I went to salute the Duke and the
Duchess, to whom I carried certain letters, who received me with no less show
of account then they could have made to an Ambassador that had been employed
in the most Christian Kings affairs.

The self same day to accompany this my glorious entertainment, the
despitefull gout made a return into my feeble limbs, and there soiourned with
me seventeen or eighteen days in the same city. In which space I drew a
tree with branches, expressing the genealogy of the house of Gonzaga;
wherewith the Duke seemed so well pleased, that he gave me a great present in
gratification. I protest I should never have dreamed that Mantua had been
honored with a Prince so nonoble for virtue, so rare for honorable courtesy,
so peerless for bounty, so familiar in histories, so conversant in
languages, so great a lover of rare properties, so entire a Christian. I sifted
diverse of his Court as narrowly as I might possibly, and I discovered them to
be true and faithful wel-willers to our country of France.

On the feast day of S. John Baptist somewhat late I set forward in my journey
toward Ferrara through Bologne: on the eight and twentieth day of the last
month I came to Ferrara, being S. Peter's eve: the next day being the feast
day, after my morning repast, I went to the honorable Duke, delivering him
certain letters, which he received with a smiling countenance, and made very
fair weather to me by his honorable and courteous entertainment, so did
likewise his Duchess. All this while making no mention to me of the King, nor
of the Calabrian, nor I to any man, the Duke and Duchess severally demanded
of me what news I heard of France or Lorayne, and so slighted me off with
license to depart, saying, we will take another day fitter to handle these
causes more at large: so I departed for that time. The next day following, the
Duke came into our covent of S. Mark, where I remained, and our Prior
entreated me to bear the Provincial company to entertain his Highness at
the Church porch: where the Duke took notice of me, and talked with me all the
way passing through the entry; and at his departure said, I will choose a more
convenient time to talk with you more at large. After breakefast I went to the
Archbishop of Pisa, and delivered him a letter from a very friend of his, in
regard whereof he did me many kind offices. And I telling him, I had undertaken
this journey for the dispatch of business that concerned my order and my self
particusarly, (for so was the tenor of my pasport) and to acquaint my lelfe in
the families of the Princes of Italy: after long deliberation and pausing for
the space of an hour, he demanded of me if I had not heard any speech of a
Calabrian, that named him self Dom Sebastian King of Portugale: to whom I
answered, that being in the court of Lorayne, I understood by letters sent from
Milane that there was such a counterfeit, and abuser, and that therefore I
would not meddle neither with him nor his affairs. And he replied unto me,
that he thought it not amiss for me to know what passed, and was done in that
business. When I found his purpose, I prepared my self to hear him as
patiently as I could, and he very pleasantly began this inuectiue which
follows.

This man that would be called Dom Sebastian. and c. is Calabrian, a merchant,
whose name is Marco Tullio Catizone, that has both wife and children alive,
which have been compelled to come from Messina to go to Naples to justify the
truth. And the same Calabrian has had access to Portugal for matters of
traffic, where some religious professors of our order have persuaded him to
call and proclaim himself Dom Sebastian King of Portugale: and the Monk has
burned and branded him with hot yrons, in the same places with the like marks
that Dom Sebastian had: and the scarre which he carries in his arm, was forced
by a gash given of purpose with his own hand, and the Monk that on his head.
Beside, when he was first taken he had only two crowns about him: and as soon
as the Venetians discharged him, the Portugals consulted how they might imbarke
him at Liuorne, and send him presently into France. Whereof the great Duke being
speedily advertised, caused all the passages to be laid betwixt Florence and
the sea coast, that he could escape no way: and so soon as he saw himself
prevented and caught, he straightway discovered his legerdemain, saying, that
he was no longer able to endure those torments and grievous imprisonments, to
maintain such foolish delusions and cosinage. Presupposed that before he made
this confession, he indented to have his life assured him, which they
ascertained him of, comforting him that he should not die. And after that he
was detected in Naples by the presence of his wife Donna Paula Catizzone, he
was insta^tly sent into Spain, without any violence done unto him, and was
there openly and generally showed to all the word, to the end that the
Portugals should no longer abuse him, and that it might be published to the
world, that he was a very impostor, a counterfeit, and a deluder. After I heard
so many foolish and gross absurdities uttered so confidently, my very soul
was so deeply plunged into extreme grief and vexatio^, that I was forced to
crave pardon of that reverend lord, for not answering, being sore perplexed:
knowing assuredly, that that Marco Tullio Catizzone died in Portugale, while he
endeavored the dispatch of some business the King sent him thither about: which
is evident by a letter sent from one D. Raimond Marqueti a Knight dwelling in
Messina, by whose means and persuasion the King sent this Marco into
Portugale. Which letter was sent by Marqueti to Venice to have bin delivered to
Dom Sebastian, which came to the Venetia^s hands, whereof the lords of Venice
caused a copy to be taken, and the original remains in the custody of one
Constantine Nicoline, citizen and inhabitant of the same city, wherehe^ce a
transcript was made, which I have about me to show. This Constantine seeing the
agents of Spain to justify an untruth so impudently without blushing, saying,
that the prisoner was called Marco Catizzone; showed this letter openly in S.
Marks church, to stop and confound their malice. Which letter when they had
scene and perused, they were never afterward so bold as to prosecute the matter
any further, but kept silence. Moreover it appeared that this prisoner could
not be Marco Tullio by another letter, written by the prisoner to D. Prospero
Baracco, which he showed me in Padua, which I craved earnestly to have
delivered me to bring with me, but I could only obtain a copy thereof, which
I have also in my custody. The same is likewise testified by another letter
from an Italian gentleman, attending the most Christian king. Whosoever is
desirous to see the said letter, shall find it in the beginning of the book,
called, Admirable adventures, etc. which was imprinted in France before I came
from thence toward these parts. I have set down these proceedings in writing
to your Lordship, to acquaint you with the forgerie and devises of those
detractors, called Castilians. Now to return to the Archbishop of Pisa, whom I
cannot but charge with great abuse, to report that those natural marks were
inseared with a hot iron, and to lay it upon a religious Monk of mine own
order. But to set aside many reasons and proofs that might easily confute his
allegations, this one shall serve to satisfy all men that have any spark of
discretion or judgment; It is impossible that any man should by art, force, or
skill, make a man's right arm and leg bigger in all proportions, then the left:
that is only reserved to God that made him.

And further, this reverend Lord would have persuaded me, that the religious
man that so marked him was D. Sampayo: which was impossible to be true, for the
said father never once saw the King since he departed from Lisbone to go into
Afrike, until the eleventh of December last past, when he was set at liberty
by the Venetians. Beside, this D. Sampayo never knew any privy marks of the
Kings body until the year of our Lord 1599. that he went into Portugale to
inquire of them. Hearing so many reports so much differing, and knowing how
hardly this Archbishop could hide his own error: and considering that to
answer him peremptorily, might rather hurt then further my purpose: and to save
my self from peril, being within his jurisdiction, I was feign to suppress
my inward passions, but said unto him: My Lord, seeing you understand that the
imprisonment of this man was the chief cause of my arriual in these parts, and
as I understand the honorable Knight came from thence, being four times sent
for by letters from Paris to the great Duke, sithence I was in Loraine,
whatsoever is or shall become of his person or affairs I resolve herafter to
take little care, but mean to follow the other employment I recounted to your
lordship. Notwithstanding, as one that has some interest in the cause, I will
render your Lordship my censure and resolution in a word, and make you partaker
of my inward and secret contemplations. Forasmuch as your lordship has
acquainted with this impostor and deluders confession, dissimulation, and
trumperies, I can do no less the^ grieve thereat very much, and the rather
that he escaped without punishment, being (as your lordship assures me he is)
so vile and so notorious an offender, maruelling you would suffer so pestilent
and damnable a wretch to live, that has been the cause of so many men's
disasters, confiscation of goods, ruins, and extinguishments, by undertaking
misaduentures by sea and land, and what not indemnities for his sake,
abandoning country, father, mother, wife, children, house and home, rest and
safety: and I wonder it pleased God to suffer such a one to be borne, that his
mother in his conception, before her deliverance, had not been transformed into
a stone, or presently bin dissolved into smoke or air.

What unhappy man could have caused me to forsake my place in Paris, where I
was well and quietly seated, to thrust my life into peril, but only he? that
wicked and ungodly man. I have twice in this unlucky journey been afflicted
with the gout: diverse times almost overwhelmed with snow, drenched in waters,
tormented with clambring rocks and hills, sustaining all hazards that sea and
land might present me, with thunder and lightning from clouds: and is it
justice think you (my good Lord) that a man occasioning so many troubles,
should live unpunished? This man has troubled me much, and grieved my very
soul. This (noble Duke) might by the aproueme^t of many, have caused him to
have been indicted, arraigned, and condemned, and have ministered to him some
extraordinary death, to the terrible example of all others, and have
manifested the same to all the world. In my conceit, my noble Lord, this
execution had bin most expedient and convenient, to the commendation of equity
and justice. The Archbishop hearing these words pronounced with such vehement
passion, as though my soul had given frank consent to my passionate
utterance, in lamentation of my hard success, said: I am much grieved for your
vexation: notwithstanding I cannot so hainously accuse nor condemn the man,
but only for his folly to call himself Dom Sebastian king of Portugal: for
surely he was a reverend man for virtue and sincerity of life. I could rather
agree to accuse that Religious traitor, by whom he was first persuaded and
suborned to take the name of King upon him. These and many such like words he
used as well to justify himself, as to recover me out of that affliction,
which he perceived his speeches had thrust me into; but in the end I took my
leave of his lordship, and returned to my cloister of S. Mark, where the
religious fathers received with many courtesies and kind welcomes. The like
entertainment I found in all other couents as I went, specially at Mantua,
where I was importuned to remain many days. God give me ability and grace to
requite them, that I may not be found unthankful; for I assure your Lordship,
I cannot express the merits and favors I found at their hands, much less
see which way I may yield them due recompense. From Mantua I thought best to go
to Rome: in hope by the friendship of the Cardinals, and other noble Lords and
Gentlemen, to find some furtherance in my affairs, to the bettering of my
unhappy Princes fortunes. That he should be my very king and lord, I am
greatly fortified in hope, and find many good signs and apparent arguments
amongst the most serious and religious men of estimation, Princes, Lords, and
others: finding it not expedient to nominate all the favorers of this
enterprise, desiring your Lordship to pardon me for not satisfying you in every
particular, concerning my success at this time according to your request:
which defects I will repair in my intelligence from Rome, from whence I hope
to send your lordship more exact aduertiseme^ts, concerning the life and
success of this Prince since the battle in Afric, from whence he hardly
escaped by flight: with all that past here in the time of his imprisonment: how,
in what manner, what day and hour he departed herehe^ce. Fa. Seraphin Banchi
has hitherto much assisted me in the business, and was very joyful of the
honorable greetings from your Lordship, desiring his continuance in your
honorable favors. By his means I am so much furthered, as I trust to morrow
morning to be dispatched hence. The Almighty bless your honorable person in
all you desire. Florence the third of July. 1601.

Your noble Lordships humble servant, father Fr. JOSEPH TEXERE Portugueze, etc.

A Letter written by the said Fr. Texere to the Bishop before saluted.
IN my last Letter written to your excellent Lordship from Florence, I promised
to perform as much, or rather more at my arrival at Rome; wherein I fear I
shall fail (for many causes checking my will and endeavor) to keep touch with
your Lordship. First, because I came not hither so soon as I intended, being
hindered by reason of my sickness which lengthned my journey: for being in
Viterbe, I soiourned seven or eight days in the house of our Lady De la
Quercia, a Monastery of our order, distant some half league from the town,
where God by the intercession of the Virgin does many miracles, to the benefit
of the wel-beleeuers. So soon as I was entered into Rome, which was Sunday the
fourteenth of July, I sought out my very friend, of whom I gathered, that his
Holiness and all the Lords of the Court of Rome conceived, and were persuaded
verily, that the prisoner which the Duke of Florence caused to be sent
therehence the three and twentieth of April at eleven of the clock at night,
and delivered into the hands of the governor of Orbetelo, was D. Sebastian the
true infallible King of Portugal. Of him I learned, how he was conducted from
Orbetelo to Hercules port, and from that port in a galley to Naples, and last
to Castelnouo. This gally the enemies made the subject, to give notice to the
whole world, that the said Dom Sebastian was condemned to the galleys, and
after to the castle Del ouo. Further, I was showed the copy of a letter, which
the Count of Lemos Viceroy of Naples wrote to the Duke of Sessa, Ambassador
from the King of Castile unto his Holiness, giving him to understand, that the
same prisoner was Dom Sebastian the true King of Portugal. I have also found
out which of the Cardinals and Prelates favor the cause of that virtuous and
holy Prince. A friend of mine lent me his coach, wherein I went directly to the
most excellent Prince, the Cardinal of Florence, and kissed his hand, of whom I
had the evidences your Lordship is advised of, and after an hour and halfes
conference with him, I departed in the same coach so visit sir Alexander Giusti
Justice de la Rota, our dear friend. From whom so soon as I was departed, I
met near his gate with another of my familiar acquaintance, that discovered
unto me certain plots and circumuentions attempted and suggested by the Duke
of Sesse, informing against me in the Consistory of Rome, that I was a
seditious man, prejudicial to the state of Christendom generally: for that
heretofore the Christian Princes had used to associate themselves in a league
jointly to make war against the Infidels; which I had been a cause to hinder,
by interposing division and contention betwixt those Princes; and as a
principal reason to induce them to believe the same: he showed publicly the
discourse which I sent your Lordship from Lions, entitled, Admirable
adventures, etc. which for the more familiar understanding was translated into
Italian and Spanish. The common dispersing of which discourse, was like to
breed much dishonor and damage to D. Philippo the third King of Castile his
master, and so purchase unto himself being his agent, infinite disgrace and
harm by his displeasure. For my part I answered that I merited no punishment
for traducing into writing such true accidents (as they were) the confirmation
whereof increased with the time: considering they were not of mine own
invention or stamping. Relinquishing this friend, I hasted straight to the
Cardinal of Ossat, into whose own hands when I had delivered letters, and
informed him thoroughly of the cause of my repair thither: he advised me not
to show my self so openly there until such time as I understood what my
enemies had conspired to object against me since my entrance into this city,
which could not be concealed, for that the Patriarch of Constantinople, (who
was and is General of the Order of S. Francis, a Sicilian borne, and so much
the more my forcible enemy, by how much he was zealous for the King of Castile
his master) had a glance of me in the Cardinal of Florence his house. My
occasions detained me so long with this Cardinal till night grew on, so that
his Lordship caused me to remain with him until the morrow, wherehence after
the hearing of his Mass, I departed to my first friends house: whither diverse
persons of quality repaired to visit me, signifying unto me, that the
Ambassador for Castile intended to work me all the mischief he could
possible: and seeing he found no sufficient means to indamage me before the
estate, he had a purpose to bring me within compass of the Inquisition,
alleging these accusations that follow. First he objected against me, that I
had been in England six or seven years, and that I ever favored the
proceedings of heretics; that I composed diverse books fraught with heresies;
that at Lions I made and began to imprint a book against his Holiness, and
the Inquisitors general of Portugale; with many other matters which I let
pass for troubling your Lordship. To all which I answered without blemish to
my honor or reputation, in this manner: I thank God, all the time I was in
England I lived amongst men that were religious, as mine enemies can testify:
and for my continance in France, I hope to acquit my self easily from
misdemeanure there. To the most capital matter and of greatest importance:
that I wrote and began to print a book at Lions against his Holiness, and the
Inquisitors general of Portugale, I can purge my self purely, and pass as
clear as the most unspotted innocent, being always approved religious and
zealous, wherein I appeal to the sincerie of all the brethren of mine own
order. In that he terms me a rebel and a traitor to the King his master, for
showing my self serviceable and faithful to a foreign Prince his enemy: in
that he is assistant to my affairs, recommending my estimation by opening a
gap, to discipher the traitorous in Portugale, backsliders, enemies to their
own friends, and very Castilian hypocrites: that I am a disperser of many
lies, in conuenticles at this instant. That article is worthy of such men's
preferring as they seem to be, and not fitting men of worth and lovers of
Religion. As it happens I have the book about me, that was printed at Lions:
which shall confute and display the malice and impudency of him that caused
the rest of my books to be burnt. The remainder that concerns these affairs,
is best known to your Lordship, and therefore to conclude this point, I crave
pardon for being so tedious. Now to return to my former subject. Sunday being
the 15. of July, and the Monday following, after I had finished the principal
part of my intention, I determined (by the counsel of my friends) to return
directly to France. And being advertised that the Duke of Sessa had sent
beforehand some of his people to way-ly me in the ordinary way, I changed my
course by Vmbrie. I departed out of Rome the fourth day after my arrival, and
passing by the cities of Narne, Tarne, Spoleto, Foligni, and Assise, I came to
Peruse, which I did only pass thorough, and shaped my course by Siene,
Florence, Bologne, thorough the confines of Modene and Mirandole: and before I
could reach to Mantua, my horse fell upon me, and hurt one of my legs very
grievously, which caused me to stay in this place, where I might provide the
best means for my recovery. I assure your Lordship, I took this mischance to
be ominous, that God would have it so, for that by my return this by-way, I
gathered some certainty of much that happened to Dom Sobastian the King, since
his slight out of Afric, until he was discharged out of this commonweal:
and now I begin to make your Lordship a true relation, certain, and without
controlement. When it was spread at Rome that I remained in this town, and that
by reason of my hurt I could not suddenly depart from hence; a friend of mine
certified me by letteers the sixth of August, in what manner Paula Catizzone
with her daughter arrived at Naples, being shipped from Messina by the
Catholic Kings agents, to come and acknowledge this prisoner for her husband:
and the said Paula meeting in the ship with a religious man of the order of S.
Francis, of her acquaintance, she dicouering the cause of her travel unto him,
assuring him she knew undoubtedly that that prisoner was not Marco Tullio
Catizzone her husband, saying, that same prisoner that they call D. Sebastia^
king of Portugale had sent him into Portugal, which she trusted would make well
for that prisoner, and do him no hurt at al: and that she came rather to
justify then to condemn him. The same man, my friend promised me of
particular aduertisements of whatsoever shall be effected in this business. I
beseech you consider the cunning the Castilians use in the expedition of their
enterprises, who are both terrible and wary in all their practices. Although
they know that Marco Tullio Catizzone died in Portugale; yet notwithstanding
they continue their indirect and false course, with inventions and sleights
coloring their proiects, to seduce and blind the world. This woman a subject
of the Spanish Kings, was threatened upon pain of death, not to hinder any of
the Kings proceedings; therefore she must take upon her to know this man, and
justify him to be her husband Marco Tullio, etc. though she had never seen
him before, be the matter never so false, as it is most untrue, and so proved
by many reasons and letters whereof I made mention to your Lordship in my
letters from Florence. I have sent a copy to my friend in Rome to be delivered
to his Holiness, and another to your Lordship with these presents, to control
all those that shall belie this action. Beside this testimony there newly
arrived a grave Portugal, a man of good authority and credit, that
understanding at Rome which way I was departed, took post horses and came
after me. Beside that he was one of my old acquaintance, he brought letters in
his bosom of recommendation to induce me to trust him, and that he might open
his secrets unto me, which certain Lords of Portugale (that sent him) charged
him to do. This man named the house in which Marco Tullio Catizzone died, to
the owner whereof he brought and delivered certain letters from the King, and
there were counter letters written which were never as yet delivered to the
King. In such sort, that this falsitie, that this prisoner is Marco Tullio
Catizzone, can by no means be proved, in favor of the inuenters thereof. Now
forasmuch as from time to time I am in more liklihood to recover this mishap: I
trust I shall not have cause to stay in this town to write any more letters
unto you, but purpose by Gods help to make small delay to come my self to
your Lorship, and excuse all other messengers. Beseeching the heavenly King to
bless your excellent lordship. From Venice the thirteenth of August. 1601.

Most humbly at your excellent Lordships service, father Fr. JOSEPH TEXERE.

The copy of a Letter, written by D. Raimond Marqueti, with this inscription:
To Dom Sebastian, calling himself King of Portugal, being at Venice.
I Received letters from your lordship the sift of September last past, wherein
I perceive the resolution your Lordship has taken, to commit your care and
trust to Marco Tullio Catizzone, a man as worthy as able to manage such a
business. Further, I render your Lordship a thousand thanks, for the good
opinion and confidence you have reposed in my person; in discharge of which
trust, I will repair my diligence, to learn news of that Marco Tullio, who
as yet is not returned into these quarters. But so soon as he shall, I will
give him to understand, how sore your Lordship longs for his return: and
will also advise him to execute your commandments in all points, with
exceeding care, diligence, and secrecy; and by him I will not fail to give
your Lordship to understand, that when it pleases your Lordship to satisfy
your desire, to see this country (haiung already run through the greatest
part of the world) I shall procure your conference with these noble men,
companions to your adventures which you so earnestly wish to behold, viz. the
Duke of Aueyro, Christopher de Tauora, and the rest. If you please to send me
some privy marks or tokens, that they may repose as much confidence in me, as
is necessary for the dispatch of your Lordships dissignes in this service, and
any other: I intend to perform to your Lordship both diligence and secrecy.
As for the letter to Donna Paula Catizzone, I hold it no policy to deliver it
her, considering it is a loose adventure in such dangers to trust a woman.
Neither will I neglect to be careful for the honor of the said Paula
Catizzones house, as your Lordship required me: and in the end the effects
shall show. To conclude, I desire your Lordship to excuse me for not using so
reverent a style to your Lordship as I could wish, which I hope you conceive I
refrain to do, because I would not be discovered in your weightier affairs:
holding this the best and safest course to do your service: wherein I beseech
the Almighty God to prosper your Lordship, and grant you due success, to
whose tuition with reverend kissing your hands a thousand times, I commit your
Lordship. From Messina the eighth of October. 1598.

Dom Raimond Marquetl.

The copy of a Letter written by Dom Sebastian King of Portugale while he was
prisoner in Venice, sent to Padua to the most reverend D. Prospero Baracco,
Amner to the Cathedral Church in that town, the original remaining in the
hands of Sr Georgio Bustarelli.
MOst reverend D. Prospero, I am to signify unto your Lordship, how much I
have been grieved for your meritlesse afflictions, having suffered imprisonment
for my sake, by the poursuite of the Castilians mine enemies. But seeing things
past are irreuocable, and are only to be overcome with patience, considering
you are not ignorant of the whole complotment. And forasmuch as I am so
restrained from writing at large, that I cannot express unto you my secret
meaning; I only request you to send some trusty messenger to Messina,
diligently to enquire and search, whether Marco Tullio Catizzone be returned
thither with any directions or not. And to that end and purpose, your reverend
Lordship may use my name to D. Raimond Marqueti, to whom I wrote heretofore
being at Moran, if you forget not, that I received also answer from him. And
this Ge^tleman you may inform of all that has past since that time (if you
think good) and when Catizzone shall happen to come thither, he may direct him
covertly to this place, where he may secretly give me knowledge of the
expedition in my affairs. And for the love you owe to the Almighty, fail not
one whit in a business to me of so great importance, considering how much it
may avail, to bring my long travails to good end: and weying, that the Lords
of Venice will not be brought to the true period of justice, notwithstanding I
have oftentimes labored unto the^ to do me right, and make me known personally
to the world, saying, that if they find me not to be D. Sebastian king of
Portugale, without favor let them worthily punish me. For all this suit they
neither yet would nor will come to the center of my just cause, and wrongful
imprisonment, saying, that they loved not to be mocked and trifled withal,
offering always very readily, that if I would deny, or not profess my self
to be D. Sebastian etc. they would set me at liberty, etc. Love me still as I
have done you, and so farewell. From Venice the 15. of April 1599.

D. Sebastian King of Portugale.

Another Letter written by the foresaid Fr. Texere a Portugale, to the same
Bishop.
I Wrote to your excellent Lordship from Venice the thirteenth of August, and
departed thence the eighteenth of the same, being then not thoroughly well: for
which reason I made the way more long and tedious then I purposed. I stayed
many days at Soleurre, because Monsieur de Vic would not let me pass, until
Monsieur de Sillery came to town. After whose coming he stayed me to see the
order of that Town, in entertaining the Cantons and other prouincials at their
first feast: and this commandment I could not well disobey. This importunity
and such other were the impediments, that I could not reach unto Paris before
the fourteenth of October. Then presently I went to Fontaine Bleau, to kiss
his most Christian Majesty's hand; who entertained me very princely, showing
himself glad of my safe return. For to tell you true, I had no assured being,
but in France (so offensive and dangerous was the Spanish indignation unto
me). At my return from Fontaine Bleau, I met with your Lordships Advocate
agent, praying him to give your Lordship advertisement of my return: promising
to write unto your Lordship shortly after: which I did not effect, partly for
mine unapt disposition, being vexed with slanderous lies and tales, which mine
enemies found occasion to spread in my absence. Who for the satisfaction of
their malice, having ne^ither care of the law of God, nor of his fear, stick
not to suppress any troth, to further the confusion of their neighbor, or
Christian brother. And to gorge their wicked appetits, respect neither the
honor of the King, his safety, nor the fiering of Portugale, which they had
lately kindled and disturbed: and more then that, being blinded in fury
themselves, think no man else can perceive their intents, be the matter never
so plain and manifest. But of this theme let this suffice, considering your
L. is not ignorant of Castilian broiles.

At my first entrance into this place, I found certain letters written from
Rome, Venice, Padua, and other ordinary passages in Italy; all which gave me
credible intelligence, that the King my Lord and master lives, and that he is
well entreated, in prison in the Castle De Ouo. And my Roman friend, being
joyful of my good news, wrote unto me in this form following: Forasmuch as
your afflictions, dangers, and travails have received some hope of good
event, and for that it is certain, that the troubles of those that fear God,
shall be converted into prosperity, so it may fall out, that Haec olim
meminisse iuuabit. These words and tidings seemed very common and vulgar; which
being conferred with those things that fell out happily in Rome, for the good of
my Sovereign, I conceived great hope, yet once again to see him reestablished
in his kingdom. By the same letter I understand, that my intelligence has
bred him great contentment, and that also he conceived no less pleasure by
those copies which I sent him, to present unto his Highness: which were the
transcripts of those I sent your Lordship from Venice, which prove that Marco
Tullio Catizzone is one, and Dom Sebastian another. A Doctor and a friend of
mine dwelling at Lions, showed me a letter which a French gentleman his inward
friend, of good calling dwelling in Rome, after he had recorded many things
concerning the King my master, revealed as follows. The Count of Lemos
Viceroy of Naples, is very favorable to Dom Sebastian his prisoner, honoring
him very much, allowing him some small liberty: which when he heard that the
King of Castile took in ill part, he began presently to restrain and kept him
sporter. When he was allowed to hear Mass amongst other prisoners, they did
honor him with much reverence, saying among themselves, that they discovered in
his countenance and carriage, a princely Majesty. And without all question, he
must needs be Dom Sebastian the King of Portugale, or some devil in his
likeness. The Viceroy (as it is said) craved license of the King of Castil, to
go into Spain, because in Naples he could not recover his health, which the
King would in no wise grant him. There be other letters sent into these parts,
not from Portugals, or any other by their appointment, the contents whereof are
here expressed. Heretofore it has been lawful and tolerable for this
prisoner that termed himself D. Sebastian King of Portugale, to speak with
any Portugals or men of other nations, that desired to see the said prisoner,
that said they had seen him before: and sithence they verified him to be Dom
Sebastian the true king of Portugal, he is more straightly kept from the sight
and speech of any then before. Another letter (having recounted something
concerning this King) adds: The Count Lemos lying in his death bed about the
last of October, said to his son in the presence of his wife and diverse other
prisoners, that he should look well to the place and charge he had, both of
the Viceroyship and his prisoners: for you see (said he) that I am upon the
point to go to God, to render account for that I have done during my life: and
here I must cease and end my worldly business: for the disburdening of my
soul and conscience, I protest that this prisoner here, whom the vulgar call a
Calabrian, is the very true Dom Sebastian, lawful King of Portugale. I know it
assuredly, having examined him, and for that I have had often conference with
him before his imprisonment. Therefore I command and entreat you to use him
well. This done, he gave him a letter, which (said he) is written to his
Majesty, I mean the Catholic King, touching these affairs, and use all the
diligence you can in these things I have given you in charge. The father being
dead, the son respected the prisoner with much more reverence then he did
before, but allowed him less liberty then he had in the old Counts life. I
have also two letters from Doctor Sampayo, the one bearing date the 18 of
November, the other the fourth of December, which confirm the same contents
before mentioned. There be many other letters here lately sent from Portugals
to the same purpose, reinforcing the truth: and here lately past a Portugal by
this town, that protests he spoke with Dom Sebastian, declaring marks and
tokens of his apparel, chamber, and bed, and other appertenances. The same
Portugal said further, the King inquired of him for certain persons, which
this party being then but young, could not remember, and therefore gave him no
direct answer. We have here many rumors from diverse places near about. One
wrote out of Portugale, which diverse other coming from thence confirm, that
upon S. Anthonies day of Padua the last year, they rong the great bell at
Villila in Arragone in the city of Coimbre, an university of Portugale, where
befell a very admirable and rare wonder. In the same town there is a covent of
Canons regulars, of the order of S. Augustine, sincerely reformed, great and
rich, in the which is interred the body of D. Alphonse Henriques, the first
King of Portugale, whom they adore for a Saint. In whose behalf (they say) God
has showed some miracles unto men, to confirm their opinion of him, that they
believe not amiss. Many religious men for this four hundred years space
successively continuing this Saint for their intercessor to God, (vt ferunt)
have obtained much release and consolation in their afflictions, as well
strangers as the natural countrymen; and to this effect they have a book
written, recording all the benefits received thereby: so that this house never
harbored any other, then those that were devoted to this holy King. The last
year an old man (whom age had made feeble and decrepit) used ever to kneel
down and pray at the sepulcher of the said King: and upon S. Anthonies day the
last year, he there in happy time offered his solemn prayers, and continued
a long time in meditation before the sepulcher, where he remained until he was
stiff, and not able of him self to rise, but by the assistance of his iuniors
and religious brethren, who beholding all his face bedeawed with tears,
demanded of him how it came to pass. This old man answered, I am very much
displeased and grieved at the negligence of our Kings and Princes of Portugale,
as well dead as living, I mean descending from this holy King, that being
assured by infinite miracles that he is in heaven in eternal glory, and lives
in the presence of God, and we never yet knew any man that traveled to
canonize him. To who^ one or two answered, That hour shall come. And father,
seeing your devotion and love is so great to this holy King, beseech him to be
a mediator for the liberty of Dom Sebastian (descending of his masculine line)
that he may be restored to his former dignities and Realms; and that good deed
will cause him to be canonized.

We have heard lately more reports by the passengers from Italy and France,
that he whom the Venetians imprisoned and released the last year, is Dom
Sebastian our true King and Lord, and that he seems no whit to degenerate from
the steps and traces of his ancestors.

As those religious men were aduising and contemplating upon the vision of this
Alphonse, which was mentioned in the Admirable adventure, etc. and considering
the promise God made unto him, when he appeared unto him in the field Orique,
the sepulcher resounded unto them three strokes, hearing the echo with
ability to judge from whence the noise came. The sound being past, they
approached nearer unto the tomb, continuing their discourse; and suddenly
again the tomb gave three other great blows, so terrible that they were
forced to recule for fear, and the echo continued so long that they all were
amazed, and became as pale and wan, as men use to be in the horror of death.
When afterward they came to themselves, recovering their senses and perfect
understanding, and conceived that it came by the old man's prayer, they went and
revealed this accident to the Bishop of that city who in all the time of
treaty between Portugale and the King of Castile, approved himself as rank
a traitor to his country, as he proved true servant to the King of Spain: who
for his recompense was established in that sea, and created Bishop of Coimbre,
Count of Arganill, etc. with 50000 ducats of yearly annuitie. This Bishop
advertised of the noise, came to the Covent and made inquisition, and finding
it a thing so extraordinary, said: You Portugals that wonder at these toies,
and give credit to bables, know that the soul of this Saint, being aloft in
glory, is so sore offended with you, that God suffers these senseless
monuments, to give testimony of your fopperies. These words were so ill taken
by the people of the town assembled about that strange noise, that the Bishop
was constrained to unsay that he had said, and to confess it was very
wonderful.

Furthermore, there are many letters come of late from Portugale, that
testify, that at Lisbone the last of October in the year 1601. the Church and
hospital of the King, (called all Saints) suddenly fell on fire by night, and
flamed so furiously, that the roof was burnt, and all the images of the Kings
of Portugal that were painted upon the wall (only the pourtrait of D.
Sebastian) was left undefaced. The self same ruin happened to the arms of
the Kings and Princes of Portugal, which were drawn in scutchions upon the
wall. The day following being the feast of all Saints, in the forenoone fell an
infinite number of hailstones as big as small eggs, red of color, which bred
as great cause of wonder, as the rain that fell the day following, which was
so extreme, that (as I have heard credibly reported by many) the people of that
town durst not go out of their doors all that day, for sear of drowning.
These things to me (as well as to others) I assure your Lordship seem
marvelous, and can find no reason of their rareness: God of his divine mercy
turn them to good. I could have written to your Lordship more news of great
consequence, if my paper had not bin injurious. But now to return to our first
subject, which I will entirely deliver unto your Lordship, and seeing I have
recovered my strength, I will proceed to declare unto you the success of D.
Sebastian King of Portugale, since his escape from the battle in Afrike: which
I entreat your Lordship to cause to be imprinted, that all Princes may have
free knowledge of the history. Paris the twelfth of January 1602.

Immediately after my last writing, I received letters from my friends at Venice
and Padua, by which I understand, the Agent of that signiorie (being resident
in the Catholic Kings Court) has written a letter to that State, which has
bin openly read at Pregay, part of the contents whereof are: That the Count
Lemos Viceroy of Naples, before his death wrote a letter to the King his
master, wherein he did assure him, that that prisoner which he caused to be
sent him from the Duke of Tuscane, under the name and title of a Calabrian, was
Dom Sebastian the very true King of Portugale, which in the year 1578. lost
the battle in Afric: which he affirmed with many assured reasons, and trials
as having thoroughly examined him of diverse things wherein he had dealt with him
both in Portugale and Castile. This Viceroy never received answer of this
letter, in his life: and therefore (being then almost at the last gasp) for
the disburdening of his soul, he detected this secret to his son that
succeeds in his place, in the presence of his wife, his confessor, and diverse
other persons of good account, giving him also a letter for the King, wherein
is ratified the same he spoke before. The new Viceroy sent to the Catholic
king, a noble man of the house of Manriques; of whose house proceeded the Dukes
of Najara. This Siegnior he sent with his fathers letter, and it is reported
that the King returned answer of the same letter to the Count Lemos,
commanding him to entreat that prisoner well, and take especial care that no
disaster chanced unto him. These news enforced me to enlarge this treatise, I
would to God they were like to be true, and that the Catholic King would
answer his title with due corresponde^cy to Christianity, according to his
Christian style, by yielding liberty to his Cosin-germaine, and restoring all
that to him belongs: which were an excellent branch of honor and
magnanimity, and an assured mean to settle Christendom in peace, and to
avoid the danger of present war, which now the lowering heavens, and
malicious inclination of stars do assure us to fall upon us. I confess, that
so many extraordinary accidents do persuade me to expect a good issue out of
all these troubles, that may be both happy and profitable to the whole
commonweal of Christendom. Pleases it your Lordship to remember that about
the infancy of our amity, I said that if the Portugals and the Castilians be
not separated, it will be impossible to maintain a general peace in Europe:
justifying my opinion, with many evident demonstrations, and yet to this day I
hold the same resolution, in which many noble men both of the counsel and
others of great calling do accord, saying, They from day to day see more
apparent reasons so to judge. To that end do I daily offer up my sacrifices and
earnest prayers to entreat the Almighty God, that it may please him of his
divine mercy, to inspire the hearts of all Christian Princes, to combine in
one knot to set this cause aright, before the increase of more mischief: for,
so much the longer as they defer this good work, so much the greater will be
the ruin of Portugale, and peril of our universal destruction.

Your noble Lordships humble servant, Fr. JOSEPH TEXERE Portugueze.

A NARRATION OF THINGS DONE BY DOM SEBASTIAN KING OF PORTVGAL, since the
battle he lost in the fields of Alquiber in Afric, fighting against Muley
Maluco an Infidel, anno 1578. until this present time.
Written by Fr. Joseph Texere Portugueze.
The Preface.
GEntle Reader, forasmuch as I have done you the favor by my travel to
discover in writing unto you a Peregrination so much desired: I shall entreat
the like of you again, in giving credit to that I will most faithfully
deliver unto you, concerning the natural inclination of the Portugals, and the
disposition of the King.

The Portugals have two especial qualities, happily differing from other
nations, which are as familiar to them, as to laugh is proper to all men. The
first is, they are extremely scrupulous of conscience: the second, they are
exceeding constant in their resolutions, especially when they are assured that
they are warranted by the law of God, and concern his glory: for the first I
will recommend unto your judgments two examples. The first, after the death of
D. Henry supposed King of Portugale, the succession of that kingdom being left
to the inheritance of women, came directly to D. Katherine Duchess of
Bragance, daughter to the son of D. Duarte, brother german to the said
Henry: who caused her title to be disputed of in the University of Coimbre,
which disputation was published in print, and compiled in a book confirmed by
the hands of fourteen Doctors, subscribing thereunto: all whose sentences
were pronounced in the favor of the said Katherine. The like censure was
exhibited by the Doctors of Bologne, Pisa, and other universities in that part
of Europe, the succession of the said Realm of Portugale, being adjudged to
the same Katherine, and D. John Duke of Bragance, her husband and cousin
german: by reason whereof (while the Cardinal lived being induced, or rather
informed by the Agents of D. Philip the second King of Castile, not to publish
the said D. Katherine to be his heir, did respite the publication, pretending
that D. Katherine, D. Anthony, and D. Philippo, being all at once with other
competitours to the crown, might set some variance among the people about the
title, leaving it to be censured after his death by certain Judges that he had
appoined and named) he swear to stand to the sentence of those Judges, and
would not pronounce him King of Portugale himself, but said it might be a
means for him to come to the best assurance of the enterprise before any
other: for that he had on his part, not only the most of the Princes of
Portugale, descending from that line, but also many cities and towns in that
Realm, whereof he was owner and Lord, being above fifty with castles, beside
the city of Bragance, and had under his government above two hundred thousand
subjects of account, by reason whereof he was the greatest and the richest
Prince subject, among the Christian Princes of Europe. Considering withal,
that out of the city of Bragance, and two other towns called Chaues, which
the Romans termed AEquas Flauas, he was able to make, and bring into the
field thirty thousand men, between the age of five and twenty and fifty
years. And it is to be noted, that the men bred in those parts be hard and
valiant soldiers, and have been so approved in the battles and victories which
the Portugals have had against the Spaniards, by whom they have been often
vanquished in ranged battles. This Princes nice conscience, was the cause why
he extended not his force to defend his right, but withdrew himself into a
corner, without purpose or intent to marry either one or the other: by which
means he left the crown to him in the right of his late wife, and his life in
short time after.

The second example.
The Lord D. Antonio, the Prior of Crato, likewise supposed king of Portugale,
by reason of his oath at Santaren, where he was chosen, and after at Lisbone,
in which election he was confirmed by the Deputies of the cities and towns of
the kingdom, promised by oath that he would make no bargain or agreement with
any of their enemies, but leave. the same Realm at liberty. The Catholic
King D. Philippo offered to make him Viceroy of Naples for his life time, with
four hundred thousand ducats of yearly rent, and the bestowing of certain
offices and benefits, and fifty thousand ducats presently to pay his debts
to go into Italy: and likewise to restore to their former state, dignity,
houses, and goods, those persons from whom they have been confiscated by his
occasion, and to give both honor and riches to all them that should accompany
and attend upon him, according to every man's place and calling; upon condition
he would renounce and disclaim all his right and interest in the kingdom of
Portugale, by virtue of their election: and if withal he would swear never to
give attention to any, that might persuade him to the contrary. His answer was
to all these great offers: That his conscience bound him to do nothing
prejudicial to the contract he had already made, and that he had rather live
poorly and die miserably in a simple chamber with credit, performing the
duty of a good Christian, then to live in great pomp and pride, in sumptuous
palaces, disclaiming the law and commandments of God.

Courteous Reader, no man can speak so assuredly, or so sensibly in this
matter as I: for in the year 1582. upon S. Augustines day, being prisoner at
Lisbone, D. Christopher de Nora (for that time appointed Viceroy of Portugal,
with who^ his Catholic M. sent a gentleman of his chamber for me) assured me,
that I might talk with him as boldly as with himself, telling me that the king
meant to employ me to D. Antonio about these affairs. This was not then
effected, for that I escaped out of prison: since when, in this country and in
England, I conferred with him diverse times about this business being his
confessor, who often said unto me, God forbid I should do a thing so contrary
to my conscience: if I should (said he) I persuade my self that every chinke
or furrow in the ground would open and swallow me up presently, by reason of
that offense. God first I desire, to take away my life: I had rather live laden
with afflictions, accompanied with misery and beggarie, reserving my serious
and public promise, then to lead a perjured life in great prosperity,
pleasures, and delights. Thus he died, obtaining (as I think) for the
preservation of his integrity, as well reputation among Christian men, as
recompense at Gods hand, desiring always to live and rest in peace: and in
regard of his small ambition, could have contented himself with the tenth part
of the King his cosins offer, had it not been for the respect to his oath at
their election: and could have found in his heart, to have quit the right and
claim he had by his father, while the right was in him, but could not dispense
with the oath they bound him with when they elected him, having power to do the
first, but not the second.

This is sufficient (as I take it gentle Reader) to prove unto you my first
proposition, That the Portugals dwell upon the severity of their conscience.
Now coming to prove the second, which is, That they are most constant in their
designs, when they resolve to build upon the true law of God, and his honor,
I am to entreat you to defend me against the murmurers, our enemies in two
respects: that is to say, not only in the principal point that shall concern
our subject, but that they may become censurers of me and of the cause, saying,
That in the first history of two, I spoke not religiously, and that I give
cause of offense to the Kings and Princes of Europe, or that I incite you to
take arms against them. To the first objection I answer, that when a person of
what estate soever he be, deliver any thing to good purpose, or utter by chance
that which is come to pass; in that he offends not, being thereunto obliged in
duty and conscience. As for the second, where they suggest that I transgress
against Christian Princes, they are much deceived: for though a man make fine
gold into a chain, yet for all that it loses neither the beauty nor
reputation of gold, nor the name of the most excellent metal of all others: so
let it be supposed that a man descended of a princely race, become a mean
subject, yet cannot any man say, he loses by his deiection of fortune his
Nobility that came by nature: for David's sheepe-hooke was no disgrace to the
Scepter of Judah, nor Iustines wallet, nor the halter of Gratian father to
Valentine, were any blemish to the imperial Crown. Therefore I conclude, that
no man can accuse me of rashness in the narration of my history, speaking to
a good end accidentally, though I prove that many Kings and Princes of Europe,
have been derived out of mean or vulgar houses.

The Chronicles of Portugale offer unto us among the traditions of our
ancestors, a notable history well worthy the reporting and observing. In
Portugale in the Province of Alentejo, otherwise called Transtagana, there is a
town called Veyros, by estimation about the bigness of Manto upon Seine,
situate upon a mountain, at the foot whereof Westward, there runs a river
which has the beginning from the North part, the current passing into the
South. Not far from that town upon the highest part of a little mountain,
regarding the West for the most part, this river seems to have an issue
toward the East; and there is a foord where men are constrained to pass,
under this promontorie: the river has made a sandy shallow place, as it were
knee-deepe, where the women inhabiting the said town use to wash their linen,
maids as well noble as vulgar. It fell out upon a day that D. John natural
son to the King of Portugale, was to pass by that point with D. Petro
Iusticier and great Master ouerseer of the cities, and by reason of that
office was endued with spiritual and temporal honor and authority. He being
a young and lusty gallant, and governor of the same town, beholding these
maidens with their clothes trust up as women use going about that labor, this
noble man began to jest with the rest of his company at the bare-legged
wenches, and passing by them, some part of his train yet to come, one wench
amongst the rest (as the history reports) in a red peticote, as she was
tucking up her clothes, discovered her legs somewhat high, and giving her self
a clap with her hand on the calfe of her right leg, said aloud, Here is a white
leg (girls) for the master of Auiz. Which being ouerheard by some of his
followers, whom she took no heed of, hearing and seeing what the wench had
both said and done, came no sooner into their Lords lodging, but they reported
unto him what they had heard a young frolike wench say, and seen her do.
Wherewithal this noble gallant being stirred, sent for her presently, and
finding means to have her secretly, upon her begot a son. And this maid was
a shoomakers daughter of that town, very rich and of good account, who
understanding that his daughter was sent for to such a noble man, and being
informed that her own speech and light behauior was the first cause, and being
assured she was defloured by her own frank consent: took it so hainously,
that at her return home, he reviled her with most opprobrious and despitefull
words, and beat her out of his doors openly: and to manifest unto the world,
how much he was inwardly vexed with the spoil of his daughter, he never after
would eat at any table, nor sleep in a bed, nor put on any shirt, never pared
his nails, pol'd his hair, nor cut his beard, which grew so long, that the
people called him Barbadon, for it continued uncut till it reached beneath his
knees. This malcontent lived so long that his grand child, called D. Alphonse
grew to be a man, and Duke of Bragance (created by the great Auize master his
father who by the election of the people, afterward became King of Portugale,
and for his worthy acts, was surnamed memorable) and Barcelos by the right of
his wife, the sole daughter, and inheritor to the Constable of Portugale. This
town of Veyros, sta^ds between 7 or 8 other towns belonging to the said Duke
and is distant but four leagues from Villa Vicosa, where his palace is. This
vicinitie was the cause that he had perfect intelligence of the shoemaker his
grandfather, and the reports he heard of him, made him so desirous to see him,
that he determined to go seek him out himself in his own town: where meeting
him in the streets, he alighted from his horse, and kneeled down before him
bare-headed, and desired him to give him his hand and his blessing withal. The
shoemaker having an eye to the Dukes train that attended upon him, and seeing
his base humbleness, and hearing his speeches, amazedly conceived him to be
some great personage, unknown to him, said: Sir, do you mock me? The Duke
answered, So God help me I do not: but in earnest I crave I may kiss your
hand, and receive your blessing, for I am your grand child, and son to Ines
your daughter, conceived by the King my Lord and father. As Soon as the
shoemaker heard these sayings, he clapped his hand before his eyes, and said:
God bless me from ever beholding the soon of so wicked a daughter, as mine
was. Yet forasmuch as you are not guilty of her offense, hold, take my hand
and my blessing, In the name of the father, etc. But neither the Duke nor his
followers could persuade him to pull away the hand that covered his eyes, so
confident this old man was in his coffeehouse: neither would he talk any
longer with the Duke. Shortly after, this old man died, and before his death,
he took order for a tomb to cover him, whereupon he communded to be engraven
all manner of tools that belonged to a shoemaker, with this Epitaph.

This sepulcher Barbadon caused to be made
(Being of Veyros, a shoemaker by his trade)
For himself, and the rest of his race,
Excepting his daughter Ines in any case.
I have heard it reported by the ancientest persons, that the fourth Duke of
Bragance, D. James soon to Donna Isabel (sister to the king, D. Emmanuel)
caused that tomb to be defaced, being the sepulcher of his fourth grandfather.

As for the daughter, after she was delivered of that son, continued a very
chaste and virtuous woman all her life, and the king made her Commandresse of
Santos, a most honorable place, and very plentiful (to the which none but
Princesses are admitted, living as it were Abbesses and Princesses of a
Monastery, builded without the walls of Lisbone, called Santos (that is,
Saints) founded by reason of some Martyrs that were there martyred. And the
religious women of that place have liberty to marry with the Knights of their
order, before they enter into that holy profession: the order is called S.
James, bearing the same Cross. In this Monastery the same Donna Ines died,
leaving behind her a glorious reputation for her virtue and holiness. Observe
(gentle Reader) the constancy that this Portugale, a shoemaker continued in,
lothing to behold the honorable estate of his grand child, nor would any more
acknowledge his daughter, having been a lewd woman, so purchasing advancement
with dishonor. This considered, you will not wonder at the Count Julian, that
plagued Spain, and executed the King Rodrico for forcing his daughter la Caua.

The example of this shoemaker is especially worthy the noting, and deeply to
be considered: for beside that it makes good our assertion, it teaches the
higher not to disdain the lower, as long as they be virtuous and lovers of
honor. It may be, that this old man for his integrity rising from a virtuous
zeal, merited, that a daughter coming by descent from his grand child should
be made Queen of Castile, and the mother of great Isabell grandmother to two
Emperors, Charles the fifth, and Ferdinando; and confute the proverb in
Spain: De cien en cien an^os los Reyes villanos:
Y de ciento en seyes los villanos Reyes. which is,
From a hundred to a hundred years Kings become villains: and from a hundred
to six, villains become Kings: so here the plough was converted into the
Scepter, in less then three score and ten years.

For the proof of my second proposition, I must necessarily refer you to the
history expressed in the discourse of the twelfth letter, entitled: Admirable
adventures, etc. concerning Dom Sebastian the true and lawful King of
Portugale: where it is reported of D. Alphonse the African (King of Portugale)
that seeing King Lewis the sixth deluded him, in not giving him aid according to
his promise made at the beginning, when he first arrived in France (by which
means for two years space he left Portugal, not being able for want of power
to bring his purpose to any good pass, for his rteurne, being ashamed to be
seen of the Portugals, for that he lost a battle against the Castilians)
determined with himself to steal as unknown out of France secretly, and
place himself in a Monastery near unto Rome. And to effect that dissigne he
disguised himself in a strange habit, taking with him but two of his people
to accompany him: but he and they were intercepted and taken by the way by
Robinet (termed the Ox of Normandy): which Philippus Comineus also confirms
with this addition, that king Lewis was much offended with Robinet for that
piece of service: forcing him to supply him with an army and embark him for
Portugale, where he ended his life, as I have already more at large declared
unto you elsewhere.

That which I have said (gentle Reader) I think to be sufficient, to acquaint
you with the natural disposition of Portugales. And to induce you to believe
what likewise has bin verified concerning D. Sebastian my Lord and Master, it
is convenient for you to know, that he resolved never to discover himself, or
to make it apparent to any man, what he was; but was fully persuaded to pass
the rest of his time vncothly, and so to finish his life in silence: because he
wilfully took upon him (contrary to the advice of Xarisa, and all the Princes,
Lords, and Commanders that accompanied him, to give battle to Muley Maluco,
in the hour, the day and place, that in their judgment was not thought fit
for his advantage: and the King acknowledging his error and oversight he
committed that day, so afflicted his soul, that the memory thereof bred him
more inward torment and vexation, then any misfortune that ever befell him in
all his woeful days. For the confirmation whereof, I will give you to
understand (courteous Reader) what I heard an old man say, being a man of great
authority, an ordinary assistant, and a common releeuer of afflicted persons be
they never so abject, and a Religious man of mine own Order, and Archbishop of
Spalato, a Venetian borne, a maintainer and supporter of truth; who during this
Realms last troubles, wrote in the behalf of his Christian Majesty. This
reverend Prelat, while I lay ficke in his house, distant some half league from
Venice, sitting by my bed side, said unto me: In this very self same bed lay
D. Sebastian your King, tormented with a fever, before his imprisonment in
Venice, at which time in my hearing, a father of the Orderof S. Bernard, a
Doctor in Divinity, very famous for his profession, entreated him to tell him
how it came to pass that he lost the battle in Africa: and because the King
condescended not to his demand, he reiterated the same again. Then suddenly I
beheld tears gushing from his eyes as big as pease, and in such abundance, as
they did wet not only his handkercher, but his shirt, the sheet, and a silk
quilt that lay upon him. This passion was without weeping or sobbing, for that
he never could do, but ever showed himself all one, no changeling, come
prosperity or adversity. At length he requested us instantly, to use some other
communication, saying, The remembrance of that intolerable mishap, was to him
such a torment, as it deprived him of reason and judgment, and made him desire
to abandon both the sight and conversation of all men. All this grief could
not supplant his sickness, which persecuted him so sore, as he was out of hope
or care of his recovery: often te^pting him to end his misery with his own
hands. I considered it was great inhumanity to add a torment to his
affliction, in seeking to extract that from his knowledge, which his extreme
sorrow would not give his tongue leave to utter: so I desired the noble man to
depart with me, and give him time to rest a while: for that the night before he
had slept very little or not at all. To conclude, the shame and grief he
sustained inwardly by his rash attempt, as is before rehearsed, committing so
great an error, and so prejudicial to Christianity, enforced him to obscure
and hide himself from all his acquaintance and familiars: imitating Alphonso
his predecessor, both in temeritie and repentance: or to equal Boleslaus king
of Poland, who to kill Stanislaus the Bishop of Cracouia, left both his Crown
and Scepter, and retired himself into Hungary, where some say within few
years after the execution of his bloody purpose, he slew himself. Others
say, that he was devoured with dogs in a forest: but the most certain report
says, that he served a Cook in a Monastery at Carinthia (called Osia) a
little distant from the town named Felikirchen: and after the sufferance of
many troubles and travels he died, and was known by a writing which was found
in his bosom, the content whereof was: I am Bolislaus sometime King of Poland,
that slew Stanislaus Bishop of Cracouia. In the same manner I believe had Dom
Sebastian the King of Portugale died, had he not been a religious man, bound in
conscience to show and reveal himself, and take pains to seek to be restored
to his former rights and dignities, so provoked to do by secret illumination
from God himself, who otherwise had resolved to end his life in an hermitage:
which intent he manifested in certain Italian verses composed by him while he
was in prison in Venice, which I have about me, uttering all his success
sithence he lost the battle in Afrike, etc. There were four examiners
appointed by the Senate to attend that business all the time of his
imprisonment there, which examinations and verses he sent enclosed in a letter
to his Holiness, which also are in custody. The Advocate, Judge, Counselor,
and Inquisitor testify, that he gave them a princely, sententious, and a
pithie answer, rehearsing all things that had past concerning himself and
others, since that battle in Afric, with the names of the Generals,
Colonies, Captains, Lords, and Gentlemen, that accompanied him in that action:
the number and the diversities of nations, the day, the hour, the situation of
the place, where it was fought; how and in what manner he escaped.

I am again to entreat you friendly Reader, to give credit to that I shall
report unto you, and not to measure the nature of Portugals by the light and
lewd dispositions of other nations.

When I was in England with D. Antonie, the putatife King of Portugal, as I
told you before, I was solicited by Fr. Diego of Chaues, a professor of mine
own order, with great importunacie to relinquish and give over this S' D.
Antonio, and incline toward his Catholic Majesty, whose confessor this Diego
was, and his sole Governor: assuring me, that if I would yield to his request,
I should be very bountifully rewarded; and wrote unto me most confidently, that
my entertainment should not want one mite of 25 or 30000 ducats yearly in
revenue to be duly paid, which allowa^ce would not only serve co^petently to
maintain me in honorabl estate, but I might also deduct a surplusage
therehence, to enrich my kindred and friends withal, who^ also the king
promised to prefer and advance for my sake, (this Cofessor was my mothers
cosin-germaine) assuring me that all my actions, intents, and purposes
whatsoever, prejudicial to his Catholic Majesty, should be quite buried in
oblivion, and no blame for any inuectiues or writings in derogation of his
Majesty should be once objected against me. And to the end I might the rather
yield unto him, he recapitulated all the particular offices and favors he had
performed in my behalf at the time of my imprisonment; that he purchased my
deliverance, and saved me from being adjudged to the galleys, and also
prevented me from being stretched upon the rack: and further, obtained pardon
of his Majesty for Emanuel Texere my uncle, that was condemned to loose his
head; and caused all his goods to be restored, that were confiscate, for being
in employment with D. Antonio against the king: and when he could not obtain a
grant at my hands of that which he demanded himself, he incited my friends
and acquaintance to do their uttermost, to win me from my constant resolution,
hoping in regard of the great distance and separation from my country, and
what by the want and necessity I endured in France, with my aged constitution
of body, I would retire from that place and end my age in Portugal, where I
began my youth: attempting afterward by rating and reuiling to make me recant,
when other prouocations would not prevail. All which inticements mixed with
bitter taunts, moved me nothing at all: and at this instant if I would
vouchsafe acceptance, I might receive the same entertainment before offered.
It is not yet two years past sithence a very dear friend of mine in this
town pressed me with vehement persuasions to return into Portugale, assuring me
of as much advancement there as I would defire: but God forbid, that ever I
should accept it, for I had rather be a poor religious beggar in France, then
a great discontented Bishop in Castile, or in Portugale: considering the
country is not it self, but in bondage, most seruilly subject to Castilian
tyranny. In this town a nobleman of France, in the presence of diverse Princes
of the Blood, accompanied with some religious men of mine own order, often
persuaded me to leave the habit of S. Dominicke, and betake me to another,
assuring me in liew thereof an Abbey (which he had in his power at that time to
give) and afterward a coue^t of 8 or 9 thousand livers annual rent: and to
make me capable thereof, he promised to procure me a dispensation from his
Holiness, to allow the exchange of my present habit. All which bountiful
proffers could not once move me to change my shape, like a mutable
weather-cocke, or an airie Camelion. For if the spirit of God forsake me not, I
will die as I have lived, a religious votarie to S. Dominicke, and a natural
Portugal: and the same blessed stabilitie possess all those that seek and
spread my reproach and defamation; and to those that make a scorn of me, I
answer nothing, but that I am a true religious Portugale, of the same
disposition that other my countrymen be: I mean the godly, virtuous, and
loyal Portugals. Neither will I admit any for my associates in this case, but
such as be most entirely sincere and constant. So I end my present narration in
the name of God, and purpose to proceed to the handling of my promised
discourse: which, albeit I cannot so exacty relate, as I desire (not being an
eye-witnes of all that has been done and suffered by this miserable king my
Lord and master) I have gathered out of the greatest probabilities and
assertions of the iustest and honestest, that I could possibly learn or
understand, that were able to give me the best intelligence: which diligence I
was bound in duty and conscience to exercise, and am withal enforced by the
importunity of many (meeting me in the town and field at every corner) to
discourse unto them my masters adventures. Therefore to satisfy them and all
the world, and to meet with their tedious inquisitions, I have effected this
collection, to rid my self of trouble, and to quench their inordinate thirst
after the truth, referring all that can read, to this and my former discourse
of Admirable adventures. Farewell.

The Narration.
AT my being in Venice (gentle Reader) I understood by diverse, that the
opinion conceived of many, and the rumor commonly spread concerning the death of
Dom Sebastian the king of Portugal, my Lord and Master, was false: and
believed rather, that their reports were more like to be true, that maintained
the contrary. For that it was confidently justified by credible persons, that
he was seen alive and safe since the battle in Afric: namely, by Cid
Albequerine, Emanuell Texer my Uncle, N. Murselo Higuera, and many other
Gentlemen and personages of great quality and account. He escaped by flight
among the route, being sore hurt in his head and in one arm, and passed as a
private man to his ships, and was embarked amongst the remnant of his army,
that saved themselves by flight, as he was forced to do. After a few days he
arrived in Portugale in a town called Neu feu de mill fuentes, near unto S.
Vincents Cape, where he refreshed himself, and sent for a Chirurgian from
Faro: his name I have forgotten (but well I remember he was reckened excellent
in his Art.) There the king soiourned, accompanied with the Duke of Aneiro, and
Christopher Tauora, and diverse other Lords, until he was perfectly healed.
The tidings of his being at the Cape were suddenly spread at Lisbon, and was
soon published generally throughout all Portugal. And it was affirmed, that he
was seen at the Covent of Capuchins (built upon the point of S. Vincent)
amongst his companions. This rumor was soon quailed by the policy and
authority of Petro de Alcacoua, great Secretary of Portugal, in the behalf
of Dom Philip king of Spain, with whom he had beforehand concluded, when Dom
Sebastian the king employed him in Embassage into Spain, before his departure
into Afric. And for that cause this Petro Alcacoua (a damnable Politician and
a monstrous traitor) as soon as the first news came, that the Christians had
lost the day, and his King and Master slain, this Jew gave secret
intelligence to the king of Castill of all that happened: signifying unto him,
that now were a fit time to surprise the kingdom of Portugal, and bid him
make ready for the purpose. I respected the handling of the second
establishment of union between the king my master before his departure, and
the king of Castile, which is expressed by one Connestay at large; who being a
man of good respect in Portugal, came post to seek me from Rome to Venice, and
amongst many other news, he reported unto me, that as soon as ever it was
bruted abroad in Portugal, that Dom Sebastian the king was living, and
prisoner in Venice, there were many devises revived concerning this brute, that
long time before lay buried. And withal you must note, that Dom Diego de Sosa
the Admiral, which conducted the king into Afric, reembarqued him from
thence into Portugal again, and gave continual intelligence unto his kindred
and assured friends, that their king was living, and that he had secretly
received him a board, among the scattered troops, and gave them an especial
charge, that they should conceal it. And further, that he gave him a secret
sign, whereby he might know him hereafter, if need required: which priuitie,
Dom Diego discovered unawares, when a counterfeit (suborned for the purpose)
came to that Diegoes house, sending for him into the field to come home to
speak with Dom Sebastian the king: to whom he said abruptly: Has he delivered
any secret token betwixt him and me, whereby I might credit thee? By which
question he published that, which he secretly had bewrayed before to his
allies. Whereupon the Cardinal Dom Henry, great Uncle to the king, took
occasion to send a trusty servant of his, called Emanuel Antunes, to S.
Vincents Cape, charging him to use all the industry he might, in finding out
what certainty he could learn of the king his Nephew. All which, this Emanuel
performed, with as much endeavor as he might possibly use: and by his diligent
inquisition about the said Cape, found that the king had been in the
Monastery: and was there certified, that he was both hurt in the head and
arm, and in a manner frantic, not only for the exceeding anguish and
vexation of mind which he suffered for the loss of victory, but withal the
shame did ever perplexe him, when he considered the overthrow came by
indiscretion and rashness, and that by his default the flower and prime of all
Portugal, was defeated and cut off. Antunes brought a very large testimonial
hereof to the Cardinal under the seal of the father Guardian, and all the rest
of his brethren of the said Monastery: which the Cardinal received with his
own hands, commanding his servant to impart this secret to none, which he for
his own part buried in his own bosom. And not being able to find out what
course his Nephew and his company took for their escape out of the country,
gave over the expectation of his recovery either of his crown and scepter while
he lived, though it were his due. But when it was known in Portugal that the
K. lived, Antunes began to acknowledge the pains he had undergone in these
affairs, by his masters appointment: which was no sooner conveyed to the king
of Castiles care, but he sent for this Antunes, of whom he had a liberal
relation of all that he knew concerning that business: and soon after Antunes
his return into Portugal, he died. Whereby it appears unto me, that God
lengthened his life some space, to reveal a truth, that seemed before to be
very intricate and doubtful. Shortly after the Portugals began to murmr
among themselves, boldly saying, that D. Philip the king had made away Dom
Sebastian their king (his Nephew) going to him to crave his aid before his
departure into Afric, because he had a meaning to gain the kingdom of
Portugal to him and his successors, and hold it by usurpation. And this
scandal was never extinguished, because fame diuulged his arriving at the Cape
called S. Vincent, and no certainty appeared to the world, what way he passed
from thence. But since it is proved, that from Spain he got shipping and
traveled into Alexandria, and there lived in Prester John's Court with his
followers, some twenty months, unknown of what quality he was, professing
that he had a desire to see the world, and traveled only to that end and
purpose: for of want he made no show, he and his company being well furnished
with gold and jewels of great price. From Aethiopia they passed over the red
sea, and so directly to the mount Sinay; from thence to the great Sophi called
Xatama king of Persia, whom he served as a Commander five or six years
against the Turks, where he achieved many victories, and diverse wounds in
his body, with much honor and reputation. In requital whereof, the king of
Persia did him many honorable offices, and gave him rich presents of
inestimable price, with the which he and his company departed. I heard at
Venice of his conference with Colonel Cigogna, a man of great experience in the
wars, which assured the Lords of the Senate, that he never talked with any man
more wise, learned, or better experienced in Military discipline, then this
noble person: and he protested he could be no other, then the same he professed
to be. The excellent and most reverend Lord the Archbishop said, he heard the
discourse between the King and the Colonel, which delighted him exceedingly.
This Archbishop I could not speak withal at my being in Venice, for that he
was employed in Dalmatia in the affairs of the State.

The King leaving Persia, went toward Jerusalem, from whence he traveled by
firm land to Constantinople: which after certain days he left, and came into
Italy, from thence to Hungary, and from thence fetched a compass by
Muscouie, Poland, Swedland, and Denmark, where he took shipping for England:
and in London it is reported he saw D. Antonio the supposed king of Portugal.
From England he passed into Holland; from Holland by Almaine back to Antwerpe:
therehence to Paris, anno 1586. It comes to my memory, that in the latter end
of the same year, one Antonio Fernandes Pignero, a Priest, which had sometime
been Amner to the said Dom Sebastian, etc. and was with me in service from the
said Lord D. Antonio, told me that the same Dom Antonio, had heard it credibly
reported, that Dom Sebastian the King was living, etc. whereat D. Antonio
seemed to be sore amazed and perplexed. About which time I craved license of D.
Antonio to go out of England into this country, which he gave with some show
of coffeehouse therewith. By reason whereof, and to avoid all suspicion, I
moved no question to him concerning the particularitie of this matter; and I
must tell you by the way, that Pignero had all this discourse in writing sub
sigillo confessionis, which although (said he) I make the same known unto you,
yet I pray you conceal it from D. Antonio, because it may be very prejudicial
to him of whom I heard it. In the year following after Easter, in the time of
Ember, when I was come to that town, whither I made the scope of my journey, I
heard the like concerning the same business which I before had heard in
England, whereof I seemed to make no great care: and coming to Paris, after
his Christian Majesty had entered the town, D. Nouuclet assured me in the
presence of diverse Portugals and French men, not once nor twice, but many
times, that it was as certain and assured that D. Sebastian (King of
Portugale) had been lately in Paris, as he spoke to me: describing him to me by
many circumstances: to all which I gave no credit, esteeming all he said to be
mere fables. Not that I held any opinion or conceit that he was slain at the
battle in Afric, but my imagination could not receive any impression that he
could be guilty of any such rare dissimulation to pass so many cities and
regions without discovery.

The last year writing to the said Doctor to Annissi where he dwelt, of these
news which I heard, that my Lord and master should be set a liberty by the
consent of the Siegniorie of Venice: I entreated him to write unto me at large,
that which he had often recited to me in this town, concerning the estate of that
King. And because his answer was, that he could not agree to the satisfaction
of my demands, I ceased to importune him any further in that behalf. But
forasmuch as at my being at Venice, some of the chiefest of the Siegniorie of
that State, asking me if I were able to say any thing concerning that the King
had answered upon his examination: saying, that he had been in Paris, and there
conferred with a Portugale fled out of his country for D. Antonioes cause,
being his cousin. And further, that he met with a gentleman of Swisser-land at
Soleurre, departing from thence toward Annissi, by whom I sent a letter to D.
Nouuelet: in the which I most instantly desired him to set down in writing all
that he had declared to me at Paris, concerning my master D. Sebastia^, etc.
At my great importunity it pleased him to grant me my desire, and here I have
annexed the same, copied out verbatim, as it was written, in manner and form,
with the recommendations he assigned me to do to his friends, (named in the
same original) men of good esteem for birth, office, and popular affectation.
So that to his truth and sincerity no man can take exception, being a
professor in his art, both very learned and excellently experienced, in his
life and manners never detected. Therefore all suspicion either of the matter
or the man is prevented.

The copy of a Letter sent from D. Nouuelet to Fr. Joseph Texere.
SIR, I received your last Letter dated the eighteenth of the month past:
whereby you make me recall to mind the grief I conceived by your letters
preceding, concerning the troubles of Emanuell Godigno, a Gentleman, borne in
Portugale. I had long since expressed in writing, and sent it you, if I had
co^iectured your disposition had been apt to entertain news. So ready and
willing I am to apply my endeavors to do you service, in any thing you shall
please to command me: but the consideration of your rare perfection of
memory, made me decline from doubt of any defect therein, and so much the
slower in committing that to writing, which I had before so obseruantly uttered
in your hearing, and in the presence of many persons of good respect, as well of
your country, as of other nations: imputing this imposition rather to your
desire to be better assured, Obsignatis tabulis, then to any want of carriage in
your understanding parts, I thus address my pen to confirm my tongues
discourse. In the year of our Lord 1588. being at Nance, in emploiment and
service of my Lord the Cardinal of Gondie, about the affairs of my Lord the
Bishop of Paris, his nephew, that was called Abbot of Buzai; I took up my
lodging in the covent of the Iacobins, where I found good opportunity to
ingraft my self in the favor and friendship of the reverend father D.
Sampayo, a man much commended for his liberal erudition in letters, but
recommended for his integrity and zeal, one of your own order, and of your
ancient and approved acquaintance, and being both godly and learned, united in
more assured bonds of love and amity, then are exercised among the vulgar.
Mean while that league of friendship then planted between that good Dr.
Sampayo and me, took so good root in us both, as it continues without peril
of supplanting til this day: and is like for your sake to fructify
abundantly, as well by increase of love, as of acquaintance with many other
noble gentlemen of good sort and condition. Among the rest of the ordinary
frequenters, came Sr. Emmanuell Godigno, to visit Doctor Sampayo at my
lodging, and taking some acquaintance of me, continued the same as long as I
lay in Nance: till I retired toward Paris, leaving to my great sorrow the
sweet conversation betwixt Doctor Sampayo and my self, loving each other
dearly. This Godigno loath to let slip out of use, the complements that had
past between him and me at Nance, at his coming to Paris frequented my
lodging daily, to understand of Doctor Sampayoes health and welfare: whereof I
not being able to give him any certain intelligence, he began to mourn and
look heavily, whom I could not choose but in that passion to accompany,
envying any man's affection should exceed mine in zeal to my friend. It
followed that, upon a sunday (in what month I remember not) this Sr. Godigno
received the Communion very devoutly, ministered by the chief of the Iacobins,
which made me refrain for that time to salute him, or he me: for intruth I
think he saw me not, and I not willing to interrupt his devotion, let him
pass without any ceremony on my part performed. Notwithstanding, the same
afternoon he repaired to my lodging, and as his custom was, demanded what
tidings I heard of his friend and mine Doctor Sampayo: and I having no better
means to inform him then before, desired him to excuse my ignorance being
unable to give him any contentment by intelligence of him, or from him. At
which answer, the kind gentleman seemed very pensive and appaled, sitting still
a long while mute and silent: whereby I imagined he had somewhat that inwardly
distempered him, for I might perceive the tears trickle down his cheeks.
Which perturbation breaking out at his eyes, afforded him some liberty to
utter these words following: Sir, I consider the great love that was betwixt
Doctor Sampayo and you, that maenifestly appeared to me at Nance: and withal,
the confidence he reposed in your fidelity toward him; which persuades me,
that I cannot commit a secret matter of great consequence to a man that can
more assuredly conceal it then your self. And I doubt not but the same shall
be as safely guarded in the treasury of your constancy, as in his, if you
will vouchsafe to give me your unfeigned promise so to do. Whereunto I answered:
Sir, if it be a secret never as yet by you revealed to any man but unto me, you
may boldly speak it: but if you have already trusted any man, or shall
hereafter declare the same to any other, it may so fall out, that you may lay
some other man's deserved blame to my charge. Therefore in this doubtful case I
beseech you trust your self, and tell me nothing: for I will not have you
ransacke your enclosure upon my protestation, although I presume so much upon
your honest sincerity, being a Gentleman both honest and religious, you will
utter nothing unto me, that shall not be like your self: considering beside, I
have seen you this day participate a sound mystery, most reverently and
devoutly among the Iacobins, which assures me, that you cannot produce any
thing out of your mouth either profane or wicked. Whereunto he replied, that
he was expressly prepared to receive the holy Communion upon this day, to the
end God might inspire him with the understanding, what was fittest for him to
do in this case, and resolved absolutely to tell it me, that I might disclose
it to Doctor Sampayo, fearing least he might die, burdened with so great a
secret, as concerned the good of all Christendom, holding his conscience
greatly charged with the weight thereof, coniuring me seriously to deliver it
safe to Doctor Sampayo: mean while if it please God to take him out of this
transitory world, it might be lawful for me to publish it openly before my
death. This and such other like speeches being ended, he began to vnbosome his
conceit, in this manner: It was my chance to meet with a Gentleman in this
town, my countriman, between the which and me there had been ancient amity:
after many days conference at secret meetings, he told me that Dom Sebastian
the King of Portugale was not dead: whereat the said Godigno seemed to be
astonished, and said, he did not believe it, until he had seen him alive with
his own eyes, and then (said he) I may have reason to be of your mind. Which
the other promised should be effected, and to that purpose carried him to dinner
to the house where Dom Sebastian was lodged, which was as I remember in S.
James his street, or in harp street; whether the first or second day, or
shortly after he had used to that place, he could not certainly name the time,
but a friend of his a Portugal came and inquired at the house for Dom Sebastian
King of Portugal: and as he was coming up the stayers, Godigno hasted down
the stayers to stop his passage, and took occasion to carry away his friend,
faining some other affairs with him because he would prevent the King from
discovery, who was very jealous of public notice. But the morrow after, the
same gentleman came again about his former business, and inquired earnestly
for the King, and being there denied him, ceased not to ask of every one he
met throughout all the city for Dom Sebastian King of Portugale, but not
prevailing at all, he fell into an extreme agony, and desisted not from
inquisition, to little purpose: and surprised with great care what to do, was at
length inspired with a motion from God to profess a solitary life, and take
upon him the habit of an hermit: so, being disguised traveled toward Spain,
and arriving at the Court, made means to speak with the Catholic King,
saying, that he had matters of great importance to reveal unto him, and to
none but the King. And after long attendance, he was admitted to the Kings
presence to have audience, to whom he protested he had lately seen Dom
Sebastian in Paris, and confirmed it by many signs and tokens of verity. The
King presently forbad him by any means to utter it to any man living, and
willed him to go abroad every where to search out and discover what he might
possibly, allowing him present money to bear his charges, delivering him a
letter to D. Bernardin Mendosa, then his ledger Ambassador in France, to give
him any money he should have cause to use, not signifying unto him for what
cause or intent: and thereupon he showed me letters, which made the matter
evident that he had been in Spain, as is aforesaid; but for the
particularities of the said letters I do not well remember, but that I hold my
self satisfied thereby that he had been in Spain, etc. but to continue his
tale, he told he had traveled so long that his money being well wasted he was
forced to go to Mendosa, to be supplied in his necessity, to whom when he
would not reveal the cause of his coming into those parts, and having letters
of intelligence out of Spain from some great man that he should deliver that
Godigno no more money, being but an impostor and a deluder, as they termed him,
Mendosa was soon confirmed in that parsimonie, intending before to shut up his
liberality and to give him never a deneere: at which denial this Godigno
began to lament and burst forth into bitter tears: as I judge his lamentation
was because he was crossed and prevented for coming to the type of his
enterprise.

In the end, protesting before God and his Angels, and by virtue of that holy
Sacrament he had that day received, that all that he had uttered to me was
true: in the end without protestation of believing or show of incredulity, I
promised him my secrecy, as he desired: some few days after this conference,
he returned unto me as he used to do inquiring what news I heard of father
Sampayo: to whom I answered, I understood of him no more then before. Mean
while, I was (as it were) distracted in conceit, seeing this Gentleman's
relation a paradoxe adverse to the fame and vulgar opinion of Dom Sebastians
death: and weying this Gentleman's integrity, zeal, and communication with the
lacobins, could not in my conscience condemn him for a lier. But whether it
were true or false, according to my promise I concealed it (though it were in
some sort an offense so to do). It came to pass in some little space after, in
the house of an Apothecarie, dwelling in the suburbs called S. German, near
the gate (whose house was razed at the siege of Paris) that this man died. Here
is all that I can say concerning this subject, which I never opened to any man
saving to Doctor Sampayo, which was a good while after, but the time I do not
justly remember: and one cause why I was loath to speak of it, was, for that I
was afraid to be thought deluded. And me thinks this I have written unto you
may seem very strange, notwithstanding the common report at this hour is,
that Dom Sebastian was seen alive two years after he was detained in Venice:
but I tell ye, the greater part of the world suppose, that he is a counterfeit,
suborned, etc. God knows what he is, who ever send you happy and long life:
so with my humble recommendations to your reverend self, I leave you. From
Annisi the last of September, anno 1601.

I forgot to tell you, that Emmanuel Godigno added to that before mentioned;
that the Catholic King gave him in especial charge to tell Dom Sebastian,
that the Catholic King requested him by any means to hasten his return
without delay to him, desiring nothing so much as to render him the possession
of his Realm and kingdom, and to bestow his eldest daughter upon him in
marriage.

I am farther to desire you of so much favor, as to send me these books from
Lions here mentioned in a catalogue enclosed in this letter, and I will
faithfully repay whatsoever you shall lay out to that purpose. Here follow the
titles: All the works you can find, De regno Christi temporali. I beseech you
salute for me Monsieur le Feure, recommending my faithful service unto him: of
whom if it please you, you may crave assistance in my business, for he is a
man, multae lectionis.

Good Lord! I had forgotten my duty to Monsieur de Tyron, to Monsieur Pelle
jay, to Monsieur de Marnay, and to my loving friends of Amboise, three
brethren, reckning my self much bound to them all: notwithstanding, I fear
they little trouble themselves with the thinking upon so mean a man as my
self, and this conceit half dismaies me to trouble you so far as to recommend
me in all humility to my Lord Bishop of Eureux. Whatsoever you shall think
convenient to perform in my behalf, either to add or diminish, I refer to
your discretion.

Your most humble servant, CL. D. Nouuelet. The superscription. To M. Texere
Portugueze, Counselor and Amner to the King, etc.

A Declaration.
THe King D. Sebastian departing from Paris traveled thorough France directly
into Italy: and I know not who followed him, or where he forsook his company,
but most assured I am, he resolved to give over the pomp and glory of the
world, and to retire himself to live privately; and being in Dalmatia, he made
choice of an hermitage for his habitation, contenting him therewith in liew of
his former princely palace. This poor hermitage was situated on the top of a
mountain, near the city of Lesine, where he abode for the space of three
years: in the issue of which time there arrived a ship of Portugale, from
whence some passengers going a pilgrimage to that hermitage, seeing the King,
knew him incontinently, and said aloud: Behold, yonder is our King Dom
Sebastian; and spread this rumor presently about the city. The King
perceiving that he was discovered, grew much displeased therewith, and upon
that coffeehouse, determined with himself to forsake the place, (to the
great crucifying of my soul, for there he lived in great tranquillity of mind
with no less consolation) being in a bodily fear least the Portugals should
come thither and search for him, he thought good to go: and before he went from
Lesine, he distributed all his moueables and household stuff amongst his
friends: three of the which coming to Venice were called before the Senate,
before whom they confirmed al which the said King confessed upon his first
examination touching his estate and accidents in those quarters. The Senators
called them to come before the King face to face in open view of the whole
Senate and assistants, and they knew one another very well; and one of them
brought a picture with him, which the King had left behind him, upon the which
was painted, Jesus Christ crucified, with S. Sebastian and S. Anthony of
Padua. And this act is so common in Venice, that they talk thereof without
controlement.

The King departed from Lesine wandering here and there, seeking some convenient
place to retire himself into, fit for his design, lodged himself in a
mountain near Pisa, where he spent his time as you shall hear. He had hose,
and what else I know not, but no hat, nor other necessary thing that might
serve instead there of: by reason whereof you must needs imagine his complexion
of force must alter, which from swart became black, his hair grew long, but
not unseemly, for he used to cut it: his garments were of course cloth, and
his food herbs, roots and fishes, which were given him for Gods sake: he
frequented the city, where, the first months of his arrival, he gave money
toward the dowries and marriages of poor maidens, and at his own charge
delivered many out of prison, discharging their debts. And having distributed
all he had for God sake, he was feign to receive again for God-sake, and took
that in good part which was given him in the town, only to serve the
necessities of his person, which were few, considering the austeritie of his
diet and hard penance which he willingly endured, relecuing prisoners with the
surplusage of his poor fortunes, if he had any, to whom he did many services
by his travel and labor, to dispatch their business whenever they requested
him. One reported unto me, that he had many charitable alms at a Portugales
house in the town, who ministered unto him clothes and other necessaries,
without knowledge what he was, or where he was borne: which he by his own
confession took very thankfully. The like befell him in S. Alexis, where he
afterward arrived: and after in Edisse a city in Syria, he received
bencuolence of his own servants, that wandered almost through the habitable
parts of the world to seek him.

After he had remained certain years in these mountains, there appeared a
vision unto him by night, wherein he thought God commanded him to repair home
into his own kingdom, and leave this desolate and solitary life, and abandon
both hermitage and mountains: but afterward misliking his former opinion, he
began to suspect the same apparitio^ to be diabolical, or mere fantastical,
and revoked that purpose for to proceed in his journey homeward: but a very old
man dwelling near unto him in the foresaid desolate place, with whom he lived
in a great league of amity, because he was a virtuous man, exercising himself
wholly in devotion and prayer, made him revoke that vnreuerent conceit of his
vision, saying that it was a good and a godly motion, and therefore could not
proceed from an ill spirit: and therefore a godly and a divine vision, and
persuaded him to do his endeavor, to execute that, which therein was given him
in charge.

The King listened unto this old man's advice, and so much the rather, for that
he discovered unto him before many strange things, and foretold many matters
that he had seen take event according to his prediuination. Whereupon the King
wiping away the tears from his cheeks, which his woeful heart had sent
outward as messengers of secret sorrow, took his leave of his fellow in
affliction, like one deprived (by grief) of ready use both of reason and
judgment. So, abruptly leaving his loving friend and religious companion,
trotted onwards of his journey from one place to another, until he came to
Messine a city in Cicile. In which place it is supposed he had left (passing
that way before) some pieces of gold and jewels of value, which to recover, to
serve his present turn, and to furnish him in good sort, he was forced to
discover himself to his companions, from whom he had stolen long before.

In this voyage he sent Marco Tullio Catizzone into Portugale, with diverse
letters, to many persons of quality (as is said before in my Treatise called
Admirable adventures.) And at Messine he shipped himself in a Gally belonging to
his Holiness, bound for Genua, being fraught with silks, and afterward came to
Ciuita Vecchia. From whence without any delay he posted to Rome, and was lodged
near unto S. Peter's Church, where as he was sleeping in his chamber, he was
robbed by certain of his servant, whom he had newly entertained into his
service, not long after his coming to Rome. And very near as shortly after my
departure therehence, hearing of the rumor, I sent to a friend of mine there,
to give me intelligence of the certainty of these tidings. Who sent me word
that he had been at his lodging, and spoke with his hostess, being a widow,
and with her children and servants, which reported all that had past in that
business, saying they well discerned by his behavior, that he was some
honorable personage, or some very great Lord, and said they were very much
grieved with the unfortunate rumor that was spread there, that he was declared
to be Dom Sebastian the true King of Portugale; which by his gravity and
maiesticall behauior assured them no less, then that he was some great Prince.

Conferring this I now learned, with these circumstances collected before in
this country, and afterward confirmed at Venice, any man may be well assured
that this report was true. At Venice one showed me an inventory, written with
his own hand, of those parcels of treasure that had been stolen from him:
amongst the rest there was a chain of gold garnished with precious stones;
which the great Sophi presented him, with a diamond of great value, and rings
with precious stones most exquisitly set, with many other pieces of good
estimation and value. And while he was distempered for the loss of these
jewels, he mist certain papers, the purports whereof were of great importance:
all which were slipperily conucyed away; which being kept had been direct
testimonies to serve his turn, in the doubtful opinions of them that were to
try and sift him, whether he were the same Dom Sebastian he pretended to be.
And having understanding of some ambushme^t laid to entrap him by the passage
of Vmbrie, he altered his course and went by Narne; and when he came thither,
and heard no news of his enemies in his way, he went forward by Tarne: where
he had intelligence that his Holiness would go to our Ladies of Laret. Then he
addressed his journey to that place directly; and when he came to Neuuaine, he
understood his Holiness had changed his purpose, and was resolved to go by
Bologne, and so to Ferrara: the King after his devotion ended, bent his travel
toward Bologne. Whither when he came sore wearied and tired miserably, he
heard of another alteration, that his Holiness by means of some sickness
that came upon him so dainly, had no intent once to budge from Rome, being
forced to keep his chamber. This tossing and reeling to no purpose, troubled
the poor King exceedingly, having broken the neck of his designs: not
knowing then what way to take, thought with himself to go some way at a
venture, not resolving upon any one, his fortunes grew so variable: at the last
he directly past to a village, which belongs to the Count of Verone, in the
midway to Mantoue, which some call Nogara. And when he came to that borough, a
strange imagination possessed him, that one violently withstood him, for going
any further that way. Then, he supposing himself to have daylight enough to
guide him to Mantoue, was contented to be checked in the other passage; finding
his mind assailed with a thousand variable cogitations, which so afflicted him,
that he could not utter any one period of his vexations, to him that
accompanied him. All this time I had no certain report of the kings being in
that place: which is the cause I made no mention of the day, as I used to do of
his other passages.

The king being at Mantoue told a Gentleman of Lorete, that when he was at our
Ladies there, he named himself, Iuan Poeta. This Gentleman being entered into
very good terms of amity with the King, did him many kind favors and
courtesies, entertaining him at his lodging in the best sort he could devise:
and shortly after accompanied him to Ferrara, where he apparelled the King in
silks and velvet. Shortly after this Gentleman had performed these offices to
the King, his urgent business called him from that place: but before he went,
he conducted the King to his tailers house, and there took order for the
supplying of his wants, and gave great charge for his special entertainment,
willing his host to call him Ioanne Baptista Sartori della contrada de Santa
Maria la Fratra. This man was of good years, very virtuous and rich, into
whose house the King entered the fourth of October, anno 1597. In which year,
the King understanding the Pope was to make his entry into Ferrara;
accompanied with this tailor, about the first of May set forward toward the
same city: whither when the King came and found not his Holiness there, he
determined then to attend his coming. In which space the King confessed
himself to Friar Alonso, a religious professor of my order, a man of great
virtue and sincerity (but very simple) who thinking to do well, did that which
fell out to be very ill, in reporting to diverse Nobles and Gentlemen, that Dom
Sebastian the King of Portugale was in the city, attending the presence of his
Holiness: and as it happens, that one evil seldom comes alone, the tailor
being acquainted with a gentleman of Portugale (whose name I know not, some
called him Baron) this Gentleman the tailor conducted home to the Kings lodging
to diner. This Portugale sitting at the table, often beheld the King advisedly
as he sat at meat, and observed him in every respect. Soon after dinner was
done, the King rose and departed to his chamber. After his retire the Gentleman
said to his hostess, and the rest of the company that dined with them, the
tailor also being present: Gentlemen (said he) this Gentleman that sat here at
diner amongst us, is surely D. Sebastian the King of Portugal. I am that
countriman and know him well, for I have seen him many times before his
departure into Afric to war against the Infidels. All we Portugals hold it
for an assured verity, that he escaped at that time very sore hurt, and that
he was seen afterward in Portugale, from whence he fled, but how or what way
we could never yet learn. The tailor no sooner heard these words, but he went
presently and told them to the king. This speech much offended the king, and
grieved him not a little; and withal, remembering that Friar Alonso had in his
mere simplicity betrayed him: and moreover, considering that the King of
Castiles Agent was advertised that he was in that city, and plotted against
him, being in great fear what evil might happen unto him, resolved presently
to steal away secretly, without taking leave either of host, confessor, or
tailor.

This discourse the tailor himself uttered unto me, with many other
particularities, in the temple of S. Siluester in Verona, confirming the same
in his own house afterward, with the effusion of abundant tears running down
his cheeks and beard, with such zealous lamentation, as he enforced me to
accompany him in the self same manner of grieuing. He told me also that he
remained in his house with him seven months at the least, and was atte^ded on
by his daughter, being a fair young maiden: and in all that while he protested
the King did not once look directly in her face, commending him for his
temperate, affable, and exceeding virtuous behavior, and that he observed his
fasts very severely, praying almost continually: and said farther unto me
weeping: Father, I fear that Prince is much injured: I beseech the Almighty
God to preserve him: O that it were lawful for me, and for his safety, that I
might keep him within my simple habitation, not as he is a Prince, but in
respect of his bounty and honor: and if I should happen to die before him, I
could leave him sufficient to live on all the days of his life. Trust me the
simplicity of this poor old man, pleased me exceedingly, and induced me the
rather to believe him. He also informed me by what title the Senate of Venice
called him, and inquired of him if ever he entertained him in his house, and
whether his answers to diverse interrogatories were true or not, and whether all
that he told the Lords were true or false? To which he answered justly and
failed not a jot; and he maintained him to be the true King of Portugale,
having many reasons so to persuade him: the one was the confident assertion of
the Portugal gentleman that dined in his company at Ferrara, saying he departed
out of Portugal secretly, yet proved by many circumstances: and this old man
assisted me much when the Senate conuented him before them, asking him how long
he kept company with him before he came to Ferrara, and whether he were the
same man that lodged in his house. Then he kneeled down before his feet,
embracing them, and looking toward the Senate, said: This is Dom Sebastian
King of Portugale, which lodged in my house: whom afterward I accompanied to
Ferrara. And when the king was asked of the Judges, whether he knew that old
man or no: he answered, that he had never seen him before this day. At which
answer, the old man told me he was more perplexed, then he was with his sudden
departure from him at Ferrara, and wept most bitterly. I must excuse the king
for thus confuting the old man before the Senate, for that he understood at
Venice and Padua, a little after he departed from the presence of the Senate,
that they had straightly imprisoned and punished one Monsieur Ieronimo at
Venice, for entertaining him into his house, and had punished diverse other for
doing him the like favor. And the King fearing that the like rigor might be
offered this silly old man, made him to disclaim his acquaintance: which the
King upon his return to prison, revealed inco^tinently to Count Caesar
Martinengo, to Count Charles his brother, and diverse other his fellow
prisoners. And the Lords said unto me, they called me to see one John Baptista
Sartori de Verona, and asked me if I knew him; and for that I was much bound to
this good old man, for many good offices done unto me, and for that I saw it
turned them al to displeasure, that did me any good, I answered for his
safety, that I knew him not, nor had ever seen him: which the poor old man
digests very heavily: and if any good friend would but deliver this my excuse
unto him, I will acknowledge my self much bound to him for that friendly
courtesy. The self same act in the like words, a Cannon of Bresse reported
unto me, meeting me in that city, acco^panying me as far as Lac, happening to
speak of the king, and of the opinion that was delivered of them generally
that had seen him: that it was thought verily he was D. Sebastian the king
most assuredly, not knowing me to be any fauorer of his proceedings: telling me
that al he knew of the matter, he heard of these Counts and gentlemen that were
in prison with him, for the space of five months: whereof he recited unto me
many particulars: and this Cannon (as I take it) was called De Lone: so after
long conference the night approaching, I took my leave of him, etc.

The King departing from Ferrara, held on his way to Padua, and being there, he
thought it fit he should attend the answer of his letters he sent into
Portugale by Marco Tullio Catizzone: his devotion performed to S. Anthony, he
determined to go to Venice, where all these things happened unto him, which we
have already reported in the former treatise, entitled, Admirable Adventures,
etc. as you may read in a letter sent to me from John de Castro; and in that,
which the king wrote to his Holiness: where it is at large specified, how he
was betrayed into the hands of the Castilians, by one of his own servants for
reward, and so committed to prison. This treacherous varlet being convinced and
reproved by some of the Kings friends, that had understanding of his perfidious
service, being already bought and corrupted with a few pence, following the
perjured faction like a maisterlesse curre, fell into the art of slandering,
and banding against his loyal master with hot pursuit, and vehement
accusations, as sodomie, cosinage, in prison and abroad. Notwithstanding all
this villainy, God that weyes all men's causes in equal balance, will not
suffer his servants ever to quail under the burden of iniquity: the hearing
of his cause was committed to Sr. Marco Quirini, which was at that time Sabio
de la terre firm, and at this day is, Sabio Grande, one of the four Judges,
commissioners allotted for this circuit. The said Quirini reporting to the
Senate what he had heard concerning his accusations, and what also was
testified in his defense, said, That he not only found this man innocent and
guiltless of the crimes laid to his charge, but thought him generally to have
lived a harmless life. This sentence was well approved and allowed by the
Senators: and as soon as it was published, which was in the beginning of the
year 1599 they freed the king from the dungion where he lay before, and placed
him in a more favorable prison, a place of some liberty. You shall read
hereafter the pains and punishment Dom Sebastian the King my master endured
sithence his misaduenture in Afric, until the day of his manifestation to
the world. I beseech you hold me excused, though I satisfy you not so
plentifully and so orderly as you expect or desire: it is all I could learn,
and it is hard to gather so much in these parts, where the truth has been so
ingeniously labored to be suppressed and smoothered: beside, the great hazard
of my person in traveling to obtain this little, assuring you that our hope
withers not, but springs daily, to see my Lord Dom Sebastian to be as absolute
King of Portugale, as it is justly due unto him by the law of God and nations:
then shall my pen trample upon the vale of tyranny and oppression, that now so
imperiously curbes poor patience and equity.

Seeing God has hitherto been both his lamp and shield, to lighten and guard
him, through so many dark and dangerous ambushments: why should we not be
assured that he that can has a purpose to make us rejoice and wonder as much
at his advancement and dignity, as his poor friends and servants are grieved
and dismayed with his fall and misery: hoping all Christian, magnificent, and
maiesticall Princes will join in intercession to the Almighty, to restore my
poor (yet princely Master) from his woeful impisonment, to his Crown and
liberty.

A Declaration.
NOw it is requisite, that I report unto you somewhat concerning the ring, that
has been so famous throughout the world, and of the rare virtues it was
esteemed for: and so forward to handle other matters, whereof some make for his
purpose, and other some as much for his hinderance.

You have heard (gentle Reader) of one that showed this King a ring, etc. thus
it happened. As soon as he was come to Venice, there was warning given to the
goldsmiths, both by him self and some other of his friends, that he was robbed
of certain pieces of gold and jewels at Rome: then he gave them the marks and
tokens; desiring them, that if any such came into their hands by chance, they
would make stay of them, until he, or some for him, came to challenge them. Not
long after, a goldsmith lighted upon a ring of gold, wherein was graven the
Arms of Portugale: which ring he presently brought to Monsieur Ieronimo, of
whom you have read before, an inhabitant of the same town, who was jointly
apprehended with the King for lodging in his house, and was not delivered
until five hours after the King was set at liberty. Ieronimo took the ring
and brought it secretly to the King, lodging privily in his house. As Soon as
the King beheld the ring, he said; This ring is none of mine, but it belongs to
D. Anthony my cousin. This relation I had from Ieronimo himself at Venice, in
the presence of many witnesses, and how the goldsmith happened to get this
ring. In Moran an Island some half league from Venice, there is an Abbot called
Capelo, a gentleman of Venice, a grave personage, and of great authority,
hearing that the King laid wait for certain jewels that he had lost, hoping
thereby to recover some of them; having a diamond in his keeping, with the
arms of Portugale, came to the town to the conuenticles of S. Francis, called
Frari, where the King lay concealed, for that he was pursued by some that meant
him no good; who no sooner beheld the ring, but he said: Verily this is mine;
and I either lost the same in Flanders, or else it was stolen from me. And when
the King had put it upon his finger, it appeared otherwise engraven then
before. The Abbot inquiring of him that brought him the ring, how he came by
it: he answered, It is true that the King has said. Therehence arose a strange
rumor of a ring, that by turning the stone you might discern three great
letters engraven: S. R. P. that is as much to say: Sebastianus Rex
Portugalliae. Ignorant people not co^ceiuing aright of the thing, raised
thereupon such rumors, as their own imaginations could gather: and at all
times, so often as the Abbot showed the ring to the King, he had many witnesses
to testify the same. I soiourned three weeks in the same I Will, very near the
Abbots house, after this had past.

To the second point: although the King were lean and weak by reason of his
travel and troubles, as it is like he could not be so strong and puissant as
he was when he reigned in Portugale, being there full fed and corpulent: yet in
Padua in the house of D. Prospero Baracco, he was seen to lift up two men at
once with great facility, one of the which was called Pasquino Morosini, the
other Bernardino Santi; both these together (putting his arm between their
legs) he heaued from the ground, without straining or wrenching in the view of
many. He did the like in the I Will of Moran to two other, the one called Ieronimo
Calegari, the other Pascalino Calegari; and there was present the Archbishop of
Spalato at the like performance of his puissance with other men of quality:
and this Pasquilino was a man both tall and corpulent. A Venetian gentleman of
the house wherein the the King was prisoner, oftentimes took occasion to scoff
at the king, saying: It was impossible he should be the person he reported
himself to be, with other geering frumpes: whereto the King said earnestly:
Sir, I pray you tell me the reason of your incredulity, and whereupon it is
grounded: and Moliner answered: Because I have heard it often reported, that
the King Dom Sebastian was a lusty strong man, of power to pull a horse-shooe in
sunder with his hands, and able to tire six horses in an hour; and you are
but a spare poor megar shrimpe, and a gristle in respect of such a one, and
scarcely able to tear four cards asunder, if they be well joined together,
nor like to tire one horse in an hour. Well, said the King, if force will
prove me to be Dom Sebastian, etc. and the matter rest only upon that, it may
be that one day I may satisfy you in that point. So long this galla^t
continued in his former geering and railing, that one day above the rest, he
moved the Kings patience, and made him angry, and constrained him to show him
by the force of his hands, that he was Dom Sebastian, etc. and made him
confess the same: for being in a rage he came upon him directly, and took him
by the girdle with his right hand, and heauing him higher the^ his head, carried
him round about the prison in that manner, to the great admiration of all that
beheld it: and this Gentleman never after durst abuse him any more, but used
him with the honor and reverence that was due unto him. In like manner, he
took up in the same prison by the girdle one Gasparo Turloni (a Gentleman of
Venice) with his right hand, and Baptiste Marsoto with his left hand, and
lifted them both up from the ground at one time. He also in the same prison
took up (putting his arm between their legs) two other Gentlemen, one very
gross and corpulent (namely Messier Lucio de Messine, and Alexander de
Alexandria) and lifted them both of a good height: the opportunity of this
Gentleman made him do it in prison: and at Padua, and at Moran he was disposed
to show his force, to pleasure his friends thereby. That which before was
spoken of the ring, and of his forces, were the two things I thought necessary
first to give you notice of.

To ad to the two first two other. In Venice there is a rich and an honorable
merchant; who hearing of this King, what marks and tokens he had on his body,
and what he had said and done, took occasion to go to him, and made means to
deserve his love and amity, by the performance of many kind offices toward
him. This merchant was a Piemontoise by nation, by name called Monsieur John
Bassanesse, and his mother being a widow married after to one Bartholomaeo
Verneti, a Piemontoise borne also: who often used to check and reprove his
son in law for going so much to the King, saying, he was am impostor and a
counterfeit: and his son in law boldly defended the King, by all the means and
reasons he could devise. During this contention betwixt the father and the son
in law, the old man said; Come hither, hear me: Emanuel Philibert Duke of
Sauoy, sent an Ambassador to Dom Sebastian king of Portugal his nephew, son
to his cousin german, which Ambassador brought him a present; and returned
back again from the said King with answer: and another present from the King
to the Duke, the Ambassadors name was Dominico Belli, whose servant I was at
that very instant, by means whereof I saw and was privy to all the parcels,
and placed them my self in the casket, and likewise saw advisedly what was
returned from the King. Now sit, if you can persuade that man that says he is
D. Sebastia^, etc. to tell me what parcels those were (that were sent to and
fro) directly, you shall bring me to be of your mind, and to confess that he
is the very same man he nominates himself to be. John Bassanesse hearing these
words, bethought himself which way he might come to have conference with the
King, to understand the right of this matter, and as he was studying how to
bring his purpose about, he dreamed of a stratageme which should effect his
design, which was, that he would perpetrate some light crime, in hope therefore
to be committed to the prison, where the king was: whereupon he resolved to take
a cudgel under his cloak and go to the Realto, the chiefest place in Venice,
and there quarrel with one or other, and bastinado him until he had drawn blood
of him, for which act he doubted not but to be committed: he proceeded
according to his secret determination, and when he was come near the Realto,
he met with a friend of his, who perceiving by his countenanee, that he was
troubled in mind, said unto him: Sir, I see by you there is somewhat amiss.
John Bassanesse being well assured, that he was a faithful servant to the King,
laid open his intention unto him, who found a means to get a note in writing
under the kings hand of all the parcels, that passed from the one to the other.
This memorandum was put into the hands of one Lecnardo Donato, one of the Sabio
grande, that first examined the King, and was thought to owe him little good
will, but after he surueyed his cause, and found it so just and true, traveled
earnestly to the Senate, to pronounce him Dom Sebastian the true king of
Portugal. All this I have heard confirmed by many very worthy persons: the
original I could not bring with me, for that Donato at my being there was
employed as General of five and twenty thousand foot, and five thousand
horse, in the county of Brosse: which force the Siegniorie had leauied the
year before, for their defense upon some intelligence, etc. But as soon as
John Bassanesse had got the writing, he hyed him home to his father in law, and
they agreed between them, that one should stand at one end of the table, and
the other below; and the father wrote the pieces he knew, and the son by his
note was able to inform the old man of diverse parcels that he had forgotten:
and the old man said it was have made him ouerslip somewhat; those four white
horses (said he) I did not well remember, but I think verily it was true: and
the old man wondered not a little, how his son came by this intelligence, and
said he had devised it himself: but seeing himself vanquished, said to his
son: Visit the King, my son, at your pleasure, and do him what good you may,
and I beseech God to assist him.

Forasmuch as I know the curious sort of people, desire to view the
particulars, and to make our proof the more autentical, I have here set the^
down in order as they were inuentoried.

The parcels presented by the Duke to the King. A case full of silks, of
diverse colors.

Another full of cloth of silver, of diverse sorts and colors.

Another full of cloth of gold, of diverse colors.

A diamond set in a ring.

An ancient garment of very great value, being a trophe, taken from the French
at S. Quintaines, embrodered and garnished about the neck with many jewels,
four white horses which the old man had forgotten, and diverse other pieces not
named.

Those parcels that were sent from the King to the Duke. A great chain of gold
of very good value: two peutrils, two bits, two pair of stirops, all garnished
with diamonds, rubies, and other stones of great price.

One diamond set in gold, which Bartholomeo Veneti said was as big as the nail
of his right thombe.

Many East-Indian dishes of sundry colors, with other rich things of good
esteem.

For the second of the last proofs, being the fourth and last, you shall
understand that there be four merchants at Venice, men endued with wealth,
honor, estimation, and charity, that in my hearing have named these four
witnesses Barnaba Rizzo, Iean Bassanesse, Constantin Nicoli, who keeps in his
hand the original letter of D. Raimond Marqueti, by which it is manifest that
D. Sebastian is one man, and Marco Tullio Catizzone another: which letter he
showed publickely at S. Marks, to convince the falsehood of the Castilians, and
their adherents: for the which and such other like services, the Spaniards
could not be appeased without revenge. The nineteenth of October, I had
intelligence by letters, that one came into this honest man's shop, his servants
being sent all out of the way, and cut him on the head with a curtelaxe, and in
diverse other places so dangerously, that he was in great peril of his life.
The malefactor escaped unknown. The fourth and last is called Baptiste
Dolphine, and these four have been ever good friends to the King, both by
entertaining him and traveling in his affairs, to the uttermost of their
power, to set him at liberty, without intermission of any minute of
opportunity, that might be spent in his profitable service. But the Castilian
Agents considering and knowing the zeal of these personages, and observing
their constancy, that both with all their might and maine, defended the cause
of the King my master: seeing that neither fair promises, persuasions, nor
threatenings, could make them desist from their vowed fidelity and assistance,
entered into this devilish practice. First they began to publish these
witnesses to be fools, cosiners, and rogues, and persuaded certain bankers
and brokers to lay wagers with them, that the prisoner was not Dom Sebastian
the King: assuring them that they might offer to give a thousand for one, if
ever it were proved or published; for that they knew assuredly, that he was a
Calabrian, a Sodomite, a thief, a cosiner, and a counterfeit, and that ere
long they should see him hanged upon one of the pillars of S. Marks Church.
These usurers believing this to be true, and desirous to make gain of any
thing, began to enter into the course of laying wagers, as the Castilians had
advised them. The witnesses hearing they offered so franckly a thousand for
one, if the prisoner were judged to be Dom Sebastian, etc. knowing certainly
that it was he: believing that the Senate, in regard of such especial marks;
tokens, and proofs, would not refuse to publish him, what they had found him:
were easily drawn to bargain with these bankers, to some of the which, the
simple and honest men gave out twenty, some thirty, some fifty, some ten,
some five crowns, in hope to be paid a thousand for one: so that they had
given out some three hundred crowns or more; and shortly after they found out
the wrong and hindrance they had done to the poor Kings cause, by their money,
they begun to repent themselves exceedingly of their folly: the account was
cast, that the repaiment would amount to three hundred thousand crowns. And
the bankers seeing themselves engaged for so great a sum of money; and if the
Senate should chance to publish that which they knew to be true, that they were
like to be stripped of the greatest part of their substance, began to complot
and oppose themselves to counterchecke the truth, which fell out to be a great
prejudice and bar to the King my masters cause; for that many chief men,
and the factors of many principal houses, were interested in this hazard of
indemnitie: as those of the house of Astroci, Caponi, Baglioni, Labia, Iacobo
Begia, Antonio Simone, Pietro Tobon, Bastian Garinoni, and many others of their
parents and allies, for their sakes: among which were diverse that bare office
in the commonweal, as Iacobo Fuscurini a proctor in S. Mark, that was ever
enemy to the King my master. In the end this devilish invention, and
Castilian pernicious policy, wrought us much woe, and multiplied our enemies
infinitely: for it was so commonly known and spoken, that little children as
they went for mustard, could say, that this was the principal cause why the
Senators would have had Dom Sebastian say, he was not Dom Sebastian but a
Calabrian, and they promised straight to set him at liberty; and not that
favor alone, but they would do what else for him, he could or would require.
Whereupon he wrote a letter to the Pope, complaining justly upon the Senators
of Venice, for requiring at his hands so unlawful a thing, to whom he declared
in his letter, that he answered them, that he had rather die a tortured death,
then confess so palpable an untruth, to gain an ignominious life and
liberty. O that it were possible for me to speak all that is true in this
case! but I must let pass infinite injuries, least the revealing all, might
rather aggraute then relieve my masters misery. If I durst, this discourse
should have been more ample, and better understood, if it were lawful that I
might say what I could say, that the Monarks and Princes of Christendom, have
done the King my Lord secretly and openly much good and ill, and are unwilling
either of both should be manifested to the world in writing. Notwithstanding I
will never bury in silence an answer that a grand Sabio of this commonwealth
made to a magnificent Prince in Europe, of great understanding, but of no great
antiquity. This Sabio going to visit this Prince, was entreated by him to
tell him what ground the Seigniorie of Venice had, to proceed upon the prisoner
in that form, which called himself Dom Sebastian King of Portugale? for (said
he) if they found him to be a Calabrian, why did they set him at liberty
without chastisement? And if it were verified unto them by good proofs and
evidence that he was Dom Sebastian King of Portugal, why did they use him in
that manner? The grand Sabio publicly made this answer in the presence of many.
Sir, forasmuch as the affairs concerned the estate of Spain, the Seigniorie
would not presume to judge whether it was he or not. This man was committed for
disobeying a commandment the Seigniorie laid upon him, and therefore
restrained two years of his liberty, to the end he might repent him of his
fault, and after the expiration of two years again dismissed him upon the
like commandment. And to be plain with your Excellency: the man would
follow no good advice, but was wilful, turbulent, and of ill government, by
which means much ill is come unto him. That word ill advised, might have been
well interpreted, for that he would not deny himself to be that which
undoubtedly he was. It was not my fortune to be present at this act, being
elsewhere employed out of those parts: but at my return it was related to me,
by a learned person that was there in present; which afterward the same Prince
himself did ratify unto me, assuring me that the answer of that Sabio grand,
did verily induce him to believe, that that prisoner was Dom Sebastian the very
true King of Portugale: for if the Seigniorie had held this man to be a
Calabrian: said this Prince, to what purpose did the Sabio hold me with such a
long discourse publickely, considering he knew the priuitie of the affairs; if
he had been proved a Calabrian, it had been sufficient to have said in a word;
Sir, he was a Calabrian, an impostor, and a cosiner, without any more ado. But
you see how the world fares, and how it swayes abruptly, and so ends my
pitiful narration; aduising, entreating, and coniuring you (gentle Reader) to
shun the snares and trips of these subtle enemies: for I can assure you, by
the testimony of a good conscience, that they be those that S. Chrysostom
term the Pharisees, Qui portabant mel in ore, and fell in cord: they will flap
you in the mouth with honey, which when you begin to chew, perhaps you shall
taste sweet, but in the digestion, you shall find it most bitter in operation.
Farewell.

FINIS.

