THE WATER-CORMORANT HIS COMPLAINT: Against a Brood of Land-Cormorants.

Divided into fourteen Satyrs.

By JOHN TAILOR.

1 A Jesuit. 2 A Separatist. A Trust-breaker. A Drunkard. A prodigal Gallant.
An Extortioner and broker A Basket-Iustice. A Cutpurse. A good and bad
Constable A Serieant and Iailor. A Patron and his Clark. A Country-Yeoman. A
Figure-flinger. A Lawyer, and Vndershriefe
My Cormorant against these does inuey,
And proves himself much better far then they


LONDON,

Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1622.

To Gentlemen, and those that are gentle.
SVbiects may seem scarce, or Printers lack work, when a Cormorant flies
into the Press, yet Cormorants oppress and therefore worthy to be pressed; but
my Cormorant has neither dipped his tongue in oil to smooth the faults of the
vicious, nor stopped his mouth to conceal the merits of the virtuous: I have
thought good to sympathize a subject fit for the time, and I have done my best
to handle it in a suitable strain.

The Cormorant is not easily induced to affability, nor I to flattery.

His best service is harsh and unsociable, so is my style. His biting is sharp
and piercing, so is my phrase. His throat is wide and spacious, my subject is
spacious. His color is black, I discover deeds of darkness. He grubs and
spuddles for his prey in muddy holes and obscure cauerns, my Muse ferrits base
debaushed wretches in their swinish dens. He like the Crocodile moves the upper
chap, this Treatise condemns that beasts dissimulation. He swallows down his
meat without taste, this book distastes such as sin without touch of
conscience.

The ods is, my Cormorants appetite is limited, but most of theirs is
insatiable.

I aim not at such men's slips as may fall by infirmity, for that were like
Esops crab, to offer to teach others to go right, going crooked my self.

Detraction is a private wounding of a man's name, and flattery a deuourer of
men alive. If I can sail betwixt these two, and not be split, I shall ariue at
my desired port.

In my passage I shall have Polipheme casting Rocks to sincke me, Critics
misconstruing my words, like spiders sucking poison out of wholesome flowers.

But from these Antipodes to goodness, by their Antithesis to nature, I
appeal to my conscience which is a witness to me that can neither accuse or
condemn me.

I aim at none but such as devour others, and yet make shift to keep
themselves out of the reach of law, I name none personally, and therefore wish
the faulty to amend with silence rather then by rubbing of a spot to make a
hole in the whole cloth, for I leave gleanings enough to make a second part if
need require. Such stomachs as cannot digest this dish, let me rather be to
them a choke pear then a Gudgeon.

There is no degree of man or woman, whatsoever, from the Court to the Cottage,
or from the Palace to the Plough, but may make good use of this Poem, either
for merry recreation, or vices defamation: and in a word, if it please the
judicious, or be any way profitable to the confirming of the good, or reforming
the bad, I have then my full recompense, with the effect of my intentions and
wishes.

John Tailor.

A brood of CORMORANTS.
A Jesuit.
THE ARGUMENT.
King-killing monsters, out of Heavens mouth flowed.
Ca^ers, and Butchers unto Rome and Hell:
The bane of youth and age, in blood imbrow'd:
Perditions gulf, where all foul Treasons dwell.
(...), lives, and souls under the saving style
Of Jesus, they devour, confound, beguile.
IN setting down this sect of blood compact,
Me thinks I see a tragic Scene in act:
The Stage all hanged with the sad death of Kings,
From whose bewailing story sorrow springs;
The Actors dipped in cruelty and blood,
Yet make bad deeds pass in the name of good.
And kindling new commotions, they conspire
With their hot Zeal to see whole Realms on fire;
As it was apparent when they did combine,
Against us, in their fatal powder Mine.
All hell for that black treason was plowed up,
And mischief drank deep of damnations cup:
The whole vast Ocean sea, no harbor grants
To such devouring greedy Cormorants,
In the wide gulf of their abhorred designs
Are thoughts that find no room in honest minds.
And now I speak of Rome even in her sea,
The Jesuits the dangerous whirlepooles be,
Religions are made waves, that rise and fall
Before the wind or breath Pontifical.
The Pope sends storms forth, fevers or combines,
According to his mood it raines or shines,
And who is ready to put all his will
In execution, but the Jesuit still.
Nor has this Cormorant long taken degree,
For Esacus more ancient is then he:
Years thousands since Troyes son he was created,
And from a man but to bird translated,
Whereas the Jesuit deriues descent
But from Ignatius Loyola, that went
For a maimed Spanish soldier, but herein
The difference rises, which has ever bin:
From man to bird, one's changed shape began,
The other to a devil from a man.
Yet herein these wide maw'd Esacians,
May well agree with these Ignatians,
First black's the color of the greedy Foul,
And black's the Jesuits habit like his soul,
The bird is lean though often he be full craw'd,
The Iesuit's hatchet faced, and wattle iaw'd,
The Cormorant (as nature best befits)
Still without chewing does devour whole bits,
So Jesuits swallow many a lordly living,
All at a gulp without grace or thanksgiving.
The birds throat (gaping) without intermission,
Resembles their most cruel inquisition,
From neither is, non est redemptio,
For what into the Corm'rants throat does go,
Or Jesuits Barrathrum does once retain,
It never returns fit for good use again.
Eighty years since he stole the Epethite
From Jesus, to be called a Jesuit,
But I could find him out a style more right,
From Judas to be named Iscariotite.
Though Paul the third their title did approve,
Yet he confined their number, that above
Threescore they should not be, and yet we see
How much increased now the Vipers be,
That many a thousand Christian lies and groans
Under the slau'ry of these devilish drones.
And he that knows but truly what they are,
Will judge a Cormorant's their better far.
A Separatist.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here earth and hell have made a false commixion.
Of painted zeal, and holiness, and love:
Of Faith, of Hope, of Charity (in fiction)
In smoke and shadows, as the fruits do prove.
Hypocrisy, which long prayers does repeat,
Deuoureth Widows, and poor Orphans cheat.
NOw enters next, to play his Oily part
A Saint in tongue, but a rough devil in heart:
One that so smoothly swallows his prey down,
Without wrath shown, or any seeming frown.
You Would think him when he does it, in a Psalm,
Or at his prayers, he is so mild and calm:
No noise, no trouble to his conscience cries,
For he deuours his prey with heau'd up eyes.
Stands most demurely swallowing down his bit,
And lickes his lips, with long grace after it.
This Bell-wether (sir reu'rence) leads the flock,
After his sense grafted in errors stock.
This reu'rend Barrabas, a Button-maker,
Himself with trusty Demas his partaker,
Meets with their brethren, Chore, Abiram, Dathan,
And term our Church the Synagogue of Satan.
Wise Balaam, Nabal, Esau, Ismael,
Tertullus, Theudas, and Achitophel,
Phiigellus, Himeneus, and Philetus,
(A crew of turne-coates that desire to cheat us)
These fellows with their Ample folio graces,
With mumping chappes, and counterfeited faces,
Though they like shotten Herrings are to see,
Yet such tall soldiers of their teeth they be,
That two of them like greedy Cormorants,
Deuoures more then six honest Protestants.
When privately a sister and a brother
Do meet, there is dainty doings with each other:
There Is no delay, they never stand shall I shall I,
Hermogenes with Dallila does dally:
And Simei with Saphira will dispute,
That nine months after she does bear the fruit.
When Zimri kissing Iesabel does greet,
And Cozby with her brother Cham, oh sweet,
It Is fit to try (their humors to refresh)
A Combat twixt the spirit and the flesh:
Provided that they do it secretly,
So that the wicked not the same espy:
These youths deride the Surples, Cross and Ring,
The knee at Sacrament or any thing
The Church holds Reverend, and to testify
Their bastardy, the Fathers they deny.
And of themselves they frame Religions new,
Which Christ and his Aposiles never knew;
And with vntemperd mortar of their own,
They build a Church, to all good men unknown,
Railes at the Harmonious Organs, and the Coape,
Yet in each Church of theirs, they raise a Pope.
Calls it the b^gde of Antichristian dross,
When they see butter printed with a Cross:
And yet for Coin thei'le any man beguile,
For when they tell it, they turn up the pile.
Upon the Sabbath they will no physic take,
Lest it should work, and so the Sabbath break.
They hate to see a Churchman ride, (why so)
Because that Christ bade his Apostles go.
Against our Churches all, they have exclaimed,
Because by Saints names most of them are named:
If these new Saints will no old Saints abide,
From Christendom they must, or run, or ride.
Saint George from England chases them away,
Saint Andrew does in Scotland bear like sway:
From Ireland good Saint Patrick them will banish,
Saint Dennis out of France will make them vanish:
Saint James will force them out of Spain to fly,
So will Saint Anthony from Italy,
And last of all (whom I had half forgot)
Saint Dany out of Wales will make them trot.
And what ungodly place, can harbor then,
These fugitive vnnat'rall Englishmen:
Except that with the Turk or Infidel,
Or on, or in the Sea, they mean to dwell,
That is in lesser room they may be crammed,
And live and die at Amster and be damned.
And sure I hold some Roman Catholics
Much better then these selfe-wild Scismatickes.
For Papists have good affability,
And some have learning, most have Charity,
Except a Jesuit, whom I think a man,
May term a tight Papistick Puritan,
And for the Sep'ratist I justly call,
A Scismaticke Impuritanicall.
But yet the Iesuit's constant in his mind,
The Scismatick is waueringly inclined.
Besides, he thinks whilst he on earth does live,
It Is charity to take, and not to give.
There are a sort of men which conscience make
Of what they say, or do, or undertake:
Who neither will dissemble, swear, or lie,
Who to good ends their actions all apply,
Who keep the Sabbath, and relieve the poor,
According to their portions and their store:
And these good people some men do backbite
And call them Puritanes, in scorn and spite,
But let all know that do abuse them so,
That for them is reserved a fearful woe;
I love and reverence only bear to such,
And those that here Inuectiuely I touch
Are Birds whose Consciences are more unclean
Then any Cormorant wase're known or seen:
I Will stand to the censure of all honest men,
If they disprove me, I Will never write again.
A Trust-breaker.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Foe to Justice, a corrupted Friend,
An outward Angel and an inward Fiend;
A hidden Serpent, a most subtle Fox
A Sugared poison, in a painted Box:
A Sirens song, alluring to mishap,
A Snare to Honesty, and Virtues trap.
THe Rich Trust breaker, upon whom hell waits
Does thrust into the River of Estates,
His foul devouring Beak, and at one prey
Will swallow fourteen Tradesmen in a day:
As many of the Country Lordships slippes
Flapdragon like, by his Insatiate lips.
The Father sometimes has been quite undone,
Through too much trusting his vnnat'rall Son,
And a Trust-breaker has a trick in's pate
To bring a rich Ward to a Beggars state.
For some corrupted men have got tuition
Of rich men's Heirs, and changed their condition
With false inducements to Recusancy,
Or suffering them through prodigality
To run so far in debt, that all their Lands
Are lost, before they come into their hands.
Fair Schools of learning have bin built from ground
For Boys whose Fathers were not worth five pound:
But false Trust-breakers hold it for no sin,
To keep out poor men's sons, take rich men's in.
This Breach of Trust is multiplide, in time
'T a Catholic, and universal crime,
That man to man is grown so much unjust,
That he is a wise man that knows who to trust.
But (if there be such) they do want much care
Who trust not in the world nor trusted are.
Collectorships, the common wealth may lurch,
For Burnings, Highwaies, Bridges, or the Church,
For loss at Sea, for Hospitalls and Schools,
One hundred knaves, may make ten thousand fools.
Yet these things are so needful, as I wot,
He Is a base villain that contributes not:
But he is a hell-hound that their Trust deceiues,
And the right due from those that want bereaues:
Why, this Trust breaking has the ex'lent skill
To make a Wife to burn her Husbands Will,
Because his first VViues Children should not have
The Portions that within that Will he gave.
And oftentimes a gasping man for breath,
Distracted with the griping pangs of death,
Has to a forged Will subscribed his hand,
And dispossessed his own son of his land.
Trust-breakers may a senseless hand so frame,
(Though being six hours dead) to write a Name,
A rich-mans wealth that is dead's like untold gold,
And that is because it is never truly told:
For like to pitch it has polluting tricks,
And some unto the fing'rers fingers sticks:
But of all Rascals since the world began,
The Banckrupt Politick's the only man,
In courteous fashion many he will undo,
And be much pitied and rewarded too:
For having got men's wealth into his claws,
He holds it faster then a Cormorants laws
Can hold a silly fish, and at the last,
Himself, himself will into prison cast.
And having broke for thousands, there the hound
Compounds, perhaps for ten groats in the pound,
Se^s richly up again, 'till time he sees,
To break, to prison again, again agrees:
And thus a cunning knave, can with a trice,
Break, and be whole again, once, twice or thrice.
These Cormorants are worse then thieves therefore,
And being worse, deserve a hanging more.
A Theife speaks what he means, and takes your purse,
A Banckrupt flattring robs you ten times worse.
The one does sildome rob ye of all your pelf,
The other leaves you nough^ to help your self:
And yet the one for little theeuing may,
At Tiburne make a hanging holliday;
VVhilest the great The^e may wi^h a golden prop,
To fair Reuennues turn a Peddlers shop.
In this voracity Father stands not free
From his own Son, nor from his Uncle, he
Being made Executor to the States of men,
My Corm'rant is a piddler to him then.
He will by cunning and vexation draw,
Heir, wealth and All, into his ravenous maw,
And when his gorge is full up to the brim,
Into some loathsome prison vomits him.
There leaves the honor of a horse and name,
To be exchanged for misery and shame:
Now tell me they that love fair truth indeed,
If such mawes do not Corm'rants guts exceed.
And to what place soever such resort,
They are the Foul Birds both in Town and Court.
A Drunkard.
THE ARGUMENT.
A madness dearly bought, with loss of fame,
Of credit and of manly reputation:
A cursed purchase of disease and shame,
Of death, and a great hazard of Damnation:
In all that is bad, the devils only Ape,
Worse then a beast, in the best manly shape.
THis fellow with the dropsy grown as big,
And much more beastly then a Sow with pigge:
His cheeks like Boreas swollen, he ^low'd and puffed,
His paunch like to a woolpack crammed and stuffed:
And by the means of what he swil'd and gul'd,
He looked like one that was three quarters mul'd.
His breath compounded of strong English Beer,
And th'Indian drug would suffer none come near.
From side to side he staggerd as he went,
As if he reeling did the way indent.
One skirt of's cloak scarce reached unto his waste,
The other dragging in the dirt he traced.
His very brains within his head were stewed,
And looked so crimson colored scarlet hewed,
As 'twere an ignis fatuus, or a comet.
His garments stunke most sweetly of his vomit,
Faced with the tap-lash of strong Ale and Wine,
Which from his slau'ring chaps does often decline.
In truth he looked as red as any coal,
And bellied like unto a Mare with foale:
With hollow eyes, and with the palsy shaking,
And gouty legs with too much liquor taking.
This valiant pot-leach that upon his knees
Has drunk a thousand pottles up se freese,
Such pickled phrases he had got in store,
As were unknown unto the times of yore,
As when he drinks out all the total sum,
Gave it the style of superna^ul^um,
And when he quaffing does his entrails wash,
It Is called a hunch, a thrust, a whiffe, a slash:
And when carousing makes his wits to fail,
They say he has a rattle at his tail,
And when his wits are in the wetting shrunk,
You may not say he is drunk, though he be drunk,
For though he be as drunk as any Rat,
He has but caught a fox, or whipped the Cat.
Or some say, he is bewitched, or scratcht, or blind,
(Which are the fittest terms that I can find.
Or seen the Lions, or his nose is dirty,
Or he is pot-shaken, or out, two and thirty
And then strange languages comes in his head,
When he wants English how to go to bed:
And though it were fit the swine should in his stye be,
He spewes out latin with pro bibi tibi:
Which is, provide for Tiburne (as I take it)
Or if it be not, he may chance to make it.
Then Irish Shachatwhorum from him flees,
And half a dozen welsh me Vatawhees:
Until he falls asleep he skinks and drinks,
And then, like to a Bore he winkes, and stinkes.
This Cormorant in one day swallows more,
Then my poor Esacus does in a score.
For mine but once a day does take his fill,
The drunkard, night and day does quaffe and swill,
Drink was ordained to length man's fainting breath,
And from that liquor Drunkards draw their death:
Displeasing God, the devil he only pleases,
And drinks with others healths, his own diseases.
And in the end contempt and shame's his share,
The whilst a Tapster is his only Heir.
Thus drinke's a wrastler that gives many a fall,
To death, to beggary and slavish thrall.
And drunkenness a wilful madness is,
That throws men to hells bottomless abisse.
For why, where drunkenness is mistress, there
Sobriety can hardly maistry bear:
And it is no question but the land has drowned,
More men with drink, then Seas did e're confound.
Wine is Earth's blood, which from her breast does spring,
And (well used) is a comfortable thing.
But if abused from it then begins,
Most horrible notorious crying sins.
As Murder, Lechery, Ebriety,
Gods wrath, damnation in variety:
For he that is a drunkard is the sum,
And abstract of all mischiefs that can come.
It wastes him soul and body, life and limb,
My Cormorant's a sober beast to him.
He that persuades a man to steal or lie,
To swear, or to commit adultery,
To stab or murder any man that lives,
Can it be said that he good counsel gives?
And he that tempts and forces men to drink,
Persuades a man to damn himself, I think,
For drunken men have into dangers run,
Which (being sober) they would never have done.
I take them for no friends, that give me wine,
To turn me from a man unto a swine,
To make me void of manners, sense, or reason,
To abuse God, blaspheming odious treason,
To hurt my soul and body, fame and purse,
To get the devil, and gain Gods heavy curse,
Though many take such for their friends to be,
I wish them hanged that are such friends to me:
For greater enemies there cannot dwell
In the whole world, nor in the bounds of hell.
Good friendly drinking I account not evil,
But much carousing, which makes man a devil,
VVanting the privilege that has a horse,
And to be urged and forced to drink perforce.
For why a horse this government has still,
Drinks what he will, and not against his will.
And he that that good rule does ouerpasse,
Has less discretion then a horse or Ass:
And any man that does this temperance want,
Is a worse glutton then my Cormorant.
A prodigal Country Gallant, and his new made Maddam.
THE ARGUMENT.
Tailors fools, Times bables, and prides Apes,
That as a Squirrell skips from tree to tree:
So they like Porteus leap from shapes to shapes.
Like foul swords in gilt scabberds, he and she
Their carcass pampers, gorgeously bedeckt,
Whilst their poor starued souls they both neglect.
NOw step^ my young gull gallant into play,
Who (borne to land) in the country scorns to stay,
To live by wit (thanks Sire) he has no need,
And if he should be hanged can scarcely read.
Drabs, dice, and drink are all his only joys,
His pockets, and his spurs, his gingling boys,
A Squirrels tail hangs dangling at his ear,
A badge which many a gull is known to wear.
His eyes red blood-shot, arguing a sod brainc,
His dam-him voice set to the roaring strain:
His nose well inlaid with rich iemmes about,
As from a watch- Tower, their h^ads peeping out,
Attended fitly, (fitting for the age)
With two shag'd Russians, and a pyde coat Page,
Who bears his box, and his Tobacco fills,
With stopper, tongs, and other vtensils.
This Fop, late buried, e're he came up hither,
His thrift and's father in one grave together,
His country stock he sold, for that is the fashion,
And to a farmer gave it new translation:
His Fathers servants he thrust out of door,
Allows his mother but a pension poor:
Salutes you with an oath at every word,
Sirrah or slave he lib'rall does afford.
His Father (a good housekeeper) being dead,
He scorns his honest block should fit his head:
And though he be not skilled in Magic Art,
Yet to a Coach he turned his Fathers Cart.
Four Teames of Horses, to four Flanders Mares
With which to London he in pomp repaires,
Woo's a She Gallant, and to Wife he takes her:
Then buys a knighthood, and a maddam makes her.
And yearly they upon their backs ore wear,
That which often fed five hundred with good cheer.
Whilst in the Country all good bounty's spilt
His house, as if a Iugler it had built,
For all the Chimneies, where great fires were made,
The smoke at one hole only is conuay'd:
No times observed nor Charitable Laws,
The poor receive their answer from the Dawes,
Who in their caaing language call it plain
Mockbegger Manor, for they came in vain.
They that devour what Charity should give
Areboth at London, there the Cormorants live,
But so transformed of late, do what you can,
You Will hardly know the woman from the man:
There sir Tim Twirlepipe and his Lady Gay,
Do prodigally spend the time away:
Being both exceeding proud, and scornful too,
And any thing (but what is good) thei'le do.
For Incubus, and Succubus have got
A crew of fiends, which the old world knew not:
That if our Grandfathers and Grand-dams should
Rise from the dead, and these mad times behold.
Amazed they (half madly) would admire,
At our fantastic gestures and attire:
And they would think that England in conclusion,
Were a mere babble Babell of confusion.
That Muld-sack for his most vnfashiond fashions,
Is the fit pattern of their transformations:
And Mary Frith does teach them modesty,
For she does keep one fashion constantly,
And therefore she deserves a matrons praise,
In these inconstant moone-like changing days.
A witless Ass (to please his wives desire)
Pays for the fuel, for her prides hot fire:
And he and she will wast, consume, and spoil,
To feed the stinking lamp of pride with oil:
When with a sword, he gat a knightly name,
With the same blow, his Lady was struck lame.
For if you mark it, she no ground does tread,
(Since the blow fell) except that she be lead:
And Charity is since that time (some say)
In a Carts younger brother borne away.
These are the Cormorants, that have the power
To swallow a Realm, and last themselves devour:
And let their gaudy friends, think what they will,
My Cormorant shall be their better still.
An Extortioner and a Broaker.
THE ARGUMENT.
Friends to but few, and to their own souls worst,
With Aspish poison poysning men at first,
Who laughing languish, never think on death,
Until these Wolves (with biting) stop their breath;
The devil and they at no time can be sunder'd,
And all their trade is forty in the hundred.
Room for two hounds, well coupl'd, and it is pity
To part them, they do keep such rank in the City,
The Extortioner is such a fiend, that he
Does make the Usurer a Saint to be.
One for a hundreds use does take but ten,
The Other for ten a hundred takes again:
The one among Christians is well tolerated,
Tother's of heaven and earth abhorred and hated,
The one does often help a man distressed,
The other adds oppression to the oppressed.
By paying use a man may thrive and get,
But by extortion never none could yet.
Though usury be bad, (it is understood,
Compared with extortion) it seems good.
One by ^e^aile, and the other by the great,
Ingrose the profits of the whole worlds sweat,
That man is happy that has meat and cloth,
And stands in need of neither of them both,
Extortioners are Monsters in all nations,
All their Conditions turn to Obligations,
Wax is their shot, and writing pens their Guns,
Their powder is the ink that from them runs.
And this dank powder has blown up more men
In one year, then gunpowder has in ten.
Bills are their weapons, parchments are their shields,
With which they win whole lordships, towns and fields
And, for they know in heaven they never shall dwell,
They ingrose the earth before they come to hell.
Yet all their lives here they with cares are vexed,
Slaves in this world, and hell hounds in the next.
And what they over the devils back did win,
Their heirs beneath his belly waste in sin.
The Broaker is the better senting hound,
He hunts and scouts till he his prey has found,
The gallant which I mentioned late before,
Turning old hospitality out of door,
And having swallowed tenants and their crops,
Coming to town, he crams Extortions chops:
Craft there, may here again be set to school,
A Country knave often proves a City fool.
He that a dogs part plays when he is there,
A wolf deuoures him when he comes up here:
The silly swain the racking Landlord worries,
But Swain and Landlord both extortion curries.
First thing is done, the Broaker smells him forth,
Hunts all his haunts, enquires into his worth:
Sents out his present wants, and then applies
Rank poison to his wounds for remedies.
In stead of licking, he is a biting whelpe,
And ranckles most, when he most seems to help,
And he hunts dry foot; never spends his throat
Till a has caught his game, and then his note
Luls him asleep, fast in Extortions bands
There leaves him, takes his fee o'th goods and lands.
And as he is the Commonwealths deceiuer,
So (for the most part) he is the thieves receiver.
Hangs up the hangmans wardrop at his door,
Which by the hangman has been hanged before.
A fishwife, with a pawn, does money seek,
He two pence takes for twelve pence every week:
Which makes me ask my self a question plain,
And to my self I answer make again:
Was Houndsditch Houndsditch called can any tell,
Before the Broakers in that street did dwell?
No sure it was not, it has got that name
From them, and since the Time they thither came:
And well it now may called be Houndsditch,
For there are Hounds will give a vengeance twitch:
These are the Gulphes, that swallow all by lending,
Like my old shoes, quite past all hope of mending:
I Would throw my Cormorants dead into the pooles.
If they crammed fish so fast as these eat fools.
A Basket Justice.
THE ARGUMENT.
The best of men, when truly exercised,
The Actor may a Saint be canonized:
Not Policy but practice, Justice frames,
Those whom bribes blind, have only threadbare names
Of what they should be, thus the Land is blessed,
When judgments just flow from the Judges breast.
BEfore the noise of these two Hounds did cease,
A Justice (coming by) commanded peace:
Peace Curres (quoth he) and learn to take your pray,
And not a word, so wise folks, go away:
This is a youth that sued his place to have,
Bought his authority to play the knave.
And as for Coin he did his place obtain,
So he will sell Justice to mak't up again,
For the old proverb fits his humor well,
That he that dearly buys, must dearly sell.
The sword of Justice draw he stoutly can,
To guard a knave, and grieve an honest man,
His Clarke's the Be that fills his comb with honey,
He has the wit, his master has the money.
Such Iusticer as this (if men do mark)
Is altogether guided by his Clarke,
He Is the vice Justice, he works all by's wits,
The whilst his master pickes his teeth, or spits,
Walks, hums, and nods, calls knave at every turn,
(As if he in a dawes nest had been borne:)
No other language from his worship flees,
But prisons, warrants, Mittimus, and fees:
Commit, before he search out the offense,
And hear the matter after two days hence,
Talks of Recognizances, and has scope
To bind and loose, as if he were the Pope.
Be the case never so good, yet build upon it,
Fees must be paid, for that is the humor on it.
And thus with only cursed wealth and beard,
He makes a world of witless fools afeard,
And when he gives them but a smile or nod,
They think this doughty elfe, a demy-god.
When fortune falls, he knows to use the same,
His Clarke and he, as quiet as a lamb,
Make not two words, but share, and go through stich,
Here Is mine, there is thine, for they know which is which
There has been, are, and will be still again,
In all professions, some corrupted men:
Before this branch of false Gehez^es Tribe,
It Is sacrilege to call a bribe a bribe,
Give him a Bucke, a Pig, a Goose, or Phesant,
(For manners sake) it must be called a present,
And when he is blind in Justice, it is a doubt,
But Turkies tallons scratched his eyes half out:
Or Capons claws, but it is a heavy case
That fowls should fly so in a Justice face.
Sometimes his eyes are goard with an Ox horn,
Or sudden dashed out with a sack of corn,
Or the whiske brushing of a Coachmares tail
To fit the Coach, but all these thoughts may fail,
Some think they are but clouded, and will shine,
Eclipsed a little with a Teirce of Wine,
Or only fallen into some hoodwinked nap,
As some men may upon the Bench, by hap.
But Justice seems deaf when some tales are told,
Perhaps his charity has taken some cold,
And that may be the cause, or rattling Coaching,
Or neighing horses to her gate approaching,
From thence into the stable, as her own:
The certain truth thereof is not yet known.
But sure she is so deaf, that she can hear,
Nothing but what her Clarke blows in her ear,
Which Clarke, good men must croach to, and stand bare
Or else final Justice among them they shall share,
His Master like a weather-cocke inclinde,
As he does please he makes him turn and wind.
This Justice of all senses is bereft,
Except his feeling, only feeling's left:
With which he swallows with insatiate power,
More bribes then does my Corm'rant fish devour.
A Cutpurse.
THE ARGUMENT.
This is a mad knave, lives by tricks and sleights.
He dives by land, and dies within the air:
He serves no man, yet courteously he waits
On whom he list, in Church, town, throng, or fair.
He will not work, yet is well clothed and fed,
And for his farewell seldom dies in's bed.
THis spirit, or this Ferrit, next that enters
(Although he be no Merchant) much he ventures,
And though he be a noted coward, yet
Most valiantly he does his living get.
He has no weapon but a curtoll knife,
Wherewith for what he has he hazards life.
East Indian Merchants cross the raging Floods,
And in their ventring, venture but their goods:
When as themselves at Hope securely sleep,
And never plow the dangerous ocean deep,
If they do lose by Pirates, tempests, rocks,
It Is but a Flea bite to their wealthy stocks:
Whilst the poor Cutpurse day and night does toil,
Watches and wards, and does himslefe turmoile:
Often cuts a purse before the Sessions bar,
Whilst others for their lives apleading are,
To Sturbridge Fair, or unto Bristoll ambles
In ieopardy he for his living rambles,
And what he gets he does not beg or borrow,
Ventures his neck, and there is an end, hang sorrow
Whilst midst his perils he does drink and sing
And has more pursebearers then any King
Lives like a Gentleman, by sleight of hand;
Can play the Foist, the Nip, the Stale, the Stand,
The Snap, the Curb, the Crosbite, Warp, and List,
Decoy, prig, Cheat, (all for a hanging shift.)
Still valiant where he comes, and free from care,
And dares the stocks, the whip, the Iaile outdare.
Speaks the brave canting tongue, lies with his dell,
Or pad, or doxi, or his bonny Nell,
And lives as merry as the day is long,
In scorn of Tyburne, or the ropes ding-dong.
But now a jest or two to mind I call,
Which to this function lately did befall:
A Cutpurse standing in a market-towne,
As for his prey his eyes scowld up and down,
At last he shoulders near a country Less,
And cut her purse, as by her he did pass.
She spide and caught him, and began to rave,
Called him rogue, rascal, villeyne, thief and slave.
Gep with a pox, the Cutpurse then replide,
Are you so fine you can no icasting bide,
I Have ieasted more with forty honest men,
So with a moraine, take your purse again.
Another satin Cutpurse, dawbd with lace,
A country Gentleman for's purse did chase,
On whom a blew-coat Seruingman did wait,
And passing through a narrow obscure strait,
The thieuing knave the purse he nimbly nims
And like a land sharke, thence by land he swims.
The Scruingman perceived the Cutpurse trick,
Said naught, but dogs him through thin and thick,
Until the thief supposed the coast was clear,
As he was pissing Blew-coat cut off's ear.
The Cutpurse madly gins to swear and curse,
The other said, Give me my masters purse,
Which you stole lately from his pocket, then
There Is no wrong done, but here is your ear again.
Thus though a Cutpurse trade be counted ill,
I say he is a man of action still:
Waits on Ambassadors that comes and goes,
Attends at Tiltings and triumphant shows
At Westminster, he still attendance gives
On the Lord Mayor, his brethren, and the Shrieues,
Although unbidden, yet he will be a guest,
And have his hand in sometimes with the best.
And whilst he lives, note how he takes degree,
Newgate's his hall, at Tyburne he is made free:
Where commonly it so falls out with him,
He dies in perfect health, sound wind and limb,
He in a Coaches elder brother rides,
And when his soul and corpse, from each diuides,
He fowls no sheets, nor any Physic takes,
But like a bird in'th air an end he makes:
And such an end I wish they all may have,
And all that love a shifting Cutpurse knave.
For they are Cormorants wheresoere they haunt,
Until the Gallows proves their Cormorant.
A good and a bad Constable.
THE ARGUMENT.
This man is to the Magistrate an eye,
Revealing things which Justice could not find.
Black deeds of darkness, he does often descry,
And is (if he be honestly inclinde)
So fit the Commonwealth in peace to keep,
By watching carefully whilst thousands sleep.
When Titan steepes his bright resplendant beams,
And hides his burning Car in the western streams;
When to the under world day takes his flight,
And leaves th'Horizon all in darkness dight,
When Philomel does against a thorn proclaim
In dulcet notes, the lustful Tereus shame,
When Maddam Midnight shows her Ebon face,
And darkness does the Hemispheare embrace,
Then (to keep all things peaceable and well)
The watchful Constable keeps Centinell.
Then if a man (with drink) his wit has left,
Or has committed leachery, or theft,
Or murder, then the Constable thinks fit
That such committers straightly he commit
He Is Lord high Regent of the tedious night,
Man of the Moon he may be called right:
Great general of Glowormes, Owls and Bats,
Comptroler over such as whip the Cats.
Dianaes forrester that with regard,
Does guard the Heard that lives within his ward,
His vigilance is most manifest,
For through his horns he lightens all the rest.
Like Minos. or just judging Rhadamant,
He walks the darksome streets of Troynouant,
Attended with his Goblins clad in Rugs,
Like Russian Bears, or Phlegetonian bugs,
Until Aurora shows her blushing brow,
And Lucifer does shine, and Cocks do crow,
Madge Howlet whooting, hides her fearful head,
Then goes the Constable and's watch to bed.
This officer in the first place I put,
He that comes next is of another cut.
Yet he is a member of the peace comes next,
And writ most commonly an ass in Text:
Image of office he is held to be
And has his staff tip'd with authority,
He has his bill-men, which can seldom keep
The name of watchmen, for they are still asleep.
His word is Who goes there? Where do you dwell?
Stand still, and come before the Constable.
Is this an hour: carry him to the Compter go.
Says a man's drunk, when his own case is so.
But let a quar'ling slave indeed go by,
Leading by the arm his rampant venery,
A thing of filthy surfeit, like a swine,
That scarce can go laden with pox and wine,
They for their sixpence shall pass by in state,
The porter with a leg will open the gate,
VVorship'd, and guarded to their lodging safe,
Not with bills only, but th'officious staff.
Whilst the good sober man, that nothing gave,
Is straight committed for a dangerous knave,
Traitor to the State, and in the Iayle must lie,
Whilst th'other's lighted to his lechery.
This Constable may have a trick in store,
His house may be safe harbor for a whore,
Because no man will offer to search there.
She there may rest, and roost secure from fear.
There she may lodge, and trade too if she will,
As sure and safe, as thieves are in a Mill,
Or Suburbs for the birth of Bastards are,
For all desire to lay their bellies there.
Nay as a Compter for a fellon's home,
Or Ladies chamber for a Priest from Rome.
But yet I say, it is not a matter hard,
To find an honest Constable in's ward.
Trust forbid else, and waking watchmen to,
Whose bills were never stolen, and much ado
To be corrupted with a villains shilling,
To wrong the good, and bad men's minds fulfilling.
Such men as those I think some few there be,
And for the rest, would they were hanged for me.
He when my Corm'rant is at rest, and thinks
Poor fish no harm, nor ought that water drinks,
That Is a night Corm'rant, and at midnight swils,
Whole cans and pots with cheaters and their Iils,
He makes all fish that comes into his net,
Drinks drunk, and sleeps, and then the watch is set.
A London Serieant and Iaylor.
THE ARGUMENT.
A brace of Hell Hounds that on earth do dwell,
That tyrannize on poor men's bodies more,
(If more they could) then devils ore souls in hell:
Whose music is the groanings of the poor.
These, when they buy their office, sell their souls,
No Cormorants are such devouring fowls.
THe Serieant I before the Iaylor name,
Because he is the dog that hunts the game:
He worries it, and brings it to the toil,
And then the Iaylor lives upon the spoil.
I Have known a Serieant that four hours has sat,
Peeping and leering through a Tavern grate,
His Yeoman on the other side the way,
Keeping the like watch both for one poor prey:
Whom when they spide, like mastiues they come near him,
And by the throat like cruel curs they tear him;
If he has money, to the Tavern straight,
These sucking purse-leaches will on him wait:
But if his stock below, and's pockets dry,
To The Iayle with him, there let him starve and dye.
Yet for all this a Serieant is devout,
For he does watch and prey much out of doubt.
He sels no spice, and yet in every place
He Is half a Grocer, for he lives by's mace:
He Is part a Gentleman, for up and downc,
Their steps he follows round about the town.
And yet he seems a Iugler too by this,
He often from shape to shape so changed is:
As sometimes like an Amsterdammian brother,
Sometimes a Porters shape, sometimes another,
Sometimes t'a Counselor at Law, and then
T'a lame, or blinded beggar, and again
T'a Country Seruingman that brings a Dear,
And with these tricks his prey he does come dear.
Wherein he imitates the devil aright,
Who can put on an Angels shape of light,
That so his craft may on men's souls prevail.
So Serieants snare men's bodies for the Iayle,
Time was he wore a proper kind of coat,
And in his hand a white rod, as a note
Whereby a man far off a knave might spy,
And shun him if he were in ieopardy.
But now to no such habit he is bound,
Because his place (near) cost him eight score pound,
To get the which again, he must disguise
And use a thousand shifts and villainies.
Oh that a man so little grace should have
To give so much, to be esteemed a knave.
To be shau'd, duck'd, and vnpittied dye,
Cursed and contemned within his grave to lie.
To hazard soul and body, never to thrive,
But by men's harms, devouring them alive.
To be the hang-mans guard, and wait upon
The Gallows at an Execution,
But yet the office is most fit we see,
And fit that honest men should have it free.
Now for the other sucking devil, the Iaylor
His worke's brought to him, as he were a Tailor.
As if he were a Fencer he will begin,
And ask a man what ward he will be in:
(But first the prisoner draws without delay,
A sop for Cerberus that turns the key.)
Then the old prisoners garnish do demand,
Which straight must be discharged out of hand.
But if he cannot pay, or does deny,
He thrusts him in the hole, there lets him lie.
If a good prisoner has a well-linde purse,
The Iaylor then esteems him as his nurse,
Suckes like a Bulcalfe, and does never cease
Till with much grief he hears of a release.
An Vnder-keeper, (though without desert)
Is a continual knave in spite on's heart:
If to the prisoners he be sharp and cruel,
He proves their knave, and his good masters Jewel:
If unto them himself he well behave,
He is their Jewel and his Masters knave.
So let him turn himself which way he can,
He seldom shall be held an honest man.
Perhaps the Iaylor in one stinking rome
Has six beds, for the Gallant and the Grome,)
In lousy linen, ragged couerlets:
Twelve men to lodge in those six beds he sets:
For which each man does pay a groat a night,
Which weeklie's eight and twenty shillings right:
Thus one foul dirty room from men unwilling,
Draws yearly seauenty three pound sixteen shilling.
Besides a Iaylor (to keep men in fear)
Will like a demi-deuill dominere:
Roar like a Bearward, grumble, snarle, and growle,
Like a Tower Cat-a-Mountaine stare and scowle.
He and the Serieant may be coupled too,
As bane of mankind, for they both undo:
Th'Extortioner and Broaker named before,
Having both bit and gripped a man's state sore:
In comes the Serieant for his breakfast then,
Drags him to the Iayle to be new squeezd again:
And thence he gets not, there he shall not start,
Till the last drop of blood's wrong from his heart.
Yet I have heard some Serieants have been mild,
And used their prisoner like a Christians child:
Nip'd him in private, never trig'd his way,
As Bandogs carrion, but went fair away,
Followed aloof, showed himself kind and meek,
And lodged him in his own house for a week.
You Would wonder at such kindness in a man,
So many Regions from a Christian.
But what is the cause, I Will lead you out o'th maze,
It Is twenty shillings every day he stays,
Besides the Serieants wife must have a stroke,
At the poor teate, some outside she must soake,
Although she tridge for it, whilst good fortunes fall,
He shall command house, Serieant, and all.
Thus may it come by the side o'th breeding woman,
The Serieants son's a Gentleman, no yeoman:
And whilst they fish from men's decays and wants,
Their wives may prove foul fleshly Cormorants.
Thus a bad Serieant and a Iaylor both,
Are Cormorants which all good people loathe,
And yet amongst them some good men there are,
Like snow at Midsommer, exceeding rare.
A Symonicall Patron, and his penny Clarke.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here Magus seeks holy things to buy,
With cursed bribes and base corrupting gold:
Lets souls for want of preaching starve and die,
Fleeces and flayes his flocks, bare pilde and pold:
That to speak truth, in spite of who controls,
Such Clerks and Patron murder many souls.
THis is the bane both of the age and men,
A Patron with his benefices ten;
That wallowes in fat livings a Church leach,
And cannot keep out of my Corm'rants reach,
One of these Patrons does devour his Clarks,
As they do perish souls, after four Marks,
And every year a pair of new high shoes,
For which betwixt two Churches he does use
Each Sabbath day with diligence to trot,
But to what purpose, few or none know not.
Except it be'cause he would eat and feed,
He Will starve two Cures, for he can hardly read.
This sir John Lacklatine, true course does keep,
To preach the Vestry men all fast asleep,
And box and cuffe a Pulpit mightily,
Speaking nonsense with nose-wise gravity,
These youths, in Art, purse, and attire most bare
Give their attendance, at each steeple fair:
Being once hired he will not displease his Lord,
His surly Patron, nor dares preach a word,
But where he gives the text, and that must be
Some place of Scripture bites no usury,
Extortion, or the like, but some calm law,
That will not fret his sore, be it nere so raw.
As calmly preached, as lamely to exptesse't.
With clamarous yell that likes the parish best.
This Clarke shall be a drudge too, all his time,
Weeds in the garden, bears out dung and slime:
Then upon Sabbath days the scroyle begins
With most unhallowed hands, to weed up sins:
And from cup filling all his week days spent,
Comes then to give the Cup at Sacrament.
And from his trencher waiting goes to serve
Spiritual food to those that almost starve;
And what is this Clarke that is of such servile mind,
Some smatring Pedant or mechanicke hind,
Who taking an intelligencers place
Against poor tenants, first crept into grace,
And drudges for eight pounds ayeare perhaps,
With his great vailes of Sundays trencher scraps.
This makes the sacred Tribe of Leui sad,
That many of them prove the Tribe of Gad,
This makes good Scholars justly to complain,
When Patrones take they care not who for gain,
When as a Carter shall more wages have,
Then a good Preacher that helps souls to save,
These Cormorants Gods part does eat and cram,
And so they fare well, care not who they damn,
The people scarce knows what a Sermon means,
For a good Preacher there can have no means,
To keep himself with clothes, and books, and bread
Nor scarce a pillow t'vnderlay his head.
The whilst the Patrons wife (my Lady Gay)
Fares, and is decked most dainty every day:
She Will see that preaching trouble not the town,
And wears a hundred Sermons in a Gown.
She has a preachers living on her back,
For which the souls of many goes to wrack,
And hires a mungrell cheaply by the year,
To famish those Christ's blood has bought so dear;
What greater cruelty can this exceed,
Then to pine those whom Jesus bids them feed,
These are hels vultures, Tophets greedy fowls,
That prove (like devils) Cormorants of souls.
A Country Yeoman.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here Dauy dicker comes, God speed the plough,
Whose Sonne's a Gentleman, and hunts and hawks:
His Farm good clothes and feeding will allow,
And whatsoere of him the Country talks,
His sonne's in silks, with feather in his head,
Until a beggar bring a fool to bed.
THe Roman Histories do true relate
How Dioclesian changed his Emp'rors state,
To live in quiet in a Country Farm,
Out of the reach of treasons dangerous arm.
Then was a Farmer, like a labring Ant,
And not a land devouring Cormorant.
For if a Gentleman has land to let,
He Will have it, at what price soever it is set,
And bids, and ouer-bids, and will give more,
Then any man could make of it before:
Offers the Landlord more then he would crave,
And buys it, though he neither get nor save.
And whereas Gentlemen their land would let,
At rates that tenants might both save and get,
This Cormorant will give his landlord more,
Then he would ask, in hope that from the poor
He may extort it double, by the rate,
Which he will sell his corn and cattle at.
At pining famine he will never repine,
It Is plenty makes this Cormorant to whine,
To hoard up corn with many a bitter ban,
From widows, orphans, and the laboring man:
He prays for rain in harvest, night and day,
To rot and to consume the grain and hay:
That so his mowes and reekes, and stacks that mould,
At his own price he may translate to gold.
But if a plenty come, this ravening thief
Torments (and sometimes hangs) himself with grief.
And all this raking toil, and carke and care,
Is for his clownish first borne son and heir,
Who must be gentled by his ill got pelf,
Though he (to get it) got the devil himself.
And whilst the fathers bones a rotting lie,
His son his cursed wealth, accursed lets fly,
In whores, drink, gaming, and in revel coil,
The whilst his fathers soul in flames does broile.
And when the father on the earth did live,
To his sons fancy he such way did give,
For at no season he the plough must hold,
The Summer was too hot, the Winter cold,
He robs his mother of her butter pence,
Within the Alehouse serves him for expense.
And so (like Coals dog) the vntutor'd mome,
Must neither go to Church, nor bide at home.
For he his life another way must frame,
To hawk, to hunt, abusing the Kings game,
Some Nobleman or Gentleman that is near,
At a cheap rate to steal what they call dear.
When if a poor man (his great want to serve)
Whose wife and children ready are to starve,
If he but steal a sheep from out the fold,
The chuffe would hang him for it if he could.
For alms, he never read the word relieve,
He knows to get, but never knows to give,
And whatsoere he be that does live thus,
Is a worse Cormorant then my Aesacus,
A Figure flinger, or a couzning cunning man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Amongst a foolish, faithless, graceless crew,
This man has better credit then Gods word:
For loss that is past, or profit to ensue,
Like to a Term, with Customers he is stored.
He Is a Sooth-sayer, but says seldom sooth,
And has the Devils great seal for what he does.
HEre now I draw a curtain and discover
Amongst all knaves the devils special lover:
One that does court him still, and daily woo,
And feign would see the devil, but knows not how.
He has him in his works, that is his sure place,
But has not Art to bring him to his face.
When he could wish him to his outward sense,
The devil sits laughing in his conscience:
Yet you shall have this figure-flinger prate,
To his gull client (small wit shallow pate,)
As if he were Lord warden of hell fire,
And Lucifer and he had both one sire,
The Fiends his cousen Germans (once removed)
From earth to hell, where he is best beloved.
More fustian language from his tongue does drop,
Then would set forth an honest tradesmans shop:
As if that all Magitians that ere were,
Unworthy were his learned books to bear,
Not Zoroastres, King o'th Bactrians,
Nor the sage Magi of the Persians,
Nor any coniuring son of Cham or Chus,
Nor Faustus with his Mephostophilus,
Cornelius Agrippa, Simon Magus,
Nor any twixt the river Thames or Tagus,
Nor Britanes Bladud, Cambriaes Merlin, Bacon,
Companions for this man would never be taken.
For he is rare, and deeply read indeed,
In the admired right reverend old wives Creed,
Takes of the Jewish Thalmud, and Cabals,
Solstitiums and Equinoctials,
Of auguries, of prophecies, predictions,
Prognostications, revelation, fictions,
And as he could the Elements command,
He seems as he their minds does v^derstand.
By Fire he has the skill of Pyromanty,
By Air he has the art of Heromanty,
By Water he knows much in Hidromanty,
And by the Earth he is skilled in Geomanty:
Palm Chiromanty, couzuing Necromancy,
To gull the world, to fulfill fools fancy.
Hags, ghosts, and goblins, furies, fairies, clues,
He knows the secrets of the devils themselves,
There Is not a Nymph, a fawn, or goatefoot Satyr,
That lives by fire, by air, by earth, or water,
Nor Driades or Hamadriades,
Betwixt Septentrio and Meridies,
But he commands them to do what they list,
If he but bend the brow, or clutch the fist.
He Will tell a man's hearts secrets what he thinks,
Like Oedipus unfolds th'ambiguous Sphinx,
With skill surpassing great Albumazers,
He with intelligencing Fiends confers,
And by his wondrous Attacoosticon,
Knows the Turks counsel, and what Prester John
Determines, or what business now befalls
Amidst the conclaue of Romes Cardinals.
He can release, or else increase all harms,
About the neck or wrests by tying charms.
He has a trick to kill the Agues force,
And make the patient better, or much worse,
To the great toe three letters he can tie,
Shall make the gowt to tarry or else fly.
With two words and three leaves of four leau'd grass
He makes the toothache, stay, repasse, or pass:
If lost goods you again would feign have got,
Go but to him, and you shall speed, or not.
But he will gain whether you get or lose,
He Will have his fee, for so the bargain goes:
He Will tell you wonders when you are alone,
Of the Philosophers admired stone:
And that it from Vtopia first did come.
Brought to him by a spirit, he sent to Rome,
Whereby (t'inrich the world he dares be bold)
To turn pans, pots, and dripping pans to gold.
And in the Goldsmiths burnisht glistring row,
Place Ironmongers with a fairer show,
Turn Spits and Andir'ns to bright mettle shining,
that when coin's scarce you straight may put to coining
These and a thousand more, as idly vain
Fools swallow, and he swallows them again,
And though the mark of truth he never hits,
Yet still this Cormorant does live by's wits,
And never will want a false devouring trick,
Till hels Archcormorant devour him quick.
A Corrupted Lawyer, and a knauish Vndershriefe.
THE ARGUMENT.
The soul of Commonwealths is in good laws,
Their execution makes a happy State,
But where corruption opes his hungry Jaws,
Where Lawyers do increase, not cease debate,
Such Law worms are the devils dearest brood,
Who make the common harm their private good.
A Hall, a hall, the tramplers are at hand,
A shifting master, and as sweetly mand:
His Buckrum bearer, one that knows his ku,
Can write with one hand, and receive with two.
The trampler is in haste, O clear the way,
Takes fees with both hands cause he cannot stay,
No matter where the cause be right or wrong,
So he be paid for letting out his tongue.
Me thinks that posie which the Painters score
Upon Inn posts, would fir this fellows door,
Because he lets his conscience out for fee,
That here is a tongue that is let at livery.
This pettifogger, like a Lapland witch,
Sels his wind dear, and so grows devilish rich:
Breath is his life and dear he will sell his breath,
The more he wastes, the nearer is his death.
To beggar any man he will not strain
His voice, except they pay him for his pain.
He best does fare where C^ients fare the worse,
And every meal has first and second course,
The dish^s that come first up to the mess,
Are bra^les and quarrels, strife, unquietness,
Contentio^s, emulations, and debate,
These furnish forth his table in great state.
And then for picking meat, or dainty bits,
The second course is actions, cases, writs:
Long suits from term to term, and fines and fees
At the last cast comes in for fruit and cheese.
The man of all men, most in art excelled,
That in Great Britain would cont^^^ion geld,
And by that means could make a good prevention,
Contention would beg^t no more con^ention.
This Lawyers riches ever springs and bloomes,
From sheeps coat, calves skin, russet hobnaild grooms,
Persuading them that all things shall go well,
Sucks out the egg, leaves them the empty shell.
He has a slight in s^inning out a cause,
Till all the money out of purse it draws,
His clients with full budgets come to town,
But he takes order for then going down,
The full is now the Lawyers, theirs the wane,
Like buckets turned to come up full again:
With papers laden think themselves most firm,
C^^e them down, to bring them up next term.
Horse, plow, and cattle go to wrack, split all,
It Is fit the stable wait^ upon ^he stall.
Their sheep the parchment bears their geese the quils,
Which turns their state as this bad Lawyer wills.
Their sh^rts the paper makes, their Bees the wax,
T'vndoe themselves that good discretion lacks,
These men like geese against themsel^es do things,
In plucking quils from their own foolish wings,
This Lawyer makes his dangerous shafts withal,
And shootes them at the fowls from whence they fall.
The Commonwealths impostu^ he does cut,
And the corruption in his purse does put.
One gives him for a bribe, a brawne or swine,
And that is drowned with another But of wine,
One gives a Coach all decked and painted gay,
Another horses draws it quite away
One gives a Jar of Oil to escape the foil,
An O^e or'eturnes the Jar, and spils the Oil.
And thus like Pharaohs Kine, he has the power,
To make the fattest bribes the lean devour.
His motions move commotions, and his suites
Four times a year do termely yield him fruits.
Four sundry ways a kingdoms Laws are used,
By two maintained, and by two abused:
Good Lawyers live by Law, and it is most fit,
Good men obey the Law, live under it.
Bad Lawyers (for their gain) do wrest the Law,
Bad men of God or man's Law have no awe.
But whether these men use Law well or i^l,
Th'inten^ion of the Law is honest still.
For as the text is rent, and torn, and varied,
And by opinions from the sense is carried
By ignorant and wilful Heretics,
Or impure separating Scismaticks,
Though from the truth of text all men should sever,
The text is permanent and sacred ever.
Even so the Law is in it self upright,
Correcting and protecting, wrong and right:
It Is no just Lawyers, (...) the laws defame,
Although some hounds of hell abuse the same.
This Cormorant I mean, gulps whom he list,
And having swallowed fees into his fist,
Defers the motion till the Court withdrawes,
Then to the cushions pleads the poor man's cause,
As formally as if the Judges sat,
No matter for the man, the money's gat.
My Cormorant was never matched till now,
If I said over matched, I Will resolve you how,
And you that read it shall confess it true,
Perhaps it is a thing well known to you,
Where Corm'rants haunts, numbers of fish grow less,
But where bad Lawyers come, there brawles increase.
Now master Vndershriefe I understand,
You bring my Lawyers work unto his hand,
You bring him stuff, he like a Tailor cuts it.
And into any shape he pleases puts it.
Though to the Client it appear slight stuff,
It shall out last him any suit of Buffe:
For though from term to term it be worn long,
It Is dressed still with the teazle of the tongue,
That (though it be old) at every day of hearing,
It looks fresh, as't had never come to wearing.
And though it seem as th'owner never wore it,
A broaker will not give him three pence for it.
Sweet master Shrieue, let it not grieve your mind,
You being the last o'th brood, come last behind,
No doubt you might be first in a bad case,
But being called under, I make this your place;
I know where ere you stand, you are so good,
You Will scorn to be unlike one of the brood,
And take it in dudgeon (as you might no doubt)
If'mongst this rank of Corm'rants you were out.
I have a warrant here for what I do,
Plain truth it self, and that have seldom you.
Some of your tribe a man may honest call,
But those my Corm'rant meddles not withal.
You that dare fright men of a shallow wit,
Who cannot read when there is nothing writ:
And can return (when you are pleased to save)
A Non inuentus for a bribing knave.
For one that stands indebted to the King
A Nihil habet, if his purse can ring.
When a poor man shall have his Bullockes ceaz'd,
And prized at little, to make you appeaz'd
You have the art and skill to raze words out
Of Writs and Warrants, to bring gain about.
I will not serve you so, for if you look,
Your name stands fairly printed in my book,
For every one to read, how you can strain
On widows goods, and restore none again.
Pick Iuries for your purpose, which is worse
Then if you picked the wronged plaintiffes purse:
Return your Writs to your advantage best,
Bring in some money, and drab ou^ the rest.
Leaving (often times) the high Shrieue in the lurch,
Who stops the bounty should repair the Church,
Or buy some bells to sound forth his devotion.
If either air, or earth, or the wide ocean
Can show worse Cormorants, or any brook,
I Will never ask a penny for my Book.
EPILOGVE.
NOw Reader, tell me (if thou well can judge)
If any honest man have cause to grudge
At these my Satyrs, being plain and true,
Giving the world and the devil their due.
I have but bluntly called a spade a spade,
And he that winceth shows himself a jade.
Be quiet, see thy faults, and learn t'amend,
Thou show thy guiltiness if thou contend.
FINIS.

