TAYLOR'S MOTTO.

Et habeo, Et Careo, Et Curo.

London Printed for IT and HG. 1621.



The Emblem Explained.
FIrst on a Rock, with raging waves embraced,
My (seeming fixed) fleeting feet are placed:
The one's like steadfast hope, the other then
Presents temptations which encompasse men,
Which he that can resist with Constancy,
Is a most happy man in Misery.
The world, which I betwixt my legs do stride,
Upon the which a book does seem to ride,
Shows that in scorn of spite, or enuies force,
My book does make the world a Hobby horse.
Riding the iadish Hackneies of this age,
In ^ plain dealing Satyrs Equipage.
The Badge upon my breast, shows plainly this,
I have a Master, Sil^^sters nagram ^ His I^j^sties ^ame, in ^u Bar^as.
just, and who he is.
I have a Muse to write, A Boat to row,
Which both the book and Oar does plainly show.
So much for what I have, now that I want,
The empty purse proclaims, that monie's scant,
Want's my fee simple, or my simple fee,
And (as I am a Poet,) dwells with me.
Thus I have want, and with want, I have care,
That hels suggestions, not my soul ensnare.
Whilst what I have, and want, neglected lies,
I to the way I care for, fix mine eyes.
My looking on the Sun, does here express,
I care to see the Son of righteousness;
And Reader, in the book, if you inquire for,
There Is more of what I have, and want, and care for.
John Tailor.
To Every BODY.
YEt not to every Reader, do I write,
But only unto such as can Read right:
And with impartial censures, can declare,
As they find things* to judge them as they are.
For in this age of Crittickes, are such store,
That of a B. will make a Battledore.
Swallow down Camells, and at Gnatts will strain,
Make Mountains of small Molehills, and again
Extenuat faults, or else faults amplify,
According as their carping censures fly.
Such are within the Motto of I have,
But though the gallant Gulls, be never so brave:
And in their own esteem are deemed wise,
I have a mind, their follies to despise.
There are some few that will their judgment season*
With mature understanding, and with reason:
And call a spade a spade, a Sichophant,
A flattring Knave, and those are th^se I want.
For those that seem to read, and scarce can spell,
Who neither point nor keep their pe^iods well:
Who do a man's invention so be martyr*
So hanging, drawing, and so cut and quarter,
Making good lines contemptible thread bare,
To keep my book from such as those I care.
Adue: John Tailor
TAILORS MOTTO.
Et habeo, Et Careo, Et Curo.
I have, I want, I care.
IS any man offended? marry gep
With a horse nightcap, does your iadeship skip?
Although you kick, and fling, and wince and spurn,
Yet all your Coltes-tricks will not serve your turn.
Vice has infected you, against virtues force,
With more diseases then an aged horse;
For some of you are hide-bound greedily,
Some have the yellowes, of fal^e Iellousie,
Some with the staggers, cannot stand upright:
Some blind with B^bes, can see to do no right.
Some foundred* that to Church they cannot go,
Broke winded some, corrupted breath do blow,
Some hoof bound, some su^bated, and some graueld,
With traveling, where the^ shuuld not have traueld.
Some are crest fallen, (...)
through th^immoderate vice,
Of gorgeous outsides, smoke, and drink, and dice.
And some are full of malle^ders and scratches,
The neck-cricke, sp^uins, shouldersplat, and aches.
The ring-bone, quitter-bone, bots, botch, and scab,
And nauelgall, with coursing of the Drab.
The back-gall, light-gall, wind-gall, shackle-gall,
And last, the spur-gall, the worst gall of all.
A good sound horse, needs not my whip to fear,
For none but Iades are wrung in the withers here.
And do these hackneyes think to run on still
(Without a bit or snaffle) as they will,
And headstrong prancing through abuses, dash,
And escape without a Satyrs yerking lash?
No, they must know the Muses have the might,
The unjust justly to correct and smite,
To memorize victorious virtues praise,
To make men's fame or shame, out live their days,
To force injustice (though it do look big)
With his own nails his cursed grave to dig:
T'emblaze the goodness of a man that is poor,
And tell the vices of an Emperor.
All this the Muses dares, and will, and can,
Not sparing, fearing flattring any man.
And so dare I, (if I just cause do see)
To write, from fear, or hate, or flattry free,
Or taxing any in particulere,
But general at all, is written here.
For had I meant the Satyr to have played,
In Aquafortis, I would whips have Iayd,
And mixed my ink (to make it sharp with all)
With sublimate, and Cockatrices gall,
Which, with a Satyrs spleen, and fury fierce,
With the least ierke would to the entrails pierce,
And with a lash that is ^ustily laid on,
Would strip and whip the world, unto the bone,
I know that none at me, will spurn or kick,
Whose consciences no villainy does prick:
And such as those will in their kennells lie,
And gnar, and snarle, and grumble secretly,
But with full mouth, they dare not bark or bite,
But fret within, with rancor and despite.
For why (before the world) I make a vow;
There does not live that male, or female now,
Against whom I have so much as is a thought,
Much less, against them are my Verses wrought,
This Motto in my head, at first I took,
In imitation of a better book:
And to good minds I no offense can give,
To follow good examples, whilst I live.
For I had rather to abide detraction,
And be an Ape, in any honest action:
Then wilfully, into a fault to run,
Though it before, had by a King bin done.
I have not here reuil'd against my betters,
Which makes me fear no dungeon, bolts, or fetters:
For be he near so great, that does apply
My lines unto himself, is worse then I.
Smooth is my style, my method mean and plain,
Free from a railing, or inuectiue strain*
In harmless fashion here I do declare,
Mine own rich wants, poor riches, and my care,
And therefore at my wants let no man grieve,
Except his charges will the same releive:
And for my Wealth (except a rotton Boat)
I never feared the cutting of my throat.
And those that for my cares do envy me,
Shall in them (if they list) great sharers be.
All my taxations are in general,
Not any personal, or national:
The troubles now in France, I touch not here
Nor of the Britain fleet before Argiere.
Nor of the forces that the Turk does bring,
Against the Poland Kingdom and their King.
Of Count Buckoy, of Beth'lem Gabor, or
Of Spinnola, or any Ambassador.
Nor Denmarkes King nor of the Emperor,
Nor Netherlands great Nauigable power.
Nor of Religious points my Muse does chant,
Of Romish Catholic, or Protestant:
Of Brownist, H^ssite, or of Caluinist,
Arminian, Puritan, or Familist,
Nor against Corporation, trade, or Art,
My poor inventions speaks in any part.
And therefore Critticke snarle, and snap, and hang,
If inwardly thou feel my Satyrs fange:
It Is wisdom in thee, if thy spleen thou hide,
And mend thy self, before thy faults be spide.
Thus as I boldly have begun to enter
Courageously, I Will through the business venture.
I have.
I Have a Soul which through it be not good,
'Twas bought at a dear rate, my Saviors Blood:
And though the Devil continually do crave it,
Yet he that bought it has most right to have it.
I (with my soul) have power to understand,
The sum of my Creators great Command:
And yet I have a Law, within me still,
That does rebel against his Sacred Will.
But though (through merit) I have Hell deserved,
Through Mercy yet I have a Heaven reserved,
I have a reason, which can diffrence make
'Twixt good and bad, to choose, and to forsake:
I have a working, forward, and free will,
Wherewith I have inclynded to do ill.
I have a Conscience, which does tell me true*
That for my sins the wrath of God is due.
And to relieve that Conscience terrifide,
I have a Faith, in Ie^us Crucifide.
I have a Judgment, by the which I see,
And Judge, how good and bad things different be:
And with just Censure, I distinguish can,
The odds between a monster and a man.
But when with judgment on my self I look,
I straight ways am with fear and horror struck:
And finding my afflicted Conscience grudged,
I judge my self, for fear of being judged.
I have a Knowledge, by the which I know,
That all that is good in me, God did bestow:
And all my thoughts, and words, and actions evil,
I have them (like my neighbors) from the Devil.
By this my Knowledge, sometimes skill I have,
To know an honest man, and know a knave:
To know where I fare well, to come again,
Where Friends for love, do only entertain.
To know that Envy, Pride and Lechery,
Sloth, Wrath, and Avarice, and Gluttony,
Does make the world dance Antique in a string,
And all their Followers to confusion bring.
I know that griping base Extortion,
As it gets wealth without proportion,
Even so, without proportion, rule or measure,
Shall be consumed, that most accursed Treasure.
I know a swearer, when I hear his Oaths,
I know a Gull although he wear good Clothes,
I know a Prodigal, by's lavish spending,
I know a Fool (my self) by too much lending.
I know I have discharged others Score,
But will (for ought I know) do so no more.
I know, that four and twenty letters teaches
All the whole worlds tongues, languages and spe^ches.
I know that I not any word can frame,
But in some Language it is an Annagram.
And though the world of sundry parts consists,
Yet all the world are Anagramatists.
I know the numbers numberless of faces,
That were, are, shall be, at all times, and places,
Are all unlike each other, for we see
They each from other may distinguished be.
I know the difference of these voices are,
Unlike each other, being near, or far.
And that men's several writings are contrary,
And in some things from one another vary,
And by this knowledge I have inward sight,
How that the works of God are infinite.
I have credulity, that when I here
A man a^ouch a thing, protest and swear*
I have given credit to him by and by,
Although the wicked wretch did swear and lie,
Because I have a hope that want of grace,
Does not our Makers Image quite deface.
As that a man who has wit, sense, or reason,
Dares to commit so horrible a treason,
As to call God to witness of his lies,
Thereby to countenance his villainies.
Thus through simplicity, and light belief,
I have belieu'd an arrant whore, or thief.
I have opinion, and have ever had,
That when I see a stagg'ring drunken swad*
Then that a man worse then an Ass, I see,
Because an Ass will never drunken be.
And yet in mine opinion I am bold,
(That friendship and ^ocietie to hold)
The merry spending of an idle hour,
To take a cup, or two, or three, or four*
If soberly the meeting be well ended,
It Is tolerable, and to be commended.
And yet I have my imperfections to,
Which makes me daily do, as others do:
For I l^ke (many rich men) now and than,
Make show to be a very honest man:
But strong temptations dog me every hour,
Which to resist I have so little power,
That if (perhaps) I had their means, I think
I should (as they do) di^e and drab and drink,
And through infirmity, or wilfulness,
Run greedily to Riots vain excess:
For Honors changes Manners, wealth and place
Are (oftentimes) temptations to disgrace,
And did some great men cast up their account,
To what their vain expenses do amount:
So much for needless quartes, so much for smoke,
Paid so much for Eringoes, (to provoke)
So much for Coach-hire, so much for a whore,
With Item not three halfpence to the poor.
And who knows, if I had their mean^s, I say
But I should be as very a K^aue as they.
For I have imperfections, and a will
And frail infirmities, t'atempt what is ill,
That I in no good action cannot stand,
Exept supported by The Almighty's hand.
I have a sense, and feeling simpathy,
Of others woe, and want, and misery:
If one man does do good, another bad
I (for them both) can be both glad, and sad.
For when I see a Great man raised hye,
I have a sense of his Nobillity,
And wish, that all his Actions still may be,
To make him worthy of his dignity.
But when I see that Fortune 'ginnes to frown,
And from her fickle wheel to cast them down,
Though their foul faults I hate and do abhor,
Yet as they are men, I have a pity for.
For when a whore is whipped, a Bawd in the Cart,
A drunkard in the stocks, for his desert:
An arrant Knave, or periurde wretch to stand,
And makes the Pillory his falling band;
Or one whose backward Fortune does prevail,
To make a bri^le of a Horses ^aile,
With riding Retrograde, in the streets proclaim,
On their own backs and breasts, their faults and shame.
When any Villain for his fault is tortured,
A Theife, or Traitor, hanged, or drawn and quarterd.
As I do hope for mercy from Above,
As they are men they do my pity move.
And I do grieve the Devil has so much power,
Man's Reason, and Aleageance to devour:
And that of Grace they laid no faster hold,
But fall into these mischeifes manifold.
I have a Fortune that attends on me,
For never will I Fortunes vassal be:
And let her frown or smile, or hang her self,
And g^ue me either poverty or pelf,
Or cast me low, or lift me up on hye,
Yet (spite her teeth) I Will live until I dye.
For all man's outward happiness, are things
Tied and bound fast to fickle Fortunes wings:
Which when she li^t she will alight and stay,
And wh^^ her wheel but turns she flies away.
She Is bountiful to fools, and therefore I
Have small share in her liberallity.
On wise men she does favors seldom fix,
For wisdom scorns her slights and iugling tricks,
And yet no (...) of man alive,
(If Fortune frown, on him) can make him thrive.
For why, so powerful is the purblinde witch,
To raise up knaves, and make fools deuilish rich,
To set an Ass on top of all her wheel,
And to kick virtue backward, with her heel,
To raise (...) Piper, Pander, or a Iester,
And therefore hang the hag, I do detest her.
She has st^ange tricks, and works for diverse end^,
To make a great man have more kin then friends,
But seldom she this good report does win,
To make a poor man have more friends then kin.
A King in's Throne, a general in the war,
Places of best command, and reverence are.
But yet if Fortune frown on their affairs,
They shall be rich in nothing but in cares.
She Is like a I^nus with a double face,
To smile and lowre; to grace, and to disgrace;
She lou's and loathes, together at an instant,
And in inconstancy is only constant.
Uncertain certain, never loves to settle,
But here, there, every where; in dock out nettle.
The man whom all her frowns or favors spurns,
Regards not her wheel, how often it turns.
A wise man knows she is easier found, then kept
And as she is good, or bad, he does accept.
He knows she comes, intending not to stay,
And giu's but what she means to t^ke away.
For by discretion it is truly known,
Her liberal gifts she holds still as her own.
And unto me her bounty has bin such,
That if she take it again I care not much.
I have a love which I to God do owe,
With which I have a fear does in me grow:
I love him for his goodness, and I fear,
To anger him, that has loved me so dear*
I fear in love, as he is a gracious God,
Not love for fear of his revenging Rod.
And ^hus a lo^ing fear in me I have,
L^ke an adopted son, not like a slave.
I have a King whom I am bound unto,
To do him all the service, I can do:
T^ whom when I shall in Alegeance fail,
Let all the Devils in hell my soul a^^aile;
If any i^ his government abide,
In whom foul Treacherous malice does recide
Against him, his Royal offspring or his friends,
I wish that Halters may be all their ^^ds.
And those that cannot most unfeignedly,
Say this, and swear, as confident as I:
Of what degree so ere, I wish (one hour)
They were, in some kind skillful Hangmans power.
I have a life was lent me before my birth,
By the great Landlord both of Heaven and Earth:
But though but one way unto life is common,
For All that ever yet was borne of woman,
Yet are there many thousand ways for death,
To dispossess us, of our lives, and breath.
For why, the Lord of life (that life does make)
Will (as he pleases) life both give and take,
And let me (blameless) suffer punishment,
Or loss of goods, or causlesse banishment,
Let me be ^ang'd, or burned or stabbed, or drowned,
All Is one to me, so still my Faith keep sound,
Then let my life be ended, as God will*
This is my mind, and hope shall be so still:
To get to Heaven, come thousands deaths together,
They Are welcome pleasures, if they bring me thither.
I know for certain, all Mortallity,
When it begins to live, begins to dye;
And when our lives that back again we give,
We ever endless then do dye, or live.
When good men wish long life, it is understood
That they would longer live, to do more good:
But when a bad man wishes to live long,
It is because he feign would do mo^e wrong.
And this one reason giu's me much content,
Thought I shall have no Marble Monnument,
Where my corrupted Carkas may inherrit.
With Epitaphs, to blaze my want of merit,
To wast as much to pollish and be-guild,
As would a charitable Almes-house build.
All which, a gouty Usurer, or worse,
May have, and have poor peoples heavy cu^se,
That many times the senseless Ma^ble weeps,
Because the ex^crated corpse it keeps.
When the mean space perhap's the wretched soul,
In flames unquenchable does yell and bowl.
I have a hope, that does my heart refresh.
How e're my soul be sundred, from my flesh:
Although I have no friends to mourn in sack,
With merry insides, and with outsides black;
Though never so poorly they my corpse interr,
Without bell, book or painted Sepulcher,
Although I miss these trifles Transitory,
I have a hope my soul shall mount to glory.
I have a vain in Poetry, and can
Set forth a knave to be an honest man;
I can my Verses in such habit clad,
'Tabuse the good, and magnify the bad.
I can write (if I li^t) nor Rhyme or Reason,
And talk of felony, and whistle Treason.
And Libell against goodness (if I would)
And against misery could rail and scould;
Foul Treachery I could mince out in parts,
Like Vintners pots, half pints, and pints, and quarts.
Even so could I, with Libles base abound,
From a grain weight or scruple, to a pound,
With a low note I could both say or sing,
As much as would me unto Newgate bring.
And straining of my voice a little higher,
I could obtain the Fleet at my desire:
A little more advancing of my note,
I from the Fleet, might to the Gatehouse floate.
Last, above Ela raising but my power,
I might, in state be mounted to the Tower.
Thus could my Muse (If I would be so base)
Run careless by degrees, into disgrace,
But that for love of goodness I forbear,
And not for any servile slavish fear.
Time serving vassalls, shall not me applaud,
For making of my Verse a great man's Bawd:
To set a luster, and a flatt^^ing gloss,
On a dishonorable lump of dross;
To sl^bber over a Ladies homely feature,
And set her forth for a most beau^ious creature.
No^ shall my free invention, stoop to adore,
A foul diseased, pocky, painted whore.
Rewards or b^^bes my Muse shall never entice,
To wrong fair Virtue, or to honor Vice,
But as my Conscience does inform me still,
So will I praise the good, condemn the ill.
That man is most to be abhord of men,
Who in his cursed hand dares take a pen,
Or be a means to publish at the press,
P^^phaned lines, or obsceane be^stlines,
Sc^^illitie* or known a parant lies,
To a^^mate or cover villainies;
A ^alter for such Poets, stead of Bays,
Wh^ make the Muses whores^, much worse then T^ais*
Such R^scalls make the Helliconian well,
((...) and respect) like hell.
and of (...), good m^n justly are rewarded,
(...) and scorned l^ke hellhounds, unregarded.
For Poetry ((...) be vs^ arig^t)
(...) mercy, and his might:
For (...) ignorance) it has some foes,
(...) may be praisd in Verse, as well as prose.
(...) are fit for Kings,
To (...) them M^taphoricall) such things
(...) they should know and hear,
(...) none but Poets dare to speak for fea^e*
A Poet's (...) a Poet, and his trade
Is still to make: but Orators, are made.
All Arts are taught and learnd, we daily see,
But taug^^, a Poet never yet could be.
And as the ^ree is by the fruit well known,
So by his writing is a Poet shown;
If he be (...) disposed, he will well endite,
If ill (...) viciously will write.
And (...) or bad, in his condition,
His (...) ^ill show his inward disposition.
And to (...) this point, and make an end,
The best am^ngst them has much need to mend.
I ha^^ a tongue, and could both swear and lie,
(I^ to such customs* I would it apply)
But often swearing now and then forsweares,
And lying, a man's credit quite out wears;
I Will trust (...) arrant Th^^fe to keep my purse,
As soon as one that lou^^ to swear and curse:
For can it be that he that takes a use,
And custom, God in swearing to abuse,
Can it be thought he will make Conscience then,
To play the false dissembling Knave with men?
Nor can my supposition ever dream,
That he who dares his Makers name blaspheame,
But that if Time would but occasions bring,
He would betray his Country, and his King.
For it is a Maximm, (no man can convince)
The man that fears not God, loves not his Prince.
And ^e that cares not for his soul, I think,
Respects not if his Country swim or sink.
To lying I bear such a have that I
Will never (wittingly) affirm a lie:
I will not say, but I a lie may say,
But I will not affirm it any way:
It Is the maintaining falsehoods to be true,
To whom a liers odious name is due.
That all untruths are falsehoods, none denies,
But sure all falsehoods cannot be called lies.
For Esops fables, Ouids art-like fictions,
(Although they are 'against truth mere contradictions,)
Of humane transformations from their kind,
Of disputations twixt the Sun, and win^e,
Of fowls, and beasts, and rivers, trees, and stones,
To tell each other of their joys or mones,
Of men transformed to dogs, bears, bulls, swine, apes,
Which shows that treasons, murders, incests, rapes;
Turns men into worse forms then beastly creatures,
When reason's dispossessed by brutish natures.
A fiction, fable, or a harmless jest,
I tolerate, but lies I do detest.
The Egyptians had a Law, that every liar,
Should strait way be beheaded, for their hyre.
But if that Law were executed here,
Few P^tifoggers would be left I fear.
The very Court would forfeit now and than,
Many a complementing Gentleman.
But sure the Ci^ty were the greatest share,
Where lying buys and sells, a world of ware;
The Country sometimes would a head allow,
In selling Corn, a Horse, a Sow, a Cow:
And then a headsman would get store of pelf,
If he could but refrain to lie himself.
I have a memory like (as I do find)
A wallet, half before, and half behind.
In the fore part my neighbors faults I put,
Behind (quite from my sight) mine own are (...).
Thus partiallity runs like a stream,
To spy a Moate, and not to see a Beam.
But when as reason memory collects.
T'exammin, my own impotent defects,
Then does it unto me such things record,
As makes me (almost) of my self abhord.
It tells me I was in corruption borne,
And to corruption that I shall return.
It tells me that betwixt my birth and this,
I have done thousand thousand things amiss,
It bids me to remember what I am,
To what place I must go, and whence I came,
And with these thoughts, when as my mind is high,
I am dejected, through humility.
And this all great men well remember may,
They are but Honorable clods of clay:
Or Reue^end Right Worshipful grave dust,
And (whence they came) again they thither must.
I say if foolish females, with fair features,
Would but remember they were Mortal Creatures:
And that as their good Grandames did before,
Even so must they, and must be seen no more,
And all their gaudy glory be forgot,
Whilst they shall lie, consume, and stink, and rot.
If these things, they would to remembrance call,
Their honied pleasures, would be mixed with Gall.
And all and every one their course would bend*
Within themselves, what is amiss to mend.
The memory, unto the soul is food,
That thinks, and says, and does the things that is good.
I have a heart does like a Monarch reign,
Who in my Microcosme, does laws ordain:
Affections, Senses, Passions, Subjects Slaves,
Some like good Courtiers; some like flattring knaves,
With show of Virtue, hiding of their Vice,
They bring their Lord t'a foolish Paradise,
For when the heart thinks swearing an abuse,
Then Anger says it is a manly use,
And when to quaffe, the mind has no intent,
Affection says it is ho^est merriment,
The mind calls Lechery abomination,
Sense says it is Gentlemanlike recreation,
The mind holds Coueteousnes worse then theft,
Sense calls it Husbandry, and frugall thrift,
Reason delights in liberallity,
Sense counsels it to prodigallity.
And thus these vassells do their King mislead,
(Whilst Reason seems to be asleep or dead.)
And thus this little Kingdom man does fade,
With hearing Traitors, when they do persuade.
I have experience, by the which I find,
That some though poor in purse, are rich in mind:
And they that have of wealth the greatest store,
Are (in content) most miserable poor,
There Is many a Mammanist does houses keep,
With lofty Turrets, and with Sellers deep:
With a most stately porch, and spacious hall,
And kitchen, lesser then a Cobblers stall
Where (in two days) a poor half ^acke of Mutton,
Proclaims the Master of the house, no Glutton.
Where foul bewitching gold in bondage is,
(^s may the keepers be, in hells abisse.)
Where waking thoughts, keeps still the mind oppressed
And frigh^full dreams, makes ^est to be unrest,
And where as fears by night, and doubts by day
Drives happiness, and sweet content away.
M^^h better then is my estate then theirs,
I have content, and they the golden cares:
I can feed well at home, and soundly sleep,
And what I have not care to lose or keep.
I have consideration, to perceive,
What Is best for me to take, and what to l^aue*
When I consider, pleasures past and gone,
Does add affliction, to affliction,
Though he that is low can very hardly rise,
Yet he that'^ high, often falls to miseries.
He that is down, his fear's already past,
Whilst he that is up may have a slippery cast.
I do consider, that I often did crave,
Things both from God and men, unfit to have:
And many times, through in considerate wi^,
Gui^ts giue^^ and receivers, are unfit.
He (...) a liberal man, that does deny,
That which will do the askers injury;
There i^ a bounty, which I will reveal,
That he nere giu's in vain that giu's in zeal:
As prodigality, brings wan^, and woes,
So liberallity, makes friends of foes.
It Is better for a man his purse to hold,
Then give to make a beggar proud, or bold,
True bounty, is (on earth) a special grace,
And has in heaven prepared a glorious place.
For as the Sun unto the moon giu's light,
Which light she gives again to us by night:
So God does give his gifts to libr'all men,
Which they (to men that want) do give again.
But he that gives should strait forget it quite,
What they that take, in memory should write.
And I accept a like, great gifts, and small,
Only to me the giuers mind is all.
It Is a base bounty when a man releiues,
These prostituted whores, or knaves, or Theiues,
For still the Devil is bountiful to those,
That unto virtue are in^etterate foes.
But many hold it for a generous part,
To give a man that is drunk the 'tother quart:
And in a humor (to have Drawers trouble)
Throw pottle Pots down stairs, to come up dubbl^*
When strait upon their knees, they all accord,
To drink a health to some unworthy Lord:
Some fusty Madam, or some carpet Knight,
^Till they can neither speak, or stand upright.
Then being all abominable drunk,
A Gallant drinks a health unto his Punke:
The which withal Sir Reverence strait they are,
Inioynd to do, upon their knees, all bare.
If any dare deny to pledge the Drab,
He Is in great danger of a mortal Stab:
For he accounts it worse then blasphemy,
That one should there his Mistress health deny.
Until at last, over charged with to much wine,
They wallow in their vomits, worse then swine:
Thus many a beastly rude Barbarian,
Gains little of a lib'rall Gentleman.
A worthy spirit, a rare Noble spark,
True bred, a merry Greek, or man of mark.
A right mad Troyan, a most ex'lent blade,
As bountiful a man as e're God made.
Thus many an idle fellow gets a name
Of Bountiful, through deeds of sin and shame.
Indeed he is liberal, that spends health and wealth,
And precious Time, in drinking others health:
If dropsy Drunkards fallen to poverty,
Should beg a Pension of his Majesty,
And in their humble suits would make it known,
How drinking of his healths, they lost their own,
I think, his Highness ^ustly would relieve them,
And (for Rewards) to each a Halter give them.
But is it not stran^^, that man so mad should be,
Idolatrous* bare-headed on his knee,
Bow and fall down unto an absent Whore,
As the only Saint (or devil) he does adore?
But e're he will kneel unto his God, to crave
For mercy, his infected soul to save:
Before he will beg Gods pardon for his crimes,
He swears him ore and ore a hundred times,
And takes it for a Gentlemanlike grace,
To spit his venom against his Makers face,
And with his Oaths, as false as black is white,
God dam him, or renounce, or sink him quite:
Refuse him (or if not refuse) for sake him,
And now and then swears, Then the Devil take him.
Thus he in ordinary talk affords,
Amongst (truth and lies) more oaths then other words,
These are the bounteous youths I car^ not for,
And these I have a heart that does abhor.
From a rich knave of worshipful degree,
I have a mind to spare my cap and knee:
To a good man that is honest, poor and wise,
I have a heart that my affection ties.
Some sixteen times I on the Seas have been,
In Spain and Germany both out and in,
At Cales, at Ostend, Prague, and ma^^ a where,
And yet I do thank God, Cham here, Cha^ here.
I have a Wife which I was wont to praise,
But that was in my younger wooing days:
And though she is neither Shrew nor Sheep (I vow
With Justice) I cannot dispraise her now.
She has an Instrument (that is ever strung,
To exercise my patience on) her tongue.
But past all question, and beyond all doubt,
She Will never infect my forehead with the Gout.
A married man (some say) has two days gladness,
And all his life else, is a lingering sadness:
The one days mirth is when he first is married,
The other's when his wife's to burying carried.
One I have had, should I the other see,
It could not be a day of mirth to me.
For I (as many have) when I did woo,
My self (in tying fast) did not undo:
But I have by my long experience found,
I had been undone, had I not been bound.
I have my bonds of marriage long enjoyed,
And do not wish my obligation void.
I have a house where I do eat and sleep,
But bread nor meat, or drink in it (I keep.)
For many Lords, and great men keep good meat,
But I spend mine, to make good fellows eat.
And though no Turrets do my house bedeck,
There one may break his fast, before his neck.
I have a trade, much like an Al^umist,
That ofttimes by extraction, if I list,
With sweating labor at a wooden Ore,
I Will get the coined refined silver Ore.
Which I count better then the sha^king tricks,
Of cuz'ning Tradsmen, or rich Politikes,
Or any proud fool, never so proud or wise,
That does my needful honest trade despise.
I have some troubles, by the which I know,
How flattring friends do ebb, and foes do flow:
Prosperity increases friendship much,
But adverse Fortune tries them with the tutch.
By troubles, and by crosses I gain wit,
When daily pleasures do diminish it.
Thus (by his power that All-sufficient is)
I have had time and power to write all this:
And I have hope that He the time will grant,
That I may tell of some things that I want,
The Motto of I have is large and wide,
Which largely here, I could have amply fide,
For I have Joy, and Love, and Comforts here,
And I have folly, sorrow, doubt and fear;
I have (in part) my frailty here revealed,
I have some Vices which I have concealed*
I have done as I have, then if I have
Bu^ pleased my friends, I have gained what I crave.
Ye^ my, I have, as great is every jot,
And as small too as any man's have not.
Et Careo, I want.
STrange is the penance of my humble Muse,
That must tell what I want without excuse.
What man (without much torture) would confess
His want, his beggary, and guiltiness;
But that the World would think him to be mad,
Or that he very small discretion had?
Yet (at this time) it is my fatal lor,
To tell I want, what other men want not.
And therefore to declare my wants most plain
I want a bragging or a boasting vain;
In words or writing, any ways to frame,
To make my self seem better then I am.
I want fair virtue to direct my course,
And stand against the shock of vices force;
And (of my self) I no way can resist,
Against Hell, the World, the Flesh, or Antichrist;
For ought I know, I want a courage stout,
Afflictions and temptations to keep out:
And I do fear should time of trial come,
My constancy would bide no Martyrdom.
But to help what I want, I want despair,
And hope supplies my want in all my care.
And as I want that bold-fac'd impudence,
As may give just occasion of offense:
So do I want base flattery with my pen,
To sooth my self, or to tax other men.
I do want goodness: for I clearly see,
All good I do or say, is not from me.
And amongst all the benefits I crave,
Goodness I want, and goodness I would have.
A man may seem too just, too full of wit,
But to be too good, never man was yet.
He that is great, is not made good thereby,
But he that is good, is great continually.
Thus great and good, together's rare and scant,
Whilst I no greatness have, all goodness want.
I do want wit t'inuent* conceive and write,
To move my self or others to delight:
But what a good wit is, I partly know,
Which (as I can) I will define and show.
Wit is the offspring of a working brain,
That will be laboring, though it be in vain:
It Is called the Mother wit, by which I find,
She Is of the bearing, breeding, femall-kind.
And some have of their mothers wit such store,
That in their fathers wisdom they are poor.
A good wit is a virtue that excells,
And is the house where understanding dwells:
With whom the mind, the memory and sense,
And reason keep continual residence:
For why, if Reason chance to be away,
Wit, (like a Colt) breaks loose and runs astray.
There Is many that have got their wealth by wit:
But never wealth had power to purchase it.
Rich fools, and witty beggars every where,
Are the third part of Mankind very near.
And little friendship does blind Fortune grant
To me; for wit and money both I want.
Yet for mine ears price I could undertake
To buy as much as would a Lybell make:
Or I could have as much, as fi^s these times
With worthless Jests, or beastly scuruy Rimes*
To serve some Lord, and be a man of note,
Or wear a guarded unregarded Coat.
Wit for a fool I think enough I have;
But I want wit to play the crafty knave:
And then the Proverb I should finely fit,
In playing of the fool, for want of wit.
To Archie (at the Court) I Will make a iaunt,
For he can teach me any thing I want,
And he will teach me for a slender fee,
A foolish knave, or knauish fool to be.
Garret grows old and honest, and withal,
His skill in knauish fooling is but small:
The Knight o'th Sun can caper, dance and leap*
And make a man small sport exceeding cheap
In the old time a wiseman was a fool,
That had compared himself with great Otoole:
But his good days are past, he is down the wind,
In both his eyes and understanding blind.
But holla holla Muse, come back again,
I was half ravished with a fooling vain:
And, if I had gone forward with full speed,
I Would played the fool for want of wit indeed.
As Frogs in muddy ditches use to breed,
So there is a wit that does from Wine proceed:
And some do whet their wits so much thereon,
Till all the sharpness and the steel is gone;
With nothing left but back, the edge gone quite*
Like an old Cat, can neither scratch nor bite.
The wit I want, I have, yet yields no profit,
Because a fool has still the keeping of it.
Which had it in a Wisemans head been planted,
I should not now want what I long have wanted;
I want that undermining policy;
To purchase wealth with foul dishonesty:
And I do want, and still shall want, I hope,
Such actions as may well deserve a Rope.
I want a mind, bad company to haunt,
Which if I do, it seems I foresight wan^*
I want a Kingdom and a Crown to wear,
And with that want, I want a world of care:
But might I be a King, I would refuse it,
Because I do want wisdom how to use it.
When an unworthy man obtaines the same,
He Is raiz'd to high preferment for his shame*
For why, the office of a King is such,
And of such reverence as I dare not tutch:
Like to the Thunder, is his voice expressed,
His Majesty, as lightning from the East,
And though he want the art of making breath,
He Is like a Demy-god, of life and death.
And as Kings (before God) are all but men,
So before men, they all are gods again.
He Is a good King, whose virtues are approved,
Feared for his Justice, for his m^rcy loved:
Who patterns all his Royal dignity,
By the just rule of Heavens high Majesty,
Who can distribute (to good men's content)
Reward for virtue, vices punishment,
Who loves a poor man's goodness, and does hate
All soul corruption in a man of State,
Combined in love with Princes near and far,
Most affable in peace, powerful in war:
And above all, religious, full of zeal,
To guard the Church, and guide the Common weal.
And though such Kings as this has seldom been;
Yet such a King as this I often have seen.
And as I want a Regal power and fame,
I want Revenues to maintain the same:
I think a King that is made of Ginger-bread
His Subjects would obey him with more dread: I should believe all were Gold
that glisters.

And any knave that could but kiss his Claw,
And make a leg, would make me but Iack-Daw.
And as the Swallow all the Summer stays,
And when the winter comes, he flies his ways:
So flatterers would adore my happiness,
And take their flight, and leave me in distress.
To praise my vices, all the swarm of them
Would flock, and all my virtues would condemn.
Much worse then Ravens is their flattery,
For Ravens eat not men until they dye:
But so a flattering knave may get and thrive,
He daily will devour a man alive.
Besides, the body only feeds the Foul:
But flattery often consumes both body and soul.
For like to trencher-Flies they ever prove,
Who still wait more for lucre then for love.
Thus, though I want a Kingly power Royal,
It Is against my will to want will to be loyal.
And if that any King alive there be
That willingly would change estates with me,
I in my bargain should have gold for brass,
And he would be accounted but an Ass.
For any Kings estate, be it never so bad,
To change it with John Tailor, were stark mad,
A King of Clubs keeps subjects in more awe:
For he commands his Knave (except at Maw)
A King of Spades has more wit in his pate,
To delue into the secrets of his state:
The King of Diamonds is too rich and wise,
To change his pleasures for my miseries.
And for the King of Hearts, he is so beloved,
That to exchange with me, he will never be moved,
For I am full of fears and dangerous doubts,
And poorer far then is a King of Clouts:
I therefore will a Subject still remain,
And learn to serve that am unfit to reign.
I want ten millions of good coined gold,
And with that want, want troubles manifold:
But if I had so much, what man can tell,
But that I should want grace to use it well?
Within the walls and skirts of Troynouant,
Many that have most goods, most goodness want:
For Charity and Riches seldom can
Have both possession in a wealthy man.
Fools that are rich with multitudes of Pieces,
Are like poor simple sheep with golden fleeces;
A knave, that for his wealth does worship get,
Is like the Devil that is a cock-horse set.
For money has his nature in it still,
Slave to the goodman, master to the ill.
The Covetous amidst his store is poor,
The mind content is rich, and seeks no more.
Who couets most, has least; who couets least,
Has most; for why, sufficient is a feast.
Wealth unto mischiefs might my mind inchant,
And therefore it is much good for me I want.
I want a Son and Heir, and I perceive,
That he no portion could from me receive;
Unless I could bequeath him Poetry,
To add more poverty to poverty:
But as I do want Children, I want care,
And Jealousy, in which some Fathers are:
For many of them rake and toil (God wot)
To gather wealth for Heirs they never begot:
And run to Hell (through mischiefs) greedily
For other men's misgotten Bastardy.
The greatest females underneath the sky,
Are but frail vessels of mortality:
And if that Grace and Ver^ue be away,
There Is Honor's shame, and Chastitie's decay.
For, if inconstancy does keep the door,
Lust enters, and my Lady proves a Whore:
And so a Bastard to the World may come,
Perhaps begotten by some stable Groom;
Whom the fork-headed, her cornuted Knight
May play and dandle with, with great delight,
And thus by one base misbegotten son,
Gentility in a wrong line may run:
And thus foul lust to worship may prefer
The mungrell Issue of a Fruterer,
Or yeoman of the Bottles it may be,
Or some vnmannerd rascal worse then he,
And though the Stripling up in years does grow,
He shall want wit his father how to know:
But he shall know one that will father him,
And with good bringing up maintain him trim:
And loves him with affection, as he were
His own most natural Primogeniter. In my English Latin Richard Swary, I
find or coynd this worthy word.

The old Knight dies and freely gives him all,
And he being grown a Gallant fair and tall,
If with his cursed wealth he purchase can,
To wed the Daughter of some Nobleman,
And being thus ennobled much thereby,
Through his Alliance with Nobility;
He may in time possess an honored state,
Which God does curse, and all good people hate:
Then shall be searched, The Heralds of this Office dwell at Nullibi.
if possible it be,
Before Cains birth, to find his Petigree:
Then is some famous coat of Arms contrived,
From many worthy families derived.
And thus may Lust and Wealth raise many a Clown,
To Reputation, and to high Renown.
Thus many good men are deceived (perhaps)
In bowing of their knees, and doffing Caps,
And courteously commit Idolatry,
To a proud branch of Lust and Lechery.
For my part, I want means to gull men so,
I may be gulled with others goodly show.
If any find my Children meat or cloth,
I got them in my sleep, I Will take mine oath,
I cannot be deceived in my Heirs,
As some that are my betters may in theirs,
And as no Bastards my free mind perplexeth,
So I want Jealousy which some men vexes.
Should thousand such as Hercules combine,
T'inspire with Jealousy this breast of mine;
Nor all the Goatish foul luxurious brood,
Could not possess me with that frantike mood^,
She that I have I know her continence,
And she as well does know my confidence;
Any yet, for ought you know, both she and I
May want both honesty and Jealousy:
Though of our selves our knowledge is but small;
Yet somewhat we do know, and God knows all.
The man, whose wife will be a whore indeed,
His Jealousy stands but in little steed:
Nor can bolts, locks or walls of brass suffice
Briareus hundred hands nor Argos eyes;
Nor all the wit in man or Devils pate,
Can alter any man's allotted fate:
For if a Woman be to lewdness given,
And is not guided with the grace of Heaven;
She will find opportunity and time,
In spite of watch or ward to do the Crime:
But if she be with heavenly blessings graced,
As outward beautiful, and inward chaste;
Then may foul jealousy and false suspicion
Against her nature alter her condition,
From good to bad, from bad to naught, and worse,
And turn her virtues to a vicious course.
For nothing can an honest mind infect,
So soon as Jealousy and false suspect:
And this foul Fury many times has wrought*
To make the bad worse, and the good stark naught:
But never yet by it (as I could hear)
The good or bad, one jot the better were:
And therefore be my wife, or good, or ill,
I Jealousy do want, and want it will.
I want dissimulation to appear,
A friend to those, to whom I hatred bear:
I want the knowledge of the thriuing Art*
A holy outside and a hollow heart:
But as I am, the same I Will ever seem,
Not worse, or better, in mine own esteem,
For what attire so e're my corpse does hide,
Or whether I do go on foot or ride:
Or were I with the Kings high favor graced,
Or at a great Lords board, at dinner placed,
And should I have all this, I were no more
But a poor Waterman, that at his Oar
Does (for a living) labor, tug, and pull,
And carries both the Gallant and the gull.
How ever others do esteem of me,
Yet as I am, I know my self to be.
If I do chance to be in company,
Well welcomed, amongst true Gentility,
I know in them it is a courteous part,
And that in me it can be no desert.
I want that high esteemed excellence
Of fustian, or mockado Eloquence:
To flourish over, or bumbast* out my style,
To make such as not understand me smile;
Yet I with Nonsense could contingerate,
With Catophiscoes Terragrophicate,
And make my self admired immediately,
Of such as understand no more then I.
Besides, I want the knowledge and the skill,
How these my lines may pass now well or ill:
For as a learned Poet lately writ
With a comparison, comparing fit
Men's writings and inventions like to Cheese,
Which with some stomachs very well agrees;
Some love it, and some cannot well digest it,
Some care not for it, and some quite detest it:
And so my lines to sundry hands may come,
Some pleasing, and displeasing unto some.
One likes it well, and very well commends it,
A second swears it is naught, and madly rends it,
A third cries mew, and scrues his jaws awry,
And in a scornful humor lays it by:
Thus some like all, some somewhat, and some nothing.
And one man's liking is another loathing.
I want hope to please all men where I come,
I want despair, and hope I shall please some;
I want ingratitude to friends, I want
A willing mind, (what is written) to recant:
I want against any man peculiar spite,
I want a self-love unto what I write:
I want some friends that would my want supply,
I want some foes that would my patience try.
If all things that I want I here should tell,
To a large volume then my book would swell;
For though my self my wants do boldly bear,
My wants of such great weight, and number are,
That sure the burden of the things I want,
Would break the back of any Elephant.
Et Curo. I Care.
I Care to think upon the Theme I write,
For Care is careful, yielding no delight:
And though Care flows like a continual stream,
Yet Care is but a very barren Theme.
Upon I care not, my swift Muse could iog,
Like to an Irish Lackey over a bog;
But my poor wit must work upon I care,
Which is a subject (like my wit) most bare.
I care to keep my wife in that degree
As that she always might my equal be:
And I do care, and at all times endeuer,
That she to have the mastership shall never.
I Care, and so must all that mortal are;
For from our births, unto our graves, our care
Attends on us, in number like our sins,
And sticks unto us close, as is our skins:
For the true Anagram of Le^rned (...) l^ds (...) that (...) ^omes near Curro.
Care is Race,
Which shows, that whilst we on the earth have place,
So many miseries do us ensnare,
That all our life is but a Race of Care;
And when I call my life unto account,
To such great numbers do my Cares amount,
That Cares on Cares my mind so much do lade,
As I of (nothing else but) Cares were made.
When I conceive I am besieged round,
With enemies that would my soul confound,
As is the Flesh, the World and ghostly Fiends,
How (severally) their force or flattery bends,
To drive me to Presumption or despair,
T'auoid temptations I am full of care.
When I consider what my God has done
For me, and how his grace I daily shun:
And how my sins (for ought I know) are more
Then Stars in sky, or Sands upon the shore,
Or withered leaves that Autumn tumbles down,
And that sins leprosy has ouergrowne
My miserable self from head to heel,
Then hopeful fears, and fe^refull cares I feel.
When I do see a man that conscience makes
Of what he speaks, or does, or undertakes;
That neither will dissemble, lie, or swear,
To have the love of such a man I care.
I care when I do see a Prodigal
(On whom a fair estate did lately fall)
When as is spent his credit and his chink,
And he quite wasted to a snuff does stink,
Who in the Spring, or Summer of his Pride,
Was worshipped, honored, almost deifi'd:
And (whilst the golden Angels did attend him)
What swarms of friends, and kindred did befriend him
Persuading him, that give, and spend, and lend,
Were virtues which on Gentry do depend.
When such a fellow fallen to misery,
I see forsaken and in beggary,
Then for some worthy friends of mine I care.
That they by such examples would beware.
A fool is he who gives (himself t'impaire)
And wise is he who gives what he may spare:
But those that have too much, and nothing give,
Are slaves of Hell, and pity it is they live.
But as the prodigal does vainly spend,
As though his ill sprung wellspring, never would end,
Yet in his poverty he is better much,
Then a hard hearted miserable Clutch;
Because the Prodigal lets money fly,
That many people gain and get thereby.
A Prodigal's a Commonwealths man still,
To have his wealth all common it is his will,
And when he wants, he wants what he has not,
But misers want what they both have, and got.
For though man from the teate has weaned bin,
Yet still our infancy we all are in,
And from our birth, til death our lives does smother
All men do live be sucking one another.
A King with Clemency and Royalty,
Does suck his Subjects love and loyalty:
But as the Sea sucks in the Rivers goods,
And Rivers back again, suck in the floods,
So good Kings, and true Subjects, always prove
To suck from each, protection, fear, and love.
All Clients whatsoever, are Lawyers nurses,
And many times they do suck dry their purses,
But though the Lawyer seems in wealth to swim,
Yet many great occasions do suck him.
The Prodigals estate, like to a flux,
The Mercer, Draper, and the Silkman sucks:
The Tailor, Millainer, Dogs, Drabs and Dice,
Trey-trip, or Passage, or The most at thrice;
At Irish, Tick-tack, Doublets, Draughts or Chesse,
He flings his money free with carelessenesse:
At Nouum, Mumchance, mischance, (choose ye which
At One and thirty, or at Poor and rich,
Ruff, slam, Trump, nody, whisk, hole, Sant, Newcut.
Unto the keeping of four Knaves he will put
His whole estate, at Loadum, or at Gleeke
At Tickle-me-quickly, he is a merry Greek,
At Primefisto, Post and pair, Primero,
Maw, Whip-her-ginny, he^s a lib'rall Hero;
At My-sow-pigg'd, and (Reader never doubt ye,
He Is skilled in all games, except) Look about ye.
Bowls, shoue-groate, tennis, no game comes amiss,
His purse a nurse for any body is;
Caroches, Coaches, and Tobacconists,
All sorts of people freely from his fists
His vain expenses daily suck and soake,
And his himself sucks only drink and smoke,
And thus the Prodigal, himself alone,
Gives suck to thousands, and himself sucks none.
But for the miser, he is such an evil,
He sucks all, yet gives none suck but the Devil:
And both of them such cursed members are,
That to be neither of them both I care.
Thus young, old, all estates, men, maids, and wives,
Do suck from one another, all their lives;
And we are never weaned from sucking thus,
Until we dye, and then the worms suck us.
I care when I want money where to borrow,
And when I have it then begins new sorrow:
For the right Anagram of woe is owe.
And he is in woe that is in debt I know:
For as I cared before to come in debt,
So being in, my care is out to get.
Thus being in or out, or out or in,
Where one care ends, another does begin.
I care to keep me from the Serieants mace,
Or from a barbrous Baylifs rough embrace:
Or from a Marshals man that mercy lacks,
That lives a cursed life by poor men's wracks,
From Serieants that are Saracens by kind,
From Baylifs that are worse then Bears in mind:
And from a Marshals monsters trap or snare,
To keep me from such knaves as those I care.
A Pander (Hostler-like) that walks a whore,
And for a fee, securely keeps the door,
A Punck that will with any body do,
And give the pox in to the bargain too:
A rotten stinking Baud, that for her crimes,
Stewd in a sweat has been some fifteen times,
A Drunkard, that delights to curse and swear,
To shun such company as those I care.
I care to please* and serve my Masters will,
And he with care commands not what is ill.
I care to have them hanged that careless be,
Or false unto so good a Lord as he.
I care for all Religions that are hurld
And scattered over the universal world:
I care to keep that which is sound and sure,
Which ever and for ever shall endure.
I care t'auoid all Sects and errors foul
That to confusion has drawn many a soul.
For be a man, a Heathen, Turk or Jew,
With care his miserable state I rue,
That he should have sense, reason, life and limb,
Yet will not know that God that gave them him.
And can a Christian think upon these things,
But it his heart with care and pity wrings?
That three parts of the world, the grace does shun
Of their Creator, and his saving Son.
And as the Christians few in number be,
Yet how they in Religions disagree,
Kings, subjects, parents, children much divided,
By hell misguided, and by Turks derided.
And can a Christian think how these things are,
But that his heart must be possessed with Care?
I would all Princes that do Christ profess,
And hope through him for endless happiness,
Their quarrels to each other to lay by,
And join against the common enemy,
Who like a tempest oftentimes has come,
Advancing Mahomet in Christendom.
If Christian Kings this way would all prepare,
For such a glorious war as this I care.
And here (for mirths sake) some few lines are made
In the behalf of me, and of my trade:
But honest Reader be not angry tho
They look like verses I wrote long ago, Some 6 or 8. lines are old of mine
own ^ut I have (...) vari^d them.

But they by many men were never seen,
And therefore fit to publish them I ween.
I that in quiet in the days of yore,
Did get my living at the healthful Oar,
And with content, did live, and sweat and row,
Where like the tide, my purse did ebb and flow,
My fare was good, I thank my bounteous fares,
And pleasure made me careless of my cares.
The watery Element most plentiful,
Supplide me daily with the Oar and Scull,
And what the water yielded, I with mirth,
Did spend upon the Element of earth.
Until at last a strange Poetique vein,
As strange a way possessed my working brain:
It chanced one evening, on a reedy bank,
The Muses sa^e together in a rank:
Whilst in my boat I did by water wander,
Repeating lines of Hero and Leander,
The Triple three took great delight in that,
Called me a shore, and caused me sit and chat,
And in the end when all our talk was done,
They gave to me a draught of Helicon,
Which proved to me a blessing and a curse,
To fill my pate with verse, and empt my purse.
By their poor gift I have experience found
What Is fit to be reprou'd, and what renownd:
And that a Waterman a member is,
Which neither King nor Commonwealth can miss,
Yet we could well miss some that are too bad,
If better in their rooms were to be had:
But though abundance of them I could spare,
It Is only for the honest trade I care.
Some say we carry whores and thieves, it is true,
I Will carry those that said so for my due:
Our boats, like hackney horses, every day,
Will carry honest men and knaves, for pay,
We have examples for it most divine,
The Sun upon both good and bad does shine* Shall Gods gifts be common to
good and bad, and our boats be private only to the good?

Upon the dunghill and upon the rose,
Upon Gods servants and upon his foes:
The wind, the rain, the earth, all creatures still,
Indifferently do serve both good and ill.
All tradesmen sell their ware continually,
To whores, or knaves, or any that will buy.
They never examine people what they are.
No more can we, when we transport a fare.
Sapho a Poetresse, a Lady famed,
Did wed a Waterman was Phaon named:
Eight Kings (with Oars) as histories do show,
King Edgar to his Parliament did row.
And when the waters all the world over ran,
Old Noah was the only waterman.
I care what quantity of this same stuff
I write, for I may do much, or not enuffe,
To end it therefore I will have a Care,
And show the Watermans brief The character of a Waterma^.
Character.
First, though he be not of the female kind,
Yet he is most like unto a Whore I find:
For both, the more unready that they be,
Both are most ready for their trade we see,
The Watermen in shirts, and Whores in smocks,
Both strip and fall to work, to increase their stocks.
Besides, a Waterman is much ungrateful,
(And yet is his ingratitude not hateful)
For (under God) the River Thamesis, Thames a watermans best friend, whom he
delights to cross.

His chiefest friend, and best maintainer is,
It feeds and fills him, gives him daily treasure,
And he (to cross that Friend) takes pains with pleasure
Mine own unkindness I have often expressed,
For when I cros^ it most, it pleased me best.
And as an Hypocrite speaks fairest when
He most deceiues, so we poor Watermen,
Go backward when we do go forward still,
And forward, we go backward with good will.
Thus looking one way, and another rowing,
With forward backward, backward forward going
To get my living I have thought it meet,
Much like a Weauer with both hands and feet,
Or like a Ropemaker, I in my trade
Have many hundred times run retrograde;
But though the Ropemaker do backward go,
Yet is his work before his face we know;
And all the voyages I undertake
My business still has bin behind my back.
But (in a word) let things be as they are,
Those whom I carry, to land safe, I care.
When I do stand my labor to apply
I neither use to call, or yall, or cry,
Or thrust* or shoue, or rake, or hale, or pull
The Gentleman, or gentleman-like Gull,
A maid, a wife, a widow, or a trull.
Be he the greatest swearer on the earth,
Or the most dangerous thief that ere had birth,
Be he or they as bad, or worse, or worst,
Then any that of God or man are cursed:
Yet (if it be their lots to be my fare)
To carry them and land them well I care,
For why? should I through careless negligence,
Drown but a Rascal by improuidence,
In me it were an action most untrue,
For robbing of the hangman of his due.
And be a velvet villain never so brave,
A silver, silken, or a Satin slave:
And that I know, and do esteem him so,
Yet with great care his Rogueship will I row,
Because I would not wrong the courteous River,
With the base corpse of such a wicked liver;
I have a care to look about me round,
That he may live and hang, and not be drowned.
I take great care how I might Cares avoid,
And to that end I have my Cares imploid:
For long a go I do remember that
There was a Proverb, Care will kill a Cat.
And it is said a Cat's a wondrous beast,
And that she has in her nine lives at least,
And sure if any Cat this care could shun,
It was the famous Cat of Whittington,
For whom was given a ship rich fraught with ware
And for a lucky Pusse like that I care.
But if Care of such potent power be,
To kill nine lives, it may kill one in me;
And therefore it behoues me to beware,
That though I care, not to be killed with care.
I care, and in my care take great delight,
(When by a Watch I do pass late at night)
Such answers to the Constable to shape,
As by good words I may the Compter escape.
My serious Cares and Considerations.
It Is said the age of man is seventy years,
If eighty, it is full of grief and Cares,
And if we of our time account should keep,
How half our lives we do consume in sleep,
And for the waking half, account that too,
How little service to our God we do:
For till seven years be past and gone away,
We are incapable to do or pray.
Our Strange Eloquence
Adolescency till our manly growth,
We wast in vanity and tricks of youth,
And as we travel to our iorneyes end,
The more we live the more we do offend.
In sixty years three thousand Sabba^hs be,
Which are some eight years in account we see,
But of those Sundays let us think again,
How little service God has had of men,
And to the holiest man it will appear,
About one hundred hours in a year.
And so in threescore years God has not one,
Wherein his service we attend upon.
And if that (less the^ one) t'account were brought,
How many a nap, and many a wavering thought,
And wandering fancies do us round beset,
(That many times the text we do forget?)
Think but of this, and then the year before
Must be abated half, or somewhat more.
Thus many a Christian sixty years has trod
The earth, and not six months has served his God.
When we our lives unequally thus share,
In thinking ^f it, I am full of care.
I care in all my actions so to live,
That no occasion of offense I give
To any man, with either pen or tongue,
In name, or fame, or goods, to do them wrong.
For he is the greatest murderer alive,
That does a man of his good name deprive
With base columnious slanders and false lies,
It Is the worst villainy of villanes:
To blast a good man's name with scandals breath,
Makes his dishonor long survive his death:
For Infamie's a color did in grain,
Which scarce oblivion can wash out again.
As nothing's dearer then a man's good name,
So nothing wounds more deeper then defame.
Nature gave man a pair of ears and eyes,
And but one tongue, which certainly implies,
That though our sight and hearing still is free,
Yet must we not speak all we hear or see,
Then he is a Viper that does lies invent,
To work thereby another detriment,
It Is sin to slander a notorious Knave,
But sin and shame a good man to deprave:
Thus good or bad, or whatsoever they are,
To do to neither of them wrong I care.
I care to get good Books, and I take heed,
And care what I do either write or read:
Though some through ignorance, and some through spite
Have said that I can neither read nor write.
But though my lines no scholership proclaim,
Ye^ I at learning have a kind of aim.
And I have gatherd much good observations,
From many humane and divine translations.
I was well entered (forty Winters since)
As far as possum in my Accidence;
And reading but from ^ossu^ to posset,
There I was mir'de, and could no further get,
Which when I think upon (with mind dejected)
I care to think how learning I neglect^d.
The Poet Books that I have read of Poesy.
Quid, (or Ovid if you will)
Being in English, much has helped my skill:
And Homer too, and Virgil I have seen,
And reading them I have much bettered been.
Godfrey of Bulloyne, well by Fairfax done,
Du Bartas, that much love has rightly won:
Old Chaucer, Si^ney, Spencer, Daniel, Nash,
I dipped my finger where they used to wash.
As I have read these Poets, I have noted
Much good, which in my memory is quoted.
Of Histories I have perusde some store,
As no man of my function has done more.
The Golden legend, I did over toss, Part of the Books of History that I have
read.

And found the Gold mixed with a deal of dross.
I have read Plutarchs Morals and his Lives,
And like a Be, sucked Honey from those Hiues.
Josephus of the Jews, Knowles of the Turks,
Marcus Aurclius, and Gueuara's works:
Lloyd, Grimstone, Montaigne, and Suetonius,
Agrippa, (whom some call Cornelius.)
Grave Seneca, and Cambden, Purchase, Speed,
Old Monumentall Fox, and Hollinshead:
And that sole Book of Books which God has given
(The blessed eternal Testaments of heaven)
That I have read, and I with care confess,
My self unworthy of such happiness.
And many more good Books I have with care
Looked on their goods, and never stole their ware,
For no book to my hands could ever come,
If it were but the treat^se of Tom Thumb,
Or Scoggins Jests, or any simple play,
Or monstrous news came Trundling in my way.
All these, and ten times more, some good, some bad
I have from them much observation had.
And so with care and study I have writ
These books, the issue of a barren wit.
The most of them are verse, but I suppose
It is much ease to name them here in prose.
The names of many of the books that I have written.
First, the Sculler.


Upon Coriat three merry books, called, Odcombs complaint, Coriats
resurrection, and Laugh and be fat. The nipping or snipping of Abuses. Two mad
things against Fenor. Tailors Urania. The marriage of the Princess. An Elegy
on Prince Henry. Two books of all the Kings of England. Three weeks, three
days, and three hours observations in Germany. Travels to Scotland. Travels
to Prague in Bohemia. An Englishmans love to Bohemia. The Bible in verse. The
Book of Martyrs in verse. The praise of Hempseed. A kicksy winsy. The great O
Tool. Jack a Lent. The praise of Beggary. Tayl^rs Goose. Fair and foul
weather. The life and death of the Virgin Mary. The Whip of Pride.


And lastly (since the reign of the Emperor I was much beholding to this
Emperors name to make up the meeter.
OTTO)
Was never seen the like of TAILORS MOTTO.
All these, and some which I have quite forgot,
With care (as is aforesaid) I have wrote.
I care how to conclude this careful strain:
In care I care how to get out again:
I care for food and lodging, fire and raiment,
And (what I owe) I care, to make good payment.
But most of all, I care, and will endeuer
To live so careful that I may live ever.
Thus without wronging any man a jot,
I show I have what every man has not:
My wants are such, that I forgive them free,
That would but steal the most of them from me.
My cares are many, as I here express,
Poor cousin Germans unto carelessenesse.
I have a knowledge some men will read this,
I want the knowledge how their liking is.
I care in all that I herein have pend,
To please the good, and show the bad to mend.
And those that will not thus be satisfide,
I have a spirit that does them deride.
I flattry want men's likings to obtain,
I care to love those tha^ love me again.
Thus be men's ^udgements steady or unsteady
To like my Book, the ^are is taken already.
The Proverb says, that have makes (often) wast,
Then wha^ is wast, imp^te it to my have:
This Book was written (not that here I boast)
Put hours together, in three days at most:
And give me but my breakfast, I Will maintain,
To write another e're I eat again.
But well or ill, or howsoever it is penned,
L^k't as you list, and so I make an
END.

