Regula Vitae, THE RVLE OF THE LAW UNDER THE GOSPEL.

Containing A Discovery of the pestiferous sect of LIBERTINES, ANTINOMIANS, and
sons of Belial, lately sprung up both to destroy the Law, and disturb the
faith of the Gospel: Wherein is manifestly proved, that God sees sin in
justified persons.

By THOMAS TAILOR Dr. of Divinity, and Pastor of S. Mary Aldermanbury, London.

Numb. 12. 8. Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?

Imprinted at London by W. I. for Robert Dawlman at the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard: 1631.

The Preface to the godly Reader.
WHat Mr. Luther in his last Sermon at Wittenberg observed, and foretold, we
see in these our days fully performed and accomplished: he had observed
thirty several sects, and sectaries, raised up by Satan in his time against
that holy doctrine preached by himself; all which had he not been able by
the Scriptures to have resisted, and refuted, he must have been (as himself
said) of thirty several religions. Among them he mentions the Anabaptists,
Antinomists, Libertines, Servitians, etc. of all whom he foretold, that though
now they (says he) by the power of the word, and by the vigilance of godly
teachers lie close and still; yet will they be intent, and ready on all
occasions to rise, and raise up their damnable errors to disturb the peace of
the Church, and the prosperity of the Gospel. And indeed accordingly have we
observed the Church of God in all times since, less or more infested with
these dangerous sectaries, I mean the Libertines, the professed enemies to the
Law of God, and to the holy obedience of it. Against whom as St. Augustine in
his time wrote two books against the Adversaries of the Law: Contra Legis
adversarios.
so Mr. Calvin dealt worthily in his time, in his book entitled, Adversus
furiosam sectam Libertinorum.
Against the furious sect of the Libertines: and many other godly men since
that time. Let not us be offended that the spawne and succession of those lewd
libertine sectaries are now issued forth in troops amongst us, Nemo miretur
aut consternetur cum tam insolitos, and ab omni ratione alienos errores cernas:
Calv.
nor marvel that the hatred of Gods most righteous Law prevails amongst a
rude multitude, the sons of Belial; whom Mr. Calvin calls a prodigious and
belluine sect, furious and madded in their opinions, and fierce as unbroken
coltes against whosoever would curb them, and straiten the reins of their
unbridled licentiousness. But rather let us observe, 1. Satan's malice in
sowing tares where good seed was sown, and that in the Lords field. 2. Gods
just permission of so many schisms as tares rising with the grain; and
therein revenging the contempt and disobedience of his word, he has sent
strong delusions, that many should believe lies, 2 These: 2.
who received not the truth in the love of it. 3. The levity, wantonness, and
instability of unsettled Gospellers, that are in every new fashion of opinion,
with every new man that has the trick of molding novell conceits against
received truths; that if thirty new-minted fancies should rise up in their
age, they were like enough to be of thirty religions, and of every last praise
God, that the truth was never truly preached till now. 4. Let us excite our
selves to the love of truth, to the hatred of error, and to the fencing of our
selves against seducers; importuning in serious invocation the God of truth,
not to punish our wantonness in profession, with taking the word of truth
utterly from us: and thus shall we temper poison to a remedy, Quod hostis
machinatur in perniciem, convertit Deus in adiutorium: Aug: Epist: ad Sextum
105.
and turn that to an help which the enemy intends for our hurt. For the
settling of mine own people (some of them looking that way) I delivered lately
some grounds, both to enforce the rule of the Law upon the regenerate, as also
to refute the contrary error of our new audacious Antinomists, and Libertines,
and Famelists, who as the old Manichees and Marcionists, abolish the whole
Law, and that wholly.

One preaches, that the whole Law since Christ's death is wholly abrogated, and
abolished. Another, that the whole Law was fulfilled by Christ 1600 years
ago, and we have nothing to do with that. Another, that to teach obedience to
the Law of God, is to teach popery, and to lead men into a dead faith.
Another, that to do any thing because God commands us, or to forbear any
thing because God forbids us, is a sign of a moral man, and of a dead and
unsound Christian. And upon these hollow and deceitful grounds do these
masters of error bottom a number other ridiculous conceits, which yet they
deliver as oracles, and anathematize whosoever shall not so receive them. As 1.
That the Law being abolished to the justified, God can see no sin in them;
for he can see no Law transgressed. 2. That the regenerate cannot sin; for
where is no Law, is no transgression: according to that Luciferian principle
rife among them, Be in Christ, and sin if thou can. 3. That being in
Christ, they are Christed with Christ, as pure as Christ, as perfect as Christ,
as far beyond the Law as Christ himself: the right brood and spawne of the
old Catharists and Puritans. 4. That the Law is not to be taught in the
Church, and they are legal Preachers that do so, and preach not Christ. 5.
They hence disclaim all obedience to the Law, and rail at the precepts and
practice of sanctification, as good for nothing, but to carry men to hell; and
cry out on the Ministers as Popish, and as having Monks in their bellies, who
set men on working, and doing, and walking holily. 6. They renounce and reject
all humility, confession and sorrow for sin, they scorn fasting and prayer,
as the seeking not of God, but of our selves. One says, that neither our
omissions, nor commissions should grieve us: and another, Neither do my good
deeds rejoice me, nor my bad deeds grieve me. They deride and flout the
exercise of repentance and mortification, and upbraid such as walk humbly
before God. What say they? Will you repent all your days? and, You cannot
sin, but you must repent an whole fortnight after. Nay they are set upon so
merry a pin, as they can think of their former sins with merriment. I am
glad of my sin (says one) because it has drawn me to Christ: and why do
thou not mourn that by those sins thou have pierced Christ? 7. They reject
the Saboth as Jewish wholly abrogated with all other commandments; as one of
them professed, that were it not for offense of men, he would labor in his
calling on that day as well as any other.

These with many other consequents of the same stamp, all tending to loose the
conscience from all awe of God, from all care of duty, from all fear of sin,
and judgment to come, (though they walk in all licentiousness, and
prodigious courses) are such as a right bred Christian cannot but tremble at;
and were there but a few drops of modest blood in their veins, the Masters
of such lewd and libertine opinions could not but blush at: who cannot answer
before God (without a sea of tears of tim^ly repentance) the mis^^a^ling of
simple men (and women especially) into such desperate ways.

My intention being only to propound the grounds of naked truth, (which as a
right line is the rule of it self, and of that which is crooked) and that to
my own, in my own plain and ordinary manner; it was far from my thought to
make my labor more public, till partly the scorn and insolency of these
schismatic spirits on the one hand, and partly the importunity of many godly
both Ministers and private persons thrust me into a second survey, and review
of what I had delivered. They said they knew some drawn off their opinions by
hearing the doctrine preached; and doubted not but if it were made more
public, it would be much more useful to the Church, especially seeing these
seducers creep into such corners of the City and Country, where are weakest
means of resistance, whose strongest hopes and holds lie in the ignorance and
too credulous simplicity of their proselites. I made many objections to my
self, some to them: I knew this argument soundly and judicially handled already
by others; that it might more profitably and sufficiently be undertaken by some
other better furnished with gifts and leisure: how little I could expect the
satisfaction of others in an argument of this moment, who in the throng of
business, and burden of many weekly exercises, could scarce gain thoughts or
time to satisfy my self: How unsafe to thrust into a public quarrel: how
importune and lawles the adversaries, who hold not themselves countable to
God, for any wrong they do unto man. But yet persuaded to deny my self for
the service of God and his Church, and that the seasonablenesse of the treatise
might add an advantage unto it, and that it might be some stay to the
teachable until a more elaborate, and complete work might by some other be
prepared: I yielded unto the publication of that little which I had done;
animating my self with the same arguments that wise and prudent Generals use
to encourage and hearten their soldiers withal, when they are to join issue
with the approaching enemy: and they be four. 1. The goodness and justice of
the cause, which is just, and honorable; for we take part with God, and fight
his battle in the quarrel of his most righteous Law. 2. The victory is easy
and certain, unless God and his Law can be conquered: and who ever rose up
against God and prospered? 3. The quality of the adversaries must add courage
unto us, Christians in name, but siding, and sorting with the damnable
heretics of ancient times: of whom I will not speak what they are worthy to
hear, but what I may with judgment write, and whom the sequel discourse will
show to be of proud, furious, and audacious spirits. 4. The assurance of divine
assistance: for are the adversaries such? certainly then is their strength
gone: God's spirit is gone from them, for he teaches the humble, and sends
the proud empty away. They pretend the spirit, and outboast all men, that they
are taught, and led, and moved by the spirit, and are past all motives and
persuasions of man or means: but God's spirit is a soft, sober, calm and
quiet spirit, both in Christ the head, and in all his members: and that
furious, factious, railing and quarrelsome spirit of theirs, Deus ecce
furentibus obstat.
is that unclean spirit of Satan, usually breathed into hetickes and enemies
of the truth, and of the spirit of truth: by whose only assistance we shall
shape them (not as they say in scorn, a garment after our own fashion) but
such an answer out of the Scriptures, as shall not hide their nakedness, but
uncover their ignorance, emptiness and folly, and vindicate the holy Law of
God from their schismatic cavills, and heretical contempt. And why not? For
do we exclaim against the Papists for blotting out the second commandment,
as sacrilegious persons? and against the Anabaptists for denying the fifth? and
shall we be silent at these sectaries, whose blindness has made them bold to
blot out all the ten at once? which although they were written with God's own
finger, and that in tables of stone, yet these mad men presume their nails so
steeled, as that they can scratch them out all at once, and yet God see no sin
in them. I shall speak unto them all along the Treatise; and now will only
desire of them, or rather of God for them these two things: First, that my
reproof may be a medicine unto them; at least if it be conceived a wound, yet
not of an enemy, but of one that out of love desires to leave them a testimony
of faithfulness: and the other is, Optimus portus poenitentiae mutatio
consilii: Cic: Philip*
that the Lord would work in them a timely change both of opinion and
practice; so as they may no longer turn the grace of God into wantonness and
liberty, but get out of this snare of the Devil, wherein they are held to do
his will, ^ who in every thing opposes, and resists the righteous will of
God re^vealed.

But to you that are desirous to walk in the old and good way, and are not
yet infected with this spreading gangrene of licentiousness, I shall be bold
to give some advise for prevention. As 1. To look carefully to your precious
souls, which Satan many ways beleaguereth: let not pretenses of faith in
Christ loose you from duty toward God; catch not at ease, or presposterous and
overtimely comforts, wherein the impostour has you at advantage. 2. Look well
to your estates, and outward means, lest these impostours make a prey, and
advantage on you, as they have done on some already, who have confessed that
these pedlars have basely inveagled from them even to the very cushions of
their windows: for the Apostle observed not in vain, that through
covetousness they make merchandise of unwary souls. 3. Suspect such men as
come with a strange language, and unwonted phrases and manner of speaking:
Etiam loquendum cum Ecclesia recte sentiente: Cyprian:
for error is a fruitful mother, yet is she ashamed of her brood, and is
willing to cover and apparel them with philosophical and metaphysicall
phrases; and so these men are willing we should seek out the brats of their
own brain, Sublime et tumidum dicendi genus; pere grino quodam idiomate
loquuntur, ut qui ipsos audiunt prima facie stupefiant. Calv: advers: Libert:
c: 2.
in the bushes and thickets of intricate discourses, and in the meanders and
laborinths of uncouth language, wherein they desire to be admired, rather than
understood: not unlike their predecessors in Calvin's time, of whom he says,
that they were like Gipsees, that had gotten a cheating, and canting language
proper to themselves; Quemadmodum circulatores, aliique errones, etc peculiari
sermonis genere utuntur^ Vide cap: 7 eiusdem libri.
and this is one of the first principles of their cousening trade. Surely the
Ministry of Christ, and his Apostles, and of all godly teachers, is to cast
off all cloakes of shame, and to walk not in craftiness, neither to handle
the word of God deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth, to approve
themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. 2 Cor: 4. 2
These clean contrary study how to involve things in darkness, Non est
humano aut seculi sensu in Dei rebus loquendu^. Hilar. lib. 8 de Trinit.
and to obscure and extinguish (if they could) the light, and devise to speak
as in the riddles and oracles of old, in ambiguous, and new-minted phrases of
their own; as if the phrase and expressions of the Scriptures were only to be
rejected in opening of the mysteries of Scriptures. Sequamur loquendi regulam
quam tradit Scriptura, neque extra illos fines evagemur.
But leaving these bold impostours to set the holy Ghost to school to teach
him to speak, we acknowledge we have not only a rule of doctrine prescribed
us in the Scriptures, but also a rule of speaking, unto which we must frame our
selves; and utter wholesome doctrine, Calv. cap: 7.
in wholesome words, and words of understanding: and all other lofty, arrogant,
and subtle manner of speaking, so as that which is uttered cannot be well
understood, the Apostle rejects it as an idle beating of the air. 1 Cor: 14. 9
4. Nourish the grace of humility, for God teaches the humble: beware of
curiosity and affectation of novelties; be wise to sobriety, and think it an
high wisdom to be established in ancient and received truths. The
fickleness of hearers, and unsetlednesse in the grounds of holy truth,
together with the wantonness of opinions, have opened a wide door to
impostours: and while for want of judgment men are ready with Salomons fool
to believe every thing, all the labor and diligence of able and godly
Ministers is too weak, to keep multitudes from running after the Ministers of
Satan, furnished with all arts to deceive, and to cheat them of the truth
which is according to godliness. Against whom while I endeavor to establish
others, I may seem to forget my self, and that I must incur many censures
and contempts from this lawless generation of men; but my labor is with the
Lord, and my reward is my conscience of well-doing: I shall contemn their
contempt, love their persons, hate their errors, and study while I am, to be
as serviceable to the Church, and the faith once given to the Saints, as I can.

CHAP. 1.
Containing the ground of the following discourse and dispute, out of Romans 6.
14. For ye are not under the Law.

IN the words of the Apostle are to be enquired, 1. What is meant by the Law:
namely, The Moral Law in the ten Commandments, containing our whole duty to
God, and to our neighbor. 2. What it is to be under the Law: namely, not under
the rule and obedience of the Law, for our Apostle loses no Christian from
that; but Christians are not under the reign of the Law, by the reign of
which, sin reigns unto death. This being the Apostles reason, that the
reign of the Law, puts them under the reign of sin. 3. Who are these that are
not under the Law? Ye: that is, believers, justified and sanctified persons,
that are dead to sin, and alive unto God in Jesus Christ our Lord, verse 11.
and only these, seeing the natural man is yet in his sins, and under the
whole power of the Law in the rigor and extremity of it. Rom: 7. 6. We are
delivered from the Law, being dead unto it wherein we were holden. But who are
these? those that serve in newness of spirit, not in oldnesse of letter; that
is, which now serve God in a new spiritual manner, excited and wrought by the
spirit; and not according to the old corruption of our nature before grace, It
is the privilege of believers, not to be under the Law.
nor according to the external letter of the law, which only breeds
external actions. And that it is the privilege of believers appears by
these reasons. 4 Reasons.


1. Because Christ was made under the Law, to redeem those that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, Galat. 4. 4. The reason is
good; Christ was under the Law, therefore Christians believing are not under
it; and, Christians are redeemed from being under the Law, and therefore are no
longer under it.

2. As many as are under the Law, Gal. 3. 10.
are under the curse. But it is the privilege of believers, not to be under
the curse; for they that are of the faith of Abraham, are blessed with
faithful Abraham. Therefore they are not under the Law.

3. It is the privilege of believers, to receive the spirit of Christ. Romans 8.
14. As many as are Christ's, are led by the spirit of Christ: and therefore they
are not under the Law. Gal. 5. 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not
under the law.

4. It is the privilege of believers to have eternal life, and the
inheritance, by promise, and not by the tenor of the Law; and therefore all
they, and only they are free from being under the Law. Gal. 3. 18. If the
inheritance be by the Law, it is no more by promise. But God gave it to Abraham
by the promise. Were believers under the Law, they should have the inheritance
by the Law: but they have it not by the Law, but by promise; and therefore are
not under the Law. For the Law and the promise in the cause of righteousness,
and life, will not be agreed, no more than light and darkness, fire and water,
whose natures are most abhorring.

Quest. But what or wherein is this privilege of not being under the Law?

Answ. This privilege will appear the clearer, if we consider the danger of
being under the Law, The danger of being under the Law, in 4 things
in four things. First, in that the Law wrappeth every sinner in the curse of
God, both in this life, as also in the life to come; so as he is no where
secure, but lies naked to the curse meeting him at every corner. The Law is a
thunderbolt to blast him in his person, in his estate, in his name, in his
goods, in his calling, in his comforts, in all his enterprises, and occasions;
the sentence is passed upon him, and where ever he is, he is in the way to
execution. It would daunt, and astonish the hardiest, and stoniest heart, to
hear the sentence of death pronounced upon it for violating the law of his
Prince and Country. It would mar all his merriments to conceive he were
presently to suffer but a temporal death for offending the law of man. And it
would much more spoil the pleasure of sin, if the sinner could with an hearing
ear, hear the sentence of eternal death denounced by the Law, against soul
and body, for violating the righteous Law of the eternal God. If an house were
ready to fall upon a man's head, how would he bestirre himself, and wind
every way to hye himself out of the danger. But the burden of the Law is more
intolerable than the weight of all the sands, and mountains in the world; and
this oppressing weight is ready to fall on the head of every sinner: which how
should it amaze, and affright them, and make them restless, till they be
gotten without the reach of the danger.

2. The Law in the reign of it shuts up heaven, (which receives no
trangressour) and sets the gate of hell wide open upon the sinner; and not
only casts him into hell hereafter, but brings an hell into his conscience
before hell; that if his heart be not dead within him as Nabals, it is
restless as the raging sea, tormenting him for the present with hellish
fears, dreadful horrors, and selfe-accusing; the biting and gnawing of which
worm is the very entrance into hell, and a beginning of the eternal torments
of it: for the avoiding whereof many wicked men have chosen death, and hastened
their own execution, as far more sufferable and easy.

3. The Law in the reign of it, thrusts the sinner under the power of the
Devil, as a condemned malefactor into the hand of the executioner, to be
ruled at his will. Now must he blind his eyes, and as it were by an
handkerchiefe over his eyes, he must pinion him, and bind him hand and foot,
and by effectual delusions prepare him to his death. And what is more just,
than that he who will not be led by the spirit of God, should be given up to be
ruled by the Devil.

4. The Law in the reign of it, adds a sting, and sharpneth the point of all
afflictions, which by it become the beginning of hell, and properly curses;
retaining their natural acrimony and poison; and are as the red sea, even a
well, and a devouring gulf to drown the Egyptians, which same sea is a wall
and paved way to save the Israelites. It armeth all Gods creatures against the
sinner, who are ready in their several ranks to revenge their Lords quarrel,
till he enter into that new covenant; of which see Hosea 2. 18. It is the Law
that makes death a door to hell, and a downfall to eternal perdition: the
Law is merciless, and knows no other condition, but do or die: so as if a
man dye under the Law, there is no expectation but of death without mercy.

Quest. 2. But how may a man get from under this dangerous estate?

Answ. By the attaining and exercise of three saving graces. How a man may get
from under this dangerous state.
First, Faith in the Son of God; which 1 apprehends Christ's righteousness
for the fulfilling of the Law. 2. Faith establishes the Law; both because it
attaineth in Christ Remission of sins, and so remission of the rigor of the
Law, as also an Imputation of that full righteousness which the Law requires.
3. Faith is the Law of Christ, by obedience of which Law every believer must
live, Habak. 2. 4.
and is answerable to the obedience of the whole Law.

The second grace is Repentance, and timely turning unto God; this helps a
man from under this danger. 1. In that it flies from the dreadful sentence of
the Law, and knocks at the gate of mercy; it seeks and sues for pardon, and
will not give over, till it have got a gracious answer, that all the sins are
remitted. 2. In that it wipes off all old scores, repealeth all the actions of
the Law, gets all sins cast into the bottom of the sea, never to be
remembered any more: nay it gett^^^ not only sins (...), but ^ven the law it
self (...) ^ort buried to the penitent person: as Moses body, and is unknown
where it was laid.

The third grace is new and inchoate obedience to the Law, which is a kind of
fulfilling it. For 1. It is a work of the spirit in the regenerate, who has
written the law in their hearts, and made them of rebels and enemies to the
Law, and the righteousness of it, lovers of the Law, and lovers of obedience. 2.
It has the promise of acceptance, and is accounted as full and complete
obedience to the Law: and themselves now called perfect and undefiled in the
way. God looks not now on their obedience as theirs, but as on his own work
in them, nor approves the person for the work, but the work for the person.

Quest. 3. How may we know a man gotten from under this danger of the Law?

Answ. By sundry notes or marks. Six notes of trial, to know one gotten from
under the danger of the Law.
First, by subjection to the Gospel in the power of it; when a man contenteth
not himself with a title of faith, or a show of profession, or a form of
godliness, or a name that he lives; but grows in the knowledge and
obedience of the Gospel: for would a man be saved, and obey neither the Law
nor Gospel? No, no, the Apostle concludes him under the whole power of the
Law, that knows not, nor obeys the Gospel of Christ, 2 These: 1. 8.

2. By thankful walking worthy of the Gospel: Ephesians. 2. 10*
this man knows that all the regenerate are Gods workmanship; and that the
end of all our freedom from sin, is the free and cheerful praise of God:
and therefore he cannot but be thankful to Christ his deliverer from under so
hard and cruel a Master as the Law, which did nothing but accuse, accurse,
terrify and condemn him: now will he highly prize his freedom, and glory in
his happy liberty: now will he live to Christ, and for Christ; and ascribe all
his happiness unto him, as does the Apostle for that happy victory over sin
and the Law, 1 Cor: 15. last: and Rom: 7. 24, 25.

3. There is now peace of conscience, which formerly (if waking) did bite and
sting; but now excuses and acquitteth. I mean not here a senseless or brawny
conscience, the issue of a dead conscience; which like a dead man, lay him
under a Church or mountain, he is quiet, feels nothing, complains of
nothing: so lay the secure sinner under the intolerable burden of innumerable
sins, his conscience is quiet, and complains not. But this peace follows
not from unfeelingnesse, but from feeling sin pardoned, from perceiving sin
subdued, and from discerning sin repented of, striven against and conquered:
for the spirit of grace is ever a spirit of mourning, and from that sowing in
tears arises the harvest of joy.

4. He that is got from under the Law is now a Law to himself, that is, he
willingly submits himself to the rule and obedience of the Law: the way to
escape the yoke and coaction of the Law is to become a free and cheerful
observer of the Law. Which stands in three things. 1. In a care to do the
duties which the Law requires, and in such manner as the Law does require, so
near as we can, Psalm: 119. 6. Rom: 7. 22. 2. In huhumility and grief that we
are so short of the Law in our best duties; that when we have done all we can,
we are so unprofitable, and that even all our righteousness is as a stained
clout. 3. And all this out of love of God, and of obedience, not for fear of
hell or judgment: whence Gods people are called a willing people. Psalm: 110. 4.

This must every believer aim at; for he that willingly lives in the breach
of the Law is certainly under the curse of it.

5. A man gotten from under the Law, gives up himself to the leading of the
spirit: Gal: 5. 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the Law. Now
to be led by the spirit is, 1. To suffer the spirit of God to guide the mind,
with knowledge, for he being the spirit of illumination, his office is to lead
the Saints into all ^^uth. 2. To allow him to carry and order the heart, will,
and affections with cheerfulness, and constancy in all good duties, whence he
is called a free spirit, not only because he works in himself freely, and
as the wind blows where he will; but from his powerful effect in the Saints,
who by his strong and mighty gales are carried strongly in their motions of
grace and obedience. This find and challendge thy freedom from under the Law.
But if the spirit that rules in the world guide the course, or Satan carry a
man into the foul lusts of uncleanness, worldliness, voluptuousness,
malice, or the like, as the swine into the lake; this man is under the whole
curse and reign of the Law, because he is under the power and reign of his
sin.

6. There is joy and thankfulness for others freedom as for a man's own: he
that is truly converted is unfeignedly glad for the work of Gods grace in
others, Romans 6. 17. God be thanked that ye have been the servants of sin,
but now ye have obeyed the form of doctrine, etc. Ephesians. 1. 5. Phil. 1. 5. A
godly Pastor with Paul wishes all as himself, except his bonds. A godly
parent will rejoice to see his children to walk in the truth. A father or
husband cannot content himself with his own safety from a deadly danger, and
see his wife and children left in it still. A godly Master as Joshua will have
all his house serve the Lord with himself, and will not endure in his family,
a wicked servant, a vassal, and slave to the Devil, and sin; but will pull
him out of the fire or water, or turn him out of doors: yea every sinner
converted himself, will strengthen the brethren, as Peter, and David, Psalm: 51.
13. By these notes may a man try and discern whether he be yet under the Law
or not.

CHAP. 2.
Explaining the Apostle, and showing how far the believer is from under the
Law.

HAving showed that it is the privilege of justified persons not to be under
the Law; we are now in the next place to limit this proposition of the Apostle
within his own bounds; which ancient bounds while our Libertines remove or
break down, they open a sluice or floodgate unto all loosnes and licentiousnes,
both of opinion, and practice.

For the right understanding of our Apostles meaning, we must consider the Law
two ways. First, in the substance of it: or, secondly, in the circumstances or
appendices belonging unto it.

The substance of the Law stands in five things. The substance of the Law in
5 things.


1. The Law in the substance of it, Psalm. 119. 89.
is an eternal doctrine, showing what is good, what is evil, never changed,
never abolished, never abrogated, (no not by Christ) but is as a beam from an
eternal Sun; and the Sun being eternal, how can the beam but be so also?
and thus believers are still under the teaching of it; without which no man can
know what God is, nor what is his worship, nor what is the manner of his
worshipp, nor what duties we are to perform, nor how to perform them, either
to himself, or to our brethren.

2. The law in the substance of it, is a revealer of sin. Romans 3. 19. By the
Law comes the knowledge of sin; and every sinner, yea even believers are
still under the rebuke of it, so long as in many things they offend all, and
stand in need of the Law, both to work them to humility and repentance after
new sins committed, to work them to a fear and reverent awe of God, and to
drive them out of themselves unto Christ, for recovery out of their daily
infirmities; for were there no law, there were no transgression, nor discovery
of it, Romans 4. 15.

3. The Law in the substance of it is a rule of good life, and as the Gospel
teaches how to believe, so the Law teaches how to live: the Law is as the
touchstone to try what is gold in us, and what is dross; it is as the line and
plummet to show what is straight, and what is crooked: and thus is under the
direction of it both for matter and manner of all actions which please or
displease God. For as the Law civil is the rule of civil life, so Gods Law is
the rule of godly life: and as a good workman that is Master of his trade, will
have his rule ever at his back, or in his hand, to measure every piece of his
work, that it may stand level and square; so even the believer has as
continual need of the rule of the Law, which (the Apostle says) is profitable
for doctrine, correction, reproof and institution even of the man of God. 2 Timothy 3. 17.

4. The Law in the substance is the express idea or representation of the Law
of nature written in our hearts in the time and state of innocence, and the
natural principles of it cannot be quite extinct, or shaken out of the heart
of the worst man; for the very Heathens had it written in their hearts, Romans 2.
15. and much less can it be shaken out of the believer, in whom it is renewed
and rewritten in their spirits by the finger of Gods spirit, Ier. 31. 33. Nay
the believer cannot choose but be framed to a cheerful and spiritual
obedience of it, so long as the spirit performs that office in them.

5. The Law in the substance of it, promises a righteousness, and eternal
life to all the performers of it: and no believer expects another
righteousness, nor another life, nor on any other condition, than the same in
the Law; only in another manner and means the same life must be attained, by
our full performance of the law, though not in our selves, but in our surety;
and by the same righteousness, not inherent in us, The believer is under the
whole substance of the Law.
but imputed unto us. So as by this former consideration we see that the
believer is still under the whole substance of the Law.

And now in the second place seeing the justified person is so many ways under
the Law, how says the Apostle that the believers are not under it? To resolve
which point, we must now consider the circumstances and appendices of the Law,
which make it an heavy yoke, Seven appendices of the Law, in none of which the
believer is under the Law.
an intolerable, and insupportable burden, in regard whereof the believer is
not under it. These appendices of the Law are seven.

First, one consequent of the Law is, that it yoaketh every man to a personal
performance of it; for himself must do all things that are written in the
Law, to live in them.

And this is now an impossible obedience, Romans 8. 3.
because of our flesh. But Christ having perfectly fulfilled the Law for the
believer, and becoming the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes: in this regard they are not under this rigor of the Law, which
knows no surety, no Mediator, no imputed obedience, but in every man's own
person; and yet the Gospel remitteth no part of the substance of the Law,
which requires perfect obedience: only it tendreth it in the person of the
surety, and gets acceptance when perfect obedience is done for the person,
though not by him.

2. Another appendix of the Law is, that this rigorous exaction of personal,
and perfect obedience is urged upon pain of eternal death: (...)
for, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in
the book of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and Gal. 3. 10. Now the believer is not
under this co^sequent of the Law: for Christ was made a curse for us, and
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. and by him being justified
by faith, we escape this damnatory sentence, Romans 8. 1. But it is one thing to
be free from the curse of the Law, another from the Law it self: and it is no
good sequel, We are free from this sanction of the Law; therefore from the
substance.

3. Another appendix of the Law is, In which regard it I^ called (...)
that it urges and forces it self upon the conscience with fear and
terror; for as was the manner of the Laws delivery at the first, so it still
thrusts it self upon the sou^^ by coaction and constraint. A^^ thus the
believer is not und^^ the Law; for the grace of (...)empteth him from the
rigorous exaction of it, and frames his heart to a willing, and cheerful
endeavor in obedience; for what the Law prescribes to be done, it helps in
the doing of it: and as Christ himself became under the Law not forced or
coacted, but freely; so is now the Christian.

But this being but an adjunct, shall we argue from removing an accident, to
the remotion of the subject? or because we are not under the Law as a rigorous
exactour, and terrible revenger, therefore we are not under it as a righteous
commander, and holy conductour?

The 4 consequent of the Law is, that it acknowledges no justification or
life, but by com^^eat obedience; (...) (...)
no life or sal^ation must be expected by the ^w, but by keeping it wholly
(...) exactly. And thus it is an impossible yoke; for by the works of the Law
no flesh can be justified, Rom: 3. 20. so as now the believer is not under the
Law for justification, unto whom Christ is made righteousness, and whose
perfect obedience is imputed, Rom: 4. 5. But it is no good argument, that
because the Law is fulfilled by Christ, it is therefore abolished by Christ:
surely every simple man can distinguish between accomplishing and abolishing
the Law: nor it will not follow, that because the Law cannot justify,
therefore it cannot instruct, guide, or edify.

The 5 consequent is, that the Law is the vigor and strength of sin; that it
arraignes, and condemns the sinner, and is the minister of death, 2 Cor: 3.
7. But there is no condemnation to those that are in Jesus, Christ, Rom: 8. 1.
for that heavy sentence of the Law is transferred upon Christ himself, and
carried off the believer. But it will never hold weight or water in argument,
that because a believer is freed from the damnatory power of the Law, he is
free therefore from the mandatory and directory power of it.

The 6 consequent or appendix of the Law is, that thereby sin is excited and
provoked by our own corruption rebelling against the Law, Rom: 7. 11. which is
not by the fault of the Law, which remains holy, just, and good, v. 12. but
by our wicked nature, Quod non lic^t acrius urit.
which is more violently carried to that which is forbidden; Gens humana ruit
in vet^tum ^e^as.
even as an untamed colt, the more it is hampered, the more mad and stirring it
is. But the believer is not thus under the incitation of the Law, who by grace
is in great part freed from this reluctation and resistance, and by the same
grace made tractable and willingly subject to the Law, which they discern to
be so concordant, and a very counterpaine of the holiness and justice of God
himself; and think themselves so far from being loosed from the Law by the
doctrine of grace, that they are faster tied to the obedience of it.

The 7 and last appendix of the Law, is to consider it as the Law of Moses, and
in Moses hand given to the Church of the Jews; in which respect it had many
circumstantiall references to that people, and many accessories in the
administration toward them; besides some strictness, rigor, and terror to
that people under rudiments: In regard of which, believers in the new Testament
are not under the Law as it was in Moses hand; but sundry references and
circumstances, as suppose, time, place, persons, tables, testament, manner,
measure, terror, rigor are altered, and changed in the Church since Christ's
death. But it will prove no good reason, that because an heir in minority is
under tutours and rods, therefore he may being come to years live as he list,
and become a lawless man: or that because the Law as given by Moses to the
Church of the Jews is in some circumstances altered, therefore it must be in
the whole substance of it abolished and that wholly: or that because the Church
of the old Testament was under a strait Law, therefore the Church in the new
Testament must be under none.

The sum of all is comprised in these three following conclusions:

1. That the regenerate are never sine Lege, Regenerat are not without a Law.
that is, without Law: of wicked men is said, that they are lawless, and
described to be disobedient, 1 Timothy 1. 8 (...).
ungodly, sinners, unholy, profane, the genuine epithites, and right
characters of our late Anomists and Antinomists; but the regenerate are no such.

2. That the regenerate are not (as our Text says) sub Lege, Nor under the Law
in 5 respects.
not under the Law: namely in respect, 1. of Justification by the Law: 2. of
Condemnation by it: 3. of Personal and perfect obedience, which Christ in
their stead has undertaken, and performed: 4. of Coaction and constraint, from
which the spirit of liberty has freed the^ in great part: 5. of the sundry
accessories of Moses his administration to that people to whom it was
delivered: in these regards, and some other they are not under the Law.

3. That the regenerate may be truly said to be in Lege, But under, that is,
within the compass of the Law
that is, in, or under the Law, or within the compass of the Law; in respect,
1. of the doctrine, rule and instruction of it: 2. of their subjection unto it,
who frame their lives secundum Legem, according to the Law: 3. of the spirits
inscription, who writing it in their hearts keeps them within the compass of
it, and holds them in the respect and cheerful obedience unto it. And thus
we have cleared the meaning of the Apostle in this, and other phrases of the
like sound, Ye are not under the Law.

CHAP. 3.
Proving believers under the rule and direction of the Moral Law.

NOw because the sons of Belial are come out, and tumultuously are risen (as
did the heathens) against the Lord, and his most righteous Law, Psalm. 2. 2, 3
saying, Let us break these bonds, and cast these cords from us; for we are
under the teaching of grace, and under the rule of the spirit, all our work is
done to our hand, and we have nothing left for us to do, and therefore the Law
to us is as the seven green cords on Sampsons arms, which he brake off as a
thread of tow when it touches the fire, Judge. 16. 9
and our selves as loose, and at liberty from it, as he was from them; for the
whole Law is abolished to us wholly. Therefore we are to prove against them,
that true believers have both a true use of the Moral Law, and besides their
lively faith, wherein they have received the spirit, have need of the
directions, and doctrines of the Moral Law, for the performance of the duties
of it: and that by these reasons.

If the same sins be forbidden after faith as before, 1 Reason All the same
sins are forbidden after faith as before.
then is the Law in some force to believers. But the same sins are forbidden
them after faith as before. And therefore the Law is in some force to them.

The proposition is clear, because the Law only discovers and reveals
sin, Romans 7. 7.
as the Gospel does the remedy. The assumption is also manifest, because the
Law is an eternal truth, and is never at agreement with any sin in
whomsoever. Concupiscence before faith is sin, and no less sin after faith
in the regenerate: David's murder, and adultery were sins after faith; and the
same man that believed in God, committed adultery with Bathsheba.

Object. These were foul sins in themselves, but not in him because he was
justified.

Answ. Then Nathan was deceived in saying, Thou art the man: and David, when he
said, I have sinned. Had David sin after faith? then was David under a Law
for obedience: for every sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
and where no Law is, can be no transgression. The like of Peter in the new
Testament apparently a believer, for Christ prayed that his faith should not
fail; yet after that fell into those foul sins against the Law, rash
swearing, and false swearing, and cursing himself; which were foul sins in
him, as well as in themselves; why should he else go out, and weep bitterly?
Peter, as full of shifts as he was to save his skin, was to seek in this
shift, to turn off all his sin, and sorrow at once, that being a believer,
and in the new Testament, the Law had nothing to do with him.

This argument our Novatians and Famelists can by no other shift avoid, but by
flying to a perfect purity in themselves: for this is a dangerous, and
desperate principle of their Catechism rife in the mouths of their Novices, Be
in Christ, and sin if thou can; and is very coherent with their other
tenants: for were the Moral Law indeed wholly abolished, why should they not
worship false Gods, swear, break the Saboth, rebel, kill, whore, steal?
what should hinder them from railing, and reviling all Ministers and people,
besides their own sect, as in a dead faith, The Saints are perfect not
perfectists.
as only moral men in state of death? all this is no sin: abolish the Law,
and thou may say, Sin if thou can. But oh vain men. Psalm. 119. 120.
Can David sin, and for his sin his flesh tremble with fear of Gods
judgments? Can Peter at the side of Christ sin, and that after so many
warnings of Christ himself? Does Paul know but in part, and after faith find a
law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind? Romans 7. 15. 19. 23.
and that after grace received, the good he would do, he did not, and the
evil he would not do, that did he? and are you in so high a form beyond
these worthies, that you cannot sin if you would? Ponder a little these
places of Scripture and if you be still mad of your perfection, Hypocratis
magis fomentis, quam monitis nostris indigent.
I will say of you as Ierom of your fellows; You had more need of physic to
purge your brains, than persuasion to inform your judgments. Eccles: 7. 20.
There is not a just man on earth that does good, and finneth not. 1 Kings 8.
46. For there is no man that sins not. Object. No? He that is borne of God
sins not. Answ. The Apostle says not simply and absolutely that he has no
sin, Non dicit non peccat, sed non dat operam peccato. Beza.
or sins not; but he sins not industriously, he makes not a trade of
sin, he sins not as the wicked do, nor sins not in reigning sin, Qui
ambulant in viis Domini, non operantur peccatum, et tamen non sunt sine
peccato. August. in Psa. 118 conc. 2.
nor sins unto death, without return and repentance, because the seed of
God abides in him, and destroys in him the work of the Devil. Prove. 20. 9.
Who can say, I am pure from sin? Who? I can say so, and I can, says every
Libertine; my sin may be sought for, and cannot be found; and mine, says
another, is washed off, that it cannot be seen; and mine, says a third, is as
a bottle of ink dispersed in the sea, and not to be discerned. And indeed thus
it is in the justified in respect of Gods account, and imputation; but while
they speak so magnifically of themselves in respect of the presence of sin,
they only blow up their bladder bigger, which all the while is swelled up but
with stinking wind and emptiness. But they would have some places out of the
new Testament, as men beyond the reach of the old. Non peccare Dei iustitia
est, hominis iustitia, indulgentia Dei. Bern. ser. 23 in Cantic.
And so they may. Iam. 3. 2. In many things we sin all: We all; all Apostles,
all Christians; sin, that is, transgress the Law; in many things, by daily
failings and errors: and therefore all we in the new Testament, since Christ's
death, though we be justified by faith, Nunc been vivitur si sine crimine; sine
peccato autem qui se vivere existimat, no^ id agit ut peccatum non habeat, sed
ut veniam non accipiat. Aug. Enchirid.
are under the rule and obedience of the Law; because we sin in many things. 1
Ioh. 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us. We: Who? The Apostle speaks of carnal men, say some of the
Libertines: as if the Apostle was a carnal man: but the former verse
expresses who they be that have sin; those that walk in the light; Haec est
regeneratorum perfectio, si se imperfectos esse agnoscant. August.
those that are in communion of Saints, and have fellowship one with another;
and those that are justified and sanctified, whom the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son has cleansed from all sin.

If the same duties be required of all after faith as before, 2 Reas.
and every conscience bound to the performance; then the Law in the whole use
is not abolished to believers. But the first is true: The same duties are
required after faith as before.
and therefore the second. The former appears, because where any duty is
commanded, there the rule of that duty is implied: and this rule is the Moral
Law, which binds all men to all duties of it both before and after Christ,
being an eternal measure of all that is right or crooked.

That it is a rule of duty before Christ, they deny not; and that it is a rule
of duty since Christ, I make it plain thus.

1. Because Christ himself did confirm, expound, establish and fortify the
Law by his word and authority, which was the scope of his large Sermon upon the
Mount, in Mat. 5. 6. and 7 chapters: which had it been to be utterly
abolished, Quod accuratius Christus exposuit, magis pertinere ad Christianos
creditur.
he would rather have declaimed bitterly against the Law as our Antinomists
do, and have rather commended the Pharisees for weakening it by their glosses;
than have vindicated it, and restored to the full strength and power of it.

2. Our Lord not only confirms it in it self by his doctrine and life, but
also in the conscience of every Christian. Matthew. 5. 19. He that breaks the
least of these commandments, and teaches men so to do, shall be least in the
kingdom of heaven: but he that shall teach and observe them, shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven: that is, shall be honored, and counted a
worthy member in the Church of God. No, says the Libertine, we must not teach
the Law in the Church; and those that do are legal Preachers, that lead men
into a dead faith; we must do nothing, because God commands us: nay we not
only reverse the least of them, but all at once, and teach others so to do.
See now if fire be more contrary to water, or Christ to Belial; than Christ to
these sons of Belial, that will be under no yoke of the Law, no rule, no
obedience.

3. The Apostles after Christ bring converted Christians every where to the
rule of the Law, and frequently allege the Law to urge the duties of it: and
therefore the Law cease not to be the rule in the new Testament; for if it
had, they would not have pressed exhortations by the Law. Romans 12. 19. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves: Why? For it is written, Vengeance is mine.
Romans 13. 8, 9. pressing the duty of love, the only debt beseeming a Christian,
he urges it by this argument; because, love is the fulfilling of the Law; and
repeateth all the commandments of the second Table, not to repeal or reverse
any of them, but to confirm them as the rule still, and comprehends them all
in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Ephesians 6. 1. Children obey
your parents; and presses the duty from the Law; for this is the first
commandment with promise. Heb. 12. 28. Let us have grace to serve God
acceptably, with reverence and fear. Why? For our God is even a consuming
fire. Did not now the Apostles come as well with a rod, as with the spirit of
meekness? 1 Cor. 4. 21
did not they persuade men, as knowing the terror of the Lord? 2 Cor. 5. 11
did not they call men's eyes, not only to behold the goodness of God, but
also to behold his severity? Romans 11. 22. Dare now an audacious Libertine step
out and tell the Apostles (as they tell us) that they were legal Preachers,
that they taught men popery and justification by works; and that they made men
only moral Christians, because they held the Law before them as the rule of
all duties both of piety and charity?

If Christ came not to abolish the Law, 3 Reas: Christ came not to abolish the
Law, and therefore it is not abolished.
but to fulfill it, then the Law is not abolished: for either Christ abolished
it, or none; and either by his coming, or not at all. But Christ charge us,
not to think that he came to abolish it, Matthew. 5. 17. For what is it to
destroy the Law, but to take from it that virtue and power whereby it is a Law,
and to make it of none effect. Christ came not to destroy the Law, why?
And that Christ came not to destroy the Law is manifest: because 1. It is his
own Law, which must endure for ever in heaven, Psalm. 119. 2. Because it is
holy, just, and spiritual, Romans 7. 13. Which words imply, 1. That there is in
it a supernatural, divine, and unperishing virtue, resembling God himself,
who shall as easily be destroyed as his Law. 2. That it serves to be a divine
direction of all men* in all holy, just and spiritual duties. 3. That it is an
holy instrument of the spirit, by which he leads out the faithful into the
practice of those duties. 4. That whosoever have the spirit sent to dwell, and
rule, and to write the Law in their hearts; they cannot detract from the Law;
but the more spiritual themselves are, the more do they discern the
spiritual power of it, and frame to the spiritual observance of it: so did
the Apostle in this place; so David, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. and 119. 39.

Nay Christ came to fulfill it, But to fulfill it, how?
in himself, and in his members. 1. By preaching, illustrating, and enforcing
the Law, by vindicating it from false glosses, and restoring to the full and
first strength of it; by all which he shows it to be immutable and eternal.
2. By plenary and full satisfaction of it, and by his perfect, and personal
obedience, both active and passive; so as he fulfilled all the righteousness
of it; and left not one iota of it unfulfilled. 3. By donation of his spirit,
writing the Law in the hearts of the elect, and inciting them to new and
cheerful obedience of it; for to this end the Saints receive the law of the
spirit of life, that they may not walk after the flesh any more, Romans 8. 2.
but after the spirit,

If the Apostles after Christ did not abrogate the Law, 4 Reas. Nor the
Apostles abolished the Law.
but establish it; then it is not abolished to believers in the new Testament.
But they by the doctrine of faith did not. Romans 3. 31. Do we abrogate the Law
by faith? God forbid; nay we establish it. Where the Apostle cries down that
gross conceit of the contrariety of the Law and Gospel, so as one of them
must needs devour the other, as Moses rod did the rods of the inchanters. True
it is they are a distinct and diverse doctrine; but in God and his word is no
contrariety* And true it is the Law and Gospel will never stand together in
the justification of a sinner before God, Lex et fides mutuo se iuvant, mutuo
sibi dant manus. P. Mart.
yet they friendly concur and agree in Christian conversation, wherein they are
inseparable, as also they are in Christian institution: yea here they help one
another, as one hand does another. Whence the holy Apostles who knew that the
Gospel was not properly and substantially the Law; yet usually in the
publication of the Gospel confirm the authority of the Law. But confirm the
authority of it.
See some instances. Romans 1. 18. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation:
and by it not only the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith,
but the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodlines: not that
the Gospel is a ministry of wrath, but a witness that wrath hangs over the
heads of wicked men rejecting the Gospel. Romans 2. 16. Christ shall judge the
secrets of men according to my Gospel: that is, according to the witness of
the Gospel preached by me. 1 John 2. 1. Brethren, I write these things to you
that you sin not: and what did he write else but the sweet tidings of the
Gospel, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
that is any confess his sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them;
and that if any sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc? For as no man
can teach any duty of the Law, but therein calls to faith: for call to the love
of God, the substance of the first Table; must not he be first believed, and
then loved? or to prayer; how can they call on him on whom they have not
believed? and so in the rest: so neither can a man preach faith without some
reference to the Law; for can a man believe a remedy without knowledge, and
search of the wound? nay it is the Law that fits us to prize Christ a
physician, or else would we never meddle with him, no more than he would seek
out for a garment that has no sense of his shame or nakedness. What if the
Law know not, nor command one to die, or satisfy for another; yet it does not
deny, or exclude, or hinder the mercy of God revealed in the Gospel, but
makes way unto it. The Apostles therefore did not abrogate the Law by faith;
nay (says our Apostle) we establish it. From whence the argument will rise
stronger: If the Apostles did stablish the Law by the doctrine of faith, then
is not the Law abolished to believers in the new Testament. But they did
establish the Law by faith.

Quest. How does faith stablish the Law?

Answ. 1. In showing that all the menaces and curses of it are not in vain,
but all fulfilled in Christ, who was laid under them all to free us from them.

2. It fulfils the Law, because it brings before God the perfect fulfilling
of the Law for justification; though not in our selves, yet in our surety, in
whom we have perfectly fulfilled it, and shall live by it; the Law must be
absolutely fulfilled by us in our surety, or we cannot live.

3. It stablisheth the Law, because faith works by love: which love is the
fulfilling of the Law: so as by faith being justified, as we are in a stronger
obligation to the duties of it, so we begin a new obedience to all the
commandments, Dicatur mihi in december praeceptis quid non fit a Christiano
observandum. Cant. Faust. lib. 3.
and there is no duty which a Christian is not firmly obliged unto. Tell me
(says Augustine) what there is in all the ten commandments, what it is that a
Christian is not bound unto?

4. Because by faith we can pray, and by the prayer of faith obtain the spirit
of God, by whom we are supplied with needful strength to obey the Law: Fides
impetrat gratiam qu^ Lex impletur.
so August: faith obtaines grace, by which the Law is fulfilled: and Ambrose
says, that faith stablisheth the Law, because faith shows those duties to be
done which the Law commands to be done. Quia quae in Lege dicta sunt
facienda, per fidem ostenduntur facta. Ambros.
And thus have we strengthened our fourth argument, which has proved that the
Apostles of Christ abolished not the Law, but established it: and therefore it
is not without use and force in the new Testament.

In whomsoever must be a constant endeavor of conformity to the Law, 5 Res:
Every believer is bound to strive to conformity with the Law.
to those the Law is not abolished. This is plain, because where any thing is
to be regulated, there the rule is necessary. But every believer after
conversion must strive to a conformity with the Law, 1. in his inner man, 2. in
his outward man, 3. in his whole man.

1. In his inner man, 1. In his inner man*
he must delight in the Law of God, Romans 7. 22. both in his mind he must serve
the Law of God, verse 25. and in his affections he must love the Law. Psalm.
119. 97. Oh how love I thy Law. Psalm. 1. 1. The blessed man delights in the
Law of the Lord: not only in the knowledge of it (which an hypocrite may) but
in the conformity of their hearts and affections with it; they carry friendly
affections to the Law. Our Antinomists outboast all men in point of their
justification. Iustificati amici Legis efficiuntur. Ambr. in Romans 8.
But St: Ambrose his rule denies them to be justified, because they are not
friends with the Law. And Mr. Luther, whom they challendge as their friend, and
favourer, rangeth them among unjustified, Qui dicit se diligere Legem mentitur;
tam enim amamus Legem, quam homicida carc^rem.
and unregenerate men; of whom he says, that they love the Law, as well as a
murderer loves the prison, and so well love these the Law, and therefore by
his censure rejected among the unregenerate.

2. In his outward man, 2. In his outward man.
and action the justified man must testify that the Law of God is written in
his heart: so the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2. 17. He that fulfilleth the commandment
abides for ever. What is this commandment, and what is it to fulfill it? The
commandment is the same which he had delivered in the former part of the
chapter, consisting of two branches. 1. To believe in the Son of God, as our
only satisfaction, our only advocate, and the reconciliati on for the sins
of the world, v. 1,. 2. That we embrace him as our unerring pattern of our
lives, and walk as he walked, v. 6. Quest. How did he walk? Answ. 1. In the
general observation of the whole Law. 2. In special: In the perfect love of
the brethren, v. 9. and in the contempt of the world. Now must Christ walk in
the obedience of the commandments, and must not the Christian? Yes, says the
Apostle, Every Christian must fulfill the commandment.

Object. What will you teach justification by works?

Answ. No, we call not men to legal fulfilling of the commandment, but
evangelicall: as 1. when the mind delights in the Law of God, as holy, just
and good. 2. When the heart hides it, to conform unto it. 3. When the
affection desires to fulfill it, rejoices when he can attain to any
obedience, and sorroweth when he fails in it. 4. When in his actions he
begins that obedience which shall end in perfect fulfilling: this the
Gospel accepts, and accompteth a fulfilling of the commandment. Thus the
Apostle, Rom: 8. 4. The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: that is, Christ by his
meritorious obedience to the death, has not only freed us believers from the
condemning power of sin, but from the commanding power of it; and so renewed
our nature, as that the Law of God shall be fulfilled in us: and that two
ways. 1. By application of his own perfect fulfilling of it unto us; with
whom we by faith being united unto him, whatsoever is his being the head, is
ours also being members. 2. By our sanctification it is fulfilled in us
inchoately: that is, by obedience begun here, which at last shall be perfected,
so as not the least motion or desire contrary to the Law shall be left in our
nature. Thus is the righteousness of the Law fulfilled, not by us, but in us,
even here below; and is our rule both in earth and in heaven.

3. In his whole man, 3. In his whole man.
the believer must grow up to the image of Christ, and to the conformity of his
holiness, which is no other but the perfect image of God expressed in the Law.
This growth in grace, and sanctification, is called the rising up to full
holiness, as the Sun rises up higher till perfect day. Prove. 4. 18. The way
of the just is as the light, which shines more and more till perfect day. But
this cannot be done without the help of the Law, the only rule by which, and
the scope unto which it must be directed. For 1. how should a believer free
from sin know himself in the service of righteousness, as Romans 6. 18. if he
be under no command, or if his obedience be without rule or direction? 2. or
how should he discover his daily errors, to be humbled for them? how should he
remember from whence he is fallen? or be raised to do his first works (for
all this must further his sanctification) without the rule of the Law? 3. Or,
how should he see the imperfection, and uncleanness that cleaves to his best
duties, whereby he is kept from proud Pharisaisme, and the arrogant conceits of
these libertine perfectists; but by this stra^ght, and unalterable rule of the
Law? By all which reasons it appears it that the Moral law is not without
force and (...) unto beleve^^.

CHAP. 4.
Discovering the true grounds of opposing so clear a doctrine.

WE never read of heretic, Nisi dum Scriptu^ae bon^e intelliguntur o^^
been, and quod in ijs non ben^ intelligitur, etiam temere and audacter
asseritur; Aug. expos. in Ioh. trac. 18.
but he would challenge the sacred Scriptures as the grounds of his heresy,
which indeed are the only hammer of heresy: and even so these spiders, who
suck poison out of the sweetest flowers, set a flourish and varnish over their
poysonfull opinions with some Scriptures, either wrested and writhen out of
their own sense, or broken off from other Scriptures and themselves; Habent
^crip^uras^ a^ sp^ciem, non a^ salutem* De^ Baptis contra Donat. lib. 4*
for they have the Scriptures, as Aug: says, the Donatists had the Sacraments
for ostentation rather than for salvation. This vizard we shall put off in the
9 chapter, which shall vindicate the Scriptures foully mistaken and misapplied
by them, and restore them to their true sense and strength against themselves;
for no sword is so fit to take off Goliahs head as his own, and no weapons can
be more keen aagainst these, as those which we shall wrest out of their own
hands. But in the mean time we will first lay open the true grounds of this
unhappy schism, and the right rise of these palpable errors. And these I
observe to be three. 1. Gross ignorance: 2. swelling pride: 3. love of
licentiousness, joined with the hatred of holiness, The first maine ground of
this schism Ignorance
as we shall discover in their order. As truth has no enemy but falsehood,
neither light any contrary but darkness; so the clear rays and beams of
saving knowledge, issuing from Christ the Sun of righteousness, are darkened
and obscured in corrupt minds by the clouds and mists of ignorance, the common
mother of mistakes and errors: for what can a man in the dark do other than
miss his way, and mar his work? And what has made these audacious
Libertines bold but blindness? who while they busy their heads in idle and
fruitless speculations, and waste their discourses in idle and impertinent
questions, are grossly ignorant in the very principles of Catechism, Hi quidem
hom^nes indocti sunt, ac idiotae, qui non usque adeo evolvendis chartis sunt
exercitati, ut exijs de^^ria sua addisc^re potuerint. Instruct. advers. Libert.
cap. 1.
and far to seek in the very lowest grounds of religion. I remember Mr.
Calvin's observation concerning the same sectaries of his time: That whereas
other heresies were raised, and defended by men of learning, wit, education,
and reading: this was set on foot, and maintained by idiots, rude, and
illiterate men, that never learned their frenzy by turning books, but in some
cobblers or artificers shops and places of rude resort: for the basest school
(says he) will serve to teach a man to blaspheme God: and to prove his
assertion, he names the two chief champions, who in his time raised and
spread it about Geneva, both well known to him and drew a great multitude after
them; Alter cubicularius, alter hostiarius libenter fieri sustinuer^t. Cap 4.
c^usdem libri.
of whom one would willingly have had the preferment of an hostler or porter;
and the other of a chamberlain or tapster; fit captains for their skill to
levy, and lead such a band: and even such are the bricks that at this day are
framed out of such clay; a base sort of people, whose ignorance (in the high
conceit of knowledge) lays them open to delusion, and wrappeth them in errors,
so as none that savor of liberty comme^h amiss unto them: whereof while I
give a list, or catalogue, let none think that I father any child on them but
their own (if they will own their own writings) or any opinion, but such as
for the loosnesse of it, and likeness with the rest of the brood, will father
it self.

I know I have to deal with men as slippery as eeles, who can play fast and
loose with their own tenants at their pleasure (for what can hold them whom
Gods Law cannot) Sure I am, many of them will deny those to be their opinions,
or in this sense; or reject them on some private persons, or absolutely deny
what they resolutely hold, if any way they may either advantage themselves, or
disadvantage their impug^er. Nor herein I am not uncharitable: It is not long
since one of their Masters (in the hearing of a Minister, June 12.
who himself related the story unto me) taught a number of silly women
gathered into his house on the saboth day; That the Law was wholly abolished:
That God could see no sin in the justified: That they were as perfectly pure
as the Angels; yea as Christ himself: with great vehemence and contention both
establishing these and the like grounds and principles of his Catechism, and
reviling our legal Preachers, that lead men into a dead faith. But upon the
thursday after, meeting the same Minister at the High Commission Court, and
fearing some danger toward him; he disclaimed to him with as much
earnestness, all that he had then taught in every particular. The Minister
only dismissing him with admonition, to consider how he could answer God and
his own conscience, in seducing so many silly women against his knowledge,
only to maintain his teeth. It shall not much trouble me whether they own
them or renounce them: I avow them to be errors, and not only creeping in the
dark, but emboldening themselves into the light, and such as are very
prejudicial to many well-meaning but weak minds, for whose satisfaction and
settling I have set them down as I have met with them in their papers, with
some short antidot and preservative against them, intending rather a short
survey, than any large refutation of them.

1 ERROR.
That Christ came to abolish the Moral Law: and that the Gospel takes away all
obedience to the commandments: and that true faith stands at defiance with
working and doing.

Answ. This threefold error arises out of a threefold ignorance.

1. Out of the ignorance of the end of Christ's coming, Ignorance of the end of
Christ's coming.
who says expressly, that he came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it: in
himself legally; in believers evangelically: as we have proved largely in the
former chap: reas. 3.

2. In the ignorance of the nature of the Gospel; 2. Of the nature of the
Gospel.
which is so far from taking away all obedience to the Law, as that it indeed
teaches and requires obedience unto it; not whereby we perform the Law; but
testify our faith in the Gospel; and is therefore called the obedience of
faith. (...).
The Law indeed calls for personal obedience to satisfy and justify before
God, Romans 1. 5.
but so does not the Gospel; but only for an obedience to testify our love
to Christ, who has satisfied it for us: for this is testified by keeping the
commandments. Ioh. 14. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my
commandments. What love then in these men, that will keep no commandments?

Object. Our love makes us keep his commandments: but what is that to the
commandments of the Law?

Answ. As if Christ did not command the same love and duties in the Moral Law.
See Matthew. 22. 37, 38. where Christ enjoyneth the young man all the duties of
both tables. 1 Ioh. 3. 23. This is his commandment, that we should believe,
and love one another. Is this his commandment of any other love than that
which is the sum of the second table? and what were the commandments of the
Apostles, but evangelicall commandments, and commandments of Christ? and yet
they commanded duties of the Law. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. Ye know what commandments we
gave you by the Lord Jesus. What were they? Such as concerned fornication, v.
3. and oppression and fraud, v. 6. and were not these the same duties of the
Law?

The 3 error flows from ignorance of the nature of faith; 3. Of the nature of
faith.
which is so far from renouncing obedience, that it is never severed from
obedience; and it is not true faith that works not by love: for what is it to
believe? it is not only to assent to what the scripture says; but to adhere
and cleave unto it, and to the Lord in the obedience of it: as Henoch by faith
walked with God; Abraham by faith left his Country; abode in the land of Canaan
as a stranger; offered his son Isaac, etc. And whence is it that obedience is
called a fruit of faith? for every act of grace must rise from the root of
that grace, as every fruit from his own root; so as works of charity are
rooted in charity, which is a distinct grace from faith: yet are they called
fruits of faith, because the doctrine of faith enjoynes them, and the grace of
faith inclines the soul unto them; and because faith receives the spirit of
Christ for sanctification, as well as the merit of Christ for justification.
But why do they exclaim against us for preaching and embracing a dead faith,
while they obtrude on their proselites a faith which must not work by love;
which, if they will believe S. James, is a dead faith

2 ERROR.
That godly life has nothing to do with keeping commandments.

Answ. The Scripture says, Godly life is nothing but keeping commandments.
that godly life is nothing else but the fulfilling of the commandment, and
will of God revealed. 1 Ioh. 2. 17. He that fulfilleth the commandment abides
for ever: which is to be meant of evangelicall fulfilling, not legal. See
chap. 3. arg. 5. One thing it is to exercise good works in way of obedience,
another to rely on them in way of righteousness.

2. Our charge is in every thing to prove and try what is the good and
acceptable will of God: and have we nothing to do with commandments the rule
of trial? certainly we can neither do any just thing without the rule of
justice, nor prosecute it justly.

3. The life of Christ was most godly, yet was said of him, Heb. 10. 7. In the
volume of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy will: and
hereunto must every member be framed that must be in conformimity with the head.

4. Not any duty of godly life can be acceptable or comfortable, but that which
is warranted by a commandment, and we must know it so to be; there can be no
right worship, or worshipper, but he that does the will of God. Ioh. 9. 31. If
any be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. So do thou
express love, show mercy, execute justice, or practice any virtue, and not by
virtue of any commandment? he that will not hear the Lord, saying, What I
command thee, that do only: shall hear, Who required these things at your
hands?

3 ERROR.
That blessedness is merely passive, and therefore it is in vain to put men
upon actions for that end.

Answ. It is so to us in respect of merit and price; but in respect of
fruition, it is obtained instrumentally by faith which is an action, and is
said to be ours* yea our own; for the just lives by his own faith: Hab. 2. 4.
not because we are authors or causes of it, but subjects in whom God works
it, and because by it things believed become our own.

2. We are mere patients in the causes of blessedness; We are mere patients
in the causes of blessedness, but not in the conditions of it.
but in respect of conditions we are not so: for as we said of faith, we may
also say of good works; God enableth to them, but man works them, and walks
in the way of them to blessedness: not that our works are causes, but conditions
without which blessedness is not attained. See Matthew. 25. 35.

3. This assertion bewrays great ignorance of the proper and present use of
sanctification, and the duties of it; which they conceive as legally urged, to
help the believer in his title and right to the blessed inheritante purchased
in heaven: Christ's righteousness only gives right to heaven; but our
sanctification gives a fitness and aptitude to it.
whereas only Christ's righteousness and merits give right and title unto
heaven; but yet the grace of sanctification gives us an aptitude and fitness
unto it: for, without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. and, no
unclean thing shall enter into the gates of that City. Rev: 21. 27
Yea it is proceeding in sanctification to the measure, and stature of Christ,
that fits us to the vision, and fruition of the glorious presence of God; and
for the full possession of that heavenly inheritance.

4 ERROR.
That the justified person is free from all spot of sin, and perfectly
righteous: for justice requires that a man should be as perfect as by creation
before acceptance.

Answ. 1. Justice requires that Gods wrath should be pacified, and a
righteousness procured whereby the sinner may be accepted to mercy; but not a
plenary and personal perfection.

2. They show gross ignorance in the nature of justification, Justification
freeth the believer from the condemnation of sin, but not from inhabitation.
which frees the believer from the condemnation of sin, but not from the
inhabitation or molestation: for sin is in the godly after justification. 1
Ioh. 1. 8. If we (that is, we that walk in the light, and have communion one
with another) say we have no sin, we deceive our selves.

3. Faith it self in the justified is sincere, but not perfect; for as we know
things believed but in part, so we believe but in part; our eye is not more
dim to see, than our hand is weak to receive: yea even in the best faith is
imperfect, and mingled with doubting. Moses ^aith quailed at the Rock; Elias
in a passion would be dead; yea even Abraham himself, who was strong in faith,
though he doubted not of infidelity, yet he doubted of infirmity, Genesis 15. 3.
By long delay, his faith was sore shaken, when he said, that Eliezer of
Damascus must be his heir. Now would I know how that which is it self
imperfect, Imperfect faith cannot make perfect.
and not free from spot of sin, can make another altogether spotless. See
more hereof in the second ground of this opposition.

CHAP. 5.
Containing four more pernicious and erroneous opinions.

5 ERROR.
That no action of the believer after justification is sin, for unto faith
there is no sin; for all sin past, present, and to come, is taken away by
the blood of Christ, and no sin remains in the kingdom where faith
reigns, and sits judge; it is out of the Laws element to judge of this
blessed condition: Neither can God allow any work that is defective in the
believer.

Answ. Here is the ghost of H. N. in this piece of new Gospel, which tells us a
dream of an absolute reign of faith, where is still remaining sin. True it
is that faith deposes the reign of sin, that it rule not, but so as that it
self never reigns in this life without the presence and assault of sin; for
such as say they have no sin with their faith, deceive themselves.

2. It is enough for the state of this life, that faith frame the heart to
willing and sincere obedience* though not to perfect and absolute.

3. It argues their gross ignorance in the Scriptures, Persons of believers
imperfect, yet pleasing to God.
which affirm, that both persons and duties of believers, though imperfect and
defective, are yet pleasing. 1. For their persons, God looks upon them in
Christ, and pronounces of them, that though they be black, yet they are
comely. Prove. 12. 22. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him. Psalm.
147. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in his people. Acts 10. 35. In every Nation
he that fears him is accepted of him. 2. For their duties, And duties also.
though they be imperfect, yet they please him, because their persons do. Mal.
3. 4. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasing unto thee.
Phil. 4. 18. An odor of sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing
unto God: speaking of the alms and charity of that Church. Col. 3. 20.
Children obey your parents, for this is wel-pleasing to the Lord. And our
comfort and happiness is, that he pleases to accept from us that which is
sincere, though weak, and imperfect.

6 ERROR.
That our Preachers teach Popery in persuading good works to further men's own
salvation.

Answ. Our doctrine and practice herein agrees with the doctrine of the
Scriptures, Godly Ministers preach not popery in calling for good works to
further men's salvation.
and with the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and because the Sectaries
cast this imputation upon godly Ministers, to weaken their authority among
their people, it will not be amiss in few words to clear it: and that in
these positions.

1. We teach according to Scripture, That every good work must rise from a
good worker, for the tree must first be good: and men gather not figs of
thistles. So as a good work is proper to a justified person, Non praecedit
iustificandum, sed sequitur iustificatum, Aug.
and the use of it cannot be to justify, because he is justified already.

2. We teach ye necessity of ye duties of ye Law to salvation; not as causes or
merits of our salvation or justification; Non necessitate efficientiae, sed
necessitate praesentiae.
which were to dethrone Christ, and preach Popery, but as a way and means
appointed by God to walk into heaven: Via regni non causa regnandi.
and so the Apostle preached them necessary. Tit: 3. 14. Let ours also learn
to maintain good works for necessary uses: and every simple man knows, that
the holding of the way must needs further the journey, and conduce to the
place intended.

3. We carefully always distinguish between the justice of works,
Distinguish between the justice of works, and the presence of them.
which conduces nothing to salvation; and the presence of works, without
which there is no expectation of salvation: for without their presence all
faith is dead, Iam: 2. 26.
and all religion vain. Iam: 1. 26.


4. We distinguish in this doctrine, the principal efficient cause of
righteousness and salvation, from the isntrumental. Is it a good reason, that
because Christ is the principal efficient, The meritorious cause of salvation,
excludes not isntrumental.
and the only meritorious cause of our salvation; that therefore all the
isntrumental and adjuvant causes and means of salvation must be cut off and
cast away? True it is that God alone decrees our salvation, Christ alone
meriteth it, the spirit alone seals it: but yet the Gospel reveals it, and
that saves; faith apprehends it, and that saves: the Ministers they preach
it, and they save, namely ministerially. 1 Timothy: 4. 16. Thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee. Did the Apostle write popery, or derogate from
Christ, in saying that Timothy did save himself and others? or is it such a
piece of popery to say, that the use of the means does further the end?

5. What will you say of St. Paul, who commands us to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling? It seems he thought that men must do something
toward their own salvation: Qui fecit te sinc te, non salvat te sine te.
as that Father did, who says, that though God made us without our selves, yet
he saves us not without our selves. And Phil: 4. 17. when he calls duties
of beneficence and charity, a fruit furthering our reckoning; that is, as a
means, not as a merit. I would know how they should further our reckoning, and
not further our salvation. True it is that mercy accepts that for a
furthering of our reckoning, which in strict justice would not go for payment:
but yet seeing the same mercy takes us into the work, we may per^wade also
with the Apostle, that Christians would be still thus furthering their own
reckoning. The same Apostle speaking of the same duties, 2 Cor: 9. 6. calls
them a sowing, and says, He that sows liberally* shall reap liberally.
Whether do not these men think, that sowing is a furtherance to the harvest?
Surely S. Paul thought so, and yet minded not to strengthen popery: for neither
is he that sows any thing, neither he that reapeth any thing, but God that
gives the promise, and increase. The same Apostle speaking of the duties of
Christian suffering, says not only that they turn to the salvation of the
Saints, Phil: 1. 9. but also that our light and momentany afflictions cause
unto us an eternal weight of glory. and do they not then further our
salvation? and what does the Apostle Peter say less? when he says, that by
addition, and exercise of graces, 2 Pet. 1. 11.
an entrance is ministered abundantly into the kingdom of Christ. And why does
the Apostle excite Christians every day to further themselves in the way of
salvation, as runners by speed and strength get nearer the goal; if we may not
urge the doctrine of good works, and Christian duties, in pretense of the
Laws abolition? which certainly was as much abolished in the Apostles days as
now?

7 ERROR.
That not as much as any outward worship of God required in the Law is to be
performed by true believers since the coming of Christ: because all the
worship of the new Testament is inward and spiritual. Ioh: 4. 23. The hour
comes, etc. and to receive the doctrine of the Gospel by faith, is to worship
the Father: Neither has any other good work done in obedience to the Moral
Law any reward: because all is the free gift of God.

Answ. 1. Here is a bundle of errors tied together, all for the upholding of
atheistical liberty; whereby they would trample under foot all Gods sacred
ordinances at once, and loose themselves from all care, and conscionable use of
the means of salvation: these wild conceits come in as the ill favored lean
kine in Pharaohs dream, that eat up all the fat kine. For how wild and loose
a consequent is it, that because God will be worshipped in all places,
therefore he must not be worshipped outwardly: or because he will be
worshipped spiritually, therefore he will not be worshipped externally.

2. How madly and confusedly is all worship inward and outward, resolved into a
fantastical faith, neither required in the Law, nor evidenced by works, as
the faith of the Gospel; nor distinguished from the faith of Devils, who by
assent receive the doctrine of the Gospel, and believe it? This is mechanical
divinity beseeming a shop, for never came it out of the schools: That there is
no worship since Christ but inward: nor that, that inward worship is nothing
but faith: nor that, that faith is nothing but to receive the doctrine of the
Gospel.

3. As simple is that they say, that no works have reward, because all is free
gift; as if free gift and reward cannot stand together: the reward being freely
promised by God, and God not unjust to forget either his own promise, or our
labor of love.

4. Are they such strangers in the Scriptures, that they have not read neither
of recompense nor reward? not indeed merited by the worker, nor deserved by the
work; but reckoned (not to the work but) to the worker being in Christ; and
bestowed of free grace, for the faithfulness of the promiser, not for the
desert of the work, or worker. In which sense, let them run and read these
places. Prove. 19. 17. Blessed is he that has mercy on the poor, the Lord will
recompense him that which he has given. Matthew: 10. 42. A cup of cold water,
shall not lose his reward. Mat: 10. 25. Come ye blessed, etc. for ye gave me
meat. Rev: 22. 12. Behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give
to every man according as his work shall be. And Psalm: 19. In keeping the
commandments there is great reward.

8 ERROR.
That God sees no sin in the justified: for he sees no iniquity in Jacob:
Numb: 23. 21.

Answ. Unhappy was his schism, and unworthy was his suffering, that wilfully
disturbed the peace of the Church, and ruined his own peace, only for a strife
of words, and mistaking a phrase of Scripture which he would not understand.
How God sees no sin in his children.
The phrase is a borrowed speech (as all may see) ascribing eyes unto God; and
taken from the custom of men, who turn away their eyes from that they would
not see. Gods eye is his knowledge; and this knowledge is twofold. 1. A simple
eye an^ ^^owledge, 1. Simplex rerum notitia.
whereby he cannot but see all things, and actions that ever were, or shall be.
Heb: 4. 13. All things are naked to him with whom (...) have to do. Ier: 23.
24. Can any man hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him? Thus
he sees all the sins of all good and bad. Psalm: 69. 5. O Lord thou know
my foolishnes, and my faults are not hid from thee.

2. A respective eye or knowledge, 2. Scientia coniuncta cum Dei voluntate.
joined with purpose and affection: and thus what he cannot but see with the
eye of his simple knowledge; he sees not with this judiciary eye: so he sees
not the sins of the elect with the eye of severity; he discernes the sin,
but not with purpose of revenge.

When God is pleased thus to behold sin, he is said in Scripture not to see
it. 1. Because he sees it not to punish it; 2. not to impute it or lay it to
the charge of the sinner; 3. when he sees it to pardon it, and to cover it,
yea and to cure it. And this phrase of not seeing sin, is the same with those
other, of casting sins behind his back, Isay 38. 17. and casting them into
the bottom of the Micah 7. 10. of putting them away as a mist, Isay 44. 22.
all improper and metaphorical speeches; but such as deceivers wrappe
themselves in, to hide and color their ignorant and witless schism; Si Deus
texit peccata, noluit advertere; si noluit advertere, noluit animadvertere; si
noluit animadvertere, no^luit (...)* maluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere. Quid
est enim Deum videre peccata, nisi punire peccata? In Psalm. 32.
taking that in the simple and literal sense, which is to be understood in the
metaphorical, and respective: and willingly shuffling and confounding those
things, the distinguishing whereof would help them back into the way of truth
and sobriety. This is also St. Augustines exposition of the phrase: What is it
for God to see sin, but to punish sin?

But for a man to say, that God can no way see the sins of believers, is to
open a wide gate to all libertinisme, epicurisme, atheism, and whatsoever else
is an enemy to the fear of God, and the awefull regard of his all-seeing eye;
and the expression was as foolish, as the conceit it self is novell, and
false* The sins of believers are covered as close from Gods sight, as this
salt-celler is now covered with my hat. Can you now (says he) see this
salt-celler? no more can God see the covered sins of believers. The man did
not consider that God could see under the hat, though his disciple could not.

Somewhat would be said against this ignorant conceit, to instruct and stay
such ingorants as are teachable, and willing to see the truth. He that must
bring every action good and bad into judgment, must see every action.
And therefore thus I reason.

1. He that must bring every work into judgment, must see every work: but
God will bring every work into judgment, whether it be good or evil:
therefore he must see every work, as well those that he brings into the
judgment of absolution, as those which he brings into the judgment of
condemnation.

2. What God sees once by his simple and absolute knowledge, he ever sees, by
one eternal and simple act, Nunquam vartatur Dei aspectus, nihil novi unqua^
vidit, nulla mutatio (...) in Dei scientiam, cum ipsa scientia Dei est ipsa Dei
essentia; and in Deo nil nisi Deus.
which is not capable of change, or forgetfulness; not now seeing, and now not
seeing; he never sees any new thing, but sees and knows all things at once
with one and the same sight; for the knowledge of God is the essence of God:
according to that ancient and approved saying, Nothing is in God but God.

3. What God directs and orders to a certain end, he must needs see and
know: but he directs and orders all the sins of believers (though past
and pardoned) to a certain end; namely to his own glory, to the praise o^ his
mercy, and to their humiliation, repentance and salvation: therefore he must
needs see that which he so wisely and powerfully orders.

4. One Attribute of God destroys not another, his mercy must not destroy his
wisdom; he must see the sins that he pardons, and in which he magnifieth
the riches of his mercy: and if God knew not all evils of whomsoever, his
knowledge were imperfect, Cognitio mali bona est.
and he should want some good knowledge; for the knowledge of evil is good.

5. What God makes them see in themselves, himself must necessarily see; but
he makes the believer see, and confess and bewail his sin, even past and
pardoned: therefore himself sees them much more. For we have no eye, nor
faculty of mind to discern any thing, Nihil in nobis (...) quae est a Deo,
vel (...) quo^ est a (...)* vel gratiae qua datur in Christo, quin Deo notum
est, and totum adprime cognitum.
but from him that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, John 1
Does he work in us the knowledge o^ our sins, and he not know them? Nay does
he enjoyne the Saints to set before his eye daily their sins in the humble
confession of them and prayer for pardon, and does he not yet see them? Do we
not hear David confessing the sins of his youth long after they were not only
committed, but remitted? Psalm. 25. and does he not confess with humility those
foul sins, after he had a special message from God, that they were
pardoned? Psalm. 51. And in the new Testament did not Paul long after his
conversion and justification, confess sins pardoned? I was a blasphemer, and
a persecuter, etc. And did not God now see and know these sins past and
pardoned; or not hear their confessions?

6. If the spirit of God maintains a continual combat against the sins of
the justified, then he sees those sins against which he fights: for we
must not think that the spirit of light and wisdom either fights in the
dark, or blindfold; or that the elect can ever find the power of the spirit
subduing those sins which he cannot see.

7. He that records the sins of the elect many years and ages after they
are pardoned, He that records sins past, and pardoned many ages before, must
needs see them.
sees sin in the justified: for how could he inspire his servants in that
which he did no way see? But so does the Lord. For of David was said long after
his death, that he was right save in the matter of Vriah. Rahab was called an
harlot many ages after her, and yet the holy Ghost forgot not that she was a
believer. Heb. 11. 31. By faith Rahab the harlot perished not. Elias was said
to be a (...) subject to the same infirmities, James 5. God that sees the
infirmities of the Saints so many ages after, sees and knows greater errors
much more, though not to impute them.

Object. But these were in the old Testament; but since the death of Christ
God cannot see sin pardoned.

Sol. O gross ignorance! Many examples hereof in the new Testament
Was the death of Christ less efficacious in matter of remission of sin, and
righteousness to believers in the old Testament than to us in the new? was
he not the same lamb slain from the beginning of the world? even the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever?

2. Do they never read the Scriptures, or do they read them, and wink at
such pregnant and plentiful examples of believers recorded, and yet many ages
before pardoned? 1 Corinthians. 6. 11. speaking of thieves, covetous, etc. And such
were you, but now ye are justified, now ye are sanctified. Did not God and
his spirit see sin past, and pardoned in the justified* Romans 6. 19. Ye did
give up your members weapons of unrighteousness. These were sins past and
pardoned in justified persons in the new Testament, and after Christ's death.
Ephesians: 2. 11. Remember that ye were Gentiles, in the flesh, without God:
aliants without hope: it seems God saw, and remembered sins past, and
pardoned, and puts them in remembrance of them. Col. 3. 7. The Apostle
charge the Colossians with what they had been, and in what fearful sins
they had walked, though now they were justified. Did the Lord charge them with
that he did not see? I might be abundant in such testimonies: but if these
places cannot clear this truth to them, let them still shut their eyes against
the Sun, and hide themselves in their own thickets; to enjoy more securely
all their licentious courses; as those wicked men that say, Tush God sees us
not, there is no knowledge in the most High.

CHAP. 6.
Containing four other as libertine and dangerous Errors as the former.

9 ERROR.
That God is not displeased with the sins of the justified, and much less
corrects them; for he is fully satisfied in Christ for all the sins of the
elect: and how can he be displeased with them for that, for which he has
received full satisfaction?

Answ. 1. The perfect good must for ever hate that which is perfectly evil: so
as God can never be at agreement with sin in any; nay he so hates sin even
in the justified, that he maintains in them a perpetual combat, and
irreconciliable war against it.

2. They conceive not that anger and love may be at the same time tempered in a
father to his children, whom because he loves he chasteneth. Ira Dei est vel
But this hatred is not a simple hatred, 1. Paterna et castigans quam vibrat in
filios
or an hostile wrath, or a revenging anger, such as he puts forth upon
contumacious sinners; 2. Hostilis and exterminans in contumaces.
but a loving, fatherly and fruitful chastisement upon sons: neither does
this wrath redound and seize upon their persons, but upon their sins. But
these confused men not distinguishing between persons and sins, cannot
conceive how God can hate their sins, and at the same time love their
persons. Neither can they apprehend aright the nature of reconciliation, which
is a freedom from revenge upon the persons; because they are sons; but not a
freedom from the chastisement of their sins, for then, says the Apostle,
Heb: 12. 8.
they were bastards and no sons.

Object. But ha^h not Christ borne all the punishment of the sins of
believers?

Answ. Yes all the punishment of malediction, Christ has borne all our
punishment of malediction, but not of correction.
which is indeed properly called punishment; but not of correction: for we must
daily bear his cross, and fulfill the remainders of the sufferings of Christ.

2. Christ has most fully satisfied the justice of God for the sins of the
elect; so as no punishment satisfactory remains to purge or satisfy for
sin past, but there remains a monitory castigation, to bring the Saints to
mourn for sin past, and to watch against sins to come.

Object. But can God punish one sin twice; once in Christ, and again in the
person himself?

Answ. No, if we understand it of the punishment of divine revenge, and not of
fatherly correction; intended not for perdition, but for ^rudition, and
caution, and to make them partakers of his holiness.

Object. It is true, the godly are afflicted, but these afflictions have no
respect to sin, but only for trial.

Answ. What none? are they not merited by sin? are they not from the just
God, whose justice cannot punish the guiltless? Far be it from thee to do
this thing, to punish the righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18. 25. Surely
correction must needs imply offense, and affliction comes not without respect
of sin, either past, to correct it; or present, to mourn for it; or to come,
to prevent it. Micah 1. 5. For the wickedness of Jacob, and for the sin of
Israel is all this. Lam. 3. 34. Man suffers for his sin. Micah 7. 9. The
Church will bear the wrath of God, because she had sinned.

Object. Yea this was in the old Testament; but since that time Christ has
dyed, and actually borne the punishment of sin: and you can bring no such
place out of the new Testament.

Answ. Has Christ done less for believers in the old Testament than in the
new? Believers in the new Testament corrected for finne.
did they bear more wrath for their sin than we? or did not Christ carry as
much wrath from the^ as from us? was not his death as virtuous to the first
ages of the world, as to the last? or did the virtue of it begin at the time of
his passion? or is not the faith of Messiah to come alike precio^s as the faith
of him come already?

2. But have we no place in the new Testament to show believers corrected for
sin? What is that, 1 Cor. 11. For this cause many are weak, and are sick,
and many die? It is too rash to say (as one) that these were carnal, and
hypocrites; unless they be carnal and hypocrites, that must not be condemned
with the world. 1 Pet. 4. 17. Judgment must begin at Gods house. Heb. 12. 6.
He scourges every son whom he receives. Why? because they are sons, or
because they have sins?

Object. Ioh. 9. 3. Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents; therefore
afflictions are not for sin: and Jobs afflictions were all for trial, not
for sin.

Answ. 1. In general. Difference of the judgment of the godly and wicked
wherein.
The difference of the judgments of the godly and the wicked, is not either 1.
in the meriting cause, for both are merited by sin. 2. Nor in their matter,
being materially both one; the same sword, the same plague, the same famine,
the same blindness, sickness and death. 3. Nor in the ground of them; for
both are threatened and inflicted by the same Law. 4. Nor in their sense and
feeling; for there is no difference between the smart of sons and slaves. But
the difference is in, 1. the person inflicting: 2. in the persons bearing and
suffering: 3. in the end of God which is not the same: 4. in the fruit and
issue which are much different in different persons: the serious consideration
of these grounds would let them see wherein their error lurketh, if they will
not be willingly ignorant.

2. For the instances: First, of the blind man. I answer, that the position of
one cause is not the remotion of another, where many concur: neither does the
affirming of the principal cause deny the less principal. God in this
judgment principally intended his own glory, in the honoring of his Son,
and not principally the sin either of the parents or son. 2. Christ
speaks not of the meritorious cause of this judgment, but of the final
cause: and so the objection is not to the purpose.

Secondly, The like we may say of Job, the principal end of his affliction was
for trial, and not for correction: but this excludes not the meritorious
cause, nor proves that there was no correction in it, at least might not be.

Object. But Christ was extremely punished, but not for sin; and therefore
there are afflictions without sin.

Answ. This is as impertinent a cavil, as the case is singular. Christ had no
sin in him, but had sin on him: he had none inherent, but had enough
imputed: he had none of his own, but the infinite burden of all the sins of
all his members lay upon him; for which he was plagued of God, Maximu^
homicida, latro, et haereticorum h^retic^ssimus. Luther
because he stood before God as the greatest malefactor that ever was: not
because he had proper sin, but appropriated; not because he did any sin,
but was made a sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him: Gods justice could not have punished him, if he had not stood before him
as a sinner. So the objection turns quite against themselves.

Object. But Christ by his Kingly power reigns to maintain in the conscience
the peace procured, both against the Law, and sin, and the Devil, and the
world, and worldly reason.

Answ. Peace without disturbance neither within nor without the Apostle knew
not, Romans 7. nor yet Christ himself, who so left his legacy of peace of his
Disciples, as that notwithstanding in the world they must have affliction.

2. It is enough that Christ reigns to maintain our peace by weakening and
subduing the power of sin daily, although he totally and wholly abolish it
not here below; and fatherly and loving correction rather furthers and
strengthens his reign, than hinder or weaken it in us.

10 ERROR.
That justified persons have no more to do with repentance; and to repent of
every particular sin is to believe that a man is not perfectly justified, or
at once* but by peecemeale as sin is committed; yea it is to undervalue the
sufferings of Christ, as not ha^ing sufficiently satisfied for all sins past,
present, and to come.

Answ. A desperate principle, as much abolishing the Gospel, as any of the
former does the Law: and indeed no enemy to the Law can be a friend to the
Gospel. But we must know, 1. That never can man be free from repentance, till
he be free from sin to be repented of; Believers must continue their
repentance
which can never be shaken off in this world. The whole life is but one day of
repentance, and repentance is the work of that whole day; and who but a profane
libertine would not have his Master find him so doing? Assidue peccantibus
assidua poenitentia est necessaria. ^ugust*
We sweep our houses every day, and wash our hands every day, because one
contracteth dust, and the other soil every day: much more have we need to
cleanse daily the houses of our hearts. See my treatise in^ituled, The practice
of Repentance, Cap. 10. and therein many reasons for con^inuance of repentance.

2. They forget that David and Peter repented after says: That the Church of
Pergamus, that kept the name of Christ, and had not denied the faith, must yet
repent her self, else Christ will come against her, Rev. 2. 12. and 16. And
how much cause have the best men to repent of their daily sins, that must
repent daily of their best duties, which they must confess are as a filthy
clout?

3. Although the spirit by faith assures the believer, that all his sins are
satisfied by the death of Christ; yet the spirit also persuades the heart,
that in this way of humiliation and repentance we shall receive assurance of
remission of daily sins, and particular infirmities: for else the spirit
should fail in his office, which is to bring even the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem (that is, true believers) to the fountain of grace,
and stir up in them deep sorrow and earnest lamentation in seeking pardon for
daily sins, and special provocations against the Lord, whom by their sins
they have pierced.

4. Prayer for forgiveness of daily sins is an act of repentance enjoined by
Christ on him that has formerly repented, is justified, and calls God
Father; as in that petition of his most holy prayer, Forgive us our trespasses.

5. They that overflow with love, and outboast all others in their pretense of
love, which is so strong and active as they need no other mover, forget that
increase of love to God must needs increase repentance and sorrow for offending
him: if love be great, so will sorrow, as in Peter. In a word, their harvest of
joy is too hasty, and will prove like an inheritance hastily gotten: this is
not the time of wiping away all our tears, nor is our dripping seedtime yet
over, but even we sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the
redemption of our bodies, Romans 8. 23.

11 ERROR.
That no believer is to pray for pardon of sin, seeing all his sins past,
present, and to come are already pardoned.

Answ. Then must you blot out that petition of the Lords prayer, Believers must
pray for pardon of sin pardoned.
wherein he has taught those that call God Father, to pray daily, Forgive us
our trespasses: which petition implies (as we have showed) daily repentance,
even in them that have repented. A man would wonder what shift they make to
repeat the Lords prayer, or to pray in his words, unless they have learned the
trick of the old Pelagians, Modestiae tantum causa, non ex humana
fragilitatis conscientia. Ierom.
who would repeat the pe^ition for modesty sake, but not out of the sense or
conscience of their own need; which modesty is indeed a lie, and fained
humility.

2. Prayer for pardon will stand with assurance of pardon, and assurance of
pardon will not stand without prayer for pardon; for then are we assured of
pardon, when we can pray for pardon, God being found favorable only in his
own way.

3. Though we know our sins pardoned, yet must we pray for pardon; neither
does assurance of pardon and mercy dead our prayer for pardon, but quicken it.
Christ knew his sheep should never perish, Ioh. 10. 28. but yet he prays for
them, that they might not perish, Ioh. 17. 11. He knew that his Father would
glorify him, but yet prays that his Father would glorify him, Ioh. 17. Who
will say this his prayer was needless? Paul knew that God would deliver him
from every evil way, yet prayed for it. So though we know our sins to be
pardoned, yet it is not needless to pray for pardon.

4. Though God in heaven have by an eternal sentence blotted out the sins of
the believer in the first act of his conversion, We must pray for pardon of
sin in the court of our own consciences, as well as in the court of heaven.
and this sentence can never be blotted out, yet we may and must pray for
pardon of sin; namely, that this sentence of pardon may be pronounced in our
own consciences: and thus it seems David prayed earnestly for forgiveness of
his sins, Psalm. 51. when he knew long before that God had forgiven them; for
Nathan had told him, that God had put away his sin: he prayed that God would
not only forgive his sin in heaven, but even in his own heart also.

5. Though our sins be forgiven even in our own consciences, And for a more
comfortable measure of assurance.
yet because of the stain and guilt of new sins our assurance is sometimes
weakened, and not so comfortable, we must pray for pardon of sin still; that
is for a greater, and more comfortable measure of assurance, and a sweeter
taste and apprehension of Gods favor in remission of sin; for who can taste
of this sweet honey, and not long for more? and whereas our weakness cannot so
firmly apprehend it, and our corruption does daily weaken it, we must pray for
the continuance of our comfort and mercy; whereof prayer is a principal means.

6. Suppose we have pardon of sin in the beginnings of it, And in the full and
final fruits and effects of pardon.
and some sweet fruits, yet we must pray for it in all the fruits, in all the
effects, in the full comfort and accomplishment of it; for by remission of
sin we are now freed from the damnation of sin, and from the domination of
it; yet are we not freed from all the remainders of sin, nor from all fruits,
and molestation of sin: for notwithstanding the pardon of our sins, we have the
presence of sin, and are in conflict with terrors of conscience, Gods just
desertions, calamities, afflictions, and fear of death. Now must we pray
according to our faith for full pardon, even for the full acquittance promised,
and that solemn sentence of absolution by the mouth of the Judge, which shall
fully and really give us complete possession of Gods whole mercy; which we now
have by right and title, but not in all the fruits, effects, and full comfort
of it; and never do the Saints pray for Christ's coming without implication of
full and final remission of sins. All which manifestly bewray the black and
blockish ignorance of this erroneous assertion

12 ERROR.
That Preachers ought not to preach the Law to believers, whom the threatenings
of the Law concern not, as being out of the reach of the Law, and beyond all
fear of condemnation: and these legal Preachers deal very lewdly in bringing
men back to the obedience of the Law, and so make them seek righteousness in
themselves.

Answ. These are merry men, and might well set themselves on so merry a pin, if
the way to heaven were so wide and roomy as they imagine it. For 1. Neither can
they sin being in Christ if they would. 2. Neither if they should, could God
see it. 3. If he should chance to see it, he could not be displeased with it.
4. If he should be displeased, his hands are bound, he cannot correct it. 5.
Themselves ought not now to sorrow or repent for any sin any more. 6. It is
idle to pray for pardon of sin, which is already pardoned, whether it be past,
or present, or to come. 7. And now they must not so much as hear of their
sins any more, and all their religion is turned into a merriment, which they
call a meeting with such comfort as they never found before: but this comfort
will prove but a laughter in the face, when the heart has cause to be heavy.
For,

1. Is there nothing else to be feared of a Christian but final condemnation?
a child may fear to be whipped, though he fear not to be disinherited: Psalm.
52. 6. even the righteous shall see and fear.

2. A man may fear that which he is sure to escape; but this is a fear of
watchfulness, not of distrustfulnesse.

3. No man is so holy but has need of threatenings, and faith believes
threatenings as well as promises; not only barely apprehending them as true and
certain, but with application to decline them, and frame to obedience even in
regard of them. Holiest of men have need of threatenings.
This is plain, because even in state of innocence was use of the threatening
to keep our sinnelesse parents from sin: and Job a just and holy man by Gods
own testimony durst not lift up his hand against the fatherless: why? because
destruction from God was as a terror unto him. And even those that receive a
kingdom which cannot be shaken, must serve and please God with reverence and
fear; because Our God is a ^onsuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29.

4. Suppose the threatenings shall never take hold of a believer, may ^ot he
therefore hear of them? To hear them is not to cast him into them, but to
keep them off him; the hearing of legal threatenings is very useful to the
best. Quanto reatus ^er legem factus ^st gravio^, tanto immensitas grat^^e
facta est illustrior. Par:
1. It makes them relish and prize the promises of much the more, and stick
faster to them, and hold in the way unto them. 2. The hearing of threatenings
kindles a flame of love to God for delivering from them. 3. Incieth our
charity and compassion to our brethren, to help them from under them, and
provokes the Saints themselves to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil: 2. 11.

5. Are we lewd Preachers for urging the Law upon men? then why were not Christ
and his Apostles so, in pressing on believers the obedience of the law? Yea to
the law more strictly expounded than by the Scribes and Pharisees? and in urging
on them a righteousness exceeding the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: which was not an imputed righteousness of faith for justification
before God, but a righteousness of sanctification in their persons performed
through grace by themselves. So when our Lord affirms, that in the kingdom
of heaven, that is the Church of the new Testament, He that does the
commandments, and teaches men so to do, shall be called great: that is,
shall be highly esteemed: was he a lewd and false teacher, leading men away
from himself, and the grace of the Gospel? or if he were not, why are we so
for teaching the same doctrine?

6. No man can teach obedience of faith, The same works are both the works of
the Law, and of faith, how?
but therein he must teach the obedience of the Law also: for the same works
are both the works of the Law, and the works of faith; which are
distinguished, not divided. For example. Lex fidei aeque atque lex factoru^
ait, ne concupiscas; sed quod operum lex minando imperat, fidei lex credendo
impetrat, August:
Love or charity (which contains all the duties of the second table) is
called a work of the Law. Luke 10. 27. What is written in the Law? how read
thou? and he answered, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. Thus it is a
work of the Law in respect of canon, rule, direction. But it is called also a
fruit or work of faith. James 2. 17, 18. Show me thy faith by thy works: and,
faith works by love. Thus it is a work of faith in respect of the cause, and
adhaesion, being an inseparable issue of it. How can a man persuade love as a
work of faith, and not the same a work of the Law?

7. How false and absurd is it to say that Preachers teaching obedience to the
Law of God, teach men thereby to hang upon their own righteousness, or to
seek their justification by their own performances? Far are we from teaching
that Judicial righteousness, performed in way of justification; all which is
a filthy ragge in the sight of God and his strict justice. Isay 64, 6.
But we persuade a Christian righteousness of sanctification wrought by the
spirit of holiness; We call for obedience, not for justification, but for
sundry other ends
* of which holy obedience are many other uses (which they are loath to see)
besides the justifying of their persons in the sight of God. As, 1. It is
called for in way of Christian conversation, that our light may shine before
men. 2. In way of imitation of Christ our head, and of conformity of his
members to his righteousness, which derogateth nothing from his
righteousness. 3. In way of testification of our righteousness before God:
for He that does righteousness is righteous, 1 Ioh: 3. 7.

Thus having set down these twelve Articles of libertine and famelisticall
faith, I will content my self therewith, although I could have easily set
down twelve more, so fruitful and generative error is: but that I intended
in this only to give a proof of their gross ignorance in principles of
religion, which was that I undertook. I could easily have refelled that
mystical and spiritual (but fantastical union of theirs) with Christ before
faith; their sanctification before justification, their elevating the sin of
infidelity, (which strongly savours also of liberty) as that it is no sin;
Unbelief an high sin against the Law and Gospel. ^
or at least of the moral Law, wherein I will not strive; though I am sure the
Scripture makes it a sin of sins: John 3. The Law commands not expressly
faith in Christ: but implies it when Christ is revealed.
and Christ calls it, the great condemnation: and perhaps they shall hold a
more sound tenent, that shall hold it both against the Law, and Gospel. For
1. It may be not unprofitably enquired, whether the first commandment do not
bind to all commandments both ordinary, Adam was not bound in innocence to
believe in Christ, for as he was not revealed, so Adam needed him not, but yet
he was bound by the Law to believe every word of God, whenever it should be
revealed*
and eztraordinary, both d^ praesenti, and de futuro: whether the Law do not
bind us to believe all that God shall utter, as well as what he has uttered.
2. Whether the second commandment does not enjoyne whatsoever is a means of
salvation, and an inward religious worship, for then the contrary must needs
be sin. 3. Whether it be not a sin against the second commandment, not to
believe that branch of the same commandment, that God will show mercy to
thousands of them that love him, The Law commands faith as a work done, the
gospel as it is an instrument apprehending Christ, Perk. on Math. page 70.
and keep his commandments. And if it be, then infidelity is a sin against
that Law.

But I forbear many things, and perhaps some will think I might have spared
some pains in refuting the former, which at the first sight are so
distastefull to the judicious, as the reciting of them might seem a sufficient
confutation: Solo auditu horrorem incutere debent, Calvin.
but my desire of helping the weak, who are easily overreached, drew me thus
far beyond mine own purpose; and my endeavor was to contract many things
into as narrow a room as I could.

CHAP. 7.
Showing the second ground of this opposition, which is horrible pride,
especially discovered in their ridiculous conceit of perfection.

THe undivided companion of ignorance is pride; for no man that ever aright
knew God or himself, but the nearer he approached to God with Abraham, the
more did he humble himself in dust and ashes. But here is a generation of men
swelled up with pride, and blown up with a presumption, that they are gotten
into the highest form of perfection: they can scorn and disdain the
directions of the Law, as being far beyond it; for they have attained a full
perfection not of justification only, but of sanctification also already; they
are free not only from the power of sin, but from the presence also: Christ
himself is not purer, or more free from sin than they are: nay being borne
of God they cannot sin if they would: if they do acts of sin in high nature;
yet where is no Law is no transgression: God cannot see them in that glass.
Hence they can loose themselves from most ministeries, but some teachers of
their own sect; and deride the holy labors of godly Preachers, who with zeal
and piety persuade men to walk according to rules. Oh what an height of pride
are those private peremptory persons come unto, who complain that their heads
have aked to hear some godly and worthy Preachers; and have professed, So
Quintinus the Libertine told Calvin to his face, that he disliked his course,
because he understood it not. Instruct advers. Liber. cap: 7.
that for the gift of two pence they would never more hear sundry such, as I
know to be of long continuance as shining and burning lights; as they may well
be in the first rank of Gods worthies, that have been of best desert in our
Church. And where is the humility of that teacher that makes his brag, Your
teachers understand not me. No? the more is your sin and shame. Do you preach
amongst a tumult of artizans, and illiterate men, so as our Ministers cannot
understand you? what is the reason you do so hide your self; seeing light
fears nothing but darkness, and truth nothing but to be hid. I must say to
you, as Jerome of the crabbed Poet Persius: Si non vis intelligi, non debes
legi.
If you will not be understood, you ought not to be read: so if you will not be
understood, you ought not to preach; unless perhaps it may be more beneficial
to the Church, that if you do preach, you be not understood. Alas that men
professing the doctrine of godliness, and pretending the practice of wisdom
and sobriety, should by the pride of their hearts become thus disguised, and
transported into raptures and fits next to frenzy and madness. But against
this windy conceit of perfection I will now say the less, The windy conceit of
perfection refuted
because I have dealt more fully against this pernicious error before in the
third chapter.

Yet here 1. let it be considered wherein the Scripture places the perfection
of Saints here below; and that is not in the want of sin, but in the fight
against sin; and not in the absence, but in groaning in the presence of
sin. For 1. would Christ teach men without sin to pray daily for forgiveness
of sin? 2. Would he command those to pray daily not to be led into
temptation, that cannot sin if they would? 3. Did he ordain the Sacrament
of the Supper for men perfect, that want nothing, to whom nothing can be added;
or to the sick, who need the physician, and to such as hunger and thirst
after righteousness, which is a sen^e of defect, not of perfection. Magnum
illud electionis vas perfectum abruit, profectum fatetur, Bern. in Can^ ser. 49.
4. Are they in holiness and perfections of grace beyond the Apostle Paul, who
many years after regeneration complains that he found evil present with
him, and a law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind; Cunctorun
in carne iustorum imperfectae perfectio est, Hieron: lib. 1. advers: Pelag:
and professes that he had not attained, and that all is here in part, and
imperfect till that perfect come. 5. Are they perfect without sin, why do
they then as other sinful men do? has death any commission where is no
sin? or if their sins be gone, and their persons justified, and yet they
die: why deny they that any correction abides any whose sin is pardoned,
unless they will say they die only for trial.

Secondly, Sanctification has three degrees in this life, Three degrees of
sanctification, and the highest imperfect.
the highest of which is imperfect.

1 Is the death of the body of sin. Which is not all at once, but resembles
the death of Christ's body on the cross, which was diminished by degrees, till
his spirit by his last breath was surrendered to his Father. Thus is it in the
christian, whose last breath of sin, and of the body go out together.

The Second degree is the burial of the body of sin, which is a further
proceeding in mortification, as burial is a proceeding of death, and a
consumption of the dead body not all at once; but by little, and little. So
mortification is not an act of a day, but of the life.

The Third degree of sanctification, is a raising from the grave of sin to a
new life, by virtue of Christ his Resurrection: that look as a graft set in to
a new stock, draws juice and life from that stock, not all at once and then
no more; but still draws, and by drawing, grows by degrees unto the full
height and age of it: eve^ so is it here, christian life is continued as
natural by daily supply and addition of that which is daily wanting. Why God
would not free his servants from all sin in life as well as in death
God indeed if he had pleased, might in a moment have freed his servants from
all sin, as well in life as in death; but he would not: because his wisdom
procures himself more glory in his protection and assistance of the Saints:
and in the victory of his servants against sin, than if they were free from
sin.

The fiercer the enemies were that rose up against Moses in the wilderness, and
against Joshua in the Land of Canaan, the more it turned to the glory of Gods
mighty power, in giving them possession in despite of them all. And so greater
honor returns to the Lord, because greater is his grace in making the sins
of the Saints remedies of sin; to humble them for sins past, to shame them
for sin present, and to work in them fear and watchfulness against sin
for time to come; then if he should at once abolish sin in them. All which,
these men shake off their hands as easily as Sampson did the green cords, when
the Philistines came upon him.

Thirdly, As he that exalts himself must be brought low; so the Scriptures
show those to be in highest estimation with God that have been, and are least
in their own eyes: The lowly speeches of Saints.
Abraham sees himself but dust and ashes. Jacob sees himself less than the
least mercy. Gideon says of himself, Who am I? or what is my Fathers house,
but the least in all Israel? Judge: 6. 13. John Baptist, than whom a greater was
not borne among women, said, I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoe.
The Centurion, I am not worthy that thou should come under the roof of my
house. Peter, Go from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man. Paul, I am the least
of all the Apostles, but the chief of all sinners. But we never read nor heard
those vain voices from any truly regenerate man: The haughty and lofty
speeches of Libertines.
I am perfect. I am pure, so as nothing can be added unto me: I cannot sin if I
would: Gods eternal power can see no sin in me: I am beheld no otherwise
then Christ himself, Tu audes Novatiane mundum te dicere; qui etsi operibus
mundus esses, hoc ipso verbo immundus ^^eres: Ambr: de poenit l. 1. c. 6.
for I am Christed with Christ, and Godded with God: I will neither greive for
my sin, nor pray for pardon of sin, and the like. No no, true grace (which
St. August: calls the first, second, and third grace of Christians) would
keep the heart from these high stairs, and strains of pride; it would fetch
them off such mounted thoughts, and change them into mournful complaints,
that they must needs, will they nill they admit the Cananit and Iebusits within
their borders, and that they must find sin in them as a law forcing them to
the evil they would not. Romans 7. 24.

And godly experience concludes, that humility is a sign of worth, but
hautines is never without emptiness and vanity. Emptiest vessels sound
lowdest; and the husbandman likes better those heavy ears of corn that hang
down their heads, than the light and empty ones that stand so upright. Fewer
words would serve wiser men. I will only say to this proud perfectist, as
Constantine the great did to Acesius one of the proud Bishops of the
Catharists, Pone Ac^siscalam, qua solus coelum ascend.
Set up a ladder Acesius, by which thou alone may climb to heaven.

CHAP. 8.
Discovering the third proper ground of this opposition, which is affectation
of licentiousness, and love of a lawles liberty, joined with hatred of
holiness, and the power of godliness.

AS pride attends ignorance, so an inseparable fruit of pride, Col. 2. 18.
is vainly to be puffed up by a fleshly mind, not holding the head: for pride
rests not in those low and humble principles of Christ, but not enduring Gods
yoakes, nor the suit and service of Christianity, raises vain reasonings
against obedience, and plotteth new devises for more scope and elbow-roome than
the Gospel allows them that must walk in the strait and narrow way to
eternal life. And this righteous judgment of God has overtaken this sect of
men with whom we deal: of whom, the Apostle affirms, 2 Pet: 2, 19
that while they promise liberty, themselves are the servants of corruption.

I know that many that as yet know not the depth of Satan in this error; Many
too charitable, not seeing the depth and danger of this error.
nor are dived into the mystery and mischief of these opinions, do conceive
more slightly of their tenants, and more charitably of their persons than there
is cause; and some may think it were fitter they should fall of themselves,
than be thrust down by the hand and strength of others: and that the labor
might have been better bestowed against more dangerous persons, and
fundamental errors much more prejudicial to the truth of the Gospel. But I
wish such to consider whether any error can be more pernicious than that which
rejects all rules of holy, and strict walking with God? What will it avail
us to contend for, or establish a faith which is dead, Iam: I, 26.
severed from the life and fruits of holiness? or what greater enemies can we
deal against than enemies of righteousness, who are not only fallen from the
abnegation of the known and received truth, but to the oppugnation of it: a
fearful fruit indeed of their declining: but men having once lost the way
of truth, know not where they shall lodge.

And it will not be amiss to look into their model of new Divinity, and how
cunningly they have molded the whole lump, and kneaded it together, that every
piece and position of it may let themselves loose from all bands of duty and
obedience. For,

1. They must not live in the presence of God, The confused lump of
Libertinisme in 9 poysonfull positions.
nor hold him in their sight as a God seeing their sins or actions, or
displeased with the evil of them: and why now should they forbear any sin?

2. They must not acknowledge God a rewarder of his own grace, or any good
duty to which he enableth: and how then can they desire to do good, or be good?

3. They must not see their sin a violation of the Law, nor as it is an enmity
against God, nor as causing wrath to work in them either humiliation for sin
past, or detestation of sin present, or fear of it for time to come.

4. Neither Gods will, nor their own wills moves them not to forbear any
sin: not the former, because they are free from all laws; not the latter,
because the will of man is turned against sin by virtue of inherent holiness
wrought by the spirit (which they disclaim) so as only the light of their
mind may condemn it; and the unseemelinesse of it in a professor may
restrain it, else they are loose to any.

5. They cannot be sick of evil motions, nor detest evil thoughts, nor watch
against temptations, nor care for the purging of their hearts; for how can they
sin being born of God? or if they could, they are not to be countable for any
sin, nor can God take notice of the^. Christ's most innocent soul was vexed with
the molestatio^ of injected motions of evil, though instantly rejected, but
these must not, they are so holy

6. They must not live by any rules, Lex Donatistarum. Quod vos lumus sanctum
est, August.
but by a wild and spacious pretense of immediate, and enthusiasticall
direction. Enemies are they to persuasion and exhortations; for because Christ's
perfections are their perfection. In vain it is to persuade either for good
thoughts into the mind, or good inclinations into the will, or good actions
into the life. They desire not their hearts, nor wills, nor actions to agree
with Gods law, for it is quite abolished. And much less do they turn the
precepts of God into prayers as the Saints ever used to do. Oh with what
violence must headstrong men be carried unto unrighteousness, when the word as
a bridle must not hold them in, nor check or control sin in the soul, to
lessen either the power or practice of it?

7. They must not brook any longer the difficulty of repentance, nor endure
the pains of mortification, because they cannot deny themselves, nor must they
ever remember sins past, as the Saints have done with much ^^uite, both (...)
own hum^liation, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. ^. and for their excitation to gratitude and
thankfulness to God for mercy, as the Apostle 1 Timothy 1. 12. 13.

8. That they may hold their sins more securely, they free themselves from
all fear of woe and judgment, and from all the strokes of God, or his word,
and so by themselves dote in a false peace. For Gods hand cannot reach them,
for he cannot be displeased with their sins, and much less temporally
correct them: and thus they refuse all crosses, either as means of
mortification, or of profiting in holiness. Heb. 12. 7. Psalm. 119 71. And they
fly the stroke of Gods word, in a faithful and free ministry, and cannot
endure this legal preaching, as men that must hold their sins; but must not
hear of them, nor bear reproof of their iniquity.

9 To all these profane opinions, The extreme danger of Libertines A rai^ing
R^bsakey, whose papers I have in my hands, revileth our Ministers, and
denounces them ipso facto to stand accursed by the holy ghost, and
excommunicate by S. Paul, for going about to establish and set up the golden
calfe of their own sanctification. They be his own words. The Lord rebuke thee
Satan.
they disclaim all precepts, and practice of sanctification, and all increase
in holiness. They revile the Preachers that call and urge men by rules and
motives to sanctification, as calling men back to the justification of the
Law. What a case now are these me^ in? how can they expect heaven, that not
only loose themselves from the holiness of them that must be inhabitants there,
but hate it, and resist it? whereby they cast themselves from the turret of
perfection, far below the state of nature. For though every natural man is
destitute of personal holiness, and of the love of it; yet every natural man
will not disclaim, revile, or contest against it. 2 How can they justify their
calling, and out-boast all men in the assurance of their calling? Seeing there
is no effectual calling but unto holiness. 1 These. 4. 7. God has not called us
to uncl^anes, but unto holiness. And if every believer be a Saint by calling,
Romans 1. 7.
how can they be called that sever sanctification (that is the love and
practice of holiness) from effectual calling? They only have received the
grace of new creation, that are created to good works, which God has ordained
to walk in, Ephesians: 2. 10. 3. How do they frustrate the end of their adoption,
which they pretend* for why are we adopted to be sons, but to be made
conformable to the image of Christ? Romans 8. 29.
for can he be a son that bears not the image of his father? That only was
Cesars Coin that carried Cesars superscription 4. May this loose conceit
prevail, The sacred office of Christ's Priesthood violated.
the maine office of Christ's priesthood shall be in vain, both in respect of
his Sacrifice, and of his Intercession: his Sacrifice, because for this Cause
he sanctified himself, that believers should be sanctified through the truth,
Ioh. 17. 19 His intercession and prayer is that the elect may be sanctified,
verse. 17. Father sanctify them. Shall Christ as a Priest sacrifice himself,
and make such earnest prayers for sanctification of believers? and is there no
such thing, or if there be, may not we preach it, and urge it? or can any
libertine disavow and scorn it, but he must also renounce and reject the
priesthood of Christ? I hope no man will co^ceive these to be slight things
which entrench upon the foundation. 5. But how comes it to pass, that they
reading the scriptures, and in them so many, and so express and unavoidable
places* calling the saints not only to the study, and practice of holiness,
but also to growth and increase in holiness, that yet they should persist in
this delusion; How they come to be blinded against so clear a light.
yea and defend it against so clear a light? Surely because they will not
submitt to Gods authority, but have pulled them selves from under his rule, he
has in justice put them out of his favor, and given them up to themselves,
and to Satan to blind them, who are so willing to be blinded: and he is
cunning enough under a pretense of Christian liberty to hold the^ in perpetual
chains of spiritual bondage; else could they not seek to elude so clear
places. As 1. call us to holiness, 1 These. 4. 16. 4. This is the will of God,
even your sa^ctificatio^. 1 Pet. 1. 15. be ye holy in all manner of
conversatio^, for it it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy. 2 Which call Gods
people to increase in holiness, 1 These. 4. 1. We exhort you to increase more
and more, and this is a commandment given us by our Lord Jesus Christ. verse
2. 2. Pet. 3. last, But grow in grace, and in the knowledge, etc. 1 Cor: 15.
58. Be abundant in the work of the Lord. Rev. 22. 11 Let him that is righteous
be righteous still, and let him that is holy be holy still. Is now the spirit
of God idle in all these and the like precepts? or does he call men now to the
justification of the Law? or is he idle in his exhortations to sanctification?
or are we so while we urge men in the words of the same spirit?

The objections are light and windy, as the opinion it self is.

1 Object. That believers are carried by an inward principle of new creation: a
good tree cannot choose but bring forth good fruit, without all these outward
motives.

Answ. The principle of good fruit is within the sap in the root, but there
be external helps, without which it will never be produced; as the Sun, the
soil, the air, the shewers, the gales of wind. So a believer, a tree of
righteousness, has an inward principle flowing from his root, which is
Christ, without whom he can do nothing; but it is fruitful by means not to
be neglected, because they are of his own appointing, and wherein he will make
us fruitful. 1 Cor: 15. 10. By the grace of God I am that I am: and his grace
was not in me in vain; but I labored, though not I, but grace in me.

2 Object. God spirit is all in all, and does all in us, and we have nothing to
do.

Answ. God leads believers by his spirit into good works, and produces holy
acts in them, but not without use of means. For 1. he puts the Law into their
hearts: 2. transformes them by obedience into the image of the word: Romans 6. 12.
3. He still prompteth and suggesteth according to the word, in the things of
Gods glory and worship; the spirit incites to the use of the means of grace,
of the holy ordinances, to the pleasures and delights of Gods house, and such
things as uphold our spiritual being.

3 Object. But Christ is our righteousness, and sanctification; what use of
any righteousness or holiness of our own?

Answ. Christ is not the righteousness of justification to any person that is
not washed, and sanctified, 1 Cor: 6. 11. 2. None can be righteous by a
righteousness infused from Christ, but thence flows an inherent
righteousness renewing our nature: for he gives us a godly nature, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
and purifieth our souls by the spirit: and thence issues an external
righteousness of life, which is an evidence of our justification by faith:
Ioh. 4. 14.
for he that does righteousness is righteous.

4 Object. But what can be added to perfection? If we be not complete in
Christ, there is defect in his merit; and they that drink of his waters thirst
no more: and we can desire no more than we have in Christ.

Answ. But that perfection here to which nothing can be added, is the dream of
waking men, contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to the practice of Saints,
whose study was and is to increase more and more. Contrary to their
experience, the best of whom complain, that they have not yet attained, nor
never shall, till that perfect come. Contrary to their prayers, and vehement
desires after further grace. Contrary to the nature of true grace, which is
still desirous of more. For it is not possible, but that they which have tasted
how good the Lord is: 1 Pet: 2* 2.
should desire the sincere milk of the word to grow by it.

2 The Saints have not so drunk as yet, that there remains no thirst after
Christ* for there is a twofold thirst. Sitis duplex, vel Indigentiae totas^s,
Coposioris fruitionis.
The former is of total indigency, or a whole want of Christ; and this is
satisfied in the believer, that he shall never so miserably thirst again. The
latter is a thirst after a more plentiful fruition of Christ and his spirit,
and graces; and this is never fully satisfied in this life, but the privation
of the former thirst, is the generation and position of this latter. Revel. ^2.
17. Let him that is athirst come.

5. Object. But we are called to the liberty of the Gospel, and are free from
all compulsion of Laws, and from all other rules than the motions of the
Spirit: for where the spirit of God is, there is liberty. 2 Cor. 3. 17.

Answ. What kind of liberty this is, we have seen already, which is not from
the rules and direction of the Law, for the Apostle says not, that we are
called to libertinisme, or a freedom from obedience to do what we list, Our
liberty here is not from the rule of the Law; but from the rule of sin.
as being without the reach of the Law; but a freedom from the rule, and
command of sin, and a sweet peace and ease in in the soul, not grounded on
rejecting the commandments, but rather upon a free and sincere regard and love
of them. Thus David professes, that he will walk at liberty, not because
he will cast off the precepts, but because he did seek the precepts. But we
have stayed long in discovering 1. the ignorance, 2. the pride, 3. the profane
licentiousness of this schism: we must proceed to that which follows.

CHAP. 9.
Answering some of the principal objections of the Libertines.

1 OBJECT.
Is this our text, Rom: 6. 19. Ye are not under the Law, but under grace.

Whence thus they reason. To them that are not under the Law, but under grace;
to those the Law does not belong, but it is to them abolished and void: But
believers are not under the Law, etc. Therefore.

Answ. 1. There is a twofold being under the Law.

First, a being under the curse, burden, malediction, condemnation, and
coaction of the Law; thus no believer is under it.

Secondly, there is a being under the obedience, rule, counsel, and direction
of the Law; and thus believers are under it much more than before; as Christ
himself also was. For they are now by the free spirit of Christ framed to a
free and voluntary obedience of it. Lex reos faciebat ^ubendo, et non
adiuvando: gratia adiu vat ut quisque sit legis factor.
So says August: The Law made us guilty by commanding but not assisting; but
grace assisteth every believer to be a keeper of the Law.

2 This objection willbe also fully satisfied by applying the former
distinction of the Law. Considering it 1. in the matter and substance of it.
And thus believers are still under it; both for performance of all holy duties
of it, and forbearance of all the evils prohibited by it: 2. in the manner of
obedience, and in the consequences, and appendices of it; and thus are they not
under the rigor, coaction or strict exaction of it, and much less under the
curse, malediction or condemnation of it. But this objection has been before
abundantly satisfied in the 2. and 3. Chapters. And therefore I pass it now
more briefly.

2 OBJECT.
Gal. 3. 10. So many as are under the works of the Law, are under the curse.
Therefore, Either the Law is utterly void to Christians, or they are still
under the curse of it.

Answ. The Apostle says not, that those to whom the Law appertains, are
under the curse; but those that are under the works of the Law. 2. The works
of the Law are twofold. Either works of obedience, done in humility, by way of
duty, in testimony of thankfulness, and of our conformity with Christ. Or 2.
works of the Law done in pride, to seek justification by the Law, and the
works of it, and so to promise to themselves eternal life by the observation
of the law. And those only that are thus under the works of the Law, are
under the curse: and the meaning of the holy Apostle is no other, whose scope
in his whole discourse is to beat down such as sought to set up justification
by the works of the Law, and not by faith only; as appears plainly in the
next verse 11. for that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God is
evident, for the just shall live by faith. But though no believer can in the
second respect be under the works of the Law for justification; Believers
under the works of the Law for obedience, not for justification.
but he must be under the curse of it: yet it follows not that he is not under
the works of the Law for obedience, and yet not under the curse of it.

This place is indeed an hammer and hatchet against popery, who by seeking
justification by the works of the Law, thrust themselves under the curse of
God; for if the curse, attacheth him that seeks righteousness before God by
Moses Law; how much more accursed are they that by observation of humane Laws
and traditions, by humane satisfactions and impositions, seek to demerrit God,
obtain without Christ, what only Christ can procure. The greater is their
sin and danger, who after the knowledge and profession of the truth for some
politic and worldly ends run back into recusancy, and popery, which is the
way of perdition, apparently renouncing the blessing of justification by free
grace; and choose the curse of the Law, which shall run into their bowels as
water: of such apostasy may be said as of Judas, it had been good for them
they had never been borne.

OBJECT. 3.
To whom the Law is not given, to those it belongs not at all, But the Law is
not given to the righteous, 1 Timothy 1. 9. Therefore it belongs not to believers
being justified.

Answ. 1. The scope and intention of the Apostle is not to abolish the Law, who
in the words immediately going before says that the Law is good if it be used
lawfully: which words clearly import and imply, that among believers there is
a good use of the Law, which true use he shows in the fifth verse, namely, to
be a guide and direction to the duties of love and charity, which is now the
effect of faith, as the words plainly show: for the end of the commandment is
love, out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. Note, that
the Apostle makes that love which is the end of the commandment, a fruit and
effect of faith: and therefore a believer is not loosed from the love and
obedience of the Law by faith, but tied unto it.

2. The sense of the Apostle is not, that a righteous man can be under no
laws; for Adam in innocence was a most righteous man, and yet was under the
Law, both in general, under the whole Moral Law; and in special, under the
Law concerning the forbidden tree: and this Law was given to the most righteous
man in the world. The Law is given unto a righteous man, but not against him.
Innocence and righteousness in perfection exempts no creature from the Law of
his Creator. But the Apostles meaning is, that the Law is not given against a
righteous man, that frames his course according to the Law; it deals not
with him as an enemy that assenteth unto it, that is delights in it in the
inner man, that is ruled and ordered by it; it can pronounce no sentence of
damnation against him; it neither can justify him who is already justified by
faith, nor yet can condemn him. And that this is the true meaning of the
Apostle appears by 2 arguments in the text. Non dicit (...), non est ^ata
lex, sed (...), non est posita.
1. In the original word (...), which implies an action or plea of God
against a man; and that the Law is not Gods action, or plea against a righteous
man to bring him under judgment, or subdue him under the sentence of it; for
Christ has freed such a one from the curse by his merit, and obedience, as
also by his spirit made him a lover of the Law. And this is the same in sense
with that of the Apostle, Gal: 5. 23. Against such (namely as express those
recited fruits of the spirit) there is no Law: (...)
for the Law is so far from condemning such, as it is a witness rather of
their conformity to it self, and consequently of their love and obedience unto
God, and of their similitude with Jesus Christ. 2 Argument in the text is, in
that the lawless and disobedient are said to be wrapped up in the full
damnatory power of the Law: against all whom it is Gods plea and action, yea
the bill of indictment to their condemnation.

3. Neither is the Law given to the just, The Law not given to the just man for
servile, but free obedience.
to wring obedience from them by terrors, or threatenings, or expectation
either of threatenings or rewards: the just are not under the Law in this
servile manner of obedience, as are the lawless and disobedient: for by a free
spirit of grace they do the works of the Law, so far as they are regenerate;
and the Law to them is not a compelling commander, but a sweet and faithful
counselor, and rule of life. But although the Law be not given to the just,
to fasten any crime or curse upon them, nor to exact personal, and perfect
obedience for righteousness before God; nor to force, compel, or rigorously
exact obedience from them: will it follow, that it is no way else given unto
them? or not as a rule of direction for obedience, and a line and square of
good works and christian life.

And these answers will fully satisfy all those other places of like sound and
sense: as Gal. 5. 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the Law*
Romans 7. 6. Now ye are delivered from the Law being dead unto it: that is, ye
are freed from the Law as it is the strength of sin, as it irritateth, and
provokes to sin, as it did while we were in the state of nature, as it
wrapps the transgressor in the curse, and as it forces it self by terror and
constraint: for now the believer serves in newness of spirit, not in the
oldnesse of the letter; that is, freely from a renewed spirit obeys the Law
as the rule of holy life.

OBJECT. 4.
Gal: 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free; and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage: that is, say they, the Law*
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has freed us from the curse of the Law.

Answ. It is not said that Christ has freed us from the obedience, or command
of the Law, but from the curse of it; which we question not.

2. Christian liberty is not a freedom from the obedience of it, but rather
from the disobedience of it: Romans 6. 18. Being free from sin, ye are made the
servants of righteousness: We are called to liberty, Christian liberty frees
us not from the obedience of the Law, but the disobedience of it.
but we must not use our liberty as an occasion to the flesh; but to frame to
the commandment, By love to serve one another, Gal: 5. 13. Where the Apostle
plainly proves, that Christian liberty loses us not from the observation of
the Law, but straightly enioyneth it, for the whole Law is fulfilled in one wo^d,
which is love* v. 14.

3. ^s they (...) the same stone, Wherein Christian liberty consists.
so i^ must return upon themselves, we must therefore again tell them, what
are those parts of ^^ristian liberty, which the Apostle aymeth at: and if they
think that the Apostle best knew his own meaning, they shall take them from
himself. The first of them is, freedom from the burden of legal ceremonies,
sacrifices, circumcision, and beggarly rudiments, which were heavy yoakes;
which being abolished by Christ, Christians must never entangle themselves with
them any more: and that the Apostle directly speaks of these in the place
alleged, see v. 2, 3. If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing:
therefore stand fast in your liberty. The 2 branch of our liberty is from the
curse of the Law, in that Christ was made a curse for us: with which most
ponderous and pressing yoke we must never entangle our selves any more, by
seeking justification by the works of the Law, and to settle us firm in this
our liberty is our Apostles aim and argument. Gal. 3. 10. 13. The third branch
of our liberty is freedom from perfect impletion, and personal performance of
the whole Law for justification: for thus we are no more debtors to the Law,
Gal. 5. 3. Nor must ever return to that bondage to seek righteousness and
justification by the Law, in whole or in part: For Christ is become of none
effect unto you, whosoever of you will be justified by the Law, ye are fallen
from grace, verse 4. The 4. branch of our purchased liberty by Christ is a
freedom from the threats and terrors of the Law, compelling and forcing
obedience: and now not fear but love must chiefly const^aine us to duty; not
compulsion, or carnal respects, must ca^^, u^ as slaves to the commandment,
but now discerning the holiness, excellency, and righteousness of the Law,
the heart is moved freely to run the ways of God, Gal. 5. 25. If we live in
the spirit, we must walk in the spirit.

OBJECT. 5.
The Law of Moses was given only to the Jews, and was to endure but unto
Christ, Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were till John. And Christ is the
end of the Law to every believer, Romans 10. 24.

Answ. 1. The Law for writing, and some Circumstances was given to the Jews by
the hand of Moses: but in respect of the substance, and matter obedience,
belongs unto all men of all ages and nations. Because, 1. It must stop every
mouth both of Jew and Gentile, Rom: 3. 19. 2. It must judge every man according
to his work, both Jew and Gentile.

2. It seems the Prophets are abolished as well as the Law. Law and Prophets,
how far abolished.
But I hope they will not say, that all the doctrine of the Prophets is
abolished. It is true, that the whole Prophetical doctrine, Legis ^t
Prophetaru^ ordo exinde cessavit peradimpletionem, non per destructionem. l. 4.
cont. Marc. c. 33.
which did signify, or prophecy, or promise good things to come; when Christ
was actually come, received accomplishment, but not abolishment: which is
Tertullians distinction. But much other positive doctrine of the Prophets, is
as useful and proper to us, (for whom it is by special divine providence
reserved) as it was to the ages to which it was first directed. And even so the
Law, which in respect of shadows was to continue till John; in the substance
of it is a permanent and everlasting doctrine, directory, and deriveable to all
the ages of the world.

3. Christ is the end of the Law; but as Augustine wittily distinguishes;
Finis perfic^ens, snon interfictens. Aug. in Ioh: t^act. 5* 5.
the perfecti^g end, not the destroying end. For,

1. He was the end or scope, unto whom the Law, Christ the end of the Law 5
ways.
especially the paedagogie of Moses was directed.

2. He was the end also of the Moral Law, because he fully and perfectly
obeyed the law, and so the Law in him attained his proper end, as it had not
else done among all the sons of men.

3. He is the end of the Law, on whom all the male diction of the ^aw fell
fully, and perfectly, and had on him full accomplishment.

4. He is the end of the Law, in whom all the blessings and promises of the Law
attain their end; for they are all in Christ yea, and amen: all of them in
him, 2 Cor: 1. 20
and for his obedience, are exhibited and complete.

5. He is the end of the Law to every believer for righteousness, in that he
does bestow and impute unto us that full righteousness which the Law requires
of us; and in that by the donation of his spirit, he kindles in believers a
new obedience framed unto the Law; so as they begin a renewed obedience of it
in earth, and fulfill it perfectly in heaven. Whence issues a clean contrary
conclusion. If Christ be the end of the Law, we are therefore faster tied to
the obedience of it than before.

Very false therefore is that position, That the Law is at such an end, as it
can nore command a man in Christ, than a dead man can command his wife; How we
are dead to the Law and the Law not dead to us.
or a Master his servant when he is made free. To which traditionary doctrine
carried from woman to woman I answer. 1. That the Apostle says indeed, Legem
autem Decalogi nec posse, nec debes re dici nobis mortuam; quam vis dicantur
Legi mortui in quibus non invenit vim pe^catricem regnan^em etc. Beza ad
defens. contra Castle: in Rom: 7. 6.
Rom: 7. 4. that by Christ's death we are dead to the Law; namely in regard of
the curse, and of those rebellious motions excited in us by occasion of it; and
in regard of the terror and rigor of it; as a woman is from the threats and
rigor of a dead husband: but the Apostle says not, that the Law is dead
either in respect of the direction of it, or our obedience to those directions.
2. As the Apostle says, we are dead to the Law: so he shows the end of our
freedom from so hard an husband; Et postea, Legem nusquam invenio dici
mortuam, sive de impiis, sive de pijs agatur.
namely that we might be married to another: i. to Christ raised from the
dead; the effect of which marriage is not a barren life, but to bring forth
fruit unto God: the blessing of the marriage between Christ and the faithful
soul is fruitfulness before God; so as this death of ours to the Law brings
in a new subjection unto it: which is indeed the height of our Christian
liberty here, and proceeds from the spirit of freedom. 3. His shift is too
short to shuffle from the first covenant to the second; and as false is it to
say, that the Law is the rule in one covenant, and not in another: as if the
matter of the first covenant and second were not one and the same; the
righteousness, and obedience of both were not one in substance, differing in
manner of apprehension and application. Shall any live by virtue of the second
covenant, that does not these things, or that brings not the righteousness of
the Law in himself, or his surety?

CHAP. 10.
Resolving sundry other objections alleged to prove the abolition of the Law.

OBJECT. 6.
To whom all the commanding power of the Law, under pain of the curse, and the
enjoining of good works for justification: as also to whom the condemning
power of the Law is abolished and ceased, to them the Law is altogether made
void, and abrogated. But to believers both such commanding power, and
condemning power is ceased. And therefore, etc.

And thus they further explain it. Suppose a justified man commit adultery, or
murder, or be drunk, the Law of God can take no hold of him, nor the just God
can punish him by the Law, being utterly abrogated to such a person.

Answ. The former proposicion is apparently false for the Law both for ma^ter
and form stands in force to justified persons, and retains on them a
commanding power, and enjoineth on them good works, although the manner of
commanding in the rigor of it is to them abated: for how ord^^^rily did Christ
and his Apostles command the works of the Law to believers, and that under
strait penalties read Math. 5. and 6. Chap. and tells his followers that when
they have done so far as they can all the things of the Law; they have done
what was their duty, and that they were bound unto, Luke 17. 10.

2. These confused men distinguish not between the condemning power of the Law
and the Law it self; yet this distinction cutteth the si^ewes of this
objection: for can it prove the Law itself abolished, Non est ^ecesse nos ab
obedientia Legis libera^^, quin Legis aliquod munus abrog^tur. Whitak ^^^tra
Dur. page: 714.
because the condemning power of it is to some removed by Christ? or if
certain uses of the Law be abolished, as in way of righteousness, life and
salvation; or in way of terrifying, accusing, or condemning the justified by
faith: must therefore the Law it self, and all other uses of it be abolished.

3. What believer conceives himself under the commanding power of the Law, to
be justified by it? or to expect to stand righteous before God by their
obedience? as these men vainly dream: no they have other ends of their
obedience to the commandments of the Law. As,

1. To testify their endeavor in obeying the righteous Law and will of God,
and their conformity to his image in the same.

2. Not for the justification of their persons, for that is only by Christ's
complete obedience made theirs by faith; but for the testification of their
justifying faith: according to the direction of the Apostle, Iam. 2. 20. Show
me thy faith by thy works.

3. Not for the attaining of salvation by the duty done; but to attain a
comfortable assurance of it ^ Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your
election sure. How may we? for if we do these things etc.

4 Not to merit any thing, but to encourage themselves in the way of
obedience, by casting eye on the blessed remuneration freely promised, and
performed to duties of love to God, and man; begun and perfected by faith in
Christ. Heb. 11* 26. Moses had respect to the recompense of reward. Yea our
Lord himself, for the joy that was set before him endured the cross and
despised the shame. Heb. 12. 2. All these are other ends which believers
propou^d to themselves in their obedience then to be justified by it.

4. I answer, it is utterly false and wicked, that Gods Law takes no hold of a
justified person committing hateful sins, as of murder, adultery and the
like. For although Christ have freed him from the curse and vengeance, and the
eternal damnation of his sin. Romans 8. 1. Yet may the Law take hold on him
for a stinging correction, and a sharp punishment according to the scandal of
his sin. Did not the Law take hold on David, when with so many other evils;
Gods sword was upon his house for ever, for his scandalous sins? Did not Gods
Law lay hold on Moses and Aaron, then whom none was more faithful in Gods
house; when for sin they lay under sharp rebukes, and chastisement, and were
barred the land of Canaan?

Object. But these were examples in the old testament, before Christ's death.

Answ. And are not believers in the new testament subject to the same law, and
penal statues of correction? Were not examples of the old Testament examples
to us that we should not sin as they sinned? 1 Cor: 10. 6.
How could we sin as they did, if we were not under the same Law? Or what else
but the law takes hold on believers in the new testament, when for the
unworthy use of the Lords ordinances they are judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.
even for this cause, says the Apostle. Object. Some say, they were hypocrites
that were judged. Answ. As if they be hypocrites that must not be condemned
with the world.

5. But of all their assertions, tha^ is a^ blind as bo^de, That if God call a
believer to account for the breach of his Law: he may say, God has nothing to
do to call him to account: he may refuse to be tried in that Court. If God
shall say, leave such a sin* or be damned; do such a duty, and ^e saved: he
may say, We will do neither the one nor the other on these terms. Well may
he say, and more, that his tongue lets fall unseemely terms: and it hides his
nakedness but a little to drop out, that his meaning is, that God has
nothing to do to call a believer into the court of nature. For howsoever he
will teach God what he has to do, or what he has not to do; he might long
since have been taught, that God will require of us even that righteousness
which he put into our nature: and that is a talent which we must be countable
for as well as any other.

OBJECT. 7.
Those that have the spirit of God for their rule, and do all by a free
spirit, they need not the Law to rule or urge the^: to them it is vain and
needless. But all believers have the spirit to rule them; and they do all by
a free spirit. Therefore.

Answ. The former proposition is false, that those that have the spirit to rule
them, have no need or use of the Law: and as gross to conceive the spirit and
the Law contrary: which are indeed inseparable: for the Law is the instrument,
the Spirit is the workmaster; the Law is the rule, the Spirit the applier of
that rule.

The spirit is so far from destroying the Law, that he writes it in the
inner parts, he adds clearenesse and light unto unto it; he works love and
delight unto it.

2. It was ever the wicked conceit of Libertine Enthusiasts, that the spirit
works our obedience immediately, and by himself alone, rejecting all means;
whereas he works it in us ordinarily by the word, the Law and the Gospel.
Ioh. 16. 13. The spirit sent to believers, shall not speak of himself: but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. He is in himself the spirit
of illumination, but enlighteneth believers by showing them what is to be done
by the Law, and what is to be believed by the Gospel.

3. Is the spirit therefore a free spirit, because he frees us from the Law?
no verily, but because he sets us free to the performance of it. This reason
holy David gives us, Psalm: 119. 32. I will then run the way of thy
commandments, when thou have enlarged or set me free. Or is that the duty of
a free and willing subject to cast off the laws of his King? No but most
freely and willingly to obey his Law: and this is the freedom wrought by the
free spirit in free and ingenious Christians.

4. To say, we obey God by by the spirit without a Law or a commandment, is a
mere non sense: for is any obedience without a Law? Is not our rule to do
only what the Lord commands? what can be more ridiculous than for a subject
to profess obedience to his Prince, but yet he will not be under any Law? And
to say they obey of love, and yet obey no commandment, is as fond and false. 1
Ioh: 53. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous Ioh: 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my
commandments: love must ever look to the commandment.

OBJECT. 8.
Those that are under the Law of Christ, are not under the Moral Law. But
Believers are under the Law of Christ, Gal: 6. 2. and so fulfill the Law of
Christ. Therefore.

And thus do they further unfold themselves, that we may understand them:
consider (say they) men as creatures in their natural being, thus are they
under the Moral Law given by their Creator: But consider them as redeemed and
new creatures, they are freed from that Law, and only tied to precepts taught
by Christ in the Gospel: which teaches to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly justly and godly in this present world: Tit: 2. 11.

Answ. Here is a whole bundle of errors to be untied.

1. The proposition is false, that believers who are under the Law of Christ,
are not under the Moral Law; seeing the Law of Christ is for substance the
same with the Moral Law: for what is the Law of Christ in the place alleged,
but the doctrine, precept, and commandment of Christ enjoining the love of our
brethren, and bearing their burden: which the Apostle opposes not to the
Moral Law, (as these sectaries do) but enjoyneth it as a more necessary Law,
than all that heap of ceremonies to which the false Apostles would have
brought them back: against whom he strengthens the believers of that Church,
through that whole Epistle.

2. It is frivolous and popish to conceive the Gospel a new Law: for is not
the covenant of grace the same in the old Testament, and new? and did not the
holy men in the old Testament, Mose^ David, Samuel, Daniel, and the rest enjoy
the same covenant with us or were they saved by another Gospel than we? or did
not they frame their lives to the same sobriety, righteousness and holiness
that we do?

2 Did not the Apostles preach and write the Gospel? Yet 1. Ioh. 2, 7. they
profess: We write no new commandment, but the old which ye have had from the
beginning. And what was that, but the same which was written in man's nature
before the fall, and after written by Gods finger in tables of stone: which
same commandment, though he call a new commandment in the next verse; that is
not, because it is another in the substance, but the same law of love renewed,
and reinforced upon new grounds by Christ the great Lawgiver. And ratified
both by his own doctrine and example, and in this new manner it was never
urged before.

3. So far is the Law of Christ from (...) moral law (...) according that
(...) of S. August. The Law knows to command, L^x^u^ere no rit, gratia i^var^*
Epist 95 ad Innocent.
but the Gospel to assist to the commandment. True it is, that Christ
abolished all Laws that made difference between man and man, Jew and Gentile,
Ephesians. 2 14. Yea and the Moral Law, so far, as it made difference between God
and man believing. And 2. as it is opposed to the Gospel: And 3. as it
hinders entrance into the kingdom to believers. And 4. as any thing in it was
accidental, significative, circumstantiall or tempoall. But all matters
substantial, essential and eternal, Christ by his Law has confirmed to
continue for ever. This harmony of the Moral Law and Christ's Law, judicious
Calvin in his harmony avoucheth, Teta Lex est consentanea cum doctrina
Evangelij, de vi tijs vitandis, et virtutibus parsequendis. page 443. Errant
qui putant Legem repugnare Christo*
The whole Law (says he) agrees with the Gospel both in condemning the sa^e
vices, and commanding the same virtues. And if this be so, then certainly it
destroys not the Law. And Pare^s on Rom: 10. 14. says, They err that think
the Law repugneth Christ in the Gospel.

4. It is little under blasphemy, that they oppose the Father, and the Son,
as if they had diverse wills* diverse rules, or contrary Laws; whereas the Son
professet^, that he spoke nothing from himself, but from the Father* Ioh. 5.
16: Besides, how does ignorance befoole them, in ^e^ling us that Christ as
(...) has loosed us from the obedience of the Moral Law due to our Creator?
For is not God the Redeemer the same with God the Creator? Is any honor due to
the Father for creation, that is not due to the Son for creation? Ioh: 5. 23.
That all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father: or is any honor
due to the Son for redemption, that is not due to the Father for redempt ^? Did
not God the Father give up his Son for our our redemption: and shall not we
well requite him in casting off all duty belonging to him as our Creator? Or
can the addition of the greatest and most singular benefit that we are capable
of, loose us from our former duty, or rather tie us faster? Certainly the gift
of Christ for our Redemption, doubleth, and fastneth the bond of love and duty
between our creator and us, but no whit does slack or loosen it. Such poor
shifts, and doubts are they driven un to, as a silly hare close followed, and
hard run.

CHAP. 11.
Showing how these Libertines run against the stream of our worthiest
Writers, graciously instructed to the kingdom of heaven.

IT is not unusual with impostors, when they ure driven off the authority of
the Scriptures, to shroud and hide themselves with some humane testimonies
wrested, and for most part distorted from the true meaning and intention of
their alleged Authors: and even so do these men pretend that they have the
consent and authority of sundry Protestant Writers, of great note and name in
the Church, to strengthen and confirm their novelties: wherein they are
impudent to admiration; seeing there is never a learned man that ever I met
with that sideth with them in the abrogation of the Law; nay not any, but as
occasion is offered, does urge the Moral Law as of great use to guide all true
believers, and justified persons in the right way of godliness, and all
Christian duties. One of this learned sect said. We are of Luther, and was
before the Apostles.
With what boldness do they claim Mr. Luther to be wholly theirs, and
themselves to be wholly of his judgment: and that they hold nothing in this
point but what they sucked from his breests? let us therefore see in this one
instance how they serve all the rest.

And first I affirm that M. Luther was so far from being an Antimonian* that
no man does more expressly and soundly overthrow and contradict this wicked
opinion than he, neither can any man desire a stronger humane witness against
the^ tha^ M. Luther. Read his words with a pause and judge. Satan (says he)
stirs up daily new sects: and now last of all he has raised up a sect of
such as teach, the ten commandments are to be taken out of the Church, Luther.
preface to Comment on the Gale.
and that men should not be terrified with the Law. And after, such is the
blindness and presumption of frantic heads. And are they other that
challenge Luther the patron of a Sect, which himself says, the Devil has
raised?

And page 171. He speaks of three sorts of men that abuse the Law. First
those that seek justification by the Law. Secondly. Those that will utterly
exempt a christian man from the Law, as the brainsicke Anabaptists went about
to do. And of this sort are very many also at this day which profess the
Gospel with us, who dream that Christian liberty is a carnal liberty to do
whatsoever they list, etc. on cap: 3. 25.

And on cap. 3. 19. page: 153. Here I admonish (says he) all such as fear
God, and especially teacher of others, that they diligently learn out of Paul
to understand the true and proper use of the Law; which I fear after our time
will be trodden under foot, and utterly abolished by the enemies of the truth.
It is easy from these words of Mr. Luther to collect, that, 1. He did not
conceive the Law thrust out of all use by Christ: for then why should men
fearing God learn the true use of it? 2. That if he feared men would abolish
it, then his judgment was it ought not to be abolished. 3. That if he esteem
this sort of men that would abolish the Law, enemies of the truth: then
certainly he is not their patron in this loose and carnal opinion.

And page 154. Forasmuch as we diligently and faithfully teach these things:
we do therefore plainly testify, that we reject not the Law, and works, as
our adversaries do falsely accuse us: but we do altogether establish the
Law, and require the works thereof, and we say the Law is good and profitable.

And cap: 5. 14. page 254. It is necessary that godly Preachers should as
diligently teach the doctrine of good works, as the doctrine of faith: for
Satan is a deadly enemy to both. Is Luther now yours? Is he not as contrary,
and directly contradictory to your foolish tenants as the Sunshine of midday is
to the darkness of midnight? Does not he disclaim you as adversaries, yea as
false accusers, while you challenge a line or syllable of his doctrine in the
patronage of your delusions? You reject the Law, and works; he professes, he
rejects neither: you abolish the whole Law wholly; but he establishes it:
you reject them for legal Preachers that teach not Christ aright, who urge men
to the duties of the Law; but he imposes it as a necessary part of their
office to urge the Law, yea as necessary as to teach the doctrine of faith. For
shame therefore never claim Luther more, nor father your fooleries on him,
than whom you have no stronger enemy.

Object. But does not Mr. Luther say, on ^ap. 3. 28. That Christ has abolished
all laws of Moses that ever were?

Answ. Y^s, all the laws of Moses whereof he speaks in that place: for take
the whole sentence, and ye shall know his mind. Where Christ is put on,
(says he) there is neither Jew, nor circumcision, nor ceremony of the Law any
more: for Christ has abolished all Laws of Moses that ever were: that is, all
ceremonial Laws. Yea and the Moral Law so far as in Moses hand accusing,
terrifying, and condemning the believing conscience: in which regard it should
be utterly ignorant whether there were any Moses, any Law, any Jew. Ibid:

Object. Page 177. So many as are justified, are justified not by observation
of man's Law, nor Gods Law, but by Christ alone, who has abolished all Laws.
Does not Mr. Luther clearly say, that all Laws are abolished?

Answ. Nothing is more true; for even the Moral Law in respect of
justification is abolished to the believer, which is Mr. Luthers expression:
but that either the Law it self in the substance of it, or in respect of all
other uses is abolished, Luther says not: and we say with Luther, Accursed be
that doctrine, life, and religion, which endeavors to get righteousness
before God by the Law, or works thereof.

Ob. Luther on c: 4 27 p. 222. says, that a Christian laying hold on Christ by
faith, has no Law, but all the Law to him is abolished with all his terrors,
and torments. And page seque: We say that the Moral Law, or the Law of ten
commandments has no power to accuse, and terrify the conscience in which
Jesus Christ reigns by grace: for he has abolished the power thereof.

Answ. And we say so too, and hold it our happiness to believe this sweet
Gospel. But Luther speaks here, and every where else of certain uses of the
Law, either for justification, righteousness and salvation; or else for
terror, accusation and condemnation: and thus we have proved long since, and
at large, that it is abolished to the believer.

2. We say, that to abolish the power of the Law, is not to abolish the Law:
and to abolish the power of accusing and terrifying, is not to abolish all the
power of it. And all their shreddings and cuttings, and poor allegations out
of Mr. Luthers works, do only prove the magnifying the Article of Christian
righteousness against the righteousness of the Law, and works: wherein Luther
was for the singular good of the Church most vehement: but none of them do so
much as glance at the abolishing of the Law as a doctrine or rule of life; Non
sunt su^ lege quoad iustificationem, accusationem, condemnationem, coactionem,
etc.
which Mr. Luther not in a few places acknowledges to bind all men from the
beginning of the world to the end of it.

But whereas no man better knew Mr. Luthers judgment than his own scholars
and followers, it will not be amiss to hear them expressing their Masters
mind in this argument, Est igitur sententia vera, et forma sanorum verborum,
esse aliquem legis usum in renatis, and is triplex est etc.
and delivering unto us what they received from him, from whom to depart in any
thing they held almost piacular.

Chemnitius a most learned and moderate Lutheran, in his common place de lege
cap. 10. and 11. directly refuteth these Antinomists, De Lege Dei cap 10.
circiter fi^em, and cap. 11. De dignitate doctrinae Legis contra Antinomos.
and shows that the regenerate are not under the Law in respect of
justification, accusation, condemnation, or coaction: but yet affirms a
threefold use of it in the regenerate: 1. as a doctrine to direct in duties: 2.
as a glass to see the defects of them: 3. as a correcter, and restrainer of
remanent corruption. In all treading in the very steps of of Luther, as we
have declared.

Fredericus Baldwinus a learned professor in Wittenberg, Sanctissimo suo
merito tabulas Legis abscondit, non ut Leginullam a^plu^ debeamus obedientiam,
sed ne maledictione f^r^at ^os qui sint in Christo.
Passionis typicae lib: 2. typ: 6. has these words. Christ our Savior by his
most holy merit has hid and covered (alluding to the propitiatory) the tables
of the Law; not that we owe no further obedience unto it, but that it may not
strike with maledictio^ those that are in Christ: for the Law is abrogated by
Christ, Abrogata Lex non quoad obedientiam, sed quoad maledictionem.
not in respect of obedience, but in respect of malediction. Many more were
easily induced to speak the same thing; but I content my self with these,
from whom none of the rest dissent: and conclude, that if Mr. Luthers scholars
understood their Masters doctrine better than these Libertines; then they sew
but a fig leaf to cover their nakedness, by stretching any of Mr. Luthers
phrases to the proving of their profane opinion.

And as Mr. Luther has abundantly cleared unto us this truth, so have we the
consent of all godly, learned Protestant Writers both ancient and modern, whom
I might induce as a cloud of witnesses; not like that cloud which Elias his
servant did see as big as a man's hand, but like the same cloud when it
covered the whole heavens.

My spare time is not so much, nor perhaps the Readers, neither in so clear a
case were it so needful to make this volume swell with such numberless
testimonies of orthodox Divines, as professedly refute this profane and lawles,
and as brainles a fancy. I will only therefore show these delinquents against
the Law to be cast by the verdict of an whole Jury of godly Divines. And
because they shall not deny but they have fair trial and proceeding, we have
empannelled twelve men, the most of which they acknowledge their friends and
well-willers, (even as they challenge Mr. Luther the foreman to be wholly
theirs) and one man shall not speak for all, as in ordinary trialls; but as it
is in great and extraordinary trialls, every one shall deliver his own
sentence.

The first of them is Mr. Calvin, Tametsi digito Dei Legem scripta^ in cordibus
habent, bifariam tamen adhuc in Lege proficiunt: est enim illis optimum
organum, etc.
who in the second book of his Institutions, cap. 7. sec. 12. having spoken of
two uses of the Moral Law; adds a third, which especially concerns the
faithful: namely that thereby they must daily more certainly know what is the
will of God to which they aspire: as also by the frequent meditation of it, Vt
frequentie ius meditatione excitetur ad obsequium, in eo roboretur, and a
delinquendi lubrico retrahatur.
they should be excited to the obedience of it, and strengthened in that
obedience, and restrained from the offenses of it.

In the 13 section he answers the Libertines objection: But because the Law
contains the ministration of death, therefore Christians must reject the Law.
Far be from us (says he) such a profane opinion: Facessat long ex animis
nostris profana istaes opinio.
for Moses excellently shows, that the Law which can beget nothing but death
among sinners, Sed una est, perfecta, et inflexibilis vivendi regula.
has among the Saints a better and more excellent use: and what that is he
shows, namely to be one, perpetual, and inflexible rule of life.

In the 14. section he answers at large that objection, that the Law is
abrogated to the faithful, De morali adhuc loquor. Non quod illis amplius non
iubeat quod rectum est, sed du^taxat ne sit illis quod antea erat, hoc est ne
eorum conscient as perterrendo etc.
speaking still of the Moral Law: namely, not that it does not still command
what is right as it did before, but that it is not that to them as it was
before, in terrifiyng their consciences, confounding, condemning and destroying
them. In which sense says he, Paul manifestly shows that it is abrogated;
not in respect of institution of life, but of the former vigorous obligation of
conscience. sect. 15. Thus have I abridged M. Calvine his larger Tractat upon
this Argument, Non ad institutionem pertinet, sed ad constringendae
conscientiae vigorem.
wherein we see him wholly consenting to the doctrine we have propounded
through our whole discourse.

Add only her unto that in the 3 book cap. 19. sect 2 Christian liberty, Vt
fidelium conscientiae sese supra Legem erigant, totamque Legis iustitiam
obliviscuntur.
consists first in this: That the consciences of the faithful in the
confidence of their justification before God, must lift themselves above the
Law, Neque hinc recte quis colligat Legem fidelibus supervacaneam esse, quos
no^ ideo docere et exhortari, etc.
and forget the whole righteousness of the Law (Yet says he no man must hence
collect that the Law is needless: For it does not therefore cease to teach, to
exhort, and incite to good, though before Gods tribunal it has no place in
their consciences.

The Law therefore, Manet igit^^ per Christum (...) Legis (...), quae (...) do
cendo, adm^ne^do, ob^urgando, co^rigendo ad omne opus b^num formet ac comparet.
by Mr. Calvin's de e^mination abides by Christ a^ inviolable doctrine, the
which by teaching us, by admonishing, by rebuking, and by correcting, does
secure and prepare us to every good work.

The second is Reverend Beza, in his defense against Castillion, on Romans 7. 6.
far be it from me says he, that I should assent to you, who say the Law is
dead to them, to whom it is chiefly alive, Absit ^t ego tibi assentiar; qui
d^cis legem ijs esse mortuam quibus maxim vivit, id est, quos h^bet maxim of
sequentes. Veque enim rex, (...).
that is, those that are most obedient unto it, meaning believers. For a King
does not more manifestly regine over any, the^ those which freely and willingly
obey his Laws. See also his judgment constant to himself in his annotations
upon 2 Cor. 3. 11. In what regard the ministry of Moses is abolshed;
concluding that the ministry of the Law is ever to be retained in the Church.
And in his notes upon 1 Ioh: 2. 7. he says. Neither is the Law abolished by
the Gospel so far forth as it commands that which is right: Neque enim
Evangelio Lex (...) est praecipit. sed, etc.
but only so far as it threatens death to all that do not perfectly
fulfill it: and as the Law by the terrors of death admonishes us to think of
seeking life in the Gospel, so the Gospel supplieth us with the grace of
regeneration, whereby according to the measure of the spirit and grace, Vt
Lexiam sua vis sit nobis secundum interiorem hominem Magister.
we begin to will and to do: that now the Law becomes to us in respect of
the inner man, a sweet Master, as the Apostle plentifully teaches, Rom: 6. 7.
and 8. chapters.

The third is learned Doctor Whitaker, the Jewel of the University of
Cambridge, who when Duraeus the Jesuit objected against Mr. Luther the same
which these Libertines affirm of him, that it was his judgment that the
Decalogue appertains not to Christians; thus gravely answers: That Luther
most truly affirmed the Decalogue, that is, that condition of the Decalogue,
either of full and perfect obedience, or of malediction for disobedience not
now to pertain to Christians; because Christ to them has taken away that
condition. 2. That Luther says no more than the Apostle does in six or seven
places there alleged: Per Lutheri latera Apostolo vulnus infligunt.
and therefore they must first accuse the Apostle, or through Luthers sides
wound the Apostle. 3. He sets down his own judgment most expressly. The Law
(says he) pertains to Christians; Lex pertinet ad Christianos, nec id unquam
negavit Lutherus: nam illa tustitia Legi^ (...) Lib. 8. de paradox, p. 703
neither did Luther ever deny it: for that justice of the Law is immortal, and
every one ought to endeavor with all his strength to live most exactly
according to the prescript of the Law. Thus we have this pro^ound and most
worthy Doctor affording us a double strength; and together with (...) brings
us Mr. Luther wholly and constantly avouching the same truth which we have
defended through our whole discourse.

The fourth is, judicious Mr. Perkins, from whose gracious mouth and Ministry
I received in my youth often the same holy truth, as now in his fruitful
writings appears every where. As in his golden chain, chap: 31. having set
down the use of the Moral law in the unregenerate, he concludes, that the
use of the Law in the regenerate is far otherwise: for it guides them to new
obedience, which obedience may be acceptable to God through Christ. And upon
Gal: 3. 12. he answers this question; why the Lord says, He that does the
things of the Law shall live: considering that no man since the fall can do
the things of the Law: and shows that still the Lord repeateth his law in the
old tenure: 1. To teach that the law is of a constant and uncheangable nature:
2. to advertise us of our weakness and show us what we cannot do: 3. To put
us in mind still to humble our selves, after we have begun by grace to obey
the law; because even then we come far short in doing the things which the
law requires at our hands. And on verse 23. he inquireth, that now seeing
faith is come, what is the guard whereby we are now kept?

Answ. The precepts of the Moral Law. The sayings of the wise are as nails,
or stakes fastened, to range men in the compass of their own duties.
Ecclesiast. 12. 11. And most plainly he coucheth our whole doctrine concerning
the Law, in the answer of our question upon verse. 15. eiusdem capitis. The
question is how far the Moral Law is abrogated. Answer. Three ways. 1. In
respect of Justification. 2. Of malediction. 3. In respect of rigor. For in
them that are in Christ, God accepts the endeavor to obey for obedience it
self. Nevertheless (says he) The Law as it is a rule of good life, is
unchangable, and admits no abrogation: And Christ in this regard did by his
death establish it. Romans 5. 31.

And on c. 4. 5. The Law must be considered two ways. First as a rule of life.
Thus Angels are under the Law, and Adam before his fall, and the Saints now in
heaven: and none yield more subjection to the Law than they, and this
subjection is their liberty. Again consider it as a grievous yoke three ways,
none can bear it, etc. And in his Treatise of conscience, cap. 2. says, That
the Moral Law binds the consciences of all men, at all times to obedience.

The fifth is our learned and industrious Doctor Willet: Bellarmin (says he)
is not ashamed to slander us, that we affirm christian liberty to stand
herein, that we are altogether freed from the obedience and subjection of the
Law: Vt Moses cum suo decalogo nihil ad not pertinent. But we call God and all
the world to record, that we witness no such thing: knowing tha-Christ came not
to dissolve, but to fulfill the Law. Here therefore Bellarmin fights with his
own shadow. But Christian liberty consists in three things that we are
exempted: 1 From Ceremonies: 2 From the curse and guilt: 3 From the servitude
and reign of sin. etc. And upon Exodus cap. 20. commandment 10. quest. 9.
says thus. The Moral Law is not now in force quoad justificationem: that is,
in respect of justification; but it binds quoad obedientiam, in respect of
obedience, for we are bound to keep all the precepts of the Law: but yet quoad
modum obedientiae et terrorem, in respect of terror, and rigorous manner of
obedience we are not bound. etc.

The sixth is that grave and learned Bishop Downam, whom I must honorably
mention, not only for his worthy parts and labors in the Church; but in the
special reference of a painful and worthy Tutor and teacher of my self in
the University. That right Reverend Bishop, in his Treatise entitled, The
doctrine of Christian liberty, does exactly (as his manner is) open and clear
this whole doctrine, and in section or paragraph 15. has these words: The
Papists charge us, that we place Christian Liberty in this, that we are
subject to no Law in our conscience, and before God, and that we are free from
all necessity of doing good works, which is a most divelish slander; for though
we teach that the obedience to the Law, is not required in us to Justification:
but that we are free from the exaction of the Law in that behalf: yet we deny
not, but that unto sanctification, the obedience of the Law is required, and we
by necessity of duty bound to the observation thereof. And again, We confess
to be free from obedience, is to be servants of sin, and the willing and
cheereful worship of God is true liberty.

And we acknowledge that the Moral Law of God is perpetual and immutable, and
that this is an everlasting truth, that the creature is bound to worship and
obey his Creator: and so much the more bound, as he has received the greater
benefits. And after, the more a man is assured of his free justification, the
better he is enabled, and the more he is bound to obey it. And the Law has
singular use in them that are justified, 1. as a rule of direction for all
obedience. 2 As a glass of detection of our imperfection to keep us humble. 3
As a rod of correction in respect of he flesh and old man for mortification
etc. And concludes that section thus. We are therefore in our sanctification
freed, though not from the obedience; yet from the servitude and bondage of the
Law, in three respects.

The seventh is, that learned Bishop Davenant a special ornament of our
Church, and one worthy to succeed that famous Jewel in the sea of Salisbury.
In his elaborate commentary upon Coloss: has these words on cap: 2. 14. Cum
Chirographum legis abr^gatum et deletum sit quoad vim damnatoriam, colligimus
illud adhuc habere vim di^rectoriam: non igitur, etc.
Seeing this handwriting of the Law is abrogated and abolished in respect of
the damnatory power of it; we gather that it yet retains a directory power;
we may not therefore hence take to our selves a liberty to sin, but an
alacrity in our service to God, etc.

The eighth is, Bishop Cowper* an ingenious and reverend Divine, who in his
fruitful Commentary on the 8. to the Romans, delivers himself wholly unto
us in this point, and in the end of the 4 verse has these words:

Albeit by Christ we be delivered from the curse of the Law, yet we are not
exempted from the obedience thereof. In respect of the one, the Apostle said,
we are not under the Law, but under grace. In respect of the other he had said,
that the Law is good, and our Savior protests, he came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it, both in himself and his members, not only by
righteousness imputed, but also inherent. For the Law stands to us as a rule of
our life; we love the holiness thereof, and strive to conform our selves unto
it.

The ninth is that most sound and learned professor of Divinity in Basil,
Amandus Polanus, who in the 6. book of his Syntagma cap. 10. proves the
decalogue, which is the sum and substance of the Moral Law, to belong unto
believers, and is of great use among Christians, by nine strong arguments. I
will forbear the recital of them, because the book is common, and easy to
be consulted.

The tenth is learned Amesius, professor of Divinity in the University of
Franeker, Quasi abrogata et quoad ^im iustificandi, et quo^^ vim condemnandi,
etc.
who speaking of the Moral Law says, that although in respect of the
faithful, it is as it were abrogated, both in respect of the power of
justifiing which it had in the state of integrity: and in respect of the power
of condemning, Valet tame^ ac viget quoad vim dirigendi, et aliquam etiam vim
retinet condemnandi, quia peccatum arguit, et condemnat^m ipsis fidelibus,
quamvis, etc.
which it had in the state of sin: yet it is of strength and force, in respect
of the power of directing. Yea, and it reteineth (says he) some power of
condemning: because it rebukes, and condemns sin, even in the faithful:
although it cannot indeed condemn the faithful themselves, that are not under
the Law, but under grace.

The Eleventh is Hieronimus Zanchius, a laborious and perspicuous writer. Who
in 1 Ioh. 2. says, Observatio^ Legis est ne^essaria Christiano homini, neque a
fide seperari potest.
that the observation of the Law is necessary to a christian man: neither can
it be separated from faith. And in his Common place on Ephesians. 2: Loco quinto de
legis Mosaicae abrogatione, sect. 9. speaking of the Moral Law says, consider
the substance of it, it is manifest that it is not abrogated: that is, that
Christ has not delivered us from our duty, whereby we are bound according to
the eternal will of God, to worship God, to love our neighbor, and to demean
our selves honestly and modestly, etc. And after, If we consider the substance
of the Law, that is, the sum of doctrine concerning piety; we deny with
Christ, that the Law is simply abrogated; who said, I came not to destroy the
Law. But if we consider the accidents which we have declared, it is manifest
that it is abrogated. Thus Mr. Zanchius wholly agrees with us in our grounds
laid down for the opening of the point: cap. 2.

The twelfth is our own worthy Estius, from whose learned tongue I received
many gracious instructions in my youth whilst he lived in the University. This
godly man in his exposition on the commandments, page: 37. says, That the Law
shall keep the use that ever it had since the fall till the general
resurrection, and therefore is as needful now to be understood as at any time.
To whom agrees Bucanus, who says, that the Law in respect of the precepts of
it shall not be abolished neither in this life, nor in the life to come; for
God requires perpetual love both toward himself, and toward the Creator suo
ordine, etc. loc. de lege.

All these worthies have passed a joint sentence against these violaters of
Gods most righteous Law, and pronounce them guilty of high treason and
transgression against the Lord; and of spreading scandalous words and writings
against the dignity, equity and validity of his eternal Law; and so against
himself the most righteous judge and author of it: and in so high and
presumptuous a sin, in vain expect they that any should plead for them. It
was Elies speech to his sons, 1 Samuel: 2. 12.
sons of Belial, that is, lawless men, and Libertines, that knew not the
Lord. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge it: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall plead for him? verse 25. which implies a
sin of an high nature directly against God, and very hardly forgiven: surely
so is this sin of an high nature directly against the glory of God, and the
majesty of his Law; yet upon their return and repentance, as they have a
Mediator in heaven to plead pardon, so also the Saints in earth cannot but
plead and pray for the pardon of those for whom Christ in heaven pleads: and
even so is our earnest prayer that they may be helped out of their error, and
come back into the way of truth. But in one sense (howsoever they applaud
themselves) they have none to plead for them, never a learned man, nor
judicious Divine that came in my hands, or under mine eye in all my reading for
these many years; nor any classicke author that leans that way. I must
needs witness to Mr. Calvin, that they learned not their delirium (as he
calls it) out of books. And if you will yet persist selfe-wise, and ascribe
more to your selves, than to all the Protestant Divines of such singular
learning and holiness; then may you make use of my service in producing so
many godly writers and witnesses against you; I have one of your frantic
papers, that have accursed four most worthy Preachers by name, and all the
rest whom you are not at leisure to name, that are on their opinion and
practice.
to fill up your list and catalogue of false teachers that preach not Christ
aright: and to the names of London Preachers, which your scandalous scattered
papers, and lost libells mention as Pharisaicall enemies to the truth now by
you discovered: you may put in Calvin, Beza, Whitakers, Perkins, and the rest
of the godly Bishops, and renowned Doctors, who are so clear also against
that which you call truth. It will make a greater noise, that you can contemn
such conquered adversaries: for what are your London Ministers to them? Much
rather do I wish you would in time consider how dangerous your way now is,
while you rise up against the most impregnable, and unconquerable Law of God:
how the Scripture brandeth them for wicked men, Prove. 28, 4
that forsake the Law, Psalm: 119, 15
and depart from the Law; and much more that disclaim and revile it. And if
those that be partial in the Law, that is, take some, and leave some, be made
despised of God, Mal. 2. 9
and vile before all people: how much more shall those that reject it all, and
in every part, be justly branded (as you are) for a vile generation of men.

CHAP. 12.
Containing the conclnsion, and a short direction how the people of God should
carry themselves toward the Law of God.

THese premises being all duly considered, it remains that such as desire to
learn Christ aright, should take his directions how to demean themselves
toward his Law, which is so holy, just, and good. To which purpose it shall
not be amiss to lay these grounds in our consciences, and order our selves by
them.

First, That in the Liberty from the Law, consists the chief stay and comfort
of a Christian; because being now freed from the guilt of sin, from the curse
of sin, and from exaction of an inherent and personal righteousness to
justification: he may now without respect of his own obedience, and without
regard of any righteousness of his own, rely upon the mercies of God, and
merits of Christ, and challenge his righteousness before God, with the the
Apostle, Phil: 3 9.

Secondly, That upon this liberty of justification, (wherein is no respect at
all of our personal obedience) issues another liberty of sanctification;
which is a freedom from the bondage and stain of sin, not wholly and at
once, (as is our justification) but in part and degrees: and here although the
obedience of the Law be quite shut out of our justification, yet it is required
unto sanctification, and we necessarily bound unto it; but not to be thereby
justified, seeing we must necessarily be justified before we can be obedient.

Thirdly, that the Law is an eternal doctrine, Psalm. 119. 89.
and abides for ever; yea David says, it endures for ever in heaven: that is,
not only his decree appears stable by the government, and perpetual Law
which he has set in the heavens, and cannot be broken: but as Saint Basil
expounds it, it abides inviolably observed by heavenly inhabitants, even the
holy Angels themselves: so as though it may be contradicted, controverted, and
resisted by Libertines on earth; yet it is not abrogable for ever, but abides
stable in heaven. Do the Angels in heaven observe it as a rule of holiness,
and do not the Saints in heaven? do they live by diverse charters? And if the
Saints in heaven, who have attained full perfection, and perfect
sanctification, are bound to the Law, are the Saints in earth so perfect, as
they are loose from it? Has not Christ done as much for them as for these?

Fourthly, That the Law of God is the rule of godly life: Psalm. 119. 24
in which regard holy David calls it a counselor, and a directer unto good
duties: and therefore we must acknowledge the necessity of this part of the
word. The Sun is not more necessary for the day, nor the Moon to govern the
night, Psalm, 119, 105.
nor a lantern or candle for a dark house; than this part of the word, so
long as we are in the night of the world: for without this light we grope in
the dark, nothing can be seen, no action can be well done, nothing wanting
can be found, no crooked thing can be straightened, no straight thing tried;
nay all our way in which this light of God shines not, is darkness, and
tends to utter darkness. The pillar of the cloud and of fire, was not more
necessary to Israel in the wilderness, for their station or motion toward
Canaan, than is this shining pillar of Gods Law to guide us unto heaven: and as
it was their happiness that their pillar lasted them till they entered Canaan;
and it had not been for their ease to have rejected it in their way: so ought
we to esteem our selves happy in the fruition of this holy doctrine, and
direction; and on the contrary these Libertines to be unhappy men, who being in
as dark, as heavy and dangerous a way, and wilderness, put out their light,
and break to pieces, and cast away their lantern.

Fifthly, Being the rule of godly life, we must square all our duties thereby;
even as a workman applies his rule to every part of his work, and declines
not to the right hand or to the left: and holy wisdom requires no less, but
that, that should be the square of all, which must be the judge of all things
done in the flesh be it good or evil. And hence is it that the LORD writes
his Law by his spirit in the spirits of the elect, and imprinteth it in the
fleshly tables of their hearts, that all their motions, actions, and affections
should be conformable unto it. But how do these lawless men, affirming the
Law to be wholly abolished, deny it to be written in their own hearts? and
consequently that they want the spirit, promised to be sent into the hearts of
the elect for this purpose: And that either themselves are none of the elect,
or that the spirit is wanting in his office, which were an high blasphemy.

Sixthly, That as the Law is a reveiler of duty, so it is a reveiler of sin
too: and discovers the sinful defects of our best obedience. And because by
the Law is the knowledge of sin, therefore by the obedience and works of the
Law can no flesh be justified. That same Law that discovers and condemns a
traitor, cannot acquit him: and it were madness for him to expect life, from
that Law which has sentenced him with death. Shall frantic Papists ever
find life and righteousness by the works of that Law which condemns that very
fact? And are not they next to fr^nzy, that after all this so open disclaiming
it; would fasten upon us, that because we teach the Law, we therefore teach
justification by the Law. Nay, we are so far from consenting to any such
poisoned assertion. That when the Gospel promises salvation and eternal
life, to repentance and good works, we deny them promised to these, as
performances of the Law, but only as they are fruits of lively faith, by which
the promises of eternal life are apprehended.

Seventhly, that the Law being a constant reveiler of sin, we must by the
Law be still drawn nearer unto Christ: not only by the Law to see our sin,
and in our sin our need of Christ: but we must see the Law fulfilled for us
in Christ: else can we never look comfortably toward the Law. And because it
revelleth sin: not only before we come to Christ, to bring us first unto
him, but it reverses sin when we are come to Christ: we must by it be
brought to Christ still. And it is false that they say, that the Law is indeed
a scoolemaster to bring us once unto Christ, but then we have done with it,
and it with us; for it must ever bring us to Christ* so long as by sin we
estrange our selves from him, or him from us. That place in Galat. 3. 24, 25.
nothing contrarieth our doctrine: Non amplius sub paedagogo, quoad
^ustificationem, damnationem, coactionem, significatinem; sed quoad doctrinam,
obedientiam. Par. in locum.
After faith came we were no longer under a schoolmaster: that is, such a
schoolmaster as it was. The place is notably opened by learned Pareus, to whom
for brevity sake I remit the Reader.

Eighthly, We must conceive the Law in the substance of it, the image of God
written in the heart of Adam in innocence, and by the finger of the same spirit
written in the hearts of all the elect: and consequently must fear and tremble
to sin against this Law, which flows from the righteous nature of God, and
the impugning of which is the violating of his own image, and nature, so far
as we can reach it. A man may break the Princes Law, and not violate his
Person* but not Gods: for God and his image in his Law, are so straightly united,
as one cannot wrong the one, and not the other.

Ninthly, We must frame our selves to love this righteous Law, for this image
of God engraven upon it: yea and the more that wicked men hate and resist it,
the more that sons of Belial rise up against it; we must love it the more,
obey it so much the more, maintain and defend the power and honor of it, with
so much the more zeal and earn estnesse, so did holy David, Ps. 119. 126.
Wicked men have destroyed the Law, therefore I love it above fine gold; where
the Prophet concludes them enemies to God, that are enemies to the Law. And 2.
that then is the time to plead for God and his Law, when wicked men most
oppose and oppress it. Now then is the time when the godly must awaken
themselves not only to observe, but also to preserve it.

FINIS.

