Tho Iolley Esquire. F. S. A.




A Valorous and Perilous Sea Fight.

Fought with three Turkish Ships, Pirates or men of War, on the coast of
Cornwall, (or Western part of England) by the good Ship named the Elizabeth,
of Plimmouth, She being of the Burden of 200 Tuns, which fight was bravely
fought, on Wednesday, the 17 of June last past. 1640.

London Printed by E. P. for Edward Wright, dwelling near Christs-Church gate.
1640.

A VALOROVS Sea Fight.
MAster Hackluit, in his well composed book of Voyages, does truly relate of
many brave Attempts, and resolute Sea Fights, and withal he does name the
Chief Commanders and others who valiantly lived and died in the said
Achievements; as Sebastian Cabot a Venetian borne, brought up in England,
VVindam, Willoughby, Chancelour, Grinvill, Cavendish, Gilbert, Chidlie,
Frobisher, Hawkins, Clifford, Wingfield, Devoreux, Bascarvill, Drake, Rawleigh,
who have all left famous remembrances of their valiant adventurous and
fortunate services performed by them for the honor of their Prince and
country, and their own just commendations to the end of time. And in these
later times this Kingdom has produced many brave and able mem, that (to the
admiration of the world) have plowed and furrowed the dangerous Ocean, and
(Maugre all oposition) bin profitable and victorious, for the service and
renown of our Nation, such as were and are Pennington, Nicholas, Maldam,
Weddell, Hyde, and many others, who do deserve to have their names enrowl'd in
the Book of Fame. So (for the continuation of this Kingdoms renown) it
pleases God to supply us with valiant and undaundted Spirits, such as these of
whom I am to make mention in this following discourse.

On the 17. day of June last, a Ship of the Port of Plimmouth, of 200. in
burden, (the name of her being the Elizabeth, and the owner of her is our
Master Abraham Iennings, the Ship having binne in a Voyage to New- England, and
thence to Virginia, after some 12. Months time returned Laden from thence, and
making their best speed for their arrival at home, they were (on the day
aforesaid) about two of the clock in the morning, within two Leagues near to
the Lizzard, which is a small Island, a good Sea mark on the West part of the
mount in Cornwall between Scilly and the main, Assaulted furiously by 3
Turkish Pirates (or men of war) where there was a most Bloody and cruel
bickering. The accursed Mahometans, having gotten the wind of the Elizabeth,
which was a great advantage for them, their Admiral being in burden 230.
Tons, with 22. Pieces of ordnance in her. The Vice Admiral was of a greater
burden, about 300. Tons, with 26. Pieces of ordnance: The Rear Admiral was
in burden 200. Tons, and had but 8. Pieces in her. So the Turks had in
their three Ships 56: Pieces of Artillery, the number of their men is unknown.

On the other side the Elizabeth had but 30. men, and three of that small
number were Passengers, or (as they term them planters) and they had but ten
Pieces of ordnance aboard, and of those, they could make use of, or plye but
five Gunnes, the Ship was so pestered with packes, and other carriage between
the Decks. The Master of the Ships name was Master Doves, (who dwelt in
Plimmouth) a Man of an excellent and invincible Spirit, as the sequel of the
fight, and his worthy life, and unfortunate death will show.

The fight continued about the time between seven and eight hours, and though
the English Ship had but 3. Pieces of ordnance (that could be used) yet by Gods
Assistance the Master Gunner (being a skillful valiant and experienced man, he
so plied and played upon the miscreants, that he killed many of them.

The Gunners of the Ships name is John Whidon. And all the while that the
Master of the Ship (Master Doves) most manfully and courageously, did labor
and bestire himself, and by his Valorous example gave encouragement to all the
rest of his Company that were in the Ship, amongst whom the three Passengers
which were with us, did most worthy deserving service. The Master still cheered
them up, and told them, that (by Gods Grace) he would not give away his ship
and himself to those accursed mis-believers, but that he was resolved with
Christian courage to fight it out so long as his life lasted.

And indeed he was as good as his word, for being so long a time furiously
assaulted with many Ordnance, and about 500 Enemies, and also being three times
boorded, and entered by the Turks (who were also thrice beaten out again)
their ship being fired, and their round house burnt, their maine-sayle was
likewise consumed in the flames, and their rigging and Cordage cut down and
spoiled. At last the Master was slain, ending his days Nobly, likewise the
Masters-mate, and the Pilot, and Quartermaster were killed outright, they having
done as much as men could do against so strong an enemy, kept Master Doves
company, both in life and death, and in heavenly happiness.

In this terrible turmoyle, there were two of the Turks had got themselves up
into the Top, and one of the three passengers (with a Musket) shot at them, and
killed them both: one of those slain Pirates, was a man of an extraordinary
great stature, and for his Corpulency, not to be equaled amongst them all; he
being killed, the English did cleave his head, and then they divided it from his
carcass, they showed the head and corpse to the Turks, and with renewed
courages and unwearied Valor they haled to the enemy, and in braving manner
said, come aboard you Dogs if you dare, and fetch your countryman; But the
Turks finding the business so hot, and the men so resolute, that their
damnable courages were quel'd, that they had no more mind to assault the
English Ship any more. So they in deriding and showting to the Turks, cast the
dead body over-boord, on the one side of the Ship, and the Cloven head into the
Sea, on the other.

There were also three Turks more slain that came aboard. But how many the
number of them that were killed is uncertain, therefore let them reckon them.
But surely their loss must needs be great, for the Master Gunner was so
diligent, wary and expert, that it was not perceived that there was a shot
lost or spent in vain, and indeed for his skill and courage, he is esteemed
not to have many fellows in the West parts of England, for his knowledge in
that Art.

The loss on the Christian side, were those four men, which were killed
outright (as is aforesaid) there were also eight more of them dangerously
wounded, whereof one of them is dead, since their arrival at Plimmouth; And
(praise be given to God) the other seven are all on the mending hand and
indifferent well, so that there is no doubt of their recovery, to health and
limbs unmaimed, only their scars will remain, as marks of their Valor, and
badges of famous reputation.

The Master Gunner, being the Chief Commander left alive in the Ship, did
hail to the Turks again, and dared them to come on again and try the other
bowt. But they had had such proof of his courage and knowledge before in the
fight, being so shattered, torn, and gauled; That they could neither boast of
Victory, nor durst then venture any more to gain it, for they perceived the
Gunners resolution was never to yield, and so they fell to their sails, and
tacklin, and very much discontented slunk away, making their moanes to Mahomet.

There were certain Hogs, and Powltrey, in the Elizabeth; And in the heat of
the fight, (the Ship being much rent and torn with the Shot of the enemy) the
poor Swine and Pullen were killed, partly with the Bullets, but most with the
shatters and splinters of shivered Planks, and timber of the Ship. Wherefore
(in derision and scorn of the Turks, who do abhor and hold all manner of
Swines flesh in abomination) The English mariners lifted up the Hogs, and
showed them to the Turk, as it were in a merry or jeeringway, to invite them
to come aboard of their Ship to eat some Porke. Thus (by the merciful
assistance of God) this one poor Ship, so weakly manned, and so meanly
furnished with Artillery or Ordnance, against so many, and so great a
multitude, (as were 3. Ships, 500. Men, and 56. Pieces, maintain a fight
almost 8. hours, and (with the loss of 3. Men) not only kill and spoil a
great number of their enemies, but also to escape them, and come off with
reputation, (as it were with Conquest, Triumph, and Victory. It is almost to be
thought miraculous and beyond belief, but that the truth of the matter is so
plainly manifested that all oposing unbelief is vain and frivolous.

For after the Turks had quite left them, they began every man to work hard,
some to lay the dead corpse as decently and cool as time and place would give
them leave, some others (who had escaped hurts, or had not received great
harms in the fight) did their best to help, dress and comfort their wounded
men: And some of them (with all speed and diligence) fell to mending their
Ropes, Cordage, Rigging, and Sails, which were cut, broken, spoiled, and burnt
in the fight; So that no one was Idle, every man employed in doing something
necessary, that (by Gods guidance) the Ship and goods arrived safe in the
harbor, or port of Plimmouth. The next morning, which was Thursday, the
eighteenth day of June last 1640.

The bodies of the four men that were slain aboard the Elizabeth, were
brought on shore, and in seemly manner buried. And at their funerals they had
two Learned, Accute, and Gratulatorie Sermons, the one of them was preached at
the Master of the Ships funeral, by the Archdeacon of Exeter, who is Vicar of
Plimmouth, and the other was preached (at the Masters-mates funeral) by Master
Thomas Bedfourd, Batchelour in divinity, and Lecturer of Plimmouth, and this
may suffice for sufficient testimony of the certainty of this former Relation.

But if there be any that be yet doubtful or diffident in this case, let them
(for their further satisfaction) read this following examination, of John
Whiddon, the valiant and well deserving Gunner, whom my Pen cannot praise
enough, nor these ungrateful times gratify him; Read but his examination as
follows, and be confirmed in the Truth, for this is a true Copy of it, which
was sent up from Plimmouth, to London, to the right Honorable the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.

The examination of John Whiddon of Plimmouth, in the County of Devon, Gunner,
had and taken at Plimmouth aforesaid, before Robert Gubbs, Merchant, Major of
the Borough of Plimmouth aforesaid, and one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, within the said Borough, the nineteenth day of June, 1640.
THe said Examinant says, that on Wednesday last about two of clock in the
morening, being the 17 of this instant June, he being Gunner of a Ship called
the Elizabeth, of Plimmouth, of two hundred Tuns burden, or thereabouts,
having ten pieces of Ordnance aboard her, and coming from Virginia, bound for
Plimmouth, two leagues off of the Lizard, they met three Turkish men of War,
who weathred and kept the said Elizabeth from the shore, and gave her chase,
and says, that the Admiral was a ship of 250 Tuns burden or therabouts: and
had 22 pieces of Ordnance aboard her, and the Vice Admiral was a ship of 300
Tuns, and had 26 pieces of Ordnance; and the Rere-Admirall was a ship of 200
tuns, and had eight pieces of Ordnance aboard her, and believes that
heretofore she was a prize, and at first they all showed both Dutch and
English colors, and had at least 500 men aboard them, who between three and
four of the clock in the morning, came up with them and boarded them, and
continued fight with them, until eleven or twelve of the clock that day;
during which time, the company of each of the said Turkish men of war,
boarded them three times, and fired their round House, killed their Master,
Masters Mate, the Pylate, and Quartermaster, and hurt eight other of their
Company, fired their maine sail, cut down all their riggin, and with their
great Shot did them and their Ship a great deal of hurt and damage, and
afterward did leave them; presently after within two Leagues, or thereabouts
off of the shore, this Examinant, and the Company of the said Elizabeth,
discovered eleven small Vessels floating on the stream, without sails, or any
men in them at all, which this Examinant, the Gunner of the Ship, does very
certainly believe were taken by the said Turkish men of War, and their
Company carried away by them, and does say, that upon the eighteenth of this
instant month of June, about four of the clock in the morning, they came
into the harbor of Plimmouth.

A Friendly, true, deserved Commendation and encouragement of all Mariners, and
the noble Art of Navigation with the most excellent and necessary use of
Shipping.
THe use of Ships and shipping, is of most worthy and memorable Antiquity.
For the blessed Patriarch Noah, built an Arc, (by the Commandment of God) of
which Arc, Noah was Admiral, Master, and Pilot. That Arc was then the
Militant Church, the whole Congregation being but 8 persons, and yet though
they were but few, they were not all sound in Religious Piety, there was a Cham
amongst them: All the people of the world, that had not grace to come aboard of
the Arc were drowned, wherein was prefigured that as many as will not come,
and be of Gods Church, are like to be cast away.

And as the Arc was tossed and weather-beaten upon the troublesome waves of the
All-Sea World (or Universal deluge) till such time as she happily grounded on
the mountain of Ararat in Armenia, Genesis 8.4. And so shall the Church be
continually turmoyl'd with tempests of tribulations, Seas of sorrow, storms of
strife, she being like a good peaceable Ship most inestimably richly laden, is
daily assaulted by 3. wicked Pirates, (the World, the Flesh, and the Devil) who
with their Associates and Vassals, (the Ocean or Sea of Rome, the Schismatic
Gulf of Separatisme, and the rough Lake of Nonconformisme,) she has not any
Ankering, rest, or Moareing at all, but upon the mountain of Holiness, the
Rock of righteousness, the True Cornerstone, Christ Jesus.

Our Savior himself, did not only pass the Sea or Lake of Genezareth, but
he also did there (in the Ship) most miraculously command, and styled the
raging winds and Seas, and he did grace one Ship so much, that he preached out
of the said Ship, or another, to the people that stood on the bank of the Sea.
Mat. 8.23. Mat. 13.2. Mar. 4.36. Luke 8.22. And the Apostles (for the enlarging
and divulging their Ministry, which was the means of the knowledge of
Salvation) did make use of Ships, as it appears in diverse places of Scripture.

A Ship well governed at Sea, is an Epitomy of a well guided Church, and
commonwealth on the Land, and it is a thing to be wished, that the earth were
as free from some sins, as the salt water is. For in a Ship at Sea, it is a
rare matter, to see a man play the brutish parts of a Glutton, or Drunkard.
There are no wrangling Lawyers, nor wicked Projectors, a Usurer or a Catchpole
are as rare to be found there, as it is to find Chastity in the Stews. In a
Ship is abstinency from swearing, and incontinency, and twice a day there is
(or ought to be) prayer and thanksgiving offered up to God.

Ships, are the impregnable Wooden walls of great Britain and Ireland. And
the winged flying and floating Castles, forts, and fortifications for defense
against foreign invasion and domestical rebellion: they were of that
serviceable use in the reign of King Edgar, that it is said that he did often
sail round about this Island with 1000 ships.

King Solomon had his Cedar brought (for the building of the Temple, by Sea to
Ioppa. 2. Chron. 2.16. And he had also brought him in Ships from Ophir, 450.
Talants of Gold. 2. Chron. 8.18. Besides Algummim wood, (of which Trees there
were no more to be seen to this day) 1. King. 10.12. Besides, precious stones
and jewels, were all brought by such Mariners and Ships as Hiram King of Tyrus
lent to King Solomon.

It is recorded that the warlike Virago Queen Semiramis, had 2000. Sail of
Ships and other Vessels, when she made war against Cyrus King of Persia,
Mark Anthony (at the Battle of Actium) with Cleopatra his Egyptian Concubine
Queen, had 800. sail of Ships and galleys, against Octavius Augustus Caesar,
and Caesar overcame that great number with 250 Ships; read Plutarcks Lives,
Page 1000. William the Conqueror came out of Normandy, and invaded England
with 896. ships. Read Stowes Chronicle: King Charles of France, fought with
1200. Ships against King Richard the second, King of England; in revenge of an
overthrow by sea that was given to the French by King Edward the third, who was
King Richards Grandfather. In the year 1571. At the Battle of Lepanto (which
is a gulf or sea near Corinth, in Greece) between the united Christians and
the Turks, on the seventh of October, the Christian fleet being of great and
small, but 206. Sail. The Turks were in number of Ships and galleys 333. in
the 14. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when Selimus the second of that name
was Turkish Emperor. Then and there (aforesaid) was a bloody Battle fought
where (to the great joy and safety of all Christendom) the Christians in five
hours won a notable and memorable Victory, and very few of the miscreant
Turks, went home to carry news to Constantinople. Read Knoles Turks
History, or else Read Stowe, page 670.

And it ought thankfully ever to be remembered, the great and wonderful Victory
that God vouchsafed to give us, from the Spanish invasion 1588. in the 31.
year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Spanish Armado being 128. Vessels
for war (besides victuallers) the English navy being (one with another) 104.
sail, and there was a supply of 340. ships more which the Prince of Parma
(Alexander Fernesius) was to bring for the Spanish Aid, and Englands ruin. But
wind, weather, and the Hollanders kept Parma and his fleet in the havens of
Graveling, Dunkirke, Newport, and some other Ports of Flanders, so that by Gods
assistance, the Valor and Valiant service of the English mariners was so
prevailing, that the Spaniards, were beaten, battered, slain, taken, sunk,
and so shattered, tattered, and scattered, there were not many of them left to
make report in Spain, of their entertainment in England.

Thus having showed partly the Antiquity of shipping, with the services which
they do for, and in matters of war, so it is fit to be considered what
commodious uses are made of shipping, and mariners in time of peace.

It is manifest that as God has been mercifully, liberally, bountiful, to
all Nations and people of the world, giving to each Climate and Country means
for the maintaining of life, yet he has not given all kinds of commodities to
any one place, Kingdom or dominion. But for the society of mankind he has
ordained negotiation commerce and Traffic. The gold and silver jewels of
India, the honey, wax, hemp, and furs of Russia; the winds, oils, spices,
drugs, sugers, silks, stuffes, Copper, cotton, mashes, yards, pitch, rosen,
tar, turpentine, fruits, fish, coals, and millions of commodities more (I
had almost forgotten Tobacco) from America, and some rattels, babyes, and
Hobby-horses from Holland) all these, were it not for shipping, mariners,
Merchandise, and Traffic, we (in England) were like to want, besides millions
of commodities more, which are endless and impossible by me to be named; and
other Nations would be destitute of our Lead, Tin, Leather, Cloth, Tallow,
Beer, and I know not how many other pretty things which we do vent, venture,
and spare, to all the Realms and regions almost of the whole World. By which
means customs are increased and paid, peace and unity maintained between
Nation and Nation, Merchants enriched, mariners and Seamen bred and
maintained, and many thousands of Arts, Sciences, Trades, Crafts, Mysteries,
and occupations, do live well, and innumerable numbers of poor laboring
people are set on work.

True Valor is both invinceable and impregnable, and (not savouring of dull
mortality) in spite of death is immortal. It knows that the only life is to
live well. It shows that happiness consists in wealth, for thieves may steal
that, wife, parents, children, kindred, friends, and our acquaintance may dye,
and all earthly goods may be spoiled and consumed by fire, water, time, or some
natural or Accidental way or other; but true valor is only Long-lived, for
it guids a Christian courageously all his life from whence it conducts to an
honorable Death, and Death cannot hold it, but delivers it to Fame, Fame,
lays it up in the Register of Time, and Time leaves it to everlasting
Eternity. To which in all my best wishes I do give both the dead and the
living that were in this former related Sea Fight; or have dyed or will dare to
dye for their Christian Faiths, Prince, and Country: I mean not rashness,
anger, fury, or desperate madness, for Lions, Bears, Bulls, Boares, Dogs,
Tigers, Cocks, and such unreasonable creatures, will fight, snarle, scratch,
byte, tear, rend, and destroy one another. But if it be asked wherefore they
do it, they do neither know or can tell. But true Valor indeed does know
that God has put an immortal soul into a mortal body (or transitory
tenement; to inhabit therein till such time as the (Lord of life) great
Landlord of all things, does (at his pleasure) command the tennant forth of a
poor house of clay, to an everlasting Mansion and perpetual habitation of
Happiness.

And as God delivered the Israelits out of Egypt, most miraculously, as his
Almighty power protected David, from Saul and Absolon, Daniel from the hungry
fierce Lions, Noah from the almost all devouring flood, Jonah from the Whale,
the three Children from the fiery Furnace, Job from the Dunghill,
Nebuchadnezzar from Beasts and exile; Joseph from his brethrens malice, and
Potiphars fury, Manasses from the Dungeon, Jeremy from captivity, England
from Spaines invasion, and Romes powder plot, so did he most wonderfully
preserve this poor Ship (the Elizabeth of Plimmouth) and the Valiant men
therein from Apparent danger and destruction. For the which, and all other, his
infinite undeserved mercies, to him alone be given all honor, and glory, Amen.

JOHN TAILOR.

FINIS.

