Two Sermons: THE ONE A HEAVENLY VOICE, CALLING ALL GODS people out of Romish
BABYLON. The Other AN EVERLASTING Record of the utter ruin of Romish AMALEK.

By THOMAS TAILOR, Preacher of the Word at REDDING in Berkshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the Golden
Cup in the Goldsmiths row in Cheapside. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND worthy Knights and Burgesses
of the Lower House of PARLIAMENT.
IN most humble sense of mine own unworthiness, which holds no comparison
with the height of your authority, place, judgment, and learning; I have
emboldned my self to present unto your wisdoms, this voice from Heaven,
calling all the people of God out of Babylon. For what voice can be more
worthy of audience, than a voice from Heaven? What voice more seasonable than
this, amongst the grave consultations of the most important affairs, and
weightiest causes of God, of his Majesty, and of this flourishing Kingdom? Or
who more fit to hear this voice directed to Gods people, than you, the
representation of all the people of God in this Kingdom? You, I say, who sit
in the places of your worthy Predecessors, by whose consent and assent, with
that Higher and Honorable House, the whole Kingdom was formerly set out of
Babylon, so far as (by the blessing of God) now it is. God will without me
(says Joseph) speak for the life of Pharaoh; and without me effect all his
good purposes for the prosperity of his Majesty and his people: and you,
without me, well know the managing of the weighty businesses which you have
in hand: neither can my candle add any light unto your Sun; only having
begun to speak, let me find grace in your eyes, and pardon to encourage you
in the doing of what you do. Your wisdoms know, that what were the two studs
of the house in which Sampson played, that is, Religion, and Justice in the
Commonwealth, if they be pulled down or shaken, the Church and Commonwealth
fall together, and all under the fall must needs perish: of the two, Religion
claims our first and chief care, as intending Gods glory more immediately,
and man's good, not temporary chiefly, but eternal. And therefore, whereas
heathen Governors could provide for the observation of the second Table,
Christian Governors, as the gates of the world, lift up their heads, that
Christ the King of glory may enter in among them. And all godly Parlaments
(whereof we have not a few examples in Scripture) first settled the causes of
God and Religion, and then the causes of the King, and of Civil Justice, as
all the companies gathered for the Lords battles, must say on every side of
the Host, For the Lord and for Gideon. Now of all the great and important
causes of God, Judge. 7.18.
which can be offered to your tractation, none is more weighty than the
subject of this little Treatise, none more nearly concerning your selves, to
whom the care of your brethren is now committed, as Benjamin was by his father
to Judah; and on whom (next to his Majesty, the breath of our nostrils, and
that Higher and honorable house) the care of all our safety is now laid. And
as all the voices of the land have made you the eyes of the land, so are all
the eyes of the land held upon you, to help us against these Babylonians, who
have been and are so busy to bring us back into our former Babylonish
Captivity; and to oppose your selves stoutly, with our Darius, against these
adversaries of Jerusalem, Esr. 6.6.
who like the Midianites, have too long troubled us with their wiles. And
because the planting of Christ's Kingdom is the only means to supplant the
Kingdom of Babylon, and the breath of Christ can only blast the hopes of
Antichrist, a readier way cannot be devised to effect this voice from Heaven,
than to provide that the knowledge of the Son of God may be propagated
through the land, and that the blowing of the rams horns of the Gospel may lay
down the walls of this Romish Ierico even with the ground. If your wisdoms
should send men over the Kingdom, as Moses did the spies, to search the land
of Canaan, they would bring you back a true report, that a great part of this
Kingdom still lies as a barren wilderness, destitute of the blessed means of
grace, and that many great parishes are as the mountains of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21.
on which the sweetshowers and raines of the Gospel fall not, or very
seldom; neither do the happy dewes of holy doctrine fall on them in their
night, nor the beams of the Sun of grace dart upon them in the day. These
faithful messengers would inform you, that all this waste and untilled ground
is left for the Babylonians, for Seminaries, Priests, and Jesuits to inhabit:
That these parishes are the very thickets, in which these snakes and vermins
hide themselves, who bear nothing about them but poison, treason, and
seduction. That these places of such black and reigning ignorance, lie open to
spoil and hazard, to be drawn easily away, by the poisoned breath of the most
sottish Priest, not to Popery only, but even to rebellions and treasons,
which for most part arise out of ignorant and blind zeal. And now who knows
whether the supply of this want, and the remedy of so great an evil, be
reserved for the crown of his Majesty's age, and the eternal renown of this
Honorable Parliament? So noble a work requires no less noble an Agent: such
a glorious and famous act well suiteth with him, who, for wisdom and
understanding, is the glory and fame of the whole earth. And now, noble and
worthy Gentlemen, God forbid that you should not take to heart the miseries
of your brethren wanting food, who behold our Lord Jesus Christ more grieved in
spirit, to see his Countrymen want Preachers, than when he saw them in
bondage under the Romans. God forbid that you should sin against God, and not
bestirre you by planting the true knowledge of God, to pull down the strongest
pillar of Popery, that you should not move every stone, for the beautifying
of Bethel, for the setting open of the gate of heaven here upon earth, for the
establishing of Gods pure worship, and for the removal of every scandal, and
advantage of Babylon. Go on therefore (worthy men) in the Lords strength,
open your mouths for the dumb and silent, and be faithful mediators for the
Kingdom of Christ, as you desire him to be a faithful Mediator for you in
the Kingdom of his Father. And from hence would arise another happy fruit,
wherein the glory of God and his Gospel would shine out in great brightness,
to the infinite disappointment of these Babylonians; namely, a more religious
and conscionable observation of Gods holy Sabbaths; whose honor is woefully
violated, not without the great scandal of our religion, by ordinary travels,
both by land and by water. Oh that your wisdoms would earnestly move our
highest terrene Majesty upon earth, for the Sabbaths of the high God, that
Gods house might be frequented, and that the ways of Sion may be beaten on the
Lords day, and not the high ways through the Kingdom. What an advantage were
it toward happiness, if men careless of their own salvation, were straightly
bound to the means of knowledge? What an advantage toward your present errant
and busines^e? for as the fourth Commandment, concerning the Sabbath, is set
in the middle, as the heart of the Laws of God, sending life and vital blood
into them all: so it is the sinews of all the Laws of men, without
observation of which, all other good Laws will be but as the seven green
cords upon Sampsons arms: headstrong and impudent sinners break through them,
as easily as sire through flax, because the sword of the Lord and of Gideon go
not together. What need I here add more to so intelligent persons, but my
prayers, that you would plead this cause of his in earth, who pleads yours in
Heaven, and who will requite it seven fold into your bosoms?

And whereas the Babylonians have mightily increased of late in their hopes,
numbers, and strength, not only those foreign frogs and Locusts, the Priests
and Jesuits, have in great armies invaded our Country, but our
home-adversaries have greatly multiplied, and Recusants risen up every where
with great hopes of raising up the ruinous walls of Ierico again: We (fearing
left these sons of Zerviah may grow too strong for us) do trust and pray,
that your wisdoms (seeing the matter of religion grows somewhat more
doubtful than formerly, not by increase of Papists only, but by swarms of
Atheists, ready to take the strongest side) will set a jealous eye over those
ancient enemies and disturbers of the peace of the Gospel, and provide that
these Frogs may be taken away from us and our people, and confined to their
own sea, and rivers; for the heaps of them stink in the land: that their
merchandise be vendible no more, that their base coins be no more current
amongst us; nor such strange children (brats of Babylon) nourished any more
amongst us, unless they will do as the Kenites who joined to the Jews, Judge
(...)
and dwelt among them, only to learn the laws, worship, and institution of
the Jews more skilfully.

Look back, worthy Gentlemen, upon the zeal and former love of your famous
predecessors, who pulled down the nests of these Antichristian birds: and
hating neutrality, and thoughts of reconciling two such contrary religions
(which as iron and clay can never be tempered together;) awaken your zeal, to
make the hopes of Babylonians utterly to perish, of ever recovering their
kingdom again in this kingdom. Cause the unclean birds that flutter again
about us, with some hopes to roust and nestle among us, (if that only would
serve their turns) to know the prudence and circumspection of so grave, wise,
and godly a Senate, who are skillful not only to devise, but also to revise and
revive the good and wholesome laws enacted, and now strengthened, for the
preservation of his Majesty's person, for the prosperity of the Gospel, the
flourishing of this kingdom, and the utter subversion of Babylonish confusion
in the same. In this great work against Antichrist, show your love to Jesus
Christ. If ever you will do him an honorable service, this is the time; It
may be the whole course of many of your lives cannot do him so much pleasure:
seeing none of you know whether you shall ever attain such an opportunity.
Many other excellent services you may perform to the honor of God, and good
of your countries, as you are godly men: but now you are to serve his
providence, In hoc serviunt domino magistratus in quantum sunt magistratus, cum
ea faciunt ad serviendum illi, quae non possunt facere nisi magistratus.
and set up his glory in those high offices which only Parliament men can
perform. God who sits in the midst of Gods, sit with you all in this high
consultation; that of both your houses may be said, I^hovah Shammah, God is
there. That this convention may be remembered from one future Generation to
another; that your Noble acts in it, may be like the acts of God, which are
most perfect and happy at the last: and that thence you may reap an happy
harvest of glory from him, and with him whose glory you have aimed at, and to
your powers upheld and promoted: In whom I rest,

In all humble duty and service, THO. TAILOR.

Errata.
Page 6. l. 11. read Ethnic Rome. page 6. l. 18. read and became Christian.
page 17. l. 18. read sent. page 19. l. last, read to the third sort. page 25.
l. 3. leave out here Asa. margent, 2 King. 25. pa. 27. l. 11. read 2. Branch.
page 5. mar. for Alcusan, read Alcasar.

REVEL. 18.4. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partaker of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.


WHen Eastern Babylon was to be destroyed for her cruelty and oppression of
Gods people the Jews, the Lord graciously warns the godly in Babylon to get
out from her, Ier. 51.45.
lest they also should be wrapped up in her destruction: And when Western
Babylon is to be destroyed for her cruelty and oppression of Gods people among
the Gentiles, the same Lord, looking back to the same prophecy, upon the same
occasion, repeateth the same admonition; and urges the same reasons, to the
same persons, for the same end; that they might be safe in the destruction of
the same city Babylon in a mystery, as appears by comparing the second verse
of this chapter with this fourth verse.

The parts of the verse are two: 1. A Commandment, Come out of her my people.
2. The reasons twofold. 1. Lest ye partake in her sins, 2. and receive of
her plagues.



Every word calls for Attention.

1. If we had a voice from heaven (will the worst say) we would hear and obey:
now here is a voice from heaven.

2. A commanding voice of God, requiring simple and speedy obedience; Come out
of her.

3. A voice directed to Gods people, among whom it may presume it self welcome.

4. Gods people obey for love of virtue, and may not partake in Babylons sins.

5. Even their dullness of flesh must be quickened by fear of punishment, and
take heed they receive not of her plagues.

If you shall as Gods people, welcome this heavenly voice, and shall please to
lend me your Christian attention, I will so succinctly, as I may not be
obscure, open the parts, first the Commandment, and then the reasons, which
will furnish us with such variety of matter, as we may remit tedious both
disputes and discourses, to other auditories.

1. In the Commandment are, 1. The persons to whom it is directed: My people.
2. Whence they must depart, from her. 3. how they must depart, come out.


My people.

1. Note, Babylon is not a city of God, yet in Babylon is a people of God, for
the Church is Catholic, and though Babylon cannot be the Catholic Church, no
more than a finger can be an hand, or an hand the whole body; yet in Babylon
are some members of the Catholic Church. Babylon a wicked place, destinated to
destruction, yet God has some of his people hid in Babylon, for whose sake
Babylon holds the word of God, though obscurely, and Baptism in substance,
though very corrupt. They ask us, Where was your Church before Luther? we say,
Even in Babylon among themselves. Why do they hout at our answer as
insufficient, and not first contest against this voice from heaven, or blot
this text out of the book?

1. Babylon is cast off unto destruction; but the Lord is not unmindfull of his
people in the common perdition of Babylon. Far be it from him to do this
thing, to slay the righteous with the wicked (says Abraham) shall not the
Judge of all the world do right? Genesis 18.25.
such is his faithfulness and care over his people, who are in covenant with
him, as they shall see him find out a time, which shall put a difference
between him that swears, and him that fears an oath; between him that
fears God, and him that fears him not.

3. Babylon is hastening to destruction, but shall not be destroyed, before Gods
people in Babylon be called out for their safety. He warns Lot to get out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.15, 16.
that he may not perish with the Sodomites.

He warns the congregation to get away from the Tents of Corah, Numb. that
they might not be swallowed up with them. 16.26.
He warned his elect by a voice in Jerusalem, saying, Migremus hinc, so as they
fled into little Pella, before the destruction of the city; for though his
justice be never so fierce, yet he remembers mercy in justice, and will
rather by voice from heaven (as here) warn his children, than their safety
shall not be provided for.

4. Gods people called out of Babylon, hear and answer the call, and therefore
they are not Gods people that stay in Babylon: they only stay in Babylon after
the call, whose names are not written in the book of life, and of the Lamb,
and who are to be rolled up in the common-destruction of Babylon.

Secondly, whence must Gods people depart? from her, that is, Babylon.

As the Church of Christ is described by a woman, Rev. 12.1. so is the
Synagogue of Antichrist, Revel. 17.1. Again, as Christ, the head of his
Church, has a city for his seat and throne, which is called Jerusalem, which
was a type of the Church of God; so has the head of this Antichristian
apostasy, his seat and throne, which is called Babylon, that great city.

Now because it is granted on all hands, that Babylon is the seat of
Antichrist, it is worth inquiry what this Babylon is.

The Papists would have us to seek for Antichrist every where but where he
is, and have sought to lead us aside to many conjectures.

Some of them tell us that by Babylon is meant the wicked world; but that
cannot be, for then when Babylon falls, the world shall fall, which it does
not; for how could the Mercha^ts bewail her fall, unless they will say they
must moan her in hell?

2. Neither is the wicked world the seat of Antichrist, for he must sit in the
Temple of God, which is not the whole world.

3. Neither are the people of God called out of the world, but in a spiritual
sense, whereas here is also a local egresse out of Babylon commanded.

Some of them say, that the Eastern Babylon in Chaldea is meant, but as truly
as the former.

For 1. that was fallen a thousand years before, and how could Gods people be
called thence in S. John's time, where they had not been of a thousand years?

2. This Babylon had rule over the Kings of the earth in S. John's time, Revel.
17.8.
and therefore must needs be that State and Monarchy which then stood at Rome,
and not that which was fallen in the Chaldean Babylon.

3. This Babylon was not that in the letter, or Babylon indeed, but Babylon in
a mystery, that is, Revel. 17.5.
a State or City which resembled Babylon.

Some of them confess the truth, Bellarm. Ribera, Alcusan. Ba^on. Viegas,
Lessi^s, Malvenda, etc.
that by Babylon here is meant Rome the Western Babylon, convinced partly by
that plain description of the woman sitting on seven mountains, having seven
heads, which were seven Kings, or seven kinds of governments; partly by the
moments and weight of Reason, Augustine. Orosius, Eus^b. Hieron. Tertull. Beda,
Victorinus, Oecumenius.
and partly by the confession of so many Fathers, who all speak as plain as
we, that Rome is Babylon.

But though the Jesuits at this day seem to speak with more judgment, yet
with as little ingenuitie; for to defend their Pope and City, they would shift
it to Ethnicke Rome, which is without all color of truth.

For 1. this Babylon is the seat of Antichrist, which I think Rome was not.
For if Ethnicke Rome were the seat of Antichrist, then could not Antichrist sit
in the Temple of God; and then were Antichrist already come long since, which
they deny, and all their fable of Antichrist quite spoiled.

2. The Fathers acknowledged Babylon to be Rome in their time, many years
after it had ceased to be Heathen, and Christian.

3. Neither can it be proved that the Christians by virtue of this commandment
departed from old Ethnicke Rome, but continued constantly enduring all those
bloody persecutions raised by those Heathen Emperors.

We conclude therefore, that by Babylon is meant here not Rome Pagan, but Rome
Papal.

Q. But why is Rome called Babylon, and not Rome in plain terms?

A. Besides many Reasons which might be given both from the mysteries of
prophecies, and from the purpose of God, who would by leaving some things
obscure, exercise the minds and diligence of his people:

Here Rome is called Babylon, for the similitude and resemblance with it, so as
one egg is not liker another than Rome and Babylon. For

1. They are like in pride and power. Similis superbia.
Eastern Babylon was the seat and head of the Monarchy, (...): so the
Western Babylon ruled over the Kings and Kingdoms of the world. Both sat as
Queens over the world; both dwelt upon many waters; both swelled in magnitude
and greatness beyond all measure; both alike potent, says Orosius.

2. They are like in perfidiousnesse and treachery. Similis perfidia.
Babylon was a City estranged from the Covenant of God: so is Rome, once in
covenant, and married unto Christ, Ecclesia similis est foeminae quae ex
antiqua soelicitate excidit, ac signa tantum habet: ornament^rum en^m suorum
th^cas and arculas habet, op^bus autem sp^^^ata est. Isidor. P^lusio^. lib. 3.
epist.
but after breaking her faith by her horrible whoredom and Idolatries, she
can call Christ no more Ishi, nor Christ can call her Ammi: and though she can
show Baptism, and rehearse the Creed and Ten Commandments, (as an Harlot can
show the Marriage Ring) yet is she a wife no longer. Christ has given her a
bill of divorce, and who so marries her that is divorced for adultery is an
adulterer.

Hence is this Papal Babylon called the great whore, the whore of Babel, the
whore that sits on seven hills, and no other whore else in the world does so,
for many just Reasons.

1. As an whore is an apostate from her conjugall faith, Why Rome Papal is
called the great Whore.
and plaieth false with him whom she professes her husband; so this whore of
Babel, once married unto Christ, is now joined to another husband the Pope, who
claims to be Christ's Vicar, the husband of the Church: as if an husband must
needs have a Vicar; or as if he can be honest that is Vicar to an husband; or
she chaste that admits a Vicar to her husband.

2. As an whore inveigleth all she can by meretricious Arts, Prove. 7.13.
she draws in the young man by her flatteries and subtleties, but most of
all she allureth great persons to folly for great rewards: Even so this whore
of Babel seduceth by craft, and in a mystery, all whose names are not written
in the Book of Life; but especially she has inveigled the Kings and Princes
of the earth to commit fornication with her.

3. As the harlot loves the dark, and seeks the twilight; so this whore of
Babylon flies the light of the Scriptures, and loves the dark night of
ignorance. What else is the mother and nurse of their devotion but ignorance?
Where does Roman religion dominere, but over ignorant countries and persons?
Where do Priests and Jesuits sculke and lurk but in dens and thickets of
ignorance? When do these Owls and Bats flutter abroad but in the twilight?
Egypt covered with darkness, was covered with Locusts and Frogs, but Goshen
having light, was rid of Locusts and such vermines.

4. An whore exhausts a man's substance, and brings him to a morsel of bread:
so the whore of Rome has by cunning, and for things not worth thanks,
exhausted the chief treasures of Kings and Kingdoms. Her Peter Pence gathered
by tyranny and hypocrisy, have equalled the Kings tribute; an unsuspected
witness of her unsatiable gathering, is that Orbis in urbe, that world of
wealth, which that great City has robbed the great world of; and yet as was
said of Paulus 3. Eius avaritiae totus non sufficit Orbis.

5. An whore enervates and weakeneth the strength, and seeks the precious
life of a man: She consumes the flesh and the body, says Solomon. Prove.
5.11.
So this Whore of Babylon has weakened all the power of Princes in their own
kingdoms, claiming all their Authority, Crowns, Laws, and making them but her
vassals to execute her designs: which if any of them think unreasonable, then
by all false arts, positions and practices, she hunteth the precious lives of
such Princes, sometimes by her own Emissaries, and sometimes by their own
subjects; armed with fraud and force, with dags and daggers, with poisons or
powder-plots. And what difference, says Mariana, Marian. de reg. lib. 1. cap.
7.
whether thou killest him with poison or stab; there be many examples (says
he) both ancient and modern, of enemies killed this way.

3. They are like in state and condition. Similis s^atus.
Babylon signifies Confusion; and in both was a Confusion of tongues, that one
could not understand another. And in both a confusion of vices, and a Chaos of
all filthiness: similia mala, says Orosius, sins of highest degrees against
God and man: for what else can be expected of a people left by God? What else
but a chain of sin reaching up unto heaven, in that state the head of which
is the man of sin. I may not now rake in this sink, he had need have a
vizard on his face, that should speak or hear of Babels filthiness: the best
way to express the filth of ordure, is quickly to cover it: therefore I will
imitate the Painter, who to express the deepest sorrow that might be, did
cover the party with a veil.

Similis exitus.
4. They are parallel in their ruin and miserable destruction, which in both
is, 1. Certain. 2. Total. 3. Final.


1. Of both was said, Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen, the present tense
for the future: and ingemination or doubling of the prophecy, notes the
certainty of their ruin.

Ier. 51.37.25. Rev. 18.8. and 15.16.
2. Both Babels must be turned to heaps, both of them must be burnt, mountains
turned into ashes: as the Kings did to that Babel, so shall the ten Kings hate
this Whore, and leave her naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

Ier. 51.63. Rev. 18.21.
3. Both of them shall be finally destroyed, never to be recovered again. Both
of them shall be as a millstone cast into the sea by the Angel, never to be
lifted up any more. Ier. 50.40. Rev. 16.21.
Both of them must be destroyed as Sodom and Gomorrah, which were never
recovered. In neither of them shall be found bridegroom or bride, the sound of
millstone, or light of a candle, or any craftsman; and therefore shall neither
of them be inhabited by man any more, but Zim and Iim shall dwell there; and
the Ostriches shall dwell therein; but never shall son of man remain there
any more, neither shall Babel ever rise from the evil.

Object. But how unlikely is this, that so strong a staff and beautiful rod
should be broken to pieces? And we will be ready to say with Mary, But how
shall this be? I answer, As God rained a shower of fire and brimstone upon
Sodom, which was as the Garden of God, and turned her to ashes suddenly; so
will he rain a great shower of hail, like talents of lead, upon Babel. And as
the fair sunshine morning could not save them; no more shall the fair
sunshine of prosperity save these, for God which condemns her is a strong
Lord.

Having declared who is this Babylon, and why: now we come to the third branch
of the Commandment, Come out of her.

As by Babylon, we mean not only the walls, and plot of ground, on which the
City of Rome stands, but the whole Papal State and Religion; so the
heavenly voice enjoynes all the people of God, both a spiritual and corporal
egresse from them.

In few words take into our view, 1. The Matter. 2. The Manner of our departure.


First for the Matter, All Gods people must depart from the Romish Church, both
in Judgment and Affection.

1. In respect of spiritual presence we must depart, 1. Mente. 1. Mente.
2. Manu. 3. Corpore.


In Judgment we must renounce their Doctrine, Faith, Worship, and whole
Religion, so far as it differs from the Scriptures: and the Harmony of
Confessions of the Reformed Churches agreeable to the Scriptures.

We must also in our Judgment renounce all Roman power executed by the Pope
and his Clergy over the Scripture, over Princes and their subjects, and over
any other Churches without their own precincts.

In our Affections we must give our hearts to the truth of God, and detest and
damn to hell their blasphemous doctrines, their hateful Idolatry, gross
superstitions, wicked manners, and the detestable courses of that wicked City
and State; contrary to many Politicians, who give us their presence, but their
hearts are in Babylon: Christ has the shell, but they reserve the kernel for
Antichrist.

2. Matthew.
2. We must depart from needless association and assistance: how can we strike
hands, and embrace amity and society with such as have broken off with God?
How can iron and clay temper together? What society between light and
darkness? What agreement between a member of Christ, and a limb of
Antichrist? How can any of Gods people say, thy person shall be mine, thy
estate shall be mine, thy children shall be mine; but thy God shall not be
mine, thy Religion shall not be mine.

And for assistance we may lend Babylon no hand to uphold her, we are commanded
not to seek the prosperity of Babel all our days, because the Lord has
divoted her to destruction, but especially those, whose hands and swords God
has sanctified to this purpose: whenever God shall put it into their hearts,
they want neither charge nor calling to reward her as she has rewarded them:
as she has levied forces against the Princes of the earth, so must they levy
forces against her; and the cup of death and wrath which she has filled to
them, they must fill her the double.

3. We must depart corporally from them, 3. Corpore.
even in respect of place and habitation. If an house be ready to fall, it must
oppress all that are under the roof. If a City be summoned to war by the
sound of a trumpet, careful men will desire to leave that City. Or if a City
be infected with a raging pestilence, we need not persuade men to fly forth of
that danger. Here is a ruinous state ready to be made an heap. Shall the little
mice, by natural sagacity, presage the ruin of the house and fly; and shall
we stay till we be oppressed under the ruin? The Lord has proclaimed open war
against this rebellious city, and shall we stay the mounting of the Canon? No
where can a man bestow himself in Popish countries, but he shall meet with
that poisoned air, a thousand times more infectious than ever was any city
with most hot pestilence, and can any man be safe, casting himself upon such
adventures?

Secondly, for the manner of our departure from Babel, we must come our, 1.
Cito. 2. Long. 3. Totaliter. 4. Finaliter.


1. We must depart hastily. 1. Cito.
Lot was commanded to hasten out of Sodom, and prolong no time, because the
danger was near; delay which is in all things dangerous, may here prove
desperate, and therefore we are commanded to fly out of Babel: Ier. 51.6.
which is a swift motion beseeming Gods people in their obedience; and because
of the neerenesse of the danger unto them.

Long.
2. We must depart far from Babel, even as far as may be. Many are afraid to
offend the Babylonians by departing too far from them. But as Moses calling
the congregation from Corah and his accomplices, said, I pray you depart from the
tents of these men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye perish in their
sins; so we must pray, to have no society or comporting with Romish Babylon,
in her heresies, Idolatry, or superstitions, for this were not to depart far
enough from them.

Totaliter.
3. We must depart wholly, thy self and all thine. When Lot was called out of
Sodom, he is willed to call and carry out with him all and every one of his
kindred, his wife, his children, his sons in law, and all whom he loved. And
Moses calls not only the head of families from Corah, but their wives,
sons, and little children: we may not think our selves departed from
Babylon, unless our wives and children be departed with us. He is but half
departed whose other half is a Recusant, neither can a man of reason think
him departed, that sends his pawnes, his sons and daughters, for education in
Popish countries.

Finaliter.
4. This heavenly voice would have us depart finally, never to return more. Lot
must not depart out of Sodom to look back again: nor out of Egypt with the
Israelites, to turn back after the leekes and onyons; nor with Spalato, run
back to Babel when we have filled our purses, nor for rumor of danger turn away
from the truth received: for suppose God should kindle a fire of persecution in
his Church, this were but a fire of trial and castigation, whereout the Lords
golden vessels should come out only brighter and better. But if we return to
Babylon, there is nothing but a fire of destruction and final ruin, to burn
up such husks and chafe, as wanting substance of grace, are blown away with
every wind of doctrine, every blast of change, and every shadow of turning.

I had now come to the second part of my text, if there stood not three sorts
of men in my way, to whom I must in few words apply my self and this part; and
being men of no good qualities, I will make what haste from them I may: The
first sort of these are Romanists, the second Separatists, the third Apostates.
The Romanists cudgel us for departing from Rome; The Separatists lay load upon
us for not departing from Babylon: can both their blows fall right? The
Papists tell us with great audaciousnesse, that we are Schismatikes, and
Heretics, because we have departed from the Catholic Church; and keep out
of the lap of our mother Church, yea out of the Arc, out of which is no
salvation. Nos exivimus ab illis corpore, ill^ a nobis animo: nos ab illis
loco, illi a nobis fide: nos apud illos reliquimus fundamenta parietum, ill^
apud nos fundamenta scripturarum: nos egressi sumus ab ill^s secundum aspectum
hominum, illi a nobis secundum iudicium Dei. Chrysostom. de haereticis in oper.
imperfect. in Matt. cap. 23. him. 46.
But our text has taught us that we are not departed from the Church of
Christ, but from Babylon. Neither can they prove us Schismatikes for departing
from them, whom we can easily prove to have departed from Christ by a general
Apostasy, contrary to the whole Kingdom of Christ, only fit for Antichrist
the Catholic Heretic. Neither are we departed from our Mother, but from the
mother of whoredom, and we may not mingle with Harlots.

3. Neither of our own head, but by this voice from heaven.

4. Our duty binds us to avoid her sins, and our safety to avoid her
plagues. Let them bring us a Text or voice from heaven to bring us back
again, and we will return; but Texts of Scriptures and heavenly voices cannot
be contrary to themselves.

2. The Separatists say we are in the midst of Babylon, our assemblies are
Antichristian, our selves no people of God, because we leap not over the pale,
and fly out with them. But first, they have not, nor can prove the Church of
England to be Babylon, unless Babylon be in covenant with the Lord, and has
both the Deeds and Seals of that Covenant, to show in all the substantial
parts of them rightly administered according to the Institution, and now
stands to the determination of the Scriptures in all things; for thus does
the Church of England, but not so Babell: and therefore we are not scarred with
the windy terms of false worship, false ministry, bowing down to traditions,
or denying the power of Christ in ruling his Church, which is both preached and
defended happily amongst us.

2. They have not, nor can prove that Christ has given us a Bill of divorce,
as he has to Babel, or that the reformed Churches have separated from us, as
they have from Babylon. As for their discoveries, what has a schism of
private men to do to excommunicate whole Churches? or why get they no Churches
to join with them? or if they could get all the Reformed Churches to them, we
expect orderly admonition before rash excommunication. For if a private man
must be admonished twice or thrice before excommunication, much more may a
whole Church expect it.

3. We are come out of Babylon by Gods blessing, in that we have pulled down
the Temples of their Idols, in that both in substance of Doctrine and
Sacraments, our Ministry agrees with the Scriptures; the head of Dagon is cut
off, his stump cast down, and cast out; and we labor in purging away all the
scent and stink of him, so far are we from worshipping the beast, or receiving
his Image.

4. We cannot therefore separate from the Church of England, but we must go
out from the true Church of God, and from the Spouse of Christ, who
acknowledges Christ for her head and foundation: and by believing in his
righteousness alone, is made a member of his body.

No reason will serve these unreasonable men, for then I might now get from
them: but their importunity stays me to answer one objection, and so I will
leave them.

Object. But what a number of corruptions have you, an heap of men's
Traditions, which Christ never acknowledged, but bred and borne in Babylon; and
what a number of Gods ordinances do you want, which a true Church of Christ
cannot want, and can you be a Church of Christ?

Answ. 1. Was not Lot got out of Sodom when he saw the smoke of the City? If
it were granted then, that a little smoke of the City did trouble our eyes,
must it follow that we are still in the midst of Babylon?

2. They point us to some corruptions and errors, to which I say: 1. Let them
show me a soil in the world, where Wheat grows without some chafe, and I
will go with them: But that is not at Amsterdam.

2. None of the corruptions which they falsely term, are of that high nature as
to call for a personal separation, because none of them are fundamental. The
least corruption that we can certainly epsy, which yet is not in constitution,
but in execution, we must separate from, in judgment, in affection, in
practice, but to separate personally for any error not fundamental, let them
teach it them to whom all errors are alike, but we may not be so dull.

3. Our Church being joined to the head Jesus Christ, and retaining the vital
parts of the Word and Sacraments; neither if wanting of something which should
be present, nor if remaining something to be cast out, can thrust her from the
right and title of the Church of God, but is in essence and being a Spouse of
Christ. For example, cut off both a man's arms, both his legs, cut off his
ears and nose, now he wants many things which a man should have, but yet so
long as the head stands alive upon the body, and other vital parts remain, he
is indeed a man, although a maimed one. Again, suppose a man had ten fingers
on an hand, or three arms, or suppose an hand stood where the foot should
stand, or the mouth were set in the forehead, here were a great aberration and
confusion against natural symmetrie of a man's body; yet he is a man, though a
very deformed one; whereas, where there is no head, or no union of members to
that head, there were no body, no man: So whatsoever they can say, though
falsely, is wanting in our Church; or whatsoever they say is redundant or
superfluous, she being founded on Christ her head, and truly dispensing the
word and Sacraments, they cannot overthrow her being of a true Church of Christ.

4. To conclude with them, some things make to the being of a Church, some to
the comeliness and well being of it: if their nimble eyes could find never so
many abuses not fundamental, all these shall only make to the disgrace and
uncomeliness of the Church, but shall never overthrow the being of it.
Whatsoever we want, let not God want his praise, nor we thankfulness, that we
want not that whereby Gods people may enjoy the joy of their salvation. And
this may serve for answer to those Separatists, if all the corruptions they
charge us with were truly objected against us, as they are not.

3. To the three sorts who go away from us to Babylon, because they were never
of us; would to God they would timely consider.

1. If the Lord be so earnest that his people which are in Babylon, should fly
out of her; it cannot but be too preposterous and desperate for those that are
gotten out to run in again.

2. That if it be a sign of the Lords people, to depart out of Babylon; it
must needs be a sign of him or her that is not the Lords, to run into her, and
so to continue.

3. What is the fearful hire of Apostasy and Apostates, of whom the spirit
of the Lord speaks lothsomely as of dogs and swine turning to their vomit and
wallowing. What can be the expectation of such, as forsaking the sound
profession of the Gospel, fall away from Christ to Antichrist; but the most
dreadful doom which is to be awarded against the Lords most cursed enemies?

4. That they sin without a cause, which aggravates the sin: nay against so
clear a light and truth enacted, protected, crowned, and in these days after
70. years of the sunshine of the Gospel, which has been the best time the
Gospel has had in the world for so long together, this thirteen hundred
years; so as for our means we might have been as stable as rocks upon our
rock and foundation.

5. That they sin against a special commandment of God, yea against a voice
from heaven in this text; they cannot say in the day of the Lord they were not
warned.

Lastly, because they love to look upon pictures, now leaving them, I will
leave with them an Emblem of such graceless Apostates as themselves: When
Israel was in the Wilderness, God gave them a daily harvest of Mannah from
heaven, but they grew weary of the Lords provision, they remember the garlike,
the leekes, and onyons of Egypt, and back they will to Egypt in all haste: but
all the while they remembered not the oppressions, tyranny, stripes, labors,
sighs, burdens, the bricks and fiery furnaces. So do these look after the
pomp, pride, wealth, and liberty of Romish Egypt; but remember not the
miserable servitude and bondage, and their tyranny upon their consciences; they
remember not their traitorous doctrines, their miserable attempts against kings
and kingdoms, their furious fires, their perfidious massacres, their bloody
inquisition. They remember not what comfortless hopes that doctrine and
Religion will afford them in the day of their death (for there is no
understanding Papist dare trust unto it) and yet look back they will. But
what is the issue and conclusion of all? As all they in the wilderness
miserably died, and never entered into the Land of rest; so these Apostates may
exchange Mannah with Garlike for the present; but in the day of the Lords
visitation, they shall reap according to their sowing; when greatness, nor
wealth, when Jesuitical subtilties, nor penal satisfactions, neither shall
their painted and Poetical Purgatory help or ease them: they would not be
stayed by a voice from heaven, but back they would to Babylon; and now must
they partake in her eternal plagues, by a sentence from heaven which is
irrevocable. That ye partake not of her sins.

This second part of our text has three things considerable in it:

1. That Babylon has great sins.

2. That not to depart from her is to partake in her sins.

3. Who they be that do partake in her sins.

For the sins of Babylon, they were most transcendent both against God, and
against man. I may not tire your patience with the enumeration. I cannot name a
fewer number than two, which the Scriptures usually insist upon in this
argument.

1. Idolatry. 2. Cruelty.
1. Idolatry. Isa. 21.9. 2 King. 17.30. Ier. 51.36.
1. Babylon was full of Images and false gods; they worshipped Bell for God, and
made them Succoth and Benath. The Dragon was worshipped also among them as God;
In a word it was a land of graven Images, and they doted on their Idols. Now
all the Idolatry of that Eastern Babylon was a type and shadow of the unheard
of Idolatries of this Western Babylon, who not only commits, but
commands shameful filthiness, neither only defends her own whoredoms,
but teaches and forces the same upon others: Therefore the Scriptures call
her a mistress, yea a mother of whoredoms, with a full cup of filthiness and
fornications in her hand; which she reaches and forces upon all her lovers.
That as all men both high and low, small and great, must fall down before the
God which Nebuchadnezzer king of Babel has erected; so must every man worship
the breaden, brazen, wooden, and golden gods, which that Nebuchadnezzer of
this Eastern Babel has set up. But I know not by what windlace the Jesuits
(as nimble as mischief it self) have brought it about, to a demurre among
Divines; whether these Babylonians be Idolaters or no? which wise men see to be
but the raising of a cloud of dust to trouble our eyes, whilst they work
their stratagems amongst, and against us.

1. For, That Romanists are formal Idolaters.
Does the spirit of God call Babylon the mother of whoredoms, and are they not
Idolaters?

2. Do they translate adoration from the Creator to the creatures (which is
Nazianzens description of Idolatry) and are they not Idolaters? Orat. in
Christ. not. 3.


3. Do they erect and worship Images of the invisible God, and are they not
Idolaters?

4. Do they give all the honor to the Image which is due to the samplar,
Cost^r. Bellarm.
and are they not Idolaters?

5. Do they command and compel every man to fall down on his knees and adore
their Host in their processions, being an external religious worship, and are
they not Idolaters?

6. They do teach that to Images, as Images, a proper religious worship is
due, as do their learned Papists, and are they not Idolaters?

7. Do they invocate all the Host of heaven, and their Host in earth; and is
not this formally to Idolatrize?

De idol^lat. lib. 2. cap. 7.
8. Are they so puzzled in this argument, as the greatest scholars are forced to
say that some Idolatry is lawful, as Gregory de Valentia. If some be lawful,
let them give a reason why not all as well; and if all or any be lawful with
them, are they not Idolaters?

Thus while she claims to be the mother Church (not without wrong both to
Jerusalem and Antioch where the Gentiles were first called Christians) we must
in the Scriptures dialect, hold her the mother of whoredoms. And if the Jews
could not abide to be borne in fornication, John 8.
let us that are free borne, scorn to take a notorious whore for our mother,
and leave her to the bastardly brood that are borne and bred up to Antichrist:
of whom may be verified, Like mother, like daughters.

The second sin noted in Babylon was cruelty, and tyranny against the Church of
God, 2. Cruelty.
where she was called a destroier, Ier. 51.25. and 50.23.
and a destroying mountain, and the hammer of the whole world.

As was the Eastern Babylon to Gods people among the Jews; so is the Western
to the Christian Church among the Gentiles: the great Abaddon and Apollyon,
called the scarlet Whore, drunk first with the wine of her fornication, and
then drunk with blood: for in her is found the blood of all the Prophets, Rev.
17.2.13.8.
and of all the Saints.

The tyranny of Eastern Babel had three properties, wherein the Western Babel
does far surpass. 1. That was a Covetous cruelty; Rev. 13.19.
for Nebuchadnezzer spoiled the city and the Temple: Here Asa sacked Gods house
and the kings house, and besides carried away all the wealth of the land. Even
so the Romish Nebuchadnezzer robs the house of God, carries away the Word,
2 Kings 26.
the Sacraments, the Scriptures, preaching, and the pure worship of God,
figured by these golden vessels, instruments and pillars; and besides robs
and spoileth Kings and Princes of their kingdoms, crowns, treasures, and
revenues, so as there is no kingdom in Christendom, which has not drunk
deep of his tyranny.

2. That was an unnatural and barbarous cruelty; for they raged against
Infants the seed of the Church, and dashed their heads against the stones.
Psalm. 137.8, 9.
So is this Babylon as fierce and unnatural in her cruelties, hatching up
savage monsters, and parricides, by teaching, counselling, acting, triumphing
and patronizing murders unheard of, unread of in Babylon: as Mastives which lie
in the shambles, have commonly bloody mouths; so do their mouths run over
with Romish Rhetoric, Ure, seca, occide, Burn, kill, poison, stab, blow up,
whom? strangers, friends, old, young, men, women, brethren, fathers, kings,
princes, kingdoms, countries, nay your own king, your native country: shed
blood, shed innocent blood, make no end of shedding innocent blood, let blood
touch blood: oh cruel Tigers to the life of man, to the life of kings and
kingdoms, and so to the very life and soul of the world.

Nebuchadnezzer of Babel, is not content to burn the three children of God,
but he must make the fire seven times hotter than ever; to show that he would
burn them seven times over apeece, if he could. This Western Nebuchadnezzer
has kindled fires against Gods servants, seven times hotter than that furnace,
devising torments as near hell fire as any hellish tyrant could invent. The
Acts of the Church, and the Acts of justice, record, that not far from this
place, the Romanists first murdered Richard Hun, a grave and wealthy citizen,
and then hanged him, and then condemned him for an Heretic, and then burnt the
dead man in Smithfield, because he appeared not, being summoned to recant his
supposed heresy.

3. That Babylonish tyranny was as unsatiable as unnatural. The Church sat
weeping in Babylon, which notes a long captivity: so under this Western
Babylon has the Church endured a long Captivity not of 70. years, but of 7.
times 70. almost thrice told, and yet an end is not come. These horseleaches
are unsatiable; do not these enemies of mankind desire rivers of blood, to
ride their horses to the saddles in the blood of the Lutherans? Domitius Nero
caused Rome to be set on fire in twelve places at once, that he might delight
himself in seeing a pattern of the burning of Troy. But our late Neroes and
Babylonians would see a pattern of hell fire before they came there, and to
that end would kindle a fire to burn not a City, but three goodly Kingdoms at
once. Duke Alb^^ boasts, that in the low Countries he slew in few years six
and thirty thousand Protestants, for which service the Pope sent him an
hallowed sword. Vigerius one of the Inquisition, affirms that it had consumed
in less than thirty years, with several kinds of torments, an hundred and
fifty thousand Protestants. O unsatiable wolves, whom all the blood of the
whole fold of Jesus Christ would not satiate!

Those that come not out of Babylon must needs partake of her sins: For
first, hardly can a man touch pitch and not be defiled: it is not every man's
case to live chaste in Sodom, as Lot did, and in this case thou can as hardly
be in her and not of her. Secondly, impossible it is for him to free himself
from evil, that shunneth not the occasions and provocations of it: and just it
is, that he that runs out to meet the Tempter, should fall by the
temptation. Therefore will Joseph run out of the house of his tempting
Mistress.

3. Our rule is not to avoid only apparent evils, but also the appearances of
evil.

Ob. But we may live and converse in Babylon, in Rome, and popish Countries
with good consciences, keeping our hearts unto God: and hence many go to their
Masses, behold their pomp and worship, admire and perhaps bow to their Idols
and do as they do, and yet be Christians good enough for all that.

Sol. Oh vain pretexts of vain men, directly giving the Spirit of God the
lie; who here teaches us, that those that come not out of her, partake of her
sin.

2. Did they see their own disposition and danger, as the Lord by this text
would have them to do, how natural a Religion Idolatry is, and how prone an
unconverted man is unto it; what an enchanted Cup these Idolaters have
prepared, and every way sweetened to the sense and sensual man; Did they
consider what a cleaving pitch, a spreading leaven, an infecting leprosy, a
fretting gangren this idolatrous filthiness is; they would listen to those
frequent holy counsels, Enter not into the way of the wicked; Prove. 4.14.
pass by the doors of the Harlots house; come not near her threshold; avoid
the place of so dangerous temptation.

3. Did they see the danger in partaking of Babylons sins, we should hear
them change their note: Did they discern how Babylons plagues are chained to
Babylons sins, and that the first mischief of communication in her sins,
is more miserable than the latter to receive of her plagues; they would listen
to that which the spirit here persuades for their own safety.

Q. Who be they that partake in Babylons sins?

A. Communication in sin is either, 1. More open, or, 2. More secret.


1. Our Romanists apparently communicate and express her sins.

1. Her Rebellion by refusing the Oath of supremacy: the greatest Rebel in
the world is Roman Religion.

2. Her Egyptian blindness and Recusancy, renouncing the Ministry, the
Scriptures and means of knowledge: For in Goshen is light and comfort.

3. Her filthiness and whoredoms by frequenting Masses, worshipping Images,
praying to Saints, and many other ways acting filthy and formal Idolatry.

4. Her Babylonian oppression of Gods servants to their power, by plotting and
contriving against them, threatening, railing, boasting, slandering, bewraying
by what means they may, how bloody minded they are, only muzled, and by their
doctrine quiet, because as yet, Res commode fieri non potest.

2. More secretly, our indifferent and wary Protestants partake of her sins.

1. By external reverence to, or at Idol worship, as bowing the knee,
uncovering the head, condemned in the second commandment as an approbation of
the Idol.

2. By counselling and persuading to Popish Religion, for so Caiphas had an
hand in Christ's death, because he counseled it.

3. By defense of Popish persons, doctrines, and practices: not a few undertake
the defense of gross Popery in their table discourse; as Free Will, the Real
Presence, Merit of Works, showing where their affection is, whilst they go
for Protestants good enough.

4. By silence, and not professing against the Idolatry of Popery in doctrine
or practice; when a man has a calling in public or private, and in not
hindering it, so far as a man has power or place; for qui non prohibet malum
cum potest, facit.

5. By flattery and praising Papists in their courses, consenting to their
discourses, countenancing their persons, choosing and affecting their society;
sort with them, eat and drink and play with them. When the Jews stoned
Steven, Paul communicated in the sin by countenance and assistance in keeping
the garments: Oh where is now David's spirit when he exclaimed, Woe is me that
I am constrained to live in Meshec, and to have any thing to do with such
wretched men!

6. By spreading Popish books, pictures, and such trash, as those Merchants
send us over, by bestowing for tokens Popish Crosses, Images, Amulets, or any
other Popish trumpery. And now adays me thinks I see the bosoms, arms,
breasts, necks, and ears, carrying the Beads, Crosses, and such Popish bables;
Whence Jerome himself once threw them out: which proclaim that many amongst
us partake of Babylons sins, making themselves guilty of her whoredoms, and
would be thought the base issue of Antichrist, and children of Fornication, as
were the Jews, when they departed from the true worship of God. And that ye
receive not of her plagues.

This last part of our text has two propositions.

1. That great and wonderful plagues are reserved for Babylon: for she having
drunk deep of two cups already, must drink a third cup off to the bottom.
She is drunk with the wine of fornication, and drunk with blood; now must she
drink a cup of wrath and plagues. If any man will be better confirmed herein,
the Angel calls him to show him the damnation of the great whore, that
sits upon many waters. Revel. 14 8.10.17.2.
That place consulted, shows that it is not only a temporary desolation of
that state and City, with sword, fire, famine, according to the old prophecy;
but also an everlasting rejection of that whole state and kingdom of
Antichrist from God, into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.

2. That whosoever communicates in the sin of this Western Babel, and will
not depart from her, must partake of her plagues: she and they shall drink of
the wine press of the wrath of God; Gods heavy indignation shall come upon
them and her to the uttermost: for it is just with God, that those who will not
be divided in sinful society, shall be undivided in judgment and suffering;
Society in sin brings society in suffering. Humane laws condemn and
execute the thief and the receiver, the murderer and consenter, the traitor
and concealer; and as just it is, that he that will partake in the sins of
others, shall partake also in the sorrows of them. What can it be but danger,
in not departing from her, who is departed from God, and God from her? For what
is all that Religion, in the points wherein it differs from us, but an
apostasy and a Catholic departure from the Christian faith; 2 Thessalonians. 2.
nay that very great Antichristian departure fore-prophesied not from the Roman
Empire, but of that Empire from the Christian faith, as appears, 1. By their
departure from the Scripture and divine writings, to humane trash, traditions,
and fables.

2. By their departing from the merits, doctrine, sufferings, and obedience of
Jesus Christ in effect, to a new Christ, new saviors, new mediators, new
intercessours, new merits, new advocates and patrons.

3. By their departure from the old way, and the ancient faith of the Prophets,
Apostles, and of the famous Church of Rome in the Apostles days, to a new
faith and Religion, not known to the Scriptures, nor to the Prophets, nor
Apostles, nor to their successors, the Fathers and Pastors, for six hundred
years at least after them.

3. What else besides ruin can he expect that staieth in such a society so
addicted to the basest wickedness: every one will say that ruin and mischief
must be his end, that runs and sorteth himself with base villains: Who
baser than the limbs of Antichrist, who are all vassals to the servant of
servants; but a just hire of those that refuse the Lord of life and liberty.
What is like to be the end of him that runs after whores and harlots, but
utter confusion? and what other can they expect that join themselves to that
harlotry Religion, who go an whoring from God, like hateful and unsatiable
harlots: What can be his end but ruin, that sorteth himself with mutinous
and rebellious persons, plotters and contrivers of mischief against the
persons, estates, lives, and kingdoms, of Princes and people? But such are
Papists taught to be, by the present doctrine of the Church of Rome.

And by such positions and principles, were the Gunpowder Traitors thrust on to
their ruin, and all other that run upon their own ruin, by rising up against
our late and present Sovereign.

Let all good Christians and good subjects say, as Jacob of Simeon and Levi
brethren in evil, Into the secrets of these men let not my soul come.

Here are reasons enough for our utter renouncing of Popery. Would thou be
without the reach of the plagues that amate her? get out of Babylon: Fear
thou not God, to avoid her sins? Fear thy self, and thine own danger; who
have heard that the Lord is coming with his mighty power to make war upon
that damned City and State, for her utter desolation. Would thou share in
the salvation of Gods people? open thine ears to this voice of God, Fly out of
Babel, Ierem. 51. Acts 2.40.
and every man save his own soul. Save your selves from this perverse
Generation. I say not that no Popish person can be saved, but whosoever will
be saved must depart from the fundamental errors of Popery; for which Christ
has given that Synagogue a bill of divorce. I say therefore again to all Gods
people; Get away from this people of a strange language; Get away from the den
of devils and habitation of Idols. Whosoever are now within this voice and
call of God, make use of it for thine own safety. Some perhaps hearing the
call of Gods people out of Babylon, they like Lots friends scorn and mock out
this warning of God: for so do reprobates and men of graceless hearts, spurn
and fleere, where they should stoop, and fear, and tremble: but let such
know, that as the Sodomites were first struck with blindness, and then with a
fiery shower, so are they under the former of these plagues already, and God is
hastening the latter upon them, if they hasten not their repentance.

The Poets have a saying, that when Jupiter will strike a man, he first puts
out his eyes: and so indeed does the just God, first blinds the eyes of
Infidels who are willing to be blinded, and then destroieth them: he gives
them up to the devil, who as an hangman, first covers their eyes, and then
turns them off.

2. That the time is hastening when they shall say they were warned and called
out, but now cannot be either pitied or helped. As Lots cousins though they
made but a merriment of Lots admonition, yet they saw the Lord in earnest, and
then too late wished they had departed according to the voice of the Lord; but
now God will not, and Lot cannot help them. Neither can they shift themselves
out of the fire, when the dreadful shower falls. Do thou sit out the
summons at thy peril; but one of two thou must choose, either thou must go out
of Babylon, or go into her destruction.

FINIS.
AN EVERLASTING RECORD OF THE UTTER RVINE of Romish AMALECK.

Delivered in a Sermon at BLACKFRIARS in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the Golden
Cup in the Goldsmiths row in Cheapside. 1624.

THE UTTER RVINE OF Romish AMALECK.
EXODUS 17.14. And the Lord said to Moses, Write this for a remembrance in the
book, and rehearse it to Joshua, for I will utterly put out the remembrance of
Amaleck from under Heaven.


THis Chapter sets down two great perils, which took the children of
Israel presently upon their deliverance from the red sea: (for the way to our
Canaan is strewed with crosses) The former was of thirst to the eighth verse.
The lattter of war: for seeing their thirst made them contend with God, God
does justly raise them up enemies to contend withal.

In this war are three things.

1. The circumstance of 1. Persons, Amaleck rose against Israel. 2. Place,
Rephidem, verse. 8.


2. The manner of the war, which was partly,

1. By power and Arms, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.

2. By prayer of Moses: If Joshua be on the vallie, Moses must be on the hill;
means must be used, but not trusted in, and prayer without use of means,
where appointed and afforded, is but a mockery.

3. The events of this doubtful war, and they be three: 1. The overthrow of
Amaleck by the sword of Ioshuah, verse. 13. 2. Gods decree of destroying utterly
the whole nation of the Amalekites. 3. The building of an Altar for a trophee,
and the perpetual memory of so happy a victory.


The verse read, contains the second of these events, namely the severe
decree for the utter destruction of the whole nation of Amaleck.

Where are two general points: 1. The record or registrie of the sentence. 2.
The reason: For I will utterly put out the remembrance, etc.


The record has two parts.

1. The writing of it, write this. 2. The rehearsing of it, to Joshua.
In the writing are four things.

1. Who must write it? The Lord said to Moses, Write this. Moses a Prophet of
God: He must make Canonical Scripture of it. And being so written, it is
unalterable and permanent. It is sealed with the Kings ring, as were the laws
of the Medes and Persians, and is irrevocable.

2. What must he write? This: that is, the whole narration of Gods dealing for
his people against the Amalekites; 1. De rebus gestis; What God had done in the
miraculous defeating of them already by the power of Moses his prayer. 2. De
rebus gerendis; What God had further to do in the final destruction of this
cursed Nation.

3. Where must Moses write this? In a book.

Quest. What book is this?

Answ. Some think it a book now missing, although the Scriptures yet extant
be sufficient; but this book was no other than this present history of
Exodus, and other his historical Commentaries in his five books, in the which
this same story is more fully repeated, as Deuteronomy. 25.17.

4. Why must he write this in a book? for a remembrance: Israel saw the great
works of God, at least all Israel could not but hear of this, and yet this is
not enough; it must be written to live in their memories, and in the eyes of
their posterities and after-generations.

Ob. But seeing Israel had many great and miraculous deliverances, besides and
above all this: why is this so directly appointed to be written in a book
above the rest?

Answ. Israel had received a far greater deliverance a little before from the
Egyptians, chasing them in the bottom of the sea, and the Lord would not have
this deliverance drowned in that, but would have a thankful memory of this
also preserved, and would have the glory of it maintained even above other
great works, both by a book and an altar, and by a name. God appointed it to
be enrolled in parchment; and Moses enrolles it in the stones of his Altar.

2. Other great works were less dependant, and more transient in the present
passages of them, but this is dependant and must be registered for future
memory and use; for diverse passages of Scripture depend upon it: and not only
the present people of God then living, but even the after ages descending of
them, must take knowledge of this fearful sentence denounced against Amalek
for these ends.

1. That they might never make league or peace with them all their days,
because the whole Nation stood accursed before the Lord.

2. That they might be ready in aftertimes whenever God should command their
kings, to offer themselves cheerfully to the execution of this sentence in the
utter extirpation of this hateful people.

3. That they should ascribe the honor of truth and justice to the Lord, when
in aftertimes they should see King Saul rejected for failing in this execution,
and not destroying those sinners the Amalekites as the Lord had commanded him,
and the kingdom given to David who was better than he, in that he effected the
Lords whole decree, in doing what Saul had omitted, 1 Samuel 30.17.

2. Rehearse it to Joshua.

Quest. Why to him?

Ans. Because Joshua must be Moses his successor, and served to these two
purposes.

1. That he for his time also should always stand out in hostility against
them, not as a revenger of private wrongs and injuries offered them, but to
bear in mind, and publicly to execute the judgments of God which were
charged upon them.

2. That it might be an encouragement to him, who was to be the Lords
Captain, and to lead out his people in the Lords battles, against all the
rest of the Nations; in that he seeing these enemies which made the first
attempt and onset upon Israel so mightily revenged by God, might hence assure
his faith, that God would go on with him, as he had now begun, until he had
given them actual and full possession of that good land which he had promised
them so long, and so often.

Now from this first part of the Text we may note,

1. That in our way to heavenly Canaan, we must make account of many
Amalekites; as Israel cannot set forth toward Canaan but Amalek will meet
them. Israel going into Egypt had no enemies; but in their way to Canaan never
wanted them. A man may go to hell merrily, and never meet with Amalekites to
hinder him; he has wind and tide with him. But let all the Israel of God
resolve in their way to meet with Amalek, to fight with Amalek, to overcome
Amalek, else there is no hope of ever seeing Canaan; we must not expect rest
till we be through the Wilderness.

2. We hence learn, to write up Gods mercies and deliverances in a book of
remembrance; and as Israel keeps a Register and Catalogue of Gods mercies and
favors toward us, our friends, our country, our Prince, our Magistrates and
Ministers; yea build up altars in our hearts, to hold the mercies of God before
our eyes.

For, 1. Nothing can more hearten our faith, than the view of the monuments of
Gods favor and gracious dealing of God with us.

2. The renewing of them upon our selves and memory, perpetuateth every gift
of God, and makes us as thankful as if we had newly received them.

3. Nothing does more bind the Lords hands from doing us good than the
oblivion of his mercies: when as every thankful acknowledgement of old favors
is but the invitation of a new; so as it is a gainefull duty.

Many have been our deliverances public and private, of the Church and
kingdom, of our Prince and people, of our own persons and estates, when many
Amalekites have risen against us; But where are our books of remembrances?
where are our Altars or our Sacrifices? where is our Iehova Nissi, in which we
proclaim God to be our banner and covert, as the words import? It was but one
of ten of the Lepers that returned to give thanks for his cleansing.

For I will utterly put out the name of Amalek from under heaven.

In this second part of the text are two things.

1. The Author of the revenge. 2. The severitie of it.
The Author or person executing this revenge, is the Lord, who says here, I
will do it. His arm is strong, and power unresistable; Who can turn him
back? Yea although he appointed and raised means to do it, as Saul and
David, yet he challenges the revenge to be his own.

2. The severitie of this revenge, in that the Lord will utterly destroy him
with a total and final destruction; and is not satisfied in overthrowing the
kingdom and dominion only, unless he put out the name and memory of them
from under heaven. All which notes a great detestation and an utter abolishing
of this people.

Quest. Why? what cause was there of such severitie in this execution?

Answ. The cause was the fierce wrath of Amalek, against Gods people the
Israelites; if Amalek be fierce against the people of God, God will be fierce
against Amalek. Now the fierce wrath of Amalek appeared against Israel, because,

1. It was unnatural, for Amalek was of the same blood and near kindred with
Israel: Genesis 20.12.
Amalek was the son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau by Tymnah his Concubine; as
Esau and Jacob were brethren: so as they forgetting blood and kindred, nourish
an unnatural wrath, and raise an unnatural war against the people of God.

2. It was causeless; we read not of any cause given them by Israel, but such
an old canker as was from the beginning in Cain against his brother Abel: such
an inbred envy of Gods mercy toward his servants, joined with a malicious
desire of spoiling them, rests with wicked men at this day, that some of them
will not look on a godly man so much as on a mastive; or if they do, it is
with a Cains countenance, cast down on their brethren. Yet can they devise no
cause more than Amalek could, only God gives more testimony to Israel than to
Amalek.

3. As it was without cause, so it was without example: Amalek was the first
enemy that set upon Israel, after they came out of Egypt: this began to all
the rest, and were first in the unjust vexation of Israel; and therefore God
will make them examples to all nations under heaven, according to that
prophecy of Balaam, Numb. 24.20. He looked on Amalek and said, Amalek was the
first of the Nations, namely, that came out against Israel. But his end shall
be destruction.

4. It was Crafty and Cowardly done: they give Israel no warning, nor offer
fair terms of war, but steal upon them, and fall upon the weakest; and when
they were weak and weary, and scattered the remnant of Israel, Deuteronomie
25.20. Thus because they join with force, fraud in spoiling Israel, the Lord
takes his peoples part, and scatters them with a terrible revenge.

Doct. In this dreadful menace of so severe a revenge against Amalek, we note
that the destruction of all the enemies of Gods people shall be both certain
and severe, as might specially be exemplified in Pharaoh, Haman, Zenacherib,
Herod, Judas, Julian, and other noted enemies, whom neither greatness nor
power, nor any other means could save from the severest strokes of Gods
revenge: for,

1. As Amalek rises up against the people of God, so do all the rest of the
enemies: and this near relation between God and his people, makes this sin
out of measure sinful, and procures a most severe revenge. How furiously do
great Princes use to revenge upon those that deface their Images in their
coins? But there is not the meanest of Saints, upon whom this great King of
glory has not stamped and engraven his own Image. With what severity are the
laws executed upon Burglaries, that break into men's houses, to rob and
spoil? especially upon sacrilegious thieves that break into, and rob Churches
and Oratories? The Church is the house of God, and the Temple of God: if any
man destroy the Temple of God, him will God destroy. How fiercely did David
revenge upon Hanun and his country, for offering abuse to his servants? and
are not the Lords servants as near and dear to him, as David's servants were
to their Lord? and yet there is a nearer relation: for the Church is the Lords
spouse, his wife, the delight of his eyes. What, says Ahashuerosh of Haman
that proud Amalekite, will he wrong the Queen in my sight? and immediately they
covered his face. Much more shall their faces be covered with shame, that wrong
the Spouse of Jesus Christ before his face.

2. The malice of the enemy is levelled against God: whatsoever they pretend,
the ground of the hatred is God himself, the light, the Image, and grace of
God; against whom they reach as high as they can. This is directly noted in
Amalek, who yet had other pretenses, Deuteronomy. 25.18. He feared not God: and he
that fears not to wrong Gods people, fears not God himself: Now because
wicked men are fighters against God himself in his people, and touching them,
they poare in the apple of his eye; he takes all the wrong done to them, as
done against himself, and brings the mischief as an arrow shot upward, upon
their own heads with such severitie, as is due to the high blasphemous and
stout Giants, who challenge the Lord himself into the field.

3. The justice of God cannot but bring perdition upon his enemies, 2 Thessalonians.
1.6. It is just with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.
They are merciless to the Church, and the Lord shuts up his mercy from
them; as they have measured to others he measures unto them. What law can be
more just than the law of retaliation and requital? The Tyrants themselves
cannot but acknowledge the justice of it, as Adonibezek, As I have done so God
has rewarded me. Now if it be just in the Lord to bring the cruelty of a
wicked man executed upon other as wicked as himself upon his own head (which
was the case of Adonibezek) how much more in the fierce revenge of the wickeds
malice against the innocent servants of God?

4. The Lord himself undertaketh to see execution done upon the wicked, as
here upon Amalek; and therefore it shall be done to purpose. For, 1. God
writes in a book of remembrance, all the cruelties of wicked enemies against
his people, as here in Amalek, both in respect of God to punish, of Iosuah to
revenge, and of Israel to rejoice in the Lords care and partaking with them. 2.
God writes their persons to destruction: partly by his threatening, Genesis 12.3.
I will curse them that curse thee. Ier. 3.2. Israel is an hallowed thing, all
that eat it shall offend, evil shall come on them, says the Lord. And partly
by his oath, for the Lord has sworn (as against the rich men of Israel that
oppressed the poor) by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget
any of their works, neither can remember them, but to destroy their names, and
blot out their memories from under Heaven.

Use 1. To terrify the enemies of the Church: seeing their hatred of Gods
people is a token unto them of perdition, and nothing can save them from the
curse of God, and that irrevocable sentence, Ezech. 35.5. Because thou have a
perpetual hatred, and put the children of Israel to flight, as I live, says
the Lord, I will prepare thee unto blood: and blood shall pursue thee. Which
was no truer against Mount Seir, than shall be certainly verified of all the
enemies of God and his people.

Now, whereas most men harden themselves against such burdens of the word of
the Lord, by sundry delusions and misconceits, it will not be amiss to meet
with some of them; that the rubs being removed, and the way cleared, this our
exhortation may be the more successful.

Many sour enemies of the Church suppose themselves out of the reach of this
reproof; because they do not by open force waste the Church of God, as Saul
did, nor are up in arms against it, as Turks and Papists, and such as stand in
open hostility against the truth, they cannot be persuaded that they are
enemies. To whom I answer; that there be millions of secret and underhand
enemies, besides these who with Amalek raise up forces against the Israel of
God, and these enemies I range into three ranks.

For they are either 1. Mental. 2. Verbal. 3. Actual.


1. Thou may be an enemy in affection and desire, as when out of hatred
thou wishest and desire evil and hurtful things to befall the people of
God, in whole or in part. Thus Balaak did but desire and affect to curse Gods
people, and this is called a war against Israel. Cain showed himself a
cursed enemy, as well in casting down his looks upon his brother, as in
rising up to slay him.

2. Thou show thy self an enemy also* when in words thou do utter and
pronounce hurtful speeches against godly men: David says of his enemies, that
they invented words against him. Do thou belly the Saints, cast names of
reproach upon them, raise or revive reports against them; and art thou not an
enemy? Was not Haman that proud enemy hanged on his own gallows, for such
inventions and suggestions against Israel?

3. Thou may be a cruel enemy, and carry thy self closely in many
underhand practices, though thou marchest not so furiously under Satan's
standard, as some other professed enemies do: as if thou be a scoffer, a
derider, and mocker of godly men or their godly practices. Gal. 4.29.
Ismael laughed at Isaak, and this is called a persecution. Christ was flouted
and mocked on the cross, and this was not the least part of his passion. If
thou can vex the child of God in his trouble, and persecute him whom God
strikes, adding affliction to his bonds, or secretly say to thy self, So, so,
thus would we have it, thou may easily discern thy self an enemy. 2. If
thou do unfit and disable them from doing good, or set hand to cast them
out of their godly course, thou expressest not the smallest enmity.
Nebuchadnezzer showed his hostility, not only in swallowing up the Church as
a Dragon, Ier. 51.34.
but also in making her as an empty vessel, and casting her out. Pilates wife
would not have her husband show himself an enemy to Christ, by having an hand
against him. Would thou not be an enemy then? have nothing to do against any
innocent and godly man. 3. If thou defendest not godly men in godly ways.
Ierico struck never a stroke against Israel that we read of, but because
Ierico opened not the gates to Israel, it is said to war against Israel.
Meroz was cursed as an enemy, Judge. 5.
because she came not out to help Gods people. He that gathers not with
Christ scatters, and the threatening is, that not only those that war
against the Church shall fall, but those also that stand not out for it.
Whosoever then thou art, that according to thy place and means servest not the
Church, that art not ready to put both thy hands under the feet of it, to do
it all the good which is laid in thy power to do, thou can expect no other
but to be reckoned and ranged among the Churches enemies, for truth has spoken
it, that the Nations and Kingdoms that will not serve the Church shall perish,
Esaias 60.11.

2. Others think it good swimming with the stream, and that it is good
policy to join with the stronger side: they see the enemies set up aloft, and
magnify themselves, because they have power in their hand, and grace of times
to bring about all that they desire. On the other hand, they see the poor
Church under hatches, without help in herself, or from others, and therefore
tread over the hedge where it is lowest, to speed themselves the better in
their own projects. But to these enemies I say, 1. That all their combinations
with the wicked, be they never so potent, cannot stay them from perdition,
unless they be stronger than the Lord; and though they magnify themselves
against the Church, and seem to bear all down before them, yet must they
fall: for what God has written he has written. All their power is but the
power of chafe against mighty whirle-winds; all their glory and advancement
against the poor members of the Church, is but as the strength and stink of
dung unto him, as is said of the Midianites, and Iabin, and Sisera, who
perished at Endor, 1 King. 14.10.
and were made as the dung of the earth, Psalm. 83.10. Who can now (besides the
enemies themselves) believe that they stand on the stronger side, while they
stand against that side, with whom the strong Lord stands? 2. As far are they
deceived in their conceit, that think the Church is helpless and friendlesse,
while they see few or no great ones step in to take her part. Ier. 51.5.
For is Israel a widow? or has the Lord forsaken her? No, no, her husband
leaves her not, nor dies away from her, as other husbands do; but ever
lives, and ever loves her, and will suffer no man to do her wrong
unrevenged; but will rebuke even Kings for her sake.

3. Others see no great danger in all these threatenings, they are none of the
greatest friends of these strict professors, neither do they see it safe to be
so forward, and yet they thrive and prosper well enough: to whom I answer;

1. That the Lord is not so unmindfull of his threatenings as they suppose; Is
it to be prosperous to be stricken with blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, and so go on blindfold as Pharaoh to destruction? or is it such
happiness for a malefactor, ready for execution, to have his eyes covered by
the hangman? ^sa^. 69.
Holy David could desire no greater revenge against most desperate enemies,
than that their eyes might be blinded.

Besides, when the Lord vexes them with many secret pulls and pinches in
themselves, both inwardly by terror of conscience, and self accusing thoughts;
as also outwardly in their estates, or names, or friends and posterity; might
they not discern (if they were not wilfully blind) that Gods justice sleeps
not, but is in his way, and that one way or other he powers out present wrath
upon the families that eat up Jacob, Ierem. 10.25.

2. Forbearance we say is no payment, so as if the Lord for the time of his
patience, suffer wicked men to go on to fill up the measure of their sins,
yet the longer the blow is a fetching, the heavier it will be, the smart
whereof is so much the more grievous, as it commonly overtaketh them in their
rest, and in their rust, and watches to hear them say, Peace, peace, and then
suddenly falls upon them: for God will avenge his elect which cry unto him
night and day; yea though he suffer long for them; I tell you (says Christ) he
will avenge them quickly.

3. Thou that have present peace in thy pursuit of godly men, little know
thou what God is brewing and bringing on thee: Pharaoh said a great while, Who
is the Lord? but the Lord was preparing to make him know him. Haman in his
bitter hatred of the Jews may be invited to the Queens banquet; but little
knows he how near mischief is unto him. Herod went on a while stretching
out his hand against Peter and James, but little knew he that God was preparing
lice to eat him up. Shemei cursed David with an horrible curse, and carried it
a great while after David's death; but at length he knew that he had spoken it
against his own life. And most memorable was that example of the Jews, who
carried the death of the Son of God forty years, and never bethought
themselves; but when they thought all was forgotten, then came the Lord like a
lion upon them, and teared, and spoiled, and paid them once for all, and wasted
and scattered them with so fearful a curse as never befell any Nation under
heaven: the which lies upon them and all their posterity even till this day.
Let this move all men to fear to offer the least reproach or injury to the
least of Gods Children. Wise men are afraid to incur the Kings indignation;
and therefore it is said, that in Hesters time the fear of the Jews fell upon
the land; so let the fear of Gods children fall upon thee, whosoever have
formerly distasted them: and let it bind thy hands and thoughts, from
conceiving or acting the least evil or hard measure against them.

Use 1. To comfort the Church of God in these threatening times, when Gebal and
Ammon and Amalek have gathered and combined their forces against this city of
God: For,

1. If we look toward God, he has undertaken to revenge the just quarrels of
his people; that if themselves would put up the wrongs and oppressions
inflicted by the adversaries, yet the Lord will not put them up, or pass by
them without revenging them. Add hereunto, that he has written in a book the
ruin of her foes; neither can they prevail in their purposes, so long as the
Lord turns an enemy, and fights against them that provoke him. Let the
enemies lift up their heads and hands aloft, and speak presumptuously against
the mountains of Israel, Isa. 41.14.
yet fear not worm Jacob, nor faint thou city of God, thou have the hand of
the highest lifted up for thee, and the arm of the Almighty stretched out for
thy defense and safety.

2. If we look to the enemies, they are many and mighty, but Amalekites; we
have to do with cruel enemies, but accursed in their persons, in their
enterprises, and in all the wicked means of accomplishing the same: and if we
look a little into the resemblance, we shall see that as Romish Amalek have
notably expressed the like cruelty with these in our text; so shall they meet
with the same certain perdition: they being written by God to destruction as
truly as the former. For,

Resemblance of Romanists with Amalek in 7. things.
1. Amalek signifies a smiting people, and of all Religions, never was any so
fierce or smiting as Romish Amalek, their cruelty transcendeth the barbarous
cruelty of Turks or Scithians; no degrees of men could avoid their strokes
with both their swords: they make no difference of men, but strike at Princes
and people, Kings and kingdoms, they smite the living and the dead, and make no
bones to blow up three whole kingdoms at once with one terrible blow or
stroke. The blows of the old Amalekites were gentle and soft to the blows of
this smiting Amalek.

2. Amalek then came forth against Israel presently upon their deliverance from
Pharaoh, presently upon the fruition of Manna from heaven, and waters out of
the rock: Amalek cannot endure Gods grace to Israel, in those means of their
sustentation, nor yet in the pillar of the cloud and fire for their safety and
direction. Even so the Romish Amalekites presently encampe themselves against
the people of God, so soon as ever they are gotten out of the darkness and
bondage of Egypt. Wilful enemies are they against the grace of God, and
against the word of his grace, which is the Mannah and Water of life, for our
refection through this our wilderness.

3. Amalek was the first enemy that Israel had, after their coming out of
Egypt, and waged war against Israel to hinder them from going into Canaan, and
not only by force but by fraud, they spoil the people of God; for they come
as Grasshoppers in multitude, and destroy the fruit of the earth, and leave no
food for Israel, so as Israel was exceedingly wasted. Even so the Romish Amalek
and Antichrist, was one of the first enemies of the Church of the new
Testament, he began in his forerunners in the Apostles days presently after
our redemption wrought by Jesus Christ from the hellish Pharaoh, and ever since
her rise, has laid in the way of the Israel of God, to hinder them from the
heavenly Canaan, and has by force and fraud wasted the Church; sending into
our kingdoms besides forcible instruments of violence, and infinite bloodshed,
innumerable armies of seducing Priests and Jesuits, who would have left the
people of God no food by the word and Sacraments: and not only robbed them of
their spiritual means, but in their temporal state; by crafty conveyances
carving to themselves whatsoever fat or sweet the kingdoms of the earth have
affoorded.

4. Amalek forgets all kindred, and all bonds and respects of Nature; they
regard not that they were of the same blood with Israel, which might have been
some restraint to their fury. So the Romish Amalekites forget all natural
bonds, and most heathenishly lay themselves in the vaults and caves of black
darkness, for the destruction of their own natural and loving Prince; with
purpose to spare neither root nor branch. Old Amalek would eat up and destroy
their enemies country; these Amalekites like so many Vipers would eat up the
bowels of their own mother, and native country. Duke Medina his sword knew no
difference between a Protestant and a Papist: no more does the powder and iron
bars, but send up suddenly to heaven as in a fiery chariot, even them of
their own Religion: such fiery zeal as carried Alphonsus Diazius out of one
kingdom into another, to kill his own brother John Diazius with his own
hands, for surenesse, only because he was a Protestant. Old Amalek cannot
equal these Savages and Monsters, with whom no respect of age or sex, no
degree of honor or learning, no plea of Religion nor Justice, no instinct of
humanity or manhood it self, can prevail for a drop of mercy or pity from
them.

5. Amalek comes cowardly upon Israel, and smites the hinmost, and falls
upon the women and children in their fainting and weariness. The same course
do the Romish Amalekites take in their plots for seduction, and destruction.
Their seducing Priests fall upon the weaker sex and sort, as the devil did at
first, and overcome first the weak and faint ones, such as lag after their
colors: as cowardly as the old Amalekites encountered Israel, so also do
these. Nay they come in warlike manner after they had declared themselves
enemies: but these dig deep and fetch their counsels as low as hell; and
under the habit and profession of friendship and loyalty, cowardly lay trains
and engines of death, which can no more be perceived, or prevented (but only
by the piercing eye of God) than can the issues of the next age.

6. Amaleks war was ill grounded and prospered accordingly; for God turned it
to the great good of his people; who were 1. Exercised by them. 2. Experienced
in the goodness of God, and in his gracious deliverance. 3. Enriched and
provided of armor, and other necessaries by the spoil of Amalek. As
unprosperous have been the wars of Romish Amalek, and their plots and projects
have turned against themselves, and to the advantage of the truth, and the
Churches professing the same. God has strangely discovered the treasons
against the Lords people and his anointed ones, and mightily broken their arms
and powers both by sea and land. Such as have risen up against the Lord have
fallen before him. And though now of late they advance themselves as if all
were to their hearts desire; yet wise men see them no great gainers, and were
they greater than they be, whosoever shall patiently wait to see Gods whole
work together, shall doubtless rejoice to see no difference between their
gains and Amaleks against Israel, but only that their confusion and overthrow
shall be more dreadful and fearful, as their sins have been most
Catholic and execrable.

7. As Amalek after a doubtful war must be overcome by Israel, and written to
perpetual destruction; so the Church has justly deserved to sustain a
doubtful conflict by Romish Amalek: but after the trial of the Church Amalek
shall be foiled, being long since written to perpetual destruction, for when
the child is corrected, the rod shall be cast into the fire.

3. If we look to our aids and succors, we need not fear the issue of our
conflict against Amalek.

For, 1. We never want a valorous and victorious Joshua, to lead us and fight
for us against Amalek. That Joshua was a Noble General, with whom the Lord
was, and none was able to stand before him, so as he set his foot on the necks
of five kings at once: but he was but a type and shadow of our Joshua a mighty
Captain, and an heavenly leader, that great Michael that treads upon the
necks of all Kings and Tyrants that rise up in arms against him and his
people. That Joshua was in the valley; but ours is upon the hill of his
heavenly glory far exalted above all his enemies.

2. As Israel had not only Joshua fighting in the valley, but also Moses
praying on the hill; so we have many Mosesses lifting up hands, and prayers,
which are powerful and prevalent against Amalek. And whereas we find much
unworthiness in our prayers, and our hands grow feeble, we have an Aaron our
heavenly High Priest, strengthening our arms and prayers, which prayers joined
with the power of Joshua, shall bring down the proudest Amalekites that ever
ware triple Crown, and put to rout all forces levelled against the Israel of
God. When the Angel came to Gedeon and said, The Lord be with thee, thou
valiant man; he replied, Judges 6.12*
If the Lord be with us, why is it thus? Why does Amalek prosper? Why do they
prevail so long? Why do they triumph with great hopes to go on, to carry the
victory? If Romish Amalek be a people written to destruction, why see we no
means of their overthrow?

Answ. 1. We need not fear the braggs of those that use to triumph before
victory: The end of a thing is better than the beginning, says Solomon. The
issue of the doubtful war shall undoubtedly join the Churches happy triumph
with their final overthrow.

2. After the Lord had written this sentence against Amalek, he stayed
execution four hundred years till Saul's time; but in the end (the time of his
patience being expired) he forgot not the accomplishment. So Amalek may
prevail awhile for the sins of the Church: and we must not grudge to allow the
Lord the time of his patience, which though it may wait many ages, yet at last
will he assuredly rise up in most sharp revenge, and utterly destroy the
kingdom and memory of Amalek from under heaven.

3. The Church may thank her self in part that Amalek prevails still over
her. For,

1. Whereas the Lord has commanded us to remember what Amalek has done to us
in our way, Deuteronomy. 25.17.19.
and repeateth it again, forget it not, we forget the strait injunction: we
remember not what they did to us in Queen Mary's days, but have forgotten
those furious flames and times. We have forgotten what Amalek did to us in
1588. and remember not that they dug a sulphurous pit in 1605. wide enough
to swallow three whole kingdoms. Now while we so easily forget that which we
are commanded to remember, what marvel if God rub our memories, by suffering
them to be pricks in our sides and eyes still?

2. Neither do we remember the Lords Oath, to have war with spiritual Amalek.
Exodus 17.16.


3. Neither do we remember that it is the duty of all the Israel of God to
fight with God in blotting out their remembrance, though the charge be very
strait, Deuteronomy. 25.19. Thou shall put out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven: as God takes his Churches part against Amalek, so the Church must take
Gods part in this great work, which the Lord will effect both for them, and by
them.

4. It is likely also we lift not up our hands so fervently and so constantly
against Amalek as we ought. If Moses hold up his hands, Israel prevails.
Exodus 17.^1.


5. It may be we are wanting in encouraging and strengthening the enfeebled
hands of our Mosesses. How could Israel have expected to prevail against
Amalek, if in stead of rearing up Moses his hands, they had turned him off the
hill with despite and contempt, and taken up some Amalekite into his stead?
How can Popish Amalek but prevail, if Popish Priests shall find any where
better entertainment than faithful Preachers, who are so many Mosesses, and
men of God, who would stand in the gap, and are indeed the horsemen and
Chariots of Israel?

Oh therefore dear brethren let us awaken our selves, and in this tempest by
the loud voice of our prayers, awaken Christ who seems to sleep in his ship
with us. Let us ply the Lord earnestly, and bind him by his own promise. Gods
promise and his peoples prayers are mighty Canons and battery against the
thick walls and towers of Romish Amalek. While the Papists are some at their
beads, and some at their swords, let us get us to our fortress of faithful
and fervent prayer, and we shall not only see the omnipotence of prayer, but
the impotencie and flight of Amalek. Did not our hands fall down, and our
prayers grow feeble, we should fill our hearts quickly with triumphant joy over
them, our hands with their spoils, and our mouths would run over with the
praises of God, for our deliverances from the power and plots of such fierce
and implacable enemies. Even so let thine enemies, those accursed Amalekites,
perish, Judge. 5.31.
O Lord, but let them that love thy name be as the Sun when he rises in his
might. Amen.

FINIS.

