A MAN IN CHRIST, OR A new CREATVRE. To which is added a Treatise, containing
Meditations from the CREATVRES. By THOMAS TAILOR, D. in Divinity.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J. Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheapeside, 1635.

A Man in CHRIST, OR A New CREATVRE.
2. Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ let him be a new creature.
IN the first Adam, all the sons of Adam had an happy estate: in which while
he stood, we stood and enjoyed the whole image of God, and all perfections
which humane nature was capable of; and when he fell, we fell, and with him
lost the whole estate of grace and glory. And so are fallen into an old ruinous
condition of the old Adam, which threatens us daily with deserved destruction,
and thrusts us under the Regiment of death. Now for our repair out of such
misery, he that made us at first must make us a new, and give us a new stock
and estate, by transplanting us out of the old stock into a new root, and by
removing us out of the old Adam, and setting us into the new Adam, Jesus Christ*

The means whereof, this Text will teach us.

In the which there are two general points: first, the estate of a man
converted, [Hee is in Christ:] secondly, the note of such a covenant, [Hee is a
new creature.]

To open the former, there are sundry questions.

Quest. 1. How a man is said to be in Christ.

Answer. Two ways: first, as a man, or creature: secondly, as a member, or new
creature.

First, as a man, or creature among others: he is so both in respect of
creation, and preservation.

The former, because every man is said to be created, not only by him, but in
him: as he is the beginning of all the creatures of God.

The latter: because every man subsisteth in him, Col. 1. 16, 17. For he is not
like the Carpenter that makes an house or ship, and leaves it to the wind
and weather when he has done: but he abides with his creature, to continue
and uphold it in its being; which else would suddenly fall to nothing.
According to Act. 17. verse 28. [In him we live and move, and have our being:]
and not only by him.

Secondly, But our Text speaks To be in Christ as a member how?
not of that, but of the second being in Christ: namely, as a member. And thus
only the Church is in him.

And as a member, one is said to be in Christ two ways:

First, externally: only as an outward member of the Church, and in the
judgment of Charity; of which number are such as profess Christ, and join
with the members in outward profession of Religion, and use of the means. Of
the which, read John 15. 6.

Secondly, inwardly and effectually: which is, when first a man is knit by
faith to the head himself: secondly, by love, to all the members, even
invisible: thirdly, by outward profession to the visible Church, and produces
fruits of this inward union with Christ. And of this our Text here speaks.
For he that is thus in Christ, is a new creature: so are not the others.

The second question is, How comes a man to be in How we come to be in
Christ.
Christ?

Answer. By the straight union and communion between Christ and the Christian:
who are far nearer than friends, or men that dwell together in one house. For
Christ and the Chrian dwells not one with another: but one in another. As it
is in the natural body, the being of a member is not properly with the head,
but in the head: so in the mystical body, the being of the believer is in
Christ the head. And as the being of the Branch is in the root: so it is
between Christ, the Vine, and the believers, who are the Branches, John 15.

This straightness of union comes from the straightness of the band, which
is, first, on Christ his part, namely his spirit of fortitude put into their
hearts.

Secondly, on our part, which is our faith, by which we are set into Christ.
Faith only gives a being in the second Adam. God offers in his covenant of
grace, Jesus Christ to be the head and Savior of his body. Faith receives
this offer, and puts our name into the deed: only faith draws and
sucketh virtue from Christ; and Romans 11. 24. [Thou art grafted in by faith.]

Object. But Christ is in us, how can we then be in Christ?

Answ. This being in Christ, is Relative: for we connot be in him, but he must
be in us. 1. John 3. 10. He that keeps his commandments, dwells in him
and he in him.

But it is with this difference, He is in us, and abides in us by his spirit,
and by upholding grace in us: We are in him by faith, and by the exercise of
grace: and those two are inseparable.

Object. But Christ is in heaven, how can we be in him, and not be there?

Answ. If our being in Christ were after a corporal manner, then to be in him,
we must be locally in heaven as he is: But this conjunction is spiritual*
and the means of it, which is faith, is spiritual: not hindered by distance of
time or place, from this most straight union. Thus Abraham by faith saw the day
of Christ, and was in Christ sundry thousands of years before Christ's
incarnation: for he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit: and the believer
is now in heaven after a spiritual manner, where Christ is. The happy estate
of a man converted.


Doct. Learn the happy estate of a man converted, that he is now in Christ, 1
Ioh. 5. 20. We are in him that is true; namely, in his Son Jesus Christ; the
same is very God, 2 Cor. 12. 2. I know a man in Christ, etc.

Reason 1. Because they stand not only in general relation to Christ as other
men, and creatures do, which are subject unto him as their Lord, but in nearer
and special relation, as they are members of his body: for all which he is
most tender, and careful, as a most loving and respective head.

Secondly, from this union flows all the efficacy of his merits upon us: for
nothing can proceed from Christ to us, till we be in him; but being set into
him; we partake in all that Christ has, as a loving husband first
communicates himself* and then all he has with the wife of his bosom.

Hence it is that Christ being elected of God, we are elected in him, Ephesians.
1. verse 9. And Christ being acquitted from our sins, we are justified in
him: for being found in Christ, as Philippians 3. 11. his righteousness is
imputed unto us. If Christ be rich, and have treasures of wisdom, and grace;
the Christian cannot be poor* [For in him we are made rich,] ^ Cor. 1. 5.
Ephe. 4. 27. [Which riches is Christ in you.]

Thirdly, as all the promises of God are made in Christ, who is the foundation
of them all; so they are made good only to them that are in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.
20. In him are all the promises, Yea and Amen: but to whom? even to the heirs
of promise: and who be they? even Abraham's seed, the faithful posterity of
faithful Abraham, Gal. 3. 10.

Fourthly, by being in Christ, the Christian has a sure estate:

First, in this life, strength, and assurance in temptations, trials, and
dangers, to be upheld unto victory. 2 Cor. 12. 2. I know a man in Christ: and
verse. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee. John 10. The sheep of Christ, can
none pluck out of his hands; his estate is not liable to casualtie: no cheater
nor robber shall defraud him of it.

Secondly, in death he has hope and assurance, in which state he is a member
of Christ, and he that sleeps in Christ, perishes not; nay, being in
Christ, but he shall be made alive again. 1 Cor. 15. 18, 22. 1. These. 4. 14,
18.

Thirdly, in that day of judgment he shall stand with boldness. 1 Ioh. 2.
28. Little children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may be bold,
and not ashamed before him at his coming.

Use 1. Labor to know thy self in this happy condition, else is Christ
appeared in vain unto thee, the whole Gospel is in vain unto thee.

Quest. But how may I know How to know a man in Christ 1. Note.
this, namely, that I am in Christ?

First, have thou disclaimed thy own righteousness, and given thy self
wholly unto him? Phil. 3. Paul could not be found in him, till he had
disclaimed his own righteousness, and esteemed it as dung. Papists cannot be
in Christ, because they do not this. Have thou denied thy self? thy head did
so. Take thou up the Cross daily? so did he. Can thou abide to crucify
the flesh and lusts of it? thy head was crucified: but if thou can not take
thy self short in carnal delights, nor renounce the fashions of the world,
nor abide the doctrine and practice of mortification; never say thou art in
Christ: can a member be so contrary to the head? Gal. 5. 24.

The second note is subjection unto Christ as a head. The 2. Note
most graceless men in the world, yea the devils are subject unto Christ as a
Lord: but art thou subject as a member unto such a head?

Quest. How is the member subject unto the head?

Answ, 1. Sweetly, and willingly, not by force and compulsion. Now ask thy
self, Is Christ's yoke irksome and tedious? Are his commandments grievous?
Is it grievous unto a member to obey the head, into which it is set?

Secondly, universally, it does all that the head enjoyneth: Art thou subject
in some commandments, but not in others? Thou can forbear murder,
adultery, drunkenness; but must swear, lie, profane the Sabbath, spend thy
time idly which is given thee to repent in: Do the members thus pick and
choose with the heads commands?

Thirdly, sincerely: in all things seeking the good of the head, above it
self: a member will venture it self to be cut off for the safety of the head.
Now what is thy aim in thy subjection? is it thy own name, reputation, thy
wealth, or ease, or any base respect? how does a member neglect it self for
the head?

Fourthly, constantly: A member is never weary of obeying the head; but how
fickle and inconstant art thou in the ways of God? Thou will obey on the
Sabbath, but wilt not be tied to daily duties, some occasions must give thee
dispensation. If some seasons of the year can win of thee to cast off thy
calling, and live like an Epicure* eating, drinking, scorning, gaming, chafing,
coveting, swearing, and the like: Is this to be in Christ? The head sets
thee on no such work: and if a man be not commanded by Christ in his actions,
he may easily know who is his master, and pay-paster. What man dare go to God
for such works to have them rewarded?

The third Note: He that is in Christ, and abides in him* there 3. Note.
is no abiding for sin, 1 John 3. 6. He that abides in him sins not.

Quest. Is there any that sins not.

Answ. 1. He sins not studiously: How a man in Christ sins not 1
he purposes not sin, but holds a resolute purpose against it. Have thou
this note of Christ his being in thee, that thou sinnest not, who can
deliberate, and purpose, and willingly venture on sin?

Secondly, he sins not willingly; 2
namely, with his whole will, and full consent: for the will, so far as it is
renewed, is not gained to his sin, but striveth relucteth, and resists.

Thirdly, he sins not affectedly, 3
or with full delight in sin; he sins sometimes: but if I have delight to
sin, says David, God will not hear me: he sins, but loves not his
sin, but hates what he does: can thou love thy sins and lusts, and
delight in works of darkness, in thy self or others? Christ abides not in
thee*

Fourthly, he sins not 4
deadly, or not to death; he abides not in his sin, in whom Christ abides:
his sin has after it three things:

1 Sorrow and grief that he has sinned. 2 Care to rise and recover himself.
3 Fear not to sin again.
Can thou run on in sin without remorse, without returning, without care of
repentance, or fear of Gods justice? can thou turn head against the ways
of God and good men desperately, as if thy conscience were turned into a rotten
post? Think thou that so living a root can admit such dead branches? or can
the surpassing holiness of Christ the head, receive into it such rotten and
gangrenous members? No, no tie thy self by a thread of profession, so long as
thou will, unto this stock thou were never ingrafted as yet, that bring such
wild and unsavory fruits, Romans 8. 10, If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness; that is, the
spirit lives by grace, and manifests that life in motions of grace and
holiness. And a plain mark of a man in Jesus Christ is that in Romans 8. 1.
[He walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit.]

Fourthly, he that is in Christ and abides in him, the Word 4. Note.
of God abides in him: for these two are inseparably joined, John Chap. 15.
verse 7. [If you abide in me* and my Word abide in you.] And this is made a
sure sign of our being in Christ, 1 Ioh. 2. 5. He that keeps his Word, in
him is the love of God perfect. By this we know that we are in him.

This is more than to hear the Word, than to understand it, or to retain it,
as many do, who can entertain it, as they do strangers, for a meal, or a
nights lodging, or a short time: but it must abide as an in-dweller; for we
dwell no longer in Christ, than his Word dwells in us, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. He that
keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him. And on this
condition only he comes in, and dwells in us, John 14. 23. If any man love
me, and keep my Word, my Father will love him, and we will come into him* and
dwell with him.

We hear many good things, but we heed and hold but a few; and those few but
a little while: as riven vessels we let them slip. For,

First, how weak an account can we give unto God (as we must) of all the good
lessons we have heard, and ought to have remembered?

Secondly, how could we continue the same men from year to year unchanged, if
the word did continue in us.

Thirdly, what strangers are many of us to the Scripture, and grounds of
Religion? whereas, if it did dwell in us, it would be as well known unto us,
as those that are in house with us.

Fourthly, how far is it to seek, and absent from us, when our minds
understand it not, our hearts affect it not, our consciences are not guided by
it, nor our actions, nor the creatures are sanctified by it? as 1 Timothy 4. 4.

How plain is it now, that thou art not in Christ, who wilt not afford his
Word a resting place in thy soul? Remember that place, 1 John 2. 24. If that
which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye shall
continue in the Son and in the Father.

The fifth note: Examine whether thou have the Spirit of Christ. This is made a
note of such a one. 1 John 3. 10. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
spirit which he has given us: And Chap. 4. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell
in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit: And if any man*
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his; that is, no member of
his body, set into him, but in show, as a wooden leg, which receives not
vital powers from the head.

Object. This is a difficult mark: But how shall I know the Spirit of Christ
to be in me?

Answ. Many find and conceive How to know that the spirit of Christ is in me.
it to be harder than it is, because they hold it no sin to doubt whether
they have the spirit or no; when as they may as lawfully doubt whether they be
Christians or no. But try thy self by this note:

First, wheresoever the spirit is, 1. Note.
he rebukes sin, Ioh. 16. 8. The spirit pricketh the heart of every convert:
and if thou have him, thou must find him a spirit of conviction.

Object. I have been often checked for my sin, and that is my comfort.

Answ. But deceive not thy self. To the spirits conviction are required three
things: First, sense and sorrow that thou have sinned: Secondly, earnest desire
of mercy, expressed in vehement hunger and thirst: Thirldly, a loathing and
leaving of sin. Never any received the spirit, but thus was sin rebuked in
them.

Secondly, the spirit writes 2. Note.
the law in the heart where he is, Ier. 31. 31. and leads into all truth,
John 16. 13. Have thou this spirit of direction and counsel, teaching thee,
and leading thee into duty?

Object. I know as much as any can teach me.

Answ. But art thou led by the spirit, or misled by the flesh and doctrine of
carnal liberty? Many are taught, few are led, and yet only they that are led
by the Spirit, are the Sons of God: The Spirit must be the guider of thy
course, as the Pilot in the ship: thou must shut thine own eyes of carnal
reason, and as a blind man, give thy self to be led by the spirit.

Thirdly, the spirit where he 3. Note.
is, rules and commands: yea, reformeth and casts out old errors of heart
and life: for he will not dwell as an underling, but as a commander: his work
is to cast down all high things exalted against grace, and to bring every
thought into the obedience of Christ. Find thou a spirit in thee prevailing
against fleshly thoughts, carnal affections, desires, conversation? find
thou a spirit, framing thoughts, speeches, actions to the conformity of the
Word? a spirit quickening to all that is good? this is the Spirit of Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, he being the spirit of 4. Note.
supplication. Zae. 12. 10 makes the elect to cry with unspeakeable groans.
Do thou find not the words of prayer which any hypocrite may, but the spirit
of prayer? who always in prayer, first, leads into the sense of sin:
secondly, into the apprehension of the excellency of mercy, which makes him
servent: thirdly, lets the soul see God appeased in Christ: fourthly, it
seals to it the truth of Gods promises, who will hear, Psalm. 50. 15.

Fifthly, assures it self to be in state of Christ his merits and 5. Note.
intercession, to whom the Father denies nothing; all which must needs
quicken the heart to fervent and frequent prayer.

The sixth Note: If thou can discern Christ in thy self, thou 6. Note.
may be sure thou art in him: for one ralative affirms the other. And
know thou not that Vnum relatorum ponit alterum.
Christ is in thee, except thou be a reprobate? 2 Cor. 12. 5.

Quest. How may I know this?

Answ. First, examine if Christ be formed in thee, Gal. 4. 12. And How to know
that Christ is in us. 1 Trial.
then Christ is formed in thine heart, when God has begun a change in thy
soul, by his grace laying in thee the beginnings, and seeds of grace.

The Apostle uses a comparison drawn from the forming of an infant in the
womb, which is not formed all at once, but the principal vital parts first;
the heart, brain, and liver, and then the other by degrees: so grace is not
wrought all at once, but by degrees: first, the beginnings of Faith,
Repentance, and holy desires, and then a more lively impression of the Image of
Christ imprinted in their heart; which stands in knowledge, holiness, and
conformity to Jesus Christ in practice and passion, in suffering and doing as
he did in some measure: Now if there be no new lump which was not in nature,
no forming, no reforming of heart and life, Christ is not there.

Secondly, try if Christ lives 2. Note.
in thee: and then Christ lives in thee, when thou live by faith in the
Son of God: making thy faith thy stay in all estates, in all actions,
temptations, afflictions, when faith carries a sway, and has a stroke in
every thing, and in life and death makes the heart and life lean upon Christ.

Thirdly, if Christ be in thee, 3. Trial.
then he moves in thee, and thou in him. The infant in the womb is discerned
by the moving of it and so is Christ discerned in the heart: and then Christ
moves in the heart, when his spirit moves and inclines it by a still and
secret voice unto all good speeches and duties; and then thou movest in him,
when thou cherishest, fosterest, and followest his motions agreeable unto the
Word, and suffer them not to die in thee. As for example: The Spirit moves
thee to redeem the time, to read in Gods Book, there to acquaint thy self
with Gods will, in time to work the works of God, to mind thy account and
reckoning; but thou resistest those motions, carnal and contrary motions
thrust them our, and call thee to cards, dice, epicurisme, merriments, wasting
thy time, putting off the evil day, as the heathens. Now Christ moves not in
thee, but the spirit that rules in the world; for Gods sweet motions are so
strong, as that ordinarily they come to a birth.

Use 2. If thou be in Christ, thou must imitate Christ; imitate him in his
nature and holy example: the member is of the same nature, and does the same
things with the head: they all compose themselves to the motion of the head,
into which they are set, 1 Ioh. 2. 6. He that says he is in him, ought to
walk, as he has walked.

Quest. How did Christ walk, that we may walk so?

Answ. Christ walked first, Imitation of Christ, wherein.
religiously: He began all things with God, did all things for God, and
referred all things unto God. First, he began all things I.
with prayer, and continued long together therein: sometimes whole nights in
prayer, as the occasions were more serious. 1
Do we so? do we sanctify every ordinance with prayer? do we continue in
prayer? do not many sit up whole nights to play? when would they sit up so to
prayer?

Secondly, he did all things by 2
the warrant and Word of his Father: he contemned his own will, that he might
do his Fathers will: Not my will, but thy will be done; yea, he would lose his
life before his obedience. Do we so? We say, Thy will be done, as if we
would do all the will of God, and as if there were but one will between Christ
and us: But as the Scribes and Pharisees, we say and do not: We will not give
our wills up to Gods will and Word, further than our selves list and like: nay,
many say, as that rebellious generation; The word of the Lord spoken unto us by
the Ministers, will not do. When or where see we any thing reformed by the
power of the Word?

Thirdly, he referred every 3
thing unto his Fathers glory: he never sought his own praise and reputation,
but avoided it: Do we so? Who dare say he seeks to glorify God in casting
off his calling, and spending days and nights in idleness, or worse? when did
our Lord walk so, that we might do so also? Fie upon such heathenish
Christianity. This glorious head will not be so disgraced, as to take in such
monsters for members.

Secondly, he walked holily, II
and commanded us to learn of him; but we that say we are in Christ, lay
aside this glass, and strive in pride to be beyond each other: We cannot
keep filthy fashions out of Christians, because neither the mind of Christ,
nor himself is in us.

Thirdly, he walked fruitfully III
and diligently in his calling, Acts 10. He went about doing good: he watched
and apprehended all accasions of helping men's souls and bodies. He spent all
his time in painful performance of his calling. How do we so, who spend so
much time in unfruitful courses, wherein we do no man good, but our selves
and others much harm?

And sometimes through the day scarce doing any thing, which may in the night
minister comfort unto us.

If men should say to themselves every night, How much time have I vainly
spent this day, which I might have redeemed to prayer, reading, or some
fruitful meditation for my souls good? to some work of Repentance, or of
Charity, or of Mercy, or Justice? Alas, what a cooling card would this be, if
he infer, My Lord never walked so; and I must walk as he walked, if I be
in him, further than in outward profession. Was he ever in Gods work? so must
I be, if I be in him.

Fourthly, he walked righteously IV.
and justly. An admirable pattern of civil righteousness. he never deceived
any man neither by word nor deed: never was guile found in his lips or hands:
never covetousness of any man's goods was found in him: he gave his due to
every man, high and low.

Do we walk so? many of us take liberty to deceive our Brethren by word or
deed, lies, oaths, and false tricks: and hold it lawful to cover our
Neighbors money under a cover and color of play, and so get his money into
our hands, which neither God, nor any good means gives us, and makes us
masters of. A most gross and hateful injustice, condemned by the light of
nature amongst the heathen: and yet neither the light of nature, nor of grace,
can cry it down amongst Christians. Never sew a fig leaf over thy sin, to
say, I care not whether I win or lose: thou should care to walk as Christ
walked, who in this case did neither win nor lose. Besides, thy chaffing and
swearing gives thy tongue the lie. And sure I am, many would take great care
before they would part with so much money to the poor, or ministry, or any good
use in a whole year, as they can set at the stake of one cast of an unlawful
Dice.

Fifthly, Christ walked in the light, namely in the purity of his V.
nature. There was no darkness of ignorance in his mind, no 1
darkness nor disorder in his will and affections: secondly, in the purity
and light of holy conversation, 2
he never committed any works of darkness: thirdly; 3
in communion and fellowship with his father, with whom no darkness has
fellowship; himself being the most pure and inaccessible light.

And thus must we walk, if we be in him. 1 John 1. 6, 7. If we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with him.

But do we so? do not many walk like Gentiles, having their understandings
darkened; not because they want light, but because they hate the light of God,
and fight against the light of the Word and of their own Consciences?

And do not many walk in the fruitless works of darkness?

I say not, slip into some works of darkness, which often a godly man may
do: but walk, trade and continue in the works of darkness; and go on to
black darkness. Such impure persons of foul hearts, hands, and lives: and
Libertines, that take liberty to do as they list, and cast off all counsel of
the Word: scorners of their teachers and instructers, and more of their godly
instructions, followers of the fashions of the world, in the loathsome guises
of it; fearing nothing so much as to be good; hating nothing more, than to be
fashioned according to the Word of God, are far from walking as Christ walked.

Lastly, how do we embrace^ communion with God, who are never so merry as
when the thoughts of God are shut out; are most heavy and weary, in the place
and means of his presence, in which he communicates himself with his
people? our sore eyes cannot abide so clear a light: And what communion can
there be between light and darkness? All this while the Apostle tells us,
that we are far enough from being in Christ.

The third use. Is this so happy To be in Christ is an estate.
a condition to be in Christ? Let it provoke us to labor to get into so happy
an estate. To which end, let us look upon it, not as the world, who sees
nothing but baseness and contempt in Christ himself, but with eyes cleared,
and then we shall discern it;

First, to be an honorable condition: To become one, not with 1. Honorable.
Christ, but in Christ: to be a member of Christ. So Christ appeared in great
humility to advance us to this honor.

Secondly, it is a most comfortable condition: for, 2. Comfortable.


First, now there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.
1.

Secondly, all thy debts are discharged. Thou have in him satisfied, and in him
fulfilled al righteousness: for who pays the wives debt, but the husband?
and the bebt being once paid, it shall never be demanded more.

Thirdly, all the grace and good that Christ has in himself, is thine: whole
Christ is thine by imputation of his merits, holiness, obedience, active and
passive. This loving Husband has all holiness and happiness for his Spouse.
His life is thine: for he that has the Son, has life; his death is thine,
and all the fruits of his passion; his resurrection and ascension is thine,
that thou may boldly ascend in affection, and cause thy prayers to ascend;
yea, and in person to ascend into thy fathers house, and pull down his
intercession. Oh what a rich estate is this, that a man can ask nothing, but
he shall have it, John 15. 7.

Thirdly, it is a most safe condition 3. Safe.
to be in Christ; our head is above water: an able head will save and protect
the members. All sins and imperfections are now covered and hid: for the head
will hide the defects of the members. He takes upon him all the quarrels of the
Christian, and mightily overcommeth hell, the grave, death, the devil, and all
adversary power: so as the elect cannot be seduced, nor severed from God.

Fourthly, it is a most fruitful 4. Fruitful
condition. John 15. 2. Every branch that bears fruit in me, he purges,
that it might bring forth more fruit. How can a branch set into such a root,
but be fruitful? Et contra. Whereas the misery of one that is out of Christ,
is, that he can do nothing at all. No branch can bring any fruit, that
abides not in him. And whatsoever branch brings not fruit in him, is cast
out as a withered branch into the fire, A fruitless barren tree dishonors
God. Herein is the Father glorified, etc. He disgraceth the stock into which
he is set.

Fftly, it is the only state of 5. Perfect.
perfection in this life. For all perfection is originally in him, and derived
to us, because we are in him. So as that in him, we attain all that makes
for grace or glory. Col. 2. 10. Ye are complete in him, who leads into all
truth, who gives all graces in their kind, and adds all degrees of those
graces, which makes up their full happiness. Yea, the perfection of this
state, is also in the preservance and continuance of it. For we bear not the
root, but the root bears us. Our salvation depends not on our selves, but
on him: for being in him, we not only grow, but increase, and the older we
grow, the more we flourish, and bring fruit, Psalm 92. 20. All other branches
may be plucked away from their stock by violence of winds, or man's hand, or
consumed by time and age; but it is not so with those that are in this root;
life nor death, things present nor things to come, can separate them, etc.

From the state of a man renewed, Romans 8. 38.
we come, to the note of him, [Hee is a new creature.] Where consider: first,
what is meant by a new Creature, and why a man in Christ is so called:
secondly, how a man may know himself to be a new Creature, which is here
employed: thirdly, how a man may become a new Creature, seeing he must be so:
Fourthly, why he must be a new Creature; Fifthly, Use both for instruction, and
secondly, consolation.

First, the new Creature, is the regenerate man, who is endued with new
qualities of righteousness and holiness, according to the image of the new or
second Adam.

To understand which, consider in man three things:

1 The substance of soul and body. 2 The faculties of them. 3 The qualities of
both.
For the first, the same substance of soul and body remains, which GOD
created at first.

For the second: the faculties be the same; the same understanding, will,
memory, affections, senses, natural motions the same they were; but the
qualities of them all are changed and new framed; for whereas in the old Adam,
the understanding was blind, now it is enlightened; the will that was
rebellious, is now bored in part unto duty: the conscience, memory, thoughts,
desires, which were dull, earthly, dead, estranged from God, now are quickened,
wakened, raised upwards: the affections, which were crooked and corrupt, are
changed and straightened: the senses which were servants of sin, are servants
of grace, senses of discipline: the members that were weapons of
unrighteousness, are now become members of Christ: in one word, the whole man
is in these qualities repaired and renewed, and made as here, a new creature;
so elsewhere a new man, Col. 3. 10. The qualities thus framed in the hearts of
the elect, at their first, conversion, are called a new creature. The man being
the same in substance, faculties, and members; only in the frame and order of
them, not the same. The new creature is not in respect of substance, Non quoad
substantiam, sed malitiam.
but of malice.

Quest. But why is he called a new Creature?

Answer. The work of grace is a kind of creation, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me
a new heart. Now if restoring of Grace, where it was, be a kind of creation;
much more the framing of grace at the first where it is not.

Secondly, there is a great resemblance between these two great works of God,
the first creation and the second.

First, the Author of the creation, Resemblance between the first and second
Creation. 1. The Author.
was the Son of God: God by Christ made all things. By him were all things
made, 1 Cor. 8. 6. There is one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him; he is the beginning of the Creatures, Acts 15. 15. He being the
mighty Jehovah, gives being, and beginning to all creatures, not in
Nature-onely, but in Grace and Glory.

Again, none can re-creat, but he that first created. What is decayed in
nature, must be restored by the Author of nature: he that brought his whole
order out of confusion, can only bring our confusion into order.

Secondly, the matter of the creation 2 The matter.
was of nothing, which is the difference of Creation from Generation, which is
the producing of a substance from a substance: so here was no preiacent grace,
no preparing grace: For how could Adam prepare himself to his own creation?
and as little can a man, dead in sin, prepare himself to the life of God:
Nay, in the first Creation, was nothing to resist, but here is nothing but an
old rubbish, strong in resistance.

Thirdly, the manner in the 3. The manner.
first Creation, all was made by a word. Psalm. 33. 6, 9. By the Word of God
were the Heavens made: and Psalm. 148. 1. and 9. He spoke the word, and all
things were made; so this is done by the same mighty creating word of God,
which is the immortal seed in the work of regeneration.

Fourthly, for the order: in that 4. The order.
the light was first made; the first word that God spoke, was, Let there be
light, and it was so. So the beginning of this Creation is an infused light of
knowledge, Col. 3. 10. The image is renewed in knowledge: and never could a
world of believers have been created, or a Church raised, but by the light of
the Gospel.

Fifthly, for the quality; in that 5. The quality.
Creation, all that GOD made, was exceeding good; but here is a further degree
of goodness, to which new creatures, are made far beyond them. They were all
exceeding good in their natural goodness, but this in a spiritual and
supernatural goodness. And whereas man was made to the image of God, he is
here also framed to the image of him that created him, Col. 3. 10. But with
this addition, that he is now created to a more sure estate in that image.

Sixthly, for relation; in that 6. Relation
the creature had absolute dependence on the Creator for his being and
wel-being, as also for his working: so this new creature must absolutely depend
upon God, both for new qualities and every new act, and the motions of them;
for we also live, and move, and have being in him alone. For as all motion is
from the power of some first mover; so must our dependence be on him, as well
for working, and moving in grace, as for our being, and beginning in it. Thus
we see what is meant by the new Creature, and why so called.

The second general point, is how this new Creature may be known, seeing it
is a note, by which a man must discern himself to be in Christ.

Answ. A new Creature may be The new Creature discerned by four properties 1.
Note of a new creature.
discerned by four properties.

1 By a new light of sound and saving knowledge: for here the work begins,
This knowledge is not natural, nor historical, nor a general knowledge of
points in Divinity, (which even the devils are not without) nor a bare
knowledge in the Theory, or speculation of divine things; but a sound and
saving knowledge, whereby the mysteries of Gods Kingdom are not only
revealed, but applied, and locked up, to the change of the man into it self:
it transformeth a man into the image of Christ; from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.
10. It is a practical knowledge, that keeps a man from every evil way, Pro.
2. and a wisdom full of mercy, and good fruits, James 3. 17. Then are
ignorant persons no new creatures, nor persons enlightened, but not changed; but
haters of knowledge and the means, are much less new Creatures.

Secondly, because no creature can be both old and new at once: 2. Note of a
new creature.
the new creation may be known by the passing away of all things, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
In the old creature was a general leprosy of sin, spread over all the
parts; and if this be not in part cured, thou art no new Creature. No man can
put the new man upon the old, but must first put off the old man. Ephesians. 4. 22.
Called the old conversation in times past, (...). So as if the old Adam live
and prosper in thee, thou art no new creature. If thou be as earthly minded
as once thou wast, if thy will be carried against the will of God, if thy
affections settle upon earthly, and vain things, only or principally: if thy
conversion be to the fashions of the world, and thou live according to
nature; thou did never attain this happy estate by new creation. Here is no
patching of a new piece upon an old; if thou be the same man thou wast
borne, thou have no part in this business.

Thirdly, in a new Creature, the whole is created a new. All 3. Note of a new
creature.
things are now new: first, grace is total in all parts; as in the birth of a
child, the whole child is borne in all the parts. This work of Creation,
Christ compares to the leaven hid in three peckes of meal, till all be
leavened: so God by a secret but powerful work, changes the whole man, and
all the parts. I say the whole, and parts of the new Creature, are renewed, and
have attained a new nature, which is called, 2 Pet. 1. 4. a divine nature,
standing of divine and heavenly qualities. The new Creature is sanctified
throughout, 1 These. 5. 23. The new Creature has all new. 1. New life
in spirit, soul, and body; all is new both within and without. See it in the
particulars, and apply them: First, the new Creature has a new life, by which
it lives now the life of God: that is, whereby God lives in his Saints; and
the life of Christ, from which he was a stranger. He lives now the life of
grace, which, when it is perfect in heaven, does become the life of glory: he
has begun eternal life below.

Secondly, a new birth? the new Creature is now borne of 2. New birth.
a new Father, begetting him which is God by his Minister; and a new mother,
sucking and feeding him, which is the Church, by her two breasts and Testaments.

Thirdly, a new soul: and here God begins, wherein this 3. A new soul.
condition differs from the other: there God made the body first, and then
breathed a living soul: but here he makes the soul new first, and works
first And faculties.
a new spirit without guile, or reigning hypocrisy: secondly, a 1
new judgment, or a new manner 2
of esteeming things: those things he accounted advantage, are now loss; and
he esteems of all things as they are helps to heaven: thirdly, new desires:
before he desired 3
earth, profits, and sinful lusts; to live at large out of the sight of God;
but now he desires freedom from sin, purity of nature, pardon of sin, the
presence of God in his ordinances, the coming of Christ, the prosperity of the
Gospel, the salvation of all Gods people.

Fourthly, new affections. As First, new joy in the law of God, 4.
in Gods ordicances of Word and Sacraments, Psalm. 122. 1. in Gods people that
excel in virtue. yea, and in afflictions for welldoing, Romans 5. 5. Thus he
could never joy before.

Secondly, new sorrows; not now for worldly things, losses, crosses, shame,
sickness; but for sin, for want, or weakness of grace, for spiritual
judgments more than temporal, for Joseph's affliction, when the enemy
prevails against the Church, when Gods wrath breaks out against his people.
Encourage thy self in these sorrows, which are a part of the new Creature.

Thirdly, new love, where he most hated: he loves God most of all, he loves
to obey him, even when he does not; he loves most that, which most crosses
his own nature; the^ smitings of the Word, the cross of Christ,
mortification, fasting, prayer. He loves dearly the honor of God, and the
place where his honor dwells; he loves the way to happiness, as well as
happiness it self.

Fourthly, new hatred: he hates his sin as the greatest evil, and his own
sin, more than another man's: yea, his most secret and dear sins most of
all: he hates not persons now, but sins: he hates all sins, even those
which himself does; small and great he spares none: Nay he hates his life,
and loves it not to the death, in comparison of Christ. These are strange
affections, but inseparable to the new Creature.

Fifthly, new senses; a new 5 New senses.
cleared eye to discern the things of God, Ephesians. 1. 15. A new ear opened,
boared, circumcised to hear and obey, Psam. 40. 6. A new taste how good God
is, and relish of the things of God. A new smell to savor the things of the
spirit, Romans 8. 5. which before were unsavory, and tastelesse. A new feeling:
he feels the work of the Word and Spirit in him, he feels a sweet
apprehension of remission of sins and Gods favor in Christ; he feels the
peace and joy of a good conscience, and fellowfeeleth the affliction of his
brethren.

Sixthly, a whole new estate: 6 A whole new condition.
he is in state of regeneration, and in state of salvation, being before in
state of death and damnation. A new name, Esaias, 62. 1. Being married to Christ,
is called by the husbands name, Christian. A new language of Canaan, he is of a
pure language. He has new food, new milk from the breasts of the Church;
Mannah from Heaven to grow by. Every creature has his proper food to live by:
so here, he has new raiment to cloth him; the righteousness of Christ, the
elder brother: new attendants and servants to keep him in his way: the Angels,
Psalm. 34. A new and living way by Jesus Christ to walk into heaven, contrary
to the way of the world.

Seventhly, a new death; not of 7 A new death.
his soul in sin, as before; but of sin in his soul: Nay, his body dies
not the common death of all men, but a new death, sanctified, seasoned in the
death of Christ: yea more, he has a new grave and burial of sin in his
soul: and his body is laid in a Tomb wherein never wicked man was laid, al
perfumed in the burial and grave of Jesus Christ. Here is a new Creature; all
new, all tending to perfection.

The fourth note of a new creature, 4. Note of a new creture.
is, new Motion, called new obedience: first, from the original: secondly, the
matter: thirdly, the manner: fourthly, the end of it.

First, the spring or rise of the 1
new Creatures Motion is from within: all he does is from the spirit within
him. The Old man's Obedience is from without, he begins at his finger ends,
is drawn by outward inducements; he sets his service to sale, to the view
of men, as a clock that works not from within, but is moved by plummets and
weights without: But the new Creature performs new Obedience from a new
ground; he has not only Spiritum adstantem, but assistentem; that is, he
has not the presence of the spirit only, but his assistance. Of all sins he
shunneth the most inward and spiritual: of all judgments he most dreadeth
inward and spiritual: of all places he would have his heart within sweetest,
cleanest, and best trimmed.

Secondly, the matter of his 2
Obedience is grounded in the Word, either in some precept general or
special, or in some example: in all his motion he looks to the rule, as the
Israelites to the cloud: he has a new commandment to observe, John 13. from
a new Master, whom his desire is to please in all things; which cannot be in
any thing, but commanded by himself.

Thirdly, the manner of his motion is new, and diverse from 3.
other men; yea, from himself. A beast may do the same things that a man
does, eat, drink, sleep: but the manner is not the same. A wicked man may
do some things that are good and commanded, as hearing, reading, praying,
fasting: but he slubbers it over, and contenteth himself to do it in any
fashion, to get it over: But a new Creature aims as much at the right manner
of doing, as the thing it self.

The maine difference in the manner of doing between the old and new creature,
is in two things:

1 As every Creature has his several delight in his proper action: so the new
Creature does duties with delight, freedom, cheerfulness. The Bird
delights in singing: so the new Creature delights in his new motion, and
the Commandment is not a burden.

2 As every Creature is uniforme in his proper action; it does them all alike
every where: so the new Creature is the same in his obedience every where.
Joseph is Joseph in the dungeon, as well as in the top of the Kingdom. Job is
Job on the dunghill.

Fourthly, the end of his Motion and Obedience is new, Gods 4
glory directly; as the glory of God shareth in all the works of the Creation,
Romans 1 (...) The Heavens declare his glory, and the Earth show his handy
works: Much more this new Creature, in his motion, expresses the glory of
God. Carnal men are like blazing-starres, which so long as they are fed with
vapors, shine as if they were stars: but let the vapors dry up, presently
they vanish and disappeare. So, so long as earthly vapors of profit,
preferment, vainglory, feed natural men, so long they appear in motion, and
shine as stars, but no longer. But the new Creature is of anothet mould, he
is a new wonkemanship, that will serve to the praise of the glory of the grace
of the workman, Ephesians. 1. 6.

The third point is, How may a man become a new Creature?

The Text says, [Let him be a new creature:] as if it were in our power to be
so, or not to be.

Answ. This implies our duty, not our ability of our selves. Our duty is to
labor after this new creation, to get into this new estate, and to be sure we
have our being in grace: secondly, the Text speaks of one in Christ, whose
will is freed in part.

Ob. But how can I seek a being in grace, having no being in it? I can resist
it, but how can I help it forward? can a dead man move to life.

Answ. 1. All such places; as Ier. 4. 4. do show us, 1. what we cannot do:
2. what we ought to do: 3. what we must attain by grace.

2 The Lord who does the wole work of creation, does it not so immediately as
he did the creation of natural things: but ordinarily uses means sanctified
to this work. God that made us without our selves will not save us without our
selves: nor works in the elect as in stocks and stones; but as in reasonable
instruments. First, he has appointed means for our regeneration and
salvation: secondly, commands us to use them: thirdly, promises, that in the
right use of them, he will put forth his mighty power upon his own means.
Therefore thou may present thy self to the means, and submit thy self unto
Gods ordinances; beware of thrusting away the offers of grace. No man can help
himself into life; but being quickened by God, knows that he lives, and does
the actions of life.

Quest. But how can I, having no grace, seek after grace in the means?

Ans. No man can seek grace, but by grace: but being sought and found of God,
can seek. To understand which, some distinguish of the means of grace.

First, some are of preparation, some of operation. In the former we are mere
patients, in the latter Acti agimus, that is, being moved we move: he works
the will and the deed, and then we will and do.

Means of preparation are, 1. Civilitie: 2. Humility.

First, a man must be ordinarily civil, before he be converted: for though
every man be in nature equally distant from grace, all of them being dead in
sin; yet as of dead men some are not so rotten as others: so by restraining
grace some are more civilized than other. And though not in respect of
themselves, yet of the common grace of God, they may be said not to be so far
from the Kingdom of God, as some others. Lazarus was in a further degree of
death, than Iairus daughter, yet both dead All are in themselves alike, as clay
before the Potter: but by common grace some may be nearer the Potters hand than
others. And there is more hope, (though no more power in himself) of a sober
and well tempered man to be converted, than of a deboist drunkard, or
whoo^emaster, or an unruly scorner of grace.

Secondly, humility: which is a sense of his utter nothing in grace; and it is
a mornefull grief of spirit in absence of grace, and presence of corruption.
Here is an emptying of the soul, which is a requisite disposition to the
filling of it. The application of the Law, makes way for the Gospel. A man
that sets out to heaven, must sail by hell. As Creation was out of nothing;
so it must be out of sense of nothing in it self: and then the Lord is about a
change, when a man sees his need of being changed. It is the poor in spirit
whom the Lord looks toward; it is the hungry soul whom he fills with
goodness: and never was this through search and serious sorrow sent away
e^^^y, Romans, 7. (...). Oh wretched man, etc. who shall deliver me? I thank
God in Jesus Christ, etc.

Now the means of operation Means to be used in this work of grace. 1. Word
preached.
which thou must use, are.

First, an outward means, is, the preaching of the Word of God, which is the
word of Truth, whereby we are begotten to God, James 1. 18. This word God
ordinarily reaches into the heart for the producing of the new Creature. If
thou neglectest this powerful means, without which no man can have ordinarily
a being in grace, thou art yet no new Creature. Thou must come to the Poole and
wait, and observe the stirring of this water, and God, by the ministry of his
Word and Sacraments, will put thee in for thy cure.

Add hereunto, that seeing God uses his Ministers, in begetting men by the
Gospel; thou must acknowledge them thy Fathers in Christ, if thou will not
proclaim thy self a bastard: if thou despise them, (as some do) then thou
despisest God himself, and this whole new creation, Acts 15. 9.

The second means is Faith; 2. Faith.
which is an internal cause of this new creation, and the first step and
degree in this happy change. He that had no being in Christ before faith, has
now a being in him: for faith makes him a son of God. Thou that would
know thy self to be a new Creature; must

First, magnify and highly esteem of faith.

Secondly, get it in the means, and keep it surer than thy life.

Thirdly, study to increase it; Oh how rich might we be in grace, if our
hearts were more large in faith? so much faith as we bring, so much grace we
carry away; this is a purifier and renewer.

Thirdly, this motion to a new 3. Strife.
Creature, is not without strife; as it is in nature, so in grace, every
creature has his antipathy, Gal. 5. 17. Think not to get so great a work
over, nor such a change without strife. Thou must therefore resist

First, whatsoever is contrary to grace without thee; bad counsels, bad
examples, the fashions of the world, corruption of thy calling, and the like.

Secondly, but especially that which is within thee: grace sets men against
themselves: regeneration will make them pluck out their right eyes, cut off
their right hands: Raise thy spirit to take part against thy flesh, and daily
subdue thy lusts. Nature strives against sickness, and so grace against
temptation.

Fourthly, in sense of thy beggary at home, thou must see^e 4. Prayer.
abroad. Go to God, earnestly entreat him: O create in me a new heart, and
renew a right spirit within me. Urge God with his promises of the new covenant,
for the circumcising of thy heart, for taking away the heart of stone, and
giving in stead of it a heart of flesh.

These are the means by which the Lord puts forth his power of new
creation; the neglect of them, depriveth us of this.

The fourth point: why must a Why a man must be a new creature. Reas. 1.
man be a new creature?

First, this is the best creation, as the greatest; even the best work that
ever God did for us; for he never changes, but to the best; for first, the
right of the second Adam is better, the state surer, the glory greater than any
we have in the first Adam.

Secondly, if it be far better than our best estate in this first Adam, how
infinitely does this state of new creation exceed the state of our present
corruption? wherein of sons of wrath, we become sons of God; of children
of hell, we become heirs of heaven; of limbs of Satan, we become members of
Christ; of sties and stables of Devils, and lusts, we become Temples of the
holy Ghost; of lost men, and cast-a-wayes, we become found in the right of the
second Adam: the common care of Angels, and all things, are made to conspire
for our good.

Secondly, only this new creation Reas. 2.
can bring thee into request, and acceptance with God: first, thy person. No
outward respect or privilege can draw the eye of Gods approbation upon thee,
Act. 10. God is no respecter of persons: wealth, learning, honor, civil
righteousness, all is dung in respect of this new Creature, Phil. 3. Neither
can any outward worship: no devotion, no ceremony, no circumcision, no
uncircumcision, but a new Creature, Gal. 6. No alms, no fasting, no meat, no
outward work or observation, commends a man to God without this new
workmanship.

Secondly, for duties; until a man be new created in Christ, he can do no
good work: an ill tree can bring no good fruit. Without me ye can do nothing,
John 15. And we must be created to good works, before we can do any, Ephesians.
2. 10.

Let the blind Papists teach us how they can justify their persons before God,
seeing they must proceed from a person justified already. Sequuntur
justificatum, non precedunt justificandum, says Augustine; that is, Good
works follow the justified person, but go not before him that is to be
justified. Good, many actions may be materially, but not morally; in themselves
perhaps commanded and commendable, but in the doer, splendida peccata; that is,
glorious sins.

Thirdly, the want of this Reas. 3.
blessed work, strippeth us of all comfort at once; and better were it to be
no creature, as no new creature.

First, for the present: if we be not new creatures, we usurp all that we
have, because we have nothing in and by Christ: For look what tenure we had in
the old Adam, we have forfeited all; nay, the more endowments we have of
knowledge, riches, means, place, authority; if not in Christ, the greater will
the abuse of them, and consequently, our own damnation, be.

Secondly, for time to come; it strippeth a man of all comfort of heaven, of
happiness: for except a man be borne a new, he shall never see the Kingdom
of God. To him that is not in Christ, there is no hope of salvation; and that
not as a professed member; but as one tied to the head first: flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Hearken, silly people, that have nothing
more ordinary in your mouths, than this; That God that made me, will save me.
God saves thee not, because he made thee once, unless he make thee again.
God saves no man, because he is his creature; for who is not? but because he
is a new creature: if thou be not created again in the second Adam, as thou
were once in the first, thou can not be saved.

Fourthly, every wise man will Reas. 4.
lay out most diligently, for that which will most bestead him, and 2
that which he esteems best for himself, and for his good and lasting
estate. Now if a man ask the Word, what is the best thing in all the world; it
answers us, a new Creature.

Look upon the heavens, earth, man, beasts, or any other creatures, they are
all old creatures, and wax old as a garment, and tend all to dissolution: they
being not lasting themselves, cannot yield a lasting happiness.

Look upon Princes, Nobles, Friends, Wives, Children, where a man looks for
most content; all flesh is grass, waxes old and withers.

Look upon all the means, and supports of life: suppose it were Mannah from
heaven, and water out of the rock; this cannot preserve us from waxing old,
nor from dissolution: the Fathers did eat Mannah, and are dead: only the
work of sound grace in us, which frames us to be new creatures shall outlast
the world. The poorest man in the world, with the least measure of sound grace,
shall outlast the Noble and Rich, with contempt of the honors and profits of
the world; seeing this workmanship is ever new, and falls not to ruin, as
the former do.

Secondly, this is that which 2
we must stick unto in time of temptation and trial; for this creation and
workmanship, no created force can deface or demolish, no more than any kind
of creature can be destroyed out of the world by all the power and art of men.
The gates of hell cannot prevail against it: he that gives this creature a
being, continues it in being.

Sometimes Satan would, make the child of God believe, that the whole work
is defaced, and fallen to pieces.

Object. Oh thou have no grace at all, but a vain conceit of it; or if thou
have any faith, it is so weak, it shall not hold out.

Ans. Yes, but first, I have faith and grace; for I desire to believe, and will
hope above hope, and above all that I can feel. A sincere desire of good,
argues a presence of that same good desired in some measure.

Secondly, this smoking Week shall not be quenched, but dressed to clearenesse.

Thirdly, though my self be weak to hold any grace that I have, yet I know
that God who created it, will uphold it; his covenant is, that as certainly as
he created the heavens, so certainly he will save Israel; and put forth as
mighty a power for the saving of his new creation, as he did in spreading the
heavens at first, Jsay 45. 17, 18.

Fourthly, though I feel and confess my grace to be weak, yet grace is not
a ground of comfort to me, as it is great or little; but as it is an argument
that I am in Christ, who is my strength and salvation: and in whom I have right
to a new heaven, and a new earth, in which dwells righteousness.

Thirdly, this is that which we must stick unto for solid comfort in the day
of death, and of judgment: first, when thou gaspest for life, this new
workmanship will only make thee able to commend thy self confidently to him,
as unto a faithful creator, a new death attends a new life: secondly, in the
day of judgment, this will make thee lift up thy head; for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ: but thee the Lord will then bring with
him to take possession of that new heaven, wherein they shall be ever with the
Lord.

Fifthly, without this new Reas. 5.
creature, is no salvation. Revelat. 21. 27. No unclean thing can enter:
without holiness no man shall see God. O then stand not on any thing else:
Many things may bring thee in account with men, but nothing but this into
account with God: not temporal, or carnal; but spiritual, and internal.

First, stand not on kindred; that is a respect of old Adam; no comfort in
being of that old house, but of a new family, of the blood of Christ. Mary's
highest privilege was to bear Christ in her heart.

Secondly, nor upon wealth; if not rich in God, in grace, in good works; for
that is a piece of the old earth.

Thirdly, nor upon calling; if Kings, Prophets, Apostles; if not Kings and
Prophets to God; in Christ all are one.

Fourthly, nor upon Circumcision, Baptism; if a broken vow: nor in profession,
as did the foolish Virgins, wanting oil.

Fifthly, nor upon illumination and hearing; the new Creature is not only
illumination of mind, but renovation of will: See there be a new heart.

Sixthly, nor an idle and fruitless course in Christianity. Look to a new
life, that thou be a new lump, and to a new course; else thou art no new
Creature. When I see a Christian stand as an image in the Church, without the
powerful motion of godliness; can I think him a new Creature? No, as God
inspired a living soul into the old Adam so here; and motion is inseparable to
life, and all the motion is toward heaven.

Now having heard, first, what this new Creature is: secondly, the notes of
him: thirdly, the means to be one: fourthly, the reasons of this new creation;

The Use is, first, for instruction. Use 1.
The work of grace is a work of Almighty power: for it is a Creation, and so
peculiar to God alone. To regenerate a man, is as mighty a work, as to create
a world, nay more: howsoever in Gods power, simply considered, nothing is
easier or harder, who could as easily have made so many worlds, as creatures;
yet qu^ad nos, in respect of our judgment, it must require a stronger power to
create a new heart, than to create a new world. For as it is more easy for a
Potter or Glass man to make a whole house full of pots, or glasses, than to
take one broken all to pieces, to set the s^eards together as strong and
handsome as they were; so is it here: For we may conceive a higher power,

First, in setting an eternal frame than a temporary.

Secondly, where a greater opposition and resistance is, as Second creation no
less powerful than the first.
here, there being none in the other.

Thirdly, that creation was to make something of nothing; here 1
of worse than nothing. 2


Fourthly, in that Christ made 3
man by a word, but to this 4
Christ must be made a man, and set his arm to his Word. Luke 1. 51. Yea, he
must set his side to it, and sweat drops of water and blood, before he can
produce it.

Fifthly, as that was out of nothing, so it cost nothing; but this 5
cost a greater price than heaven or earth could contain: for God must shed
his blood to redeem his Church.

Sixthly, that was done in six 6
days: this is not perfected of a long time, being done by degrees, the whole
life after conversion is little enough for it.

Seventhly, that was one powerful miracle; but in every 7
new creature are a number of miracles; in every one a blind man restored to
sight, a deaf man to hearing, a man possessed with many devils, dispossessed;
yea a dead man, as Lazarns, raised from the dead: in every one a stone turned
into flesh.

From this creating power, I gather these conclusions;

First, that the work of Gods grace, where God pleases to 1. Conclus.
work it, can neither be resisted nor frustrated. What Creature could resist
the being and forming of it self? Indeed before the work of grace comes,
we cannot but resist it: but in the instant of grace, we neither can nor will
resist. For God that found no will to grace: has made a will, and does so
overpower and overruled it, as that Paul, being converted, shall as willingly
preach Christ, as ever before he persecuted him. And no marvel, seeing the
Workman is the spirit of strength and fortitude, and the instruments which he
uses, are mighty through God, to cast down all contrarieties.

The late refiners of Palegianisme and Popery, followers of Arminius, lest they
should lose all nature; hold the doctrine of free will in man to his own
conversion; and say, that possitis omnibus operationibus quibus ad conversionem
in nobis operandam utitur Deus: manet tamen ipsa conversio ita in nostra
potestate, ut possumus non converti; that is, Grant all the operations which
God uses to work conversion in us: yet conversion so abides in our own
power, that we may be not converted; and perpetually put a resistability in
man's will to frustrate Gods work of conversion. Which rightly and plainly in
few words to conceive.

First, we deny not but there is a rebellion and a resistance of grace in
depraved nature, quantum in se est; that is, so far as it can to hinder
grace, Act. 7. You have always resisted the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did.
Nay, in the regenerate themselves, the flesh lusts against the spirit.

Secondly, but though we grant some act of resisting, yet we deny any such
resistance as is superans, and prorsus impediens; that is, there is no such
power or resistance in corruption, as to frustrate Gods intention, or
altogether hinder the efficacy of his grace, where he will put it forth, so as
it may remain in our power to be converted or not. Which we may prove by
these testimonies of Scripture.

Ier. 31. 18 [Convert me and I shall be converted:] therefore the Lord works
inresistably. Ezekiel. 36. 26 [A new heart I will give you.]

Ob. Yea, he may give it: but we may resist the gift, and choose whether we
will receive it.

Answ. No says the text, [I will make you walk in my Statutes]

Acts. 16. 14. [God opened the heart of Lidia.]

Ob. She might have resisted.

Answer. No, the metaphor is taken from opening a door or lock; and he that
is the opener is he that has the key of David, and he opens, and no man
shuts, Revelat, 3. 7 which is as much as to say, he works irresistably.

Reason 1. If man's corruption Reason 1.
could hinder the work of Grace, where God is pleased to work it, then Gods
counsel and decree may be hindered and frustrate: for the Lord never intends
any execution or action, without any eternal decree. But this position is
contrary to Scripture Isay. 46. 10. [My counsel shall stand.] Isay 14. 27.
[Hath the LORD determined, who shall frustrate it?] Therefore the Lord
effects his counsel irresistably.

Secondly, if man's corrupt will Reason 2.
can hinder the efficacy of Gods Grace where he will please to bestow it, then
the corrupt and finite will of man is of more power than the omnipotent power
of God, which he always puts forth in the work of man's conversion, Ephesians.
1. 19. The Apostle prays they may know what is the greatness of the power of
God, in them that believe.

Why, how great? even the same which he put forth when he raised Christ from
the dead: and the same power he puts forth in raising us from the dead. Who
ever saw a dead man either help or hinder his own quickening? So as we
conclude, this putting of GODS grace and aid under the power of man, and the
not putting of man's will under the power of him, who quickneth where he will,
John 5. 21. to say that God by his omnipotent power does not incline our wills
to his will, or that he has not our wills more in his power than our selves
have; all this is the Pelagian Heresy. Let sharp wits busy themselves in it
as much as they will: God sets not forth his grace as Chapmen do their
wares, to see whether a customer will choose, and buy, or not. Is his power
almighty? then it is not resistable. If it be resisted, how is it almighty?

Object. But the word which is the means of creation, may be resisted.

Answ. 1. The word it self, without the presence and concomitance of the
spirit, is not an able instrument of conversion; for Paul is nothing, Appollos
nothing.

Secondly, the word as an ordained instrument of Gods will to effect this or
that, attended with the spirit of fortitude, can no more be resisted, than the
omnipotent will of God: but now it does ever that for which it is sent. Isa. 55.

Conclus. 2. The gift of saving grace is no exciting or reviving 2. Conclus
grace, as Papists and Pelagians teach: but it is more, even a creating grace,
which is a framing of something out of flat nothing in grace and godliness.

If it were so, that every man had such an internum principium; that is, an
inward principle, as they speak of, to dispose himself to will that which is
truly good: or if a man were but half dead, and wounded as the Samaritan,
here were no creation. If in conversion Christ only removed an impediment, as
the Jailer when he takes off the prisoners shackles, and he were only an
instrument to help us to save our selves, this were to cease to be a second
creator. But Christ remains a Savior, and has not resigned his work over
to us, to be Saviors of our selves.

Conclus. 3. Nothing in us, either in being, or foreseen to be 3. Conclus.
in us, was any cause of Gods decree, thus to create us the second time, more
than the first: for, Creatio est causa totius entis; that is, Creation is the
cause of the whole being: secondly, what faith or good works could be
foreseen in them, who were all in a forelorne and lost estate? All the sons
of the first Adam must needs be beheld in the state of sin and death, before
the second Adam take them in hand: thirdly, Non ens, nihil agit adens; that is,
That which has no being, does nothing to a being: How can that which has no
being at all, persuade to the being of it self?

Concl. 4. Neither the Word nor 4. Conclus.
Sacraments have any power in themselves to confer grace. This were to
Idolize them, and to set them up for gods. The Minister may allure and persuade
grace: but Gods power must work it. For, what is Paul, what is Apollos, if God
give not the increase? In the ministry may be suavis motus; but in God only
is fortius tractus: that is, in the ministry is a sweet motion, but God only
strongly draws us, and then we run after him, Cant. 1. 3.

Objection. The Gospel is the power of GOD to salvation, Romans 1.

Answer. That is only when the Lord in it puts forth this creating power,
else it becomes a savor of death unto death. For in this ministry God only
must be depended on for working and increasing of Grace: He must be of
infinite power that can confer grace; for it is a creation. Is creation to
be ascribed to any power, which is not almighty? Gods grace raises dead men
in sins: can any but the almighty power do this? It rescueth us from the
strong man, that keeps hold till a stronger come: and must it not be an
almighty power that must do this? It lifts us to an unutterable glorious
estate in heaven: must not this be the working of an almighty power?

Esteem therefore the ministry, Gods instrument; but all the power to be from
God: as in Lazarus raising, the principal efficient was Gods Almighty power,
the voice was his instrument, which power by his voice restored the spirit of
natural life to this dead body.

Conclus. 5. It is not in our own power to repent when we will, 5 Conclus.
nor so soon done as we think, nor so easy a thing as most conceive. For it
is a creation, a work of almighty power: A work of as much difficulty to make
a new heart, as a new world. There needs no such power to work such a fancy
as men dream Repentance to be; to this work the same power is required, as
commanded light out of darkness; the same power which raised Christ out of
the earth, and lifted him to heaven. Colos. 1. 12. Tellest thou me that thou
can repent when thou list, I will as soon believe thee to tell me thou can
make a world when thou listest.

Conclusion 6. Whosoever is a new creature, may find in 6. Conclus
himself the effects of this mighty power. When God had created the world, a
man could look no^ where, but he should epsy the effects of God his Almighty
power in several kinds of creatures.

First, a number of things 1
which were dead, were now quickened with life: so must every new creature be
called effectually out of the death of sin, and find in himself a new life;
that he may truly say after a sort, as Christ, I was dead, but am alive,
Revelat. 1. 18. Though it be with him as it was with Lazarus, after he was
raised, that he carry a while the bands and napkins of death about him, yet
he has heard the voice of Christ quickening him, and he is alive again.

Secondly, Gods power appeared, 2
in inlightening of the world at first: so must thou find this second creation
powerful in the understanding, changing it, and inabling it to discern the
things of God though contrary to sense and nature: yea, foolish and absurd to
reason. Every new creature must truly say with the blind man, John 2. Where
as I was blind, I am sure I see: and get his eyes daily cleared to see Gods
favor smiting, killing; to epsy righteousness in a cloud of miserable
earth, heaven in the midst of hell. In looking upon the creatures, the nearer
Adam could behold them, the more did the power of God shine in every part of
every creature: so in this new creature. The greatest power is most observable
in the most noble faculties and abilities.

Thirdly, what a power discovered 3
it self in the change of that confusion, in such ranks or orders of the
creatures? And no less power is seen in the change of the new creature. Of a
Lion, he is become a Lamb: of a proud rebel, he is become humble and lowly:
as hard a thing as it is for a Cammell to pass through a Needles eye: a
strong is come to cast out those confusions of lust, and concupiscence, once
so powerful commanders over us.

Fourthly, What a power is discovered in upholding the 4
creatures in their kind? so here in the new creature: to continue and uphold
the work of grace in the midst of our corruptions, is as strange and
powerful, as to make fire burn and increase in the water.

Fifthly, what a power is put 5
forth in ordering the several wills of the several creatures? So in the new
Creature, who readily denies his own will, reason, wisdom, liberty, life,
and all to give up it self to Gods will in all things. How marveilous is it,
that of so rebellious a will, it should be framed to cheerful obedience of
Gods commandments, thinking none of them grievous?

Sixthly, what mighty and divine 6
power is that that over-ruleth all the motions of the creatures; which else
would turn to the dissolution of the whole? The same is put forth in the
motions of the new creature, inward and outward: To quicken us with heavenly
desires and affctions, is not less wondrous, than to see lead flying upward,
or iron float on the water; as to love GOD and his Word and ministers; all
which set themselves against the swinge of corrupt nature, of his dear and
profitable sins. To make Gods ordinances, worship, Sabbath, his delight, to
which he was as heavy as a Bear to a stake: To rejoice in losses, and crosses
for Christ, rather than fear them: which nature in times past, hated above
hell.

To hate the works of the flesh, which formerly were meat and drink, and
sweet morsels under the tongue; and thought it as necessary as water to a fish:
Here is Digitus Dei, Gods finger, a workmanship of God, a new creature.

Seventhly, how mightily did Gods power manifest it self in 7
over-comming all difficulties in that creation? no finite power could turn
hand to it.

So in the new creature, this power

First, makes him run through thick and thin, fire and water, sword and
bands; and thousands of deaths for Christ. In Gods ways he can run scarce
interrupted with those rubs that overturne others: The cords that bind others
hands and feet, are Sampsons flax to him; difficult commandments are easy
to him. At one word, he can sacrifice his Isaac, leave his country, not
questioning or reasoning the case.

Secondly, he can overcome the most grievous temptations; he can wrestle with
Jacob, till he have never a limb left, and prevail with God himself. The
keenest weapons of death cannot conquer this power; no water drown it: Let him
kill, yet it will trust; he may kill the creature, but the new creature is
unconquerable.

Use 2. Content not thy self with the first Creation, for had that continued
good, we had not needed a second: and if thou have no more then the first
creation, it were better thou had never been a creature. Labor therefore
to grow up in this workmanship, till thou be wholly new. How to grow up in
this new creation.


To which purpose, thou must daily,

First, grow up in humility, and in consciousnesse of thine 1. In humility.
own inability to every good word and work. Paul after conversion, was much
and often in this sense. We are not able to think the least good thought; and
the good I would do, I cannot. For as the power of God in this new creation,
did put forth it self, when we were of no strength: Romans 5. 6. so will it
still manifest it self more in the sense of our infirmities. 2. Cor. 12. 9. My
power is made perfect in weakness: And, When I am weak, then I am strong:
verse 10.

Secondly, grow up in faith, 2. Infaith.
by daily renewing of it, and use of means. Abridge not thy self in the use
of means, neither public nor private; the more thou would find this
powerful work, the more must thou labor in increase of faith, Christ could
not show his mighty and miraculous power, where unbeleefe hindered: and the want
of faith hinders the displaying of this creating power, Matthew. 13. 10.

Thirdly, daily decking and adorning thy soul with graces, 3. In beautiful
graces.
by growing from faith to faith, from grace to grace. Hereby thou make room
for Christ in thy heart, and fittest it as his Temple, wherein he will reside
for the upholding of his own most gracious work. Thus whereas every other
creature waxes older and older; only the new creature grows newer and
newer, more flourishing in his age.

Use 3. Let us demean our selves as new creatures, Col. 1. 10. 1. These. 2. 12.
[Walke worthy of the Lord.]

Quest. How shall we so do? How to demean our selves new as creatus.


Answ. 1. Manifest and maintain that new image which is imprinted upon thee.
In the first creation, every creature came 1. Manifest and maintain this image.
forth and appeared in their several forms and kinds wherein they were
created: so the new Creature must appear in his own likeness.

This was Adams advancement above all the creatures, that he was made in the
image of God, as none of them were. And this is the honor of all the Saints,
that they are advanced to a far more excellent image of the second Adam: for
shall the first Adam beget children in his own likeness, and shall not the
second Adam? Shall earthly fathers beget creatures like unto themselves, and
will our heavenly father beget children to another similitude, than his own?

Who art thou then that professest thy self a son of God, and in thy life
resemblest the image of Satan, sin, and unrighteousness? that professest the
second Adam, but bear the image of the first?

Secondly, maintain this image of God thy self. The first Adam, made in the
image of God, soon departed from this image. Satan stole this image from the
first creature: and is no less envious against the image of God in the new
creature; but will assay whether by temptation, he can rob us again. Take
heed of temptation: Let not the new creature meddle with forbidden fruit;
Consider the danger of disordering this workmanship by sin. Adam by creation
was a most lovely, innocent, and familiar creature with God: yet by one sin
of the most excellent and beloved creature, was rejected and punished in
himself, and all his posterity; yea behold the whole frame of this goodly
world, and all the creatures; how this excellent workmanship, defiled and
disordered by sin, was destroyed with an universal deluge. Let not the new
creature sin against greater grace. The Lord knows none that want this image;
but will say one day, Depart from me, I know you not.

Secondly, to demean our 2 Resign our selves to Christ our second Creator.
selves as new creatures; we must resign up our selves wholly to Christ whose
creatures we are: for all creatures else resign themselves to the glory of
their maker.

Man in his first creation had the name Adam imposed upon him, to note his
frailty; that he was taken out of the dust of the earth: but in his second
creation, which is from heaven, he has a more honorable name: as the name of
Christian, of a member of Christ, of a brother of Christ; to note, that as he
was taken from the side of Christ, so he should not abase himself to the
service of sin, Satan, earth, or lusts: but only devote himself to Christ,
and walk worthy of this honorable name.

First, desire to know and mind 1
nothing but him. In the first creation, man was endued with a clear knowledge
of God the Creator; and while he stood, all his thoughts and meditations were
taken up with sweetest contemplations of God his Creator. Now in the second
creation he is endued with the knowledge of the highest mysteries of God the
Redeemer: and now all his thoughts should run after Christ, and his desires
should fix themselves upon Christ: and as Paul, I desire to know nothing else
but Christ, and him crucified; and as the Martyr, Only Christ, Only Christ.

Secondly, desire to be wholly 2
employed for him. The creatures of Kings and great ones, as they are abusively
called, apply themselves wholly to the will of their Masters, that have made
them so great: And they be not their own; their wills, their times, their
motions, their actions, and themselves, are not themselves, but wholly their
Masters. And so here it is the Apostles argument. 1 Cor. 6. Ye are not your
own: glorify therefore God in your souls and bodies, for they are his.

Thirdly, only fear to displease him by sin; seeing as creatures 3
we depend upon him, both fot our being and working. If he withdraw himself,
or by sin be driven from us, we stand not in grace one moment.

Thirdly, to demean our selves 3 Move as new creatures.
as new creatures, we must move according to the motion of the new creature.
Adam in the innocence was not to be idle, but to live in labor, and in the
exercise of a calling: so Cain and Abel, Lords of the world, were trained up in
a calling; so was the second Adam: So must we be diligent in the calling of a
new creature, (that is) the calling of a Christian: We must neither be idle
nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord.

This is a notable means to attain to the perfection of the new creature. For
as every creature in nature mooveth from imperfect to perfect, so it is in
grace; which our Savior expresses by the corn in the field, Mark 4. which
first rises to a blade, and then moves to an ear, and then to ripe corn in
the ear: So the new creature rises by degrees to perfction.

The exercise of the body causes growth: which is not so much action as
strength of action. Not the trade, but diligence in the trade and calling,
increases the stroke. The diligent hand makes rich: so diligence in the
means of grace, and earnestness in good things, adds unto the stock of
grace. Therefore as Paul, forgetting what is behind, let us press hard to the
mark, and high calling: Phil. 3. 13.

Fourthly, to demean our selves as new creatures, we must 4. Converse among
new creatures.
converse among new creatures. Every creature by nature gather to their likes:
Birds of a feather, Beasts of one kind. For every Creature has agreement, and
sympathy with his kind: and things thrive best among their like; Even so the
new man will be among new men. A Dove of Christ cannot affect, nor thrive, to
live among Ravens: Nor the Sheep of Christ among the Swine, that wallow in
earthlinesse and lust. The new creature contemns a vile person: but honors
them that fear the Lord.

First, join thy self now to the society of the Saints. For How?
as the Lord at first made man a 1
sociable creature above all the rest: so when he makes him a new creature,
it is not to thrust him into a cloister; but to live in holy and fruitful
society, and shine as lights, not thrust under bushels, but set in
candlestickes, in the midst of a froward generation.

Secondly, admire this new 2
workmanship in the meanest beginnings of grace, and that in the meanest
professor of godliness: and honor it above the creation of a Duke or a
Prince, that professes against it. Esteem a godly man not according to his
first birth, but according to his new birth, I know no man after the flesh,
says Paul, that is, not according to their minority in the first creation, but
according to the state into which they are newborn, and brought into by a
second creation. And therefore men despise the new creature, because they see
nothing but a piece of old earth upon them, which is base in outward
appearance. And so they beheld Christ himself, and saw no form and beauty on
him. They gaze on the Esa. 5 3 2
earthen vessel: but see no hidden treasure.

Thirdly, agreement in judgment 3
and opinion knitteth men in society, Romans 15. 6. The new Creatures have but
one faith, one Lord, one hope, one religion, one profession. And herein thou
must agree with them: Gal. 6. 16. They have one rule: Hardly shall we find a
new Creature Popery in some sense rightly called the old Religion.
among the Papists, who say, they are of the old Religion: which indeed in
sundry senses may be called old, though it be a new device, and humane policy.

First, because it is every way 1
agreeable to the old man, a pleaser of natural corruption: requiring nothing
which corrupt nature will not willingly afford.

Secondly, it may be said to be old, because it can never beget a 2
new creature.

Thirdly, it is so old and doting, 3
as that it is tottering and falling to ruin, as it self has shifted long
since off the foundation laid by the Prophets and Apostles.

Fourthly, conformity and similitude of manners link men 4
together in good or evil, Phil. 3. 17. Look on them which walk so: walk
with the wise. The surest band of society in the new creature, is, the
similitude of manners, and converse in the communion of Saints: where each one
chooses his companion, for the grace of God he espieth in him, and from whom
he may hope to get good. He never looks to gather grapes of thorns, nor
figs of thistles: and therefore his delight is in the fellowship of Saints,
in Gods house, in their houses, in public duties of Gods worship, in private
duties of edification. Who would look for these new Creatures in Tavernes,
Play Houses, Alehouses, places of riotous meeting, and hellish resort? where
ordinarily is no mention of grace, but to disgrace and wound it, and all the
friends of it. Follow the light side of the cloud, and not the dark side of it.

Fifthly, to demean our selves as new Creatures, we must live 5. Live as new
creatures.
to the good of others. No Creature lives for it self, but for the whole: The
Sun shines not for it self, but for the world: Trees bear not fruit for
themselves: Nor do clouds breed rain for themselves, but to water the earth.

So the new creature must not only be good: but do good to others. The
Commandment is, Gal. 6. [Doe good unto all, but especially to the household of
Faith.] These trees of righteousness must be laden with fruits, that every man
may gather and taste. A private man, but a public good. Light is a most
communicative, and diffusive Creature; and the more it imparteth, it has never
the less: Much more the light of grace; it fears nothing so much as a
bushel, as truth fears nothing but to be hid. Ask thy self, of what good
use art thou in the world, that professest thy self a new creature: Art thou a
private minded man, a worldling, a man without bowels and compassion, a man
without hands, from whom nothing can be wrung, for God, for his Church, his
ministry, or any good use? thou art far from a new creature, and as yet an
unprofitable lump of earth, without sense of Heaven. Christ's whole life was in
doing good to all.

Use 4. Let no man pretend his old man as a plea to maintain his lusts. Oh I
was angry, says one, and I cannot bear an injury, it is my nature to be
hasty: And I, says another, was overcome in company with drink, and my
nature is to be soon overcome; and so in other lusts. But have thou not now
made a good plea? is it not all one to say, thou art no new Creature, who have
nothing but nature in thee? Why art thou a Christian, and no new Creature? Or a
new creature without the spirit, which lusts and subdueth the rising of the
flesh?

Others by the same plea excuse the sins of their callings, Others do so,
and I must do as other men: but a new Creature must differ from all old and
sinful courses.

Others follow the courses of the world with full spirits, in every new
disguised fashion of apparel, in excessive pride, in riotous gaming, feasting
etc. and say, it is the fashion, course, and custom of the age and time: But
were thou a new creature, thou would not then plead for the old corruption of
the world. A new creature is called out of the world, and has a new
constitution and frame of life, answerable to that calling, but contrary to the
world. The defense is worse than the fault.

The last Use, is a ground of consolation to all Gods children, in that they
are new creatures. The privileges of the new creature are like that white
stone, and the new name, Revel. 2. 17. which no man knows, but he that
receives it. The stranger enters not into his joy. I speak now of childrens
bread, which is not cast to dogs, and of things that are riddles to the
greatest part of the world. It could not be but that men in hearing what honor
all the Saints have in their new estate, should reach at them as men ravished,
if the veil were not over our hearts, as over the Jews, when Moses was read.
But the covenant was ever sealed amongst the disciples.

These privileges of the new creature, are in respect, Priviled^es of the new
creature.


First, of their renovation, and newness; and this both of their nature and
condition.

First, he has attained a new and divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And this both
in respect of a new father, and a new image: For whereas we be children of
wrath, of disobedience, and of our father the devil, whose works we do,
John 8. and by nature the seed of the wicked: we by the second creation,
become the sons of God, the seed of Christ, and Gods very offspring. (...),
Acts 17. 28. For now of his own good will he begat us by the Word of truth,
James 1. 17. and what a dignity and honor is this to be Gods children, Kings
children? Seems it a small thing, says David, to be son in law to a King?
what am I, or what is my fathers house, to be son to a King? In the first
creation, thou say to corruption, Thou art my father; in the second, thou
say to God; Thou art my father: 1. John 3. 1.

And secondly, whereas we bear the image of the first Adam in sin and
corruption; and by sin no child can be liker his father, than we are like
the Devil: By this second creation, we attain a new image of the second
Adam, wherein we resemble our heavenly Father. Oh what a forlorn estate was
that in the first Adam, wherein the image of God, by the fall became as a dead
child, having some lineaments and image of the father, but a loathsome and
rotten carkase, left only as a monument of that image which once was there, to
leave them without excuse? Romans 1. 20.

But now we are renewed to the Image of God again; which the Apostle places
in, first, knowledge; secondly, holiness and righteousness.

For knowledge, whereas in the first Adam, we are as blind as Moles; our
minds are in darkness, more miserable than that of Egypt: a comfortable light
of saving knowledge is created in our minds, which are renewed in knowledge. A
Sun of grace, and righteousness is risen to us, and our eyes are open to
behold it. A sanctified knowledge, not of the History of Christ, but of the
virtue and power of Christ, in our own new workmanship. Not a speculative, but
a feeling knowledge, not like that of carnal men and hypocrites, whose
knowledge of the truth reflecteth not on themselves; being like to stone
vessels, which hold sweet waters, but are not sweetened by it: but it is a
knowledge changing the mind and man into it self, 2 Cor. 3. 10.

And for holiness, the Saints carry upon them the image of God, both inwardly
and outwardly. In the soul, the new Creature resembles God himself, in holy
wisdom, truth purity, and so in many his most holy attributes; and in holy
affections: Loving, where God loves; approving, what he approves; hating,
what he hates; delighting in the persons most, in whom God most delights:
showing kindness, patience, mercy, even to enemies, as the Lord himself does.

And for outward holiness of obedience and conversation; whereas when he was
in the old Adam, he walked in the ways of the world, without God, and without
hope; expressing the old Adam in all bad customs and habits of sin, and the
man being wholly dead in sin, only his sin was alive: Now being a new
creature, he bears holiness written in his forehead, as being made a Priest
unto God. A new man has new manners, new obedience, new carriage, and
conversation: he now walks after Christ, the most absolute pattern of all
purity and holiness.

Oh what a comfortable change is here? for whosoever bears this image of God
in any measure, are dear unto the Lord: how pleasing is it to a father to see
his own favor, countenance, and conditions upon his children? and commonly
children that most resemble their father, are dearer unto them.

Secondly, this renovation is 2 A new condition.
unto a new condition: and this in a new Covenant, Life, Inheritance.


First, for the first: In our old 1 Covenant.
creation, God had covenanted nothing but wrath, which by sin we incurred:
now we are become enemies of God, and God to us: he is whetting his glittering
sword, upon the edge of which we cast our selves. Our necks are laid on the
block, and all ready to execution: he pleased to grant us a pardon, and renew
with us another covenant of grace; whereby he has both discharged the
offense, and released the punishment: and yet more, bestows righteousness
upon us, and enters into perfect reconciliation, beholding us as friends:
James 2. 23. Abraham was the friend of God, as a man after his own heart: so
David, Act. ^3. 22. as beloved of God. Let the new creature cast out the spirit
of bondage to fear: now thy sins are forgiven, the Law satisfied, Gods wrath
appeased, all old bonds discharged, go in peace.

Secondly, for the second; 2. Life.
whereas all the sons of Adam were altogether dead in sin, neither was it
possible that our first Parents, being altogether dead to God, and without the
life of God, could convey any life of God to their posterity, no more than a
root or stock of a tree, altogether dead, could bear any live branches: no
more than men and women naturally dead, can bring forth living children. What
an happy change is made in the new creature, by regeneration and incorporation
into Christ, who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to
light by the Gospel? 2 Timothy 1. 10. And who has quickened us being dead in sins
and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 4. Now what a distance is between life and death;
especially, life to grace, and death in sin? So much is the comfort of a new
creature, above a man unregenerate.

Object. Alas, I find not this life of God, but am assailed and daily foiled
by sin.

Answ. Our life created in Christ, is not altogether perfect in this world, but
some remnant of the old Adam, will still bewray it self. For as in a field,
the dead carkases remain, to show what a victory is achieved; so the carkases
of sins remain, to show what a victory we have by Christ: but without life
and power to conquer us; or if any life be in sin, it is as the life of a
Serpent, whose head is crushed in pieces.

Secondly, life in all living men is not alike: but in some stronger, in some
weaker; in some more healthful; in some more conflicted with diseases; in some
more aged and tall; in some weaker and younger: and so it is in the life of
God. But can thou find it in any measure or degree? happy art thou. If
natural life be so precious and desirable, what is spiritual and eternal?

Object. Oh that I could find Notes of heavenly life.
this life in any measure!

Answ. First, where life is in man, there is a breathing. Have 1
thou holy affections, petitions.

Secondly, where life is, there 2
it is maintained by food. Do thou desire the sincere milk, the Mannah? do
thou thrive, and grow by it? can thou digest strong meat?

Thirdly, where life is, there is 3
growth to the full vigor. Do thou grow in stature, and strength, outgrowing
the weakness and infancy of grace, passing the several ages of Christianity?

Fourthly, where life is, there 4
is motion. Do thou move in the manly actions of grace? walk thou
diligently in the calling of a Christian, abroad and at home?

Fifthly, can thou bear burdens, afflictions, from God, without 5
murmuring? wrong from men without revenge? Here is the life of God.

Thirdly, for the third; whereas in the first Adam, we are all 3. Inheritance.
cast out of Paradise of the third heaven, as persons in disgrace with their
Sovereign, are banished from the Court, as Absalom after his slaying his
brother, was commanded out of the Kings presence, and might not see the Kings
face, 2 Samuel 14. 24.

The new creature restored to favor, has a tenure and certainty of the
inheritance of Saints, and not only so, but present possession, though not
full possession, both in Christ, who took possession as a head, not for
himself, but for his members, both in their name, and to their use: As also in
beginnings of heavenly life, and conversation already; what comfort can a Saint
in heaven want? But of every new creature the Apostle says expressly: [Hee is
raised to heavenly places already.] ^. Pet. 1. 6.

The second ground of comfort hence, is from Gods gracious acceptance, who
calls them new Creatures, that are very imperfectly new. We have cleaving to
us a great deal of old rubbish and corruption, from the old man: but if we
have the least beginnings of new Creation, and the least seeds of sound grace
(but as a grain of mustard-seede) he pleases to style us thereby, as if no
old thing were left in us. So in Canticles the fourth [Thou art all fair, my
love, and there is no spot in thee:] and in the context. All old things are
past.

Reas. 1. He names the end New creatures denominated from imperfect nevvnesse.
from the beginning, and those new, that only tend to newness, and speaks
of us as we are in his account, not our constitution.

Secondly, for our encouragement, 1
our God tells us we 2
have crucified the flesh and lusts, Gal. 5. 29. when we are not yet half way
in the work: that we are sanctified and saved, when we are but in the
beginning of both; both to hold us on in those beginnings, (For, what account
will he make of us, when we are all new creatures, that thus esteems of us
now?] as also to assure us of perfection, as the harvest was in the first
fruits. The new creature shall be as surely perfect, as if he were already.

Thirdly, that we should admire this grace, and imitate it, 3
in espying the grace of God in others, and esteem them from that, and not
from their corruptions. Whereas clean contrary, we can fix both our eyes upon
the least frailties to disgrace them, and the whole profession for their sakes:
but pass over many excellent graces. Is this to be like God? would we have God
do so by us? or if he should, should we ever carry the name of new creatures?

The third ground of comfort, is in respect of the Lord his gracious
preservation, and perfecting this work.

Now the Lord upholdeth this new creature: New creatures, how upheld.


1. Partly, by conquering oppositions and enmities against it. 2. Partly, by
confirming it against all encounters and impediments.
To the former: Satan and our own corruption could cast us off the happiness
of our first creation, but not of the second.

Reas. 1. When God once be^ginneth 1
true grace, it is followed with grace, till all be new. Deuteronomy. Chap. 31. ver. 4
[Perfect is the work of God.]

In the creation he never gave over till he had perfected all the Creatures: so
will he never give over the work, till there be a perfect new creature.

Secondly, true grace, though 2
never so small, is Gods earnest of glory: and the Lord never tepenteth him of
his earnest.

Thirdly, sound grace is as the light that shines more and 3
more till perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. The golden chain clears it: Romans 8. 30.
Once justified, ever glorified.

Fourthly, to destroy the new Creature, requires a stronger 4
power than that which set it up. Therefore all the gates of hell, nor any
created power can demolish this frame: Which made the Apostle triumph as in a
victory gotten, Romans 8. 37. Here is the comfort of Perseverance.

Secondly, the Lord upholdeth his own workmanship, by confirming it against
all encounters.

First, of worldly baseness. Art thou in a mean condition, a poor creature,
despised, and cast off of men? yet being a new creature, thou art the Son of
God, an heir of grace: thou have a new name, a new stone of absolution, a new
title to a new heaven, and those new mansions which Christ is gone to trim up
for thee.

Secondly, of worldly wants. Art thou poor, and in want of necessaries, and
have scarce from hand to mouth to provide food and raiment? yet being a new
creature, thou want not a full treasury and storehouse.

The same full and liberal hand that feeds and sustaineth all the baser and
inferior creatures, will much more sustain thee a new Creature. The Lord that
looks on thee not as a Creator, but as a Father, will look to thee, and will
supply all wants, with a new tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of
God, and with that new garment of immortality which never waxes old.

Thirdly, of worldly persecutions. Why the new creature is so hated in the
world.
Because himself has noted the true reason, why the new creature is so hated
in the world. The reason is, because it is new, and called out of the old
estate of the world: For

First, every new thing is a wonderment for a time: therefore 1
men gaze at grace, as if it were a Comet, or new Star. Whence the Apostle
says of himself, and the rest, that they were as gazing stocks to men and
Angels.

Secondly, contrariety between 2
the godly and wicked: In one, all is new, a new judgment, will, affections,
actions: in the other, all is old still; and a new patch will never agree with
an old cloth. Hence an old ungracious man will better agree with a sinner of
any kind, than with a godly Christian.

A natural man can agree with Papists or Turks, better than Professors: For
both agree with him in oldnesse and darkness; and darkness is not contrary
to darkness, but to light: But with a sincere Christian he cannot agree; for
his light is contrary to his darkness.

Thirdly, grace in the new Creature, is a secret disgrace to 3
the old man. A new thing quite puts down the old, and disgraceth it, and
therefore no marvel, if the world, lying in the old suddes of sin, endures
it not.

To conclude all: have thou felt the power of the Word and Spirit renewing thy
soul? Oh rejoice abundantly in this great mercy. If God had created thee an
Angel from heaven, he had not honored thee with such a privilege, as to
create thee anew in Jesus Christ: for then they are but servants and ministers
to thee that art an heir of salvation.

If thou do not feel it, awake out of security, die not in this sleep.
Consider? the image of God defaced in thee, the fearful sentence of the Law,
the ghastly face of death, the terrors of the last judgment, the millions of
men that are in hell already for want of this new Creature; and the patience of
God toward thee, waiting for thy conversion, and offering thee good means of
salvation, that thou might get at length into Christ, and be a new Creature.

FINIS.
MEDITATIONS From The CREATVRES. As it was Preached in Aldermanbury by Thomas
Tailor D. in Divinity.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for J. Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheapeside, 1635.

MEDITATIONS From the CREATVRES.
PSALM. 8. 3. When I behold thine Heavens even the works of thy fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: What is man (say I) that thou
art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him? etc.
COnsidering with my self of the benefit of Meditation, together with the
difficulty of it, which has almost worn it out of use amongst Christians; I
thought fit to afford a little help, to lead up careful Christians into this
mount of Meditation: in which mount God will be seen. And who sees the
clogge of earth pressing down his soul, and needs not this pulley to fetch
it up again? And, who is sensible of legions of noisome lusts, that take up
the heart as their proper habitation, and desires not better guests? Who can
discern the darkness of his mind, and not open his windows, and hereby let
in some light into his dark house? Now as the Lord himself, his Word and
Decrees, are the principal object of ordinary Meditation: so are his works;
and execution of his decrees a fit object for extraordinary. Whereby we have
not only a sensual use of the Creatures, as the bruit beast: but a
spiritual; and profit not only our bodies, but our souls by them. Wherefore
else did the Lord create them? not, as he might, all in a moment, or in a day,
but in six days: but that we might orderly meditate of them, even in
particular, and gain by them some sound knowledge, which might reflect upon
the will and understanding. Wherefore has his wisdom afforded such variety
and plenty of them? but that we should be always stored with matter of
fruitful Meditation, and never be without the object or matter of our own
good. And what else is the cause that many are so fruitless and barren in
their course, and such wasters of precious time? but that they never intended
to carry their minds along in such profitable Meditations: which, where they
dwell, suffer not a man to be idle or unprofitable in the works of the Lord.
For, whereas a good man may be cast into such circumstances, as he cannot
always be in good actions: yet were it hard, if he might not be always in
some good Meditation, wherein to improve his time. But to the words.

This Psalm is inscribed to him that excels on Gittith: so also are 81. and
89. Psalms. Some think

1. Because David compounded it in Gath, in his banishment.

2. Some, from a musical instrument so called, because either invented or most
used in Gath.

3. Some, from a kind of melodious Verse, or Song.

4. But I think, it respects the time when this and those songs used to be
sung, namely, at the time Haggittith, that is, of winepresses or vintage: Which
feast was solemnly celebrated by the Israelites, in which feast, they
especially praised the name of God, for the great and manifold benefits
conferred upon men. Which is the substance of this Psalm: wherein the Prophet
extolleth the Majesty of God.

1. By contemplating the works of nature, in the world, to the fifth verse.

2. By considering his work of grace in gathering him a Church, from the
miserable mass of mankind. These two are the great works, wherein the Lords
greatness shines out: The Creation and Redemption; the one written in the
volume of the Creatures, the other in the volume of the Scriptures. In this
Verse

1. He acknowledges himself occupied in contemplation of the heavens and
stars. Looks on them not with the eyes of the body only, but with the eye of
faith.

2. That he is led to God by them: For, 1. He says not the heavens, but
thine heavens: that is, 1. Of which thou art Maker. 2. Of which thou art the
owner, possessor, and indweller, Psalms 89. 12. [Thine are the heavens, and
thine is the earth.] Genesis 14. 19. He is possessor of heaven and earth.
2. He adds, the work of thy fingers: hands and fingers are ascribed to God
metaphorically. And here the heavens are called not the works of his hands,
but of his fingers: to note his singular industry, his exquisite workmanship
and art, and also his special love and care over these works. 3. The Moon
and Stars thou have established, that is, thou have assigned every one their
place, and confirmed them by a perpetual law, written in their nature, and set
them sure and firm bounds which they cannot pass.


3. In this contemplation he casts his eye upon himself, to cast himself
low before God. When I consider both the greatness of the workman, and the
largeness of the work, and for whom they were framed; then in sense of my
baseness, think I, [Lord what is man, or the Son of man as thou visitest him?
etc.] Not, what is Adam, which were no great matter of pride: but what is
Enosh? frail, mortal, infirm and miserable man, now after his fall, that he
should enjoy such a workmanship. From hence in general observe.

Obser. That the voice of the creatures is not to be banished out of the
Church.

Reason 1. If all Scriptures be profitable to teach and improve, then those
that teach divine things from natural.

Reason 2. The Profits and Apostles, and Christ himself were most in this
kind of instruction, by Parables and Similitudes; therefore Ministers and
Pastors may do the like.

Objection. The Creatures only conceive; they convert not.

Sol. Must no doctrine of conviction be heard in the Church? the frivolous
conceit of Antinomists is, Away with the Law, let it be buried with Moses, and
let no man know where, after men are once come to Christ. But though we have a
superior doctrine and help in the Church, must we therefore refuse this?

Object. The Heathens had this knowledge, and it is fitter for them.

Sol. Must not we know God in his works, because the Heathens did? Nay, if
they by his works came to know the invisible things of God, may not we much
more, who by faith know, that the world was made by the Word of God? Heb. 11. 2.

2. Did not the Philosophers discourse of God, Justice, Virtue, the chief
good, all morality, all civil and oeconomicall duties? must a Christian be
therefore locked up from them?

3. David was able to distinguish between things handled, and the manner of
handling, between the same object, and differing considerations of them. So
Christians consider the same heavens, earth, etc. but spiritually and
supernaturally: as ^: to magnify the Creator: 2. to excite our faith and
confidence: 3. to humble our selves.

Ob. We must desire to know and preach nothing but Christ, and him crucified:
therefore away with all the Law, and all the preparatives to Christ; away with
all rules and directions of the Law, when men are come to Christ.

Sol. Surely, these men must blot out a great deal of Scripture; as, all the
creation, all the Law and explication of it, all the history, all the parables
and similitudes, all that part of Scripture of the book of Job, of Psalms, of
Prophets, wherein Gods Majesty is exalted in the creatures; or put in some more
to it, to prohibit us the use, and show us the exposition of them.

Use. As the Prophet here looks fruitfully on the Heavens, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars: so must we. So did he also in Psalm 19. and, There is no
language, tongue, or speech, where their sound is not heard. We will not
discourse of this voice, as if we were in the School of Plato, or Aristotle,
or Tully de natura deorum: but as in the School of Christ, taught by the
Scriptures, and the spirit speaking in them. For,

1. Has not the Lord in wisdom made them all?

2. Has not he furnished us with reason and discourse to draw out some
strains of that excellent wisdom by them, and from them?

3. Shall Philosophers, Physicians, Naturalists, and Heathens learn many good
lessons from them? and only shall not Christians.

4. Have we been set to this School ever since we were of years of
discretion, and have taken out no lessons of wisdom, out of this great Book?
Or shall we still look upon these things as on fair papers that have no
letters? or as illitterated men look upon written papers? but not able to
read a word?

Know then that we may learn somewhat.

1. From all the Creatures in general. 2. From every Creature in particular.
The voce of the Creatures in The voice of the creatures in general. I.
general, is seen in these seven particulars.

All of them teach us to bewail our rebellion against God, which all of them
reproove. For they all stand in their kind and station, in which God set them
at first: The Sun rejoices to run his course; the Sea keeps his bounds
and banks miraculously by the law of his Creation; the Earth stands upon his
foundation: the Heavens keep their motion; the Waters ebb and flow; the very
Cock croweth and keeps his appointed watch. Yea, all of them, further than
man's sin has disordered them, keep the Law of their Creation: But no man
does so; they have all strayed away from God. Man has fallen from his station,
has stopped in all his supernatural motion: Nay, a man regenerate, as great a
Disciple as Peter, sleeps and snorteth in grievous sins, and cannot watch
one hour with his Lord.

All of them teach us obedience II.
and service unto God. Because,

1. All they serve the Lord by a perpetual Law: the Heavens declare the glory
of God, the earth shows his handy work; the Winds and Seas obey him; fire,
snow, hail, vapors, stormy winds fulfill his word. Psalm. 148. 8. Frogs,
grassehoppers, lice, come by armies at his Word: nay, they will run from
themselves, and cease to be themselves in obedience to him. The fire shall not
burn if he say the word: the fluid Sea shall be a solid wall and pavement:
the River Jordan shall run back: nay, the Sun shall stand still, and go
back ten degrees if he will appoint him: Fire will descend, iron swim,
water ascend upward. Now, shall the senseless creatures have ears to hear
their Creator, and man be deaf? Shall his Word bind them, and not us
reasonable creatures to whom it is given?

2. They all serve us on condition that we serve him; and willingly are ruled
by us, no further than we are ruled by him; and therefore we are called the
Lords hosts, soldiers, and armies, both to defend us in his service, and to
force into rank the rebellious and disobedient.

3. Their service of us, is not a motive only, but a measure of our service of
him. For,

1. They serve us only; so we ought him only as our Lord.

2. Always, night and day they never cease; so should we serve the Lord.

3. They serve us freely without hope of reward; not forced, but most willingly
by natural instruction: so ought our obedience to our God, to be free and
cheerful.

4. They serve us with their best and sweetest gifts: the Sun with comfort,
influence of heat and light: the trees with their sweetest and ripest fruit,
the beasts with their sweet, fat fleece, and sweetest life. So ought we the
Lord with our best parts, affections, strength, endeavors, and whatsoever we
have, being his, of him, and from him.

5. They serve us to the wasting of themselves, and loss of their being. We
ought also to serve our God, though to the loss of our selves, our dearest
things and lives. Here are laymens books enough; every creature in his eye,
hand, or use, reads this lesson to him; I serve thee my Lord, serve thou thy
Lord.

All of them are the Lords professors, teaching us the invisible III.
things of God. Romans 1. 20.

1. His Eternity; for as they could not make themselves, so their maker must
needs be before the things made; and consequently he must be eternal.

2. His Wisdom shines in the exquisite, and artificial cunning, in the
frame of the smallest creature: As of the Bees or Ant. Consider the beauty,
order of them all; and therein does his wisdom shine: as also in the variety
and distinction of them. So in the excellent order and subordination of them
one to the service of another. So that an heathen might say, In wisdom he
made them all: and shall be condemned, for not seeing the wisdom and art of
the workman.

3. His power; must not he be Almighty, that makes all things of nothing;
that hangs the huge vastness of the earth as a ball without any pillar to
support it; that can bound the sea with his word only; that can sustain such
a mass of creatures?

4. His bountifulness and goodness. In his endowments of every creature in
this kind: In his large provision for them in their several necessities: In
making them all so good in themselves, and for our good and benefit. All of
them call on us to taste and see how good God is in himself, who is so good in
these: how good unto us he will be in his Palace, who is so good to us in
our prison. Here be millions of Ministers and Apostles sent by GOD into the
world, to preach unto men the inexhaust treasures of their Lords goodness,
wisdom, and power.

All of them teach us to depend IV.
upon him, as they do for their being and well-being, for their motion or
station. Psalm. 145. 15. [The eyes of all things wait on thee, and thou give
them food in due season:] and Psalm. 147. ^. [The young Ravens cry to him for
food, and he feeds them.] So should we much more, not only cast our care
on him, and expect all our good from him; which is to knock at the right
door, and to go to the fountain: but also receive all, as from his hand, not
shifting for our selves by unlawful means, and taking our estate at the hand
of the Devil, in lying, deceiving, usury, etc. and to return all in a sober,
moderate, and sanctified use unto him again: for how unkindly did the Lord
take it at Isreal's hands, that they should take his wool, and flax, and oil,
and bestow it on Baals service? Hos. 2. 8. Think now with our selves how
disdainefully we should hear; The Ox and Ass know their feeder, but we do
not ours.

All of them teach us to love him, and return all fruits of love to him;
because

1. They are all fruits of his love, his love tokens to us.

2. God loves us better than all them, whom he made their Lords; and should
not we love him better than all creatures?

3. All threaten us failing in our love, for that turns them against us, and
they become revengers of his quarrel: the sun will burn up our fruits, or
deny his comfort and shine: the clouds will drown our fruits, the air pinch
them, and punish us.

4. Shall every creature, of which I am Lord, yield me fruit; my cattle, my
trees, my ground? and shall my love be fruitless unto my Lord?

All of them teach us unity, VI.
love and peace one with another: all of them do conspire in unity, and
harmony among themselves, for the good of the whole: they prefer the good of
the universal before the particular good of themselves. Fire will descend,
water will ascend, and all to hinder a rupture and vacuum or emptiness in
nature.

They all have their several contrary qualities and motions, but trouble not
one another. The fire does warm the air; the air preserves the water; the
water moysteneth, and makes the earth fruitful: one element is a good
neighbor to another, though never so contrary in qualities. They have all
their several degrees and differences; some high, some low, some light, some
dark. The sun excels all the stars in splendor; the stars, one
differ from another in glory: Gold excels amongst metals. In the sensible
creatures, the heart and vitals are most noble; yet nature has so sowdred them
together, as there is no disdain, no contention; but superior creatures are
bound to the inferiors, and communicate themselves in governing; the inferior
communicate in obeying. Nay, they all conspire to set forward man's happiness
and welfare. So ought we to prefer the public, before the private good of
our selves; and be helpefull to one another in our several ways. Also in our
several degrees of superiority, and inferiority, be beneficial, and
communicative of our gifts and services. All must conspite and consent to set
forward the good of every man, and help up his happiness, heavenly and
earthly.

All of them teach us to grow weary of our present fervitude of VII.
sin, and wait for our promised deliverance, Romans 8. 22. For if they shall
sigh under our burdens, shall not we our selves? shall we be more senseless
of our misery, than they be of it? shall we go on in sin, which is so
burdensome and dangerous? Ask the beasts, and they will tell thee, sin is
an intolerable burden; and take thou pleasure in sin? See thou not the
beasts wanting reason, saving themselves from danger, as they may? Balaams Ass
will shun and not go forward against a drawn sword; and shall we against the
sword of the Lords hand drawn out against sin?

Thus the creation of the world is a Scripture of God, and the Mundi creatio,
Scriptura Dei Clemens.
voice of God in all the Creatures, and by them all speaks unto us always,
and every where. The whole world is his book: so many pages, as there are
several creatures; no page is empty, but full of lines; every quality of the
creature, is a several letter of these lines, and no letter without a part of
Gods wisdom in it. Thus of the creatures voice in general.

Now come we to show the voce of God in the particular creatures, which are so
infinite in number, so diverse in qualities, as this discourse would swell to
How to meditate of the creatures. Instance showed.
an exceeding great volume: Therefore I will only instance in some few
particular creatures, which our Prophet here specifies in this Psalm, as the
heavens, the sun, the moon, and stars, etc. Holding these instances
sufficient samplers, whereby we may pattern out our meditations; and as
occasion shall serve, suck out the sweet even out of every creature, as shall
be obvious: dealing as Geographers, who being to contract the great world in a
little sheet, for great rivers, they draw small lines, and for great cities,
only a period.

The first particular creature 1. In the heavens.
that the Prophet mentions as the subject of his meditation, is the heavens
and firmament. In which, consider

How the heavens and firmament 1
have a voice to declare the glory of God, is plain: Neither is there any
speech or language where this voice is not heard, Psalm. 19, 3. Let us see what
lessons the Spirit will speak to us in them.

1. The height of the heavens 1. Their height.
above the earth, shows the infinite height and honor of him, whose standing
house is above all aspectable heavens. How great is himself that thus
stretches the heavens with his span? Isay 40, 5.

2. This may put us in mind of the infinite mercy and goodness of God. So
David in Psalm. 103. 3. [How much higher the heavens are above the earth, so
great is his goodness to them that fear him.

3. This minds us of the majesty of God. Kings have their Palaces to show
their majesty and glory in: now heaven above is the pavillion of the Lord,
Psalm. 104. [His throne and seat is in heaven.]

2. The matter of them is so 2. Their matter.
pure, subtle, and excellent, as man's wit cannot reach: all this preaches the
purity and divinity of the workman.

2 This may remember us how pure that heart and mansion must be, wherein the
Lord will dwell; our hearts are Gods heaven upon earth.

3 By this we may remember, Revel. 21. 27. No impure thing shall enter
therein; nothing that works abominations or lies. How ought we to study for
purity and holiness, to fit our selves for what God has prepared for us?

3 The form of the heavens being round and circular, this 3. Their form.
may mind us of,

1 The infiniteness of the Maker: a circle is an infinite figure.

2 The perfection of God; a circle being the most perfect and capacious figure.
Hence is said, [In my Fathers house are many mansions,] John 14. 2.

3 As the circle of the heavens is equally distant from the point and center of
the earth; it may mind us that heaven is equally distant to all believers; and
in every Nation, he that fears Acts 10.
God, and works righteousness shall be accepted.

4 The firmness and constancy 4. Their firmness
of it, preach the truth and unchangeablenesse of him, whose only word is the
pillars on which this great frame leans, and though the mountains are called
the pillars of heaven, Job 26. 11. and 2. Sam. 21. 8. because they so appear
to be, yet indeed, his word, power, and truth, are the pillars. This may
undershore the faith of the Saints. Does his truth uphold the great frame of
the heavens, and will he not uphold thee?

2 This assures us heaven is a safe place to treasure in, no thief nor robber
can spoil or deprive us of what we lay there: therefore the Latins hence call
it firmamentum. Christ exhorts us to treasure up in heaven, Mat. 6.

5. The admirable rapt and 5. Their motion.
swift motion: and revolution in 24. hours, which our conceits cannot follow;
leads us to the mighty power of the first mover, who is far more swift and
ready to help us in our needs: It guides us also to that hand that orders
the falling and moving of the sparrowes, of our hairs; and in whom we live and
move.

2. It teaches us to be as ready and constant in our motions, and duties, as
they who never stand still, but are in perpetual swift motion and execution of
his will.

6. What a number of gracious meditations do the heavens afford 6.
Meditations from them as they are still in our eye.
a heart that does desire to be fruitful? I see every where the heavens, Oh
that is the place whither Christ ascended, and where he is, which must contain
him till his second coming. And shall not my desires be there?

2. It is a place from whence I expect a Savior, and shall not my conversation
be there where Christ is? Col. 3.

3. It is my own country: there is my fathers house, my kindred, my home and
inheritance, my brothers and sisters, my elder brother, shall not I then
esteem my self a stranger here and hasten thither?

4. It is the most goodly creature, and yet reserved for the fire of the great
day, for man's sin: should not I herein behold Gods infinite hatred of sin,
who will set his own house on fire for it? should not I hate and tremble at
sin? And seeing all this goodly frame shall be dissolved, What manner of men
ought we to be in all manner of conversation? 2 Pet. 3. 11. How richly might
we furnish our minds with matter of fruitful meditations, should we thus
look on the heavens? Thus cannot the Heavens, nor never did.

In the Heavens, behold the light, the first creature that God II. The light.
made, his first word was, fiat lux: that is, let there be light. As a man that
builds a house, he first considers how he may let light into it; without
which it were but a dungeon, and cave of darkness; and so had the whole world
bin a Chaos and confused heap without the light from heaven. As no quality of
bodies does more resemble Divinity, than the light; so nothing in the world of
natural things, more aptly preaches unto us the nature of God, who pleases
to call himself light: dwelling in light in accessable, yea being himself
that essential, infinite, uncreated light, wherein is no darkness at all.

1 Do I see the light, the nature of which no man can perfectly attain? Job
38. 19. Tell me (says God) if thou know this; Where is the way where light
dwells? Does not this carry my mind to God himself, that eternal and
infinite light, whose infinite nature none could ever comprehend?

2 Do I see that God made not the light for himself; for he being light it
self, needed it not; but for me amongst others: how can I but admire his care
and goodness? how can I choose but gather what light and comfort is in
himself, who has put so much in the creature? and rise by it to his Divinity,
who (as light) so communicates himself, that no man the less, because
another more?

3 Do I see the light made so pure, fair, clear, and perfect, as nothing can
pollute it? if it looks into all filthiness, it contracts none. How can I
but herein see an excellent resemblance of Gods infinite purity and perfection
of his essence, in his eternal love, in whom is no darkness, to whom nothing
is more contrary then darkness? and though he behold all darkness and order
all confusion, yet in his divine understanding, is not any obscurity or
dimnesse.

4. Do I see the light freely and perpetually communicating it self, and
diffusing it self to all men. I cannot but see GOD himself, always
abundantly communicating himself with all men, either by the light of nature
which is the chief ornament of a man, or by the light of grace, which is the
chief beauty of a Christian, or by the light of glory: which is the chief and
highest pitch of an happy and glorified man. John. 1. 9.

5. Do I see the light always like it self, never communicating with
darkness, but fighting against darkness, and irreconcilably resisting it?
Even so may I conceive God to be one, and always the same, and ever like
himself, in his nature, words, and actions: never favoring, but fighting
against darkness, and works of darkness, sins and corruptions, which are as
clouds, sometime getting between the light and us, and hindering the comforts
of his beams from us.

6. Do I see light driving away darkness; distinguishing things that were
involued in darkness; producing things out of darkness and secrecy? How can
I but contemplate, that God, that eternal light, will one day discover all
things that are in darkness, and bring all secret works, words, or thoughts,
and set them in a clear light: Nothing is so secret which shall not be
revealed; and God and his truth shall at last prevail against all error,
powers, and wicked opposites set against it. Besides, light leads me to
Christ the light of the world: But of that more conveniently in handling the
great light, the Sun.

7 How can I behold so noble a creature without some use concerning my self?

1 Do I see a man cannot see light without light? and can I know God without
Gods teaching?

2 I see the more light the Creature has, the more excellent, profitable, and
useful it is: the Stars more excellent than stones for their light, the
Sun than the Stars: Of stones, the more light and shining, the more price
and value, and virtue are they of. So should I think of my self, the more
light of God and grace I can get, sure the more worthy I am; and of others, as
they excel in knowledge and grace so should I think of them, as of stars
which differ in glory according to the proportion of their light.

3 I see the greater light obscure the less: and it is absurd to light a
candle to the Sun. Why then should I stick unto worldly wisdom, worldly
comforts, earthly contentments, which are as candles to the Sun: the great
light of the day, of heavenly wisdom, spiritual comforts, durable
contentments?

4 I see the light brings comfort and refreshing, draws all eyes unto it,
all Creatures follow it, but hateful Bats and Owls, etc. When I have slept
all night, the light wakeneth me, raises me to the actions of the day. Oh
what joy brings it to the soul, when God shows himself lightsome to it?
should not his glorious light be the sweetest object of the eye of my soul?
Why should not this light awaken my soul, and raise me from the sleep of sin
and lusts?

If light go away, darkness succeeds, in darkness none can see the way
before him. O therefore why should not I lay fast hold of the Lord, who is my
light, and walk in his light, by which alone I can hold the plain and direct
way to eternal life and light?

5. I see the light in an instant presenting it self, as the lightning is
suddenly dispersed from one side of heaven to another. If I be in darkness
and desertion, the Lord, my light, can and will suddenly present himself with
joy and comfort to my soul.

6 Was I darkness? now I am light in the Lord, that is, enlightened by the
Word of truth. 2. Enlightening others by holy instruction and conversation.
Thus we must be wary and walk as in the light.

In the Heavens consider we III. The light bodies.
all the light bodies. as the 1. Sun, 2. Moon, 3. Stars.


These rightly considered will bring much light to the eyes of the mind: and
though we have in the Church a superior means by the voice of the Scriptures;
yet we may not despise the day break, because the noone is brighter.

Quest. But why does the Prophet here not mention the Sun, but the Moon and
Stars?

Ans. When a man beholds the Moon and Stars, the Sun is absent, as in the
night. It seems it was his manner to walk forth in the night season, to
behold and contemplate the Lords greatness and goodness, in these servants of
the night: and we should find some times of the night not unfruitfully spent,
if we would take up this practice. But if the glory of God shine so much in
these obscure lights: and if David could so teach, and admonish his heart by
them: how much more by the brightness of the Sun? And if David by day look
upon the Heavens, as Psalm 19. 1. he can say, The Heavens declare the glory of
God, because in them he has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which comes
forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber, arraied with nuptial and glorious
garments, turning all eyes toward him; and as a Giant strong and speedy to
make a swift and long course, such as even our thoughts want wings to follow.

1 When I behold the Sun in his wounderfull magnitude, 1. His magnitude
being an hundred sixty and six times (at least) bigger than all the vast body
of the earth; how can I choose but be led unto the Lord? and say, Great is
the Lord, great is his power, and there is no end of his goodness. For, how
much greater is the Creator of the Sun and Heavens, than the things created.

2 When I behold the pulchritude 2. His brightness
and brightness of the Sun, which is such as blinds and destroys my
sight, as too weak to behold it; what infinite light and brightness must I
conceive in the Father of lights; in that bright and eternal Sun, who never
sets, in whom is no shadow of change? who can but here admire at the majesty
of the Creator?

3 When I behold the Sun ever 3. His motion.
in his motion, never standing still but by miracle, never slacking his motion,
but always keeping the same pace; should not I learn to be constant in my
motion, never to be idle, or make stop in my course or duty?

2 When I see that God himself and his Word is as the soul and spring of the
Suns motion; he commands him to come forth as a Giant to run his race; he
can stop him in his race, and by a word command him to stand still, or run
back: I must learn hereby to be sure, that Gods Word, as a soul, gives life
to my actions, my motions, and courses: I must move where his word bids me, I
must stand, and be every thing at his word.

3 When I see the Sun in his motion keep his bounds and zodiac, never going
without his own line, but precisely keeping his course, and not so much as
slugging therein, must not I learn hence to contain my self within the
bounds of my calling, and his command?

4 When I see the Sun in all his motions carry heat, light, comfort, and
direction, and is the chief ornament of this inferior world; and that he
goes no where but the world is better for him: should not I in all my course,
strive to be profitable? and by the light of my conversation be comforting,
directing, and shining to others in good works? And when I see the Sun impart
his light, and shine unpartially on good and bad, I must learn to do good to
all, good, bad, friends, enemies, envying my light to none, no more than the
Sun does his to any.

4 Do I see the Sun set every 4. His s^tting.
day, and rise every day? Solomon would have me see therein, my own misery and
vanity. Eccles. 1. 4. Thus has the Sun continued his course for many
generations: But I rise but once, and have but one day of natural life
allotted me: and if my self and others once set, and the night of my life be
come, there is no more returning to this life.

5 I see this glorious sun sometime clouded, sometime eclipsed: 5. His eclypse.
and this calls on me to see the eclypse of heavenly light in my self: my
sin has reached unto heaven, and often inverteth even the order of nature in
obscuring light bodies: for light bodies not to shine, is besides their nature:
As in the death of Christ, God would let the world see her sin, in crucifying
the Son of God. Never see the Sun hide his comfortable presence, but
confess thou deservest never to see it any more.

6 I see sometime the Sun by his extreme heat, scorch 6 His burning heat.
and burn up the plants and fruits of the earth. Herein our Lord in the
Parable, has directed man's eyes to behold the persecution and affliction of
the Church, which often scorcheth the greenness of grace, and makes many
professors wither and fall away, Cant. 1. 5. I am black, for the Sun has
looked on me: and indeed,

1 The Sun does not more ordinarily or daily arise, than persecution daily
waits on the Word.

2 As the Sunbeams diffuse and disperse themselves into every place; and no
man can hide himself from the heat of the Sun, Psalm 19. 3. So do the
beams of this Sun of persecution, dart into every place where the Sun of
grace shines in the Church. No godly man can hide himself from the heat of
this Sun, but one time or other it will find him out.

3 The Sun has not more beams to scorch, and dry up the moisture of the
earth, than Satan and the wicked world have to dry up the moisture of grace,
where it is not sound; sometimes by armies of inward and spiritual
temptations, sometimes by open tyranny and hostility. That is not a true mark
of a true Church, which Bellarmine designeth, outward splendour and prosperity,
but the Cross and 7. His resemblance to Christ the Son of righteousness.
Persecution.

7 But above all other, the sweetest use of the Sun is to see in it Jesus
Christ the Son of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. Rev. 1. 12. For,

1. As there is but one Sun in the heavens, so but one Son of
righteousness, the only begotten Son of God, Ioh. 1. 14. and as this Sun is
not only light, but the fountain of light, and in it self a body of most
surpassing and shining light: So Jesus Christ is light in his essence; an
heavenly light as the Sun, a light that none can reach or attain, the light
of the world; as the Sun is a light in whom is no darkness: so his face
shines as the brightest Sun, Rev. 1. 16. and as in the midst of Planets,
inlighteneth those that are about him.

2. I see of all creatures, the Sun most admirable, all the world admireth
it. A great part do idolatrously adore it. And the whole Church must admire
her Sun; yea, let all the Angels of heaven adore him, as ten thousand times
passing the Sun of the world. For

1. That is but a mere creature, though very glorious: but this is the mighty
God, the maker of that.

2 That serves the outward man in things of this life. But this the inward man
in things spiritual and eternal.

3 That rises and shines on good and bad: but this only on the good, only
on his Jerusalem, Esaias 60. 1.

4 That rising, obscureth the stars, but this inlighteneth all believers, who
by his presence shine as lights in the worlds darkness.

5 That may be eclypsed and darkened, and though it rise every day, it every
day sets: but this Sun of the Church being eternal, shall never lose or
lessen his shine and glory; and once risen, shall never set more, Esaias 60. 20.

3. I admire the sun for his purity and piercing nature; the sun is (...), of
many eyes, who disperseth from himself on all sides, infinite beams of light,
as so many eyes on every creature: and none can hide it self from this great
eye of the world: and so pure, that looking on all filthiness, contracteth
none. But how much more am I to admire the surpassing purity of Christ, whose
most piercing eye none can avoyde: for all things are naked to him, with whom
we have to deal: and so pure is this son, that though he was borne of
sinners, lived and conversed with sinners, yea, died with and for sinners, and
as a sinner, yet no man could justly accuse him of sin, but he remained in his
nature and life purer than the sun in his strength. And must not the Saints
imitate this their Son, though they live amongst sinners, and see much foul
behavior amongst men? yet to keep themselves pure in the midst of a crooked
and perverse generation.

4. I behold the Sun, a most powerful creature; for though his body be in
heaven, yet his comfortable beams reach to the extreme parts of the earth.
May I not now behold Jesus Christ being in heaven bodily, and ascended thither
in that his flesh; yet by his spirit, grace, and power, present with his
Church, in all parts of the world unto the end? Mat. 28. 10. And as the Sun
rising, comes forth as a Giant to run his course, and makes such haste in
his way, as no created force can hinder him: So this powerful Son of his
Church, makes haste in his way to her; all created power of men and Angels,
cannot hinder him. [Hee skippeth over mountains Cant 2. 8.
and hills in his haste unto her.]

5, What comfort have we by the sun; and shall we not have the same in Christ?

1. Does the sun drive away the darkness of the night? and does not Christ
the thick mists of sins, the darkness of ignorance, error, wrath,
damnation, and of hell it self? But for the sun of the world, were a
perpetual night; much more by the absence of this sun of righteousness,
were it so in the Church.

2. Does the sun by his beams give direction for this natural life? etc. So
does Jesus Christ by his beams of wisdom and grace, directing us, work in
us spiritual and heavenly life. What can a man do commendably without the
Sun? So what is that we can do, that can be acceptable without Christ?

3. Is the sun under God, the life, quickner, and comforter of the world,
otherwise dead? and see ^e not Christ quickening all the elect, dead in sins and
trespasses, warming them with beams of his love, which as sunne-beames, do
reflect back on himself?

4 Does the Sun make and preserve the seasons of the year, Summer, Winter,
Spring, Autumn? See Jesus Christ, having all seasons in his hand; the seedtime
of grace here, that harvest of glory hereafter. He appoints the summer and
prosperity of his Church, and changes it into a sharp winter of adversity.
All vicissitudes and changes of the Church, are appointed by his wisdom,
Daniel 2. 21. Whence we may learn a number of duties. As;

1. Do all creatures rejoice in the Sun, but hateful Bats and Owls? do they
follow the Sun, thrive and prosper in the sun, turn after the sun, as
Mari-gold, Dazy, Turnesole? etc. Should not new creatures draw near and follow
this Sun to prosper it it? Do we open our windows and doors to take in the
beams of the Sun, and not open the doors of our hearts for the Word, that the
beams from Christ may inlighten and warm us?

2. When the Sun rises, men go forth to labor. When Christ our Son is
risen, and present in his offers and ordinances, we must work and walk
before the night come.

3 Men in the Sun walk uprightly: in a misty night to stumble and fall, is
more hurt than shame; but to fall at noone, is headdinesse or distemper. So to
sin against such a light, in the sunshine of the Gospel, is far more
shameful, than in the night.

4. See we men in the Sun do decent things? ashamed of things unseemely or
unlawful, because all eyes are on them, and themselves are in the light?
Should not this teach Christians to walk in their sun? Let the thief cover
himself with darkness: the adulterer watch for the twilight: Papists,
Atheists, etc. persevere to do shameful things without blushing. Let our Sun
make us ashamed of uncomely or unconscionable things. Let not men see us run
naked in the sunshine.

5. We see the greater light drownes the less, and the Sun obscures all
other lights: and if men have the Sun, they care but little for the Moon. Let
it teach the soul clothed with Jesus Christ the Son, to tread the Moon under
feet, Revel. 12 1. that is, things earthly and mutable: shall not the
Sunshine darken the Moon? Zucheus, so soon as he got Christ into his
heart, presently gives half his goods to the poor, and with the other half
makes restitution. But men that admire the Moon, are surely in the night
still. If the Sun appears, the Moon disappeareth.

Now come we to consider the Moon, that other eye of the The Moon.
world, and Queen of heaven. Grace will draw much light to our souls out of
this.

The consideration thereof will lead us to see our own impurity; 1
for though in it there be brightness, clearenesse, etc. yet all is darkness
compared with the Sun. So whatsoever excellency there is in us it is mere
darkness in respect of Christ, the fountain of all excellencies. This use
Job made thereof, Chap. 25. 4, 5. The moon and stars are not pure in his
sight, how much less man, a worm? etc.

In beholding the Moon, I 11. The Moon resembles the Church
am taught to consider the image, of the Church on earth, Cant. 6. 10. [Who is
fair as the moon.]

1 As the Moon borrows all her light from the Sun, whereby she shines: so
does the Church receive all her endowments from Christ the Son of
righteousness, and fountain of light, in whom they are originally. Hence
Christ is called the light, Ioh. 1. that is, that very light and true light;
the Church being only a witness of this light in him, as the moon is of the
Sun. This consideration may teach us two things.

1. It may humble us, in that all the light we have, it is but borrowed: we
of our selves are but darkness. What have we which we have not received?

2. It teaches us to depend so far on the light of the Church, as we are
sure she borrows her light of Christ. Therefore to give the Church authority
over the Scriptures, is as if one should send the Sun to Gal. 1* 4.
the Moon for light; therefore the voice of the Church is not the formal
object of faith.

2. The Moon somewhat does resemble the Sun in her light, motion, figure,
and influence, and virtue over herbs, and plants, etc. The Moon also is led
by the Sun, she follows his circle. So every member of Christ should stand
in conformity to the Son of God; we should be fruitful and profitable in
our motions, and follow the examples of Christ, who is gone before us.

3. As there is in the Moon many changes eclypses, sometime Ecclesia sua habet
tempora, viz persecutionis, pacis, etc. Amb Hex. lib. 4 cap. 2
dark, sometime light; never looking on inferior bodies, with one face:
Constant in nothing but inconstancy. So the Church on earth is often changed,
sometime seeming more glorious, sometimes less: and the Son of righteousness,
Jesus Christ is farther or nearer unto it in his gracious presence and spirit.
This meditation, Saint Ambrose did much ruminate.

4. As the Moon when she appears not unto us, but is in darkness, has
both light in Ecclesia videtur at luna deficere, sed non deficit: obumbrari
potest, deficere non potest. Orbis lunae integer manet cum totus non full get,
etc.
her self, and light and beauty from the Sun: So the Church may be obscured,
and disappeare to our sight; but at the same time it has not only a being,
but a communion, and enlightening from Christ her Sun; Christ is as a faithful
and skillful pilote, the Church as a ship, the world as the Sea; and Christ
has promised not to leave his Church in this dangerous Sea, but to bring her
to the haven safe. Saint Ambrose follows this meditation thus. The moon may
have a diminution of her light, but not of her body: the Orb of the Moon is
whole, though the shine be but in one quarter: So it is also with the Church.

In the Moon I am taught to III. The moon resembles this world in.
set a resemblance of this world and earthly things, Revelat. 12. 1. there the
Moon is taken for earthly, wordly things.

1. In respect of inferiority, 1 Inferi^riti^.
the Moon is the lowest of all celestial bodies. So the world, and external
blessings of it, are the least and lowest of all; and there is no comparison
between heavenly and earthly things: So ought we to esteem of the things of
this world, and give them the lowest place in our affections. Hence the woman,
that is, the Church, Revel. 12. 1. when she was clothed with the Sun, that
is, when she had Christ his righteousness applied unto her by faith; she
trod the Moon under her feet; that is, she held all sublunary things,
worldly, earthly things, base and low in her affections.

2. In respect of mutability and 2. Mutability.
change: if she increase now, straight she does decrease as fast: if she be
now in the full, she is presently in the waine, she is never seen two nights
with one face: even so is the frail estate and inconstant condition of all
sublunary things. Now, to day full and increased in wealth, honor, pleasure;
to morrow in the waine, and no appearance of it: to day flourishing in health,
strength, to morrow faded and fallen. Are not all worldly things of as round a
figure as the moon, unstable and unconstant? 1 John 2. 17. [The world passes
away and the lusts of it:] so does the luster of it, and whatsoever is
desirable in it.

3. In respect of her obscurity 3. Obscuritic.
and spots: for the moon in her chief brightness is clouded and speckled
with black spots, a darkness within her self obscureth her: so are all
worldly things: the greatest wealth in the world is spotted with many wants,
cares, fears; the highest glory with sad adversity, and some sense of
misery. The most choice and delicate pleasures are but bitter-sweete,
motheaten, and very alluring baits, covering mortal hooks: here is no light
without some darkness.

4. In respect of her end and use. For by Gods ordinance the Use 4.
Moon is set to govern the night, as the Sun to rule the day: So the profits
and pleasures, and earthly comforts, serve only for our use and benefit while
we are in the night of this world, and veil of darkness compassed and
clouded with vailes of sin and calamities, the fruits thereof.

5. The Sun rising, I see the Moon disappeare, and there is 5. Disappearing.
no need of her shine: so when the blessed Son of righteousness shall rise in
the glory upon us, and we shall walk in that blessed and celestial light,
there is no more need of earthly comforts, that blessed Son shall drown and
swallow up all the lights of these candles, and of the Moon it self. As that
holy woman and martyr going to her death said, I am now going to a place where
money bears no mastery, Rev. 21. 23. that City has no need of the worlds
Sun nor Moon; for the glory of God and the Lamb are the light of it.

Now we proceed to the Of the stars.
Stars of the firmament, the handmaides of the Queen of heaven, who in their
nature call us all to the knowledge of God. And by the teaching of grace, they
all may be as the star that led the wise men to Christ. In them let us
consider,

The unconceiveable magnitude of them, the swiftness of their motion, their
secret, but admirable efficacy and influence; and all this to be put forth or
restrained at the Lords pleasure, must needs argue him to be wise of heart, and
strong of power, Job 9. Verses 4, 7, 9, 10. to order so great things, and
unsearchable, yea, marvelous things without number. Add hereunto the multitude
of them, which thou can not number: the force and power of them, as mighty
armies, for the execution of the Lords justice and mercy, which thou can not
reach All this leads us into the sense of our own imperfection in knowledge
to apprehend his perfections, that calls them all by their names. And hence
we are called both to acknowledge the power of him that made Pleiades and
Orion, Amos 5. 8. as also to praise his goodness, that made the great lights;
the Sun to govern Psa. 136. 8
the day, the Moon and Stars to rule the night.

This might stir up our faith concerning the multitudes of believers in the
Kingdom of Christ, which shall be as the stars of the firmament, Genes. 22.
17.

This consideration the Lord uses as an argument to confirm the faith of his
Church, Ierem. 33. 22. Therefore is the Lord worthy of praise, Psalm. 136. 7.

The stars keep their courses, II.
and motions, and orbs constantly, and unweariably: they suffer no eclypses in
themselves as the greater lights do: they never deny their light unto others.
By which both our faith may be strengthened, and our duty directed. The former
the Lord urges to confirm our faith in the stability, and truth of his
promises, Ier. 31. 35. If the courses of the moon and stars can be broken,
then may the seed of Israel cease. The latter directs us,

1. To stand in our own orbs with constancy, doing our own duty as fixed
stars, Jude 13. not as the shooting or wandering stars, that is, unconstant
and unstable men, carried about with every wind of temptation, doctrine, lust:
But we must hold on anweariably in doing our duty.

2. To shine in grace without eclypses, so far as is possible.

3. To deny to none our help and light that stand in need.

We see one star differ from III.
another in magnitude, claritie, glory and motion: yet one hinders not
another, one envieth not at another. Which notes

1. The diverse degrees of grace here. For the Saints have diversity of gifts,
which makes them as stars, diverse in their use and shining, site and
magnitude: yet must not be adverse, not envious, not in pride advance our
selves above others; the stars do not so. The stars have each one their glory:
but none of them from themselves. And what have thou which thou have not
received?

2. The diverse degrees of glory hereafter, proved by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.
41. What a sweet elevation of the soul were it, in beholding the stars, to
put our selves in mind of that heavenly glory, wherewith we shall be clothed?
as the Scripture does, Dan. 12. 3. They that turn many to righteousness shall
shine as the stars.

We see the stars shine brightest IV.
in darkest nights, to teach and excite us in darkest nights of trial,
afflictions, and dangers, most to manifest our light of faith, patience,
fortitude, and graces. Where should fortitude demonstrate it self, but in the
field and combat? Where do spices send forth their odoriferous smells, but in
the mortar under the pestle?

In every star we must labor to see Jesus Christ, who calls V.
himself

1. The morning star, Revel. Christ the morning star.
2. 28. And the bright morning star, Rev. 21. 16. He that overcommeth, I will
give him the morning star, that is, I will communicate my self wholly unto
him, and make him conformable unto me im my glory: Always the proportion of
head and members observed.

The morning star is the most bright and shining of all the stars in
heaven: see in it the most excellent light, and celestial glory of Christ,
wherein the Lord Jesus excels all men and Angels, as far as the morning
star, all the stars of heaven.

The morning star communicates all his light to the world. In this see
Christ communicating to the world of believers all light of Grace and Glory.

The morning star dispelleth the nights darkness, Hence conceive Christ
that day star rising in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. who by the light of his
Prophetical and Apostolical Word, his Spirit accompanying the same,
dispelleth the darkness of ignorance and errors, wherein we were wrapped in
the night of sin, and unregenerate estate.

The morning star is anteambulo Solis, and fitly said to be the Suns
harbenger, and forerunner of perfect day: Conceive Christ our morning Star,
not only dispelling and dispersing with the beams of his light, the
darkness of this present life, which is a night in comparison: But is a
pledge of our perfect day, and future glory, who in the morning of our common
resurrection will show himself to all his Saints in surpassing Glory and
Majesty, above the perfect light of a thousand Suns. Thus we see the use of
the Stars in their natural use excellent and useful: but in spiritual and
supernatural far more to the Christian and Believer.

2. Behold Christ termed the Christ the star of Jacob.
star of Jacob, Number. 24. 17. Here observe.

1. The original of a star is from heaven, not earth: I must conceive of
Christ otherwise than of other men, which have their original on earth. But he
is the Lord from heaven, as God he is from heaven.

2. Yet a star of Jacob. As a man of the posterity of Jacob: so I must
conceive him both God and man.

3. This star first rises in the horizon of Judea, and Jerusalem, see Psalm.
60. 1. and carries his light round about to all nations, as the stars.

4. The use of this star, is to be a load-starre to help us to our haven,
that as Mariners on the Sea behold the Pole Star to sail safely, and avoid
rocks and shelves: So must we on the Sea of this world look at this star,
and fear no shipwreck.

Now come we to consider the Of the clouds.
inferior heavens, and in these consider the Clouds, Air, Winds.


The Clouds have a voice to teach us, not only that mighty voice of thunder,
which made Clouds lead us to God.
proud Pharaoh confess his own wickedness, and beg prayers, as Exodus 9.
21. but also a silent voice, every of them being as that pillar of the cloud,
which was a sign of Gods presence amongst his people, as Exodus 13. 21. yea,
every cloud herein like the cloud of the Tabernacle, whereof is said, the glory
of God appeared in the cloud, Exodus 16. 10. I may say as Job 37. 14. Hearken
and give heed to these wondrous works of God.

Who is the Father of rame, Job 38. 28. that is, besides the Lord? what power
is there that binds the waters in the thick clouds, so that the cloud
breaks not? Job 26. 29. And if thou do know who it is that makes the
clouds to labor to water the earth, and who it is that turns them about by
his government to do whatsoever he commands them on the world for punishment
or mercy? yet do thou know how God disposes them? The variety of them, the
wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge? Job 37. from verse 11. to
17.

Can thou tell how the bottles of heaven are filled? how they being of
infinite weight and magnitude, are hung as in a balance in the soft air,
without any other, stay than his Word? How the windows of Heaven be open to
rain down fatness and plenty? Psalm. 65. 12. Surely in these things the Lord
left not himself without witness amongst the Gentiles in giving them rain
and fruitful seasons, Act. 14. 17. and much less among us in the Church, to
whom by the teaching of grace they proelaime his wisdom, power, justice,
mercy, as also his glory and majesty, who rides on the clouds as on a horse,
and turns them what way soever he pleases.

As they lead us to God, so II.
they serve to afford us many excellent meditations.

1 Do I see the rain fall from the clouds to water the earth, and returns
not in vain? Isa. 55. 10. I must see the work of the word preached upon my
earthly heart, for the moystening, softening, and changing of my heart; for
preparing it to fruitfulness: and preserving it in fruitfulness, for it shall
never be in vain, but does the work for which it is sent. Never was a greater
plague in Israel, than when for three years and a half it rained not on the
earth in Ababs time: a greater plague cannot be in this life, than when the
rain falls not to the moystening the furrows of our hearts.

2. Do I see the clouds to be as a shadow, and cover against the heat,
parching and burning of the Sun: I must herein behold the Lords protection, as
a covering cloud, or shadow, saving his Saints from the sun of affliction and
persecution; which will burn up those that are not defended, Psalm. 91. 1. They
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Here is another manner of shadow
than Iona'hs gourd. I will run under this shadow, (says David, Psalm. 121. 6.)
and the sun shall not smite me by day.

3. Do I see the rainbow in the clouds? I must meditate of Gods
faithfulness, who has set it as a sign of mercy and patience: yea, I may
carry my mind beyond the temporal; and conceive of Gods everlasting mercy in
Christ, in whom I come to the throne of grace, which is described to have a
rainbow round about it, Rev. 4. 3.

4. When I see the cloud disperse it self upon all grounds, and raines fall on
good and bad; I must learn to distill my goodness to all in general; good
and bad, friends and enemies. And so show my self a child of my heavenly
Father, who lets his rain fall on the just and unjust, Mat. 5. 45.

5. When I see the dewes of Dewes resemble Christ.
small raines, which is the joy and life of flowers; I must in them beheld
Jesus Christ, who compares himself unto dew, Hosea 14. 5. I will be a dew to
Israel: the dew presents it self in fair weather: so Christ is 1
near, when Gods face and favor is calm and pacified.

The dew refreshes and reviveth 2
withering meadows: so Christ by his grace, refreshes and quickneth dry and
dead hearts, remitting sins, and infusing moisture of grace and holiness, to
make them fruitful in all good works.

The dewes temper and allay 3
great heat and parching of the sun: so does Christ cool the burning heat
of his Fathers wrath; and quenches the fiery darts of the devil, cools the
heat of persecution; and all, that we may become and continue fruitful.
Without these dewes from heaven, is no expectation 4
of fruits in earth, and without Christ and his grace, we can do nothing at
all.

6. I see a morning dew and sudden rain soon dried up: I must look to the
soundness of my grace, faith, and comfort, that it be not as an hasty rain,
or an heritage hastily gotten: that it be not as the righteousness of
Ephraim. Hos. 6. 4. as a morning dew, by sunrising suddenly vanished and gone,
when is most need of it. Hence learn to strive against hypocrisy.

7. In beholding the clouds, what a profitable meditation were it to consider
them as the glorious chariot of Christ, wherein he ascended to heaven, and was
taken up in the cloud from the sight of his Disciples, Acts 1. 9. And wherein
he shall descend in great glory and majesty to judge the quick and dead,
Matthew. 26. 64. As also how serviceable the clouds shall be unto us, as unto
our head; when in the last day we shall be taken up into the clouds to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever with him, 1 These. 4. 17.

Now come we to the air, Of the air.
which is not in vain, but may also lead us to God; for it has express
impressions of his fingers. For,

It truly and really subsisteth, I. Leading to God many ways.
though it be not seen: so has also the Lord the maker thereof, a real but
invisible existence.

It leads us by the hand, to the ubiquitie of GOD; for it is every where, and
in every open place and secret, in towns and fields, and widest deserts; it is
in the bowels of the earth, in the bottom of the Sea, within us, without us.
Even so must I conceive God present, at and in all places, immediately
compassing me every where as the air. Nay, has place in my heart and mind,
that as surely as I continually draw the air into my body, heart, and brains:
so is the Lord much more present within me. This will not let me shut him up
in heaven, whose essence is not more there, than in this inferior world;
though his glory and Majesty shine clearer there. Neither to think him far
absent, nor by walls, doors, windows, closets or chambers, kept from seeing
or knowing my ways, no more than air: but I shall continually stand in awe,
and fear to offend him.

I see the air, the preserver of my life, that without it, I cannot III.
continue any whit, but presently perish, so as we may say of it truly, as the
Apostle of God himself: In it under God we live, move, and have our being,
Acts 17. 28.

The air of it self is dark, IV.
but yet admits the sunbeams to penetrate it, and lighten it. So must I, a
Chaos of darkness in my self by nature, become a receptacle of light, and
receive the beams of grace, from the sun of grace and righteousness.

As no creature wants a Of the Winds.
voice to teach man; so no man ought to be ashamed to learn, by whatsoever God
will teach him: Amongst the rest, there is not almost any natural thing which
poynteth us out to more spiritual use, nor affords more sweet matter of
divine Meditation than the words, which both lead us unto God, and into our
selves, both for humiliation and direction.

It has an apt resemblance and image of God in it. I.


1. In the subtilenesse and invisibilitie of the nature of it. No Winds
resemble God.
man ever saw the wind: thou can notisee it, says Christ; the way of the
wind is not known: so no man saw God at any time, and his ways are
unsearchable, and past finding out. The swiftness of the winds may note Gods
omni-presence, who is said to ride on the wings of the wind.

2. In powerful motion and efficacy of it, which no man can hinder or resist.
For this invisible creature, has a mighty force in tearing, rending, driving
before it whatsoever stands in the way; trees, houses, nay, the raging seas,
the ponderous clouds, yea, the rocks and mountains, and is able to shake the
very foundations of the earth: And who sees not here a lively resemblance of
the omnipotent power of God, whose mighty arm works so unresistably in all
the things of nature, yea, of grace, rending the hard rocks of our hearts, and
casting down lofty mountains, exalted against grace? Who art thou that can
resist the Spirit in man?

3. In the freedom of his motion, the wind blows where it lists, John 3.
7. No man can make the wind blow, nor leave blowing, but it mooveth it self,
and rests freely. And herein should we cast our eyes on the Lords free
working, as in all the works of nature, so of grace. He will have mercy where
he will; and harden whom he will. He will send the winds of his grace, and
they shall hear the sound of it in this region, not in that; in this
congregation, not in another; yea, this heart in the same congregation shall
have the sound, and not another. He will blow a stronger gale, a fuller blast,
a greater measure of grace on some, than on another. He may do with his own
as he will. And all things work the same spirit to every one severally, as
he will, 1. Cor. 12. 11.

4. In the secrecy of his working of mighty work: the winds are invisible, but
work wonders in every place open and secret; but in a most still and silent
manner: for thou know not whence it comes, or whether it goes. Whereby
the Lord leads us to the secret work of the spirit in our conversion. As the
subtle Motum scimus, motum nescimus.
wind pierces by the tenuity of his substance into every cranney, and no man
can keep it out: so does the Spirit of God blow into the very secrets of thy
very conscience. The woman at the Well wondered how this wind could so pierce
her, which brought a sound of all that ever she did. Who is acquainted with
the work of grace in himself, and has not woundred after how unspeakeable a
manner this wind has blown upon him?

1. What a still voice he heard behind him, directing him, and persuading him
to the good way. But stronger than all power of man or Angels, and still
followed with inward motion, to provoke him further.

2. How after a secret and unknown manner, these gracious winds have
dissolved the clouds of iniquity, and watered the earth of his heart with
raines of repentance, and godly sorrow; and ever since have kept his heart
softened and humble.

3. He knows not how; but these blessed winds have dispersed the noisome
vapors and corruptions of his heart: scattered the clouds of ignorance,
error, infidelity, doubts, fears, and cleared the heavens to him; that now he
chearefully beholds the sunshine of Gods favor in Christ, and walks in
the light and comfort of it; and see^h nothing. Why? but he hears a still
voice and sound of this wind, the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing the
pardon of his sins, and his assurance of acceptance and reconciliation.

4. He finds a secret voice and sound of the wind making requests in him,
with sighs which cannot be expressed. This secret breath and inspiration of
the Spirit, gives him breath, and makes him frequent and fervent in prayers;
to which he was as heavy as a Bear to the stake.

5. He finds the sound of this wind, not only as the voice behind him, but
feels the power of it as a strong blast behind him, to drive him forward in
the ways of God. And whereas before he was as the ship that lay wind-bound:
now having a fair gale of wind, he is as a ship under sail, that goes as
swift as an arrow: He can comfortably pray, read, hear, meditate, admonish,
watch as an active man in godliness: As a bird flying with the wind, flies
swifter. In all these things we may and must admire the greatness of God, who
has laid up the winds in his treasury, and rides upon the wings of the wind,
Psalm. 140. 3. and made them the wheels of his chariot.

The consideration of the winds, leads us into our selves; II. Winds lead
us into our selves.
and that,

1. For humiliation: For who knows the nature of the wind, the place of the
wind, the way of the wind? He would have us humble, not only by the
ignorance of mind in divine things, but even in natural.

2. See in the wind our own vanity. Lord what is man? Job 7. 7. Remember that
my life is but a wind.

1. Inconstant as the wind, a short puff which none can lay faster hold on,
that on the wind: all humane things are as light as the wind.

2. Suddenly past away from us: even sometime so soon as it comes.

3. It returns not again, no more than the wind, Psalm. 78. 39. He
remembered, they were as wind passed, not returning again.

2. For instruction: shall so fierce a creature be at a beck, and shall not I?

1. I see this mighty creature obedient and subject to GOD, Mat. 8. 26. Who is
this to whom winds and seas obey? do they testify to Christ that he is the
Son of God, and shall not I hear his Word, and acknowledge him my Lord and
my God?

2. When I see a boisterous wind, and tempest arise, and carry away light
things; as feathers, straw, chafe: I must take notice of the miserable estate
of wicked men, on whom destruction and fear shall come as a whirle-winde,
Prove. 1. 27. They shall be driven away as chafe and feathers in the wind,
Psalm. 1. Job 21. 18. The wicked shall be as stubble before the wind, and as
chafe which the storm carries away. This was Ieremies meditation, Chap. 18.
17.

3. When I see or hear great winds do great harms, to blow down houses
over men's heads, unroote oaks, and strong trees: I must now look to my
foundation and rooting in grace, be sure I be founded on a rock, that when
raines fall, winds blow, and storms beat against my house, it may stand,
Matthew 7. 27. If we build our walls with untempered mortar, it shall fall; a
great shower shall come, and hailestones shall cause it to fall; and a stormy
wind shall break it, Ezekiel. ^3. 11, 12.

4. When I see reeds and rushes tossed and shaken with every wind, I must
look to my stablishing in the doctrine and profession of godliness, that I
be not carried about with every wind of libertine doctrine, every puff of
temptation, every frivolous humane invention, every frown of superiors, every
threatening of the times, every cross occasion, as a man unstable in the
grounds of received truth. John Baptist was not as a reed shaken with the
wind; as many unsettled heads, carried into all novelties, conceits, and
opinions, that no gid die conceit can be broached, but shall find favorers
and admirers of things in true judgment to be explored: but labor for
soundness within. We have seen many fair Apples and Pears hanging on a
tree lovely in sunshine, which in the next whistling wind quite fall off,
because they were rotten or unsound at the core. We are yet in some calm, but
the storm rises suddenly, we know not how soon we shall be shaken, many
prognostics of foul and stormy weather are upon us. Let us be wise and
settle our selves in sincerity of heart, and sound love of the truth, which
shall hold us on our foundation, when others shall be overturned.

Thus the Prophet, having sufficiently by the eyes of his mind, drawn much
matter of meditation from the heavens; he casts down his eyes on the earth,
in the last verse of this Psalm, and with admiration, says, O Lord, how
wonderful is thy name in all the earth! Noting, that not only the heavens,
but also the earth, being rightly considered, may offer unto us abundant matter
of divine meditation. Seeing then the whole hosts of heaven and earth are
before thee, complain not thou want matter whereon to meditate. Come then,
and see what great The Earth
works the Lord has done in the earth, and hearken what a loud voice it has
to lead us unto God and our selves. See Job 12. 7.

Consider what bars, or engines, what mighty foundations I.
uphold the massy substance of the whole earth and sea, that the infinite
weight should not fall through the soft, thin, and compassing air, where no
man can make a feather hang without some stay. This was Jobs meditation, which
led him to the infinite power of GOD, who hangs the earth upon nothing, Job
26. 7. The whole frame of the heavens has no other collumes than the air, the
air leans on the earth, the earth hangs on nothing but the mighty and
powerful Word of God.

From the unmovable strength and stability of the earth, whose foundation
cannot be shaken: we may fruitfully meditate of the stable and undoubted truth,
and certainty of the Word of the Lord, both in his promises, and menaces: Isay
48. 13. My hand has laid the foundation of the earth: Therefore hear, O
Jacob, he will do his will in thee, O Babel, etc. Psalm 125. 1, 2. They that
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, and stand for ever. As the hills
compass Jerusalem, so does the Lord his people.

From the earth which is full III.
of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm 33.

1. We behold the riches of God, whose footstool it is.

2 The bountifulness of God, who has given it to the sons of men, Psalm 115.
16. and made it our table, prepared and furnished with all dainty food; our
house in which we dwell, and a kind and liberal mother affording us all her
riches and store at all times.

3. The providence of God, who cloatheth the grass, and decketh the earth: and
will he not much more them that fear him? Mat. 6.

4. The justice of God in the barrenness of the earth; A fruit of our fall and
sin, and a just curse of the barrenness of our own hearts: A fruitful land
he turns to barrenness for the sins of the inhabitants.

From the earth we may raise IV.
sundry instructions concerning our selves:

1. Matter of humility: It being our common Mother whence we come, and whether
we must return. Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return.

The same in the fading of flowers, withering of grass, and the mowing it
down, put David in mind of the fading prosperity, and unavoydable mortality
of men, Psalm. 90. 6, 7. Our matter is not iron, steel, etc. but grass. All
flesh is grass. This sense of our mortality should quicken the care of
immortality.

2. Heavenly-mindednes. Seeing the earth is but a prick or a point in
comparison of heaven, and so should it be unto us: who would lose an infinite
for a finite, a thing of nothing? See we not the earth hiding the wealth of it
within the bowels, all the rich metals, minerals, and costly stones? And why
conceive not we hence their nature? Her self would cover these from our eyes,
that we should not set our hearts on them, nor they hinder us from better
things.

3. Love and labor after Gods Word. I see what pains men will take to dig
and fetch out metals, as silver, gold, etc. why should not I dig deep for
wisdom, and esteem Gods Word as gold tried by the fire, worth much pains
and labor? Prove. 2. 4.

4. I see the earth receiving seed, return abundant fruit, according to the
cost and pains of him that manureth it. Oh where is the thankful return of
fruits of grace, which I should bring unto God for his cost, and manuring of
me? Every good heart and good ground must do so, Matthew. 13. 8. Every
faithful soul, as a fat soil, must be in some proportion answerable to the
means, lest being often watered, and remaining fruitless, we be near a
curse, etc. Heb. 6. 7.

We come now to particulars. Of trees and plants.
Look upon the Plants and Trees.

1. And put thy self in mind, to become a tree of righteousness, the planting
of the Lord.

2. Thou see the Tree stand firm upon his roots against winds and
tempests: see thou be firmly rooted on Christ, lest the blast of persecution
shake thee.

3. Thou see the Tree well planted not only green, but fruitful. Art not
thou as a tree planted by the rivers of waters, in Gods garden and orchard of
grace? Has not he warmed thy heart with his Sun of grace? and watered thy
soil with fruitful showers? Do thou now, not only become truly
regenerate, moystened with the Spirit of grace, to make thee flourish and look
green; but also bring pleasant fruits unto the Lord? else look for the axe
to hew thee down, and cast thee into the fire.

4. I see a good Tree brings not fruits only, but good fruits, and an evil
Tree brings forth no good fruit: No man gathers grapes on thistles. By my
fruits must I be known. A good and a bad Tree may bring forth leaves, and
arms, and greenesse alike: so good and bad have many external things alike in
common, as wealth, name, beauty; yea, hearing, speaking, profession. But good
fruits from good juice and sap, are proper to good and living roots: I must
examine the goodness of my fruits.

5. I see fruitful Trees the more laden, the more they incline and bow
themselves down near the ground, offering their fruit to every gatherer: So
must I, the more fruitful in grace, be the more humble, and free, and
beneficial to every one that can gather any thing from me.

6. What particular can I behold, and not gather some spiritual fruit? See I a
Palm Tree? It is an image of a just man thriving by afflictions: The more
weight the more growing, Psalm 92. 13. Look I upon a Vine? Christ compares
himself to a Vine, John 15. and the faithful to the Branches set into him.
How many Meditations may one draw hence? Nay, the very Thorns and Briars teach
us to beware of earthly and choking cares, Luke 8. 14. and pleasures which
choke the Word, that the seed of God cannot thrive in their hearts; besides
the sight of our sin, in the abundance of them.

Ask the beasts, and every one of Of the Beasts.
them will teach thee something, Job 12. 7. All the beasts on a thousand hills
are the Lords, Psalm 50.

In the Lion, behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who foiled the roaring
Lion.

In a Lamb, see the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

In a Sheep, note the wandering disposition, Isay 53. 6. And the duty to hear
the voice of Christ the Shepherd, and follow him, Ioh. 10.

In a Goat, a stinking creature, see the image of a reprobate, who shall be
set on the left hand, Mat. 25. 33.

In the Ox and Ass, to know our Master that feeds us, Isay. 1.

In the Horse and Mule, indocible creatures, who cannot be taught by rules,
but by overruling and bridling; see our untaught and refractarie nature:
therefore let us not be like them, Psalm. 32. 9.

In the little Emmet, see what providence and diligence thou art to use; while
time lasts to lay up for time to come. Avoid laziness, and idleness, and
know thy season, Prove. 6. 6.

In the contemptible Worm, trodden under foot: Consider the humility of
Christ, who was as a worm and no man, Psalm. 22. Let the same mind be in you.
Thus shall we use them as their Lords, when we see the Lord in them. And
while we cannot be beyond them in strength of body, quickness of senses, and
swiftness of foot; we shall be beyond them in discourse of mind, and in
divine and spiritual contemplation.

Look on the Birds upon and Of the Birds.
about the earth, and consider from them all:

1. The providence of GOD; they reap not, nor spin, and yet are fed: a Sparrow
falls not to the ground, without his will, Matthew. 6. 26. [Are not we better
than they?]

2. In the Dove we have a lesson of patience, meekness, innocence,
simplicity, without wrath or revenge Matthew. 10. 16. David mourned for sin,
like a Dove.

3. The Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, teach us wisdom to know our seasons, Ier.
8. 7. Let us learn to know the day of our visitation.

4. The Eagle, to fly unto Christ where ever he be, in earth or heaven, Mat.
24. 28.

5. The Hen brooding her chickings, puts us in mind of Gods mercy, in
gathering us, and stretching the wing of his mercy over us, Matthew 23. 27. We
have no safety but under him; we lie open to prey and spoil without him.

6. The Raven of the valley must put children in mind of their duty toward
their Parents, least they pick out their eyes, Prove. 30. 17.

7. The nests of birds must put us in mind of our Saviors poverty, Matthew 8.
20. If we want such conveniences, we must be content as he was.

8. The taking of silly birds in a net or snare, must put us in mind, to
beware of hasting to sin, which is as if a bird should hasten unto the snare,
Prove. 7. 23.

Look upon the sea and fishes, and behold the wonders of God in the deepes.

1. Who is it, who calmeth the sea by his power, and by his Of the Sea and
Fishes
understanding smites the pride of it? who measures the face of the waters
with a compass? Job 26. 10, 11. and keeps it from flowing over the earth?

2. The sea is like unto God, an inexhaust fountain; for when so many floods
and rivers are run out, as so many thousand millions of creatures enjoy: it is
not diminished, but remains in the same fullness: for this is the river of
God that is full of waters; Psalm. 65. So the Lord is a sea of grace: the more
he gives, himself has never the less.

3. I see all rivers run into the sea, and pay a tribute to that whence they
do receive: So, as all is from God, all must return to him by way of
thankfulness.

4. I see the sea obey his maker, keep his bounds and banks; I must fear God,
show my obedience, stand in my vocation, Ier. 5. 22.

5 I see in the sea a map of the misery of man's life; it flows and ebbeth:
seldom is the sea quiet, but after a little calm, a tempest rises suddenly.
So I must look for storms upon this sea of so troublesome a world.

6. In the Sea are innumerable creatures, small and great: there walk the
ships, there play the Leviathans; some of which have been found six hundred
foot long, and three hundred and sixty foot broad all which shows the
power, wisdom, and providence of God: for all these do wait on thee O Lord,
Psalm. 104. 25.

7. In the Fishes, it will not be fruitless to consider what miracles God
has wrought by them. Jonah saved by a fish: two fishes multiplied by Christ,
to feed five thousand men, besides women and children: how Christ made
himself known by a great draught of fishes, Mat. 17. 27.

8. When I see fishes caught in a net, or hook unawares: Consider the folly of
men taken by baits of pleasure; and think no more of their time, but are
taken, as fishes, in an evil net, Eccles. 9 12.

9. When I see a Fisher cast in his nets to catch fish, I may enter into a
large field of the net of the Gospel, cast into the sea, Matthew. 13. 47. and of
Ministers the fishers of men, Matthew 4. 19. and of the pulling men out of the
sea of the world, by the power and preaching of the Gospel; as is showed in
that Prophetical vision of Ezekiel 17. 9, 10.

Thus have we showed how all earthly things may minister heavenly meditations
to heavenly minds. How a good man will and may easily fall out of earthly
talk into heavenly for when he minds heaven, and the carnal man earth;
both are in their elements. The fire of the one, namely the spiritual man,
heaveth him upward, and the earth of the other presses him down, and burieth
him alive

We have seen by the former discourse, that no man wants Preachers to help
him toward Vox Dei est in om nibus, per ominia, de omnibus, and ad omnia,
loquens nobiscum semper and ubique.
GOD. Every Creature may be a Preacher to him, in whom the spirit first
inwardly preaches: and we may take notice how barren and fruitles our minds
are, and how frothie our speeches by our own defects. God is not wanting to us
neither in his Word, nor in his Works, neither in the Scriptures, nor in the
creatures; but is still teaching, counselling, admonishing and justly condemning
those that in both remain untaught. We will conclude the Treatise with the
words of Job; Behold these Job 26. 14.
are a part of his ways, but how little a portion hear we of him? and who can
understand his fearful power?

FINIS.

