KEEP YOUR TEXT. OR A short Discourse, wherein is set down a Method to
instruct, how a Catholic (though but competently learned) may defend his Faith
against the most learned Protestant, that is, if so the Protestant will tie
himself to his own Principle and Doctrine, in keeping himself to the Text of
the Scripture. Composed by a Catholic Priest.

Vincent. Lyrinens. cont. Haeres. Si quis interroget quempiam Haereticorum:
vnde probas,
vnde doces hoc? Statim ille: Scriptum est enim.
woodcut of a tall cross with a triple plinth, associated with the Birchley
Hall secret press Tollentem Extollit It crowns the carrier


1619.

AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Reader.
GOOD READER, Thou may understand, that some years past there was printed a
little English translation out of French, concerning a Conference in France,
between a Father of the Society and a Minister of Amiens; wherein the learned
Jesuit by tying the Minister to his own principle of proving the Points
controuerted from the written Word alone, did in the presence of many, mightily
confound the Minister. This short English translation (as experience has
showed) has wrought much good upon diverse. But being aduertized, that the
Copyes of it are almost spent, partly by loss of many, and partly otherwise;
Therefore I have here taken some small pains to set down in a short Discourse
the said Method, in effect, holden in dispute by the former Jesuit, but in
several points enlarged, altered, and molded anew. For omitting the French
Confession of Faith (as being different in many articles from the doctrine of
our English Protestants) whereunto the former English Translation by discussing
several points of Faith there maintained, had special reference; I have first
premised certain observations for the better conceiving of the Method here
prescribed.

Secondly, the Method it self of answering is more enlarged.

Thirdly, where the Minister in the foresaid Conference much relied upon
conference of Scripture, it is here showed, that conference of Scripture, even
by the acknowledgment of diverse learned Protestants, is altogether insufficient
for proof of any Article.

Fourthly, the Argument is here fully answered, which may seem to be taken by
retorting upon us the Method here practiced, when we undertake the Opponents
part and office against the Protestant.

Fifthly, whereas in alleging of only Scripture, the sole drift of the
Protestants, is to appeal to their own interpretation of it, rejecting herein
the interpretation of the Primitive Church; therefore I have here alleged the
judgments of diverse most eminent Protestants, accordingly condemning the
Primitive Fathers of flat Papistrie; and consequently, of their supposed false
constructions given with us of the Scripture.

Sixthly and lastly, here are presented to the Reader certain forcible
arguments of Credibilitie, priuiledging the Fathers above the Protestants in
interpreting Gods sacred written Word: all which several passages are wanting
in the foresaid English Translation. And thus, Christian Reader, farewell, and
use this my small labor to the spiritual benefit of thy Soul.

KEEP YOUR TEXT. A Discourse, wherein is set down a Method to instruct, how a
Catholic (though but competently learned) may defend his Religion against any
learned Protestant, so that the Protestant will tie himself to his own
Principle, in keeping himself to the Text of the Scripture.
IT is too well known, that Luther (whose fall, the fall of the star in the
c. 9.
Apocalypse, may seem to a dumbrate) had no sooner by his defection from the
Catholic faith, endeavored to overthrow the Roman Church, but that there
instantly was erected a new Church (no, no Church, which brooks Innovation and
Novelty; yet so reputed, and after graced with the title of the Protestants
Church.) This Church (indeed, this broken troop of some few scattered and
branded soldiers, forsaking the ensign of our Lord Jesus; (sweet Jesus, do
they thus remunerate thy corporal death, suffered to expiate the guilt of their
eternal death) laboring to justify her iniustifiable doctrine by declining
all other proofs, 50. Luther in comment. c. 1. ad Galat. Brent. Prolog. c. de
Tradit. Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 8.. 8. Kemnit. Examen. Council. Trid. s^ss. 4.
made sole recourse to the sacred Scriptures (so Malefactors fly to holy
places for Sanctuary) where diuorcing the letter from the sense, she did so
paraphraze the same with her adulterate Scholies and Expositions, as that no
Heresy so cross to the Unity of Christian faith, which to a vulgar eye might
not seem to be proseminated and sprung from thence. Nor content herewith, but
further she proceeded (for Man once finally leaving God, precipitates himself
into an Abysme or infinite depth of irrecouerable inconveniences) undertaking to
write most virulent Treatises against Apostolical Traditions, and the
authority of Christ's Church; as ignorantly presuming, that the more due
reverence was exhibited to them, the less was ascribed to the Scripture.
Hereupon her members vauntingly gave out (for Heresy is ever borne with the
Twinne of Pride) that the superstitious Papist (so pleases it them in their
charitable language to style us) was deadly wounded in all points of his faith
with every little splinter or passage of the written Word. Which Word (as is
said) they have erected for the sole rule of faith, auerring, So write the
former cited Protestants, besides many other: As for example, Beza is alleged
by D. Bancroft in his Survey, p. 219. for sole proof of any point, to say:
Aduerbum prouoco.

Cartwright in his second Reply, part. 1. p. 509. thus writes: We have good
cause to hold for suspect whatsoever in government or doctrine the Primitive
times left unto us, not confirmed by substantial proofs of the Word. D.
Rainolds thus reprehendeth S. Basil and S. Chrysostom for their not admitting
only Scripture, in his conclusion annexed to his Conference: I take not upon
me to control them, but let the Church judge if they considered with advice,
etc. D. Whitakers thus says of Chrysostom, touching the said point, l. de
sacra Script. page 678. I answer, it is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy
so great a Father. Finally (to omit many others) D. Wallet in his Synopsis, p.
38. says: The Scripture is not one of the means, but the sole, whole, and
only means to work faith.


that nothing is to be believed as an Article of faith, which has not it
proof taken from thence: and that themselves will confound the poor Papist in
any point whatsoever of Religion from the Scripture it self, scorning to
borrow any other proofs, then from the writings of the Prophets, the Apostles,
and the Evangelists. But this is a mean frothy oftentation of words, and (as
the learned Catholic well knows) invented only to retain that grace and
favor, which they have already gained from the weak judgments of their
abused followers. And therefore to repress this their inconsiderate
venditation of prooning, what they pretend, only from the Scripture (they here
telling us that as a Diamond cuts a Diamond, so one place of Scripture best
explicates and unfolds another) I do challenge the Protestant peremptorily to
stand to this his assertion; And because I do expect at his hands, that he
should forbear all other kinds of Proofs, then from Scripture alone (to the
which by his own doctrine he has precisely obliged himself) I have therefore
accordingly entitled this Treatise, Keep your Text; Thereby to put him in
remembrance, that in his proofs he does not flee from the Scripture: but
punctually keep himself to the same. But I am assured, that his performance
herein will light short of his promise, and that such vanting prouocations will
in the end resolve to fume in his own disgrace, himself thus dangerously
running upon the edge of that sentence: Pro. c. 13
Qui inconsideratus est adloquendum, sentiet mala. Because I well know, that
the learned Catholic is able out of his own reading to encounter the
Protestant by entering into a large field of disputation from the written Word,
or otherwise; and seeing it is a degree of Victory to limit or give bounds to
the assaults of the Adversary, therefore for the ignorant only (I mean the
unlearned Catholic) at this time I will take some pains, and will undertake
to demonstrate in this discourse, how a Catholic (though but competently read
in the Scriptures, and merely ignorant in the Fathers writings and other humane
learning) may in dispute make good and defend his Catholic faith against the
learnest Protestant in Christendom, as long as the said Protestant does
punctually and precisely tie himself to his own Principle insisted upon in
this Treatise, to wit, That the written Word of God is the sole rule of our
Faith, and that nothing is to be believed, as an Article of Religion, which
cannot be proved thereby.

1.
Now, for the facilitating and better effecting hereof, I will premise some few
observations, among the which the first is, That the Catholic is to remember,
that the Protestant charging our Catholic doctrine with error and
superstition, and vanting So Beza said in his Conference at Poysi: and Fulke
against Stapleton, p. 2. the like is affirmed by Luther, who thus writes,
epist. ad Argent. Christum a nobis primum vulgatum audemus gloriari; as also by
Jewel in his Apology; by Perkins in his exposition of the Creed; and by
diverse others.
himself to sent from God (I mean in Luther, Calvin, and other his
Predecessors) as the Restorer of the Gospels light, and the Discouerer of our
supposed errors (so many Ages heretofore generally believed) is become by this
means the Plaintiff or Accuser, and the Catholic the Defendant; and therefore
himself is obliged to prove, and the Catholic (as being the Defendant) only
to answer: for who defends a Cause, is bound only to repel the suggestions
and arguments of his Accuser, without urging any affirmative or positive proofs
in his own Apology. The same task the Protestant undergoes even in reason
and equity it self: For, seeing it is a principle invented by the Protestant
(but disclaymed by us) that nothing is to be believed as an article of faith,
but what has it proof out of the Scripture; therefore it peculiarly belongs
to the Protestant to prove by the Scripture alone, what he maintayneth against
us.

Hence it follows, that the Catholic (as is above said) is freed at this
time from proving any thing from the Scripture alone (as one that is loath to
make any building on another man's Land) since it is the Protestant (and not he)
who aduanceth this principle, that the Scripture is to give sole proof for
trial of matters of faith.

Hereupon then we are to premonish, that a Catholic (I still here speak of
one, who through want of learning is not able to become the Opponent to his
Adversary) as being through the former reasons disobliged thereof, do never
undergo the part of arguing or opposing, precisely still keeping the
Defendants part, and without much insisting in the authorities or reasons, why
he defends this or that point; though otherwise he may purposely be much
urged thereto by the Protestant, and this to the end, that the Protestant by
this means may subtly discharge himself of proving every point or position
questioned, out of the Scripture alone. And according hereto (the better to
keep himself in the person of the Defendant) if the Protestant should thus
argue for example: Praying to Saints is not to be found in the Scripture;
therefore you err in practicing of it. The unlearned Catholic may here deny
the Consequence, and pass over the Antecedent; because in denying the
Antecedent (though otherwise it is false, and is to be denied) he makes
himself the Actor or Plaintiff in seeking to prove it from the Scripture; and
so obliges himself to prove, whereunto greater measure of learning is
required, and freeth his Adversary from his former undertaken task of Proving
or Opposing: The Consequence, I say, he is to deny, and so to force the
Disputant to proceed on further in proving of it, out of the Scripture alone,
which he never can effect.

2.
The second observation. That the Protestant does undertake two things. First,
to prove his own doctrine to be true out of the written Word alone. Secondly,
to confute our pretended errors out of the same Word. And here we are to note,
that the impugning of our Catholic faith in diverse articles, and the
maintayning what the Protestant holds concerning the said articles, are two
different things in themselves. For, when the Protestant impugneth our
Doctrine, he commonly holds the Negative part; yet, besides this his
negation, he for the most part affirms some other thing concerning the same
point: as for example in the question of the Real Presence: The Protestant
denies peremptorily our Catholic doctrine herein, yet he teaches and
affirms withal, that the Supper of the Lord is the figure of Christ's body;
in like sort, that the body of Christ is really and truly taken by the mouth of
faith. Here now, I say, that supposing the Protestant could convince out of the
Scripture our Doctrine herein as false, yet he can not conclude, that himself
therefore erreth not: for, admit for the time, that Christ's body were not
really in the Eucharist, yet can it not be inferred hereupon, that therefore
the Eucharist is a figure of Christ's body, or that therefore his body is really
taken with the mouth of faith: for, as our Doctrine (of a supposall) may be
false, so also may the Protestants doctrine be false; I mean, what the
Protestant positiuely affirms herein (since this his affirmation is not
merely contradictorie unto our affirmation concerning the said article:
Hereupon then we are to forewarne the Protestant, that he is not only to prove
from Scripture (to insist in the former example) that Christ's body is not
really in the Eucharist under the forms of bread and wine (as we Catholics
do believe) but he is also to prove from Scripture, that the Eucharist is a
figure of his body, and that Christ's body is really and truly taken with the
mouth of faith: Thus must he allege some Texts of Scripture, proving, that
there is a double manducation in the Eucharist; the one of the signs of
Christ's body by the corporal mouth; the other of Christ's real body by the
mouth of faith. The same course the Protestant may be forced to take in all
such articles, in the which (besides his denying of our doctrine) himself
affirms something?

3.
The third observation. That (as it is above noted) the Protestant thus
obliging himself to prove not only his own affirmative Positions out of the
Scripture, but also to disprove from Scripture, what the Catholics affirm
concerning any articles, he is by this means compelled to prove Negative
Propositions (as being mere contrary to the Catholics affirmations) from the
Scripture: Thus for example, where we hold, that there is a Purgatory, that we
may pray to Saints etc. the Protestant is to euict and prove out of the written
Word, that there is no Purgatory, that we ought not to pray to Saints. Where
we are to premonish, first, that it is not sufficient for the Protestant to
say, that the former Negative Positions of Purgatory and the like, are proved
sufficiently by the written Word of God, in that the written Word of God (which
is by his judgment the rule of Faith) makes no mention, that there is a
Purgatory, or that we are to pray to Saints. This answer avails not only,
because (to omit that the Catholics do not acknowledge the Scripture for the
rule of faith) it is directly false (since from the Praying to Saints proved
out of Luke 16. Acts 5. 2. Cor. 1. etc. As Purgatory from Matthew. 5. Matthew. 12.
Mark. 3. Luke 16. etc. besides out of the Machabees.
Scripture we can prove the foresaid articles) but also in that the Protestant
Minister ever with great venditation of words liberally engages himself,
positiuely and expressly to refute the Catholics pretended errors from the
written Word it self, which he does not by using his former evasion. Neither,
secondly, can he say, that Negative Propositions (such, as there is no
Purgatory, no Real Presence, and the like) are not to be proved, alleging
herein the authority of Metaph.
Aristotle, who teaches, that that, which is not, cannot he known, and
consequently cannot be proved. This, I say, forces nothing, for the Protestant
hereby discovers his ignorance in Philosophy, seeing Aristotle in the former
words understands by that, which is not, that, which is false (as the
contexture of the precedent and subsequent passages in him do clearly manifest
so much) meaning, that that which is false, is not, and consequently cannot be
demonstrated as true: for otherwise who knows not, that Aristotle proves
infinite negative Propositions: as, that there is no Vacuum in rerum natura,
that there are not many Worlds, and diverse such like; a verity so generally
acknowledged by all Philosophers, as that two of the Moodes of arguing in the
first figure (to wit, Celarent and Ferio) are invented only for proof of
Negative Propositions. Add hereto for the greater conuincing of this slight,
that the Scripture it self proves sundry Negative Positions: as for example,
Romans 9.
Saint Paul proves most amply, that God is not unjust in the predestination
and reprobation of Men; in like sort the Scripture demonstrateth, that there is
no variation or change Numb. 23 and Malach. c. 3.
in God, that God cannot sin, that he wills not Eccles. 15 Job 31. Psalm. 5.
Man to sin, and the like. Thus it appears, that the Protestant assuming to
refute our supposed Errors from the Scripture, is there by engaged to prove
many Negative Propositions from the Scripture; and this not from the silence of
the Scripture, not speaking of such points; but from it, as it particularly
condemns them. And here add further, that though it were true, that the
Scripture by not speaking of Purgatory, disproueth the being of it; yet does
not the Scripture therefore prove, as an article of Faith, that there is no
Purgatory, (which is a point here to be insisted upon) even as the Scripture
speaks nothing in a Prophetical Spirit, that Mahomet was a false prophet,
and yet though the Scripture by not speaking of him, should condemn him for
such, it follows not nevertheless, to believe from the Scripture as an
article of Faith, that Mahomet was a false prophet; since it is one thing to
say, that the Scripture by silence and not speaking of it, proves a thing not
to be; another to affirm, that the Scripture proves the not belief of the
said point to be an article of Faith.

4.
The fourth and last observation. That if the Protestant in his disputes
draws any argument either from Philosophy, from the authority of Fathers,
Councels, or any other humane testimony, the Catholic may well answer, that
though at other times he is well content all these several kinds of arguments
to have their due respect and place, yet at this present (by reason that it is
an Axiom obtruded upon him, that the Scripture alone is to determine all
points of Faith) he is to reject all such reasons and moral persuasions.
Neither can the Protestant justly insist in urging of them without renouncing
his foresaid Principle. We are here further to instruct the Reader, that a
syllogism or argument in proof or disproofe of an article of Faith, whereof
the one Proposition is taken from the Scripture, the other from Philosophy, or
some other humane authority, I say, that such a syllogism or argument does
not prove any thing only from the written Word of God; and therefore seeing
the Protestants in their disputes are accustomed to frame such syllogismes,
when their arguments are reduced into Logical forms, the Catholic may and
ought to reject al such arguments, as long as the Protestant undertakes to
prove his faith only by the Scripture, as being by his assertion the sole rule
of Faith; from which rule are excluded all Philosophical and humane
authorities whatsoever. Here, I say, the Catholic (I ever mean a Catholic
not learned in humane literature, and therefore not able to discuss the weight
and force of Philosophical points or other humane reasons) may well answer,
that admitting such an argument for good and perfect in form, yet the
authority, whereupon it lies, is at this present to be rejected, since it is
taken partly from Scripture and partly from humane learning; and so the
Scripture not wholly, but in part proves the question controuerted; contrary
to the Axiom of the Protestants, who teach that the Scripture is not a
partial, but a total rule of Faith, and who glories, that he is able to
justify his own Protestant faith only from the Scripture without the helps of
any humane authorities at all.

We will illustrate, what we here mean, in this syllogism following, whereby
the Protestant labors to prove, that Christ's body cannot really be in the
Eucharist.

That body, which is in Heaven, is not at the same time upon the earth.

But the body of Christ is now in Heaven (according to that Text in the Acts
chap. 3. Heaven must receive Christ until the time of the restitution of all
things.)

Therefore the body of Christ is not now upon the Earth or Altar.

Here now the unlearned Catholic is to reject (according to the Protestants
own Principle) the authority of this argument (though otherwise Logical in
form) for though the Minor or second Proposition be taken out of Scripture,
and is most true; yet the Mayor or first Proposition (whereupon the weight of
the argument chiefly relyeth) is borrowed from a Proposition in Philosophy, to
wit, that one Body cannot be in several places at one time; and thus what is
here proved, is proved principally from Philosophy, and consequently the
argument is not to be prized by the Catholic, who at this present expects
proofs only from the Scripture, and from nothing else. Thus far concerning
these few precedent observations, of which the Catholic is to make use, and
put in practice, as often as occasion shall be presented, when he contesteth
in disputation with any Protestant. It now follows in this next place to
exemplify in one or other Article or Question, how a Catholic (who is but of
small reading) is more particularly to comport and carry himself in his
conflict with a Protestant Minister, or some other such like man; who has
promised aforehand with great iollitie of words to confirm his own faith and
refute our pretended errors only from the Scripture it self.

And because the Scripture is alleged by the Protestant after two sorts; The
first manner in obiecting the pure and express Word it self, without help of
any illations or consequences; so as the immediate and literal sense thereof
is auerred by him to fall plumbe upon the proving of his faith or disprouing
our errors.

The second in urging a Text of Scripture for proof or disproofe of a point;
but this not in it immediate sense and construction, but only by way of
necessary inferences and consequences, as himself affirms; Both these two
sorts of the Protestants disputing we will consider a part, and show, how a
Catholic (not greatly seen in Divinity) is able to defend his faith against
any learned Protestant, insisting only in the holy Scripture, as the sole rule
of faith.

And first I will begin with the first manner of pressing the Scripture
against us, to wit in seeming to urge it in it immediate sense and
Construction; where I am in the beginning to forewarne the Catholic, that he
does sever and distinguish these words frequently used by the Protestant in
alleging of Texts: to wit, This is the sense of such a Text of Scripture, or,
the Scripture in this place means thus, etc. from that, which that Text
imports in it plain and familiar acception of Words: since that other
construction understood by the former words of the Protestant, is but
calumniously obtruded upon the Text. And for the better encouraging of the
unlearned Catholic herein, I can and do assure him, that there is not any one
Text through out the Bible, which the Protestant uses to allege against any
Article of our faith, the which Text even according to their own English
Translations may seem in direct and express words immediately to impugn the
point, against which it is produced (yea oftentimes it does not so much as
concern it) but that when it is objected against the said Catholic point, it
is forcibly wrested by the Protestant thereto, with this or the like vshering
phrase: This is the sense of this Text, etc. or else it is applied against our
doctrine only by help of weak inferences or sequels, of which kind of
consequences we shall hereafter speak.

1.
But to proceed forward. I will exemplify my following Method in the Questions
of the Real Presence, and of Antichrist which may serve as Precedents to be
followed in all other Questions. And here if you (for I now suppose, that I
speak to an unlearned Catholic) be to dispute with a Protestant Minister,
you are, first, to demand of him, if he can allege any evident and express
place of Scripture (not seconded only with his own interpretation of it, or
help of sequels) for the destroying of the Real Presence of Christ's body in
the Eucharist; if he can, then urge him presently to show it; if he cannot (as
certainly he cannot) then before you proceed further, force him to confess in
plain terms, that he has no express Scripture without further
interpretation, which does condemn the supposed error of the Real Presence.

2.
Next, if the Protestant Minister should seek to expound by way of conference
of places those words of our Savior: This is my Mat. 26
body, This is my blood. figuratively, by those other words of his: I am Ioh.
15.
the Vine, and I am Ioh. 10.
the door, etc. both which Texts all grant to be taken in a figurative
construction: then demand of your Minister, if he can allege any passage of
Scripture, which affirms, that these words: This is my body, etc. ought to
be interpreted by those words, I am the Vine, or, I am the Door. If there be
any such passage, let it be instantly read; if the Scripture says not so much,
but only the Protestant Minister auerreth it from his own conjecture, then
force the Minister to confess, that it is not the Scripture, but himself,
that teaches, that these two figurative Texts of the Vine and the Door, are
to serve for a rule, whereby we are to interpret those other words of Christ:
This is my body, etc. for these open Confessions (as showing that the Minister
even in the beginning abandoneth his Principle touching his relying upon
Scripture) will much confound him in the presence of his auditorie. Add, that
such conference of Scripture is but uncertain even according to D. Whitaker,
who thus writes hereof, L. de Eccles. contra Bell. controu. 2. q. 4. p. 221.
Qualia illa media or Look what the means of interpreting are (speaking of
conference of places) such the interpretation must be; but the means of
interpreting obscure places are uncertain, therefore the interpretation must
be uncertain; and if uncertain, then may it be false: thus He. In like manner
if he urge those words of our Savior: Ioh. 6.
The Spirit quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, or any other Text of like
nature, you may tell him, that you find nothing in the express words and
immediate construction of them touching the absence of our Saviors body in the
Eucharist, since these words say nothing of our Saviors body, nor so much as
naming it at al. If the Minister reply, that Christ means in these words,
that his body profits nothing, and therefore he would not really give it to
his Disciples to eat at the last supper; you may answer, that (besides the
atrocitie of this Position ascribing no profit to Christ's body, which suffered
death for the redemption of Mankind) you deny, that Christ in the foresaid
words speaks or means of his own body; but only of a So is this Text
expounded by Cyprian, Sermon. de Coena Domini. Origin. l. 3. Ep. ad Romans
Chrysostom upon this place.
carnal understanding of spiritual things. If the Minister will not yield to
you herein, then will him (according to his undertaken task) to prove out of
some place of Scripture, that the former words are spoken of Christ's body: if
he say he can, cause him presently to repeat it: if he confess he cannot
(as it is impossible for him to do) then let him openly acknowledge that it
cannot be proved from Scripture, that the former words, to wit, The flesh
profits nothing, do concern the flesh of Christ, much less the absence of
it in the Eucharist.

3.
Thirdly, the Catholic is to demand touching the interpretation of this Text
of Scripture, or of any other, who is to judge, whether the interpretation
given by the Minister be good or no. If he reply, that the Scripture is to
judge of it; then urge him (as I admonished before) to show any passage of
Scripture, teaching, that his interpretation of the former Text is good and
true; if the Scripture affirms not so much, then is it the bare assertion of
the Minister himself, which warranteth his former interpretations of the Texts
alleged by him, for true; and then the Minister forsakes herein his main
Principle of proving from the Scripture alone, erecting himself the last and
supreme Judge in all Controversies of Faith and Religion: and then consequently
he performs no more herein, then all Heretics heretofore have been
accustomed to do, to wit, strangely to allege and detort So witness Tertul.
l. de Praescrip. aduers. haeres. Ierom. Ep. ad Paulinum. August. cont.
Maximinu^ Arianum, l. 1 Vincent. Lyr. aduer. haeres.
the Scripture for patronizing of their Heresies; and finally, to make
themselves sole Judges of interpreting the Scripture.

4.
Fourthly (for the greater confronting of our poor Minister thus entangled)
you are to demand of him, whether his gravity (forsooth) stands subject to
error or mistaking in his exposition of the former Texts of Scripture against
the Real Presence; if he confess, that he may err therein, then follows
it, that his belief (as being founded upon a doubtful construction, and such
as may be erroneous) is no longer any true belief, since Faith in it own
nature (according both to Catholic and Protestant) is most certain and
infallible. If the Minister say, that he relyeth in the interpretation of the
Texts mentioned, or the like, upon other learned Ministers of his own
brotherhood, then leaves he again the Scripture, and finally relyeth for
proof of his faith upon the bare authorities of certain particular men. But
if his vanity rise to that height, as to maintain himself not to be subject
to any erroneous mistakings in interpreting the Texts of Scripture, then first
cause him (according to his own prescribed method of proving) to allege some
place of Scripture, warranting this his supposed infallibility of expounding;
and if he urge any Text detorted to that end and purpose, tell him, that if it
make for his not erring in expounding the Scripture, then much more makes it
for the not erring of the whole Church of Christ therein, which point
notwithstanding (I mean the sea Whitakers hereof he Eccles. cont Bellar.
controu. 2. q. 4. p. 223. Jewel in his Apology of the Church of Eng and,
part. 4. c. 4. Luther epist. ad Argentinenses. Perkins in his exposition upon
the Creed, page 400. For these Protestants teach, that the Church of Christ
wholly erred from Austins time till Luthers days.
not erring of the whole Church in it interpreting of the Scripture) himself
denies: But if the whole Church of Christ may and has erred in Religion, and
consequently in interpreting Gods written Word (as the Protestant confidently
auerreth, that it has) then ask the Minister, with what face can he (being
but a member of his Church, and perhaps but a bad and unlearned member thereof)
assume to himself a freedom of not erring, when he interprets the
Scripture?

5.
Fifthly and lastly, it behooves you to hear at large the Ministers
interpretation of Scripture, and his proofs and reasons warranting his said
interpretation; and then you are to desire him to make good those proofs and
reasons out of the Scripture alone, which he not doing, then are you to deny
his said Explications, Proofs, and Reasons, not obliging your self (as being
the Defendant) to show the reason of your denial. And it is more aduantageous
for you, simply to deny his expositions and proofs of the same, then to set
down the reasons of such your denial. For, by alleging your reasons
(whereunto the Defendant is never obliged) besides, the danger, perhaps, of
your own insufficiency discovered in laboring to make them good, you give fit
occasion and opportunity to the Minister to begin new discourses against your
Reasons, and so by degrees (and before you be aware) he leaves his Scene, and
windeth himself out of his undertaken task, to wit, of proving his
interpretation of the Texts of Scripture by Scripture; to which method, if you
punctually and precisely tie him, without suffering him to use any digressions
or euasions by questioning of you, or otherwise (as by his own Principle,
Doctrine, and often vanting he obliges himself) then shall you find him
presently stabled and plunged in the midst of his disputes; it being
impossible for him to justify and make good his first undertaking, or his
expositions of Scripture by Scripture alone. And thus far concerning the
first kind of the Ministers alleging Texts of Scripture in proof or disproofe
of any point controuerted: Which course here set down, the Catholic is to
observe in all other Texts of Scripture, which any Protestant shall urge out of
their immediate and literal Construction, to prove or disprove any point
controuerted between him and us.

In this second place it comes in to prescribe certain directions, how an
unlearned Catholic is to answer to the Protestant Minister, when he
labors to prove or disprove any article of Faith from the Scripture, but
this not immediately from the express and evident sense thereof (whereof I
have before entreated) but only by certain inferences and sequels, necessarily
(as he says) deduced out of the said Scripture.

This form shall be exemplified in the former example of the Real Presence;
the falsehood of which doctrine our Protestant Minister will (perhaps) labor
to prove by an inference or deduction, drawn from the pure written Word of God
in the Acts chap. 3. where we read, that Heaven must receive Christ, until
the time of the restitution of all things, meaning, that Christ is to stay in
Heaven till the end and consummation of the World. Now, out of this place the
Protestant Minister thus argues, (as above I have touched in one of my former
observations.)

That body which is in Heaven, is not at the same time upon the earth under the
forms of Bread and Wine.

But the body of Christ, according to the former alleged Scripture, remaynes
till the end of the World in Heaven.

Therefore, the body of Christ is not here upon the earth under the forms of
Bread and Wine.

1.
Now, before the Catholic do answer directly to this argument, I would have
him, first, to demand of our Minister, if for want of express Texts to
convince our doctrine of the Real Presence, he is forced to use inferences
and consequences from Scripture; for we see, that place of the Acts touches
not the Question of the Real Presence, but only by consequence (which kind of
arguing is evermore weak and uncertain) if the Minister will not confess so
much, then wish him to insist in clear and perspicuous passages of Scripture,
without any furtherance of Inferences, omitting the more obscure. If he can be
drawn to such a confession, then force him thereto, it much disaduantageing
his cause, since at other times he professed in great gallantrie and bravery
of words to confute our Catholic Doctrine herein, even from the unanswerable
perspicuitie and euidencie of the Text it self.

2.
Secondly, coming to the deduction of his argument in particular, the
Catholic is not precisely to insist in the discoursing the falsehood thereof
(leaving this to the closure and end of the whole Dispute.) But he is to show,
that every true consequence or illation is drawn from two Propositions, of
which if either of them be not in the Scripture either expressly, or at least
secondarily by another illation, then does the Minister in urging such an
argument (as for the most part he does) fly from his undertaken task of
conuincing the Catholic point by the Scripture alone. Here then in the former
Syllogism: to wit, That body which is in Heaven, is not at the same time upon
the earth under the forms of Bread and Wine. But the body of Christ, according
to the Scripture, remains ever in Heaven; Therefore the body of Christ is not
here upon earth under the forms of Bread and Wine. You are to demand of your
Minister, whether the first Proposition (which is, That body which is in Heaven
is not at the same upon the earth etc.) be in express Scripture or no; if it
be, then let him prove it from some evident and express Text; if it be not,
then force him to confess so much; and next will him to prove the same
proposition at least by consequence out of some Text of Scripture. But he not
being able to prove the same by Consequence, then force him to confess so much
in the hearing of such as are present, who may clearly see, that the Minister
has twice or thrice already abandoned the Scripture in his form of proving.

Next give him liberty to prove the said Proposition by any other Means he
can. He having no other means of proving it, then in this sort from
Philosophy only; Every Body possesses or occupies at one only place; and
consequently it follows, that that Body, which is in Heaven is not at the
same time upon the earth under the forms of Bread and Wine. Here now our
Minister is afresh to be required to show his Mayor or first proposition
(which is this: Every body possesses or occupyeth at once but only one place)
out of the Scripture, which he granting, he cannot, let him confess so much
publicly. Then will him to prove it only by consequence from Scripture, the
which to perform he is no more able. And he then acknowledging so much,
suffer him to prove his said Proposition by any other Medium, he can. But
remember still, that according to this prescribed method, he be put to prove
his Mayor or Minor of his next ensuing argument (the choice of either of them
being left unto your self) first, by express Scripture, if not so, at least
by consequence from Scripture; and lastly, seeing by neither of the two former
means he can prove it, suffer him to prove it, as he may, still proceeding
with him punctually (according to these directions) in every argument, which
he shall make. Which course being kept with the Minister must needs confound
him in the presence of his absurd auditorie, since he shall be forced by this
means seven or eight times more (according to the number of arguments made by
him) to relinquish and abandon his main Principle erected by himself; to wit
that nothing is to believed as an Article of faith, but what receives it sole
proof from the written Word either in express Words, or at least by
necessary illation out of it.

3.
In the third place you are to demand (according to our method in the first
kind of Texts) of your Minister, being environed in these straits, whether he
is subject to error in his deductions and consequences of Scripture or no? If
he confess himself, that he may err therein, then can it not be an Article
of faith, which is proved thereby, since faith (as is noted above) cannot be
subject to error or mistaking: And then it follows, that it is lawful to
believe or not believe such an Article of faith, as not being proved from
Scripture, but by doubtful, and perhaps erroneous consequences. If he say, he
is not subject to such an error, then disclaymeth he from another point of his
doctrine as is before intimated) which teaches that the whole Church (then much
more himself, being but one illiterate fellow) may and actually has fowly
erred in Articles of faith, and deductions of Scripture.

4.
In the fourth place you are to demand, if the Scripture does affirm, that
what is deduced by necessary consequences out of it self (for here we suppose
for the time, that the Ministers Consequences from Scripture as necessary) be
Scripture, or the belief of such Consequences is to be holden, as an Article
of faith or no? Here I speak precisely of an Article of faith, since it is one
thing to say, that a Proposition is true, and to maintain the contrary is to
maintain a falsehood; another thing to auerre the said Proposition to be an
Article of faith. Now if the Scripture says, that every such consequence is to
be taken as Scripture, and the belief thereof as an Article of faith, then
desire the Minister, that he would show you where the Scripture so says of
consequences taken out of it self. If no such assertion is to be found in the
Scripture (as certainly there is no such) then how are those points to be
accounted Articles of faith (at least by the Ministers own doctrine) which he
proves from consequences of Scripture? since the Scripture says not in any
place, that either Consequences drawn from Scripture are Scripture (as indeed
they are not) or that such consequences taken from Scripture are to be
acknowledged, as Articles of faith; And yet our Minister and his party
generally teach, that those only are Articles of faith, which receive their
probation only from the Scripture: deadly wounding their own Religion with
their own hands, seeing all the reformation (as they term it) which they have
made of our Catholic faith, consists only in certain pretended sequences and
inferentiall deductions out of the Scripture. If the Minister here reply, that
diverse Catholic Authors (for all are not of that opinion) do teach, that
necessary and inevitable consequences deduced out of the written Word are to be
taken, as Articles of faith: then may you say, first, admitting so much yet
such consequences are not Scripture, and therefore what is proved only by them,
is proved by that, which is not Scripture: Next demand of your Minister, if
he grownd himself herein upon the authority of some particular Catholic
Writers; if he does, then follows it, that he grounds his Articles of faith
not upon the Scripture (which by his own doctrine he should do) but upon the
judgments of certain Men, and such, whom at other times he absolutely
rejects with all contempt and scorn. And here he is to note, that
Catholics, as not holding the written Word to be the sole rule of faith, may
without contradicting themselves, teach the foresaid opinion, which the
Protestant cannot defend without mainly impugning and crossing his former
doctrine of the Scripture being the sole Judge of faith; since (as I have said)
the Scripture in no place affirms, that consequences drawn out of it self,
are to be received as Articles of faith. If our Minister, secondly, reply,
that our Savior himself in Matthew 22. has argued from consequence of
Scripture, and proves thereby the Resurrection of the dead, you are to
answer thereto, first, that Christ our Lord by drawing any consequences from
Scripture, does make the same consequences to become Scripture; since
whatsoever he said, which is recorded by the Evangelists, is thereby become
Scripture: Secondly, say that it is an Article of faith to believe, that our
Savior concludes truly, whatsoever he deduceth from the Scripture by
consequence, since the Scripture witnesses, that he enjoyed an infallible
assistance of God; neither of which privileges can our poor Minister assume
to himself: Thirdly, say, it is true, that the Resurrection of the dead is an
Article of faith, but the Scripture says not that it is an Article of faith,
in that it is proved by consequence from Scripture, which is the point only
here questioned of.

5.
In the fifth place you may put your Minister in mind, that every true
consequence resulteth out of two Propositions put in good form of a
Syllogism, according to the true rules of Logic, but the Scripture delivers
not any rules, which are to be observed in the form of a Syllogism, or other
approved method of arguing; therefore it follows, that when the Minister
labors to prove his Articles by consequences of Scripture, he proves not
his Articles by only Scripture (since Scripture (as is said) speaks nothing
of the form of consequences) and consequently in his controversies of faith,
he relyeth not upon Scripture, as only Judge, (as he promised in the beginning
to do) but rather upon Aristotle, who sets down the true rules and
precepts to be observed in consequences, or at the most he relyeth upon the
Scripture joined with Aristotle, and then not upon Scripture only.

6.
In the sixth place, demand of your Minister, who shall judge of the
consequence, which he deduceth from Scripture, whether it be good or no: As for
example, in the former alleged illation concerning Christ's body in the
Eucharist, to wit: The body of Jesus Christ is in Heanen (as we read in the
Acts c. 3.) therefore it is not upon the earth under the forms of Bread and
Wine. The Protestant maintains this to be a good consequence, we Catholics
deny it. Who must now judge, whether it be a true, or a vicious consequence?
If the Scripture must be Judge hereof, then cause the Minister to allege some
Text of Scripture (which according to our Sectaries is the rule of all truth in
faith) affirming the Inference to be good. If the Protestant Minister himself
must judge of the goodness of the consequence (and yet there is no more reason
for him, then for the Catholic to judge thereof) who then sees not, that the
Protestant under the pretext of the holy Scripture makes himself sole and
last Judge of Scripture it self, of consequences drawn from the Scripture,
and finally of all Controversies in Faith and Religion? And here you may
further add, and demand how it is possible, that an ignorant Mechanical
fellow (who perhaps cannot write or read) can have true faith of any point,
that is deduced by consequence from Scripture, since he is not able to judge,
whether the Consequence be good or vicious (especially where one of the
Propositions is taken from the difficult grounds of Philosophy) and then much
less can he judge of the requisite forms of syllogismes. He must not here
insist upon the affiance he has of his Ministers learning, who deduceth this
Consequence, seeing by so doing he forsakes the former Principle of the
Protestants; to wit, that articles of Faith are to receive their proofs not
from Men, but only from the written Word of God. Again, seeing in the
Protestants censure, the whole Church of God may err (as is before urged) in
consequences drawn from Scripture, and in articles builded upon the said
consequences; much more then may any one Minister be deceived therein.

7.
In the last place of all, after the Catholic has thus fully showed by
several ways, that the Minister many times in his proofs has relinquished
the Scripture (whereupon before he pretended to rely) he may descend (if so
he find himself furnished with sufficient learning thereto) to examine the
truth or falsehood of the Propositions, from which the Ministers consequence
arises: though perhaps it were better judgment to rest satisfied with the
former Victory; as being more easily to be discerned by the ignorant
Auditorie, then otherwise it could be, being gained by long and difficult
disputes.

Now in the examining of the Propositions of the former Argument, for example,
which was this:

That body, which is in Heaven, is not upon the Earth.

But the body of Christ is in Heaven, as we read in the Acts, chap. 3.

Therefore the body of Christ is not upon the Earth, etc.

The Catholic (I say) is here to deny the first Proposition; to wit, That
body, which is in Heaven, is not upon the Earth: distinguishing for greater
satisfaction, that one and the same body cannot naturally, or by the ordinary
course of Nature, be at once both in Heaven and upon the Earth; but
supernaturally and by the Power of God it may be; as we hold that Christ's body
is supernaturally and by the omnipotency of God, both in Heaven, and under the
forms of Bread and Wine; where his body through Gods infinite power has no
reference to any external coextention of Place.

If the Minister do proceed on further against this distinction, still
drawing one argument after another out of Philosophy or other humane
authority, the Catholic may (when it please him) demand of the Minister,
whether all the Propositions, which he alleged in so many arguments, be in the
Scripture or no? if they be not (as certainly they are not, but are grounded
upon Philosophy or other humane learning) then follows it ineuitably, that
the Minister (besides his often leaving of Scripture before) has afresh
abandoned the Scripture many times after the distinction was given. And the
reason hereof is manifest, because he draws his Consequence from the written
Word of God, accompanied with some nine or ten Propositions, or more or less,
according to the number of the Propositions made: Which Propositions are not
found in the Scripture, nor can be proved from it, but are taken from
Philosophy or other humane literature. Of all which Propositions (besides that
nothing is proved by Scripture alone, as it is proved by the help of them) if
but any one be false, or through ignorance or otherwise misse-vnderstood; then
necessarily it follows, that the first proof and consequence, drawn from
Scripture (as implicitly and potentially relying upon the said false or
misse-vnderstood Proposition) be also false; and consequently, the article, as
proved thereby, can be no article of Faith. And thus far of this Example of
the Real Presence: yet for greater illustration of the Method here prescribed,
and that every ordinary judgment may become more capable thereof, I will
proceed further in exemplifying it in another point of Controversy,
maintained by the Protestants, to wit, that the Pope is Antichrist.

Now, for proof hereof, the Protestant Minister does commonly urge that Text
in the second of the Thessalonians, chap. 2. viz. Unless there come a revolt
first, and the Man of Sin be revealed, the son of Perdition, which is an
Adversary, and is extolled above all, that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he sits in the Temple of God, showing himself, as
though he were God, etc. Out of which words our Adversaries do teach, that the
true portrayture or delineation of the Pope may be taken, since (say they) this
former Text does even literally and expressly personate the Pope.

1.
Now here again, according to the former method, the Catholic is, first, to
demand of the Protestant Minister, who alleges this place, whether this Text
in clear and express words, or only but by his own presumed construction,
either names the Pope or speaks of him in direct terms. That it names not
him, it is evident: That it is to be understood of the Pope, we deny, but our
Minister affirms.

2.
Therefore, secondly, you are to require your Minister, to show by conference
of Scripture or otherwise, where the Scripture affirms, that the points
contained in this former Text, to wit, a Discession or revolt; the Man of
Sin; the son of Perdition; one, that is extolled above all, that is God;
and finally, one, that sits in the Temple of God, as God, are to be
understood of the Bishop of Rome: If the Minister say, there are some such
Texts auerring so much, will him to show them; if he grant, that there is not
any (as of necessity he must) then is the former Text wrested to the Pope,
only through the Ministers wilful misse-application and misse-interpretation.

3.
Thirdly, demand of your Minister, who shall judge whether this foresaid Text
be to be understood of the Pope or no. If the written Word must judge (as
according to his own Principle it ought) then cause him to produce some
passage of Scripture, warranting so much; if no other Scripture does warrant so
much, then rests it, that the Minister soly becomes Judge thereof; and so he
abandoneth the Scripture for Judge, and erecteth himself as Judge.

4.
Fourthly, enquire of your Minister (as before in the example of the Real
Presence) whether the Minister in his application or interpretation of this
Text of Scripture be subject to error or no? If he be, then follows it,
that the believing the Pope to be Antichrist (as being proved from the
interpretation of this Text of Scripture delivered by the Minister) is no
article of faith; since it is grounded upon that authority, which is subject
to error. If the Minister say, that he cannot err in this his construction,
then (as is before delivered) he swarueth from that general doctrine of the
Protestants, which teaches, that the whole Church of God (and then
consequently any one member) may and has foulely erred in construction of
Scripture, and in points of faith, deduced from such constructions.

5.
In the fifth and last place, examine his interpretation of the former Text more
particularly, and show (if your sufficiency of learning will extend so far,
for otherwise content your self with your former demands) how several points
in this Text cannot in any sort be applied to the Pope: and how the ancient
Fathers have interpreted the same Text in a most different sense from the
Ministers interpretation, and in the same sense which we Catholics deliver:
as for example, that the Revolt or Discession here specified, is not meant of
any revolt from truth of Doctrine (as the Protestants affirm) but a revolt or
departure from the obedience of the Roman Empire, as Catech. 15.
Cyril, In hunc locum.
Chrysostom, In Apolog. c. 32.
Tertullian, and In 2. Thessal. 2.
Ambrose, do expound these words.

Again that the Pope is not extolled above all, that is God, is evident, and
consequently, that the Pope is not Antichrist; since he acknowledges God and
Christ our Savior: and yet according to the judgments of L. 20. de Ciuit. Dei
c. 8.
Augustine, In c. 11. Danielis.
Jerome, L. 6. de ^^^^tate.
Hilarious and others, Antichrist shall in express and direct words deny
Christ, not acknowledging him in any sort, as the Redeemer of the World. That
the Pope confesses himself to be the servant of God (which by the former Text
Antichrist shall not do) and that therefore he sits not in the Temple of
God, as God, is also clear: And therefore answerably hereto we read, that
Damasus then Pope of Rome was called by In 1. Timoth. 3.
Ambrose: Rector domus Dei, the governor of the House of God: and that the
Bishop of Rome was in like manner styled by the Council of In Epist. ad Leonem.
Chalcedon: Custos Vineae, the keeper of Gods Vineyard.

Lastly, that by the Temple of God in the former Text is not to be understood
the Church of the Christian, but the Temple of the Jews, as we Catholics
maintain, and show out of the ancient Fathers, to wit, out of C. 23. in
Matthiam.
Hilarious Catech. 15
Cyril of Jerusalem, In c. 21. Lucae.
Ambrose, In hunc locum.
Chrysostom, L. 20. de ciuit. Dei. c. 19.
Austine, and Q. 12. ad Algasiam.
Jerome: All which Fathers do jointly teach, that the Temple of Solomon (which
was the Temple of the Jews) shall be the seat of Antichrist, and not Rome;
from which we gather that in the foresaid Fathers judgments this passage of
the former Text cannot be applied to the Pope.

This done. Cause your Minister to disprove your interpretation (taken from the
authority of the Fathers or otherwise) from the Scripture alone; and urge him
to show and set down such passages of Scripture, from which he may make show
to confirm his own Constructions and the Reasons thereof, and to refute your
interpretation and the Reasons thereof, which he shall find most impossible to
perform. And thus far of this Text, which the Protestants are accustomed to
produce, as immediately and expressly proving without any help of sequels, that
the Pope is Antichrist.

Now if your Minister should urge that place in the Apocalips, chapter 17. (as the
Protestants are wont strangely to insist therein) wherein S. John speaking of
the Whore of Babylon, says: It is that great City, which is seated upon seven
Hills, and has the government over the Kings of the earth. From which Text the
Protestants gather by way of inference and sequel, that seeing Rome is seated
on seven Hills, and that the Pope of Rome usurps (as they say) domination
over diverse Kings; And seeing that by the Whore of Babylon Antichrist is
understood, that therefore the Pope is from hence necessarily proved to be
Antichrist.

Now, here again, you are to recurre to your former Method practiced above in
answering to Texts of Scripture urged by way of consequence in disproofe of the
Real Presence.

And first demand of him, if for want of express and clear Texts he is forced
to fly to obscure places of consequences and illations. And if he pretend any
more evident proofs of Scripture in this point, wish him (omitting all
doubtful illations) to insist in them alone. But if he will persevere in
alleging this Text, then for greater perspicuitie you may draw it into an
argument in this form.

Antichrist or the Whore of Babylon is said in the Apocalips, chapter 17. to sit
upon seven Hills, and to tyrannize over the Kings of the Earth.

But the seat of the Pope (to wit, Rome) is placed on seven Hills, as all men
confess; and he usurps rule over Christian Kings and Princes.

Therefore the Pope is Antichrist or the Whore of Babylon.

2.
Next desire your Minister to prove from Scripture alone two points in your
Mayor or first Proposition: first, that by the Whore of Babylon in the 17. of
the Apocalypse, Antichrist is meant; secondly, that by the words, seven Hills,
we are to understand literally and plainly seven Hills, and not some other
thing shaddowed thereby; seeing in the Apocalypse most points are delivered in
figurative and Metaphorical words. I say, will him to prove these
constructions by some express Texts of Scripture; If he grant he cannot, then
cause him to acknowledge so much openly; And that done, will him to prove so
much by some consequence at least of Scripture: If he make show hereof, then
cause him to set down that other Text, from the which he seems to prove his
foresaid construction by consequence: And thus accordingly in his next new
argument and all others ensuing, you have the like liberty to deny any one
Proposition (I mean, which to you shall seem more false) and to cause him to
prove the denied Proposition, first, from express Scripture, then that
failing, from Scripture at least by way of consequence: in proouing of which
you shall doubtlesly find your Minister often to relinquish the Scripture, and
consequently to abandon his doctrine of the Scriptures sole Judge.

3.
In the third place (as in the former Texts I admonished) tell the Minister,
that if he be subject to error in these deductions from Scripture (to wit,
that by the Whore of Babylon Antichrist is meant, and that the words, seven
Hills, do here literally signify seven Hills) then can it be no Article of
faith, which is founded upon such doubtful proofs: if he be not subject to
any such error, then most insolently he assumeth that privilege to himself (I
mean the gift of not erring) which he grants not to the whole Church of God.

4.
In the fourth place will your Minister (as before we have taught) to prove
(which he never can do) that the Scripture says, that what is deduced
necessarily out of it self (for here you may suppose the deductions to be
necessary) ought to be taken as an Article of faith; though otherwise we should
grant, that the deductions be true.

5.
In the fifth, you may tell him, that seeing the Scripture speaks nothing of
the true and approved forms of Syllogismes, they being delivered by the rules
of Logic and Philosophy; that therefore admitting for the time your Ministers
Texts and Testimonies for probable, and truly applied; yet so far forth, as
concerns the forms of consequences (deduced from those Texts, and here
insisted upon by your Minister) the Scripture alone cannot assure us of the
soundness of them; and consequently it cannot assure us (to rest in the former
example) that by the Whore of Babylon in the 17. of the Apoc. Antichrist is
meant; or that by the seven Hills in the said Chapter we are literally to
understand seven material Hills, and consequently that the Pope is Antichrist.

6.
In the sixth, demand of your Minister, who must judge, whether this Exposition
given by him of the foresaid Text be good or no? If he say the Scripture must
judge, will him to allege some Text of express Scripture. If he says that
the Protestant Church or himself must judge, then put him in mind, that he
abandoneth his former doctrine of the Scriptures sole Judge of Articles of
faith, and flies to the authority of Man therein: Lastly, you may ask him,
if he would be content (as in reason he ought) that the authority of the
ancient Fathers might be admitted touching the foresaid exposition of the
former Text; If he would then follows it, that (besides his forsaking hereby
the Scripture as Judge) he would be convicted of error therein; seeing the
Fathers are traduced by the Protestants to be Patrones not only of other
Catholic Opinions, but also of this particular question, to wit, that the Pope
is not Antichrist.

7.
In the seventh and last place, if you be not content with his former
overthrow, you may (if your reading and learning shall enable you so far)
examine more particularly the passage of the former Scripture, and show from
the contexture of the place it self; first, that by the Whore of Babylon
Antichrist cannot possibly be understood; seeing in the same Chapter of
Apocalypse we read, that the ten horns of the Beast there described at the
coming of Antichrist, shall make the Whore of Babylon desolate, and consume
her with fire; for thus we there read: And the ten horns, which thou saw
upon the Beast, are they, that shall hate the Whore, and shall make her
desolate, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Now how can the
Whore here signify Antichrist or his seat, if at his coming she is to be
overthrown and demolished? Next you may show that the Expositions of the
Fathers are different, concerning what the Whore of Babylon here signifies;
yet not any of them can be applied to the Pope: for In Psalm. 26.
Austine, In hunc locum.
Aretas, Ibidem.
Haymon, and S. Bid do understand by the Whore, which sits on seven Hills,
and has domination over the Kings of the earth, not Rome, but the universal
City of the Devil; which in the Scripture is often called Babylon, and is
opposed to the City of God, which is his Church, and called Jerusalem. And by
the seven Hills, these Fathers understand the general state of all proud Men,
and chiefly of earthly Kings. But L. contra Iudaeos.
Tertullian, and Epist. 17. ad Marcell.
Jerome do indeed mean by the Whore of Babylon, Rome; to wit, Rome Ethnike,
as it worshipped Idols and persecuted Christians; but not Rome Christian; which
Exposition does nothing prejudice the Pope or us Catholics.

Here now if your Minister will not rest satisfied with these Expositions,
will him to refute all or any of them from the Scripture alone, as he has
obliged himself by his own doctrine to do in acknowledging the Scripture for
sole Judge of all Religious Controversies.

To conclude, you may for the close of all tell your Mi-Minister, that rhis and
the other Text alleged are so far from proving the Pope to be Antichrist;
that diverse learned Protestants (as holding the proofs deduced from them to be
most in consequent) do maintain, that Antichrist is not yet come.

Of this Opinion, to wit, that Antichrist is not yet come (and consequently
that the Pope is not Antichrist) is Zanchius, In Epist. Paul. ad Philip.
Boloss. and These. p. 246.
and Franciscus In his Book entitled Antichristus sieve Prognostica finis
mundi, p. 74.
Lambertus, both markable and learned Protestants. And from hence (you may tell
him) it proceeds, that Mr. Dove in his Sermon touching the second coming of
Christ thus writes: Some Protestants make a doubt, whether Antichrist be yet
reueiled or no. A point so evident that our English Puritanes in their mild
defense of the silenced Ministers Supplication to the High Court of Parliament,
do charge and censure most severely our English Protestants (besides for other
things disliked by them) for teaching, that the Pope is not Antichrist.

And thus far of this second example, and of the Method to be holden herein
in disputing with your Minister; where you are to aduertize him, that seeing in
his Disputes he must rely much upon conference of Scriptures, that this
course is holden most uncertain even in the judgments of the Learned
Protestants, to wit, of D. L. de Eccles. contra Bellar. contr. 2. q. 4. p. 22.
Whitakers (above alleged) of Vbi supra.
Beza and of Mr. So urged by Hooker in the Preface of his Eccles. Polity, p.
28.
Hooker. And here according to this method of answering, I could wish the
Catholke to be well practiced in the Question it self of the Scripture being
sole Judge, when the Protestant seeks to prove the same only from Scripture;
seeing this Question contains implicitly in it self all other Questions and
Controversies of faith.

Now, against this former Method of disputing and answering, if it should be
objected by any, that the learned Catholic when he maintains at any time the
part of the opponent, stands exposed to the same danger (and so, dum capit,
capitur) to the which the Protestant in this Discourse is said to lie open:
since the Catholic often insisteth in consequences drawn from Scripture;
urges Reasons deduced from Natural or Moral Philosophy; warranteth his own
Expositions of Scripture by the testimony of Men, to wit, of the Pope and
general Councels; and so Meteor-like (in regard of Divine and Humane
Authorities) hangs between Heaven and Earth. To this I answer, that learned
Catholic is not prejudiced by this my Method.

And first concerning Consequences drawn from Scripture, though the Catholic
does freely embrace them (as not holding the express Scripture alone to be
the rule of faith) yet so far forth, as concerns only Scripture, he
insisteth not in them alone, but he is able to produce express plain, and
literal passages of Scripture proving his Articles of faith without any help
of Scripturall consequences, though never so necessary; Of which kind of proof
the Protestant is wholly deprived, and therefore flies for refuge only to
supposed illations from Scripture, or to some obscure passages thereof, which
in express terms speak nothing of the Question, for which they are alleged;
but only are strangely detorted by his most wilful mis-application.

For example of the perspicuous Texts of Scripture in defense of our Catholic
faith, I will insist in some few of them for some delibation and taste of the
rest.

And first concerning the Real Presence (before mentioned) we urge those
plain words of Christ: To Mat. 26.
wit, this is my body, etc. This is my blood, etc.

In like sort for the Primacie of Peter we urge that passage: Thou Mat. 16.
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it.

For the not erring of the Universal Church we insist (besides in the former
Text) in those words of the 1. Tim. 3.
Apostle, Who calls the Church: the pillar and foundation of truth. How then
can the Church err?

That Priests may truly forgive sins, we rest upon the promise of Christ made
to his Apostles (who were Priests) and in them to his Successors: Whose sins
John 20.
you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you shall retain,
they are retained. What more evident?

That Baptism truly remitteth Original Sin (contrary to the Protestants
Doctrine) we prove from that most perspicuous place: John 3.
Except a Man be borne again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Finally (to omit infinite other passages of Scripture of the like conuincing
euidency for our Catholic Articles and Religion) that Works do justify and
not only Faith, we produce Saint James, saying in express words, thus: James
3.
Do you not see, that a Man is justified by Works, and not by Faith only? How
literally and punctually he proves the Point controuerted.

In all which places we find the Catholic Conclusion it self (for which they
are urged) literally set down; and our Adversaries therefore, as acknowledging
so much, are forced to fly to figurative constructions of them. Neither do we
need to forge any strange or mystical construction of them (as the Protestant
in his allegations of Scripture is accustomed to do) saying, only by our own
warrant: This the Scripture here would say etc. or, this is the meaning of such
a Text etc. but it suffices for us, to press only the most obuious, familiar,
and literal sense of the said Texts.

Now to that second part of the former Objection, where it is urged, that the
Catholic insisting in Proofs drawn from Philosophy, or from humane
authorities of the Pope, Fathers, Councels, and the like, stands obnoxious to
the same inconveniences, whereunto the Protestant by vrgeing proofs of like
nature, is judged in this discourse to run.

I answer to this, first, that seeing the Catholic (notwithstanding all due
reverence and honor to the Scripture) acknowledges not the Scripture to be
the sole rule or square of Faith, that therefore he may seek to prove his
articles from other testimonies, then only Scripture.

Secondly, I say, that the Catholic believes not any point as an article of
faith, because it receives it proof from humane authorities; since they are
holden as moral inducements only of faith; the Church of God being the
Propounder of such divine Mysteries, and the revelation of them made by God,
the true Formal, and last Cause of our belief of them.

Lastly, I answer, that the supreme Bishop or general Council, from whom the
Catholic draws his authority, are not simply humane authorities, but withal
divine and supernatural. Since the one is the head of the Church, the other
the mystical body of Christ; to both which himself has Mat. 16. 1. Tim. 3.
given infallible assistance in points touching Man's salvation, and has Mat.
18.
threatened, that they, who finally shall deny this assistance, shall never
enter into the spiritual Canaan. And thus much touching the solution of the
former objection.

Hitherto we have discoursed of the Method, which is to be observed by an
unexperienced Catholic with a ready and prepared Protestant Scripturist;
where, if we deeply weigh, what can be the last hope of such a Disputation, we
shall find, that the final resolution of all would run to this point; to
wit, to know what credit and affiance is to be given to certain exorbitant
constructions of Scripture, forged against all true contexture of the passages
themselves, and crossed by the reverent Antiquity of the purest Ages; by which
course the Protestant stands no less chargeable in believing of errors, then
in not believing the truth. So as this must be in all likelihood the issue of
all: for so long as the Protestant Minister perseuers in alleging of
Scripture, so long he expects, that we should reverently entertayne that sense
and construction of it, which his worthy-selfe vouchsafes with wonderful
pertinacie of judgment (the very Crisis of all Heretical disease) to impose
upon it: thus making himself in the end sole Judge both of the Scripture, and
of all Controversies from thence to be proved. For to admit our expositions of
the Scripture, he scorns, solemnly affirming, that it were openly to
patronize superstition; to follow the judgments of the ancient Fathers in
their interpreting of it, he is no more willing, since he is content to charge
and insimulate (though truly) the said Fathers within the defending of our
supposed errors: And hence it is, that diverse of our Adversaries have
disgorged out of their impure stomachs most Serpentine and venomous speeches
against those Lamps of Gods Church. And answerably hereto we find Luther (the
right hand of Satan) thus to belch forth in his Inuectiues against the Fathers
of the Primitive Church, saying: Tom. 2. Wittenberg. An. 1551. l. de sermon.
arbitr. p. 434.
The Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the
Scriptures, they have erred all their life time; and unless they were amended
before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church.
Thus Luther.

Doctor Whitaker says: Cont. Duraeum, l. 6. p. 423.
The Popish Religion is a patched Couerlit of the Fathers errors sewed
together.

The pretended Archbishop of Canterbury: In his defense to the answer of the
Admonit. p. 473.
How greatly were almost all the Bishops of the Greek Church, and Latin also,
for the most part, spotted with doctrines of Freewill, of Merit, of Invocation
of Saints, and such like.

Beza: Epist. Theol. epist. 1. p. 5.
Itaque dicere nec immerito etc. I have been accustomed to say, and I think
not without just cause, that comparing our times with the ages next to the
Apostles, we may affirm, that they had more conscience and less knowledge,
and we more knowledge and less conscience. So Beza.

Melancton: In 1. Cor. c. 3.
Presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the
doctrine concerning the justice of Faith, increased Ceremonies, and devised
peculiar Worships.

Finally, L. de notis. p. 476.
Peter Martyr speaking of our Catholic doctrines, thus says: So long as we
do insist upon Councels and Fathers, we shall be always conversant in the
same Errors.

But who is more desirous to see at large, how the Fathers of the Primitive
Church are, first, confessed by Protestants, to teach every particular article
of our Catholic and Roman Faith. Secondly, rejected by the Protestants for
teaching such doctrines. Thirdly, abusiuely alleged by the Protestants, for
the more debasing of the said Fathers, let him peruse viz. tract. 1. and 2.
throughout.
that most exquisite and excellent Work (the very scourge of our modern
Heretics) styled, The Protestants Apology of the Roman Church; from which, I
acknowledge, that I have discerped these last few testimonies.

In this manner now you see, we find not only Virtue, Learning, and
Antiquity, to be most shamefully traduced by Vice, Ignorance, and Innovation,
but also our selves, consequently by reason of our refuge made to the Fathers
Commentaries for the exposition of the Scripture, to be mightily wronged by
our Adversaries, as if under the pretext of Antiquity we labored to
introduce Novelty. Now, from all this it necessarily follows, that in the
rigid censure of these seven Judges, the ancient Fathers (those Champions, I
mean, of the true Israelites, against the wicked Philistians, whose pens
were peculiarly guided by God to the pursuit and profligations of future
Heresies) did most foulely contaminate and defile the beauty of the holy
Scripture, with their erroneous Commentaries (since they believed nothing, but
what (as they thought) was warrantable, at least not repugnant to those divine
writings) thus distilling by their misconstruction of it (to use our
Adversaries own phraze) our Superstitious and Babylonian Religion. But since
it imports much to the picking out of the true sense of Scripture, alleged
by the Protestant, against us, and consequently to the drift of this small
Treatise, to show, whether it is more probable, that the Fathers (whose joint
interpretation of Scripture is ever coincident, and conspires with ours) should
rather not err in their exposition of it, then our nouelizing Sectaries;
therefore I will more largely set down (which shall serve as the Catastrophe
to close up this Discourse) such aggravating circumstances on both sides,
which, so farre-forth, as they concern the interpreting of Scripture, may
justly seem to advance the Fathers, and depresse or vnderualiew our Sectaries;
they being such as in a clear and dispassionate eye, or in the libration of an
eauen and stable hand, shall be able (I hope) to weigh much, and cause in this
point an euidency of Credibilitie at least, if not an euidency of Truth, and to
admonish us to call to mind that counsel in Job: Job c. 8.
Diligenter inuestiga patrum memoriam: and again, Ibidem.
Interroga generationem pristinam. But to begin.

1.
The Fathers lived in the times near Ignatius and Dionysius, the Apostles
Scholars; Just. Martyr, Irenaeus, in the second Age. Tertull. Origin, Cyprian,
in the third. Athanas. Ambr. Hilar. Basil. Nazianz. in the fourth. Chrysostom.
Ierom. Augustine. in the fifth.
to Christ, some conuersing with his Apostles, others with their Scholars; and
therefore the more easy for them to know, what expositions of Scripture were
first delivered, and what Faith first preached. Add to this, that the very
practice of their Religion then used (the Church then remaining, by the
acknowledgement of our Adversaries, in her integrity of faith) served, as a
Comment to them of the Scriptures. Our Sectaries appeared so many ages after,
and indeed so late (to wit, in these our own Canicular and unlucky days) as
that their very writings, wherein they first vented forth their doctrine, may
be said to be, as yet, scarce dry; Men, at this present living, who can
remember their first revolt and insurrection: so evident it is, that their
belief was never heard of before the deplorable apostasy of Luther; Luther,
the Adam of his unfortunate posterity, upon whom is derived, by his fall, an
Original Contumacy (as I may term it) against the Church of Rome; their
perdition following ineuitably, except they baptize themselves in the tears of
an unfeigned and contrite submission. But to proceed.

2.
The Fathers (for no small number of them) even from their Cradle and Mothers
breasts did suck those Ignat. Epiphan. Athanas. Basil. Nazianzen. Chrysostom.
Cyrill. Theodoret. etc. were Greek Fathers, in which tongue the new Testament
was written.
tongues, wherein a great part of the Scripture was first written; and
therefore they are much aduantaged (the Letter being the shell of the sense)
for the picking out of the true meaning thereof. Our Sectaries, what insight
they have in the said tongues, is only by Art and industry (which ever
subscribeth to Nature) whereof if we compare them with the Fathers herein,
they will appear to be but young and Alphabeticall Linguists: which disparitie
of theirs must needs be great, since the Tongues in this respect may be truly
termed the Porters of Learning, or the Mines, wherein the riches of knowledge
are found.

3.
The Fathers delivered their sentence and interpretations of Scripture, many
ages before the points of Faith and Doctrine (for which they were urged) were
ever questioned of, and therefore what they writ, was free from all partiality
and prejudice of judgment; the false glass, which ever reflecteth back the
sight of any thing in an untrue form. Our Sectaries, now after their Religion
has once got one wing, do after shape such constructions of Scripture, as are
most suitable to their Positions: thus, where in reason Faith is to be framed
according to the sense of Scripture, here with them the sense of Scripture is
to be measured by their faith.

4.
The Fathers, though writing in different Ages, different Countries, different
Tongues, upon different occasions (like the earth, which is most stably settled
in an unstable place) even with wonderful agreement, consent, and constancy
(an infallible Character of Gods holy Spirit, for, non est Deus dissentionis, 1
Cor. 14.
sed pacis) do interpret all the chief passages of Scripture, urged either by
us or our Adversaries, in one and the same sense; in regard whereof it is less
probable, that God should permit so many, so virtuous, so learned men jointly
to err therein. Our Sectaries indeed inter-league and jump together in
wresting Gods Word from all Catholic sense, but that done, then begin their
irreconciliable wars and disagreements, in seeking to appropriate the
several Thus for example in that place of Matthew. c. 16. Tues Petrus, by the
word Rock, Erasmus understands every one of the faithful, Calvin Christ,
Luther and the Centurie writers do understand thereby the confession of Faith.
Constructions to the upholding of rich ones peculiar and different opinion:
thus they being instantly resolved in themselves from whom to fly, but not
whom to follow: a Document to teach us, that Heresy is ever in labor with
Discord, and Union against the true Church presently ingenders Disunion within
the false Church; for it is certain, that the several Doctrines of our
Adversaries could yet never be wounded up in one general Confession.

5.
The Fathers did cut of all lets and impediments, which might hinder either
Devotion or Study (the two wings, wherewith Man's understanding mounts up to the
speculation of the highest Mysteries.) Hence it proceeded, that they embraced
perpetual Chastity, contemned all Riches and Honors, chastized their bodies
with Fasting, Prayer and other spiritual Disciplines (thus according to the
Alchymist, making Mortification immediate to precede Vinification) so as this
course of abandoning the World (besides Gods special assistance to all such
truly Noble and Heroical Designs) cleereth and enlighteneth much the
speculatiue power of the Soul, (the only faculty proper for knowledge)
otherwise ouer-clowded with the mists of wordly cares, anxieties, and
distractions. Our Sectaries, though commonly at the first they ever have the
Gospel in their mouths (thus acting the Prologue with the Spirit, but the
Epilogue or Conclusion with the Flesh) are in the end become so loath to be
spotted with the least aspersion or touch of Superstition, (since Osiander in
Epitom. Cent. 4. p. 99 and p. 100. and 103.
no better they repute the Fathers lives) as that they prostitute themselves as
Drugges to the Word; being become even breathless through their earnest
pursuit of Temporal pleasures, dignities, and sensuality; and raueling out
their whole time in the gaining and enjoying thereof; but the less marvel,
since it is written, Romans 8.
that those who are after the flesh, favor the things of the flesh.

6.
The Fathers (I mean diverse of them) through Gods boundless Omnipotency,
vntwisting at his pleasure the thread of Nature (for most easy it is to that
powerful hand, which first created Nature, to dis-nature all things created)
have wrought many stupendous and astonishing Miracles: some whereof were done
in proof and confirmation of their Vide Cyprian. Sermon. de lapsis. Ambr. de
obitu Satyr. c. 7. Optat. l. 2. contra Donatist. Nazian. in Cypr. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. Chrysostom. l. contra Ge^til. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 14.
Religion; and though the rest of them performed did not fall plumbe and
immediately upon the strengthening of their doctrine, yet they all demonstrate,
that the exhibitors of such were of a true faith and doctrine; since God is not
able (this disabilitie in him is power, this weakness, strength) to concur
miraculously with a man of an erroneous religion; especially when such
proceedings might be calumniously wrested to the supporting of falsehood; In
the number of these Miracles wrought by them, and the raising up of the dead,
the supernatural curing of diseases, the certain foretelling of accidental
events merely depending of Man's Will, and the like: the only sealing
arguments, and such as most forcibly check Man's incredulity. Our Sectaries
(though emulous of the Catholic Church her glory herein) could never truly
vaunt of restoring to life, or miraculously curing a dead Fly or a scabd
Horse: Nay, most of them disclayme D. Morton in his Apology: Cath. part. 1. l.
2. c. 25. Sutcliff in his Examination of the Survey of D. Kellison, and almost
all other Protestants.
so far in this point, that they boldly avouch (only thereby to
dis-countenance those of Catholic times that all true Miracles have ceased
ever since the Apostles days: and error controuled by the most grave
testimonies of ancient Authors, and by the certain experience of these our
times: add hereto, that it were the greatest Miracle, for Gods hands so many
Ages together to be manicled and tied (especially where so often just occasion
has been presented) from working of Miracles.

7.
To conclude, the Fathers (I speak of sundry of them) for professing only
their faith and Religion have endured with invincible Fortitude and immooueable
Resolution (through the particular assistance of the Holy Ghost) most exquisite
torments; diverse of them in the most tempestuous and rugged state of the Church
conquering the Persecutors cruelty by their own patient suffering of
Martyrdom and As Ignatius, Polycarpus, Cyprian, and others.
death: death, which, because their birth to Immortality: Tertull. l. de Anima.
Paradisiclauis, sanguis Martyris. Our Sectaries (excepting some few
Mechanical fellows burnt here at home, for their obstinacy, in Queen Mary's
time) are so far from suffering any pressures by profession of their faith,
as that most of them have made their Religion a rush to the worldly
preferments, they by it only enjoying (as by want of it losing) riches,
honors, aduancements, and other (as I may term them) such glorious miseries;
so as, perhaps, it may be said, that their greatest persecution (considering
Gods secret judgments and future punishments) is, that they have not tasted
any persecution; and their most dangerous misery, that they have lived wholly
exempt from misery. And thus far now touching the ballancing of the ancient
Fathers with our present Sectaries.

But to come to an end of this short Mescelene or compounded Treatise; here I
remit to all impartial judgments the consideration of two Points, proved in
these few Leaves. First and primatiuely, that though the Protestant sets
down a Basis or groundwork of his Religion (and vantingly undertakes
accordingly) that all articles of Faith are to receive their proof only from
the sacred Scripture (which holy Writings we Catholics affect with all due
respect, reverence, and honor) yet is he not able to prove the points of his
own faith, or to impugn ours, from the said head only; but is forced, after
he has framed one or two Syllogismes or Arguments to fly from Scripture,
either to some humane authority, or to his own private spirit for his
interpreting the Scripture; bearing himself herein like to the Ostrich, which
(as the Prophet says) is great of feathers, but short of flight. Secondly,
(and but incidently) when as the Protestant makes his own particular
judgment, the last and highest Tribunal, from whence his exposition of
Scripture receaues it warrant; and whereas this his construction mainly
impugneth the construction given by the ancient Fathers (since the Fathers
maintayning our Catholic doctrine, even in the Protestants acknowledgement,
must consequently maintain our Catholic sense of the Scripture) that the
Fathers through diverse privileges found in them (but wanting in the Protestant
Ministers) are much aduantaged above our Adversaries, for the delivering of the
intended sense of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture: And this made manifest by
all probable and moral inducements: so as Reason it self does hear reason,
and plead in behalf of the Fathers, and the light of Nature proclaymeth to us
in this point their light of Grace; all such others, as maintain the
contrary, being through their wilful relinquishing of all natural judgment
and understanding herein, worthily comprehended within the admonition or
reprehension of the regal Prophet:

Psalm. 31.
Nolite fieri sicut Equus aut Mulus,quibus non est intellectus.

FINIS.

