THE IMITATION OF CHRIST, Divided into four Books.

Written in Latin by THOMAS a KEMPIS, And the Translations of it Corrected and
amended by W. P.



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the famous University, for
Edw. Forest. 1639.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God WALTER LORD BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, Prelate
of the Noble order of the GARTER, my singular good Lord and Patron.
Right reverend Father in God, and my very singular good Lord.
SETting aside more serious studies, and being desirous to recreate my self
with some books of meditation, it was my good hap to meet with this little tract
Of the Imitation of Christ: And having looked over some of it, I began to admire
both the plainness and the pythinesse of it; being so well fitted to the
capacity of the ignorant, and yet not unworthy the perusal of the learned,
insomuch that I find it to be true by mine own experience, that the high
co^mendations so many have given of it, is not without just cause. For I must
confess to the glory of God and mine own comfort, that I have profited more in
the course of Christianity, by the perusal of this one small book of devotion,
then by turning over many volumes of controversies. For I found in it great
motives to self-denial, humility, obedience and devotion, to humility in our
selves, to obedience toward superiors, to devotion toward God. I then began
to enquire whether it were translated or no, and I find it is translated into
all languages, and into english several times, yet could none of these
altogether please me; for I perceaved some of them to stick too close to the
letter, and others fly too far off: I have therefore taken a little pains to
fit it to our own language and yet not leave the author too much. And because
the Author thereof was too much addicted to one side, I made bold to leave out
that which might offend any Christian palate, and have endeavored that it
should look with an equal and unpartiall eye upon all good Christians. And it
were to be wished that we had more books in this kind, and that we did
especially apply our selves to such kind of books; for men now adays are
immoderatly wedded to their own opinions, they labor to dispute well, not to
live well, and delight more in books of controversy to strengthen them on that
side they are, then in books of devotion to teach them what each good Christian
should be.

So that the admonition of the Apostle was never more seasonable then now, Let
your moderation be known unto all men. Phil. 4. 5. That therefore others may be
the better encouraged to peruse this so plain and profitable a book, I have
presumed to shelter it under your Lordships gracious protection. And to whom
could I more fitly dedicate so pious a work then to your Lordship, in whom
humility piety, and devotion, joined with a singular temper and moderation are
so well met together. The assured confidence of all these does give great
assurance, that you will favorably accept of the weak endeavors of

Your Lordships humbly devoted Chaplain WILLIAM PAGE.

To the Christian READER.
ANd to whom should I more fitly commend this pious work of the Imitation of
Christ, then to thee good Christian Reader whosoever thou art, and wheresoever
thou dwell; I say wheresoever thou dwell, for nowadaies it is an hard
matter to find a good Christian: the Prophet bid them run to and fro, through
the streets of Jerusalem, and seek in the broad places thereof if they could
find a man, Ier. 5. 1. They were not so much troubled to find out a man as we
shall be to find out a Christian. We so busy our selves about Controversies,
that we forget to be good Christians. There was a time indeed when the name was
first given at Antioch, Act. 11. 26. that it was then well set by; but this
lasted not long, for presently after they fell a sideing amongst themselves,
and one cried I am of Paul, another I am of Apollos, and another I am of
Cephas, and another I am of Christ, and much ado had S. Paul 1. Cor. 1. 12. to
appease these factions: for presently after they fell to them again, and have
so continued, yea and increased in them even unto this day. But Christ is not
divided, says the same Apostle, neither is this to imitate Christ the God of
love and peace, who loved us when we were his enemies; and the Apostle makes a
good inference of imitation upon it. 1. John. 4. 11. Beloved, if God so loved
us we ought also to love one another: Nay as though there were nothing else
required of a good Christian, and a follower of Christ, our savior says, Ioh.
13. 15. by this shall all men know you are my disciples, if you have love one
to another. Seeing then this is the proper and peculiar badge and cognizance of
a disciple of Christ to love his fellow disciples, what preface would be fitter
here, then an introduction to all Christians to be in peace and charity one
with another.

But alas how unwelcome a task is it, to entreat of peace and charity! For he
that goes about to part a fray, in all likelihood will have blows on both
sides, especially where the opposites and combatants are fierce and violent, he
that is eager on any one side shall be sure to find some fast friends, but he
that bewaileth the miserable distraction of the whole, and does but set a foot
forward to make up the breach, will find few to take his part, but shall be
sure to have many about his ears: And therefore we may observe that presently
after our Savior had said, Blessed are the peacemakers, Mat. 5. 9. 10. he
immediately adds, Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness
sake: knowing well enough that if a man will undertake to be a peacemaker, he
must presently prepare to suffer persecution, and I know none greater then that
of peacemakers in religion for they suffer on all sides, either by sharp and
bitter words, or by scoffing and jeering speeches. For although the hot-spurres
of these times be at deadly fewde and bitter enmity one with another, yet will
they like Herod and Pilate, join together and muster up their forces against
those who labor any kind of pacification and desire to be quiet in the land.
We is me (says David Ps. 120. 4. 5 6. that I am constrained to dwell with
Mesech, and to have mine habitation amongst the tents Kedar: my soul has long
dwelt among them, that be enemies unto peace. I labor for peace but whn I
speak unto them thereof, they make them ready to Battle. Never could the pious
and peaceable Christian more truly cry out then now, My mothers Children were
angry with me. Cant. 1. 5. A strange speech to call them Mothers children: had
it not been a more easy and familiar way to say my Brethren or my Sisters were
angry with me (for so they must be, if they were her Mothers Children) why then
does she make such an involved speech of it, My mothers children were angry
with me. True indeed though they cannot choose but be her brethren, (as being
her Mothers children) yet she does not, she dares not call them brethren, for
they will not acknowledge it, they hate the name of brethren, and make
themselves professed enemies, and therefore she is forced to leave out this
loving and affectionate compellation of brethren, and say in a kind of strange
phrase, My mothers children were angry with me. Yet should no man be
discouraged, from performing so worthy a duty, for though there be a
per^ecution that attends upon peacemakers here, yet is there a blessing
promised them hereafter. And seeing our blessed Lord and Master Christ Jesus,
when he was about to leave his Apostles and Disciples, he left unto them this
golden legacy: Ioh. 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, O
how well would it become us his Priests to be men of peace, to write for the
peace of Jerusalem, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for they shall prosper
that love it. Psalm. 122. 6.

I will begin this exhortation unto peace and Charity, from that common name
which we all bear in that we are called Christians, and do all pretend to
imitate Christ in our doctrine and practice. There was a time indeed when this
name was much taken notice of and great danger for any man to own it, when
they had no other argument then, nor any other cause of their cruel
persecutions, but to hear a man confess Christianus sum, I am a Christian:
But when these storms were blown over, and the Church began to be in peace,
this name of Christian was not so much regarded. And yet methinks the very name
of Christian is not altogether to be contemned, for, unless I am deceived
whosoever has but this appellation may challenge a brotherhood with me, for in
Scripture I find a brother and a Christian to be the very same, so that
whosoever is a Christian will necessarily be my brother. 1. Cor. 7. 12. 13. If
any brother has a wife, says the Apostle, that believes not, and she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away; and if the woman has an
husband which believes not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him: But if the unbelieving depart let him depart, a brother or a sister
is not in bondage in such cases. Where the Apostle plainly shows that a
brother and a sister are such as are Christians and opposite only to Infidels
and unbelievers. Neither ought we to take that exhortation of Saint Paul 1.
Pet. 2. 17. when he says love the brotherhood, in any narrower sense, but that
we should love every one that is a Christian, not only because he agrees with
me in some opinions concerning religion, but I ought to love him in that
respect he is a Christian, and professes Christ crucified. Neither ought we to
love him thus with an ordinary kind of love, in wishing him well and doing him
good, for so we ought to love and do good to all, but there is a more strict
tie of love that lies upon us Christians one to another; and therefore although
the Apostle wishes us to do good to all men, yet especially to the household
of faith, Gal. 6, 10. that is, to such as be Christians.

Were this precept of the Apostle practiced as it ought to be, there would not
be so much uncharitableness, nor peradventure so much dissension amongst
Christians. Why can we not consider one another as united in this blessed name
of Christian, and set aside for a time those names of faction and division^ why
should we not rejoice awhile in those things wherein we agree, and not always
be wrangling about those things wherein we differ? Of what moment those
opinions are wherein we disagree I am not able to determine; this I dare be
bold to say, that the points wherein we are friends are of far greater
consequence, then those are wherein we fall out. And yet we so eagerly contend
one with another, and damn each other to the pit of hell, as though our
differences were very important, and our agreement not worth the talking of.
For my part I should be loath to exclude any visible Christian Church from all
hopes of salvation, and if I must needs offend, I had rather give account to a
merciful God for too much mildness and Charity, then too much fierceness and
severity: yet I hope to make it appear that my opinion of Charity shall not
exceed the bounds of verity.

A chief cause of the continuance of these dissentions is, that men mind not
so much the common cause of Christianity, as their own particular engagements,
nor stndy how they may agree one with another, as how to uphold the side they
are on: whereas would they set aside prejudice and partiality and cast an
equal eye upon all the Churches, they would not spy so many faults abroad,
and so few at home, but would freely confess there might be greater concord
amongst Christians then now there is. No other unity do I labor for at this
time but that of charity, that Christians would not for some differences in
opinion, pronounce such an heavy sentence upon one another, as is that of
Damnation. If God should deal with us as we deal with one another, if he
should censure us all, as we censure one another, I know not who should be
saved: The Papist damning the Protestant, and some among us the Papists, and
both of them any other that shall differ from them both. But my hope is, and my
hearty prayer to God shall be, that he would be more merciful to all these
then they are one to another. When I consider with my self the manifold
distractio^s of Christians about Religion, and the great fiercenes and violence
used on all sides, every one thinking his own opinion truest, and consequently
damning all others that differ from him, I could not but call to mind that
prophecy of our blessed Savior Mat. 24. 12. concerning these latter and worser
times, Because iniquity shall abound (says he) the love of many shall wax
cold: for although charity of it self be of a hot and diffusive nature, yet
now clean contrary to the nature of it, it is in most men grown cold; it being
the nature of cold to contract and combine to congeale and draw into a narrow
room; thus is it now with our charity. For whereas like the heat in our
natural bodies, it should diffuse it self into all the members thereof, unto
the whole Christian Church, yet I know not how it has, taken cold, for men
contract their love now into a very small compass and narrow room, that is,
to no more then to such who jumpe with them in the same opinion about Religion,
leaving others who differ from them, to nothing but death and damnation. For
not only in several countries but in the same Kingdom, in the same City, nay
in the same family there are several Religions, or at the least several
opinions about Religion reigning: So that what Saint Austine complained of in
his time is truly verified in these, Epist. 147. Thou see (says he) with how
great and miserable distraction Christian houses and families are divided and
troubled; husbands and wives can agree well enough to go to bed together, but
they cannot agree to go to Christ's Altar together: There they swear peace one
to another, but here they can have no peace. Parents and children live well
enough together in one house of their own, but one house of Gods will not hold
them both. Their desire is that those should succeed them in their own
inheritance, who yet think they have no inheritance with Christ. Masters and
servants divide the common Lord and Master of us all, who yet took upon him the
form of a servant, that so he might free all: I say never more fully verified
then in these days; For in how many families shall we observe this great
division, the husband goes to Church and the wife stays at home, or the wife
goes to Church and the husband stays at home, and so between parents and
children, Masters and servants. The father will give his son the portion of
his land, who yet thinks he shall have no portion in the land of the living.

The great division of the Christian world, was first between the East and West
Churches, and this West has been since subdivided into the Roman and the
reformed Religion: So that the division amongst Christians which is
considerable is but into three parts, the Eastern, the Romanist, and our
Reformed. All Christian Churches, and so far forth the members of them
brethren and sisters; and not only Christian Churches, but also Catholic and
Orthodoxe in these points wherein they agree one with another, and with the
Primitive Church. Why may it not be with these Churches as it was with those
seven Churches of Asia which S. John wrote unto, in which there were some
things commendable, and other things amiss? they were encouraged in the former
and reproved for the latter. And although some of them were better then others,
yet you shall scarce find one of them to which he does not say, habeo adversus
to pauca, I have a few things against thee: And yet we shall find that Christ
himself was in the midst of all these seven Churches, for he was in the midst
of the seven golden candlesticks, Revel. 1. 13. and had in his right hand
seven stars. Revel. 1. 16. For writing to the Church of Ephesus, he makes
this one of his attributes: Apoc. 21. These things (says he) who holds the
seven stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks. So that our Savior walked in the midst of all these Churches,
even in that lukewarm Church of Laodicea, which he threatened to spue out of
his mouth. And let Rome tell us never so much of her infallibility and unerring
chair, yet questionless there is none of our Churches, no not the best of
them, that our Savior may not say to her, habeo adversus to pauca, I have a
few things against thee. And as those several Churches, though some of them
very faulty, yet were all several members of Christ, and helped to make up one
body: so all those Churches, though some of them much to blame, yet may all
help to make up one Chatholique Church: and why may it not be so in these.
Churches I speak of? For first they all agree in that one and only foundation
of Religion, Jesus Christ as the Apostle calls him, No other foundation can
any other man lay, then that which is laid, to wit Jesus Christ, and this no
doubt is a sure and good foundation, and this makes them to be Christian
Churches, they are all baptized into Christ, and look to be saved by his
sufferings: And think not this to be a small matter; for S. Paul desired to
know nothing else, I esteemed not (says he) to know any thing among you but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and it worked upon his affection as much as
upon his understanding. God forbid that I should rejoice (says he) save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14. that is in Christ crucified.
Besides this one foundation, they all embrace the two Testaments, the three
Creeds, and the four first general Counsels, and many other very material
points. The discord amongst us Christians has been long ago objected to us;
and certainly there has nothing so much drawn some out of the Church, and
kept others from coming to the Church, as these quarrels amongst our selves;
Unto whom I briefly answer: If they like not our differences, let them join
with us in those things wherein we agree, and that is to be Christians, to
believe in Christ and him crucified, and those other principal points whereof
I speak, and to strive to imitate Christ to their power, and then our discords
will less trouble them. It is true, we have not all built alike upon this
foundation, but some no question have built wood and straw, as well as silver
and gold; yet all of us no doubt did strive to imitate Christ as near as we
could, both in our doctrine and in our practice: and certainly in these
superstructures of religion, good intentions must go far, or else it will
go hard with many of us; not that they altogether excuse the fault, but
doubtless they take off much from the punishment. There is a difference
between the East and west Churches, in what kind of bread the Eucharist is to
be received; the East receiving in unleavene^ bread, the west in leavened. And
herein though they differ among themselves, yet the^ both strive to imitate
Christ, because the one Church thought our Savior used then the bread that was
leavened, the other, that which was unleavened. Either Church is the less
blameable because they think both that they follow our Saviors example.

S. Austin in like manner does prettily reconcile a difference between some
concerning the time how often we should receave the holy Sacrament of the Lords
supper; for some it seems in his time thought we were bound to receave the
Eucharist every day, others but now and then. Some (says he Epist. 118.)
communicate daily, others but upon certain days, some will omit no day, others
will only receive on the Sabbath, and the Lords day. There is a freedom to be
used in both these: Some will say we must not daily receive the Sacrament,
because we ought to select and set apart some days wherein we must live more
carefully and religiously, and so come to the Sacrament more worthily and with
greater devotion: On the other side, another tells us, yea but if the
plague sore of sin and violence of the disease be so great and dangerous,
such sovereign medicines as these are not to be deferred. Of both these says
he let every man take his choice, and do that which he thinks in his
conscience he may best and most piously perform; for neither of these
dishonor the body and blood of our Savior, but rather both of them do strive
to honor this saving Sacrament. For Zacheus rejoiced greatly to entertain our
Savior in his house. The Centurion said, Lord I am not worthy thou should
come under my roof; both of these did worship and honor our Savior, though
after a diverse, and as it were a contrary manner, both of them being miserable
by reason of sin, both of them obtaining mercy for their sins. Thus one man
to honor Christ dares not receive every day, another also to honor Christ
dares not omit any day. And although these be but petty differences, yet why
may I not apply it to controversies of greater moment, especially seeing that
ancient Father S. Salvian lib. 5. de Providentia, has found a good intention
in the Arians the most pernicious and most dangerous heretics accounted that
ever have been in the Church* They whom we account heretics (says he) account
not themselves heretics, for they so much esteem themselves good Catholics,
that they defame us with the note and appellation of heresy. That therefore
which they be to us, the very same are we to them. We are certain that they
injure the divine generation in that they say the Son is less and inferior
to the Father: They think us likewise injurious to the Father, because we make
the Son equal unto him. The true honor of God is amongst us, but they think
that to be the honor of the Deity, to believe as they believe. They are
undutifull but they think it the greatest duty of their Religion: They are
impious but they think this to be true piety. They err therefore, but they
err with a very good mind and intention, not with a hatred, but with a good
affection toward God, verily believing that they honor and love God. Although
they have not the right Faith, yet they notwithstanding think this to be
perfect love toward God. In what manner they shall be punished in the day of
Judgment for this very error of false opinion, no man can tell but the judge
himself.

A good lesson for the hot^purres of these times, with whom it is a very easy
matter to pronounce damnation upon the very least disagreement in Religion,
whereas this good Father would not determine any thing concerning these great
heretics the Arians, but leaves them to the mercy of the judge, not being able
to discern what they did deserve. You see that this holy Father finds out a
good intention even in these heretics. And if there was a good intention
amongst those that were so grossly erroneous, why may there not be good
intentions found out amongst us also, who are not at such great odds, and
acknowledged on all sides to have no such dangerous opinions amongst us.

I speak not this any whit to countenance that opinion of the Arians, which is
creeping into the Church again, but leave them to stand or fall to their own
master, and shall in the mean time be persuaded that they go not against their
consciences, and so far forth hit will go better with them: yet with this
holy Father, not free them from punishment, but must refer the manner and
measure thereof to the time of judgment.

Those of the Church of Rome are so impatient of this doctrine, that they care
not for being saved unless they may be saved alone; And their writers
generally agree upon nothing so much, as that out of their Communion there is
no Salvation. One of their late writers, (Barckly Paren. l. 1. cap. 1) can
profess thus, We (says he) proclaim with the whole Church, and we command
with Moses that Heaven and Earth would hear us, that there is no communion
between God and Belia, and that these Protestants do so far differ from us in
matters of faith, that they altogether in vain expect those mansions of
happiness which are prepared for us. And afterward he says, He that dares
believe a stubborn and obstinate Protestant can be saved, does by so believing
fall from the Catholic Faith. And that this is no private or obscure sentence
of the Church, but that all Catholics are of the same mind, that none of them
are ignorant of it, nor any can dissemble it, unless he be an unexpert Divine,
or for fear or ambition preferres some men's favor before the truth.

Another of your company Camp. rat. 10. averres the same, with a very great and
solemn protestation, I call to witness (says he) Gods Throne, and that
tribunal at which I shall ^sand to give an account of these my reasons, and of
whatsoever I have spoken or done, that either there is no heaven at all, or
that it peculiarly and properly belongs unto us.

I Campian, must ye be saved, and none but ye? what is not heaven able to
hold us as well as you? Or will our salvation be any disparagement to yours? It
seems it will. But to come a little closer to you: Is it nothing with you at
one breath, to throw so many souls headlong to hell, for whom Christ died; and
which is more who are already incorporate into Christ by Baptism? It cost more
to redeem their souls; but you will let that alone for ever. Our comfort is
that though you pass such sentence upon us here, yet you are not to be our
Judges hereafter, but must your selves come to give an account as well as we,
and peradve^ture of these speeches. Account us not men of so desperate and
deplored an estate that we would wittingly and willingly run into hell* why
should not out salvation be as dear unto us, as yours is unto you? or why
should you not think us to have as great a care of our salvation, as you have
of yours? For could we be persuaded that we were in heresy, and that there
is no salvation out of your Church, how quickly would we fly unto you? How
gladly would we be entertained by you? what means and moans would we make to be
members of your society? Who can endure such peremptory pronunciations of
Judgment, of God's eternal wrath and condemnation upon us, before we come to
our hearing? And seeing, God's mercy is overall his works, who can endure that
you should interdict God's mercy, and judge what the sentence of the Judge
shall be, before the day of judgment. Lib. 1. advers. Pelag. So that if God had
a mind to spare such sinners (as you say we poor Protestants are) yet by your
verdict and prescription he could not be suffered to do it as S. Jerome long
ago complained of Critobulus the Pelagian. Were we such tares in the field of
the Church, as you would make the world believe, yet if you would imitate
Christ, Mat. 13. you should let us grow till the harvest, lest you pluck up
the good corn with us.

Neither are you thus fierce alone, there are some of our own side, to requite
you in your own kind, are as confident that you cannot be saved, as you are
that we cannot; so that the Question now is, In which of our two Churches
salvation is to be had? For taking for granted that we have excluded all
others, and got heaven between us, we cannot be content to share it, but we
must confine and ingrosse it to one of our Churches, as though it could not be
had in both, nay as though it could not be had out of both; for I am verily
persuaded, and dare undertake to make it good, that those poor Eastern
Christians, who differ from us both, will yet come to heaven as soon as either
of us: which were it well considered might be a good means to pacify this
Question, and to abate the heat of many more between us.

But this monopolizing of Christ, although it be generally entertained by the
Roman Party, yet are not all our reformed Divines so strait lac't, but many
of them, and those of no small note can be content that others should be saved
with them, and therefore they are called by you, by way of derision (Preface to
Charity mistaken) good fellow Christians. As though they had so much of the
good fellow in them, that they have too little of the good Christian. And
indeed you have most reason to be angry with these good fellow Christians, for
they are like to do you all the mischief, for having found that there may be
salvation in our Church as well, yea, with more ease then in yours, we shall
never be thinking of going any further. As for those who are so eager, `that
will confine salvation to one certain Church, you have some hope of them, that
in time they may come over to you: And what you object to us as a crime, we
esteem as our great glory, and account it one of God's special blessings that
we live in the bosom of a Church that is so charitable, and we are willing to
have so much of the good fellow in us, because we would not have too little of
the good Christian: for though our Creed be comprised in a narrow room, yet
our charity extends far, not only to you, but the Eastern Church.

We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
Sister, in the day when she shall be spoken of? We have a little Sister. Cant.
8. 8. Though the Church of Rome call the Church of Greece Heretical and
Schismatic*, yet we of the Church of England, esteem her to be a Daughter
of the Catholic Church, and our Sister, though now she be little, yet she was
a great one, not inferior any ways to the Church of Rome, she brought forth
many children, and gave milk plentifully; but now alas she is little by reason
of her long persecution, and her breasts dried up, for now she is in a manner
barren and able to bring forth but few children. And although She be in this
poor and desolate estate, yet the Church of Rome will do nothing for her, for
when at the Council of Florence she desired aid of them against the Turks,
they gave her no succor at all, but left her in misery here, and adjudged her
as they do us to death and damnation hereafter. What shall we do for our
Sister? so long as we acknowledge her for our Sister, we should be willing to
do something for her in the day when she shall be spoken of; for as yet no
body speaks for her, no body laments her, but lets her alone, as if she
deserved no pity, no succor, no commiseration, the Romanists have persuaded so
many that she is schismatic and heretical in her tenants. But all those who
esteem of her as a sister, I hope will do some thing for her in the day when
she shall be spoken for, when her cause shall be pleaded, and she cleared from
holding such dangerous and damnable Doctrines, then certainly she will have
many to pity her, many to help her.

But the confining of salvatito your own Party, has not only sharpened the
pens of many Writers to much bitterness and condemning one another, but also
has unsheathed the swords of many Princes and Potentates to the great and
lamentable effussion of much Christian blood. S. Paul thought it a strange
thing in his time for a brother to go to law with a brother: I speak to your
shame (says he). Is it so that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one
that is able to judge between his brethren, but brother goes to law with
brother, and that under the Infidels? 1. Cor. 6. 5. 6. What if S. Paul lived in
these days, wherein not only a brother goes to law with a brother, but a
brother goes to war with a brother, yea, and which is more, makes that to
be a motive unto his war, to wit, Religion, which should be a forcible means
of peace and reconcilement: Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum? Is it
possible that Religion should ever be the true mother of so much mischief? No,
no, ou^ true mother the holy Catholic Church does not further such designs,
but lament them, and does more justly complain then Rebecca did when twins
strove in her womb, seeing it is so, why am I thus. For she could be content
would her children but strive, and struggle one with another, but when they
come to blows and blood, yea much effussion of blood, as we see at this day,
how can she be but like Rahel weeping for her children and not be comforted
because they are not? Mat. 1 18. When was that ever more truly fulfilled then
now, they that kill you shall think they do God good service! Ioh. 16. 2. Do
you not think you have done God good service in those many massacres in France,
in every of which how many thousands of poor Christians have you swept away
with such a sudden destruction, that had they been willing, you gave them not
so much time as to repent them of their Protestancy? Do you not think that you
had done God good service, if that horrible design of the Gunpowder-Treason
had taken effect, a prodigy not to be spoken of without horror and amazement,
void of all humanity as well as Christianity. But do what you can, call us
Heretics Schismatiques, and what other disgraceful name you can invent,
imprison us, banish us, strangle us, stifle us, burn us, hang us, we are yet
your brethren. Certainly had our Savi-intended to begin or propogate his Church
by this means, he could as easily have sent forth mighty men of war to
compel others to believe in him, as poor fishermen who catch none but such as
come to net, or are fairly allured to lay hold on the bait. If this open
hostility were used against the Turks, the common enemy of the Christian name,
there were some pretense for it; and therefore we read that Moses, Exodus 2.
when he saw the Israelite and the Egyptian fight, he did not say, why strive
you, but drew his sword, and slew the Egyptian, but when he saw the two
Israelites fight, he said, ye are brethren why strive ye. What a glorious
sight would it be to see the red Crosle once again advanced as it was in the
days of Constantine? and if we did not see it written in heaven, I hope we
should find it true upon earth, in hoc signo vinces. Unto this holy war I
suppose all they would come, who have promised to fight under Christ's banner.
And set aside for a while this private interest of Protestant, and Papist, and
Grecian, and Lutheran, and Calvinist, and Arminian, and Socinian, and if there
be any other division amongst us, and take upon us that general livery of
Christianity, and so join together to rescue our brethren from that wild
Boar of the Forest which has laid wast this goodly vine; and afterward we
might see how we could decide the Controversies amongst Christians: For
whosoever is in the right, I hope we are all well enough persuaded that he is
in the wrong. Could Herod and Pilate, otherwise deadly enemies be made friends,
and agree together to condemn Christ, and shall not those, who are already
brethren and therefore should be friends, combine together to save Christ: I
say to save Christ, for so long as we save and preserve his members, we save
and preserve him; but so long as we suffer his members to be thus persecuted
and oppressed, he cannot choose but suffer with them: But we in steed of
bandying against the common enemy, muster up our forces one against another,
and find that to be true by lamentable experience, there is no greater hatred
then of brethren that are falllen out.

Seeing then that all Christians are brethren, I say brethren, as having one
Father of us all, brethren as having one faith, one Lord, one Baptism, whereby
we are borne into the Catholic Church, and one food by the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, which makes us groan to be perfect men in Christ; seeing we are all
these ways brethren, I may well say as Moses did, ye are brethren why strive
ye? or if ye must needs be striving about matters of Religion, strive and
strive earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

And because I say we are brethren I would not have you think we like not the
cause we have in hand, or that we are ready to yield unto you, and presently
join hands with you, as some of you imagine, and many of our side causelessly
suspect, but this is all, we would have the breach no greater then it is, and
would not have the world believe, because we differ in some things, that we
agree in nothing. And although we call you brethren, we will not wink at your
faults, or join with you in them, but this does put us in mind to admonish
you more gently of them as brethren, though you rage never so fiercely against
us, for by this means we shall express our charity toward you, and so heap
coals of fire upon your head. God he knows we are far enough from yielding
to you as Romanists, yet should we not be charitable to you as Christians, we
were much to blame. But ^ee how you mistake, or rather indeed pervert and abuse
this our charity: For (say you) by your own acknowledgement, there may be
salvation in our Church, but we all deny there can be salvation in yours,
therefore all if they had care of themselves would have recourse to us, for it
is the safer way to be a member of that Church where both sides yield there may
be salvation, then in that where one side denies it. This were something if
Salvation or Damnation depended upon opinion, but I suppose that charitable
opinion of ours in hopeing you may be saved, makes you never a whit the nearer
heaven, but our selves, and that rough censure of yours in setting us all out
for damnation, makes us no whit the nearer hell but your selves. And I had
rather be a member of that Church which holds there may be salvation in both,
then of that which holds there can be salvation but in one. For holding with
the first I am safe wheresoever I am, but holding with the latter, I must be in
danger wheresoever I am. I say wheresoever I am; for I am not only in danger of
my salvation, if I be in that Church wherein I think there is no salvation, but
also in that out of which I think there can be no salvation, because I confine
salvation to one of these, which though I think it be in this alone, yet it may
be in the other alone.

Many other motives unto charity might be showed, but these briefly shall
suffice for me, The one is, that we are Christians, and therefore brethren, and
so ought to love as brethren; Another is, in that I hope our intentions are
good, and that none maintains a false opinion perversely against his
conscience* and this last is, that for some opinions that are not so orthodoxe
yet there may be hopes of salvation, although it be not without smart and
punishment.

Now let me say unto all Christians, as S. Paul does to the Corinthians 2. Cor.
6. 11. 12. 13. O ye Christians, our mouth is open unto you, and not only so,
but our heart is enlarged, not only to the Roman, but even to the East Church,
and to as many as call upon the name of our Lord Jesus. Ye are not straightened in
us, but ye are straightened in your own bowels, now for a recompense in the same,
I speak unto you as unto Brethren, be ye also enlarged.

Let me bespeak all learned Prelates and Pastors on all sides, as S. Austine
Epist. 147. does Proculianus a Bishop and a favourer of the Donatists, I pray
and beseech thee ( says he) if there be any good disposition in thee, which
many do extol, and commend, if it be not a counterfeit courtesy by reason of
worldly honor, that the tender bowels of pity and compassion begin to yerne
in thee, and that you would have these controversies discussed between us at
the length, not by wrangling and railing one at another, but by fervent prayers
and earnest supplications unto Almighty God, and by comparing all things
peaceably and examining them in the spirit of meekness, lest the poor
ignorant people which now yield to and willingly obey our jurisdiction and
command over them, press us with this their submission and dutiful obedience
to us in the day of the Lord Jesus, and say, they did as their leaders directed
them, but rather by our unfeigned love and charity, being together with us drawn
from those by paths of error and dissension, they should be directed into the
right way of truth and peace. I will conclude all with our Churches prayer,
that it would please God to inspire continually the Universal Church, with the
spirit of truth, unity and concord, and grant that all they who do confess
his holy name, may agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in unity and
Godly love! And although we cannot at the first attain to that perfection to
be of one mind, yet let us begin to be charitable, and bear with one
another; for who knows but that by entertaining this bond of peace, we may in
good time come to the unity of the spirit; which he heartily wishes, and daily
prays for, who is

Thine in Christ W. P.

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of following Christ, and the contempt of all worldly vanities.
HE that follows me walks not in darkness, says our blessed Savior the
true light.

2 And because he is truth as well as light, we must follow him, if we will
truly be enlightened, and cast off all the works of darkness.

3 Let it be then our chiefest care fully to tread in his blessed steps.

4 His sacred documents were they rightly understood, do far exceed all
humane instructions, and he that has the spirit of Christ, shall be sure to
find there the hidden Manna.

5 But so it falls out that many though they often read and hear this Gospel
of peace, though they are many times made partakers of these dainties, yet they
relish them not, because they have not the taste of the spirit.

6 But he that will be Christ's best Scholar, must translate his words into
deeds, and he that will truly know what his Savior has said, must be sure to
practice what he has done.

7 What will it profit a man profoundly to dispute of the Trinity, and yet be
puffed up with pride and so displease the Trinity.

8 It is not eloquence of words, nor strength of understanding that makes any
man more holy and just, but it is a virtuous and religious life that draws
near unto God.

9 I had rather feel the effect of compunction in my heart, then know the
nature of it in my head.

10 Suppose thou could repeat the whole Bible, and many other good sayings
without-book; it would argue thee to have a good memory, but not to be the
better Christian.

11 Vanity of vanities and all is vanity besides the love of God, and his alone
service.

12 This is chief wisdom, through the contempt of this world to pass unto a
better.

13 It is vanity then to hunt after riches because they are transitory, or
trust in them because they are uncertain.

14 It is vanity also to be ambitious after honor, and greedy to climb up
into any high place.

15 It is vanity to follow after fleshly lusts, and desire that which will
hereafter add to thy punishment.

16 It is vanity to wish for a long life, and to be altogether careless of a
good life.

17 It is vanity only to have a care of this present life, and not to have an
eye to that which is to come.

17 It is vanity to love that which is quickly gone, and not to hasten thither
where is joy without end.

18 Remember often that saying The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
ear with hearing.

18 Labor then to withdraw thy soul from the love of things visible, and to
fix upon the delight of things invisible.

19 For those that follow their sensuality defile their conscience, and whiles
they gain the favor of men, they loose the grace of God.

CHAP. II.
To have an humble opinion of ones self.
EVery man does naturally desire to know; but knowledge without the fear of
God, what avails it?

2 Better is the poor iusticke whose conversation is in heaven, then the proud
Philosopher who is still gazing into heaven.

3 He that knows himself well indeed is vile in his own eyes, and is not
affected with the applause of men.

4 Though I knew all things in the world, yet had not charity, what would it
help me before God? who will judge me according to my works of charity. Be not
very greedy to know much, for there is in it great distraction and deceit.

5 Those that be learned would willingly be taken notice of and accounted wise.

6 There be many things the knowledge of which do profit the soul little or
nothing.

7 And he is very unwise that troubles himself much with any thing, but that
which may further his salvation.

7 Multitude of words do not satisfy the mind, but a good life does refresh
the soul, and a clear conscience makes us very confident with God.

The greater knowledge thou have, the heavier shall be thy Judgment, unless
thy life be so much the more holy.

9 Be not then lifted up with any knowledge or learning, but rather let the
increase of thy knowledge be the increase of thy fear.

10 If thou think thou have a good understanding and know much, yet know
withal that thou art ignorant of much more then thou know.

11 Be not wise in thy own conceit but rather acknowledge thine ignorance,
and say, Lord I thank thee that I am not ignorant how ignorant I am.

12 Why should thou prefer thy self before any, when there are many more
learned and skillful then thy self

13 Will thou know and learn any thing for thy profit, study to be unknown,
and nothing to be accounted of.

14 This is the highest and most useful study truly to know thy self, and
then to despise thy self: To esteem nothing of thy self but always to have a
good and high opinion of others is great wisdom and perfection.

15 Though thou see another openly to offend or commit some great crime, yet
thou should not presently think thy self better then he, for though thou art
so for the present, yet thou know not how long thou can continue so.

16 It Is true, we are all of us frail, yet this is the way to gather true
strength, to think no man more frail then thy self.

CHAP. III.
Of the Doctrine of truth.
HAppy is he whom truth teaches not by letters and words that vanish, but in
its own proper shape.

2 Our own opinion and conceit does ofttimes deceive us, and at the best sees
but a little.

3 What profit is there to cavil much about secret and obscure points, seeing
we shall never be called in question for not knowing them.

4 Great folly it is to neglect profitable and necessary studies, and busy our
selves incurious and dangerous inquiries, for in so doing we have eyes but see
not.

5 Why spend we so much time in learning genus and species, and other logical
words, he is rid from a great many of opinions, whom that everlasting Word does
speak unto.

6 All things have their being of that one Word, and all things do speak
according to that one Word, and this is that beginning which does speak unto
us, without whom no man understands or judges any thing aright.

7 He to whom all things are one, and who draws all things to one, and
beholds all things in one, the same can stand firm in his heart and repose
himself quietly in his God.

8 O God which art the eternal truth make me one with thee in everlasting love!

Many times to read much and to hear much, it^irketh me, in thee is all I would
have or can desire.

9 Let all teachers hold their peace, let all Creatures keep silence in thy
sight, but speak Lord for thy servant hears, speak thou alone unto me and
it suffices!

10 By how much the more one is united to himself, and admits of no
admixture within himself, by so much the more easily does he co^ceive high
mysteries, because he is enlightened from above

11 A pure, sincere, and stayed spirit is not distracted, though it be employed
in diverse matters, for that it works all to the honor of God, and laboring
for inward tranquillity seeks not it self in any thing it does.

12 Who hinders and troubles thee more then the unmortified and unruly
affections of thine own heart!

13 A good and godly man before he do any business outwardly abroad does
first rightly order it inwardly at home.

14 Neither shall his employment drive him to any corrupt inclination, but he
will draw it to the rule of right reason.

15 Great are the confliccts of every good Christian, but of all combats the
forest is to conquer our selves.

16 This then should be our chief endeavor continually to maintain the
sight, and every day to be stronger and better then another.

16 The greatest perfection we can attain to in this life, it has some
imperfection annexed to it, and our greatest light of knowledge is not void of
some darkness.

17 An humble knowledge of thy self, is a more secure way to heaven, then a
profound searching into other kinds of learning.

18 Not that humane learning is blameworthy, nor the knowledge of any thing
whatsoever is to be disliked, because it is good in it self, and ordained of
God.

19 But yet a good conscience is to be preferred before all knowledge, and a
virtuous life before all learning.

20 But because men commonly labor more to know well, then to live well, this
makes them so much to wander out of the way and reap little fruit of their
labors.

21 O if men would be as careful in removing vices, as they are in moving
questions, there would not be so much looseness amongst the vulgar, nor such
enormities in retired places!

22 Assuredly at the day of judgment we shall not be examined how many books
we have read, but how many good works we have done; not how rhetorically we
have spoken, but how religiously we have lived.

23 Tell me now what is become of all those great Doctors and Masters in
Israel, which thou knew to be so famous and pointed at in their life.

24 Others now possess their places and preferments, and perchance do scarce
ever so much as think of them.

26 In their life time they seemed to be some body; who but they? but now they
are gone, we hear not a word of them.

27 O how quickly does the glory of this world pass away; would God their life
had been answerable to their learning, then had their study and reading been to
good purpose!

28 Alas how many perish in the world through this vain knowledge, in that
they make small account of the worship of God.

29 And because they rather strive to be high then humble, therefore they
vanish in their vain imaginations.

30 Accosding to thy charity so is thy greatness, he is truly great who is
little in his own eyes, and lightly esteems all height of honor.

31 He is wise indeed who accounts all things else but dung that he may win
Christ, and he is learned indeed that abandoneth his own will that he may do
Gods.

CHAP. IV.
Of Providence or Prudence in our actions.
WE must not rashly believe every word of man, but warily and seriously ponder
whether it be consonant to the will of God.

2 But alas such is our weakness and so great our infirmity, that we oftener
think and speak the worst of another then the best.

3 But such as be perfect will not easily give credit to every tale that is
told them, they know how prone every man is by nature unto evil, and how easy
it is to offend with the tongue.

4 It is a point of great wisdom to be neither rash in our actions nor stiff
in our opinions.

5 And as great wisdom it is not to believe all thou hear, nor yet what
thou hear and believe, to be by and by telling it another.

6 Take advise of a wise and conscientious man, and follow his better
instructions rather the^ thine own fancies.

7 A good life makes a man wise to Godward, and gives him great experience
in many things.

8 The more humble a man is in himself, and obedient to his God, the more
prudent shall he be in all his affairs and enjoy greater quietness of mind.

CAAP. V.
Of the reading of holy Scriptures.
IN the holy Scriptures we must look after the truth of the matter, not the
eloquence of the words, and we should read them with the same spirit they were
penned.

2 We ought rather to mark in them the evidence of the spirit, then the
excellency of the words, for it is better to read a Book that brings devotion
to my heart, then knowledge to my head.

3 Let not the authority of the Writer be he of great or small account, but the
pure love of truth, move thee to read and seek out not so much who it is that
speaks, but diligently mark what it is that is spoken.

4 Men are here to day and gone to morrow, but the truth of our Lord remains
for ever. God speaks to us sundry ways, without respect of persons.

5 In reading the Scriptures our curiosity does often hurt us, when we go
about to comprehend that, which indeed we should let alone.

6 If thou desire to reap commodity read withal humility simplicity, and
fidelity, and never covet to be accounted learned.

7 Be questioning always with godly men, and hearken with silence unto their
sayings, be not offended with the Proverbes of thine elders, for they are not
left unto us without a cause.

CHAP. VI.
Of inordinate desires and affections.
Whensoever a man desires a thing inordinately, he is presently disquieted
within himself.

2 The proud and covetous men are never at rest, but the poor and
meeke-spirited live together in abundance of peace.

4 The man that is not yet thoroughly mortified is quickly tempted, yea and
overcome too with small and trivial things.

5 He that is weak in the spirit and as yet carnally minded, and prone unto
sensuality, can hardly withdraw himself altogether from earthly desires.

6 And therefore it often grieveth him when he goes about to withdraw
himself, and is easily moved to anger if any one does withstand him.

7 But if he has followed therein his appetite, he is presently gauled with
remorse of conscience, because he has yielded to his unruly passions, which
does no whit make to the peace he sofght for.

8 Wherefore the true peace of mind is gotten, not by following but resisting
wicked af^ections.

9 There is no peace then in the heart of a carnal man, nor in a man that is
addicted to outward things, but to the upright man and him that is fervent in
the spirit, there is great quietness.

CHAP. 7.
Of Flying vain Hope and Pride.
IT is a vain thing to trust either in man or any other creature, for there is
no help in them.

2 Be not ashamed to be in subjection to others for the love of Jesus Christ,
and to be esteemed poor in this life, count it thy great riches.

3 Depend not upon thyselfe, but put thy confidence in the Lord, do what lies
in thee, and God will bless thine endeavor.

4 Trust not to thine own knowledge, nor in the policy of any mortal man, but
rather in the grace and favor of God who exalts the humble, and humbles
those who exalt themselves.

5 Glory not in thy wealth though thou have much, nor yet in thy friends though
they be mighty, but in God who gives all these, and would gladly give thee
himself before all these.

6 Be not proud neither of the beauty of thy face, or bigness of thy body, for
a little sickness does deforme the one, and consume the other.

7 Be not too well conceited of thy wit and abilities of nature, least thou
displease God, who is the sole-giver of all the goods of nature.

1 Esteem not thy self better then others, least God who best knows what is
in man, account thee worse then others.

9 Be not proud of well doing, for God judges not as man does, for that often
offends him, that pleases them.

10 If thou have any goodness in thee think that another has more, so shall
thou preserve within thee that rich treasure of humility.

11 To debase thy self under all men can never hurt thee, but to prefer thy
self before any man may do thee some harm.

12 The humble man is in a continual calm, but the haughty mind fumeth
commonly with indignation.

CHAP. VIII.
Of avoiding too much familiarity.
OPen not thine heart to every man, but communicate thine affairs with the
wise and godly.

2 Acquaint thy self with the grave and aged, and delight not much in young
and strange company.

3 Flatter not the wealthy to make him proud of his riches, neither do thou
willingly appear before great personages.

4 Keep company with the humble the sincere and devout, and confer with them
of those things that may be for thy edifying.

5 Be not in special familiar with any woman, but in general commend all good
women to God.

6 Carefully avoid too much acquaintance with men, that thou may be the more
familiar with God and his holy Angels.

7 Although thou ought to have charity toward all men, yet hold familiarity
but with a few.

8 Many men unknown unto us may be famous for their good parts whose bodily
presence does seem to be but contemptible.

9 Some men we know not are cried up for their worth, who being well acquainted
with deserve little to be regarded.

10 We think sometimes to please others by being acquainted with them, whom yet
we more distaste with our lewd behavior, then delight with our company.

CHAP. IX.
Of Obedience and Subjection.
THough it be very hard to live in obedience under a Governor, and not to be
at our own disposing, yet it is far better to obey then rule.

2 Many live under obedience rather out of necessity then willingly, such
easily vex and punish themselves, and are ready to murmr and repine upon a
small occasion.

3 Neither can they attain to any freedom of mind, unless they cheerfully
submit from the heart and for God's sake.

4 Turn hither or thither, go whither thou will, thou shall never find so much
case as in humble subjection under a Governor.

5 The very imagination and change of places has deceived many a man, when he
was under he thought there was no life to a Ruler; now he commands, he holds it
better to obey.

6 It Is true, every man is willing to follow his own fancy, and is apt to
make much of those that are of his mind.

7 But if God be amongst us we will discard our own opinion, rather then
disturb the common peace.

8 It may so fall out that thou art in the wrong, for who is so wise that he
can fully know all things.

9 Therefore trust not too much to thine own opinion, but be willing to give
an ear to the judgment of others.

10 But suppose thou art in the right, yet if for God's and quietness sake
thou shall forbear thine opinion, thou shall gain more by thy humility, then
thou shall loose in thy knowledge.

11 I have oftentimes heard that it is more safe and secure to hear and take
counsel, then to give it.

12 It may so fall out that a man's own judgment and opinion may be right
enough; but not to hearken and yield to others when good reason requ^res, must
needs be a sign of great stubbornness and pride.

CHAP. X.
Of avoiding superfluity of Words.
TAke heed of public meetings as much as is possible, for to talk of worldly
affairs does us great harm mean we never so well.

2 For we are quickly defiled and even led captive by vanity, and for my part I
have wished many times that I had been either silent or absent.

3 But what might be the reason we are so apt to conference, seeing we so
seldom break it off without some hurt of conscience.

4 The reason hereof I conceive to be this, that by mutual communication we
much comfort one another, and refresh our wearied souls oppressed with many
cares.

5 Of what we love best or desire most we are apt to think and speak freely, or
else of those things that do most trouble and molest us.

6 But alas this is often to small purpose or profit, for this outward comfort
is a great hindrance to the inward, and our humane discourse to our heavenly
consolation.

7 That thou pass not thy time idly, spend it in watching and prayer, but if
it be fit for thee to speak, speak those things that may edify.

7 An evil custom and carelessenesse of profitting in good works, is a great
means to make us very fruitful in ill words.

8 To compare spiritual things with spiritual things does greatly further our
progress in the spirit, especially where men of like minds and spirit are
joined together in the Lord.

CHAP. XI.
Of obtaining peace, and desire of profiting.
Would we not busy our selves in other men's employments, which we have
nothing to do withal, we might enjoy at home much peace within our selves.

2 How can he continue long in any quietness, that thrusts himself into
other men's affairs, who seeks occasion to be busy abroad, and seldom takes
occasion to recollect himself at home.

3 Blessed are the simple and pure in heart, for they shall inherit abundance
of peace.

4 Why are some of the Saints come to such perfection, and given to so much
contemplation, but because their whole care has been to mortify themselves
and their earthly desires.

5 And this has made them able freely to attend their own affairs, and with
the whole strength of their soul to unite themselves to their God.

6 But as for us we are too much carried away with our unbridled passions and
too too sollicitous for temporal trash.

7 We also seldom overcome any one vice as we should, we are not enflamed to
profit daily more and more, and this makes us continue cold in devotion, and
lukewarm in Religion.

8 Were we but once thoroughly dead unto our selves, and not inwardly entangled
in our own souls, then should we relish the things that are above, and get
some experience of heavenly contemplations.

9 The greatest and indeed the only impediment is, that we are in bondage to
our passions and vile affections, and labor not to follow the perfect
footsteps of the faithful.

10 And when any small adversity befalls us, then we are very soon cast
down, and betake our selves to the miserable comforters of this world.

Now if we would not give back but like valiant soldiers stand upon our guard
doubtless the Lord would send us help from above.

12 For he that gives occasion to fight, to the end we may get the victory,
surely is ready to help those that fight manfully.

14 If we place our progress in religion only in these outward observances,
then will our devotion come quickly to an end.

15 Wherefore we must lay the Axe to the very root, that our unquiet
affections being eradicated we may find rest to our souls.

16 If every year we did but root out one vice, we should in a few years
become perfect men.

17 But we often find it to be clean contrary, that we were better and purer
at the beginning of our conversion, then we have been after many years of our
profession.

18 And whereas our fervor and forwardness should increase daily more and
more, we think it a great matter if a man retain but some part of his first
love.

19 Did we but strain and force our selves a little at the first, then might we
do all things afterward with ease and delight.

20 I confess indeed it is hard to leave old wonts, and as hard, yea harder to
go against our own wills.

21 If thou art not able to overcome these things that be little and light, how
will thou be able to conquer those things that are more difficult?

22 At the beginning therefore strive with thine own inclination, and unlearne
if thou can a naughty custom, lest otherwise when thou would, thou can
not so easily, and all that thou endeavourest will be but in vain.

23 O if thou did but consider what peace thou should reap unto thy
self, and joy unto others by behaveing thy self well, I suppose thou would
be more careful of thy proficiency toward God, and fearful to give any
offense unto man.

CHAP. 12.
Of the profit gotten by adversity.
IT is good for us sometimes to suffer affliction and contradiction, because
they oftentimes call a man home unto himself.

2 They make a man to know that he lives here but in banishment, and that he
must not trust to any thing in this world.

3 It is good for us sometimes to be crossed and contradicted, yea to be ill
spoken of, and ill thought of, although we both do and mean well.

4 These wonderfully increase in us the virtue of humility, and strongly beat
down in us the vice of vainglory.

5 For then we more earnestly call God to witness in us and for us, when men
abroad dis-esteeme us and give no credit unto us,

6 Therefore ought a man so wholly to depend upon God, that he needs not to
seek after many comforts amongst men.

7 When a man of good meaning is troubled or tempted, when he is vexed
outwardly in body or inwardly in mind.

8 The more he considers he stands in need of God's assistance, without
whose help he perceives he can do nothing that is good.

9 Then he sorroweth and greatly ^igheth and desires to be delivered from the
miseries he endures.

10 Then is he weary of living any longer, and wishes death were at hand that
he might be dissolved and be with Christ.

11 Then also he well perceives and is thoroughly persuaded that full security
and perfect peace cannot be had in this world.

CHAP. XIII.
Of resisting Temptations.
SO long as we live in this wicked world we must look to be troubled with
miseries and ^^mptations.

2 Hence we find it written in that holy Book of Job, The life of man upon
earth is but a warfare and temptation.

3 Therefore ought every one to be very careful of his courses; and that he be
not led into temptation thoroughly arm himself with watching and prayer.

4 Lest the Devil find occasion to entrappe and deceive us, who never
slumbereth but rangeth about seeking whom he may devour.

5 There is no man so holy or perfect but is tempted sometimes, and to be
utterly without them is altogether impossible.

6 Though temptations seem for the present to be grievous and troublesome, yet
are they often very profitable to us in the end.

7 They are instructions, purgations and humiliations unto us, they instruct
our lives, they purge our affections, and humble our souls.

8 All the saints of God have profited in this life, and passed unto a better
through many tribulations and temptations.

9 And those that have not been able to endure these temptations, have become
reprobates in themselves and back-sliders from God.

10 There is no order so sacred, no place so secret, where there is not either
temptations to try thee or troubles to molest thee.

11 There is no man whilst he lives can be wholly free and secure from
temptations.

12 Though we had none without us, we have enough within us, being all of us
borne in concupiscence and sin.

13. Temptations come upon temptations, miseries upon miseries, and having lost
our first happiness, we have eversome unhappiness or other to endure.

14 Whilst many seek to avoid temptations, they are plunged into them deeper,
and some to shun one trouble fall into a worse.

15 By flying we show our selves not conquerors but cowards, it is patient
abideing and true humility that make us stronger then all our enemies.

16 He that cuts off but the branches of temptations, and plucks not up the
root from whence they spring, shall be little the better.

17 For they will assail him so much the sooner and make him worse then he was
before.

18 By little and little (through Gods help,) by patience and longani^ity thou
shall more easily get the mastery, then by any sudden violence or ^turdy
importunity.

19 Often take good advise when thou thy self art tempted, and deal not
roughly with another that is tempted, but minister unto him comfort, as thou
would be comforted thy self.

20 The very root and original of all evil temptations, is the great
inconstancy of our minds, and the little confidence we have in our God.

21 For as a ship without a stern is tossed to and fro with wind and weather,
so a careless and unconstant man has great variety of temptations.

22 As fire tries iron, so temptation a just man, we know not oftentimes what
we are able to do, until temptations do show us what we are.

23 We must be very watchful then especially, when temptation is but newly
begun, for then is the enemy more easily overcome.

24 If thou suffer him not to enter in at the door of thine heart, but give
him his answer at the threshold when he gives the first knock.

25 Wherefore one said very well,

Take a disease at the first, and 'twill easily be cured,
But an after remedy will be hardly endured.
26 For first of all there comes into thy mind a bare cogitation, next a
strong and vehement imagination, after that an evil motion and consent joined
with a wonderful delectation.

27 And so our deadly enemy if we set him but put in his head, does after with
greater ease draw in the whole body.

28 And by how much the longer before any man stirs against his enemy, by so
much the weaker is he when he does resist, and his enemy the stronger whom he
must resist.

29 Some suffer greatest assaults in the beginning of their conversion, and
some at the later end, but others are much troubled all their life long.

30 Some again are but gently and lightly assaulted according to the wisdom
and equity of the divine appointment, which weighs the state and conditions
of all men, and pre-ordaineth all things to the salvation of his elect.

31 We ought not therefore to despair when we are tempted, but so much the
more fervently pray unto God, who is ready to help us in all our adversities.

32 Who according to the saying of S. Paul will not suffer us to be tempted
above that we are able, but will give an issue with the temptation, that we may
be able to bear it.

33 So then in all temptations and tribulations let us humble our souls under
the mighty hand of God for the humble in spirit will he save and exalt.

34 In these troubles and adversities a manis proved how much he has profited,
and the more his virtue has been manifested here, the greater shall be his
reward hereafter.

35 Nor is it any great matter for a man to be zealous and devout when nothing
does trouble him, but if in time of adversity he bear himself patiently there
is good hope he has profited not a little.

36 Some there are who in great and fierce temptations are strangely preserved,
who in small and ordinary trials are often overcome.

37 To the end that being truly humbled they never in great matters trust to
their own strength, who in such small trifles have showed themselves to be so
weak.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of avoiding rash Judgment.
BEware thou judge not rashly the deeds of other men which thou shall the
better take heed of, if thou let thine eyes reflect upon thy self.

2 In judging of others a man labors in vain, is commonly deceived and easily
offends, but in judging and examining himself, his pains is always well
bestowed.

3 As we fancy any thing commonly we judge of it thereafter, for private
affection does easily oversway sound judgment.

4 If God were always the pure intention of our desire, we should not be so
much troubled with the repugnancy of our sensuality.

5 But still some inward secret inclination, or some outward molestation comes
in thy way, and either the flesh within, or the world without draws us along
after them.

6 Many in their actions would make you believe, nay have made themselves
believe, they intend some public good, when indeed they aimed at their own
private ends.

7 They seem also to live at their hearts ease, so long as things go well
with them but if any thing fall out otherwise then they look for, then quickly
they are troubled and discontented.

8 Great dissension rises many times amongst friends and neighbors, yea
amongst those that be zealous and religious through diversity of opinions.

9 It is a very hard matter to leave an old custom, and no man is willingly
drawn further then his own eyes will lead him.

10 If thou followest the conduct of thine own reason and industry, more then
the subduing virtue of thy Savior, seldom and slowly shall thou be
illuminated from above.

11 For God will have us fully and perfectly submit our selves to him, and
transcend the narrew reach of all reason by love that is enflamed.

CHAP. XV.
Of works proceeding from Charity.
WE ought to do no kind of evil either for any profit to be gotin this
world, or for the pleasure of any man.

2 Yet for the help of the needy we may pass over it for a time, or do
another instead of it, and this is not the loss but the change of a work and
that for a better.

3 Let thy work be never so great and glorious, without charity it is nothing
worth; be thy work but small and trivial, yet done in charity, is very
effectual.

4 For God regards not so much what is done, as how and with what affection a
thing is done, he does most, that loves most.

5 He does much that does a thing as it should be done, and he does so who
preferres the public good, before his own private affections.

6 Natural inclination, self will, hope of reward, desire of gain, are
seldom wanting to our works, and so that which seems to be charity is rather
indeed carnality.

7 He that is endowed with true and perfect charity, he seeks himself in
nothing, but desires and only studieth God's glory in all things.

8 He does also repine at no body because he loves no private joy, nor will he
rejoice in himself, but above all things desires to be blessed in his God.

8 He attributes nothing that is good to others, but wholly refers them all
unto God, from whom as from a fountain all things do proceed, and in whom
finally all the Saints have their fruition of rest.

9 O he that has but one spark of true charity would easily discern all
earthly things how full they are of vanity.

CHAP. XVI.
Of bearing with other men's defects.
THose things which no man can amend either in himself or in others he ought
to bear patiently until God have otherwise disposed.

2 Think with thy self, that perchance it is better to be so for thy trial
and patience, without which all our good works are little to be regarded.

3 Thou ought to pray notwithstanding when thou have such impediments, that
God would vouchsafe to help thee that thou may bear them patiently.

4 If one that that is once or twice admonished cannot endure it, or will not
amend, be not rigorous with him, because he has offended, do not thou offend.

5 But commit thy whole cause to God, that his will may be fulfilled and his
name honored in all his servants, for he that can turn all things to the best
can work good out of evil.

6 Endeavor thy self patiently to bear with any faults and infirmities of
others, for that thou thy self have many things that must be borne withal by
others.

7 If thou can not make thy self such a one as thou would be, how can
thou expect to have another to thy liking in all things.

8 It is injustice to expect that in another which thou have not in thy self,
to look for perfection in others, and yet not to amend imperfections in our
selves.

9 We will have others severely punished, and will not amend our selves; the
large liberty of others disliketh us, and yet we will not have our desires
denied us, we will have rigorous Laws imposed upon others, but in no sort will
we our selves be restrained.

10 And thus it appears howseldome we weigh our neighbors in the same
balance with our selves. If all men were perfect what then should we have to
suffer at other men's hands for God's sake.

11 But now God has thus ordained that every man should have a burden of his
own, let us learn to support and bear one another burdens.

12 For there is none without defect, none without his burden, no man
sufficient by himself, no man wise enough of himself.

13 But we ought to bear with on^ another, comfort one another, equally help,
instruct, and admonish one another.

14 By occasion of adversity every man knows what great virtue is in
himself, for such occasions make thee not frail, but show thee what thou art.

CHAP. XVII.
Of solitary life.
THou must learn to break thy self of thine own will in many things, if
thou will keep peace and concord with others.

2 It is no small matter to lead a^ contemplative or practical life, to live
in either of those places without reproof, and to persevere therein faithfully
unto the death.

3 Blessed is he that has there lived well and died as he ought to doe^.

4 If thou will stand uprightly and perfect in virtue as thou oughtst, carry
thy self as a pilgrim and stranger upon the earth.

5 Thou must be contented to be esteemed a fool for the love of Christ, if
thou will lead a religious and Christian life.

6 The choice raiment and shorn head make little to the purpose, but change of
manners and cutting of unruly passions make a man truly Religious.

7 He that seeks after any thing but God and his souls health, shall be sure
to find nothing but tribulation and grief.

8 Neither can he long enjoy a peaceable and quiet mind, who striveth not to be
the least and veriest abject of all.

9 Thou art come hither not to be served but to serve, know that thou art
called to suffer and to labor, not to loiter and live at ease.

10 As gold in the furnace so are men tried in this world, here none can stand
upright, but he that stoopeth in all humility* and heartily for the Lords sake.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the example of the holy Fathers.
COnsider the lively examples of those holy Fathers who are dead, who shined so
bright in true perfection and Religion.

2 You shall easily perceive how little or nothing at all it is that we do,
alas what is our life, if you do but compare it with theirs?

3 Those holy men and friends of Christ served the Lord in hunger and thirst,
in cold and nakedness, in labor and weariness, in watching and fasting, in
prayers and holy meditations in persecutions and many reproaches.

4 O how many and grievous tribulations suffered the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the rest who endeavored to follow Christ^ steps,
they hated their lives here that they might have life everlasting.

5 O how strict and severe a life led those holy Father^ in the wilderness?
What long and grievous temptations did they endure? How often were they vexed
with our common enemy?

6 What often and fervent prayers did they offer unto God? How rigorous
abstinency did they daily undergo? What fervent care and zeal had they to
profit in the spirit?

How great and sharp a combat had they for the taming of their vices? how pure
an dright an intention had they to Godvvard? They labored all day* and prayed
all night, although when they labroured with the body they prayed with the mind.

7 In a word, they spent all their time to their best advantage, and thought
the hour to soon at an end they employed in God's service.

8 For the great sweetness they found in heavenly contemplations, they forgot
the necessity of their corporal refection, and for the food of their souls
did not regard the relief of their bodies.

9 As for all riches, dignities, honors, friends and kinsfolks, they utterly
renounced them all, and desired to have nothing this world can afford.

10 They could hardly be persuaded to take the necessary sustenance of their
life, and to yield to their body in that they must needs, was with a great
deal of repugnancy.

11 They were very poor in outward goods, but very rich in inward grace,
without they seemed needy, but within they were refreshed with grace and
heavenly consolation.

12 They were mere strangers to the world but were near and familiar friends
to God, in their own eyes, and in the sight of the world they were but abject
and despised persons, but in the eyes of God very p^etious and beloved.

13 They were grounded in humility, lived in obedience, walked in charity and
patience, therefore did they daily profit in the spirit and obtained great
favor at the hands of God.

14 They were set out for examples to all righteous men, and these few men
should more provoke us to a spiritual progress, then the great number of
lukewarm Christians to a remissness in behavior.

15 O how great was the fervor of all religious persons in the beginning of
their holy institution?

16 How great was their devotion^ to prayer, how great emulation of virtue? How
exact discipline was set on ^oote? how great reverence and obedience observed
they in all things under the rule of their superiors?

17 Their footsteps yet remaining do testify that they were indeed holy and
perfect men, who fighting so stoutly trod the world under their feet.

18 Now he is thought a jolly man that is not an open offender, and can but
patiently endure what he has already undertaken.

19 O the coldness and negligence of our time and state that we soon decline
from our first fervor, that by reason of our luke-warmnesse and sloth we are
even weary of our lives.

20 It is a sign that all proficiency in virtue is utterly dead in us, when we
follow not the examples of so many godly men before us.

CHAP. 19.
Of the exercise of good religious persons.
THe life of a good religious person ought to excel in all kind of virtue,
that he may be such a one inwardly to God, as he seems to be out wardly to
men.

2 Yea for a good reason he should be better within then he appears without,
for God beholds the heart, whom we ought highly to reverence, wheresoever we
are, and walk in purity like Angels in his sight.

3 We ought every day to renew our good intention, and stir up our selves to
fervor and devotion, as though this were the first time of our conversion, and
say thus,

4 Help me O Lord my God in this my good purpose and in thy holy service, and
give me grace this day to make a good entrance and beginning, for what I have
done hitherto is to little purpose.

5 According to our purpose and good endavour you must judge of ones course and
well doing, and he that will reap great commodity must be careful to use
great diligence.

6 For if he that goes on courageously finds great rubbs in his way, how
many will he find that sets forward, but seldom and uncertainly.

7 There be many things that cause us to leave our good intents, and the least
omission of spiritual exercises, brings ^o little hinderance to our soul^s.

8 The determinations of the just depend upon Gods grace, and not upon their
own wisdom, upon whom they always rely, for whatsoever they take in hand.

9 For man does propose but God does dispose, neither is the way of man in his
own hands.

10 If usual exercise be sometimes omitted either for piety toward God, or
profit to my neighbor, it may easily afterward be recovered again.

11 But if out of a sloathful mind or careless negligence we for sake the
same, it is a great offense against God, and very prejudicial to our selves.

12 Let us do the best we can, we shall fail in many things, yet let us
always take some certain course, and especially against those vices which do
most of all molest us.

13 We must diligently search into and set in order both the outward and the
inward man, because both of them are very necessary to our coming forward in
godliness.

14 If thou can not continually call thy self to an account, yet do it
sometimes, at the least once a day, to wit, at morning or at night.

17 In the morning consider what thou intendest to do, and at night examine
thy self what thou have done.

16 How thou have behaved thy self in thought word and deed; for in these
perhaps thou have often offended both God and thy Neighbor.

17 Gird thy loins like am an against the vile assaults of the Devil, bridle
thy riotous appetite, and thou shall be the better able to keep under all the
unruly motions of the flesh.

11 Be thou at no time idle altogether but either reading or writing, or
praying or meditating, or endeavoring some thing for the public good.

19 As for bodily exercises they must be used with great discretion, neither
are they to be practiced of all men alike.

20 The exercises that are not common are not to be exposed to public view;
for things private are practiced ^ore saf^ly at home.

21 Nevertheless thou must beware thou neglect not that which is common, and
be more ready for private occasions.

22 But having fully and faithfully accomplished all, thou ar^ bound and
enjoined to do, if thou have any spare time be take thee to thy self, as they
devotion shall require.

23 All cannot use one kind of exercise, but one is more convenient for this
person another for that according to the diversity of times also, diverse
exercises are fitting.

24 Some suits better with us on working days, other on holy days, some we
have need of in temptation, and of others in time of peace and quietness. Some
we mind when we are pensive, and other some when we rejoice in the Lord.

25 When chief festivals draw near, good exercises are to be renewed and the
prayers of holy men more fervently to be implored.

26 From feast to feast we should think thus with our selves, as though we were
then to depart out of this world, and to be made partakers of that everlasting
feast in heaven.

27 Therefore ought we carefully to prepare our selves against such holy times,
and lead our conversation so strictly as though we were shortly at God's hands
to receive the reward of our labors.

28 But if our departure be deferred, let us think with our selves that we are
not sufficiently prepared, and unworthy yet of so great glory which shall be
rev^aled to us in due time, and let us endeavor to prepare our selves more
diligently to our end.

29 Blessed is that servant (says S. Luke the Evandgelist) whom when his Lord
comes shall find him watching; verily I say unto you he shall make him Ruler
over all his goods.

CHAP. XX.
Of the love of Solitude and Silence.
Seek for an apt and convenient time to be at leisure to thy self, and
meditate often upon God's benefits and blessings.

2 Meddle not with curiosities, but pursue such matter which may rather yield
compunction to thy heart, then information to thy head.

3 If thou will withdraw thy self from speaking vainly and from gadding
idly, as also from harkning after novelties and rumors, thou shale* find
leisure sufficient and convenient enough to meditate of good things.

4 The greatest and best of God's Saints avoided the society of men when they
could coveniently, and did rather choose to live secretly, and set themselves
apart unto God.

5 One said, as often as I have been among men, I returned home less a man then
I was before, and this we find true when we talk long together.

6 It is easier not to speak a word at all, then not to speak more words then
we should, it is easier for a man to keep home, then to keep himself well
when he is abroad.

7 He therefore that intends to increase in the spirit and inner man, must with
Jesus depart from the multitude and press of people.

8 No man safely does go abroad, but he which gladly can abide at home, no man
speaks securely but he that holds his peace willingly.

9 No man rules safely but he that is ruled willingly, no man securely does
command, but he that has learned readily to obey.

10 No man rejoices securely, unless he has the testimony of a good
^onscience, yet the security of the Saints was always full of the fear of God.

11 Neither did those eminent gifts and excellent graces that were in them,
make them more haughty, but more humble.

12 But the security of the wicked as it arises of pride and presumption, so
in the end it deceives them and turns to their own destruction.

13 Although thou seem to be a good religious man, or never so devou^ yet
promise not to thy self security in this life.

14 It falls out many times that those have fallen into great^st danger by
overmuch confidence and presumption who have been in greatest esteem and
account amongst men.

15 Wherefore it is better for many not to be altogether free from temptations,
but often assaulted least by too much security they should be pu^fed up with
pride, or rely too much upon worldly comforts.

16 O how good a conscience would he keep, that would not seek after transitory
joy, who would not entangle himself with the affairs of this world.

17 O how great peace and quietness should he possess, that can cast away all
vain-cares, and think only upon heavenly things, and would place all his hope
and confidence in God!

18 No man is worthy of heavenly comfort, unless he have diligently exercised
himself in holy compunction.

19 If thou desire true contrition of heart enter into thy closet and shut
out all worldly tumult as it is written, examine your own hearts upon your
be^s and be still.

20 In thy closet thou shall find what abroad thou shall often loose, the more
thou visitt thy closet, the more thou will lik it, the less thou come
thereunto the more thou will loath it.

21 If in the beginning of thy amendment thou art content to remain in it, and
keep it well, it will afterward be to thee a dear friend, and a most
pleasant comfort.

22 In silence and in quietness a devout soul makes her self perfect, and
learneth the secrets and mysteries of holy Scripture.

23 There she finds floods of tears wherein she may every night wash and
cleanse her self that she may be so much the more familiar with her Creator, by
how much the farther off she lives from all worldly disquiet.

24 Who so therefore withdraw^th himself from his acquaintance and friends,
God and his holy Angels will draw near unto him.

25 It is better to live privately and to have regard to himself, then to
neglect himself and his own salvation, though he could work miracles.

26 It is very commendable in a religious person, seldom to go abroad to be
unwilling either to see or to be seen.

27 Why art tho^ willing and desirous to see that which is unlawful for thee
to have and enjoy? for the world passes away and the lusts thereof.

28 Our sensual desires draw us to ^oave abroad, but when the pleasure is
past, what carriest thou home with thee but a grieved conscience and distracted
mind?

29 A merry going out brings commonly a mournful return home, and a joyful
evening makes many times a sad morning.

30 So all carnal joy has a pleasant entrance, but in the end it bites like
an Adder, and stings like a Cockatrice.

31 What can thou see elsewhere, which thou can not see here? behold here
are heaven and earth and all the Elements, for of these are all things created.

32 What can thou see any where that can long continue under the sun? thou
th^nkest perchance to satiate thy self and have thy fill, but thou shall never
attain it.

33 Sho^ldst thou see all things present before thine eyes, it were but a vain
and unprofitable sight, lift up thine eyes to God in the highest, and pray him
to pardon all thy sins and infirmities.

34 Leave vain things to the vain, and do thou give heed to that which God
commands, shut the door upon thy self, and call unto thee Jesus thy Beloved.

35 Stay with him in thy closet for thou shall not find so great peace any
where else: had thou not gone abroad and hearkened to idle rumors, thou had
lived more at hearts-ease.

36 And seeing thou delightest sometimes to hear news, it is fit thou suffer
for it some unquietness and trouble of mind.

CHAP. XXI.
Of compunction of Heart.
IF thou will any thing come forward, keep thy self always in the fear of
God, and yield not too much scope to liberty.

2 Keep in awe all thy senses under the severe rod of Discipline, and give not
thy self over to foolish mirth.

3 Give thy self to compunction of heart, and thou shall find much devotion
therein, compunction brings much good which dissoluteness is wont quickly to
destroy.

4 A wonder it is that any man can heartily rejoice in this life, if he duly
consider his banishment, and thoroughly weight the many perils wherewith his
soul is environed.

5 The levity of our minds and the little care we have of our faults makes us
insensible of the sorrows of our souls.

6 But we often vainly laugh when we should justly weep: the service and fear
of God is the truest liberty, and a good conscience a continual feast.

7 Happy is he that can avoid all cause of distraction, and recollect himself
to the union of holy compunction.

8 Happy is he that can cast away from himself all that may defile his
conscience, or any way grieve or burden it.

9 Bestirre thy self like a man, one custom overcomes another, if thou can
forbear meddling in other men's matters, they likewise shall not have to do
with thine.

10 Busy not thy self in matters which appertain to others, neither do thou
meddle at all with the affairs of thy betters.

11 Still have an eye to thy self first, and be sure more especially to
instruct thy self before all thy loving friends.

12 If thou have not the favor of men, be not grieved at it, but take this to
heart because thou do not carry thy self so warily and circumspectly as it
becomes the servant of God and a devout religious man.

13 It is better oftentimes and more secure that a man has not consolations in
this life, especially such as are consonant to our carnal desires.

14 But that we have not all or very seldom tasted divine consolation, we may
thank our selves, because we seek not after inward compunction, as having not
altogether forsaken outward vanities.

15 Know that thou art unworthy of divine consolation, and that thouhast
deserved much tribulation.

16 When a man has perfect contrition, then is the whole world grievous and
loathsome unto him

17 A good man never wants matter of mourning, for whether he consider his
own or his neighbors estate, he knows that none lives here without great
tribulation.

18 And by how much a man looks narrowly into himself, by so much he sees
greater cause of lamentation.

29 Our sins and wickednesses wherein we lie weltring, do minister unto us
so much matter of sorrow and compunction, that we can seldom apply our selves
to heavenly contemplations.

20 Did thou but as often think with thy self how soon thou may die, as
how long thou may live, there is no question but thou would more earnestly
labor thine amendment.

21 If thou but let the pains, that hereafter are to be endured, sink deeply
into thy heart, I belieeve thou would willingly undergo any labor or sorrow
in this world, and not be afraid of the greatest severity.

22 But because we do not take these things to heart, and as yet love those
things only that delight us, this makes us so dull and key-cold in Religion.

23 If our body be amiss we may thank our selves for it, it is often our
decay, and want of spirit which makes our miserable body so easily complain.

24 Pray therefore unto the Lord with alll humility, that he will vouchsafe to
give thee the spirit of contrition.

25 And say with the Prophet, feed me O Lord with the bread of tears, and give
me plenteousnesse of tears to drink.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Consideration of humane misery.
MIserable thou art wheresoever thou be, or whithersoever thou turnest, unless
thou turn thy self un to God.

2 Why art thou troubled, when things succeed not as thou would or desire,
for who is he that has all things accoording to his mind?

3 Neither I nor thou, nor any man upon the earth, there is none in this world
be he King or Pope without some tribulation or other.

4 Who is then in the best estate or condition? even he who for God's sake can
suffer affliction.

5 Many weak and frail men can say, O what an happy life has such a one, how
wealthy, how mighty he is, in how great honor and credit.

6 But lift up thine eyes to the riches of heaven, and thou shall perceive that
all the goods of this life are nothing so be accounted of.

7 They are very uncertain, rather burdensome then delightful, because they
are never enjoyed without carfulness and fear.

8 Man's happiness consists not in having abundance of wealth, but a mean
estate should content him, it is truly misery enough even to live upon the
earth.

9 The more a man hungreth after godliness, the more he abhors this life
because he sees more clearly and perceives more sensibly the defects of
humane corruption.

10 For to eat and to drink, to sleep and to watch, to labor and to rest, and
to be subject to other necessities of nature is doubtless a great misery to a
devout mind, that would gladly be free and delivered from sin.

11 For the inward man is much oppressed with these outward and corporal
necessities whilst we live in this world.

12 Therefore the holy Prophet prays with great devotion to be delivered from
them, saying, draw me O Lord out of my necessities.

13 But woe be to them that know not their own misery, and a greater woe to
them that take delight in this miserable and corruptible life.

14 And some there be so much dote upon it, although with great labor and
pains they can scarce get bread to eat, yet could they live here always, they
would care but little for the Kingdom of heaven.

15 O how mad are these in their brains and faithless in their hearts, who
lie so deeply drowned in the earth that they can think of nothing but earthly
things.

16 But miserable wretches as they are, they shall in the end feel to their
cost how vile and vain that was which they loved.

17 Whereas the Saints of God, and all the fast friends of Christ look not on
those things which pleased the flesh, and flourished for a time, but panted
after everlasting rreasures with all greediness and desire.

18 Their whole desire was carried upward to things durable and invisible, that
the desire of things visible might not draw them to things below.

19 O Brother loose not thy confidence to come forward in godliness, there is
yet time, the hour is not yet past.

20 Why will thou defer thine amendment from day to day, arise and begin this
very instant, and say now is the time to be doing, now is the time to be
working, now is the best time to amend my self.

21 When thou art ill at ease and much troubled, then is the time to profit
best, thou must pass through fire and water before thou come to a place of
refreshing.

22 Unless thou offer violence to thy self, thou shall never get the victory
over sin so long as we carry about us this frail body of ours we can never
be without sin or live without sorrow.

23 We could gladly be quiet and freed from all misery, but seeing by sin we
have lost our innocence, we have by that also forfeited our felicity.

24 Therefore we must hold our selves content, and expect the mercy of God till
this our iniquity be put away, and this mortality of ours be swallowed up of
life.

25 O how great is humane frailty which is always prone to evil to day thou
confessest thy sins, and to morrow thou committest the very same thou have
confessed.

26 Now thou art in the mind to look well unto thy ways, and within a while
thou so behavest thy self, as though thou had never any such mind at all.

27 Good cause have we therefore to humble our selves, and never to have any
great conceit of our worth, we are so frail in our nature, so inconstant in
our courses.

28 Besides, that may quickly be lost by our own negligence, which by the
grace of God and our own great pains we have scarce at length obtained.

29 What will become of us in the end, who begiu to wax cold so timely?

30 Woe be unto us if we will now give our selves to ease, as if all were in
peace, and safety, when yet there appeareeh no sign of sanctity in our
conversations!

31 We have need like young beginners be newly instructed again to good
manners, if happily there be any hope of our future amendment and spiritual
progress.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the meditation of Death.
THere will very quickly be an end of thee here, therefore see what will become
of thee hereafter. To day a man, to morrow none, and out of sight, out of mind.

2 O the stupidity and hardness of man's heart, who thinks only upon the
present, and has no care of the time to come!

3 Thou should so order thy self in all thy thoughts and actions, as if to
day, yea this very moment thou we, it ready to depart.

4 Had thou a clear conscience thou would not greatly fear death, care not
so much for the death of this body as the sin of thy soul.

5 If thou art not prepared to day, how will thou be prepared to morrow? thou
know not what will be to morrow, and how know thou that thou shall live
till to morrow?

6 What are we the better to live long, if we prove not the better by long
living? for length of days does oftnes make our sins the greater, then our
lives the better.

7 O that we had spent but one day well in this world.

8 Many keep in mind how long it is since their conversion, and yet forget to
fructify in a holy conversation.

9 If to die be accounted dreadful, to live long may prove more dangerous,
happy is he that has his end before his eyes, and prepares himself to die
daily.

10 If at any time thou have seen an other man die, make account thou must
follow him, he has showed thee but the way.

11 When it is morning think thou may die before night, and when evening
comes, presume not upon next morning.

12 Be thou therefore always in a readiness, and so lead thy life that death
may never take thee unprepared.

13 Many die suddenly and when they look not for it, for the son of man will
come, when we think not of his coming.

14 When thy last sand shall be run out, thou will have a far diffetent
opinion of thy whole life that is past, and be exceeding sorry thou have been
so careless and remiss.

15 O how wise and happy is he that now labors to be such a one in his life,
as he wishes to be found at the hour of his death.

16 To contemn the world perfectly, to go forward in virtue zealously, to
love reprose willingly, to amend our lives seriously, to obey superiors gladly,
to deny himself thoroughly, and to suffer affliction for his sake patiently,
make us confident we shall die happily.

17 Whilst thou art in health thou may do many good deeds, but when thou art
sick, I see not what thou art able to do.

18 Few in the weakness of their bodies gather strength to their souls, as
they who are walking abroad, are seldom settled at home.

19 Trust not to friends and kindred, neither do thou put off the care of thy
soul till hereafter, for men will sooner forget thee, then thou art aware of.

20 It is better to look to it betime and do some good a fore hand, then to
trust to other men's courtesies.

21 If thou do not provide for thy self in this world, who will have care of
thee in that which is to come.

22 The time that is now present is very precious, now is the day of salvation,
now is the acceptable time.

23 But alas that thou should spend thy time so idly here, where thou
might purchase to live eternally hereafter.

24 The time will come when thou shall desire one day or hour to amend in, and
it is a great question whether it will be granted thee.

25 O be loved from how great danger might thou deliver thy self! from how
great fear free thy self, if thou would be now fearful and careful how to
die!

26 Labor now to live so, that at the hour of death thou may rather rejoice
then fear, learn now to die to the world that thou may begin to live with
Christ.

27 Learn now to contemn all earthly things that thou may freely go to
Christ.

28 Chastise thy body now by Repentance that thou may then have assured
confidence.

29 Ah fool, why do thou think to live long, when thou can not promise to
thy self one day, how many have been deceived and suddenly snatched away?

30 How often do thou hear these reports, such a man is slain, another is
drowned, a third breaks his neck with a fall, this man died eating, and that
man playing?

31 One perished by fire, another by the sword, another of the plague, and
another was slain by thieves, thus death is the end of all, and man's life
passes away like a shadow.

32 Who shall remember thee when thou art dead? and who shall pray for thee
when thou can not help thy self?

33 Do, do now my beloved whatsoever thou art able to do, for thou know
not when thou shall die, not yet what shall befall thee after thy death.

34 Now whilst thou have time heap unto thy self everlasting treasures, think
on nothing but the salvation of thy soul, care for nothing but the service of
thy God.

35 Make now friends to thy self by honoring the Saints of God, and imitating
their virtues, that when thou failest in this short life they may receive thee
into everlasting habitations.

36 Esteem thy self as a stranger and Pilgrim upon the earth, and as one to
whom the affairs of this world do nothing appertain.

37 Keep thy heart free from the world and lifted up directly unto God, because
thou have here no abiding city.

38 Send thither thy daily prayers and sighs joined with unfeigned tears, that
after death thy spirit may be happily commended into the hands of the Almighty.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Judgment and the punishment of Sins.
IN all thy ways have a special aim to thy end, for how can thou be able to
stand before a severe Judge to whom nothing is hid.

2 Who is not pacified with gifts, nor admits any frivolous excuses, but
will judge according to right and equity.

3 O wretched and foolish sinner, who sometimes fear the countenance of an
angry and ignorant man, what answer will thou make to an angry and all-knowing
God?

4 Why do not thou provide for thy self against that great day of Judgment,
when no man can excuse or answer for another, bu^ every one shall have enough
to answer for himself?

5 Now are thy pains profitable, thy tears acceptable, thy groans audible, thy
grief pacifieth for thy sins and prepares thy soul.

7 The patient man has a great and wholesome purgatory, who though he receive
injuries, yet grieveth more for the malice of an other then for his own wrongs.

8 Who prays willingly for his adversaries, and from his heart forgiveth
their offenses, and delaieth not to ask forgiveness of whomsoever he has
offended.

9 Who is sooner moved to compassion then to anger, who often offers violence
to himself, and labors earnestly to bring the body into subjection to the
spirit.

10 It is better to purge our sins and offenses here, then keep them to be
purged and punished hereafter verily we do but deceive our selves through an
inordinate love of the flesh.

11 What else will that fire consume but thy sins, the more thou sparest thy
self and followest thy pleasure now so much the more hereafter shall be thy
punishment, and a greater fuel added to that flame.

12 In what thing a man has sinned in the same shall he be punished, there
shall the sloathfull be pricked forward with burning goads, and the gluttons
vexed with great hunger and thirst.

13 There shall the lascivious and loves of pleasure be bathed in burning pitch
and stinking brimstone, and the envious like mad dogs shall howl for very
grief.

14 There is no fault but shall have its proper and peculiar torment, there the
proud shall be filled with all horror and confusion, the covetous shall be
pinched with exceeding penury, one hour of pain there shall be more bitter,
then a thousand years of the sharpest penance here.

15 There is no quiet no comfort for the damned there, yet here we have some
intermission of our labors and enjoy the comfort of our friends.

16 Be now solicitous and sorrowful for thy sins, that at the day of
judgment thou may be secure with the company of blessed souls

17 For then shall the righteous with great boldness stand against such as
have vexed and oppressed them, then shall he sit to judge men, who is now
content to be judged of men.

18 Then shall the poor and humble have great confidence, but the proud man
shall be compassed with fear on every side.

29 Then will it appear that he was wise in this world, who had learned for
Christ to be a fool and despised.

30 Then shall affliction patiently undergone delight us, when the mouth of
iniquity shall be stopped up, then shall the devout rejoice and the profane
mourn.

31 Then shall he more rejoice that has beat down his own flesh, then he that
has abounded in all pleasure and delight.

32 Then shall the poor garment shine and glitter, and the precious robes seem
vile and contemptible, then shall be more commended the poor cottage, then the
stately palace.

33 Then will constant patience more avail us then all earthly power, and
simple obedience be preferred before all worldly wisdom.

34 Then shall a good and clear conscience more rejoice a man then the
profound learning of philosophy, and the contempt of riches weigh more then all
worldly treasures.

35 Then will thou be comforted that thou have prayed devoutly, then fared
daintily, and be more glad thou have kept silence, then thou have talked much.

36 Then will good works prevail more then godly words, then a strict life and
severe repentance will be more pleasing then all earthly delight.

37 Prove first here what thou can endure hereafter, accustom thy self now
to suffer a little, that thou may then be delivered from more grievous pains.

38 If now thou can endure so little, how will thou then be able to endure
perpetual torments, if a little suffering make thee so impatient, what will
hell fire do hereafter.

39 Assure thy self thou can not have two Paradises; it is impossible to
enjoy delights in this world, and after that reign for ever with Christ.

40 Suppose thou had hitherto lived always in honor and delights, what
would all this avail thee if thou were to die at this instant.

41 All therefore is but vanity and texation of spirit, besides the love of God
and his alone service.

42 For he that loyeth God with all his heart is neither afraid of death nor
judgment, nor of punishment, nor of hell, for perfect love gives secure access
to God.

43 But he that takes delight in sin, what marveil is it if he be afraid both
of Death and Judgment? Yet it is good although love be not of force to withhold
thee from sin, that at least the fear of hell should restrain thee.

44 But he that lays aside the fear of God, can never continue long in good
estate, but falls quickly into the snares of the Devil.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the zealous amendment of our whole life.
BE watchful and diligent in the service of God, and often bethink thy self
wherefore thou came hither, and why thou have left the world.

2 Was it not that thou might live to God, and become a spiritual man, be
fervent then to come forward, for shortly thou shall receive a reward of thy
labors,

3 There shall not be then any fear or sorrow in thy coasts, labor but now a
little, and thou shall find great rest, yea perpetual joy to thy soul.

4 If thou continuest faithful and fervent in doing good, no doubt but God
will be faithful, and full in rewarding thee.

5 Thou oughtst to have a good hope in getting the victory, but thou must not
be seem of it, lest thou wax either negligent or proud.

6 When one that was in great anxiety of mind often wavering between fear and
hope, did once being very sorrowful prostrate himself by prayer in a Church
before the Altar, began to think thus with himself, saying,

7 O that I knew certainly I should persevere unto the end, and presently heard
this heavenly answer within him, what if thou kn^wst it, what would thou do?
do but so now as thou would then do, and thou shall be secure.

8 And being straightway conforted and strengthened in mind he committed himself
wholly to the will of God, and so left off all careful doubting.

9 Neither would he curiously search what should become of him, but rather,
applied himself to know* the perfect and acceptable Will of God, for the
beginning and accomplishing of every good work.

10 Put thy trust in the Lord and do good says the Prophet, and inhabit the
land, and thou shall be fed with the plenty thereof.

11 One thing there is that draws men back from a progress in good and a
thorough reformation of evil, the horror of the difficulty and the labor of
the combat.

12 For without doubt they especially above all others profit best in
godliness, who strive more manfully to overcome these things, which are most
grievous and averse from their own dispositions.

13 For there a man profits more and obtaines greater grace, where he more
overcomes himself and mortifieth the inward man.

14 But all have not alike to overcome and mortify, for although, a man have
stronger passions, yet if he be zealous in the chase, shall sooner overcome,
then he that has fewer, and is not so fervent.

15 Two things especially much further any great amendment, to wit^ to withdraw
our selves violent (...) that to which our nature is vitiou^^^ ^^clined, and
earnestly to contend for the good we stand in need of.

16 Be careful also to avoid with greater diligence those things in thy self
which do most displease thee in others.

17 Gather some profit to thy soul out of every occasion whosoever thou be, so
that if thou see or hear any good examples, be kindled and provoked to do
the like.

18 But if thou perceive any thing worthy of reproof, take heed of doing the
same, or if thou have done it, labor quickly to amend it.

19 As thou eyest other men so are other men's eyes upon thee, how sweet and
pleasant a thing is it to see those that be fervent and zealous, to be
tractable and obed^ent.

20 Again how sorrowful and sad a spectacle is it to see men live dissolutely
and disorderly, not applying themselves to that whereunto they were called.

21 How hurtful and pernicious is it to neglect the chief intent and (...) of
their callings, and busy (...) in that which they have nothing to do withal.

22 Be mindful of that profession thou have taken upon thee, and have always
in thy heart the remembrance of Christ Crucified.

23 When thou lookst upon his life thou may well be ashamed of thine own for
though thou have a long time professed christianity, yet have thou not
endeavored much to conform thy self to Christ.

24 A religious man who exercises himself attentively and devoutly in the
life and death of Christ, shall there abundantly find all things necessary and
profitable, and out of Jesus he shall need to seek nothing.

25 O if Jesus Christ and him Crucified would sink deep into our hearts, how
quickly and sufficiently learned should we prove?

26 A religious man that is zealous takes and endures all well that is
commanded him, but he that is negligent and luke warm has tribulation npon
tribulation.

27 Nay he is upon every side straightned and molested, for he is void of
inward consolation, and forbidden to take any outward comfort.

28 A religious man without discipline is in great danger of ruin, he that
seeks liberty and ease shall ever live in disquiet, for one thing or other
will always displease him.

29 O that we had nothing else t^ do but always with our mouth and whole
heart to praise our Lord God!

30 O that thou might never have need to eat, nor drink, nor sleep, but
always praise God, and only attend upon spiritual employments.

31 Then should thou be much happier then now thou art, when upon every
occasion thou art so ready to follow the lusts of the flesh.

32 Would we were not put to such necessities, but had only the spiritual
^efections of the soul, which alas we ^ast of too seldom.

33 When a man is come to that pass, that he seeks no comfort in any
creature, then does God first begin* to be a sweet relish unto him.

34 Then will he be well content with whatsoever shall befall him, then shall
not a great matter overjoy him, ^or a small matter trouble him.

35 But with great integrity and confidence commits himself to God, who shall
be to him all in all, to whom nothing perishes or dies, but all things live
unto him, and serve him without delay.

36 Remember always thy end, and how time lost never returns, without care
and diligence thou shall never become virtuous.

37 If thou beginnest to wax cold all is not well with thee, hut if thou give
thy self to fervency thou shall find much peace, and through the assistance of
God's grace and love of virtue, thou shall find thy labor but light.

38 The fervent and diligent man is ready at all assayes, it is easier to
endure the labor and pains of the body, then to conqu^re the vices and
passions of ^he mind.

39 He that avoideth not small slips, by little and little may take a great fall,
if thou spend the day well, thou will be always merry at night.

40 Be watchful over thy ways, and whatsoever become of others be careful of
thy self, the greater violence thou usest against thy self, the greater
benefit shall thou reap.

THE SECOND BOOK*
CHAP. I.
Of inward Conversation.
THE Kingdom of God is within you, says the Lord. Turn thee with thy whole
heart unto the Lord, and forsake this wretched world, and thy soul shall find
rest.

2 Learn to contemn outward things, and give thy self to the inward, and thou
shall see the Kingdom of God to come into thee.

3 For the Kingdom of God is peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, which is not
bestowed upon the wicked.

4 Christ will come unto thee, and show thee his comfort, so that thou will
provide within thee a dwelling place fit for him.

5 All his beauty and glory is within, no^ caring for any thing else, there
delighteh he himself.

6 The inward man he often visits and has with him sweet discourse, pleasant
comfort, much peace, wonderful familiarity*

7 O faithful soul make ready thy heart for this bridegroom, that he may
vouchsafe to come unto thee, and dwell within thee

8 For so he says, if any man love me he will keep my word, and we will come
unto him, and will make our aboade with him.

9 Give therefore unto Christ a place in thy heart, and deny entrance to all
others, when thou have Christ, thou art rich enough, and he will suffice thee.

10 He will faithfully oversee thee; and carefully provide for thee in all
things, so that thou shall not need to depend upon men.

11 For men soon alter their minds, or quickly fade away, but Christ remains
for ever, and stands out stoutly to the very end.

12 There is little trust to be given to frail and mortal man, though he be
profitable and dear unto thee; neither ought thou much to be grieved when
sometimes he crosses and contradicts thee.

13 They that to day take thy part to morrow may be against thee, and so on the
contrary: they often turn like the wind.

14 Put thy whole trust and confidence in God, love him for his mercy, fear
him for his judgment, he will answer for thee, and will do in all things* what
is best.

15 Thou have here no abiding City, and wheresoever thou be, thou art but a
Stranger and Pilgrim, neither shall thou ever have rest, unless thou be fully
united to thy Savior.

16 Why do thou gaze up and down here, since this is not the place of thy
abode: In heaven ought to be thy dwelling place, and all things here to be
looked upon but as it were in the passage.

17 All things pass away, and tho^ together with them, beware thou en^angle
not thy self in them, l^ast thou be caught and confounded.

18 Let thy thought be on the Almighty, and thy prayer be directed unto Christ
without ceasing.

19 If thou can not contemplate high and heavenly things, rest thy self in
the passion of thy Savior, and dwell willingly in the wounds of his sacred
body.

20 For if thou fl^e devoutly to his holy wounds, and to the precious marks of
his Passion, thou shall find great comfort in all thy tribulation.

21 Neither will thou much care to be despised of men, and wilt easily endure
the words of slanderous tongues.

22 Christ was also in the world despised of men, he was exposed to the
reproach of his enemies, and forsaken by his acquaintance and friends in his
greatest extremity.

23 Christ had adversaries and backbiters, and will thou have all men thy
friends and benefactors, how shall thy patience be crowned, if no adversity
befall thee?

24 If thou will not endure adversity, how art thou Christ's friend? Suffer
with Christ, and for Christ, if you desire to reign with Christ.

25 If thou have but once entered into the secrets of thy Savior, and tasted a
little of his ardent love, then would thou not care for thine own commodity
or discommodity, but rather rejoice at thy wrongs offered thee, for the love of
Jesus makes a man to despise himself.

26 A lover of Jesus and of the true inw^rd man, and one free from inordinate
affections, can easily turn himself to God, and being lifted up in spirit
above himself, rests in the fruition of joy.

27 He that relisheth all things as they are, and not as they are called and
esteemed to be, he is truly wise indeed, and rather tought of God then of men.

28 He that knows to walk within himself, and to make small account of
outward things shall be sure to have time and place enough to perform devout
exercises.

29 The inward man does quickly recollect himself, because he never gives
himself wholly to outward employments.

30 Bodily labor is no let unto him, nor necessary business so it be
seasonable, but as things fall out so he applies himself unto them.

31 He that is well disposed within himself, is not troubled with the strange
and perverse behavior of men by how much a man draws business to himself,
by so much is he hindered and distracted.

32 If all were well with thee, and thou thoroughly purged, all things would
turn to thy good and profit.

33 Therefore do many things displease thee and often trouble thee, because
thou art not yet full dead unto thy self, nor free from the affection of
earthly things.

34 Nothing so defiles and entangleth the heart of man, as our impure love of
these earthly creatures.

35 If thou refuse comfort in outward things, thou shall more easily
contemplate the things that are in heaven, and often inwardly triumph for very
joy.

CHAP. II.
Of humble S^bmission.
Weigh not very much who is for thee or against thee, let this be thy care and
endeavor, that God may be with thee in all thou take in hand.

2 Keep a good conscience and God will defend thee sufficiently, for whom God
will help, no malice of men can hurt.

3 If thou know how to suffer and hold thy peace, without doubt thou shall
have help from above, he knows the season and manner how to delive^ thee.

4 Therefore thou oughtst to resign up thy self unto God, for it belongs to
him to help and deliver from all mischief.

5 Oftentimes it much avails us for the better keeping of humility, that
others know and reprehend our faults.

6 When man humbles himself for his own offenses, then he easily pacifies
others, and quickly satisfies those that are offended with him.

7 God protecteth and delivers the humble, he loves and comfort the
humble, to an humble man he humbles himself.

8 Unto the humble man he gives great grace, and after he has cast him down,
he raises him unto glory.

9 Unto the humble he reveals his secrets, and sweetly draws and inviteth
him unto himself.

10 Though the humble person suffer much outward calamity, yet is he at peace
within himself because he relieth upon God, and not upon the world.

11 Think not that thou have profited any thing at all, unless thou have
learnt to esteem thy self inferior unto all.

CHAP. III.
Of a good and peaceable man.
BE first of all at peace with thy self, then may thou be better able to
pacify others, a peaceable man does more good then he that is learned.

2 A passionate man turns good into evil, and easily believes the worst. A
good quiet man turns all things into good, he that is peaceable is not
suspicious of any.

3 He that is discontent and troubled, is tossed up and down with many
suspicions, he is neither quiet himself nor suffers others to be quiet.

4 He speaks that oftentimes which he ought not to speak, and omitteth that
which were more expedient for him to do.

5 He considers what others are bound to do, and neglects that which he is
bound to himself.

6 First therefore have a zealous care over thy self, and then thou may
justly show thy self zealous of thy neighbors good.

7 Thou know well how to excuse and color over thine own deeds, and yet
thou will not admit of other men's excuses.

8 It were more equal and meet thou should accuse thy self, and excuse thy
brother, if thou will be borne withal, bear thou with another.

9 Behold how far off thou are yet from true charity and humility, which
knows not how to be angry or displeased with any, but with him that has it.

10 It is no great matter to converse with the good and those of a gentle
disposition, for that is naturally pleasing unto all, and every one is willing
to be at peace, and love those that are of his humor.

11 But to be at quiet with the stubborn and perverse, with the disorderly and
such as cross us, is a great grace, a very commendable and manly fact.

12 There be who are at peace with themselves and with others also, and there
be who can be quiet neither with themselves nor with others; they are
troublesome to others, but to themselves most of all.

13 And others there are who keep themselves in peace and labor to bring
others into peace.

14 Our greatest peace, in this miserable life consists rather in humble
enduring, then in not feeling adversities.

15 He shall enjoy the greatest peace that can tell how to be most patient;
such a man is a conqueror of himself, a Lord of the world, a friend of
Christ's, and an heir of heaven.

CHAP. IIII.
Of a pure mind and upright intention.
With two wings man is lifted up from earthly vanities, to wit, with
simplicity and purity; simplicity ought to be in our intentions, purity in our
affections.

2 Simplicity fixes the eyes of our soul upon God, purity apprehends and
tastes his sweetness; thou shall not be hindered from any good action, if thou
be inwardly free from inordinate affections.

3 If thou intend and seek nothing else but the good pleasure of God and the
profit of thy neighbor, thou shall enjoy internal liberty.

4 If thy heart were sincere and upright, then every creature would be unto
thee a looking glass of life, and a Book of holy learning.

5 There is not a creature so small and so vile, that does not represent the
goodness of God.

6 If in thine own heart thou art good and pure, then would thou be able to
see and understand all things without any let or impediment; a pure heart
pierces heaven and hell.

7 Such as a man is inwardly so he judges outwardly, if there be joy in the
world the pure of heart possesses it, if tribulation and affliction, an evil
conscience feels it.

8 As iron put into the fire loses his rust, and burns bright like fire, so
he that turns truly unto God, puts off the flesh, and is become a new man.

9 When a man begineth to wax cold, then he is afraid of small pains, and
willingly receives comfort from without.

10 But when he begins fully to overcome himself, and to walk manfully in the
ways of God, then he esteems those things but easy which before seemed
grievous unto him.

CHAP. V.
Of the consideration of ones self.
WE cannot trust to our selves very much, for lack of grace and understanding;
there is but little light in us, and that which we have, we quickly loose out of
negligence.

2 And many times we do not perceive how blind we are within, we often do
evil and excuse it worse.

3 We are sometimes moved with passion, and think it to be zeal, we reprehend
small things in others, and pass over greater matters in our selves.

4 We quickly feel and weigh what we suffer at the hands of others, but we mind
not what others suffer from us.

5 He that does well and rightly consider his own works, will find little cause
to judge hardly of another.

6 The inward man prefers the care of himself before all other cares, and
he that diligently looks to himself, does seldom speak much of other.

7 Thou shall never be devout and right within, unless thou be silent
concerning other men's affairs, and look especially to thy self.

8 If thou attend wholly to God, and to thy self, thou will be little moved
with whatsoever thou see abroad.

9 Where art thou when thou art not with thy self, and when thou have run over
all, what art thou the better if thou neglect thy self.

10 If thou desire peace of mind and true concord, thou must cast behind thee
all other things, and look only to thy self.

11 Furthermore thou shall gain much if thou shall keep thy self f^ce from
all worldly cares, and thou shall greatly decay if thou make any account of
earthly things.

12 Account nothing great, nothing high, nothing grateful, nothing acceptable
but God alone, or that which is from God.

13 Esteem all comfort vain which thou receivest from any creature, the soul
that loves God despises all things in respect of God.

14 God alone who is eternal infinite and incomprehensible is the comfort of
the soul, and the true joy of the heart.

CHAP. VI.
Of the joy of a good Conscience.
THe glory of a good man is the testimony of a good conscience: have a good
conscience and thou shall ever have joy.

2 A good conscience is able to endure much, and is exceeding cheerful in
adversities, an evil conscience is always fearful and unquiet.

3 Thou shall rest quietly if thine heart reprove thee not; rejoice not but
when thou have done well.

4 Wicked men have never any true joy, neither do they feel inward peace, for
there is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord.

5 Although they say we live in peace, there shall no evil happen unto us, and
who dares do us any harm.

6 Believe them not, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord arise, and their
actions shall turn to nothing, and their cogitations shall utterly perish.

7 To glory in tribulation is no hard thing to him that loves, for so to glory
is to glory in the Cross of our Lord.

8 The glory is short which is given and received from men, sorrow always
attends the glory of the world.

9 The glory of the good is in the testimony of a good conscience, and not in
the tongues of men, the gladness of the just is of God, and in God, and their
joy is of the truth.

10 He that desires true and everlasting glory cares not for that which is
temporal, and he that seeks after temporal glory, or contemns it not from
his heart, is less in love with heavenly.

11 He injoyeth great tranquillity of mind, that eareth not for the praises or
dispraises of men, he is easily content and pacified whose conscience is pure.

12 Thou art not the more holy for being commended, nor the more vile for being
dispraised, thou art what thou art, neither can thou be greater then what
thou art in the sight of God.

13 If thou consider what thou art within thee, thou will not care what men say
of thee, man sees but the face, but God considers the heart.

14 Man looks upon the deeds, but God weighs the intentions; to do always
well, and to esteem little of thy self, is a sign of an humble mind.

15 To refuse to be comforted by any creature is a sign of great purity and
inward confidence.

16 He that seeks a thing without himself, to bear witness of himself, it
is plain he has referred himself wholly unto God.

17 For not he that commends himself the same is approved, says S. Paul,
but he whom God commends.

17 To walk inwardly with God and not to be possessed with any outward
affection, is the state of an inward and spiritual man.

CHAP. VII.
Of the love of Jesus above all things.
BLessed is he that understands what it is to love Jesus, and to despise
himself for Jesus sake.

2 Thou oughest to leave thy beloved for thy beloved, thy beloved sin for thy
beloved Savior; for that Jesus will alone be beloved above all things.

3 The love of the creature is deceiptfull and unconstant, the love of Jesus is
faithful and permanent.

4 He that cleaves to creatures shall full with that which is ready to fall,
he that embraces Jesus shall be fastened into him.

5 Love him, and keep him for thy friend, who when all go away, will not
forsake thee nor suffer thee to perish in the end.

6 Prevent the world and begin to forsake it first before it forsake thee, for
thou must one day be left of all men whether thou will or no.

7 Stick thee close to Jesus both in life and death; and commit thy self unto
his trust, who when all fail, can alone help thee.

8 Thy beloved is of that nature, that he will none of that which appertains
to others, but will have thy heart alone, and sit like a King in his own
throne.

9 If thou could purge thy self perfectly of all creatures, Jesus would
willingly dwell with thee: whatsoever confidence thou reposest in men without
Jesus, is all no better then lost.

10 Trust not, nor rely upon a reed full of wind; for that all flesh is as
grass and all the glory thereof shall wither away as the flower of the field.

11 Thou shall quickly be deceived, if thou look only to the outward show of
men: and if in them thou seek for comfort and commodity, thou shall instead
thereof often feel losses and crosses.

12 If thou seek Jesus in all things, thou shall surely find Jesus: but if
thou seek thy self, thou shall also find thy self, but to thine own
destruction.

13 For man does more hurt himself, if he seek not Jesus, then the whole
world, and all his adversaries could annoy him.

CHAP. VIII.
Of familiar oonversation with JESUS.
When Jesus is present, all is well, and nothing seems difficult, but when
Jesus is absent, every thing is hard.

2 When Jesus speaks not inwardly unto us, our comfort is nothing worth; but
if Jesus speak but one word, we feel much consolation.

3 Did not Mary Magdalen presently rise from the place where she wept, when
Martha said unto her, Thy master is here, and calls thee.

4 Happy is the hour when Jesus calls from the tears of the eyes to the joy
of the spirit. How dry and hard art thou without Jesus?

How foolish and vain, if thou desire any thing out of Jesus? Is not this a
greater loss, then if thou should loose the whole world.

5 What can the world profit thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is a
grievous hell; and to be with Jesus is a sweet Paradise.

6 If Jesus be with thee, no enemy can hurt thee, he that finds Jesus finds
a good treasure; yea a good above all goods.

7 And he that loses Jesus, loses too much, and more then the whole world.
He is most poor that lives without Jesus: and he most rich that is well with
Jesus.

8 It is a great skill to know how to converse with Jesus, and a great wisdom
to know how to keep Jesus.

9 Be humble, and peaceable, and Jesus will be with thee; be devout and quiet,
and Jesus will stay with thee.

10 Thou may drive away Jesus and loose his grace, if thou give thy self
to outward things.

11 And if thou should drive him from thee, and loose him, unto whom will thou fly, and what friend will thou then seek?

12 Without a friend thou can not well live: and if Jesus be not above all a
friend unto thee, thou shall be too too sorrowful and desolate.

13 Thou do therefore foolishly, if thou do trust or rejoice in any
other. It is better for the^ to have all the world against thee, then Jesus
offended with thee.

14 Amongst all things therefore that be dear unto thee, let Jesus alone be
thy chiefest beloved.

15 Love all for Jesus, but Jesus for himself. Jesus Christ alone is
especially to be beloved, who alone is found to be good, and faithful above
all friends.

16 For him, and in him, let as well friends as foes be dear unto thee: and all
these are to be prayed for, that all may know and love him.

17 Never desire to be singularly commended or beloved, for that appertains
only unto God, who has none like unto himself.

17 Neither do thou desire that the heart of any should be set on thee, nor
do thou set thy heart on the love of any: but let Jesus be in thee, and in
every virtuous and good man.

18 Be pure and free within, and entangle not thy heart with any crea^^re. Thou
ought to be as it were naked, and carry a pure heart to God, if thou will
consider, and prove, and see how sweet our Lord is.

19 And truly unless thou be prevented, and drawn by his grace, thou shall
never attain to that happiness, to forsake and cast away all, that thou alone
may be united to him alone.

20 For when the grace of God comes unto a man, then he is strong and nothing
is hard unto him, and when it goes away, he is poor and weak, and as it were
left unto the will of whomsoever will afflict him.

21 In this thou ought not to be dejected, nor despair, but to resign thy
self with all indifferency unto the w^ll of God, and to ^eare all things that
befall thee for the glory of Christ.

22 For after winter follows summer: after night comes day, and after a
tempest fair weather.

CHAP. IX.
Of the want of all comfort.
IT is (...) great matter to despise humane (...), when we have divine, or to
neg^^^ divine when we have humane.

2 It (...) and very much, to be able to wan^ both humane and divine comfort.

2 And for the honor and glory of God, to be willing to endure desolation of
heart; and to seek himself in nothing, nor to regard his own good actions.

3 What great matter is it, if thou be cheerful and devout at the coming of
heavenly grace? This hour is w^^shed for of all men.

4 He rides easily whom the grace of God carries. And what marvel, if he
feel not his burden who is borne up by the Almighty, and led by the greatest
guide?

5 We are always willing to have something for our comfort: and a man does
hardly put off, and forsake himself. The holy Martyr S. Laurence overcame the
world with his Prelate.

6 Because he despised whatsoever seemed delightsome in the world: and for the
love of Christ he patiently suffered the high Priest of God S. Si^tus to be
taken from him, whom he most loved.

7 He overcame therefore the love of man by the love of the Creator; and he
rather chose the divine pleasure, then humane comfort.

8 See thou also learn to forsake some necessary thing, and a beloved friend
for the love of God.

9 Be not grieved when thou art forsaken by a friend, knowing that we all at
length must be separated one from another.

10 A man must fight long, and with a constant mind, before he g^^ the victory,
and be able to place his whole heart in God.

11 When a man trusts in himself, he easily slideth unto humane comforts.

12 But a true lover of Christ, and a diligent follower of virtue, gives not
himself to such solace, nor seeks sensible sweetness, but rather forcible
exercises, and to sustain hard labors for Christ.

13 When therefore spiritual comfort is given thee from God, receive it
thankfully; but know that it is the gift of God, not any desert of thine.

14 Be not puffed up, joy not too much, neither do thou presume vainly: but be
rather the more humble for that grace, and more wary and fearful in all thy
actions: for that hour will pass away, and temptation will succeed.

15 When consolation is taken from thee, despair not presently; but with
humility and patience attend the heavenly visitation: for God is able again to
give thee greater consolation.

16 This is not new nor strange unto them, that have experience in the way of
God; for in the great Saints and ancient Prophets, there was oftentimes such
kind of alteration.

17 For which cause one when he had grace, said, I said in my prosperity I
shall never be removed.

18 But when this was gone from him, he adds what he found in himself,
saying* Thou turnedst thy face from me, and I became troubled.

19 Yet does he not despair in the midst of these changes, but more earnestly
prays unto our Lord, and says: Unto thee (O Lord) I will cry, and I will
pray unto my God.

20 Lastly he receives the fruit of his prayer, and witnesses that he was
heard, saying: Our Lord has heard me, and taken pity on me: our Lord is become
my helper.

21 But wherein? Thou have turned (says he) my sorrow into joy, and thou have
compassed me about with gladness.

22 If great Saints have been so dealt with all, we that are poor and weak
ought not to despair, if we be sometimes fervent, and sometimes cold.

23 For the spirit comes and goes, according to the good pleasure of his
will, for which cause blessed Job says, Thou visitest him early in the
morning, and suddenly thou provest him.

24 Whereupon therefore can I hope, or wherein ought I to trust, but in the
great mercy of God alone, and in the only hope of heavenly grace?

25 For whether I enjoy the presence of good men, or devout brethren, or
faithful friends, or holy Books, or learned treatises, or sweet songs and
himmes,

26 All these help little, and have little savor, when grace forsakes me, and
I remain left in my own poverty.

27 At such a time there is no better remedy then patience, and the resigning
of my self unto the will of God.

28 I never found any so religious and devout, that has not had sometimes a
with drawing of grace, or felt not a decrease of fervor.

29 There was never Saint so highly rapt, and illuminated, who first or last
was not tempted.

30 For he is not worthy of the high contemplation of God, who has not been
exercised with some tribulation for God's sake.

31 For temptation going before, is wont to be a sign of ensuing comfort. And
unto those that are proved by temptations, heavenly comfort is promised. He
that shall overcome, says he, I will give him to eat of the tree of life.

32 But divine comfort is given, that a man may be stronger to bear
adversities. There follows also temptation, lest we should wax proud of that
good.

33 The Devil sleeps not, neither is our flesh as yet dead: therefore cease
not to prepare thy self to the battle: for on thy right hand, and thy left
are enemies that never rest.

CHAP. X.
Of thankfulness for the grace of God.
Why seek thou rest, since thou art borne to labor? Dispose thy self to
patience, rather then to comforts, and to the bearing of the Gross, rather
then to gladness.

2 What secular person is there, that would not willingly receive spiritual
joy and comfort, if he could always have it? Spiritual comforts exceed all
the delights of the world, and all the pleasures of the flesh.

3 All worldly delights are either vain, or unclean: but spiritual delights
are only pleasant and honest, produced by virtues, and infused by God into pure
hearts.

4 But no man can always enjoy these comforts according to his desire; for the
time of temptation is not long away.

5 False freedom of mind, and great trust of our selves, is very contrary to
heavenly visitation.

6 God does well in giving grace: but man does evil in not returning it again
wholly unto God, with thanksgiving.

7 And therefore the gifts of grace cannot flow in us, because we are
ungrateful to the given: and return them not wholly to the head fountain.

8 For grace is ever due to him that is thankful, and from the proud shall be
taken that which is wont to be given to the humble.

9 I desire not that consolation that takes from me compunction, nor that
contemplation which breeds a haugh^y mind.

10 For all that is high, is not holy: nor all that is sweet, good: nor every
desire, pure; nor every thing that is dear unto us, is grateful to God.

11 I do willingly accept of that grace* whereby I may ever become more humble
and fearful, and be made more ready and able to forsake my self.

12 He that is taught by the gift of grace, and by the scourge of the
withdrawing thereof; will nor dare to attribute any good to himself: but will
rather acknowledge himself poor, and naked.

13 Give unto God that which is God's; and ascribe unto thy self that which is
thine own: that is, give thanks unto God for his grace, and acknowledge that
nothing is to be attributed to thee, but only sin, and the punishment due
thereunto.

14 Content thy self, and desire always the meanest and lowest things, and
the highest shall be given thee: for the highest stand not without the lowest.

15 The highest Saints before God, are the least in their own judgments; and
how much the more glorious, so much the humbler within themselves.

16 Those that are full of truth, and heavenly glory, are not desirous of the
vain glory of this world. Those that are firmly settled and grounded in God can
no way be proved.

17 And they that ascribe all unto God what good soever they have received,
seek not glory one of another but would have that glory which is from God
alone: and desire above all things to praise God in himself, and in all the
Saints, and always tend unto the same.

18 Be therefore grateful for the least gift, and thou shall be made worthy to
receive greater. Let the least be unto thee also as the greatest, and the most
contemptible as an especial gift.

19 If thou consider the worth of the giver, no gift will seem little, or of
mean esteem. For it is not little that is given by the Sovereign Majesty of
God.

20 Yea if he should give punishment and stripes, it ought to be grateful, for
that he does it always for our salvation, whatsoever he permits to happen
unto us.

20 He that desires to keep the grace of God, let him be thankful for the
grace given; and patient for the taking away thereof. Let him pray that he may
return, Let him be wary and humble, lest he loose it.

CHAP. XI.
How few the lovers of the Cross of Christ are.
Jesus has now many lovers of his heavenly Kingdom, but few bearers of his
Cross: He has many desirous of comfort but few of tribulation.

2 He finds many companions of his table, but few of his abstinence. All
desire to rejoice with him, few will suffer any thing for him, or with him.

3 Many follow Jesus unto the breaking of bread, but few to the drinking of the
Cup of his Passion. Many reverence his miracles, few follow the ignominy of his
Cross.

4 Many love Jesus, as long as adversities happen not. Many praise and bless
him, as long as they receive any comfort from him.

5 But if Jesus hide himself, and leave them but a while, they fall either
into complaint, or into too much dejection of mind.

6 But they that love Jesus for Jesus, and not for some comfort of their own,
bless him in all tribulation and anguish of heart, as well as in the greatest
comfort.

7 And although he should never give them comfort, they notwithstanding would
ever praise him, and always give him thanks.

8 O how powerful is the pure love of Jesus, which is mixed with no
self-love, nor proper interest! Are they not all to be called hirelings that
ever seek comforts?

9 Do they not show themselves to be rather lovers of themselves, then of
Christ, that always think of their commodity and g^ine? Where may one be found
that will serve God, without looking for reward?

10 It is hard to find any one so spiritual, that is free from the love of all
earthly things. For where is any that is inddeed poor in spirit, and free from
all affection of creatures? thou may go to the end of the world before thou
find him.

11 If a man should give all his wealth, yet is it nothing. And if he should
do great penance, yet is it little* And if he should attain to all knowledge
he is yet far off.

12 And if he should have great virtue, and very fervent devotion, yet there is
much wanting, to wit, one thing which is most necessary for him.

13 What is that? That leaving all he forsake himself, and go perfectly from
himself, and retain nothing of self-love. And when he has done all that he
knows to be done, let him think that he has done nothing.

14 Let him not weigh that much which might be much esteemed, but according to
truth, let him affirm himself to be an unprofitable servant, as our Savior
has said: When you shall have done all things that are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable servants.

15 Then may he be truly poor in spirit and naked, and say with the Prophet: I
am alone and poor, yet no man richer, no man more powerful, no man more free
then he that can leave himself and all things, and put himself in the meanest
and lowest place.

CHAP. XII.
Of the highway of the holy Cross.
Unto many seems hard this sppeech, Deny thy self, take up thy Cross and
follow Jesus: But it will be much harder to hear that last word: Get ye away
from me, ye cursed into everlasting fire.

2 For they that now willingly hear and follow the word of the Cross, shall
not then fear to hear the sentence of everlasting damnation.

3 This sign of the Cross shall be in heaven, when our Lord shall come to
Judgment.

4 Then all the servants of the Cross, who in their life time conformed
themselves unto Christ crucified shall draw near unto our Lord with great
confidence.

5 Why therefore fear thou to take up the Cross, which leads thee to a
Kingdom? In the Cross is health, in the Cross is life, in the Cross is
protection against our enemies.

6 In the Cross is infusion of heavenly sweetness, in the Cross is strength
of mind, in the Cross is joy of spirit, in the Cross is the height of virtue,
in the Cross is the perfection of sanctity.

7 There is no health of the soul, nor hope of everlasting life, but in the
Cross. Take up therefore thy Cross and follow Jesus, and thou shall go into
life everlasting.

8 He is gone before, bearing his Cross, and is dead for thee on the Cross;
that thou may also bear thy Cross, and desire to die on the Cross with him.

9 For if thou die with him, thou shall also live with him; and if thou be
his companion in pain, thou shall be partaker with him also in glory.

10 Behold in the Cross all does consist, and all lies in ending our life
upon it: for there is no other way, unto life, and unto true inward peace, but
the way of the Holy Cross, and of daily mortification.

11 Go where thou will, seek whatsoever thou will thou shall not find a
higher way above, nor a safe^^ way below, then the way of the holy Cross.

12 Dispose and order all things according to thy will, and judgment: yet thou
shall ever find, that of necessity thou must suffer somewhat, either willingly
or against thy will.

13 So as thou shall never fully avoid the Cross, for either thou shall feel
pain in thy body, or in thy soul thou shall suffer tribulation of spirit.

14 Sometimes thou shall be forsaken of God, sometimes thou shall be troubled
by thy neighbors, and which is more, oftentimes thou shall be irksome to thy
self.

15 Neither can, thou be delivered or cased by any remedy or comfort* but so
long as pleases God, thou ought to bear it.

16 For God will have thee learn to suffer tribulation without comfort; and
that thou submit thy self wholly to him, and become more humble by tribulation.

17 No man has so lively a feeling of the Passion of Christ, as he who has
chanced to suffer the like. The Cross therefore is always ready, and every
where attends thee.

18 Thou can not escape it, whither soever thou fliest; for wheresoever thou
go, thou carriest thy self about with thee, and thou shall ever find thy
self.

19 Turn thy self upward, turn thy self downward, turn thee within, or
turn thee without.

20 Which way soever thou do turn thee, always thou shall find the Cross.

21 And every where of necessity thou must have patience, if thou will have
inward peace, and obtain an everlasting Crown.

22 If thou bear the Cross willingly, it will bear thee, and lead thee to
thy desired end, to wit, where there shall be an end of suffering, though here
there shall not

23 If thou bear it unwillingly, thou make for thy self a new burden, and
increasest thy load, and yet notwithstanding thou must bear it do what thou
can.

24 If thou cast away one Cross, without doubt thou shall find another, and
that perhaps a more heavy.

25 Think thou to escape that which no man could ever avoid? which of the
Saints in the world was without crosses and tribulations?

26 Verily Jesus Christ our Lord was never one hour without pain of
suffering, so long as he lived. Christ (says he) ought to suffer, and rise
again from death, and so to enter into his glory.

27 And how do thou seek any other way, then this Kings high way, which is
the way of the holy Cross?

28 The whole life of Christ was a Cross and Martyrdom: and do thou seek
rest and joy?

29 Thou art deceived, thou art deceived, if thou seek any other thing the^
to suffer tribulations, for this whole mortal life is full of miseries, and
environed on every side with crosses.

30 And how much the more one has profited in spirit, so much the heavier
Crosses he oftentimes finds; for the love he bears to God, increases the
grief which he endures for his banishment.

31 But yet this man, though so many ways affl^cted, is not without the ease
of consolation, for the great good which he perceives to grow unto him by the
bearing of his Cross

32 For whilst he willingly puts himself under it, all the but then of
tribulation is turned into the confidence of divine consolation.

33 And how much the more the flesh is wasted by affliction, by so much the
more is the spirit strengthened by inward grace.

34 And sometimes he is so strengthened with the ^eeling of tribulation, and
adversity, for the love of conforming himself to the Cross of Christ, that he
would not wish at any time to be without sorrow and tribulation.

35 Because he believes, that so much the more acceptable he shall be unto
God, how much the more for number and weight he can suffer for him.

36 This is not the power of man, but it is the grace of Christ, that can, and
does so much in frail ^lesh: that what naturally it always abhors and
flies, that by fervor of spirit, it takes hold on and loves.

37 It is not according to man's inclination to bear the Cross, to love the
Cross, to chastise the body and bring it into subjection, to shun promotion.

38 To suffer contumelies with a joyful heart, to despise himselfee, and to
wish to be despised, to bear all adversities, and damages, and to desire no
prosperity in this world.

39 But if thou depend upon thy self thou shall be able to perform no such
matter of thy self.

40 But if thou trustest in our Lord, strength shall be given thee from heaven,
and thou shall subdue under thee both the world and the flesh.

41 Neither shall thou fear thy enemy the Devil, if thou be armed with faith,
and rely upon Christ crucified.

42 Resolve therefore with thy self, like a good and faithful servant of
Christ, to bear manfully the Cross of thy Lord, who out of love unto thee was
crucified for thee.

43 Prepare thy self to bear many adversities and diverse kinds of troubles
in this miserable life; for so it will be with thee, wheresoever thou be, and
so surely thou will find it, wheresoever thou hide thy self.

44 So it must be, and there is no remedy, or means to avoid tribulation and
sorrow, but to bear them.

35 Drink of the Cup of our Lord with a good affection, if thou will be his
friend, and desire to have part with him. As touching consolation, refer
that to the will of God, let him do therein as shall best please him, but
yield thou thy self to the bearing of adversity, and account it as the
greatest comfort.

46 Set thou thy heart upon the suffering of tribulations, and account them the
greatest comforts.

47 For that the passions of this life are not worthy of the glory that shall
be revealed, although thou alone could suffer them all.

48 When thou shall come to this estate, that tribulation for Christ's sake
shall seem sweet and pleasant unto thee, then think it is well with thee, for
thou have found a Parradise upon earth.

49 As long as it is grievous unto thee to suffer, and that thou desire to
fly it, so long shall thou be ill at ease, and the tribulation thou fliest will
follow thee every where.

50 If thou setlest thy self to that thou ought, to wit, to suffer, and to
die to thy self, it will quickly be better with thee, and thou shall find
peace.

51 Although thou should have been rapt even unto the third heaven with
Paul, thou art not by this secured, that thou shall suffer no contradiction.

52 I (says JESUS) will show him how great things he must suffer for my name.
It rests therefore that thou suffer for him, if thou will love JESUS, and
perpetually serve him.

53 O, would to God, thou were worthy to suffer something for the name of
Jesus! how great glory would it be unto thee, what joy to all the Saints of
God, how great edification also to thy neighbor!

54 For all do commend patience, thought few desire to suffer! With great
reason thou ought to be willing to suffer a little for Christ; since many
suffer far great things for the love of the world.

55 Know for certain that thou ought to lead a dying life. And how much the
more every one dies to himself; so much the more does he begin to live unto
God.

56 No man is sit to attain unto heavenly things, unless he submit himself
to the bearing of adversities for Christ.

57 Nothing is more grateful unto God, nothing more wholesome to thee in this
world, then to suffer willingly for Christ.

58 And if it were in thy choice* thou should rather wish to suffer
adversities for Christ, then to enjoy the delight of many comforts.

59 Because by these means thou should be more like unto Christ, and more
conformable to all Saints.

60 For our good works, and the perfection of our estate consists not in
much sweetness and comforts, but rather in suffering great afflictions and
tribulations.

61 If there had been any better thing, and more profitable to the souls
health then suffering, surely Christ would have showed it by word, and example.

62 But he plainly exhorted all the disciples that followed him, and all that
desire to follow him, to the bearing of the Cross:

63 And says, if any man will come after me let him deny himself and take up
his Cross, and follow me.

64 So as when we have read and searched all, let this be the last conclusion,
That by many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

The end of the second Book.
OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Of the inward speech of Christ to a faithful soul.
I Will hear what our Lord God will speak in me. Blessed is the soul that
hears our Lord speaking in h^^: and receives from his mouth the word of
comfort.

2 Blessed are those ears that receive the sound of the divine voice, and
listen not to the whisperings of the world.

3 Blessed indeed are those ears that hearken not to the voice which sounds
outwardly, but unto truth which teaches inwardly.

4 Blessed are the eyes that being shut up to outward things, are attentive to
those things that are within.

5 Blessed are they that enter into the inward things, and endeavor to prepare
themselves more and more by daily exercises to the attaining of heavenly
sec^ets.

6 Blessed be they that delight to attend the service of God, and cast from
them all impediments of this world.

7 Consider these things my soul, and shut up the doors of thy sensual
desires, th^^ thou may hear what thy Lord God ^^eaketh in thee.

8 Thus says thy beloved; I am thy saf^^y thy peace and thy life. Keep thy
self with^^e and thou shall find peace. Forsake all transit^ry things and
seek those that be everlasting.

9 What are all temporal things, but deceiving snares? and what do all
creatures avail thee, if thou be forsaken by the Creator?

10 Forsake therefore all earthly things and labor to please thy Creator, and
be faithful unto him, that thou may attain unto true happiness.

CHAP. II.
That truth speaks inwardly without noise of words.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, I am thy servant, grant me
understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

2 Stir up my heart to hear the words of thy mouth* let thy speech descend as
the dew into my soul.

3 The children of Israel in times past said unto Moses, Speak thou unto us,
and we shall hear the^e; let not our Lord speak unto us, least perhaps we die.

4 Not so Lord, not so, I beseech thee! But rather with the Prophet Samuel, I
humbly and earnestly entreat: speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

5 Let not Moses speak unto me, nor any of the P^ophets, but thou rather
speak, my Lord God, the inspirer and enlightner of all the Prophets.

6 For thou alone without them can perfectly instruct me, but they without
thee can profit me nothing.

7 They can pronounce words, but they give not spirit. They speak marveilous
well, but if thou hold thy peace, they inflame not the heart.

8 They deliver the letters, but thou openest the sense. They bringforth
mysteries, but thou disclosest the understanding of sealed things.

9 They declare thy commandments, but thou helpest to fulfill them. They show
the way, but thou give strength to walk in it.

10 They work only exteriorly, but thou instructest* and enlightnest the
hearts. They water outwardly, but thou give fruitfulness. They sound forth
words, but thou give understanding to the hearing.

11 Let not therefore Moses speak unto me, but thou my Lord God, the
everlasting truth, lest perhaps I should dye, and become without fruit, if I be
warned outwardly only and not enfl^med within.

12 Lest the word heard and not fulfilled, known and not loved, believed and
not observed, should increase my punishment.

13 Speak therefore Lord for thy servant hears, for thou have the words of
everlasting life. Speak unto me to the comfort of my soul, and to the
amendment of my whole life, and to thy praise and glory and everlasting honor.

CHAP. III.
that the words of God are to be heard with humility* and that many weigh them
not.
Son, hear my words, words of great comfort, excelling all the knowledge of
the Philosophers and wise men of this world.

2 My words are spirit and life, not to be w^ighed by the understanding of
man. They are not to be drawn to vain liking, but to be heard with silence,
and to be received with all humility and great affection.

3 And I said, Blessed ^s the man whom thou shall instruct* O Lord, and shall
teach thy saw, that thou may give him quietness from evil days; and that
he be not destroyed upon earth.

4 I (says our Lord) have taught the Prophets from the beginning, and cease
not continually to speak to every one: but many are deaf and give no ear to
my speech.

5 The greater number do more willingly listen to the world, then to God, and
follow sooner the desires of their flesh, then the will of God.

6 The world promises temporal and small things, and is served with great
diligence; I promise most high and eternal things, and the hearts of men are
nothing moved with it.

7 Who is he that serves and obeys me with equal care to that with which
the world, and the Lords thereof are served.

8 Blush Sidon, says the sea; and if thou ask the cause, he are wherefore,
For a little prebend a long journey is undertaken* for everlasting* life many
will scarce once lift a foot from the ground.

9 A thing of small value is sought after greedily: for a penny sometimes there
is great contention; for a vain thing and sleigh^ promise, men doub^ not to
toil day and night.

10 But alas for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable reward, for the
highest honor and glory without end, they are loath to take the least pains.

11 Blush therefore slothful and complaining servant, that they are found more
ready to destruction, then thou to life. They rejoice more at vanity, then thou
at verity.

12 And yet they are sometimes frustrated of their hope, but my promise
deceaveth none, nor sends him away empty that trusts in me.

13 I will give that which I have promised, I will fulfill that which I have
said; but to him that remains faithful in my love to the end, I am the
rewarder of all those who are good, and do try my devout servants with greater
and severer temptations.

14 Write my words in thy heart, and think diligently of them: for they will be
very necessa^y in time of temptation.

15 What thou understandest not when thou read, thou shall know in ^he day
of visitation.

16 I am wont to visit my elect two several ways, to wit, with temptation and
comfort.

17 And I daily read two lessons unto them, one reprehending their vices,
another exhorting them to the increase of virtues.

18 He that has my words and despises them, has within himself that shall
judge him at the last day.

A prayer to implore the grace of devotion.
1 O Lord my God, thou art all that I can desire. What am I, that dare speak
unto thee? I am thy poorest servant, and a most vile worm* much more poor and
contemptible then I either know or dare express.

2 And yet Lord remember this one thing, that I am nothing, that I have
nothing, and that I am worth nothing. Thou alone art good, thou alone art
righteous, thou alone art holy, thou can all, thou do all; thou fillest
all, only the wicked thou sendest empty away. Remember O Lord thy tender
mercies, and fill my heart with thy grace, for thou will that none of thy
works should be in vain.

3 How can I sustain my self in this miserable life, unless thy mercy and
grace support me?

4 Turn not thy face from me, delay not thy visitations; draw not away thy
comfort, least my soul become like a barren and dry land wherein is no water.

5 Lord teach me to fulfill thy will; teach me to live worthily and humbly in
thy sight: for thou art my wisdom, thou do perfectly know me.

6 Yea thou know me not only before I was conceived in the womb, but also
before the very world was made.

CHAP. IV.
That we ought to live in truth and humility in the sight of God.
Son, walk in my sight in ^incerity and truth; and ever seek me in
singleness of heart.

2 He that walks before me in truth, shall be defended from evil incursions,
and truth shall deliver him from seducers, and from the detractions of the
wicked.

3 If truth shall make the free, thou shall be free indeed; and shall not need
to care for the vain words of men.

4 Lord it is true according as thou say, so I beseech thee, be it unto me,
let thy truth teach me let it defend me, and bring me to a blessed end.

5 Let the same truth deliver me from ^ll evil affection and inordinate love:
and I shall walk with thee in great freedom of heart.

6 I will teach thee (says the Truth) those things that are right and pleasing
in my sight. Think of thy sins with great serrow, and grief; and never
esteem thy self any thing for thy good works.

7 Thou art in very deed a sinner^ and subject to many passions. Of thy self
thou always tendest to nothing, and art quickly cast down, quickly overcome:
quickly troubled, quickly dissolved.

8 Thou have nothing wherein thou can glory, but many things for which thou
ought to humble, and despise thy self, for thou art much weaker then thou
cast perceive.

9 And therefore let nothing seem much unto thee whatsoever thou do. Let
nothing seem great, nothing precious, and wonderful, nothing worthy of
estimation.

10 Nothing high, nothing truly commendable, and to be desired, but that which
is everlasting.

11 Let the eternal Truth above all things please thee. Let thy own great
unworthiness always displease thee.

12 Fear nothing, blame, and fly nothing so much, as thy sins and vices,
which ought to displease thee more, then the loss of any thing whatsoever.

13 Some walk not sincerely in my sight, but led by a certain curiosity, and
pride, will know my secrets, and understand the high mysteries of God,
neglecting themselves and their own salvation.

14 These oftentimes (for that I resist them) do fall into great temptations
and sins, for their pride and curiosity.

15 Fear the judgments of God, dread the wrath of the Almighty, B^t discuss
not the works of the Highest. Search thine own iniquities, in how much thou
have offended, and how much good thou have neglected.

16 Some carry their devotion only in books, some in pictures, some in outward
signs and figures, some have me in their mouths, but little in their hearts.

18 There are others, that being illuminated in their understanding, and purged
in their affection, do always aspire with an earnest mind to everlasting
happiness.

18 And are unwilling to hear of the things of this world, and do serve the
necessities of nature with grief; and these perceave what the spirit of truth
speaks in them.

19 Because it teaches them to despise earthly, and love heavenly things: to
neglect the world, and day and night to desire heaven.

CHAP. V.
Of the wonderful effect of divine grace.
I Praise thee O heavenly Father, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, for that thou
have vouchsafed to remember me a poor and wretched creature.

2 O Father of mercies and God of all comfort, thanks be unto thee, who
sometimes with thy comfort refreshest me unworthy of all comfort.

3 I ever bless and glorify thee with thy only begotten Son, and the holy
Ghost the comforter for ever and ever.

4 O God my Lord, the holy lover of my soul, when thou shall come into my
heart, all that is within me will rejoice.

5 Thou art my glory and the exultation of my heart; thou art my hope, and my
refuge in the day of my tribulation.

6 But because I am yet weak in love, and imperfect in virtue, therefore I have
need to be strengthened and comforted by thee.

7 Visit me therefore often, and instruct me with thy holy discipline, deliver
me from evil passions, and heal my heart of all mordinate affections, that
being cured within, and well purged throughout, I may be made fit to love,
strong to suffer, and constant to perseaere.

8 Love is a great matter, in very truth a great good, which alone makes every
thing that is heavy to be light, and bears equally all that (...) unequal.

9 For it carries a burden without any burden, and makes every thing that
is bitter to be sweet and savory.

10 The noble love of Jesus enforces man to work great things, and stirs
him up to desire always the most perfect.

11 Love will be aloft, and not kept down with any abject things. Love will be
free, and a stranger to all worldly affection.

12 That his inward sight be not obscured, that he be not entangled with the
desire of any transitory game: or troubled with the want thereof.

13 Nothing is sweeter then love, nothing stronger, nothing higher, nothing
more ample, nothing more pleasant, nothing fuller nor better in heaven or in
earth.

14 For that love has his beginning from God, and cannot rest but in God above
all creatures.

15 He that loves, flies, runs, and rejoices; he is free and not held in.
He gives all for all, and has all in all, for that he rests in one Highest
above all, from which all good flows, and proceeds.

16 He respects not the gifts, but turns himself above all goods unto the
giver. Love oftentimes knows no measure, but enflameth above all measure.

17 Love feels no burden, weighs no pains, desires above its strength,
complains not of impossibility, for that it thinks all things lawful, and
possible.

18 It is therefore able to undertake all things, and performs and brings
many things to effect: whereas he that does not love, faints and can do
nothing.

19 Love always watches, and slumbring sleeps not: being wearied, is not
tired: straightened is not pressed: frighted, is not troubled: but like a lively
^lame, and burning torch, bre^keth upwards, and passes through all with great
security.

20 If any one loves, he knows what this voice cries, a loud cry in the
ears of God, is the burning love of the ^oule, which says, My God, my love
thou art wholly mine, and I am wholly thine.

21 Enlarge me in love, that my heart may taste how sweet it is to love, and to
be dissolved, and swim as it were in the streams of love.

22 Let me be possessed by (...), mounting above my self, with excessive
fervor, and admiration.

23 Let me sing the song of love, let me follow thee on high, my beloved, let
my soul faint in thy praises, rejoicing with love.

24 Let me love thee more then my self, and not my self, but for thee, and
all in thee that truly love thee, as the law of love commands which shines
from thee.

25 Love is swift, sincere, pious, sweet and delightful: strong, patient,
faithful, prudent, suffering, full of courage, and never seeking it self.

26 For where one seeks himself, there he falls from love. Love is
circ^mspect, humble and upright: not remiss, not mutable, nor attending unto
vain things; sober, chaste, constant, quiet, and guarded in all the senses.

27 Love is subject, and obedient to Superiors, mean and abject to it self,
devout and thankful unto God, trusting and hoping always in him, even then
when God imparteth no sweetness unto it: for without sorrow none lives in
love.

28 He that is not ready to suffer all things, and stand to the will of his
beloved, is not worthy to be called a lover.

29 A lover ought to embrace willingly all that is hard, and distasteful for
his beloved, and not to turn away from him, for any contrary occurrencies.

CHAP. VI.
Of the proof of a true lover.
Son thou art not yet a strong and prudent lover.

2 Wherefore Lord?

3 Because thou give over thy enterprise for a small adversity, and too
earnestly seek after comfort.

4 A constant lover stands firmly in temptations, and gives not credit to
the crafty persuasions of the enemy. As I please him in prosperity, so I am not
unpleasant to him in adversity.

5 A prudent lover considers not so much the gift of his lover, as the love
of the giver. He rather esteems the good will, then the value, and places
all gifts under his beloved.

6 A noble lover rests not in the gift, but in me above any gift. All
therefore is not lost if sometimes thou have less taste of me and my Saints,
then thou would.

7 That good and sweet desire which thou sometimes feel, is the effect of
present grace, and a certain taste of the heavenly Country; whereon thou must
not rely too much, for it goes and comes.

8 But to fight against evil motions of the mind, which may happen unto thee,
and to despise the suggestion of the d^ell, is a sign of virtue and great
strength.

9 Let not therefore strange fancies forced into thee, of any matter
whatsoever, trouble theo. Retain a firm purpose and an upright intention to
God.

10 Neither is it an illusion that sometimes thou art suddenly rap^ on high,
and presently returnest again unto the accustomed vanities of the heart.

11 For thou do rather unwillingly suffer them, then commit them, and as long
as they displease thee, and thou strivest against them, it is a gain not a
loss unto thee.

12 Know that thy ancient enemy does ever strive to hinder thy desire to good,
and to divert thee from all devout exercise.

13 To wit, from the pious memory of my passion, from the profitable*
remembrance of thy sins, from the guard of thine own heart, and from the
firm purpose of pro^iting in virtue.

14 He thrusts many evil thoughts into the mind, that he may cause a
wearisomenesse, and horror in thee, to draw thee from devout prayer and
reading.

15 Humble confession is displeasing unto him, and if he could, he would cause
thee to cease from receaving the Sacrament of my Body.

16 Trust him not, nor care for him, although he should often set snares of
deceit to entrap thee.

17 Charge him with it, when he suggesteth evil, and unclean thoughts unto
thee: Say unto him, Avaunt filthy spirit, blush miserable wretch, thou art
filthy that bring such things into mine ears.

18 A way from me thou wicked deceaver, thou shall have no part in me: but
Jesus shall be with me as a strong warrior, and thou shall remain confounded.

19 I had rather dye and undergo any torment, then to consent unto thee. Hold
thy peace and be silent, I will hear thee no more, though thou should work
me many troubles.

20 My Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? If whole
armies should stand together against me, my heart shall not fear; Our Lord is
my helper, and my Redeemer.

21 Fight like a good soldier: and if thou sometimes fall through frailty,
take to thee a better heart then before, trusting in my more abundant grace:
and take great heed of arrogance and self-conceit.

22 For this cause many are led into error, and sometimes fall into blindness
that is almost incurable.

23 Let the fall of the proud, foolishly presuming of their own strength, serve
thee for a warning, and a perpetual humiliation.

CHAP. VII.
That grace is to be hid under the veil of humility.
Son, it is more profitable, and safe for thee to hide the grace of devotion,
not to extol thy self, nor to speak much, nor to esteem much thereof: but
rather to despise thy self, and fear it, as given to one unworthy thereof.

2 That affection is not to be cleared unto, which may be quickly changed into
the contrary. Think when thou art in grace, how miserable and needy thou art
wont to be without it.

3 Neither does therein only con^ist the progress of a spiritual life, when
thou have the grace of comfort; but when thou humbly, and patiently can
suffer the withdrawing thereof.

4 So that thou be not then less diligent in the exercise of prayer, nor
suffer thy self to pass over the rest of thy accustomed good works;

5 But that thou willingly perform what lies in thee, according as thou art
able and understandest to be fit; not neglecting thy self wholly for the
dryness, and trouble of mind, which thou feel.

6 There are many that when it succeeds not well with them, presently they
become either impatient or negligent.

7 The way of man is not always in his power, but belongs to God, to give
and to comfort, when he will, how much he will, and whom he will as it shall
please him, and no more.

8 Some unadvised persons have overthrown themselves for the greedy desire
which they had of the grace of devotion:

9 Attempting more then they were able to perform, not weighing the measure of
their weakness, but following rather the desire of their heart, then the
judgment of reason.

10 And because they presumed on greater matters then was pleasing to God,
therefore they quickly lost their grace.

11 They were made needy, and left in a dejected estate that built themselves
nests in heaven; to the end that being humbled, and impoverished, they may
learn not to fly with their own wings, but to live in hope under my feathers.

12 They that are yet new, and unacquainted in the way of our Lord; unless
they govern themselves by the counsel of the wise, may easily be deceaved
and overthrown.

13 And if they will rather follow their own judgment, then give credit to
others that are experienced, their end will be dangerous, if they cannot be
drawn from their own conceit.

14 Seldom those that are wise in their own opinion, suffer themselves humbly
to be governed by others.

15 A little knowledge with humility, and a slender understanding, is better
then great treasures of learning with a vain self liking.

16 It is better for thee to have less then much of that whereof thou may be
proud.

17 He does not discreetly, that wholly gives himself over to mirth,
forgetting his former poverty, and the chaste fear of God, which fears to
loose the grace which he has obtained.

18 Neither is he virtuously wise, that in time of adversity or any tribulation
whatsoever, yields to despairing thoughts, and thinks and imagines of the^
less confidently then he ought.

19 He that will be over secure in time of peace, shall be often found too
dejected and fearful in time of war.

20 If thou could always continue humble, and lowly within thy self, and
temper, and govern thy soul well, thou should not so soon fall into danger
and offense.

21 It is good counsel, that when thou conceavest fervor of spirit, thou
should think what will become of thee, when that light shall leave thee.

22 And when that does happen, remember the light may return again, which for
thy instruction and my glory I have withdrawn for a time.

23 Such proof is often more profitable, then if thou should always enjoy
prosperity according to thy desire.

24 For worth is not to be weighed in a man by the number of visions and
comforts which he has, or by his knowledge in Scriptures, or by his being
placed in high degrees; but in that he is grounded in true humility, and
replenished with divine charity.

25 If he always purely and entirely seek the honor of God, if he esteem
himself nothing, and with a sincere heart despise himself, and rejoice more to
be humbled then honored by others.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a mean conceit of our selves in the sight of God.
SHall I speak unto my Lord, since I am dust and ashes? If I esteem better of
my self, behold thou stand against me, and my iniquities bear true
witness, neither can I speak against it.

2 But if I abase and esteem nothing of my self, and cast off all
selfe-conceipt, and (as I am) account my self to be dust,

3 Thy grace will be favorable unto me, and thy light will be near unto my
heart, and all estimation how little soever shall be swallowed up in the depth
of my nothing, and perish everlastingly.

4 There thou show my self unto me, what I am, what I have been, and
whither I am come: for alas I am nothing, and I knew it not.

5 And if I be left to my self, behold I become nothing, and a mass of
infirmity, but if thou suddenly look upon me, I am presently made strong, and
filled with new joy.

6 And it is a great marvel, that I am so suddenly lifted up, and so
graciously embraced by thee, that of mine own weight always sink downward.

7 Thy love is cause hereof, freely preventing me, and relieving me in many
necessities, preserving me also from grievous dangers, and (as I may truly say)
delivering me from innumerable evils.

8 For surely by evil loving my self, I lost my self, and by seeking the^
alone, and sincerely loving thee, I have found both my self and thee, and for
thy love have more deeply brought my self to nothing.

9 For that thou, O most sweet Jesus, dealest with me above all desert, and
above all that I dare hope or request.

10 Blessed be thou my God; for although I be unworthy of all good, yet the
nobleness of thy bounty and thy infinite goodness, never cease to do good
even to the ungrateful, and to them that be turned away far: from thee.

11 Turn us unto thee O Lord that we may be grateful, humble and devout: for
thou art our safety, our power, and our strength.

CHAP. IX.
That all things are to be referred unto God, as unto the last end.
Soon, I ought to be thy chiefest and ^ast end, if thou desire to be truly
blessed. With this intention thy affection shall be purified, which is
oftentimes inclined inordinately to it self, and unto creatures.

2 For in any thing thou seek thy self, thou presently faintest and driest up
within thy self. Direct therefore all things chiefly unto me, for I am he that
has given all.

3 Consider every thing as flowing from the highest good, and therefore all
things to be reduced unto me, as untheir first beginning.

4 Out of me, as out of a living fountain, the little and the great, the poor
and the rich, do draw the water of life, and they that willingly, and freely
serve me, shall receive grace for grace.

5 But he that will glory out of me, or be delighted in any particular good
shall not be grounded in true joy, nor enlarged in his heart, but shall be many
ways hindered and straightened.

6 Thou ought therefore to ascribe no good unto thy self, nor attribute the
praise of virtue unto any man, but give all unto God, without whom* man has
nothing.

7 I have bestowed all, and will that all be returned to me again: and with
great severity I require thanks.

8 This is the truth that puts to flight vainglory. And if heavenly grace,
and true charity enter in, there shall be no envy nor grudging of heart,
neither shall there be any place for self-love.

9 For divine charity overcommeth all, and enlarges all the forces of the
soul.

10 If thou understand aright, in me alone thou will rejoice, in me alone thou will hope: for none is good but God alone, who is to be praised above all, and
to be blessed in all.

CHAP. X.
That despising the world, it is sweet to serve God.
NOw I will speak again Lord, and will not be silent. I will say its the ears
of my God, my Lord, and my King that is on high*

2 O how great is the multitude of thy sweetness Lord, which thou have hidden
for those that fear thee!

3 But what art thou to them that love thee? What to them that serve thee with
their whole heart?

4 Truly unspeakable is the sweetness of thy contemplation, which thou
bestowest on them that love thee.

5 In this chiefly thou have showed me the sweetness of thy charity, for that
when I was not, thou made me;

6 And when I went astray far off from thee, thou broughtest me back again,
that I might serve thee, and have commanded me to love thee.

7 O fountain of everlasting love what shall I say of thee? How can I forget
thee, that have vouchsafed to remember me, even when I withered away and
perished!

8 Thou have used mercy with thy servant beyond all the expectation of my
heart: and have bestowed thy grace and friendship beyond all merit.

9 What shall I return unto thee for this grace? For it is not granted to
every one to forsake all things, to renounce the world, and to undertake a
retired life. Is it much that I serve thee whom all creatures are bound to
serve? It ought not to seem much unto me to serve thee.

10 But this rather seems much and marveilous unto me, that thou vouchsafest
to receive into thy service one so poor and unworthy, and to join him with
thy beloved servants.

11 Behold all is thine which I have, and whereby I serve thee; and yet in very
deed thou rather servest me then ^ thee.

12 Behold heaven and earth, which thou have created for the service of man are
ready at hand, and do daily perform whatsoever thou do command.

13 And this is little: yea thou have also appointed the Angels to the service
of man; but that which exceeds all, is that thou thy self have vouchsafed to
serve man and promised to give thy self unto him.

14 What shall I give thee for all these thousands of benefits? I would I could
serve thee all the days of my life.

15 I would I were able at least for one day to do thee some worthy and
acceptable service! Thou art truly worthy of all service, of all honor and
everlasting praise*

16 Thou art my Lord, and I thy poor servant, that am bound to serve thee with
all my forces, neither ought I ever to cease to praise thee.

17 And this I wish to do, this I desire; and whatsoever is wanting unto me,
vouchsafe I beseech thee to supply.

18 It is a great honor, a very great glory to serve thee, and to despise all
things for thee. For great grace shall be given to them that shall willingly
submit themselves unto thy most holy service.

19 They shall receive most sweet comfort of the holy Ghost, that for thy love
shall renounce all carnal delights.

20 They shall attain great freedom of mind, that for thy names sake shall
enter into the narrow way, and shall have left off all the care of this world.

21 O sweet and delightful servitude of God, by which, man is truly made f^ee
and holy!

22 O sacred state of religious bondage, which makes man equal to Angels,
pleasing to God, terrible to Devils and acceptable to all the faithful

23 O service to be embraced, and always wished for, by which we obtain the
greatest good, and attain to that joy which never shall have end?

CHAP. XI.
That the desires of our heart are to be examined and moderated.
Son, thou ought to learn many things more, which thou have not yet ^ell
learned.

2 What are those, Lord?

3 That thou frame thy desire wholly according to my pleasure: and be not a
lover of thy self, but a diligen^^ follower of my will.

4 Thy desires oftentimes do stirr^ thee up, and drive thee forwards with
violence; but consider whether thou ar^ moved rather for my honor, then for
thine own profit.

5 If I be the cause, thou will be well content with whatsoever I sha^^
ordain, but if there lurk in thee any selfe-inclination, behold this is it
that hinders thee, and weighs the^ down.

6 Beware therefore thou incline not too much toward any desire that comes
to thy mind, before thou ask my counsel;

7 Lest perhaps afterward it repent thee, and that thou begin now to dislike
that which before did please thee and which thou earnestly desiredst at the
best.

8 For every affection that seems good, is not presently to be followed: nor
every contrary affection at the first to be fled.

9 It is expedient sometimes to use a restraint even in good desires and
endeavors:

10 Least by importunity thou incur distractio^ of mind, and by evil example
become a scandal unto others, or being gainsaid by others thou be suddenly
troubled and fall.

11 Yet sometimes thou ought to use violence, and resist manfully thy
sensual appetites, and respect not what the body would, or would not but
rather to labor, that even perforce it be subject to the spirit.

12 And it is to be chastised so long, and to be forced under servitude, until
it readily obey in all things, and learn to be content with a little, and to be
pleased with ordinary things, and not to murmr against any inconvenience.

CHAP. XII.
Of the effect of Patience, and of strife against Concupiscence.
LOrd God, I perceive Patience is very necessary unto me: for that many
adversities do happen in this life.

2 Howsoever I shall dispose of my peace, my life cannot be without war and
affliction.

3 So it is, Son, and my will is not that thou seek after that peace which
is void oftemptations, or that feels no contrarieties;

4 But then think that thou have found peace, when thou art exercised with
sundry tribulations, and tried in many adversities.

5 If thou say that thou art not able to suffer much, how then will thou endure
the fire of hell? Of two evils the less is always to be chosen.

6 That thou may therefore avoid everlasting punishments in the next world,
endeavor to suffer patiently for God the present evils of this.

7 Do thou think that men of this world suffer little or nothing? Thou art
deceived, look into the life even of them that live in greatest delicacies, and
thou shall find it otherwise.

8 But thou will say, they have many delights, and follow their own wills, and
therefore they make small account of their tribulations.

9 Be it so, that they have whatsoever they will; but how long do thou think
it will last.

10 Behold, the wealthy of this world vanish away like smoke, and there shall
be no memory of their joys past.

11 Yea even while they live also, they rest not in them without grief,
irksomeness, and fear.

12 For the self same thing in which they take their delight, is oftentimes
the cause of sorrow unto them and much affliction.

13 They have their desert, who for that they immoderately seek, and follow
delights, they do not obtain them, but with shame and sorrow.

14 O how short and deceiptfull, how inordinate, and filthy are all those
pleasures?

15 Yea so senseless and blind are men that they understand it not, but like
dumb beasts, for a little pleasure of a corruptible life, they incur the
eternal death of their soul.

16 Do not thou therefore, my Son, follow thy inordinate concupiscence, but
forsake thine own will; delight thou in the Lord, and he will give thee thy
hearts desire.

17 If thou desire true delight, and to be more plentifully comforted by me,
behold, in the contempt of all worldly things, and in the cutting off of all
base delights, shall be thy blessing, and abundant comfort shall be given thee.

18 And how much the more thou withdrawest thy self from all comfort of
creatures, so much the sweeter and more forcible consolations shall thou find
in me.

19 But at first thou can not attain unto them without a certain grief,
labor, and strife.

20 The old custom will make resistance, and thou must overcome it with
another custom that is better. Thy flesh will murmr, but thou must bridle it
with fervor of spirit.

21 The old Serpent will sting and trouble thee, but by prayer he shall be put
to flight: and with profitable labor thou shall shut the door against him.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the example of Christ.
Son, he that endeavors to withdraw himself from obedience, withdraws
himself from grace. And he that seeks to have things in private, shall loose
the common.

2 He that does not willingly and freely submit himself to his Superior, it is
a sign that his flesh is not yet perfectly obedient unto him, but oftentimes
rebelleth and murmureth against him.

3 Learn therefore readily to submit thy self to thy Superior, if thou
desire to subdue thine own Passions.

4 For the outward enemy is sooner overcome, if the inward man be in good
estate.

5 There is no worse enemy, not more troublesome to the soul, then thou unto
thy self, not agreeing well with the spirit.

6 Thou must of necessity have a true contempt of thy self, if thou will
prevail against flesh and blood.

7 Because thou lovedst thy self as yet too inordinately therefore thou art
afraid to resign thy self wholly to the will of others.

8 But what great matter is it if thou that art d^st and nothing, submittest
thy self to man for God's sake.

9 When I the Almighty and highest Sovereign, who created all things of
nothing, humbly submitted my self unto man for thee?

10 I became the most humble and abject of all men, that thou might overcome
thy pride with thy humility.

11 Learn to obey, thou that art dust. Learn to humble thy self thou earth
and clay, and put thy self under the feet of all men. Learn to break thine
own will, and to yield thy self to all subjection.

12 Take courage against thy self, and suffer not pride to live in thee: but
humble and submit thy self to all, that every one may go over thee, and tread
thee as dirt of the streets under their feet.

13 Vain man, what can thou complain of? what can thou answer, foul
sinner, to them that reprove thee, who have so often offended God, and so many
times deserved hell?

14 But mine eye has spared thee, because thy soul was precious in my sight:
that thou might know my love, and always remain grateful for my benefits.

15 That thou might continually give thy self to true subjection and
humility, and might bear patiently the contempt of thy self.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered, lest we be exto^^ed in our
good deeds.
THou thundrest thy Judgments over me, Lord, and shakest all my bones with
fear and trembling, and my soul is fore afraid.

2 I stand astonished, and consider; for that the heavens are not pure in thy
sight, If thou have found wickedness in Angels, and have not pardoned them,
what shall become of me?

3 Stars fell from heaven, and what do I presume that am dust? They whose
works seemed laudable, fell into the lowest.

4 And I have seen them that did eat the bread of Angels, to be delighted
with the husks of swine.

5 There is no sanctity, if thou O Lord, withdrawest thy hand, no wisdom
avails if thou ceasest to govern.

6 No strength helps, if thou leavest to defend; no chastity secure, if thou
do not protect it.

7 No custody of our own profitable, if thy sacred watchfulness be not
present.

8 For if thou leavest us, we sink and perish; but if thou vouchsafest to visit
us, we are raised up, and do enjoy life.

9 We are inconstant, but by thee we are strengthened: we wax cold, but by
thee we receive heat.

10 O how meanly and basely ought I to think of my self! how little, yea nothing
ought I to esteem it, if I seem to have any good!

11 O Lord how ought I to submit my self under thy unsearchable Judgments:
where I find my self to be nothing else, but nothing, and nothing!

12 O unmeasurable weight! O sea that can never be passed over: where I find
nothing in my self, but that which is altogether nothing!

13 Where then is the lurking hole of glory? Where is the confidence conceived
of virtue?

14 All vainglory is swallowed up in the depth of thy Judgments, which hang
over my head.

15 What is all flesh in thy sight? Shall clay glory against him that frames
it? How can he be lifted up with vain words whose heart is truly subject to
God?

16 All the world cannot moove him to any elation of mind, whom truth has
subjected unto it self, neither shall he be moved with the tongues of all his
praisers, that has settled his whole hope in God.

17 For they also that speak, behold they are all nothing: they shall pass
away with the sound of the words, but the truth of our Lord remains for ever.

CHAP. XV.
What we ought to do, and say in every thing which we desire.
Son, say thus in evering thing, Lord, if it be pleasing unto thee, let this
be done in this sort, Lord if it be to thy honor, let this be done in thy name!

2 Lord if thou see it expedient for me, and allowest it to be profitable,
then grant unto me, that I may use this unto thine honor!

3 But if thou know it will be hurtful unto me, and not profitable to the
health of my soul, take from me all such desire.

4 For every desire proceeds not from the holy Ghost, though it seem unto
man right and good.

5 It is hard to judge whether a good spirit, or the contrary drive thee to
desire this or that:

6 Or whether also by thine own spirit thou be moved thereunto. Many are
deceived in the end, who at the first seemed to be lead by a good spirit.

7 Always therefore, whatsoever occurreth unto thy mind to be desired, let it
be desired with the fear of God, and with humility of heart.

8 And above all thou ought to commit it unto me with full resignation of
thy self: and thou ought to say, Lord, thou know what is best, do this,
or that, as thou please.

9 Give what thou will, and how much thou will, and when thou will: Do with me
as thou know, and as best pleases thee, and is most for thy honor.

10 Set me where thou will, and deal with me in all things according to thy
will: I am in thy hand, turn me, and turn me again which way soever thou
please.

11 Behold I am thy servant, ready to obey thee in all things: for I desire not
to live unto my self, but unto thee: and would to God it might be in some
worthy and perfect manner.

A Prayer for the fulfilling of the will of God.
GRant me grace sweet Jesus, that it may be with me, and labor with me, and
persevere with me until the end.

2 Grant me always to desire and will that which is most acceptable unto thee,
and best pleases thee.

3 Let thy will be mine, and let my will ever follow thine, and agree perfectly
with it.

4 Let my will and ^ill be all one with thine; and not be able to will, or
refuse any thing else, but what thou will, or rejectest.

5 Grant that I may die to all things that are in the world, and to love for
thy sake to be cotemned, and not to be known in this world.

6 Grant that above all things that can be desired, I may rest in thee, and
make my heart to enjoy peace in thee.

7 Thou art the true peace of the heart, thou art the only rest: out of thee
all things are troublesome and unquiet.

8 In this peace, in this very same, that is, in thee, one chiefest, eternal
good; I will sleep and take my rest, AMEN,

CHAP. XVI.
That true comfort is to be sought in God alone.
Whatsoever I can desire, or imagine for my comfort, I look not for it in
this life, but hereafter.

2 For if I should alone have all the comforts of the world, and might enjoy
all the delights thereof, it is certain that they could not long endure.

3 Wherefore my soul, thou can not be fully comforted, nor have perfect
delight but in God, the comforter of the poor, and the receiver of the humble.

4 Expect a while my soul, expect the divine promise, and thou shall have
abundance of all good things in heaven.

5 If thou desire inordinately the things that are present, thou shall loose
the celestial and eternal. Have temporal things in use, and the eternal in
desire.

6 Thou can not be filled with any temporal goods, because thou art not
created to enjoy them.

7 Although thou enjoyest all that is created, yet can thou not be happy
thereby nor blessed, but in God that has created all things, thy whole be
atitude and happiness consists.

8 Not such as is seen, and commended by the foolish lovers of the world; but
such as the good faithful servants of Christ expect, and the spiritual, and
clean of heart, whose conversation is in heaven, sometimes take a taste of
before hand.

9 Vain and short is all humane comfort: Blessed and true is the comfort which
is received inwardly from truth.

10 A devout man every where carries with him Jesus his comforter, and says
unto him: Be present with me Lord Jesus in every place, and time!

11 Let this be my comfort to be always willing to want all humane comfort.

12 And if thy comfort be wanting, let thy will and just trial be unto me as
the greatest comfort, for thou will not be angry always, neither will thou
threaten for ever.

CHAP. XVII.
That all our care is to be placed in God.
Son, suffer me to do with thee what I please, I know what is expedient for
thee. Thou think as a man, thou judge in many things as humane affection
persuades thee.

2 Lord, what thou say is true. Thy solicitude for me is greater then all
the care that I can take for my self.

3 For he stands at too great a hazard, that casts not his whole care upon
thee Lord.

4 So that my will may remain right and firm in thee, do with me whatsoever
it shall please thee; for it cannot be but good, whatsoever thou do with me.

5 If it be thy will I should be in darkness, be thou blessed: and if it be
thy will I should be in light, be thou again blessed.

6 If thou vouchsafest to comfort me, be thou blessed and if thou will afflict
me, be thou also ever blessed.

7 Son, thou ought thus to behave thy self, if thou desire to walk with
me, thou must be as ready to suffer grief as to receive joy: Thou ought to
be as willing to be poor and needy, as plentiful and rich.

8 Lord, I will willingly suffer for thee, whatsoever thy pleasure is shall
befall me.

9 I will receive indifferently from thy hand, good and evil, sweet and sower,
delightful and sorrowful: and give thee thanks for all that happens unto me.

10 Keep me from all sin, and I will neither fear death, nor hell: so as
thou do not for ever cast me from thee, and blot me out of the Book of life,
what tribulation soever befall me, shall not hurt me.

CHAP. XVIII.
That temporal miseries, by the example of Christ, are to be borne patiently.
Son, I descended from Heaven for thy health, I took upon me thy miseries,
my charity and not any necessity drawing me thereunto, that thou might
learn patience, and not refuse to bear temporal miseries.

2 For from the hour of my birth, until my death on the Cross, I was not
without suffering of grief. I suffered great want of temporal things: I often
heard many complaints against me.

3 I bear patiently shame and reproaches: for benefits I received ingratitude;
for miracles, blasphemies; for heavenly doctrine, reprehensions.

4 Lord, for that thou were patient in thy life time, chiefly in fulfilling the
commandment of thy Father,

5 It is reason that I miserable sinner should have patience in all things
according to thy will, and for mine own health bear the burden of this
corruptible life as long as thou will.

6 For although this present life be burdensome, yet notwithstanding, it is now
by thy grace made very easy, and by thy example and footsteps of thy Saints,
more plain and tolerable to the weak.

7 Yea, much more comfortable also, then it was in times past in the old Law,
when the gate of heaven remained shut, and the way also to heaven seemed dark,
when so few took care to seek after thy Kingdom.

8 Neither they also that then were just, and ordained to be saved, could enter
into the heavenly glory before thy Passion, and the debt of thy sacred death
was discharged.

9 O how great thanks am I bound to give thee, that thou have vouchsafed to
show unto me, and to all faithful souls a direct and sure way to thy
everlasting Kingdom!

10 For thy life is our way, and by holy patience we go unto thee, that art
our Crown,

11 If thou had not gone before us and taught us, who would have taken care
to follow?

12 Alas how many would stay behind, and remain far off, if they beheld not
thy excellent examples.

13 Behold we are yet cold, although we have heard of so many of thy wouders,
and thy heavenly documents! what would become of us if we had not so great
light to follow thee?

CHAP. XIX.
Of suffering of injuries, and who is proved to be truly patient^.
What is it, thou say, Sonne^ Cease to complain, considering my passion,
and that of my other Saints, thou have not yet made resistance unto blood.

2 It is but little thou suffer, in comparison of them that have suffered so
much, so strongly tempted, so grievously afflicted, so many ways tried and
exercised.

3 Thou ought therefore to call to mind the heavy sufferings of others, that
thou may the easier bear the little adversities which thou suffer.

4 And if they seem not little, beware lest thy impatience be cause thereof. Yet
whether they be little or great, endeavor to bear all patiently.

5 How much the better thou disposest thy self to suffering, so much the more
wisely thou do, and so much the more favor do thou procure.

6 Thou shall more easily also endure it, if thy mind be prepared, and thy
self accustomed thereunto.

7 Do not say I cannot suffer these things of such a one, at the hands of such
a person, nor such things are not to be suffered by me;

8 For he has done me great wrong, and upbraided me with those things which
I never thought of: but of another I will willingly suffer, and as I shall see
cause.

9 Such a thought is foolish, it considers not the virtue of patience, no^ by
whom it shall be crowned, but rather weighs the persons, and the injuries
offered.

10 He is not truly patient, that will not suffer, but as much as he thinks
good, and by whom he lists.

11 But he that is indeed patient, minds not by whom he is exercised, whether
by his superior, or some of his equals, or by his inferior; whether by a good
and holy man, or by a perverse and unworthy person.

12 But indifferently from all creatures, how much soever, or how often soever
any adversity happens unto him, he takes all thankfully as from the hands of
God, and esteems it a great gain.

13 For that nothing with God, how little soever, so it be suffered for God,
can be without reward.

14 Be thou therefore always prepared for to fight, if thou will have the
victory: Without combat thou can not attain unto the Crown of patience.

15 If thou will not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned, but if thou desire
to be crowned, fight manfully, and endure patiently.

16 Without labor there is no coming to rest: nor without fight can the
victory be obtained.

17 Lord, let that be made possible to me by thy grace, which seems
impossible to me by nature.

18 Thou know that I can suffer little, and that I am quickly dismayed, when
a small adversity arises.

19 Let all exercise of tribulation be made pleasing unto me; and be welcome
for thy name: for to suffer and to be troubled for thee, is very profitable for
my soul.

CHAP. XX.
Of the acknowledging of our own infirmity: and of the miseries of this life.
I Will confess against me my injustice, I will confess unto thee O Lord my
infirmity: Oftentimes it is a small matter that discomforteth, and grieveth me.

2 I purpose to resist with courage, but when a small temptation comes, if
brings me into very narrow straits.

3 It is sometimes a very trifle, from whence great temptations do proceed.
And whilst I think my self somewhat safe, when I least expect it, I find my
self sometimes overcome with a small blast.

4 Behold therefore Lord, my humility, and my frailty every way known unto thee.

5 Have mercy on me and deliver me out of the mire of my infirmities, that I
stick not fast therein, let me not for ever remain dejected.

6 This is that which oftentimes bears me back, and confounds me in thy
sight; for that I am so subject to fall, and weak in resisting of my passions.

7 And though I do not altogether consent, yet their continual assaults are
troublesome and grievous unto me, and it is tedious, and a very irksome thing
to live thus daily in strife.

8 Hereby my infirmity is made known unto me, for that wicked fancies do
always much more easily enter in upon me, then they can be cast out again.

9 O mighty God of Israel, the zealous lover of faithful souls, let it please
thee to consider the labor and sorrow of thy servant, and assist him in all
whatsoever he undertaketh.

10 Strengthen me with heavenly force, lest my old man, my miserable flesh, not
fully as yet subject to the spirit, prevail and get the upper hand; against
which I ought to fight, as long as I breath in this miserable life.

11 Alas, what a kind of life is this where tribulations and miseries are never
wanting! where all is set with snares, and compassed with enemies?

12 For when one tribulation o^ temptation goes away, another comes, yea and
during the first conflict also, many others come unlooked for, one after
another.

13 And how can a life be loved that has so many afflictions, and is subject
to so many calamities and miseries?

14 How is it called a life that begets so many deaths, and plagues? And yet
it is loved, and many seek to delight themselves therein.

15 The world is oftentimes blamed, that it is deceiptfull and vain, and yet
it is not easily forsaken, because the inclinations of our flesh do too much
overruled us.

16 Some things draw us to love it, others to contemn it. To the love of the
world do draw us the concupiscence of the flesh, the concupiscence of the
eyes, and the pride of life:

17 But the pains and miseries that do justly follow them, cause a hatred and
loathsomeness thereof.

18 But alas wicked pleasure overcommeth the mind which is given over to the
world, and she esteems it a delight to be under thorns, because she has
neither seen nor tasted the sweetness of God, and the inward delight of
virtue.

19 But they that perfectly contemn the world, and endeavor to live to God
under holy discipline,

20 These are not ignorant of the divine sweetness, promised to the true
forsakers of the world, and do more clearly see how grievously the world
erreth, and how it is many ways deceaved.

CHAP. XXI.
That we are to rest in God above all his gifts.
ABove all things, and in all things, my soul, thou shall ever rest in God,
for he is the everlasting rest of the saints.

2 Grant me most sweet and loving Jesus, to rest in thee above all creatures,
above all health and beauty, above all glory and honor;

3 Above all power and dignity, above all knowledge and learning, above all
riches and arts, above all joy and gladness:

4 Above all fame and praise, above all sweetness and comfort, above all hope
and promise, above all merit and desire:

5 Above all gifts and presents that thou can give and impart unto us, above
all joy and jubily that the mind of man can receive and feel:

6 Lastly above Angels and Archangels, and above all the heavenly Host, above
all visible and invisible things, and above all that thou my God art not.

7 For that thou, my Lord God, surpassest all, thou alone art most high, thou
alone most powerful, thou alone most full and sufficient, thou alone most
sweet and comfortable,

8 Thou alone most beautiful, and loving, thou alone most noble and glorious
above all things: in whom all good things together both perfectly, are and ever
have been, and shall be.

9 And therefore it is too little and not sufficient, whatsoever thou bestowest
on me besides thy self, or revealest unto me of thy self, or promisest whiles
thou art not seen, and not fully obtained.

10 For surely my heart cannot rest, nor be fully contented unless it rest in
thee, and surmount all gifts and creatures whatsoever.

11 O my most beloved spouse Christ Jesus, the most chaste lover, the governor
of all creatures! who will give me wings of true liberty to fly, and rest in
thee?

12 O when shall it be fully granted me to consider in quietness of mind, and
see how sweet thou my Lord God art?

13 When shall I fully recollect my self in thee, that for thy love I may not
feel my self, but thee alone, above all sense, and feeling, in a manner not
commonly known.

14 But now I oftentimes lament and bear my infelicity with grief:

15 For that many evils occur in this vale of miseries, which do often
trouble, grieve, and darken me;

16 Often hinder and distract me, allure and entangle me.

17 To the end I should not have free access unto thee, and that I should not
enjoy those sweet and heavenly imbracings, which thou always give to the
blessed and celestial spirits. Let my sighs and manifold desolation on earth
moove thee.

18 O Jesus, splendour of eternal glory, and comfort of the pilgrim soul,
with thee is my tongue without voice, and my silence speaks unto thee!

19 How long does my Lord delay to come! Let him come unto me his poor
servant, and make me glad.

20 Let him put out his hand, and deliver me miserable wretch from all anguish.
Come, come blessed Lord: for without thee I shall have no joyful day, nor
hour.

21 Thou art my joy, and without thee there is nothing but want. A wretched
creature I am, and in a manner imprisoned, and Ioaden with irons.

22 Until thou comfortest me with the light of thy presence, and give me
liberty, and show a favorable countenance unto me,

23 Letothers seek what they please instead of thee, but for me, nothing else
does, nor shall delight me, but thou only my God, my hope, my everlasting
health.

24 I will not hold my peace, nor cease to pray, until thy grace return
again, and thou speak inwardly unto me.

25 Behold I am here: behold I come unto thee, because thou have called upon
me.

26 Thy tears and the desire of thy soul, thy humility, and the contrition of
thy heart, have inclined and brought me unto thee.

27 And I said, Lord I have called thee, and have desired to enjoy thee being
ready to forsake all things for thee. For thou first have stirred me up that I
might seek thee.

28 Blessed be thou therefore O Lord, that have showed this goodness to thy
servant, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

29 What has thy servant more to say before thee, but that he do greatly
humble himself in thy sight, and be always mindful of his own iniquity and
baseness.

30 For there is none like unto thee in all whatsoever is wonderful, in heaven
and earth. Thy words are good, thy judgments true, and by thy providence all
things are governed.

31 Praise therefore and glory be unto thee, O wisdom of the eternal Father!
let my tongue, my soul, and all creatures together praise and bless thee.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the remembrance of the manifold benefits of God.
OPen, O Lord, my heart in thy Law, and teach me to walk in thy commandments.

2 Grant me to understand thy will, and to remember thy benefits, as well in
general, as in particular, with great reverence and diligent consideration:
that henceforward I may be able worthily to give thee thanks.

3 But I know and confess, that I am not able to give thee due thanks, for the
favors which thou bestowest upon me, even in the least moment.

4 I am less then the least of all thy benefits bestowed upon me: and when I
consider the excellency of thy Majesty, the greatness there of makes my
spirit to faint.

5 All that we have in our soul and body, and whatsoever we possess outwardly
or inwardly, naturally or spiriuallyl are thy benefits, and do praise thee as
bountiful, pious, and good, from whom we have received all that is good.

6 Although one has received more, another less, all notwithstanding are
thine, and without thee, even the least cannot be had.

7 He that has received greater, cannot glory of his own desert, nor extol
himself above others, nor insult over the lesser.

8 For he is greater and better that ascribes least unto himself, and is more
humble and devout in rendering thanks.

9 And he that esteems himself basest of all men, and judges himself most
unworthy, is fittest to receave greater blessings.

10 And he that has received fewer, ought not to be sorry nor bear it
impatiently, nor envy them that are enriched with greater store;

11 But attend rather unto thee, and chiefly praise thy goodness, for that
thou bestowest thy gifts so bountifully, so freely, and so willingly without
respect of persons.

12 All things proceed from thee, and therefore in all things thou art to be
praised; thou know what is fit to be given to every one.

13 And why this man has less, and he more, it is not ours, but thine to
determine, who do weigh in just measure the good behavior of every one.

14 Wherefore my Lord God, I esteem it as a great benefit not to have much,
whereby outwardly and before men I might seem worthy of praise and glory.

15 So that he, who considers his own poverty, and baseness, ought not
therefore to conceave grief, or sorrow, or to be therefore troubled, but
rather to take great comfort, and to be glad.

16 For that thou, O God, have chosen the poor and humble, and the despised of
this world for thy self, and for thy familiar and domestical friends.

17 Witnesses are thy Apostles themselves, whom thou have appointed Princes
over all the earth.

18 And yet they lived without complaint in the world, so humble and simple, o
the eyes of men, without all malice and deceit,

19 That they rejoiced to receive contumelies for thy name; and what the world
abhors, they embraced with great affection.

20 Nothing therefore ought so to rejoice him that loves thee, and
acknowledges thy benefits, as the accomplishment of thy will in himself, and
the pleasure of thy eternal appointment.

21 Wherewith he ought to be so contented and comforted, that he would as
willingly be the least, as any would wish to be the greatest: and as peaceable
and content in the last, as in the first place.

22 And as willingly to be despised and contemned, and to be of no esteem or
account, as to be preferred in honor before all others.

23 And to comfort him more, and please him better, then all the benefits which
he has received or can desire.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of four things that bring much peace.
Son now I will teach thee the way of peace and true liberty.

2 Do Lord, I beseech thee, at thou say, for I shall be very glad to hear
it.

3 Endeavor my Son to do rather the will of another, then thine own. Ever
choose rather to have less then more.

4 Always seek the lowest place, and to be inferior to every one.

5 Wish always, and pray, that the will of God may be wholly fulfilled in
thee, behold such a man enters into the limits of peace and most quiet rest.

6 Lord, this thy short speech contains much perfection, it is little in words
but full in sense, and abundant in fruit.

7 For if it could exactly be kept by me, then should I not so easily be
troubled. For as often as I feel my self unquiet, and afflicted, I find that
I have strayed from this doctrine.

8 But thou that can do all things, and ever love the good and profit of
my soul, increase in me thy grace more and more, that I may fulfill thy words
and perfect mine own health.

A prayer against evil thoughts.
MY Lord God, be not far from me: my God have regard to help me, for sundry
thoughts have risen up against me, and great fears afflicting my soul.

2 How shall I pass through them without hurt? How shall I break through them
without danger?

3 I, says he, will go before thee, and will humble the glorious of the earth.

4 I will open the doors of the prison, and reveal unto thee the hidden
secrets.

5 Do Lord as thou say, and let all evil thoughts fly from before thy face.

6 This is my hope, and my only comfort, to fly unto thee in all tribulation,
to trust in thee, to call upon thee from my heart, and to expect patiently thy
comfort.

A prayer for the enlightening of the mind.
ENlighten me good Jesus, with the clearness of inward light, and expel all
darkness from the habitation of my heart.

2 Repress the many wandering thoughts, and beat down the fury of the
temptations, which violently assault me.

3 Fight strongly for me, and vanquish the evil beasts, that is, the
allureing concupiscences, that peace may be made by thy virtue, and abundance
of thy praise sound in thy holy Court, which is a pure conscience.

4 Command the winds and tempests, say unto the sea, be still: and to the
North Wind, blow not; and a great calm shall ensue.

5 Send forth thy light and thy truth, that they may shine upon the earth, for
I am an empty and unprofitable piece of earth, until thou imparlight unto me.

6 Pour out thy grace from above, wash my heart with heavenly dew, give water
of devotion to wash the face of the earth, to bring forth good and perfect
fruit.

7 Lift up my mind, overcharged with the weight of sin: draw up my whole
desire to heavenly treasures.

8 That having tasted the sweetness of celestial happiness, it may loath to
think of earthly vanities.

9 Take me violently to thee, and deliver me from all unstable comfort of
creatures: for no created thing can fully quiet and satisfy my desire.

10 Join me unto thee with an unseparable band of love: for thou only fillest
the mind of him that loves thee, and without thee all things are vain and
frivolous.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others.
Son, be not curious trouble not thy self with idle cares. What is this or
that to thee? do thou follow me.

2 For what is it to thee, whether that man be such or no, or whether this man
do, or speak this or that?

3 Thou shall not need to answer for others, but shall give account of thy
self, why therefore do thou trouble thy self?

4 Behold I know every one what he is, and do see all things that are under
the sun.

5 And do understand how it is with every one, what he thinks, what he
would, and at what his intention aymeth.

6 All things therefore are to be committed unto me: but do thou keep thy
self in good peace, and suffer the unquiet to trouble himself as much as he
will.

7 Whatsoever he shall have done, or said, shall fall upon himself, for he
cannot deceave me.

8 Desire not too great fame in this world, nor to be known to many, nor to
have the private love of men: for these things breed distractions, and cause
great darkness of heart.

9 I would willingly utter my words, and reveal my secrets unto thee, if thou
did* diligently observe my coming* and did open the door of thy heart
unto me.

10 Be careful in thy courses, and watch in thy prayers and humble thy self
in all things.

CHAP. XXV.
Wherein does the firm peace of the heart, and true proficiency consist.
Son, I have said, Peace I leave to you, my peace I give to you: not as the
world gives, do I give to you.

2 All do desire peace, but all care not for those things that appertain unto
true peace. My peace is with the humble, and meek of heart.

3 Thy peace shall be in much patience, if thou will hear me and follow my
voice thou may enjoy much peace.

4 What then shall I do?

5 In every thing attend unto thy self what thou do and what thou say:
and direct thy whole intention unto this, that thou may please me alone, and
desire or seek nothing out of me.

6 But of the sayings and doings of others, judge nothing rashly: neither do
thou entangle thy self with things not committed unto thee: and doing thus, it
may be thou shall be little (...) seldom troubled.

7 But never to feel any trouble at all, nor to suffer any grief of heart or
body, is not the state of this life, but of everlasting rest.

8 Think not therefore that thou have found true peace, if thou feel no
sorrow, nor that then all is well, if thou have no adversary.

9 Nor that it is perfect, if all things be done according to thy desire.
Neither do thou then esteem highly of thy self, or imagine thy self to be
especially beloved, if thou be in great devotion, and sweetness:

10 For in these things a true lover of virtue is not tried: neither does the
proficiency and perfection of man consist in having them.

11 Wherein then Lord?

12 In offering thy self from the very bottom of thy heart, unto the will of
God, not seeking thine own interest or commodity, neither in great nor little,
neither for a time nor for ever.

13 So that with equal countenance, thou may persist in thanksgiving, both
in prosperity and in adversity, weighing all things with an equal balance.

14 If thou be of such courage and so patient in hope, that when inward comfort
is withdrawn from thee, thou prepare thy heart to suffer greater matters,

15 And not justify thy self, as though thou ought not to suffer these, and
so great afflictions, but justify me in whatsoever I appoint, and praise my
holy name.

16 Then thou walk in the true and right way of peace: and thou shall have
undoubted hope to see my face a gain with great joy.

17 And if thou attain to the full contempt of thy self; then shall thou
enjoy as great abundance of peace, as thy banishment may permit.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the excellency of a free mind which humble prayer better obtains then
reading.
LOrd, it is the work of a perfect man, never to slack his mind from the
attentive thought of heavenly things, and as it were to pass without care
through many cares*

2 Not faintingly, but with a certain privilege of a free mind, adhering by
inordinate affection to no creature.

3 I beseech thee most merciful God, preserve me from the cares of this life:
least I should be too much entangled hereby: and from the many necessities of
the body, least I should be enthralled by pleasure.

4 From all hindrances of the soul least broken with troubles I should be
dejected and dismayed. I mean not from those things that all worldly vanity so
greatly desires.

5 But from those miseries, that as punishments, do weigh down and hinder the
soul of thy servant, with the general curse of mortality, that it cannot
enter into the liberty of the spirit, as often as it would.

6 O my God, the unspeakable sweetness, make bitter unto me all carnal
comfort, which may draw me away from the love, of everlasting happiness, and
wickedly allure me to it self with the force of a certain present delight.

7 Let not flesh and blood O my God, let not flesh and blood, Let not the world
and the short glory thereof deceive me.

8 Let not the Devil and his subtle fraud supplant me. Give me force to
resist, patience to suffer, and constancy to persevere.

9 Give me instead of all the comforts of the world the most sweet unction of
thy spirit; and in lieu of carnal love, power into, my soul the love of thy
name.

10 Behold, meat, drink, cloathe^ and other necessaries for the maintenance of
the body, are burden some unto a fervent spirit.

11 Grant me to affect such nourishments in due measure, and not to be
entangled with an overgreat desire of them.

12 It is not lawful to renounce them wholly, for that nature is to be
sustained: but to desire superfluities, and those things that do rather
delight* then sustain, the Law of God forbids.

3 For otherwise the flesh would rebel against the spirit: Herein I beseech
thee, let thy hand govern me, and teach me, that I may not exceed.

CHAP. XXVII.
That private love most hinders from the chiefest good.
Son, thou ought to give all for all, and to retain nothing of thy self:
Know that the love of thy self, does hurt thee more, then any thing in the
world.

2 According to the love, and affection thou bear them, so does every thing
cleave unto thee more or less: If thy love be pure, simple, and well ordered,
thou shall be free from bondange.

3 Covet not that which thou may not have: Be not willing to have that which
may hinder thee and deprive thee of inward liberty.

4 It is a wonderful thing that thou committest not thy self wholly unto me,
from the bottom of thy heart, with all things, that thou can desire or have.

5 Why do thou consume thy self with vain grief? Why tirest thou thy mind
with needless cares? Stand to my curtesy and thou shall be no looser by it.

6 If thou seek this or that, and would be here or there to enjoy thine
own commodity and pleasure, thou shall never be in quiet, nor free from
trouble of mind.

7 For in every thing, somewhat will be wanting, and in every place there will
be some that will cross thee.

8 Not every external thing therefore attained, and heaped together helps
thee: but it rather avails, if thou despise it, and do root it out from thy
heart.

9 Which thou must not understand only of thy revenewes and wealth, but of the
desire of honor also, and vain praise; all which do pass away with this
fading world.

10 The place avails little, if the spirit of fervor be wanting: neither shall
that peace which is sought abroad long continue, if the state of thy heart be
destitute of a true foundation.

11 That is* unless thou persist in me, thou may change, but not better thy
self: For when occasion does happen, thou shall find that which thou soughtest
to fly, and perhaps more.

A Prayer for clensing the heart, and obtaining of heavenly wisdom.
Confirm me Lord with the grace of thy holy spirit: Give me force to
strengthen my inward man and to purge my heart from all unprofitable care and
grief.

2 Not to be drawn away with sundry desires of any thing either little or
great, but to consider all things how they are transitory, and do quickly
fade, and that I my self do also pass away together with them.

3 For nothing is permanent under the sun, where all things are vanity, and
affliction of mind: O how wise is he that so considers them!

4 Grant me Lord heavenly wisdom, that I may learn above all things to seek
and find thee, above all things to delight in thee, and to love thee, and to
think of all created things as they are, according to the disposition of thy
wisdom.

5 Grant me prudently to avoid him, that flatters me, and to suffer patiently
him that contradicts me.

6 It is great wisdom not to be moved with every blast of words, nor to give
ear to dangerous flattery: for so we shall go one securely in the way which
we have begun.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Against the tongue of Slanderers.
Son, be not grieved if some think evil of thee, and speak that which thou
do not willingly hear.

2 Thou ought to judge the worst of thy self, and to think no man weaker
then thy self: If thou walk well inwardly, thou will not much esteem of
flying words abroad.

3 It is no small wisdom to be silent in time of evil, and inwardly to turn
to me, and not to be troubled with the judgment of men.

4 Let not thy peace be in the tongues of men: For whether they judge well or
evil, thou art nevertheless always the same.

5 Where is true peace, and true glory? Is it not in me? And he that coveteth
not to please men, nor fears to displease them, shall enjoy much peace.

6 From inordinate love and vain fears arises all disquietnesse of the
heart, and distraction of the senses.

CHAP. XXIX.
How we ought to call upon God, and bless him when tribulation draws near.
BLessed (O Lord) be thy name for ever, since it pleases thee that this
temptation and tribulation should fall upon me.

2 I cannot fly it, but have need to fly to thee, that thou may help me, and
turn it to my good.

3 Lord I am now afflicted, and it is not well with me, I am much troubled with
this present grief:

4 And now, dear Father, what shall I say? I am taken in narrow straits, save
me from this hour: yet therefore came I into this hour, that thou may be
glorified, when I shall be greatly humbled, and by thee delivered.

5 Let it please thee Lord to deliver me: for poor wretch that I am, what can
I do, and whither shall I go without thee?

6 Grant patience Lord, even this time also: Help me my God, and then I will
not fear how much soever I be oppressed.

7 And now in this, what shall I say? Lord, thy will be done: I have well
deserved to be afflicted and grieved.

8 Surely I ought to bear it: and I would to God I might bear it with
patience, until the tempest be passed over, and it become calm.

9 But thy omnipotent hand is able to take this temptation from me, and to*
assuage the violence thereof, that I utterly sink not under it, as oftentimes
heretofore thou have done unto me, my Lord, my Mercy!

10 And how much the more hard it is to me, so much the more easy is this
change of thy mighty, hand to thee.

CHAP. XXX.
Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of recovering grace.
Son, I am thy Lord, who do use to give comfort in the day of tribulation:
Come unto me, when it is not well with thee.

2 This is that which most of all hinders heavenly consolation, that thou art
slow in turning thy self unto prayer.

3 For before thou do earnestly commend thy self to me, thou seek many
comforts, and delightest thy self in outward things.

4 And hence it proceeds that all does little profit thee, until thou
consider that I am he, that deliver those that trust in me.

5 And that out of me there is neither powerful help, nor profitable counsel,
nor remedy that can continue.

6 But now thou having recovered breath after the tempest, gather strength
again in the light of my mercies:

7 For I am at hand, says our Lord, to repair all things, not only entirely,
but also abundantly, in a very plentiful measure.

8 Is there any thing hard to me? or am I like unto him that promises and
performs not?

9 Where is thy faith? Be firm and constant, take courage and be patient,
comfort will be given thee in due time.

10 Attend me, expect, I will come and cure thee: It is a temptation that
vexes thee: and a vain fear that affrighteh thee.

11 What else does the care for future incertainties bring thee, but sorrow
upon sorrow? Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

12 It is a vain and unprofitable thing to be grieved, or to rejoice for
future things, that perhaps will never happen.

13 But it is incident to man, to be deluded with such imaginations: and a
sign of little courage to be so easily drawn away by the suggestion of the
enemy.

14 For he cares not so he delude and deceive thee, whether it be true or
false which he proposes: whether he overthrow thee with the love of present or
the fear of future things.

15 Let not therefore thy heart be troubled, neither do thou fear: Believe in
me and put thy trust in my mercy.

16 When thou think thy self furthest off from me, oftentimes I am nearest
unto thee.

17 When thou judge that almost all is lost, then oftentimes greatest hope of
obtaining is at hand. All is not lost when any thing falls out contrary unto
thee.

18 Thou must not judge according to that which thou feel for the present,
nor give thy self over to any grief from whence soever it comes, as though
all hope of delivery were quite gone.

19 Think not thy self wholly left although for a time I have sent thee some
tribulation, or withdrawn thy desired comfort; for this is the way to the
Kingdom of heaven.

20 And without doubt, it is more expedient for thee, and the rest of my
servants, that ye be exercised with many adversities, then that ye should have
all things according to your desires.

21 I know the secret thoughts of thy heart, and that it is very expedient for
thy souls health, that thou be left sometimes without taste and feeling of
spiritual sweetness;

21 Least perhaps thou should be puffed up with good success, and should
please thy self in that which thou art not.

22 That which I have given, I can take away, and restore it again when I
please.

5 When I give it, it is mine; when I withdraw it, I take not any thing that is
thine: for mine is every good, and every perfect gift.

8 If I send thee affliction or any cross whatsoever, repine not, nor let thy
heart be dismayed.

25 I can quickly lift thee up again, and turn all thy sorrow into joy.

26 Nevertheless I am just, and greatly to be praised, when I do all this
unto thee.

27 If thou be wise, and consider thy case truly, thou will never yield so
cowardly to grief, for any adversity that befalls thee, but rather rejoice and
give thanks.

28 Yea to account this thy only joy, that afflicting thee with sorrows, I do
not spare thee.

29 As my Father has loved me, I also love you, said I unto my beloved
Disciples, whom certainly I sent not to temporal joys, but to great conflicts:

30 Not to honors, but to contempts not to idleness, but to labors: not to
rest, but to bring much fruit in patience. My Son, remember these words.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the contempt of all creatures to find our Creator.
LOrd, I stand yet in need of greater grace, if I must go so far as that no
man or creature can hinder me;

2 For as long as any thing holds me, I cannot fly freely unto thee. He
desired to fly with great liberty that said, who will give me wings like a
dove, and I will fly and rest? What thing more quiet then a simple eye? and
what more free, then he that desires nothing upon earth.

3 Man ought therefore to ascend above all creatures, and perfectly to forsake
himself, and to remain in excess of mind.

4 And consider that thou, who are the maker of all things, have nothing
amongst creatures like unto thee.

5 And unless a man be free from the affection of all creatures, he cannot
with freedom of mind, attend unto divine things.

6 And for this cause there are so few contemplative men to be found: for that
few can wholly sequester themselves from fading creatures.

7 Much grace is necessary to lift up a soul, and to carry it above it self.

8 Unless a man be lifted up in spirit, and delivered from all creatures, and
wholly united unto God: whatsoever he has, is of little account.

9 Long shall he be little, and lie in earthly baseness, that esteems any
thing great, but the only unmeasurable and eternal good.

10 For whatsoever is not God is nothing, and ought to be accounted as nothing.

11 There is great difference between the wisdom of a spiritual and devout
person, and the knowledge of a learned and studious Clerk.

12 Far more noble is that learning which flows from above, from the divine
influence, then that which is painefully gotten by the wit of man.

13 There are many that desire contemplation, but they endeavor not to
exercise those things that are required thereunto.

14 It is a great hinderance that we rest in signs and sensible things, and
make little account of true mortification.

23 I know not what it is, nor by what spirit we are led, nor what we pretend,
we that seem to be called spiritual.

24 That we take so much pains, and so great care for transitory and base
things, and scarce or seldom think of our inward profit, with full collection
of our senses.

25 Alas, presently after a slight recollection, we break forth; and weigh not
our works with diligent examination.

26 We mind not where our affections lie: nor bewail the impurity of many
faults that are in all our actions.

27 For all flesh had corrupted her way, and therefore did that general flood
ensue.

28 Since our inward affection then is much corrupted, it must needs be that our
action proceeding thereof, be corrupted, as a sign of the want of inward
vigor.

29 From a pure heart proceeds the fruit of good life.

30 We ask how much one has done: but how virtuous his actions are, is not so
diligently considered.

31 We inquire whether he be strong, rich, beautiful, handsome, a good writer,
a good singer, or a good labourer;

31 But how poor he is in spirit, how patient, and meek, how devout and
spiritual, is seldom spoken of.

32 Nature respects outward things, grace turns her self to the inward
virtues: That is often deceaved: this has her trust in God, to the end she be
not deceaved.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the denial of our selves, and forsaking all our affections.
Son, thou can not possess perfect liberty, unless thou wholly deny thy
self.

2 All such as be lovers of themselves are bound in setters, they are covetous,
curious, wanderers, seekers of ease, and not of those things that appertain to
Jesus Christ.

3 But oftentimes devising, and framing that which will not continue, for all
shall perish that proceeds not from God.

4 Keep this short and complete word, forsake all and thou shall find all.

5 Leave thy inordinate desires, and thou shall find rest*

6 Consider this well: and when thou have fulfilled it, thou shall understand
all.

7 Lord this is not one days work nor childrens sport: yea in this short
sentence all the perfection of religious persons is included.

8 Son, thou must not go back nor straitwaies be dejected, when thou hear
the way of the perfect; but rather be stirred up to more noble attempts* or at
least to conceave an earnest desire thereof:

9 I would it were so well with thee, and thou were come so far, that thou
were no longer a lover of thy self, but did stand merely at my beck, and at
his whom I have appointed a Father over thee,

10 Then thou should exceedingly please me, and all thy life would pass
away in joy and peace.

11 Thou have yet many things to forsake, which unless thou wholly resign
over unto me, thou shall not attain to that which thou desire.

12 I counsel thee to buy of me purified gold, that thou may become rich,
that is, heavenly wisdom, which treads under foot all base and earthly
things.

13 Set little by the wisdom of this world, and esteem not of the contentment
of men, nor thine own fancies.

14 I said, that thou should buy the mean and base things, in steed of those
things that are precious, and highly esteemed amongst men:

15 For true heavenly wisdom seems very base, and of small account, and is
scarce thought of by men.

16 For that esteems not highly it self, nor seeks to be magnified upon
earth.

17 Which many praise from the teeth outward, but in their life they are far
from it: yet is it the precious pearl which is hidded from many.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of inconstancy of heart, and of directing our final intentions unto God.
Son, trust not to thy affection: that which now is, will quickly change into
another.

2 As long as thou live thou art subject to mutability, even against thy will.

3 So that now thou art merry, now sad, now quiet, now troubled, now devout,
now distracted, now diligent, now idle, now heavy, now light.

4 But he that is wise, and well instructed in the spirit, remains always
one in the midst of these changes, not heeding what he seeks in himself, or
which way the wind of mutability blows.

5 But that the whole intention of his mind, may tend as it ought, to the most
perfect and best end.

6 For so he may continue one, and the self same, without any change in the
midst of so many: sundry chances, directing always the sincere eye of his
intention unto me.

7 And how much purer the eye of the intention is, so much the more constantly
does he pass through the variety of many contrary waves.

8 But in many things the eye of a sincere intention waxes blind, for it
quickly looks upon some delightsome object that occurreth.

9 And it is rare to find one that is wholly free from all blemish of seeking
himself.

10 So the Jews in times past came into Bethania to Martha and Mary, not for
Jesus alone, but to see Lazarus also.

11 The eye of our intention therefore, is to be purged, that it may be sincere
and pure, and to be directed unto me, neglecting the multitude and ^ariety of
earthly objects.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That God is sweet above all things, and in all things, to him that loves.
BEhold my God, and behold all things! What would I have more, and what more
happy thing can I desire?

2 O sweet and comfortable word! but to him that loves the word, not the
world, nor those things that are in the world.

3 My God, and all things! Enough is said to him that understands, and it is
pleasant to him that loves, to repeat it often.

4 For when thou art present, all things do yield delight, but when thou art
absent, all becomes irksome. Thou give quiet of heart and much peace, and
pleasant joy.

5 Thou make men think well of all, and praise thee in all things: neither
can any thing please us long without thee.

6 But if it be pleasant and delightsome, thy grace must be present, and it
must be seasoned with the sweetness of thy wisdom.

7 what can be distasteful unto him, to whom thou art pleasing? And whom thou
delightest not to him, what can be pleasant?

8 But the wise of the world, and they that have their contentment in sensual
things, cannot attain to thy wisdom, for in the world is much vanity, and in
the flesh is death.

9 But they that follow thee by the contempt of worldly things, and
mortification of the flesh, are proved to be truly wise; for they are changed
from vanity to truth, from flesh to spirit.

10 To these God is sweet, and what good soever is found in creatures, they
wholly refer unto the praise of their Maker.

11 Notwithstanding great, yea very great is the difference between the
sweetness of the Creator, and of the creature, of eternity and of time, of
uncreated and created light.

12 O everlasting light, surpassing all created lights, cast forth the beams of
thy brightness from above, and pierce the most Mward corners of my heart.

13 Purify, rejoice, clarify and quicken my spirit with all the powers thereof,
that I may cleave unto thee with excess of unspeakable joy.

14 O when will that blessed and desired hour come, that I may be filled with
thy presence, and thou may be unto me all in all!

15 As long as this is not granted me, I shall not have full nor perfect joy.
Alas! my old man yet lives in me, he is not wholly crucified, he is not
perfectly dead;

16 He does yet covet strongly against the spirit, and moves civil wars, and
suffers not the Kingdom of my soul to be in peace.

17 But thou that rulest the powers of the sea, and asswagest the motions of
the waves, rise and help me.

18 Dissipate the people that desire war, and destroy them in thy might, and
let thy hand be glorified: for there is no hope nor refuge for me, but in thee,
my Lord God.

CHAP. XXXV.
That there is no security from temptation in this life.
Son, there is no security in this life: as long as thou live thou shall
always have need of spiritual armor.

2 Thou live among enemies, and art assaulted on all sides: if thererefore
thou defendest not thy self on every side with the shield of patience, thou
can not be long unwounded.

3 Moreover if thou six not thy heart on me with a sincere will to suffer all
things for me, thou can not sustain the heat of this battle, nor get that
victorious crown which they have that are in glory.

4 Thou ought therefore manfully to go through all, and to use a strong
hand against whatsoever withstandeth thee.

5 For to him that overcomes is given Manna, and to the negligent is left much
woe.

6 If thou seek rest in this world, how will thou then attain to everlasting
rest? Give not thy self to much ease, but to much patience.

7 Seek true peace, not in earth, but in heaven; not in men, nor in any
creature, but in God alone.

8 Thou ought for the love of God willingly to undergo whatsoever labors,
to endure whatsoever griefs, temptations, vexations, anxieties, necessities,
infirmities, injuries, detractions, reprehensions, humiliations, confusions,
corrections, and contempts.

9 These help to the attaining of virtue: these try a Novice of Christ, these
make up an heavenly Crown.

10 I will give an everlasting reward for a short labor, and infinite glory
for transitory confusion.

11 Think thou, that thou shall always have spiritual consolations at
will? My Saints had not so, but many afflictions, and sundry temptations, and
many discomforts.

12 All which they endured patiently, and trusted rather in God, then in
themselves: knowing that the sufferings of this time are not worthy to obtain
future glory.

13 Will thou have that straight ways, which many, after tears, and great
labors have hardly obtained, Expect the coming of thy Lord, do manfully, be
of good courage.

14 Fear not, do not fly, but offer both body and soul for the glory of God;
I will reward thee in most plentiful manner, and I will be with thee in all
thy tribulations.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Against the vaine-Iudgments of men.
Son, six thy heart steadfastly on God, and fear not the judgments of men,
when thy conscience gives testimony of thy justice and innocence.

2 It is a good and a happy thing to suffer in that sort; neither will it be
burdensome to an humble mind, nor to him that trusts rather in God, then in
himself.

3 The most part of men are given to talk much, and therefore little care is to
be had of their words: neither is it possible to satisfy all.

4 Though the Apostle endeavor to please all in our Lord, and made himself
all unto all, yet he little regarded that he was judged by humane judgment.

5 He did for the edification and health of others, as much as he could and lay
in him yet could he not hinder, but that he was sometimes judged, and despised
by others.

6 Therefore he committed all to God, who knew all, and defended himself with
patience, and humility against evil tongues, and such as thought vanities and
lies, and spoke what they listed.

7 Yet sometimes notwithstanding he answered, lest the weak might have
received scandal by his silence.

8 Who art thou that fear mortal man? to day he is, and to morrow he is not
seen. Fear God and the terror of men shall not trouble thee.

9 What harm can the words or injuries of any do thee? he rather hurts
himself then thee: neither can he avoid the Judgments of God, be lie what he
will.

10 Have thou God before thine eyes, and contend not with complaining words.

11 I am able to deliver thee from all shame and wrong, and to repray every one
according to, their works.

12 And if for the present thou seem to be trodden down, and to suffer
shame and confusion without desert do not repine, neither do thou lessen thy
crown by thy impatience, but rather lift up thine eyes to me in hea.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of a full and pure resignation of our selves for the obtaining freedom of
heart:
Son, leave thy self, and thou shall find me. Make choice of nothing,
appropriate nothing to thy self, and thou shall ever gain.

2 For greater grace shall always he given thee, when thou do perfectly
resign thy self, and not turn back to take thy self again.

3 Lord, how often shall I resign my self? and wherein shall I forsake my
self? Always and in every thing, as well in little as in great.

4 I do accept nothing, but do require that thou be as it were naked and void
of all things.

5 Otherwise, how can thou be perfectly mine, and I thine, unless both
within and without thou be free from all self-will?

6 And how much the sooner thou do this, so much the better shall thou find
thy self, and how much the more fully and sincerely thou do it, so much the
more shall thou please me, and so much the more shall thou gain.

7 Some there are that resign themselves, but with some exception: For they
put not their whole trust in God, and therefore do labor to provide for
themselves.

8 Some also at the first do offer all, but afterward being affailed with
temptations, do return again to that which they had left, and therefore they
go not afterward in the way of virtue.

9 These shall not attain to the true liberty of a pure heart, nor to the
grace of my divine familiarity, unless they first make an entire resignation,
and offer themselves a daily sacrifice unto me.

10 For without this can never be obtained the union with me, wherewith my
Saints enjoy me.

11 I have often said unto thee, and now again I say the same: Forsake thy
self, resign thy self, and thou shall enjoy great internal peace.

12 Give all for all, seek nothing, require nothing, repose thy self purely
and with a full confidence in me, and I will give my self unto thee, and
darkness shall not cover thee.

13 Let this be thy whole endeavor, let this be thy prayer, let this be thy
desire.

14 That casting off all propriety, thou may all naked follow thy naked
Savior Jesus: and dying to thy self, may live eternally to me.

15 Then shall vain fantasies, evil perturbations, and all superfluous cares
fly away, then shall immoderate fear leave thee, and inordinate love shall die.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of good government of outward things, and of recourse to God in dangers.
Son, thou ought with all diligence to procure, that in every place and
action, or external business, thou be inwardly free, and master of thy self,
and that all things be under thy disposition, and thou not subject to them.

2 That thou may be Lord and Master of thy actions, not a servant or a
hireling, but rather a freeman, and a true Hebrew belonging to the lot and
freedom of the Sons of God;

3 Who put the things that are present under their feet, and place their
thoughts on that which is eternal; who look on transitory things with the left
eye, and with the right do behold the things of heaven.

4 Who depend not upon temporal things but make such things depend upon them
and serve them.

5 As they are ordained by God, and appointed by the Creator of all, who has
left nothing in his creatures without due order.

6 If thou remain firm and steadfast in all events, and do not weigh by the
outward appearance, nor with a carnal eye, the things which thou see and
hear,

7 But presently in every occasion do enter with Moses into the Tabernacle
to ask counsel of our Lord, thou shall sometimes hear the divine and
celestial oracle, and shall return instructed of many things, both present
and to come.

8 Moses had always recourse to the Tabernacle for the deciding of all doubts,
and obscure questions, and fied to the help of prayer, for the remedy of the
iniquity and dangers of men.

9 So ought thou in like manner to fly to the closet of thy heart, earnestly
craving the divine favor.

10 For the Scripture testifies, that therefore was Iosue and the children of
Israel deceived by the Giboanites, because they consulted not first with God,
but giving too lightly credit to fair words, were deluded with counterfeit
piety.

CHAP. XXXIX.
That a man be not over earnest in his affairs.
SOn, always commit thy cause to me I will dispose well of it in due time,
expect my ordination, and thou shall find it will be for thy good.

2 Lord, I do most willingly commit all unto thee, for my care can profit
little: O that I cleaved not too much to future events, but oftered my self
with all readiness of mind to thy divine pleasure!

3 Son, oftentimes a man does earnestly labor for that which he desires,
and when he has gotten it, he begins to be of another mind, and not to
esteem so much of it, as before he did.

4 For man's affections do not long continue fixed on one thing, but do pass
from one to another.

5 It is therefore a matter, not of least moment, to forsake our selves even in
the least things.

6 The true spiritual profit of man consists in denying and forsaking of
himself: and he that is thus resigned up lives in great freedom and
security.

7 But the ancient enemy, who always labors to withstand the servants of
God, omitteth at no time his wonted temptations, but day and night lies still
in wait, to cast the unwary, if he can, into the snare of deceit: Watch
therefore and pray, says our Lord, that you enter not into temptation.

CHAP. XL.
That man has no good of himself, nor any thing whereof he can glory.
LOrd, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou
vouchsafest to visit him? What has man deserved that thou should give him
thy grace?

2 Lord, what cause have I to complain, if thou forsake me? or if thou do
not that which I desire, what can I justly say against it?

3 Surely, this I may truly think and say: Lord, I am nothing, I can do
nothing, I have nothing that is good of my self.

4 But in all things I do fail, and am defective, and do ever tend to
nothing: and unless thou help me, and do inwardly instruct me, I become
cold, and am dissolved.

5 But thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever, always good,
just, and holy, doing all things well, justly, and holily, and disposing al
things with wisdom.

6 But I that am more inclined to fall, then to go forwards, do never
continue in one estate: for seven different times are changed over me, yet does
it soon turn to the better, when it so pleases thee, and when thou
vouchsafest to stretch forth thy helping hand.

7 For thou alone can help me without the favor of man, and so strengthen
me, that my countenance shall be no more changed, but my heart shall be
converted, and rest in thee alone.

8 Wherefore if I could once perfectly forsake all humane comfort, either for
the love of devotion, or for mine own necessity, which inforceth me to seek
after thee (for none else can comfort me) then might I well hope in thy grace,
and rejoice in the gift of new consolation.

9 Thanks be unto thee, from whence all proceeds, as often as it goes well
with me: but I am mere vanity, and nothing before thee, an unconstant and
weak man.

10 Whereof then can I glory? Of why do I desire to be esteemed of? Is it not
of nothing? And this is most vain.

11 Truly, vainglory is an evil plague and very great vanity, because it
draws from true glory, and robs the soul of heavenly grace.

12 For whilst a man pleases himself, he displeases thee: whilst he gapeth
after the praise of men, he is deprived of true virtue.

13 But true glory and holy exultation, is for a man to glory in thee, and not
in himself, to rejoice in thy name, and not in his own virtue, nor to delight
in any creature, but for thee.

14 Praised be thy name, not mine: magnified be thy work, not mine: let thy
holy name be for ever blessed, but to me let no part of men's praises be given.

15 Thou art my glory, thou art the joy of my heart: In thee will I glory and
rejoice all the day; but for my self I will not joye, but in my infirmities.

16 Let the Jews seeeke the glory, which one man gives to another: I will
desire this, which is from God alone.

17 For all humane glory, all temporal honor, all worldly highness, compared
to thy eternal glory, is vanity and folly.

18 O my truth, my mercy, my God, most blessed Trinity, to thee alone be all
praise, honor, virtue, and glory for all eternity!

CHAP. XLI.
Of the contempt of all temporal honors.
Son, trouble not thyselfe, if thou see others honored and advanced, and
thy self contemned and debased.

2 Lift up thy heart unto me in heaven, and the contempt of men in earth will
not grieve thee. Lord, we are blind, and quickly seduced with vanity.

3 If I look well into my self, I cannot say, that any creature has done me
wrong, and therefore I cannot justly complain of thee:

4 But because I have often and grievously sinned against thee, all creatures
do justly take arms against me, for shame and contempt is due unto me, but
unto thee praise honor and glory.

5 And unless I do so prepare my self, that I be willing, and do rejoice to
be despised and forsaken of all creatures, and to be esteemed nothing at all, I
cannot obtain internal strength and peace, nor be spiritually enlightened, nor
wholly united unto thee.

CHAP. XLII.
That our peace is not to be placed in men.
Son, if the peace thou have with any, be grounded on the opinion which thou
have of him, or on the contentment thou receavest in his company, thou shall
ever be unconstant and subject to disquiet:

2 But if thou have recourse unto the ever-living and eternal truth, a friend
going from thee or dying shall not grieve thee.

3 The love of thy friend ought to rest in me, and for me is he to be beloved
whosoever he be whom thou think well of, and is verily dear unto thee in
this life.

4 No friendship can avail, or continue without me; neither is the love true
and pure, which they have, whose hearts are not joined together by me.

5 Thou ought to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends, that
(forasmuch as appertains unto thee) thou should wish to be without all
company of men.

6 Man approaches so much the nearer unto God, how much the farther off he
departs from all earthly comfort.

7 So much the higher also he ascends unto God, by how much the lower he
descends into himself, and how much the baser he is in his own conceit:

8 But he that attributes any good unto himself, hinders the coming of Gods
grace into him, for the grace of the holy Ghost ever seeks an humble heart.

9 If thou coulde^st perfectly annihilate thy self, and purge thy self of all
created love, then should there flow into thee great abundance of my grace.

10 When thou castest thy eyes on creatures, the sight of thy Creator is taken
from thee.

11 Learn to overcome thy self in all things for the love of thy Creator, and
then shall thou be able to attain to heavenly knowledge.

12 How little soever it be, if it be inordinately loved and regarded, it
defiles the soul, and hinders the enjoying of the chiofest good.

CHAP. XLIII
Against vain and secular knowledge.
Son, let not the fair speeches, and subtle sayings of men move thee; for
the Kingdom of God consists not in words, but in virtue.

2 Observe well the words which I speak: for they inflame the heart, and
enlighten the mind, induce compunction, and bring sundry comforts.

3 Do thou never read to show thy self learned or wise: but labor to
mortify thy vices, for that will profit thee more, then the knowledge of many
hard and difficult questions.

4 When thou shall have read and known many things, thou ought ever to
return to one beginning.

5 I am he, that teaches man all knowledge; and do give to little ones a more
clear understanding, then can be taught by man.

6 He therefore to whom I speak, shall quickly be wise, and shall profit much
in spirit. Woe be to them, that inquire many curious things of men, and do
little desire to know the way how to serve me.

7 The time will come, when the Master of Masters shall appear, Christ the
Lord of Angels, to hear the lessons of all, that is, to examine the consciences
of every one.

8 And then he will search Jerusalem with a candle, and the hidden things of
darkness shall be laid open, and the inventions of tongues shall be silent.

9 I am he that in an instant do raise up the humble mind, to understand more
reasons of the everlasting truth, then can be gotten by ten years study in
schools.

10 I teach without noise of words, without confusion of opinions, without
ambition of honor, without contention of arguments.

11 I am he that teaches to despise earthly things, to loath things present,
to seek the everlasting, to delight in the things that are eternal.

12 To fly honors, to suffer scandalls, to place all hope in me, to desire
nothing out of me, and above all things servently to love me.

13 For one by loving me entirely, learned divine things, and spoke wonders: he
profited more in forsaking all things, then in studying subtilties.

14 To some I speak ordinary things, to others, things more rare to some I
appear sweetly by signs and figures, but to some I reveal mysteries with much
light.

15 The voice of books is one, but it teaches not all men alike: For I am the
internal teacher, I am the Truth, the searcher of the heart, the understander
of thoughts, the setter forwards of good works, distributing to every one
according to my will.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of not drawing outward things to our selves.
Son, in many things thou ought to be ignorant, and esteem thy self as
dead upon earth, and as one to whom the world is crucified.

2 Thou must also pass over many things with a deaf ear, and rather think of
that which appertains to thy peace.

3 It is more profitable to turn thine eyes from the sight of unpleasing
things, and to leave unto every one his own opinion, then to strive with
contentious words.

4 If thou stand well with God, and considerest his judgments, thou shall
the more easily yield to the will of others.

5 O Lord, to what an estate are we come! Behold, we bewail a temporal loss,
and for a little gain we toil and spare no labor, and the spiritual damage
of our soul is forgotten, and hardly at length called to mind.

6 That which little or nothing profits, is always remembered, and that which
is chiefly necessary, is negligently passed over.

7 Because man's nature carries him to external things, and unless he quickly
return unto himself, he lies drowned in them with delight.

CHAP. XLV.
That credit is not to be given to all men: and how prone man is to offend in
words.
HElp me Lord, in my tribulation, for vain is the defense of man. How often
have I been deceaved, finding want of faith, where I thought it sure? And how
often have I found faith, where I least expected it?

2 It is vain therefore to trust in men, but the safety of the just, O Lord,
is in thee. Blessed be thou my God, in all things that befall us! We are weak
and inconstant, quickly deceaved, and soon changed.

3 Who is he, that is able so warily to keep himself, that he never fall into
any deceit or doubt? But he that trusts in thee, O Lord, and seeks thee
with a pure heart, does not easily fall.

4 And if he fall into any tribulation, be he never so much inthralied, yet he
shall quickly be delivered or comforted by thee, for thou will not forsake him
for ever that trusts in thee.

5 The friend is rare to be found, that continues faithful in his friends
distress, but thou, O Lord, thou alone art faithful at all times, and there
is none like unto thee.

6 O how wise was that holy soul that said: My mind is firmly settled and
grounded in Christ! If it were so with: me then would not human fear so
easily trouble me, nor words move me.

7 Who can foresee all things? who is able to beware beforehand of future
evils? If things even foreseen do oftentimes hurt us, how can things unlooked
for choose but wound us grievously?

8 But why did (not provide better for my self, (...) why also have I so
easily given credit ^o others?

9 But alas we are men, and God knows weak and f^^ile men, although by to any
we are reputed and called Angels.

10 To whom shall I (...) credit Lord? to whom but to thee? Thou art the truth
that neither do deceave, not can be deceaved.

11 And on the other side, every man is a liar, weak, unconstant, and subject
to fall, especially in words, and therefore we must not easily give credit even
to that, which in outward show seems at the first a certain truth.

12 O with how great wisdom have thou warned us to take heed of men? and
because the enemies of man are his familiar and domestical acquaintance, not
to trust, if one should say, Behold here, or behold there.

13 I am taught to my cost, and I would to God I might thereby increase my
care, and not my folly.

14 Be wary, says one, be wary, keep unto thy self what I tell thee.

15 And whilst I hold my peace, and think it is secret, he cannot keep that
secret, which he desired should be secret, but presently disoloseth me and
himself, and goes his way.

16 From such tales, and such improvident people, protect me Lord, that I fall
not into their hands, nor ever commit such errors.

17 Give me grace my God to observe truth, and constancy in my words and remove
far from me a deceiptfull tongue. What I am not willing to suffer, I ought by
all means to avoid.

18 O how good and quiet a thing it is to be silent, and not to talk of
others, nor to believe all that is said, nor easily to report what we have
heard.

19 To lay ones self open to few, always to seek after thee, the beholder of
the heart? not to be carried about with every wind of words, but to desire that
all things both within and without, be accomplished according to thy will and
pleasure.

20 How secure is it for the keeping of heavenly grace, to fly the sight of
men, and not to seek those things, that seem to cause admiration abroad, but
to follow that withal diligence, which brings amendment of life, and
increase of fervor.

21 To how many has virtue known and overhastily commended been hurtful? How
profitable has grace been, kept with silence in this mortal life, which is
nothing but a perpetual temptation and a warfare?

CHAP. XLVI.
Of putting our trust in God, whom evil words arise.
Son, be constant, and put thy trust in me: For what are words, but words?
They pass through the air, but hurt not. If thou be guilty, determine
willingly to amend thy self* if thou be innocent, resolve to suffee this
willingly at least for God.

2 It is a small matter to suffer sometimes a few words, if thou have not yet
the courage to endure stripes.

3 And why do small matters go to thy heart, but for that thou art yet
carnal, and regardest men more then thou ought?

4 Because thou art afraid to be despised, therefore thou will not be
reprehended for thy faults, and therefore seek shadows of excuses.

5 But look better unto thy felfe and thou shall see, that the world yet lives
in thee, and a vain desire to please men.

6 For when thou refusest to be humbled, and reproved for thy faults, it is
surely evident, that thou art neither truly humble, nor dead to the world, nor
the world perfectly crucified to thee.

7 But give diligent ear to my words, and thou shall little respect ten
thousand words spoken by men

8 Behold if all should be spoken against thee that could be most maliciously
invented, what would it hurt thee, if thou sufferedst it to pass, and made
no reckoning at all of it? Could all those words pluck as much as one hair
from thy head?

9 But he that has not his heart within him, nor God before his eyes, is
easily moved with every little dispraise, when as he that trusts in me, and
trusts not in his own judgment, shall be free from humane fears.

10 For I am the Judge and discerner of all secrets: I know how the matter
passed, I know him that offers the injury, and him that suffers it.

11 From me has this word proceeded, this has happened by my permission, that
out of many hearts thoughts may be revealed.

12 I shall judge the guilty and the innocent, but by a secret judgment I
would before hand try them both.

13 The testimony of men oftentimes deceaveth, my judgment is always true, it
shall stand and not be overthrown.

14 It is commonly hidden and secret, and not known in every thing but to few;
notwithstanding it never erreth, neither can it err, although to the eyes of
the foolish it seems not right.

15 Men ought therefore to return to me in every judgment, and not to stand in
their own opinions.

16 For the just man will not be troubled, whatsoever happens unto him from
God: and if any thing be wrongfully brought forth against him, he will not much
care, neither will he vainly be glad, if by others he be with reason excused.

17 For he considers that I am he that searches the heart and reins, and
do judge, not according to the outward face, nor humane appearance.

18 For that is oftentimes found ^ulpable in my sight, that in the judgment of
men is thought to be commendable.

19 O Lord my God, the just Judge, strong and patient, thou know the frailty
and perversity of man, be thou my strength, and all my trust, for mine own
conscience suffices me not.

20 Thou know that which I cannot reach unto, and therefore in every
reprehension I ought to have submitted my self, and to have borne i^ patiently.

21 Vouchsafe mercifully to pardon me, as often as I have failed herein, and
give me again grace of greate^ sufferance.

22 For thy bountiful mercy is more availeable to me for the obtaining of
pardon, then my conceaved justice for the defense of my hidden conscience.

23 Although my conscience accuse me not, yet I cannot hereby justify my self,
for if thy mercy be away, ^o man living shall be justified in thy ^ight.

CHAP. XLVII.
That all grievous things are to be endured for life everlasting.
Son, let not the pains dismay thee which thou have undertaken for me,
neither be thou discomforted for the tribulations which do befall thee, but
let my promise strengthen and comfort thee in all events.

2 I am able to reward thee above all measure: Thou shall not long toil here,
nor always be oppressed with grief; attend a while, and thou shall see a
speedy end of thy evils.

3 There will come an hour when all labor and trouble shall cease: Litl^ and
short is all that passes away with time.

4 Do as thou do, labor faithfully in my vineyard, I will be thy reward:
Write, read, sing, mourn, keep silence, pray, suffer crosses manfully: life
everlasting is worthy of all these and greater combats.

5 Peace shall come in the day which is known unto our Lord, and ^here shall
be no day nor night, to wit, of this time, but everlasting light, infinite
brightness, steadfast peace, and secure rest.

6 Then thou shall not say, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
nor cry, woe be unto me, for that my dwelling in a strange country is prolonged!

7 For death shall be thrown down, and health shall be without decay, no
anxiety, blessed joy, sweet and glorious company.

8 O if thou had seen the everlasting crown of the Saints in heaven, and
with how great glory they now rejoice who in times past were con^^mptible to
this world^ and esteemed unworthy of life it self,

9 Truly thou would presently humble thy self even unto the earth: and
would rather seek to be under the feet of all, then to have command, so much
as over one.

10 Neither would thou desire the pleasant days of this life, but rather
rejoice to be afflicted for God^, and esteem it thy greatest gain to be
reputed as nothing amongst men.

11 O if thou had a feeling of these things, and did suffer them to enter
into the depth of thy heart, how durst thou so much as once to complain!

12 Are not all painful labors to be endured for everlasting life? It is no
small matter to loose or to gain the Kingdom of heaven.

13 Lift up thine eyes therefore unto heaven: behold I, and all my Saints with
me, who in this world had great conflicts, do now rejoice, now are comforted,
now are secure, now do rest, and shall remain with me everlastingly in the
Kingdom of my Father.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the everlasting day, and shortness of this life.
O Most blessed mansion of the heavenly City: O most clear day of eternity
which night obscureth not, but the highest truth ever enlightneth, day ever
pleasant, ever secure, and never changing into a contrary state.

2 O that that day would once appear, and all these temporal things were at
an end.

3 To the Saints it shines glistering with everlasting brightness, but to
those that are Pilgrims upon earth, it appears only a far off, and as it
were through a glass.

4 The inhabitants of heaven do know how joyful that day is: but the banished
children of Eve bewail the bitterness and tediousness of this.

5 The days of this life are short and evil, full of sorrow and anguish,
where man is defiled with many sins, encumbered with many passions, disquieted
with many fears, filled with many cares,

6 Distracted with many curiosities, entangled with many vanities, compassed a
bout with many errors, worn away with many labors, vexed with temptations,
weakened with delights, tormented with want.

7 O when shall these evils be at an end! When shall I be delivered from the
miserable bondage of sin? When shall I think, O Lord of thee alone?

8 When shall I perfectly rejoice in thee? When shall I be free from all
impediments in true liberty, without all grief of mind and body?

9 When shall I have firm peace, peace secure and without trouble, peace
within and without, pence every way assured.

10 O good Jesus, when shall I stand to behold thee? When shall I contemplate
the glory of thy Kingdom*

11 When will thou be unto me all in all things? O when shall I be with thee in
thy Kingdom which thou have prepared for thy beloved, from before all worlds.

12 I am left a poor and banished man in the land of mine enemies, where there
are daily wars, and great misfortunes.

13 Comfort my banishment, assuage my sorrow: for my whole desire sends up
sighs unto thee: For all ^s burdensome to me, whatsoever this world offers
for my comfort.

14 I desire familiarly to enjoy thee, but I cannot attain unto it: I would
gladly fix my heart to the things of heaven, but temporal cares and
unmorti^ied passions weigh me down.

15 In ^ind I would be above all things, but to my flesh I am enforced to be
subject against my will.

16 Thus unhappy man that I am, I fight against my self, and am become
grievous to my self, whilst my spirit seeks after the things that are above,
and my flesh that which is below.

17 O what do I inwardly suffer, when in mind I consider heavenly things, and
presently in my prayers, a multitude of fleshly fantasies present themselves
before me?

18 My God, be not far from me, depart not in thy wrath from thy servant:
Cast forth thy lightning, and disperse them: send out thy darts, and break all
the fantasies of my enemy.

19 Gather my senses together unto thee, make me forget the things of this
world: grant me grace to cast away speedily the appearance of vices.

20 Succor me, O everlasting truth, that no vanity may move me. Come heavenly
sweetness, and let all impurity fly from thy face.

21 Pa^don me also, and mercifully forgive me as often as I think upon any
thing else besides thee in prayer.

22 I truly confess, that I am wont to be subject to many distractions: for
oftent^mes I am not there, where I do corporally stand, or sit, but rather,
whither my thoughts do carry me.

23 Where my thoughts are, there am I^ there is oftentimes my thought where my
affection is: that quickly occurreth unto me, which is naturally delightsome,
and by custom pleasing.

24 And for this cause, thou tha^ art truth it self, have plainly said, Where
thy treasure is, there is also thy heart.

25 If I love heaven, I willingly think of heavenly things: If I love the
world, I rejoice at the felicity of the world, and grieve for the adversity
thereof.

26 If I love the flesh, I imagine oftentimes those things, that are pleasing
to the flesh; If I love the spirit, I delight to think of spiritual things.

27 For whatsoever I love, thereof do I willingly speak, and hear, and carry
home with me the forms and representations thereof.

28 O blessed is that man, that for thee, O Lord, forsakes all creatures, that
violently resists nature, and out of the fervor of spirit crucifieth the
concupiscences of the flesh:

29 That with a clear conscience he may offer sincere prayers unto thee, and
be worthy of the company of the angelical Quires, all earthly things outwardly
and ^nwardly being excluded.

CHAP. XLIX.
Of the desire of everlasting life, and how great rewards are promised to those
that fight valiantly.
Son, when thou perceivest the desire of everlasting bliss to be given thee
from above, and desire to depart out of the Tabernacle of this body that thou
may without shadow of any enterchange behold my light, open thy heart, and
receive this holy inspiration with thy whole desire

2 Give great thanks to the heavenly goodness, that deals with thee so
favorably, visits thee mercifully, stirs thee up fervently, holds thee
up powerfully, lest through thine own weight thou fall down to the vanitie^ of
the earth.

3 Neither do thou obtain this by thine own thought or endeavor, but by
the only favor of heavenly grace and divine bounty.

4 That thou may profit in virtue and obtain greater humility, and prepare
thy self to future battles, and endeavor to cleave unto me with the whole
affection of thy heart, and serve me with a servent desire.

5 Son, fire often burns, but flame ascends not up without smoke: so
likewise the desires of some men are earnestly carried to heavenly things, and
yet they are not free from temptation of carnal affection:

6 And therefore it is not altogether purely for the honor of God, that which
they so earnestly request of him.

7 Such is also oftentimes thy desire, which with such importunity thou
presentest unto me.

8 For that is not pure and perfect, which is infected, and desiled with the
love of thine own proper commodity and interest.

9 Ask not that which is delightsome and profitable to thee, but that which is
grateful to me, and appetaineth to my honor.

10 For if thou judge aright* thou ought to prefer and follow my
appointment, rather then thine own desire, or any thing that can be desired.

11 I know thy desire, and have heard thy often groans: Now thou would be
in the freedom of the glory of the Sons of God: now does the everlasting
habitation, and the heavenly Country full of joy delight thee.

12 But this hour is not yet come: it is yet another time, to wit, a time of
war, a time of labor and trial.

13 Thou desire to be filled with the chiefest good, but thou can not
attain it for the present: I am he, says our Lord, expect until the Kingdom
of God does come.

14 Thou art yet to be tried upon earth, and to be exercised in many things:
Comfort shall be sometimes given thee, but abundant fullness thereof shall not
be granted to thee.

15 Take courage therefore, and be valiant as well in doing as in suffering
things contrary to nature: Thou ought to put on a new man, and to be changed
into another man.

16 Thou must oftentimes do that which thou would not, and leave undone
that which thou would: that which is pleasing to others shall go well
forwards, that which thou wishest shall not speed.

17 That which others say shall be heard, what thou say shall be nothing
regarded: Others shall ask and shall receive, thou shall ask and not obtain.

18 Others shall be great in thc praises of men, but of thee there shall be no
speech, to others this or that shall be committed, but thou shall be accounted
sit for nothing.

19 At this nature will sometimes repine, and it is much if thou endurest it
with silence.

20 In these and such like, a faithful servant of our Lord is wont to be
tried, how he can deny and overcome himself in all things.

21 There is scarce any thing, wherein thou have such need to mortify thy
self, as in seeing and suffering those things that ^are contrary to thy will.

22 Especially when that is commanded, which seems unto thee inconvenient, or
to little purpose.

23 And for that thou being placed under authority, dare nor resist higher
power, therefore it seems hard unto thee, to walk at the beck of another,
and to leave wholly thine own opinion.

24 But consider, Son, the fruit of these labors, the end near at hand, and
the reward above all measure, and thou shall receive no grief there by, but
great comfort of thy patience.

25 For in regard of that little of thy will which now thou willingly forsakest,
thou shall always have thy will in heaven.

26 There thou shall have all that thou will, or can desire, there thou shall
enjoy all good without fear of loosing it, there shall thy will be ever one
with me; it shall desire nothing strange or private.

27 There no man shall withstand thee, no man hinder thee, nothing come against
thee: but all things desired shall be there together present, and refresh thy
whole affection, and fulfill it to the highest.

28 There I will return thee glory for the reproach which here thou
sufferedst, a garment of praise for former grief; for the lowest place, a seat
of an everlasting Kingdom:

29 There shall the fruit of obedidience appear, the labor of repentance
rejoice, and humble subjection shall be gloriously crowned.

30 Now therefore bow thy self with great humility under the h^nds of all, and
regard not who said, or commanded this.

31 But take great heed, that whether thy Superior, or thy inferior, or thine
equal require any thing of thee, or do insinuate their desire, thou take it
all in good part, and endeavor to fulfill it with a sincere intention.

32 Let one seek this, another that, let him glory in this, the other in that,
and be praised a thousand thousand times.

33 But do thou neither rejoice in this, not in that, but in the contempt of
thy self, and in the good pleasure and honor of me alone.

34 This art thou to wish, that whether it be by life, or whether it be by
death, God may be always glorified in thee.

CHAP. L.
How a desolate person ought to offer himself into the ^ands of God.
LOrd God, Holy Father^, thy holy name be now and for ever ble^^ed, because, so
it is done, as thou would have it, and it is good, ^what thou would have
done.

2 Let thy servant rejoice in thee, not in himself, nor in any thing else, ^or
thou alone art the true gladness, thou art my hope and my crown, thou art my
joy and my honor, O Lord.

3 What has thy servant, but what he has received from thee, even without any
desert of his? Thine is all that thou have given, and whatsoever, thou ^^st
made.

4 I am poor, and in labors from my youth: and sometimes my soul is heavy
even unto tears, sometimes also she is troubled at her self, by reason of
passions which rise against her.

5 I desire the joy of peace, I earnestly crave the ^peace of thy children,
that are fed by thee in the light of comfort.

6 If thou give peace, if thou infuse holy joy, the soul of thy servant shall
be full of heavenly sweetness, and shall become devout in thy praise.

7 But if thou withdraw thy self, (as very often thou art wont) he will not be
able to run the ways of thy commandments, but rather he boweth his knees
and knocks his breast.

8 For it is not with him, as it was yesterday, and the day before, when thy
light shined upon his head: and he was protected under the shadow of thy wings,
from the temptations which violently assaulted him.

9 O righteous Father, and ever to be praised, the hour is come, that thy
servant is to be proved! O beloved Father it is fit, that in this hour thy
servant suffer something for thee.

10 O Father worthy of eternal honor, the hour is come which from all
eternity, thou did fo^eknow should come.

11 That for a short time thy servant should outwardly be oppressed, but
inwardly live for ever with thee.

12 He should be a little despised, and humbled, and made as an abject in the
sight of men, and much afflicted with passions and infirmities, that in the
morning of the new light he may rise again with thee, and be glorified in
heavenly places.

13 Holy Father, thou have appointed it so, and wilt have it so, and this is
fulfilled which thy self have commanded.

14 For this benefit thou bestowest upon thy friend, that albeit for thy sake
he must suffer affliction in this world, yet is it but how often, and by whom,
and as thou will give leave.

15 For in the world nothing comes to pass, either without thy counsel,
without thy providence, or without a cause why.

16 It is good for me, Lord, that thou have humbled me, that I may learn thy
righteous Judgments, and cast away all haughtiness of heart, and presumption.

17 It is profitable to me, that shame has covered my face, that I may rather
seek to thee for comfort, then to men.

18 I have learned also hereby to dread thy inscrutable judgment, that
afflict^st the just with the wicked, but not without equity and justice.

19 I give thee thanks, that thou have not spared my sins, but have worn me
away with bitter stripes, inflicting sorrows, and sending griefs within and
without.

20 There is none under heaven that can comfort me, but thou my Lord God, the
heavenly Physician of soule^, that strikest, and healest? bring into hell,
and drawest out again: let thy correction be upon me, and let thy rod instruct
me.

21 Behold beloved Father, I am ^n thy hands, I bow my self under the ^od of
thy correction: let my neck and shoulders feel the stripes of thy
chastisement, that my crookedness may be conformed to thy will.

22 Make ^^^devou^ and humble disciple of thine, as thou art wont very well to
do, that I may be ready at every beck of thy divine pleasure.

23 I commend my self and all mine unto thee to be corrected: It is better to
be rebuked here, then hereafter.

24 Thou know all and every thing, and there is nothing hidden from thee in
the conscience of man.

25 Before things are done, thou know that they will happen, and have no
need that any should teach thee, or admonish thee of those things, which are
done on earth.

26 Thou know what is expedient for my good, and how much tribulation is fit
for purging the rust of my sins.

27 Do with me according to thy ^esired pleasure, and despise not m^ sinful
life, better and more clearly known to none then to thee alone.

28 Grant me, Lord to know that which is to be known; to love that which is to
be beloved, to praise that, which pleases thee most: to esteem that which is
precious unto thee: to despise that, which is contemptible in thy sight.

29 Suffer me not to judge according to the sight of the outward eyes, to give
sentenc^ according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant men.

30 But to discern of visible and spiritual things with a true judgment, and
above all things ever to search after thy good will and pleasure.

31 The senses of men are often deceived in their judgments, the lovers of the
world are also deceived in loving only visible things: What is a man the
better, for that he is esteemed great by man?

32 The deceitful in exalting the deceitful, the vain man in extolling the
vain, the blind in conducting the blind, the weak in magnifying the weak,
deceives him: and does verily more shame him, while he does vainly praise him.

33 For how much every one is in thy sight O Lord, so much he is, and no (...)
says humble S. Francis.

CHAP. LI.
That a man ought to employ himself in works of humility, when force is
wanting for higher exercises.
Son, thou art not able always to continue in the fervent desire of virtue,
nor to persist in the high pitch of heavenly contemplation.

2 But thou must sometimes of necessity by reason of original corruption
descend to inferior things, and bear the burden of this corruptible life,
though unwillingly and with grief.

3 As long as thou cariest a mortal body, thou shall feel great trouble and
heaviness of heart.

4 Thou ought therefore in the flesh oftentimes to bewail the burden of
the flesh: for that thou can not always persevere in spiritual exercises
and divine contemplation.

5 It is then expedient for thee to fly to humble and exterior works, and to
refresh thy self with good and virtuous actions.

6 To expect with a firm confidence my coming, and heavenly visitation, to
bear patiently thy banishment, and the dryness of thy mind, until I visit
thee again and deliver thee from all anxiety.

7 For I will make thee forget thy pains, and enjoy inward quietness.

8 I will lay open before thee the pleasant fields of holy Scripture, ^ha^ with
an enlarged heart that may begin to run the way of my commandments.

9 And thou shall say, that the sufferings of this time are not worthy of the
glory to come, that shall be revealed in us.

CHAP. LII.
That a man ought to esteem himself unworthy of comfort, and to have deserved
stripes.
LOrd I am not worthy of thy comfort, no^ of any spiritual visitation, and
therefore thou dealest justly with me, when thou leavest me poor and desolate.
Though I could power out even a sea of tears, yet I were not worthy of thy
comfort.

2 For (alas) I deserve nothing, but to be scourged and punished, in that I
have grievously and often offended thee, and sinned in many things.

3 All things therefore duly considered, I am not worthy even of the least
comfort.

4 But thou mild and merciful God, who wilt not that thy works do perish, to
show the riches of thy goodness upon the vessels of mercy, even beyond all
mine own merit, vouchsafest to comfor thy servant, above humane measure.

5 For thy heavenly consolations are not like humane communications, and in
comparison of thee we are miserable comforters.

6 What have I done O Lord, that thou should bestow upon me, any heavenly
comfort.

7 I remember I have done no good at all, but have been always prone to sin,
and slothful in my amendment.

8 It is so true, that I cannot deny ^it, if I should say otherwise, thou
would plead against me, and there would be none to defend me.

9 What have I deserved for my sins, but hell and everlasting fire?

10 I confess in the truth of my heart, that I am worthy of all sco^ne and
contempt, and it is unfit that I should be remembered, amongst thy holy ones.

11 And although I be unwilling to hear this, yet notwithstanding for the love
of truth, I will lay open my sins against my self, that I may the better
obtain mercy at thy hands.

12 What shall I say, being guilty, and full of all confusion? I have nothing
to say but this, I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned, have mercy on me, pardon
and forgive me.

13 Suffer me a little, that I may bewail my grief, before I go unto the land
of darkness, and be covered with the shadow of death.

14 What do thou require of a guilty and miserable sinner, ^ut that he be
contrite and sorrowful* and do humble himself for his sins.

15 In true contrition and humbleness of heart, is bred a hope of
forgiveness, a troubled conscience is reconciled again, grace lost is
restored* man is defended from future wrath, and God and the penitent soul
meet together in a holy kiss.

16 Humble contrition for ^innes, is an acceptable sacrifice unto thee O Lord,
savouring much sweeter in thy nostrils then the perfume of franki^sence.

17 This is also the pleasant ointment, which thou would have powered upon
thy sacred feet, for thou never despisest a contrite and humble heart.

18 There is a place of refuge, from the angry face of the enemy; there is
amended, and washed away whatsoever elsewhere was polluted and defiled,

CHAP. LIII.
That the grace of God is not given to those that savor of earthly things.
Son, my grace is precious, it suffers not it self to be mingled wit^
external things, nor earthly comforts. Thou ought therefore to cast away
all hindrances of grace, if thou desire to receave the infusion thereof.

2 Choose therefore a secret place to thy self, love to live alone with thy
self, desire the conversation of none, but rather power out devout prayers
unto God, that thou may keep thy mind compunct, and thy conscience pure.

3 Esteem the whole world as nothing: prefer my service before all outward
things: for thou can not altend unto me, and be delighted also in transitory
vanities.

4 Thou ought to sequester thy self from thy acquaintance and friends, and
to keep thy mind deprived of all temporal comfort.

5 So the blessed Apostle Peter required, that the faithful of Christ should
keep themselves as strangers and pilgrims in this world.

6 O how great a confidence shall he have at the hour of death, whom no
affection to any earthly thing detained in the world.

7 But the weak mind is not yet capable of so retired a heart: neither does
the fleshly person understand the freedom of a re^ollected mind.

8 Notwithstanding if he will be truly spiritual, he ought to renounce as well
those which are far off, as those which are near unto him, and to beware of
no man more then of himself.

9 If thou perfectly overcome thy self, thou shall with more ease subdue the
rest. It is a glorious victory to triumph over our selves.

10 For he that keeps himself subject in such sort, that his sensuality be
subdued to reason, and reason in all things be obedient to me, he is truly a
conqueror of himself, and Lord of the world.

11 If thou desire to mount unto this height of perfection, thou must begin
manfully, and set the axe to the root, that thou may pluck up and destroy,
thy hidden and inordinate inclination to thy self, and unto all private and
earthly good.

12 Of this vice (that man too inordinately loves himself) almost all
depends, whatsoever is wholly to be overcome: which being once overcome and
subdued, there will presently ensue great peace and tranquillity.

13 But for that few endeavor perfectly to dye unto themselves, and do forsake
themselves wholly, therefore they remain entangled in themselves, and cannot
be lifted up in spirit above themselves.

14 But he that desires to walk freely with me, it is necessary that he
mortify all his inordinate affections, and not adhere unto any creature by
private love.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of the different motions of Nature and Grace.
Son, mark diligently the motions of thine own nature, and my grace, for in
every contrary and secret manaer these are moved, and can hardly ^e discerned,
but by him that is spiritual, and inwardly enlightened.

2 All men desire that which is good, and pretend some good in all their words
and deeds, and therefore under pretense of good, many are deceaved.

3 Nature is deceiptfull and seduceth, intangleth, and deceaveth many, and
always proposes her self for her end.

4 But grace walks with great sincerity, and avoideth all show of evil,
pretends not deceipts, and does all things purely for Gods, sake in whom also
she finally rests.

5 Nature will not willingly dye, nor be kept in, nor overcome, nor be subject
to any, nor be subdued.

6 But grace labors to mortify her self, resists sensuality, seeks to
be subject, is willing to be overcome* and will not use her own liberty.

7 She loves to be kept under discipline, and desires not to rule any but
always to live and remain wholly subject unto God, and for God i^ ready
humbly to bow unto all men.

1 Nature striveth for her own commodity, and considers what profit she may
reap by another.

9 But grace considers not what is profitable and commodious unto hef self,
but rather what is profitable (...) many.

10 Nature willingly receaveth honor and reverence: but grace faith^fully
attributes all honor and glory unto God.

11 Nature fears shame and contempt, but grace rejoices to suffer reproach
for the name of Jesus.

12 Nature loves idleness, and bodily rest, but grace cannot be idle, out
willingly imbraceth labor.

13 Nature seeks to have those things that be cu^ious and precious, abhors
that which is mean and base.

14 But grace delights in plain and humble things, despises not course and
mean, nor refuses to wear that which is old and torn.

16 Nature respects the things of this world, rejoices at earthly gain,
^orroweth for loss, is moved with every injurious word.

17 But grace thinks on that, which is everlasting, and cleaves not ^o that
which fades with time, she is ^ot troubled with loss, nor exaspera^ed with
injuries, for that she has pla^ed her treasure and joy in heaven, where
nothing perishes.

18 Nature is covetous, and does ^ore willingly receave then give, she ^^veth
to have things proper and pri^ate.

19 But grace is pitiful and liberal to all, avoideth singularity, is content
with a little, thinks it happier to give, then to receive.

20 Nature inclines to creatures, yields to her own flesh, follows
vanities, and listneth to discourses.

21 But grace draws unto God, and seeks after virtues, renounceth
creatures, flies the world, hates the desires of the flesh, restrains
wanderings abroad, blusheth to be seen in public.

22 Nature is willing to have some outward comfort, wherein she may delight her
senses.

23 But grace seeks comfort in God alone, and delights above all visible
things in the highest good.

24 Nature works all for her own gain and profit, she can do nothing
freely; but for bestowed benefits, she hops to obtain either that which is
equal, or better, either praise or favor, and coveteth to have her works and
gifts much esteemed.

25 But grace seeks no temporal thing, nor asks any other reward ^or her
des^rts then God alone, nor desires more of temporal, necessaries, then what
may serve her, for the obtaining of everlasting glory.

26 Nature rejoices to have many friends, and kinsfolks, she glories of
Noble birth and descent, pleases the powerful, fawneth upon the rich;
applaudeth those that are like her self.

27 But grace loves her enemies, and is not puffed up with multitude of
friends, nor esteems place or birth, but where it is joined with greater
virtue.

28 She rather favors the poor, then the rich, has more compassion of the
innocent, then the powerful, rejoices in the simple, and respects not the
deceiptfull, exhorts ever the good to labor, for the better gifts, and by
virtue to resemble the son of God.

29 Nature quickly complayneth of any want and trouble, grace constantly
suffers all kind of need. Nature turns all things to her self, striveth
and contendeth for her self.

30 But grace reduces all to God, from whence originally they proceed: she
ascribes no good to her self, neither does she arrogantly presume of her
self.

31 She contendeth not, nor prefers her opinion before others, but in every
sense and understanding submits her self to the eternal wisdom, and to
the divine judgment.

32 Nature coveteth to know secrets, and to hear news, she will appear
abroad, and make proof of many things by the experience of her own senses, she
desires to be known, and to do those things for which she may be praised and
admired:

33 But grace cares not for hearing news, nor to understand curious matters,
for that all this springs from the ancient disorder of our corrupt nature,
seeing there is nothing new, or durable upon earth.

34 She teaches therefore to restrain the senses, to avoid vain pleasing and
ostentation, humbly to hide those things that are worthy of praise and
admiration, and of every thing and every knowledge to seek profitable fruit,
and the praise and honor of God.

35 She will not have her self nor hers publicly praised, but desires that
God should be blessed in his gifts, who of mere charity bestows all things.

36 This grace is a supernatural light, and a certain special gift of God,
and a proper mark of the elect, and a pledge of everlasting salvation*

37 Which lifts up a man from earthly baseness to love the things of heaven,
and of a carnal makes him a spiritual person.

39 How much the more therefore nature is depressed and subdued, so much the
greater grace is infused, and the inward man daily by new visitations more
reformed according to the image of God.

CHAP. LV.
Of the corruption of nature, and efficacy of divine grace.
MY God, who of thy mere goodness have created me to thy Image and likeness,
grant me this grace which thou have showed to be so great, and so necessary to
salvation, that I may overcome my wicked nature, which draws me to sin, and
to the loss of my soul.

2 For I feel in my flesh the law of sin, contradicting the law of my mind,
and leading me captive, to obey sensuality in many things.

3 Neither can I resist the passions thereof, unless thy holy grace fervently
infused into my heart do assist me.

4 Thy grace O Lord, and great grace is needful, that nature may be overcome,
which is ever prone to evil from her youth.

5 For by Adam the first man, being fallen and corrupted by sin, the penalty
of this stain has descended upon all mankind.

6 In such sort, that nature it self, which was created good, and without
defect, is now accounted for vice, and for the infirmity of a corrupted nature,
for that the motion thereof left unto it self, draws to evil and abject
things.

7 For the little force which remains, is like a certain spark lying hidden
in the ashes.

8 This is natural reason it self, compassed about with great darkness,
still retaining, power to discern good and evil, and the distance between
true and false.

9 Although it be unable to compass all, that it approv^th, and enjoys not
the full light of truth, nor the former integrity of her affections.

10 Hence it is, my God, that according to my inward man I delight in thy law,
knowing thy commandments to be good, just, and holy, and yielding, that all
evil and sin is to be avoided:

11 But in my flesh I serve the law of sin, whilst I rather obey sensuality
then reason. Hence it is, that I have a will to do good, but know not how to
perform it.

12 For this cause I often purpose many good things, but for that I want grace
to help my infirmity, for a light resistance I go back, and faint.

13 I know the way of perfection, and see clearly enough what I ought to do,
but pressed with the weight of mine own corruption I rise not unto it.

14 O Lord, how needful is thy grace for me, to begin any good work, to go
forward, and to accomplish it: For without it I can do nothing, but in thee I
can do all things, when thy grace does comfort me.

15 O heavenly grace, without which our own merits are nothing, and no gifts of
nature are to be esteemed! Arts, riches, beauty, and strength, wit, or
eloquence are of no worth with thee O Lord, without thy grace.

16 For gifts of nature are common to good and evil, but the peculiar gift of
the elect is grace and love, wherewith being marked, they are esteemed worthy
of everlasting life.

17 This grace so much excels, that neither the gift of prophecy, nor the
working of miracles, or any speculation, how high soever, is of any esteem
without it. Neither faith, nor hope, nor other virtues are acceptable unto thee
without charity and grace.

18 O most blessed grace, that make the poor in spirit rich in virtues, and
the rich in many blessings, humble in heart.

19 Come down unto me, replenish me in the morning with thy comfort, lest my
soul should faint with weariness, and wither away with dryness.

20 I beseech thee Lord, that I may find grace in thy sight, for thy grace is
sufficient for me, though other things that nature desires be wanting unto me!

21 If I be tempted and vexed with many tribulations, I will not fear these
evils whilst thy grace is with me? she is my strength, she gives advise and
help, she is stronger then all enemies, and wiser then the wisest.

22 Thy grace is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light
of the heart, the solace in affliction.

23 She drives away sorrow, she expels fear, she is the nurse of devotion,
and the mother of tears.

24 What am I without it, but a rotten piece of wood, and an unprofitable
stalk only meet for the fire?

25 Let thy grace therefore, Lord, always prevent me, and follow me, and make
me ever diligent in good works, through Jesus Christ thy Son, Amen.

CHAP. LVI.
That we ought to deny our selves and imitate Christ, by the Cross.
Son look how much thou can go out of thy self, so much may thou enter
into me: As to be void of all desire of external things, makes inward peace;
so the forsaking of our selves joyneth us internally to God.

2 I will have thee learn the perfect leaving of thy self unto my will,
without contradiction and complaint: Follow me, I am the way, the truth, and
the life.

3 Without the way there is no going aright, without truth there is no knowing
aright, without life there is no living at all.

4 I am the way which thou ought to follow, the truth which thou ought to
trust, the life for which thou ought to hope.

5 I am the way which cannot lead amiss, the truth which cannot err, the life
which cannot end.

6 I am the way that is straight, the truth that is highest, and the life that
is truest, yea a blessed life, a life uncreated.

7 If thou abide in my way thou shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
thee free, and thou shall lay hold on life everlasting.

8 If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments; if thou will know the
truth, believe me. If thou will be perfect, sell all thou have.

9 If thou will be my disciple, deny thy self, if thou will possess a blessed
life despise this present life, if thou will be exalted in heaven, humble thy
self upon earth.

10 If thou will reign with me, bear the cross with me: For only the
servants of the cross find the way of bliss and true light.

11 Lord Jesus, for as much as thy life was strict, and despised of the world,
give me grace to imitate thee, though I be despised by the world.

12 For the servant is not greater then his Lord, nor the Disciple above his
Master.

13 Let thy servant be exercised in thy holy life, for there is my health and
true holiness.

14 Whatsoever I read or hear besides, does not recreate or delight me fully.

15 Son, now that thou know and have read all these things, happy shall
thou be, if thou fulfill them.

16 He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him, and will make him sit
with me in the Kingdom of my Father.

17 Lord Jesus, as thou have said and promised so let it be, and that I may
obtain thy favor.

18 I have received the Cross, I have received it from thy hand, and I will
bear it, and bear it till death, as thou have laid it upon me.

19 Truly the life of a good religious person is the cross, and it is a sure
guide to heaven: It is now begun, it is not lawful to go back, neither is
it fit to leave that which I have undertaken.

20 Let us then take courage my brethren, and go forwards together, Jesus will
be with us, for Jesus sake we have undertaken this cross.

21 For the love of Jesus let us persevere in the cross, he will be our
helper, who is our guide and forerunner.

22 Behold our King goes before us, who also will fight for us: let us follow
him manfully, let us not be dismayed, but be ready to dye with courage in the
battle, and let us not blemish our glory by flying from the Cross.

CHAP. LVII.
That a man be not too much dejected, when he falls into some defects.
Son, patience and humility in time of adversity, are more pleasing unto me,
then much comfort and devotion in prosperity.

2 Why art thou grieved for every little trifle spoken and done against thee?
Although it had been much more thou ought not to have been moved:

3 But now let it pass, it is not the first that has happened, nor any new
thing, neither shall it be the last, if thou live long.

4 Thou art cheerful enough as long as no adversity occurreth: Thou can
give good counsel also, and can strengthen others with thy words, but when
any tribulation suddenly knocks at thy door, thou art destitute of counsel,
and void of force.

5 See therefore thy great frailty; which thou often provest in very small
occasions: It is notwithstanding permitted for thy good, when these and such
like occasions befall thee.

6 Put it out of thy heart the best thou can, and if it touch thee, yet let
it not de^ect thee, nor trouble thee long: bear it at least patiently, if thou
can not joyfully.

7 Although thou be unwilling to hear it, and feel in thy heart some motion
of disdain, yet repress thy self, and suffer no inordinate word to pass out
of thy mouth, which may be a scandal to the weak.

8 The storm which now is raised shall quickly be appeased, and inward grief
shall be sweetened by the return of grace.

9 I do yet live, says our Lord and am ready to help thee, and to give thee
greater comfort then before, if thou put thy trust in me, and call devoutly
upon me.

10 Be more patient, and prepare thy self to greater suffering: All is not
lost, if thou feel thy self often asslicted, or grievously tempted.

11 Thou art a man, and not God: thou art flesh, not an Angel. How can thou
look to continue ever in the same state of virtue, when an Angel in heaven
has fallen, and the first man in Paradise lost his standing.

12 I am he that do give healthful comfort to them that mourn, and do raise
up unto my divinity, those that know their own infirmity.

13 Lord, blessed be thy sacred word, more sweet unto my mouth then the honey,
and the honey comb!

14 What should I do in these my so great tribulations and anguish* unless
thou did comfort me with thy holy, sweet, and heavenly speeches.

15 What matter is it, how much and what I suffer, so as I may at length
attain to the haven of happiness.

10 Grant me a good end, grant me a happy passage out of this world, be
mindful of me, my God, and direct me the straight and ready way to thy
everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret judgments of God.
Son, beware thou dispute not of high matters, nor of the secret judgments
of God; why this man is forsaken, and he assumed to so great grace, why also
this man is so much afflicted, and he so greatly advanced.

2 These things exceed all humane power, neither can any reason or discourse of
any man search out the judgment of God.

4 When the en^my therefore suggesteth these things unto thee, or some envious
people demand them of thee, answer that of the Prophet,

5 Thou art just, O Lord, and thy judgment is right. And again: The
judgments of our Lord are true, and justified in themselves.

6 My judgments are to be feared, not to be discussed, for they are such as
cannot be comprehended by the understanding of man.

7 In like manner I advise thee not to inquire, no^ dispute of the glory of the
Saints, which of them is holier then the other, and which shall be greater in
the Kingdom of heaven.

8 These things oftentimes breed strife and unprofitable contentions, they
nourish also pride and vainglory, from whence do usually spring envy and
dissentions:

9 Whilst one endeavors to have this, another to have that Saint vainly
preferred. To desire to know and search our such things, is to no purpose, but
to displease the Saints.

10 For I am not the God of dissension, but of peace, which peace consists
rather in true humility, then in exalting themselves.

11 Some are carried with zeal of affection, to love these, or those most, but
this love is rather humane then divine.

12 I have made all the Saints: I have given them my grace, I have made them
partakers of my glory: I know the merits of every one, I have prevented them in
the benedictions of my sweetness.

13 I foreknew my beloved before the beginning of the world, I chose them out
of the world, they chose not me first.

14 I called them by grace, I drew them by mercy, I led them through sundry
temptations, I have sent them great inward comforts, I have given them
perseverance, I have crowned their patience.

15 I know the first and last: I embrace all with inestimable love, I am to be
praised in all my Saints, I am to be blessed above all things, and to be
honored in every one, whom I have thus gloriously exalted, and predestined,
without any precedent merits of their own.

16 He therefore that contemns one of the least of my Saints, honors not
the greatest, for that I made both the less and the greater.

17 And he that derogateth from any of my Saints derogateth also from me, and
all the rest in the Kingdom of heaven.

18 All are one by the band or charity, they think the same, they will the
same, and are all knit together in one perfect band of love.

18 But yet (which is much more high) they love me more then themselves, and
more then their own ^merils: For being ravished above themselves, and drawn
from the affection of themselves, they tend wholly unto the love of me, in whom
also they rest, enioyning me with unspeakable glory.

19 Nothing can put them back, nothing press them down, for being full of
everlasting truth, they burn with the fire of unquenchable charity.

20 Let therefore carnal and earthly men, that can affect no other but private
joys, forbear to dispute of the state of Saints: They add and take away
according to their own fancies, not as it pleases the everlasting Truth.

21 There is in many great ignorance, specially in those that be slenderly
enlightened, and these can seldom love any with perfect spiritual love.

22 They are always much drawn by a natural affection, and humane friendship
to this man or to that, and according to the experience they have of themselves
in their earthly affections, so they frame an imagination of heavenly.

23 But there is an incomparable distance between the things which the
imperfect frame in their conceits, and those which are illuminated do see by
revelation from above.

24 Beware therefore, my Son, that thou treat not curiously of these things,
which exceed thy knowledge, but rather so apply thy endeavors, that thou may
at least have the meanest place in the Kingdom of heaven.

25 And if any one did know which of the Saints exceeded others in sanctity, or
is esteemed greater in the Kingdom of heaven, what would this knowledge avail
him, unless he should thereby humble himself the more in my sight, and stir
up his mind to praise my name with greater fervor.

26 His labor is much more acceptable unto God, that thinks of the
greatness of his sins, and his wan^ of virtues, and how far off he is from
the perfection of the Saints, ehen he that disputes of their greatness.

27 It is better to labor after the piety and devotion of the Saints, and with
an humble mind to imitate their glorious examples, then to search their secrets
with vain curiosity.

28 They are well and right well contented, if men could content themselves, and
refrain from these vain discourses.

29 They glory not of their own merits, for they ascribe no good unto
themselves, but attribute all to me, who of my infinite charity have bestowed
my blessings upon them.

30 They are replenished with so great love of my Godhead, and so superabundant
joy, that there is no glory that is, nor happiness that can be wanting unto
them.

31 All the Saints how much the higher they be in glory, so much the more
humble they are in themselves, and nearer and dearer unto me.

32 And therefore thou have it written, that they did cast their Crowns before
God, and fell down upon their faces before the Lamb, and adored him that
lives for ever and ever.

33 Many inquire who is the greatest in the Kingdom of God, that know not
whether they shall ever be numbered there amongst the lest.

34 It is no small matter to be even the lest in heaven, where all are great,
for that all there shall be called, and shall be indeed the Sons of God* The
lest there shall be great among thousands, and the sinner of a hundred yeaes
shall die.

35 For when the Disciples asked who was the greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven, they received this answer* unless you be converted, and become as
little children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

35 Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is
greater in the Kingdom of heaven.

37 Woe be unto them that disdain to humble themselves willingly with little
children: For the low gate of the Kingdom of heaven, will not give them
entrance.

28 And woe be to the rich, th^^ have their comforts here, for whilst the poor
enter into the Kingdom of God, they shall be lamenting without.

39 Rejoice you that be humble: and you that be poor, be you glad, for yours
is the Kingdom of God, if you walk according unto truth.

CHAP. LIX.
That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone.
LOrd, what trust have I in this world? or what is the greatest comfort, that
all things under heaven do yield me? Is it not thou, my Lord God, whose
mercies are without number!

2 Where has it been well with me without thee? Or when could it be ill with
me, when thou were present? I had rather be poor for thee, then rich without
thee.

3 I had rather choose to be a Pilgrim in earth with thee, then to possess
heaven without thee: Where thou art, there is heaven: and there is death and
hell, where thou art not.

4 Thou art my desire, and therefore it behooves me to send forth deep sighs
from my heart, and cry and pray unto thee.

5 For I have none to trust unto, none that can help me in time of necessity,
but thee alone, my God: Thou art my hope, and my trust, thou art my comfort,
and most faithful unto me in all my distresses.

6 All men seek their own gain, thou only seek my salvation and my profit,
and turnest all things to my good.

7 Although thou permittest many temptations to assault me, and many
adversities to befall me, yet thou ordainest all this to my good and profit,
who art wont to prove thy beloved servants a thousand ways.

8 In which proof thou ought no less to beloved and praised, then if thou
did replenish me with heavenly comforts.

9 In thee therefore, my Lord God, I put my whole hope and refuge: in thee I
place my tribulation and anguish; for I find all to be weak and unconstant,
whatsoever I behold out of thee.

10 For neither can many friends avail, nor forcible helpers aid, nor wise
counselors give profitable answer, nor the books of the learned comfort, nor
any wealth deliver, nor any secret, or pleasant place defend, if thou thy self
do not assist, help, comfort, instruct and keep us.

11 For all things that seem to be ordained for the rest and solace of man
when thou art absent are nothing, and do bring indeed no joy, nor comfort at
all.

11 Thou therefore art the end of all that is good, the light of life, the
depth of wisdom: and the most forcible comfort of thy servants, is to trust in
thee above all things.

12 To thee therefore do I lift up mine eyes: In thee my God, the Father of
mercies I put my whole trust.

13 Bless and sanctify my soul with thy heavenly blessings, that it may be
made thy holy habitation, and the ^eate of thy eternal glory; and that nothing
may be found in the Temple of ^hy greatness, that may offend the eyes of thy
Majesty.

14 According to the greatness of ^hy goodness, and the multitude of thy
mercies, take pity upon me, and hear the prayer of thy poor servant, who is
^arre exiled from thee in the land of the ^hadow of death.

15 Protect, and keep the soul of thy servant, amidst so many dangers of this
corruptible life, and by the assistance of thy grace, direct it in the way of
peace, to the country of everlasting light, Amen.

The end of the third book.
OF THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
A devout exhortation unto the blessed Sacrament.
The Voice of Christ.
COme unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you,
says our Lord.

2 The bread which I will give, is my flesh, for the life of the world.

3 Take ye and eat, that is my Body that shall be delivered for you; do this
in remembrance of me.

4 He that eats my flesh, and drinks by blood dwells in me, and I in him.

5 The words which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life.

CHAP. I.
With how great reverence Christ ought to be received.
The voice of the Disciple.
THese are thy words O Christ, everlasting Truth, though not spoken all at one
time, nor written in one and the self same place; because therefore they are
thine and true, they are all of them thankfully and faithfully to be received
by me.

2 They are thine, and thou have spoken them, and they are mine also, because
thou have spoken them for my salvation: I willingly receive them from thy
mouth, that they may be the deeper imprinted in my heart.

3 These devout words so full of sweetness and love, do stir me up, but
mine own offenses do amaze me, and my impure conscience drives me back from
the receiving of so great mysteries.

4 The sweetness of thy words does encourage me, but the multitude of my
sins do oppress me.

5 Thou command me to come confidently unto thee; if I will have part with
thee: and to receive the food of immortality, if I desire to obtain
everlasting life and glory:

6 Come, say thou, unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will
refresh you.

7 O sweet and lovely word in the ear of a sinner, that thou my Lord God
should invite the poor and needy to receive thy most blessed Body!

8 But who am I Lord, that I may presume to approach unto thee, behold the
heavens cannot contain thee, and thou say, Come ye all unto me.

9 What means this most pious benignity, and so loving invitation? How shall
I dare to come, that know not any good in me, whereupon I may presume?

10 How shall I enter into thy house, that have often offended thy most
gracious countenance.

11 The Angels and the Archangels honor thee, the Saints and just men do
fear thee, and thou say, Come ye all unto me.

12 Unless thou, O Lord did say it, who would believe it to be true? And
unless thou did command it, who would dare to come unto thee?

13 Behold, Noah a just man labored a hundred years in preparing the Arc,
that he might be saved with a few: and how can I in one hours space prepare my
self to receive with reverence the Maker of the world?

14 Moses thy great servant and especial friend, made an Arc of incorruptible
wood, which also he covered with most pure gold, to put the Tables of the Law
therein: and I a rotten creature, how shall I so lightly dare to receive the
maker of the Law, and the giver of life?

15 Solomon the wisest of the Kings of Israel, bestowed seven years in
building a magnificent Temple, in in praise of thy name, and celebrated the
feast of the Dedication thereof eight days together, he offered a thousand
peaceable sacrifices, and set the Arc in the place prepared for it with the
sound of trumpets and joy:

16 And I the most unhappy and poorest of men, how shall I bring thee into my
house, that can scarce spendone half hour devoutly? and I would to God it
were once almost one half hour ^n worthy and due manner!

17 O my God, how much did they endeavor to please thee, and alas how ^itle is
that which I do? How short ^ime do I spend, when I prepare my self to
receive? I am seldom wholly recollected, very seldom altogether free from
distraction.

18 And yet surely no undecent thought should occur in the presence of thy
Deity, nor any creature draw me unto it: for I am not to harbor an Ang^l, but
the Lord of Angels.

19 And yet there is great difference between the Arc and the Relics
thereof, and thy most pure body with his unspeakable virtues.

20 Between those legal sacrifices, figures of future things, and the true
sacrifice of thy body, the complement of oll ancient sacrifices.

21 Why therefore do I not become more fervent in thy venerable presence?
Wherefore do I not prepare my self with greater care to receive thy sacred
gifts?

22 Since those holy ancient Patriarchs, and Prophets, yea Kings also and
Princes with the whole people have showed so great zeal of devotion to thy
divine service.

23 The most devout King David danced before the Ark of God with all his force,
calling to mind the benefits bestowed in times past upon his forefathers.

24 He made instruments of sundry kinds, he published Psalms, and appointed
them to be sung with joy: himself also oftentimes played upon the harp.

27 Being inspired with the grace of the holy Ghost, he taught the people of
Israel to praise God with their whole heart, and with pleasant voices every day
to bless and praise him.

28 If so great devotion was then used, and such memory of divine praise before
the Arc of the testament;

29 What reverence and devotion is now to be performed by me, and all Christian
people in the presence of this Sacrament, in receiving of the most precious
Body of Jesus Christ?

30 Many go to sundry places to visit the Relics of Saints, and are
astonished when they hear of their miraculous work:

31 They behold the spacious buildings of their Churches, and kiss their
sacred bones wrapped in silk and gold:

32 And behold thou art here present with me on the Altar, my God, the Holy of
Holies, the Maker of all things, and Lord of Angels.

33 Oftentimes in those devotions there is but curiosity of men, and the
novelty of the beholders in the seeing of such sights, and little fruit of
amendment is gotten thereby, especially where there is so unconstant wandering
without true contrition:

34 But here in the Sacrament of the Altar, thou art present, my Lord, God and
Man, Christ Jesus, where also plentiful fruit of, everlasting salvation is
obtained, as often as thou art worthly and devoutly received.

35 No levity, no curiosity, or sensuality draws unto this, but firm faith,
devout hope, and sincere charity.

36 O God the invisible Creator of the world, how wonderfully do thou deal
with us, how sweetly and graciously do thou dispose of all things with thine
elect, to whom thou offerest thy self to be received in the Sacrament.

37 O this exceeds all understanding of man: this chiefly draws the hearts
of the devout, and inflameth their desire!

38 For thy true faithful servants that dispose their whole life to amendment,
oftentimes receive great grace of devotion, and love of virtue.

39 O admirable and hidden grace of this Sacrament, which only the faithful of
Christ do know: but the unfaithful, and such as are slaves unto sin, cannot
conceive nor feel.

40 In this Sacrament spiritual grace is given, and lost virtue is restored in
the soul: and beauty disfigured by sin returns again.

41 This grace is sometimes so great, that with the fullness of devotion, which
is here given, not only the mind, but the weak body also feels great
increase of strength.

42 Our coldness and negligence surely is much to be bewailed and pitied,
that we are not drawn with greater affection to receive Christ, in whom all
the hope and reward of those that are to be saved does consist.

43 For he is our sanctification and redemption: he is the comfort of
passengers, and the everlasting fruition of Saints.

44 It is much therefore to be lamented that many do so little consider this
comfortable mystery, which rejoices heaven, and preserves the whole world.

45 Oblindnesse and hardness of man's heart, that does not the more deeply
weigh the greatness of so unspeakable gift, but rather comes by the daily use
thereof, to regard it little or nothing.

46 For if this most holy Sacrament should be celebrated in one place only, and
consecrated by one only Priest in the world, with how great desire do thou
think would men be affected to that place?

47 And what esteem would they have of such a Priest of Almighty God, by whom
they might enjoy the consolation of these divine mysteries.

48 But now there are many Priests, and Christ is offered up in many places
that so the grace and love of God to man may appear so much the greater, how
much the more this sacred Communion is common through the world.

49 Thanks be unto thee, good Jesus, everlasting Pastor of our souls, that
have vouchsafed to refresh us poor and banished men, with thy precious Body
and Blood!

50 And to invite us to the receiving of these mysteries with the words of thy
own mouth, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I
will refresh you.

CHAP. II.
That great goodness and charity of God is bestowed upon man in this Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.
PResuming of thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, being sick, I approach
unto my Savior, hungry and thirsty to the fountain of life, needy to the King
of heaven, a servant unto my Lord, a creature to my Creator, desolate to my
merciful comforter.

2 But whence is this to me, that thou vouchsafest to come unto me? Who am I
that thou should give thy self unto me?

3 How dare a sinner presume to appear before thee? And thou, how do thou
vouchsafe to come unto a sinner?

4 Thou know thy servant, and see that he has no good thing in him, for
which thou should bestow this benefit upon him.

5 I confess therefore my unworthiness, and I acknowledge thy goodness: I
praise thy mercy* and give thee thanks for this thy unspeakable charity.

6 For thou do this for thine own sake, not for any merits of mine, to the
end that thy goodness may be better known unto me, thy charity more
abundantly showed, and thy humility more highly commended.

7 Since therefore it is thy pleasure, and have commanded that it should be so,
this thy bounty is also pleasing to me, and do wish that my offenses may be no
hindrance unto it.

7 O most sweet and bountiful Jesus, how great reverence and thanks, with
perpetual praise is due unto thee for the receaving of thy sacred body, whose
worth and dignity no man is able to express!

8 But what shall I think of at this time, now that I am to receive this divine
Sacrament, and to approach unto my Lord, to whom I am not able to give due
reverence, and yet I desire to receave him devoutly?

9 What can I think better, and more profitable, then to humble my self
wholly before thee, and to exalt thy infinite goodness above me.

10 I praise thee my God, and will exalt thee for ever, and I do despise, and
submit my self unto thee, even into the depth of my unworthiness.

11 Behold, thou art the Holy of Holies, and I the skum of sinners! behold thou
bowest thy self down unto me, who am not worthy so much as to look up unto
thee!

12 Behold thou come unto me: it is thy will to be with me, thou invitest me
to thy banquet:

13 Thou will give me the food of heaven, and bread of Angels to eat, which is
no other truly then thy self, the lively bread, that descendedst from heaven,
and give life unto the world.

14 Behold from whence this love proceeds! what kind of favor and benignity
is this which shines upon us! What thanks and praises are due unto thee for
these benefits.

15 O how good and profitable was thy counsel, when thou ordainedst! How sweet
and pleasant the banquet when thou gave thy self to be our food.

16 How wonderful thy work, O Lord, how powerful thy virtue, how unspeakable
thy truth! For thou said the word, and all things were made, and this was
done which thou command.

17 A thing of great admiration, and worthy of faith, and surpassing the
understanding of man, that thou, my Lord God, true God and Man, should be
exhibited unto us by the elements of bread and wine, and thy body worthily
received should be the spiritual food of our soul.

18 Thou who are the Lord of all things, and stand in need of none, have
pleased to dwell in us by means of this thy Sacrament.

19 Preserve my heart and body unspotted, that with a cheerful and pure
conscience, I may often celebrate thy mysteries, and receave them to my
everlasting health, which thou have chiefly ordained and instituted for thy
honor, and perpetual memory.

20 Rejoice O my soul, and give thanks unto God for so noble a gift and
singular comfort, left unto thee in this vale of tears!

21 For as often as thou call to mind this mystery, and receavest the body
of Christ, so often do thou remember the work of thy redemption, and art
made partaker of all the merits of Christ.

22 For the charity of Christ is never diminished, and the greatness of his
mercy is never drawn dry.

23 Therefore thou ought always to dispose thy self hereunto by a fresh
renewing of thy mind, and to weigh with attentive consideration this great
mystery of thy salvation.

24 So great, now, and joyful it ought to seem unto thee, when thou come
to the holy Communion, as if the same day Christ first descended into the womb
of the Virgin, were become man, or hanging on the cross, did suffer and dye
for the salvation of mankind*

CHAP. III.
That it is profitable to communicate often.
The voice of the Disciple.
BEhold, O Lord, I come unto thee, that I may be comforted in thy gifts, and be
delighted in thy holy banquet, which thou, O Lord, have prepared in thy
sweetness, for the poor.

2 Behold in thee is all whatsoever I can, or ought to desire: thou art my
health, and my redemption, my hope and my strength, my honor and my glory.

3 Make joyful therefore this day, the soul of thy servant, for that I have
lifted it up to thee my sweet Jesus, I desire to receave thee now with
devotion, and reverence.

4 I do long to bring thee into my house, that with Zachreus I may obtain to
be blessed by thee, and numbered amongst the children of Abraham.

5 My soul thirsts to receave thy body, my heart desires to be united with
thee.

6 Give thy self to me, and it suffices: For besides thee no comfort is
availeable, I cannot be without thee, nor live without thy gracious visitation.

7 And therefore I must often come unto thee, and receave thee as the only
remedy of my health, lest perhaps I faint in the way, if I be deprived of thy
heavenly food.

8 For so, most merciful Jesus, thou once did say, preaching to the people,
and curing sundry diseases, I will not send them home fasting, lest they faint
in the way.

9 Deal thou therefore in like manner now with me, who have vouchsafed to
leave thy self in the Sacrament for the comfort of the faithful.

10 For thou art the sweet refection of the soul, and he that eats thee
worthily, shall be partaker, and heir of everlasting glory.

11 It is necessary for me, that do so often fall and sin, so quickly wax
dull and faint, that by often prayers and confessions, and receaving of thy
sacred body, I renew, cleanse, and inflame my self, lest perhaps by long
abstayning. I fall from my holy purpose:

12 For man is prone unto evil from his youth, and unless this divine remedy
help him, he quickly slideth to worse.

13 This holy communion therefore draws back from evil, and comfort in
good.

14 For if I be now so often slack and negligent when I communicate or
officiate, what would become of me, if I received not this remedy, and sought
not after so great help.

15 Though every day I be not sit, not well prepared to communicate, I will
endeavor notwithstanding at convenient times to receave the divine mysteries,
and make my self partaker of so great a grace.

16 For this is the only chief comfort of a faithful soul, whilst she
wandreth from thee in this mortal body, that being mindful of her God, she
often receave her beloved with a devout mind.

17 O wonderful benignity of thy mercy toward us, that thou, Lord God, the
Creator and giver of life to all spirits, do vouchsafe to come unto a poor
soul;

18 And with thy whole Deity and Humanity to turn her hunger into satiety ^ o
happy mind and blessed soul that is vouchsafed to receave thee her Lord God,
with devout affection, and in receaving of thee to be filled with spiritual
joy!

19 O how great a Lord does she entertain? How beloved a guest does she
harbor? how pleasant a companion does she receave? how faithful ^ friend does
she accept? how beautiful and noble a spouse does she embrace?

20 She imbraceth him who is to be loved above all that is beloved, and above
all things that may be desired. Let heaven and earth and all their beauty be
silent in thy presence:

21 For what beauty and praise soever they have, it is received from thy
honor, and shall not equal the beauty of thy name, of whose wisdom there is
no end.

CHAP. IV.
That many benefits are bestowed upon them that communicate devoutly.
The voice of the Disciple.
O My Lord God, prevent thy servant in the blessings of thy swetnesse that I
may attain thy favor to approach worthily and devoutly to the holy Sacrament!

2 Stir up my heart unto thee, and deliver me from all heaviness and sloth^^
visit me with thy comfort, that I may taste in spirit thy sweetness, which i^
this Sacrament as in a fountain plent^ fully lies hid.

3 Give light also to mine eyes ^ behold so great a mystery, and strong then me
to believe it with undoubte^^ faith.

4 For it is thy work, and no^ man's power, thy sacred institution, no^ man's
invention:

3 For no man is of himself able to comprehend and understand th^^ things,
which surpass the deepest reach even of Angels.

4 What therefore shall Iunworthy sinner, earth and ashes, be able to search
and comprehend of so high and sacred a mystery?

5 O Lord in syncerity of my heart, with a good and firm faith, and at thy
commandment, I come unto thee with hope and reverence; and do verily believe,
that thou God and Man affordest a gracious presence at this Sacrament.

6 Thy holy pleasure is, that I receave thee, and by charity do unite my self
unto thee:

7 Wherefore I do flee unto thy clemency, and do crave special grace, that I
may wholly melt in thee, and abound with love, and hereafter never admit any
external comfort.

8 For this most high and worthy Sacrament is the health of the soul and body,
the remedy of all spiritual sickness.

9 By it my vices are cured, my passions bridled, temptations overcome or
weakened, greater grace infused, virtue increased, faith confirmed, hope
strengthened, and charity inflamed and enlarged.

3 For thou have bestowed, and still oftentimes do bestow many benefits in
this Sacrament upon thy beloved that receave it devoutly.

11 O my God the Protector of my soul, the strengthener of humane frailety,
and the giver of all inward comfort,

12 Thou impartest unto them much comfort against sundry tribulations, and
liftest them up from the depth of their own baseness, to the hope of thy
protection, and do inwardly refresh and illustrate them with a certain new
grace.

13 In such sort, that they who before Communion felt themselves heavy and
indisposed, afterward being strengthened with heavenly meat and drink, do
find in themselves a great change to the better;

14 Which thou do so dispose to thy elect, that they may truly acknowledge,
and patiently prove, how great their own infirmity is, and what benefit and
grace they receave from thee.

15 For they of themselves are cold, dull, and undevout, but by thee they are
made fervent, cheerful and full of devotion.

16 For who is there, that approaching humbly unto the fountain of sweetness,
does not carry away from thence at least some little sweetness?

17 Or who standing by a great fire, receaveth not some small heat thereby?
Thou art a fountain always full and overflowing; a fire ever burning and
never decaying.

18 Wherefore if I cannot draw at the full out of the fountain, nor drink my
fill, I will notwithstanding set my lips to the mouth of this heavenly
conduite, that I may draw from thence at least some small drop, to refresh my
thirst, to the end I wither not away and utterly perish.

19 And though I be not altogether celestial, nor so inflamed as the Cherubims
and Seraphims, notwithstanding I will endeavor to apply my self to devotion,
and dispose my heart to obtain some small spark of divine fire by humble
receaving of this lifegiving Sacrament.

20 And whatsoever is hereunto wanting in me, good Jesus, most blessed Savior,
do thou supply for me: most benign and gracious Lord, who have vouchsafed to
call all unto thee, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor and are burdened,
and I will refresh you.

21 I labor in the sweat of my brows, I am vexed with grief of heart, I am
burdened with sins, I am troubled with temptations, I am entangled and
oppressed with many evil passions;

22 And there is none to help me, none to deliver and save me, but thou, Lord
God, my Savior, to whom I commit my self, and all mine, that thou may keep
me, and bring me to life everlasting.

22 Receave me to the honor and glory of thy name, who have prepared thy Body
and Blood to be my meat and drink.

23 Grant O Lord God, my Savior, that by frequenting thy mysteries, my zeal
and devotion may increase more and more.

CHAP. V.
Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Priestly function.
The voice of Christ.
IF thou had angelical purity, and the Sanctity of S. John Baptist, thou
^vert not worthy to receive, nor handle ^his Sacrament:

2 For it is not within the compass of the deserts of men, that man should
consecrate and handle the Sacrament of Christ, and receive for food the bread
of Angels.

3 A great mystery, and great is the dignity of Priests, to whom is granted
that which is not permitted to the Angels:

4 For Priests alone rightly instituted in the Church, have power to ce^ebrate,
and consecrate the Body of Christ.

5 The Priest is the Minister of God, using the words of God, by the
commandment, and appointment of of God, but God is there the principal Author,
and invisible Worker, to whom is subject all that he pleases, and all that he
commands, does obey.

6 Thou ought therefore to give more credit to God Almighty in this most
excellent Sacrament, then to thine own sense, or to any visible sign: And
theresofore thou art to come unto this mystery with fear and reverence.

7 Consider attentively with thy self, and see what that is, whereof the
Ministry is delivered unto thee by the imposition of the hands of the Bishop.

8 Behold thou art made a Priest, and consecrated to officiate: see now that in
due time thou offer Sacrifice unto God faithfully and devoutly, and carry thy
self so, as thou may be without reproof.

9 Thou have not lightened thy burden, but are now bound with a straiter bond
of discipline, and art obliged to a more perfect degree of sanctity.

10 A Priest ought to be adorned with all kind of virtues, and to give example
of good life to others.

11 His conversation should not be according to the ordinary and common
proceedings of men, but like to the Angels in heaven, or to perfect men on
earth.

12 A Priest clothed in sacred garments is the Vicegerent of Christ, to pray
humbly, and with a prostrate mind unto God for himself and the whole people.

13 And know that he is placed as a modiatour between God and the sinner:
Neither ought he to cease from praior and holy oblation, till he obtain grace
and mercy.

14 When a Priest does celebrate, he honors God, rejoices the Angels,
edlfieth the Church, helps the living, and makes himself partaker of all
good deeds.

CHAP. VI.
An Interrogation of the exercise before Communion.
The voice of the Disciple.
When I weigh thy greatness, O Lord, and mine unworthiness, I tremble, and
am confounded in my self.

2 For if I come not unto thee, I fly from life; and if I unworthily intrude my
self, I incur thy displeasure.

3 What therefore shall I do my God, my Helper, and my Counselor in
necessity?

4 Teach me the right way, appoint me some brief exercise suitable to this holy
mystery of the sacred Communion.

5 For it is good for me to know, how I should reverently and devoutly prepare
my heart unto thee, for the profitable receiving of thy Sacraments, or for the
celebrating of so great and divine a Sacrifice.

CHAP. VII.
Of the discussing of our own conscience, and purpose of amendment.
The voice of the Beloved.
ABove all things, the Priest of Go^ ought to come to celebrate, han^dle, and
receive this Sacrament wit^ great humility of heart, and lowly reverence, with
a full faith, and a godly desire of the honor of the divine Majesty.

2 Examine diligently thy conscience, and to thy power, purge and cleanse it
with true contrition, and humble confession:

3 So as there may be nothing in thee, that may be burdensome unto thee, or
that may breed thee remorse of conscience, and hinder thy free access to these
heavenly mysteries.

4 Repent thee of all thy sins in general, and in particular bewail thy
daily offenses: And if thou have time, confess unto God in the secret of thy
heart, all the miseries of thy disordered passions.

5 Lament and grieve, that thou are yet so subject to sensuality,

6 So addicted unto the world,

7 So unmortified in thy passions, so full of the motions of concupiscence,

8 So unwatchful over thy outward senses,

9 So often entangled with many vain fantasies.

10 So vehemently inclined to all outward things,

12 So wonderful negligent in the interior,

13 So prone to laughter and inmodesty,

14 So hard to tears and compunction,

15 So prompt to ease and pleasures of the flesh,

16 So dull to austeritic and fervor,

17 So curious to hear news and see vain sights,

18 So slack to embrace that which tends to thine own humiliation and contempt,

19 So covetous of abundance, so ^^iggardly in giving,

20 So fast in keeping,

21 So inconsiderate in speech,

22 So unbridled to silence,

23 So loose in manners,

24 So courageous in deeds,

25 So greedy to meat,

26 So deaf to the Word of God,

27 So hasty to rest,

28 So slow to labor,

29 So watchful to tales,

30 So drowsy to watch in the service of God,

31 So hasty to the end thereof,

32 So inconstant in attention,

33 So negligent in saying thy prayers,

34 So undevout in celebrating, the Communion.

35 So dry in receiving,

36 So quickly distracted,

37 So seldom wholly recollected.

38 So suddenly moved to an anger,

39 So apt to take displeasure against another,

40 So prone to judge,

41 So severe to reprehend,

42 So joyful in prosperity,

43 So weak in adversity,

44 So often purposing much good, and performing little.

45 These and other thy defects confessed, and bewailed with sorrow, and great
dislike of thine own infirmity, make a firm purpose always to amend thy
self, and to go forwards in virtue.

46 Then with full resignation, and with thy whole will offer thy self up to
the honor of my name, a perpetual sacrifice in the Altar of thy heart:

47 Faithfully committing thy body and soul unto me, that so thou may also
obtain that favor, to come worthily to offer sacrifice unto God, and to
receive profitably the Sacrament of my body.

48 For there is no oblation worthy, nor satisfaction greater, for the washing
away of sins, then to offer up our selves unto God purely and wholly in the
holy Communion.

49 And when a man shall have done what lies in him, and shall be truly
penitent, as I live, says our Lord, who will not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he be converted and live, and I will not remember her sins any
more, but they shall be all forgiven him and fully pardoned.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the oblation of Christ on the Cross and resignation of our selves.
The voice of the Beloved.
AS I willingly offered up my self unto God my Father, with my hands stretched
forth on the Cross, and my body naked for thy sins, so that nothing remained
in me that was not turned into a sacrifice, for the appeasing of the divine
wrath:

2 So ought thou also to offer up thy self willingly unto me daily, as a
pure and holy oblation, with thy whole force and desire, in as hearty manner as
thou can.

3 What do I require of thee more then that thou resign thy self wholly unto
me?

4 Whatsoever thou give besides thy self, is of little account in my sight,
for I seek not thy gift, but thee.

5 As it would not suffice thee to have all things whatsoever besides me: so
neither can it please me whatsoever thou give, if thou offerest not up thy
self: Offer thy self unto me, and give thy self all that thou art, for God,
and thy offering shall be grateful.

6 Behold I offered up my self wholly unto my Father for thee, and gave my
whole body and blood for thy food, that I might be wholly thine, and thou
remain mine.

7 But if thou abidest in thy self, and do not offer thy self up freely
unto my will, thy oblation is not entire, neither shall the union between us be
perfect.

8 Therefore a free offering up of thy self into the hands of God, ought to
go before all thy actions, if thou will obtain freedom and grace.

9 For this cause so few become inwardly illuminated, and enjoy true liberty
of heart, for that they do not resolve wholly to deny themselves.

10 My saying is undoubtedly true: Unless one forsake all, he cannot be my
Disciple. If thou therefore wish to be mine, offer up thy self unto me with
thy whole desires.

CHAP. IX.
That we ought to offer up our selves and all that is ours unto God, and to
pray for all.
The voice of the Disciple.
THine, O Lord, are all things that are in heaven and in earth: I desire to
offer up my self unto thee, as a free oblation, and to remain always thine.

2 O Lord, in sincerity of my heart, I offer my self unto thee this day in
sacrifice of perpetual praise, to be thy servant for ever.

3 Receive me with this holy oblation of thy precious body, which in the
presence of the Angels invisibly attending here upon thee, I offer up this day
unto thee, that it may be to the health of my soul, and the salvation of all
thy people.

4 I offer unto thee, O Lord, all my sins and offenses, which I have
committed in the sight of thee, and thy holy Angels, from the day wherein I
first could sin, to this hour, upon thy holy Alta^^.

5 That thou may consume and burn them all with the fire of thy charity,
and wash out all the stains of my sins, and cleanse my conscience from all
offense, and restore to me again thy grace, which I lost by sin, forgiving
me all my offenses, and receiving me mercifully in the kiss of peace.

6 What can I do for my sins* but humbly confess and bewail them and
entreat always for mercy without intermission? I beseech thee, hear me in
thy abundant mercy, when I stand before thee my God!

7 All my sins are very displeasing unto me: I will never commit them any
more, but I am sorry, and will be sorry for them as long as I live, and am ready
to repent, and do any thing that may move thee to pardon them.

8 Forgive me, O God, forgive me my sins, for thy holy names sake. save my
soul, which thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood.

9 Behold I commit my self unto thy mercy, I resign my self over into thy
hands: do with me according to thy goodness, not according to my wickedness,
and manifold iniquity.

10 I offer up also unto thee all whatsoever is good in me, although it be very
little and imperfect, that thou may amend and sanctify it, that thou may
make it grateful and acceptable unto thee.

11 And always perfect more and more that which thou have begun, and bring me
also, who am the slothful and unprofitable servent to a good and blessed end.

12 I offer up also unto thee all the godly desires of devout persons, the
necessity of my parents and friends, my brethren and si^ters, and of all those
that are dear unto me, and that have done good either to my self or others
for thy love:

13 And that have desired me to pray for them, and all theirs, that they all
may receive the help of thy grace and comfort, protection from dangers,
delivery from pain, and being freed from all evils, may joyfully give worthy
thanks to thee.

14 I offer up also unto thee my prayers and sacrifices, especially for them
who have in any thing wronged, grieved, or standered me, or have done me any
damage or displeasure:

15 And for those also, whom I have at any time grieved, troubled, and
scandalized by words, or deeds, wittingly, or at unawares, that it may please
thee to forgive us all our sins and offenses, one against another.

16 Take O Lord, from our hearts all jealousy, all indignation, wrath, and
contention, and whatsoever may hure charity, and weaken brotherly love.

17 Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy on those, that crave thy mercy: give grace
unto them that stand in need thereoff, and grant that we may be worthy to enjoy
thy grace, and attain unto life everlasting, Amen.

CHAP. X.
That the holy Communion is not lightly to be forborne.
The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought often to have recourse to the Fountain of grace, and of divine
mercy; to the Fountain of goodness, and of all purity, that thou may be
cured of thy sins and passions, and be made more strong and vigilant against
all temptations and deceipts of the Devil.

2 The enemy knowing the greatest profit, and remedy to consist in the holy
Communion, endeavors by all means and occasions to withdraw and hinder
faithful and devout persons from it:

3 Some when they purpose to receave the sacred Commnnion, suffer greatest
assaults of the Devil:

4 For that wicked spirit (as is written in Job) comes amongst the Sons of
God, to trouble them with his accustomed malice and impiety, or to make them
overfearefull and perplexed:

4 That so he may diminish their affection, or by his subtle assaults, take
away their faith, to the end they may either altogether abstain from this
divine food, or at least come unto it with less devotion.

5 But there is no heed to be taken of his frauds and malicious suggestions,
be they never so filthy and hideous, but all is to be turned back upon his own
head.

6 Thou ought to contemn and scorn him miserable wretch, and not to omit
the sacred communion for his assaults, and the troubles which he raises.

7 Oftentimes also an excessive care for the obtaining of devotion, and a
certain anxiety for the making of thy confession hinders thee.

8 Follow in these occasions the counsel of the wise, and put away all anxiety
and scruple, for it hinders the grace of God, and over throws devotion.

9 Omit not for every small vexation of the mind which happens, to receave
this holy Sacrament.

10 But go presently to confess thy sins, and willingly to forgive others,
whatsoever offenses they have done against thee, and if thou have offended any,
humbly crave pardon, and God will willingly forgive thee.

11 What avails it to delay confession, and to defer receaving? Purge thy
self with speed, spit out the venom presently, make have to take a remedy, and
thou shall find it better, then if thou deferredst it long.

12 If thou omittest it to day for this cause, perhaps to morrow some greater
will fall out, and so thou may be hindered a long time from these divine
mysteries, and become more unfit.

13 Stir up thy self, and shake off all heaviness and sloth, with the
greatest force and speed thou can.

14 For it profits nothing to continue long in disquietnesso and trouble of
mind, and for daily occurring impediments to withdraw thy self from the
Sacraments.

15 Yea it hurts very much to defer Communionlong, for it is wont to breed a
great and dangerous dullness.

16 Alas, some cold and dissolute people do willingly delay their confession,
and do therefore defer the sacred Communion, lest they should be bound to
greater watch over themselves.

17 O how little charity and weak devotion have they that so easily omit the
receaving of these holy mysteries!

18 How happy is he and grateful to God, who orders so his life, and keeps
his conscience in such purity, that he may be ready and fit to communicate
every day, if it were covenient and might be done without notice taken!

19 If any one sometimes abstain of humility, or by reason of some lawful
impediment, he is to be commended for the revorence which therein it showed.

20 But if it proceeds of coldness, he must stir himself up, and do what
lies in him, and God will prosper his desire, for the good will he has to
do it, which God does chiefly respect.

21 And when any lawful hinderance does happen, he must always have yet a
good will and loving desire to communicate, and so shall he not loose the fruit
of the Sacrament.

22 For a devout person may everyday and hour profitably and without let,
receave Christ spiritually.

23 And yet on certain days, and at time appointed he ought to receave
Sacramentally, with an affectionate reverence, the Body of his Redeemer, and
rather seek the honor and glory of God, then his own comfort.

24 For he communicates mystically, and is invisibly fed, as often as he
devoutly calls to mind the mystery of the incarnation, and the Passion of
Christ, and is inflamed with his love.

25 He that prepares not himself, but when a feast draws near, and when
custom compels him thereunto, shall often be unprepared.

26 Blessed is he that offers himself as an Holocaust and burnt offering to
our Lord, as often as he does celebrate or communicate.

27 Be not too long nor too short in officiating, but keep the accustomed
manner of those, with whom thou live.

28 Thou ought not to be tedious and troublesome to others, but to observe
the common course according to the appointment of thy Superiors.

29 And rather frame thy self to the profit of others, then to thine own
devotion or desire.

CHAP. XI.
That the Body of Christ, and the holy Scriptures are most necessary unto a
faithful soul.
The voice of the Disciple.
O Most sweet Lord Jesus, how great is the delight of a devout soul that
feasteth with thee in thy bntiquet.

2 Where there is no other meat offered to be eaten, but thy self her only
beloved, and most to be desired above all the desires of her heart.

3 And verily it would be a great comfort unto me, to power out tears from the
bottom of my heart in thy presence, and with devout Magdalen to wash thy feet
with the tears of mine eyes.

4 But where is this devotion? where is so plentiful shedding of holy tears?
Surely in the sight of thee and thy holy Angels, my whole heart should be
inflamed and dissolve into tears for joy.

5 For I enjoy thee in the sacrament truly present, though darkened and in a
shadow.

6 For to behold thee in thine own divine brightness, mine eyes would not be
able to endure it, neither could the whole world stand in the cleerenesse of
the glory of thy Majesty.

7 I do really enjoy and adore him whom the Angels adore in heaven, but I as
yet for the time in faith, they in his proper form, and without shadow.

8 I ought to be contented with the light of true faith, and to walk therein,
until the day of everlasting brightness break forth, and the shadows of
figures pass away.

9 But when that shall come which is perfect, the use of Sacraments shall
cease: For the blessed in heavenly glory need not the remedy of Sacraments, who
rejoice without end in the presence of God:

10 Beholding his glory face to face, and being transformed by his brightness,
into the brightness of the incomprehensible Deity, they taste the word of God
made flesh, as he was from the beginning, and as he remains for ever.

11 Whilst I remember these wonderful works, even all spiritual comfort
whatsoever becomes very tedious unto me: for that as long as I behold not my
Lord openly in his glory, I make no account of whatsoever I see or hear in
this life.

12 Thou art my witness, O God, that nothing can comfort me, no creature give
me rest, but thou my God, whom I desire to behold everlastingly.

13 But this is not possible whilst I remain in this mortal life, therefore
I must frame my self to much patience, and submit my self to thee in all my
desires.

14 For thy Saints also, O Lord, who now rejoice with thee in the Kingdom of
heaven, whilst they lived, expected in faith and great patience the coming of
thy glory.

15 What they believed, I believe, what they hoped for, I expect; whither they
are come, I trust by thy grace I shall also come.

16 In the mean time I will go forward in faith, strengthened by the examples
of the Saints.

17 I have also devout books for my comfort, and for the guide of my life, and
above all these, thy most holy Body for a singular remedy and ^efuge.

18 For I perceive two things to be chiefly necessary for me in this life,
without which this miserable life would be insupportable unto me.

19 Whilst I am kept in the prison of this body, I acknowledge my self to
stand in need of two things, to wit, food, and light.

29 Thou have therefore given unto me, weak creature, thy sacred Body for the
refection of my soul and body, and have set thy word as a light unto my feet.

30 Without these two I could not well live: For the word of God is the light
of the soul, and thy Sacrament, the bread of life.

31 These also may be called the two tables set on the one side and the other,
in the storehouse of the holy Church.

32 One is the table of the holy Altar, containing the sacred bread, that is,
the precious body of Christ:

33 The other is of the divine law, containing holy doctrine, teaching true
faith, and certainly leading to the part of the Temple within the veil, where
are the Holy of Holies.

34 Thanks be unto thee, Lord (...), light of everlasting light, for thy able
of holy doctrine, at which thou ^^vest us by thy servants the Prophets and
Apostles, and other Doctors.

^5 Thanks be unto thee Creator and redee^^er of man, who to manifest thy
charity to the whole world have prepared a great supper, wherein thou have
offered to be eaten, not the mystical lamb, but thine own most sacred Body
and Blood:

36 Rejoicing all the faithful with thy holy banquet, and replenishing them to
the full with thy heavenly cup.

37 In which are all the delights of heaven, and the holy Angels do feast with
us, but with a more happy sweetness.

38 O how great and honorable is the office of Priests, to whom it is granted
with sacred words to consecrate the Lord of Majesty, with their lips to bless
him, with their hands to hold him, with their own mouth to receave him, and to
administer him to others!

^2 O how clean ought to be those hands! How pure that mouth! How holy the
body! How unspotted the heart of the Priest, into whom the Author of purity so
often enters.

40 Nothing but holy, no word but chaste and profitable ought to proceed from
the mouth of the Priest, which so often receaveth the Sacrament of Christ.

41 Simple and chaste ought to be the eyes, that are wont to behold the body of
Christ, the hands pure and lifted up to heaven, that use to handle the Creator
of heaven and earth.

43 Unto the Priests especially it is said in the Law, Be ye holy, for that I
your Lord God am holy.

43 Assist us Almighty God with thy grace, that we, who have undertaken the
office of Priesthood, may serve thee worthily and devoutly in all purity, and
with a sincere conscience.

44 And if we cannot live in so great innocence as we ought to do, grant us
notwithstanding in due manner, to bewail the sins which we have committed:

43 And in the spirit of humility, and sincere intention to serve thee
hereafter with more fervor and devotion.

CHAP. XII.
That he that is to communicate, ought to prepare himself with great diligence.
The voice of the Beloved.
I Am the lover of purity, and the giver of all sanctity, I seek a pure heart,
there is the place of my r^st: Make ready and adorn for me a great chamber,
and I will make with thee the Passover for my Disciples.

2 If thou will have me come unto thee* and remain with thee, purge the old
leaven, and make clean the dwelling of thy heart, shut out the whole world and
all tumult of vices.

3 Sit like a sparrow solitary ^^on the house top, and think of thy offense in
the bitterness of thy soul.

4 For every lover prepares ^he best and fairest room for his beloved, and
herein is known the affection of him that entertaineth his beloved.

5 Know thou notwithstanding that the worth of no action of thine is able to
make this preparation sufficient, although thou should prepar^ thy self a
whole year together, and think on nothing else:

6 But of my mercy and grace only thou art suffered to come to my table, like a
beggar invited to dinner to a rich man, who has nothing else to return him
for his benefits, but to humble himself, and give him thanks.

7 Do what lies in thee, and do it diligently, not for custom, nor for
necessity, but with fear and reverence, and hearty affection receave the body
of thy beloved Lord and God, who vouchsafes to come unto thee.

8 I am he that have called thee, I have commanded it to be done, I will supply
what is wanting in thee, come and receave me.

9 When I bestow the grace of devotion on thee, give thanks to God, for it is
given thee, not for that thou deservest it, but because I have mercy on thee.

10 If thou have it not, but rather feel thy self dry, continue in prayer,
sigh and knock, and give not over until thou have attained to some crumme or
drop of saving grace.

11 Thou have need of me, not I of thee, neither come thou to sanctify me,
but I come to sanctify and make thee better.

12 Thou come that thou may be sanctified by me, and united unto me, that
thou may receave new grace, and be stirred up again to amendment.

13 Neglect not this grace, but prepare thy heart with all diligence, and
receave thy beloved into thy soul.

14 But thou ought not only to prepare thy self to devotion before
Communion, but carefully also to conserve thy self therein, after thou have
received the Sacrament.

15 Neither is the careful guarde of thy self after, less exacted, then
devout preparation before.

16 For a good guard afterward is the best preparation thou can make for the
obtaining again of greater grace.

17 Because that man's mind becomes very indisposed, if he presently power
himself forth to outward comforts: Beware of much talk, remain in some
secret place, and enjoy thy God.

18 For thou have him whom all the world cannot take from thee: I am he to whom
thou ought wholly to give thy self, that so thou may live hereafter not
in thy self, but in me, without all care.

CHAP. XIII.
That a devout soul ought to desire with her whole heart to be united unto
Christ in the Sacrament.
The voice of the Disciple.
HOw may I obtain this, O Lord, that I may find thee alone, and open my whole
heart unto thee, and enjoy thee as my soul desires?

2 And that no man may look upon me, nor any creature move me or respect me,
but thou alone may speak unto me, and I to thee, as the beloved is wont to
speak to his beloved, and a friend to ba^quet with his friend.

3 This I pray for, this I desire, that I may be wholly united unto thee, and
may withdraw my heart from all created things, and more by sacred Communion and
often celebrating learn to taste of heavenly and everlasting sweetness.

4 O Lord God, when shall I be wholly united unto thee, and swallowed up by
thee, and altogether forgetful of my self! thou in me, and I in thee, and so
grant us both to continue in one.

5 Thou art my beloved, the choicest amongst thousands, in whom my soul has
taken pleasure to dwell all the days of her life.

6 Thou art my peacemaker in whom is greatest peace, and true rest, without
whom is labor and sorrow, and infinite misery.

7 Thou art a hidden God, and thy counsel is not with the wicked, but thy
speech is with the humble and simple of heart.

8 O Lord, how sweet is thy spirit! who to the end thou may show thy
sweetness toward thy children, vouchsafe to feed them with the most
delightsome bread which descends from heaven, and is full of all sweetness!

9 Surely there is no other Nation so great, that has Gods approaching unto
them, as thou our God art present to all thy faithful.

10 Unto whom for their daily comfort, and for the lifting up of their hearts
to heaven, thou give thy self to be eaten and enjoyed.

11 I or what other Nation is there so famous, as the Christian people? or what
creature under heaven so beloved as a devout soul, to whom God himself
comes to feed her with his glorious flesh.

12 O unspeakable grace! O admirable favor, O infinite love singularly
bestowed upon man!

13 But what shall I give unto our Lord in return of this grace, for so
singular a charity?

14 There is no other thing more grateful that I am able to give, then to
bestow my heart wholly on my God; and to unite it perfectly unto him.

15 Then shall all my bowels rerejoyce, when my soul shall be perfectly united
unto God: Then he will say unto me, if thou will be with me, I will be with
thee.

16 And I will answer him: Vouchsafe, O Lord, to remain with me, I will very
gladly be with thee: This is my whole desire, that my heart be united unto thee.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the fervent desire of some devout persons to receave the body of Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.
O How great is the store of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou have hidden for
them that fear thee!

2 When I remember some devout persons, who come unto thy Sacrament, O Lord,
with great devotion and affection, I am oftentimes confounded, and blush within
my self, that I come so negligently and coldly to thy altar, and to the table
of the holy Communion:

3 That I remain so dry and without any hearty affection, that I am not wholly
inflamed in thy presence, my God,

4 Nor so earnestly drawn and moved, as many devout persons have been, who out
of a vehement desire of receaving, and a feeling affection of heart, could not
contain themselves from weeping:

5 But with the desire both of soul and body they earnestly longed after thee,
O God, the lively fountain, being not otherwise able to temper not satisfy
their hunger, but by receaving thy body with all joy and spiritual greediness.

6 O most ardent faith of those persons, a probable argument of thy sacred
presence.

7 For these truly know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whose heart
burns so within them, whilst thou, O blessed Jesus, walk with them.

8 Such desire and devotion, I seldom find in me; so vehement love and
fervency is oftentimes far off from me.

9 Be merciful unto me, good Jesus, sweet and benign Lord, and grant me thy
poor needy creature, to feel sometimes at least, in this holy Sacrament, a
little hearty desire of thy love:

10 That my faith may be more strengthened, my hope in thy goodness increased,
and that my charity once pefectly inflamed, after the tasting of heavenly
Manna, may never decay.

11 Thy mercy, O Lord, is able to give me the grace I desire, and to vis^^ me
in thy bounteous clemency with the spirit of fervor, when it shall please thee.

12 For although I burn notwith so great desire as those that are so
especially devoted unto thee, yet notwithstanding by thy grace, I desire to
have this great inflamed desire:

13 Praying and craving that I may participate with all such thy fervent
lovers, and be numbered among them in their holy company.

CHAP. XV.
That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and denial of our selves.
The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought to seek the grace of devotion instantly, to ask it earnestly,
to expect it patiently and confidently, to receave it joyfully, to keep it
humbly, to work with it diligently*

2 And to commit the time and manner of this heavenly visitation to God, until
it shall be his pleasure to come

3 Thou ought chiefly to humble thy self, when thou feel inwardly little
or no devotion, and yet be not too much dejected, nor grieve inordina^ly for it.

4 God often gives in a short moment that which he has a long time denied, he
gives sometimes in the end, that which in the beginning of prays, he deferred
to grant.

5 If grace should be alwai^s presently given, and at hand ever with a wish,
it could not be well endured by a weak man.

6 Therefore devotion is to be expected with good hope, and humble patience;
yet impute it to thy self, and thy sins, when it is not given thee, or when
it is secretly taken from thee.

7 It is sometimes a small matter that hinders and hides grace from us, if it
be to be called small, and not rather a great matter, that hinders so great a
good.

8 And if thou remove this, be it great or small, and perfectly overcome it,
thou shall have thy desire.

9 For presently as soon as thou give thy self to God with thy whole heart,
and seek not this, nor that, for thine own pleasure or will, but setlest thy
self wholly in him, thou shall find thy self united unto him, and quiet.

10 For nothing will taste so well, and please thee so much, as the good will
and pleasure of almighty God.

11 Whosoever therefore with a sincere heart directs his intention to God,
and ^mptieth himself of all inordinate love, (...) dislike of any creature
shall be most fit to receave grace, and worthy of the gift of devotion.

12 When a vessel is full already all that you power in runs quite beside:
For our Lord bestows his blessings there, where he finds his vessels empty.

13 And how much the more perfectly, one forsakes the basest things, and dies
to himself by contempt of himself,

14 So much the more speedily grace comes, and enters in more plentifully,
and lifts up the heart that is free, to a higher state of grace.

15 Then shall he see, and abound, and wonder, and his heart within shall be
enlarged, because the hand of our Lord is with him, and he has put himself
wholly into his hand for ever.

16 Behold so shall the man be blessed, that seeks Almighty God with his
whole heart, and busieth not his soul in vain.

17 This man procures great grace of divine union, in receaving the holy
Eucharist, for that he regards not his own devotion and comfort, but above
all he prizeth the honor and glory of God.

CHAP. XVI.
That we ought to manifest our necessity unto Christ, and to crave his grace.
The voice of the Disciple.
O Most sweet and loving Lord, whom I now desire to receive devoutly, thou
know my infirmity, and the necessity which I endure, with how many sins I
am opp^essed, how often I am grieved, tempted, troubled, and defiled:

2 I come unto thee for remedy, I crave of thee thy heavenly comfort, and the
^ase of my pain.

3 I speak to him that knows all things to whom all my secrets are open, and
who can only perfectly comfort and help me.

4 Thou know what it is, whereof above all I stand in most need, and how
poor I am in virtues.

5 Behold I stand before thee, poor and naked, calling for grace and graving
mercy.

6 Refresh this thy hungry and needy creature, give heat unto my coldness with
the fire of thy love: give light unto my blindesse with the brightness of thy
presence.

7 Turn all earthly things into bitterness to me, all things grievous and
contrary, into patience, all base and created things, into contempt and
oblivion.

8 Lift up my heart to thee in heaven, and suffer me not to wander upon earth:
be thou only sweet and delightsome unto me from henceforth for evermore:

9 For thou only art my meat, and my drink, my love and my joy, my delight and
all my good.

10 O that with thy presence thou would wholly inflame, burn, and change me
into thee, that I might be made one spirit with thee, by the grace of inward
union and the melting of fervent love.

11 Suffer me not to go from thee hungry and dry, but deal mercifully with
me, as thou have oftentimes dealt wonderfully with thy Saiuts.

12 What marve^le if I should be wholly inflamed by thee, and dye in my self,
since thou art ever burning and never decaying, love purifying the heart, and
inlightning the understan^^ing.

CHAP. XVII.
Of burning love and vehement desire to receive Christ.
The voice of the Disciple.
With great devotion and burning love, with most hearty affection and fervor
I desire to receive thee O Lord,

2 As many Saints and devout persons have desired thee, when they received thy
Sacrament, who were most pleasing unto thee in holiness of life* and most
fervent in devotion.

3 O my God my everlasting love, my whole good, my happiness without end, I
would gladly receive thee with the most vehement desire, and most worthy
reverence, that any of the Saints ever had, or could feel.

4 And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion, yet I
offer unto thee the whole affection of my heart, as if I alone had all those
most sweet inflamed desires.

5 Yea whatsoever also a devout mind can conceive and desire, all that with
greatest reverence, and most inward affection I offer and present unto thee.

6 I wish to reserve nothing to my self, but freely and most willingly to
sacrifice my self and all mine unto thee, my Lord God, my Creator, and my
Redeemer.

7 I desire to receive thee this day with such affection, reverence, praise and
honor; with such gratitude, worthiness, and love, with such faith, hope and
purity,

8 As thy most blessed Mother the glorious Virgin Marie received, and desired
thee, when she humbly and devoutly answered the Angel,

9 Who declared unto her the mystery of the Incarnation, and said, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord, let it be done unto me according to thy word.

10 And as thy blessed Forerunner, the most excellent amongst the Saints, John
Baptist, cheerfully leaped with joy of the Holy Ghost, whilst he was yet shut
up in his Mothers womb;

11 And afterward seeing Jesus walking amongst men, humbling himself very
much, said with devout affection, The friend of the Bridegroom that stands
and hears him, rejoiced with joy for the voice of the Bridegroom:

12 So I also wish to be inflamed with great and holy desire, and to offe^ my
self up to thee with my while heart.

13 Wherefore I offer also and present unto thee joys, fervent desires,
excess of mind, spiritual illuminations, and heavenly visions of all devou^
hearts.

14 With all the virtues and praises exercised by all creatures in heaven and
earth, for my self, and all such as are commended to me in prayer, that by all
thou may be worthily praised, and glorified for ever.

15 Receive, my Lord God, the affections of my heart and desires which I have
to give thee; infinite praise, and thanks, which according to the measure of
thy unspeakable greatness are due unto thee.

16 These I yield thee, and desire to yield thee every day and moment of time,
and I do entreat, and invite all the heavenly spirits, and all thy devout
fervants, to give thanks and praises together with me.

17 Let all people, Tribes, and Tongues praise thee, and magnify thy holy and
sweet name with great joy, and fervent devotion, and let all that ^everently
and devoutly celebrate thy most high Sacrament, and receive it with full faith,
find grace and mercy at thy hands, and pray humbly for me sinful creature.

18 And when they shall have obtained their desired devotion and joyful union,
and depart from thy sacred heavenly table, well comforted, and marveilously
refreshed, let them vouchsafe to remember my poor and needy foul.

CHAP. VIII.
That a man be not a curious searcher of this Sacrament, but an humble follower
of Christ, submitting his sense unto faith.
TYPE="sub"The voice of the Beloved.
THou ought to beware curious and unprofitable searching into this most
profound Sacrament, if thou wile not be drowned in the depth of doubt.

2 He that is a searcher of Majesty, shall be oppressed by glory: God is able
to work more then man can understand.

3 A pious and humble inquiry of truth is tolerable, so he be always ready to
be taught, and do endeavor to walk in the sound paths of the ancient Fathers
doctrine.

4 Blessed is that simplicity, that forsakes the difficult ways of
questions, and goes on in the plain and assured path of Gods Commandments*
Many have lost devotion, whilst they would search after high things.

5 Faith and sincere life are exacted thy hands, not height of understaning,
nor the depth of the mysteries of God.

6 If thou do not understand, or conceive those things that are under ^hee,
how shall thou be able to comprehend those that are above thee?

7 Submit thy self to God, and let thy sense be subject to faith, and the
^ight of knowledge shall be given thee in that degree, as shall be profitable
and necessary for thee.

8 Some are grievously tempted about faith, and the Sacrament, but that is not
to be imputed to them, but rather to the enemy:

9 Do not regard nor dispute with thy thoughts, neither do thou give answer
to the doubts moved by the enemy.

10 But believe the words of God, believe his Saints and Prophets, and the
wicked Serpent will fly from thee.

11 It is oftentimes very profitable to the servant of God to suffer such
things:

12 For he tempts not Infidel^ and sinners, whom he already secure
possesses, but he sundry ways tem^teth and vexes the faithful and d^vout.

13 Go forward therefore with sincere undoubted faith, and come (...) the
Sacrament with unfeigned reverence: And whatsoever thou art not able to
understand, commit securely (...) Almighty God.

14 God deceives thee not: he deceived that trusts too much to him self:
God walks with the simple, r^vealeth himself to the humble, give^
understanding to little ones, openets the sense to pure minds, and hides grace
from the curious and proud.

15 Humane reason is weak, and may be deceived, but true faith cannon be
deceived.

16 All reason and natural search ought to follow faith, not to go before it,
nor impugn it.

17 For faith and love do chiefly excel, and work in a hidden manner in this
most blessed and superexcellent Sacrament.

18 God, who is everlasing, and of infinite power, does great and in^^^utable
things in heaven and in earth, and there is no searching out of his ^onderfull
works.

19 If the works of God were ^^ch as might be easily comprehended by humane
reason, they were not to be called wonderful and unspeakable.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the Chapters contained in this Book.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF following Christ, and the contempt of all worldly vanities page 1 To have
an humble opinion of ones self. 4 Of the doctrine of truth. 7 Of providence or
prudence in our actions. 12 Of the reading of holy Scriptures. 13 Of inordinate
desires and affection. 15 Of flying vain, Hope and Pride. 16 Of avoiding too
much familiarity. 18 Of obedience and Subjection. 19 Of avoiding superfluity of
words. 21 Of obtaining peace, and desire of profiting. 23 Of the profit gotten
by adversity. 26 Of resisting Temptations. 28 Of avoiding rash judgment. 34 Of
works proceeding from Charity. 36 Of bearing with other men's defects. 37 Of
solitary life. 40 Of the example of holy Fathers. 41 Of the exercise of good
religious persons. 45 Of the love of solitude and silence. 50 Of compunction of
heart. 56 Of the consideration of humane misery. 60 Of the meditation of death.
65 Of Judgment and punishment of sins. 71 Of the zealous amendment of our
whole life. 77
THE SECOND BOOK.
OF inward Conversation. 84 Of humble submission. 90 Of a good and peaceable
man. 91 Of a pure mind and upright intention. 94 Of the consideration of ones
self. 96 Of the joy of ^ good conscience. 98 Of the love of Jesus above all
things 101 Of familiar conversation with Jesus. 103 Of the want of all comfort.
106 Of thankfulness for the grace of God. 112 How few the lovers of the Cross
of Christ are. 116 Of the high way of the holy Cross. 119
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF the inward speech of Christ to a faithful soul. 130 That truth speaks
inwardly without noise of words. 132 That the words of God are to be heard with
humility, and that many weigh them not. 135 A prayer to implore the grace of
devotion. 137 That we ought to live in truth and humility in the sight of God.
138 Of the wonderful effect of divine grace. 141 Of the proof of a true
lover. 146 That grace is to be hid under the veil of humility. 150 Of a mean
conceit of our selves in the sight of God. 154 That all things are to be
reserved unto God, as unto the last end. 156 That despising the world it is
sweet to serve God. 158 That the desires of our heart are to be examined and
moderated. 162 Of the effect of Patience, and of strife against concupiscence.
164 Of the humble obedience of a subject, according to the example of Christ.
167 Of the secret Judgments of God to be considered, lest we be extolled in
our good deeds. 169 What we ought to do, and say in every thing which we
desire. 172 A Prayer for the fulfilling of the will of God. 174 That true
comfort is to be sought in God alone. 175 That all our care is to be placed in
God. 177 That temporal miseries, by the example of Christ, are to be borne
patiently. 179 Of suffering of injuries, and who is proved to be truly patient.
181 Of the acknowledging of our own infirmity: and of the miseries of this
life. 184 That we are to rest in God above all his gifts. 187 Of the
remembrance of the manifold benefits of God. 192 Of four things that bring
much peace. 197 A prayer against evil thoughts. 197 A prayer for the
enlightening of the mind. 198 Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others.
200 Wherein does the firm peace of the heart, and true proficiency consist.
20^ Of the excellency of a free mind, which humble prayer better obtains then
reading. 204 That private love most hinders from the chiefest good. 206 A
Prayer for cleansig the heart, and obtaining of heavenly wisdom. 208 Against
the tongue of Slanderers. 210 How we ought to call upon God, and bless him
when tribulation draws near 211 Of craving the divine aid, and confidence of
recovering grace. 212 Of the contempt of all creatures to find our Creator. 217
Of the denial of our selves, and forsaking all our affections. 220 Of
inconstancy of heart, and of directing our final intentions unto God. 223 That
God is sweet above all things, and in all things, to him that loves. 225 That
there is no security from temptation in this life. 225 Against the vain
Judgments of men. 230 Of a full and pure resignation of our selves from the
obtaining freedom of heart. 232 Of good government of outward things, and of
recourse to God in dangers. 235 That a man be not over earnest in his affairs.
237 That a man has no good of himself, nor any thing whereof he can glory.
238 Of the contempt of all temporal honors. 241 That our peace is not to be
placed in men. 242 Against vain and secular knowledge. 245 Of not drawing
outward things to our selves. 247 That credit is not to be given to all men,
and how prone man is to offend in words. 249 Of putting our trust in God, when
evil words arise. 253 That all grievous things are to be endured for life
everlasting. 257 Of the everlasting day, and shortness of this life. 259 Of
the desire of everlasting life, and how great rewards are promised to those
that fight valiantly. 264 How a desolate person ought to offer himself into
the hands of God. 270 That a man ought to employ himself in works of humility,
when force is wanting for higher exercises. 276 That a man ought to esteem
himself unworthy of comfort, and to have deserved stripes. 277 That the grace
of God is not given to those that savor of earthly things. 280 Of the
different motions of Nature and Grace. 283 Of the corruption of nature, and
efficacy of divine grace. 289 That we o^ght to deny our selves and imitate
Christ, by the Cross. 294 That a man be not too much dejected, when he ^alleth
into some defects. 297 Of not searching into high matters, and into the secret
judgments of God. 300 That all our hope and trust is to be fixed in God alone.
307
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
A Devout exhortation unto the blessed Sacrament. 311 With how great reverence
Christ ought to be received. 312 That great goodness and charity of God is
bestowed upon man in this Sacrament. 321 That it is profitable to communicate
often. 326 That many benefits are bestowed upon them that communicate devoutly.
330 Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Priestly function. 335 An
Interrogation of the exercise before Communion. 337 Of the discussing of our
own conscience, and purpose of amendment. 338 Of the oblation of Christ on the
Cross and resignation of our selves. 342 That we ought to offer up our selves
and all that is ours unto God, and to pray for all. 344 That the holy Communion
is not lightly to be forborne. 348 That the Body of Christ, and the holy
Scriptures are most necessary unto a faithful soul. 353 That he that is to
communicate, ought to prepare himself with great diligence. 360 That a devout
soul ought to desire with her whole heart to be united unto Christ in the
Sacrament. 363 Of the fervent desire of some devout persons to receave the body
of Christ 366 That the grace of devotion is obtained by humility and denial of
our selves. 369 That we ought to manifest our necessity unto Christ, and to
crave his grace. 372 Of burning love and vehement desire to receive Christ. 374
That a man be not a curious searcher of this Sacrament, but an humble follower
of Christ, submitting his sense unto faith. 378
FINIS.

