THEOLOGICAL LOGIC: OR THE THIRD PART OF THE TRIAL OF TRVTH: Wherein is
declared the excellency and aequity of the Christian Faith, and that it is not
withstood and resisted; but assisted and fortified by all the forces of right
reason, and by all the aid that artificial Logic can yield. Against the
Heathenish Atheist, and the Romish Catholic^* whereof the one takes exception
against the Faith (...) Christ in general; and the other against the doctrine
thereof, as it is professed in the Reformed Churches, as being in their
opinions absurd, and contrary to the evident and undeniable grounds of reason.

BY JOHN TERRY Minister of the Word of God at Stocton.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER, Anno Dom. 1625.

2 THESSALONIANS. 3. 1. Furthermore brethren, pray for us, that the word of God may
have a free current, and be glorified as it is with you: and that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all have not faith.

AVG. DE TRIN. l. 4. c. 6. Against reason no sober man, (that is himself in
his right wits) against Scripture no Christian man (that is of a sound and
orthodoxe faith,) against the Church no man of a peaceable spirit, (that is not
a Schismaticke, or at the least, somewhat schismatically affected) will reason
or dispute.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, ARTHVRE, LORD BISHOP OF BATH AND WELLS,
JOHN TERRY wishes all increase of grace in this life, and of glory in the life
to come.
IT is truly said (Right reverend and my very good Lord) that a foolish Judge
does ouer-hastily give sentence, not rightly apprehending, or duly weighing
all things belonging thereunto. An example whereof we have both in Jews and
Gentiles, unto whom the Gospel preached, was a stumbling-blocke, and seemed to
be a foolish and an absurd doctrine, they being carried away so to judge by
this hasty conceit, that a man who came himself to shame and death, could not
bring others to life and glory.

Whereas if they had rightly apprehended, and duly weighed and considered,
that sin was a most shameful and deadly evil, which could not, as Gods
decree stood, be done away, but either with the shame and death of the
offender, or of some other party that should undertake to satisfy the justice
of God for the same, they would have perceived that the Gospel revealing
Christ Jesus the aeternall Son of God, assuming humane nature, and joining it
into one person with his divine, and therein performing all things necessary
for our full reconciliation to God, that so by his humiliation and shameful
death, he might bring u^ to life and glory; they would (I say) well have
understood that the Gospel thus revealing Christ Jesus unto us, is the 1 Cor.
1. 23.
power of God, and the wisdom of God.

And verily the Gospel is the most powerful wisdom that ever was revealed
to man; because it makes men, that by the corrupt suggestions of Satan were
made mad, and Luc. 15. 17. Eccl. 7. 27. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
put out of their right mind, wise to salvation by faith in Christ: yea is not
the sincere embracer of the Gospel, the wisestman that lives on earth, seeing
he only embraces the right means whereby he may be made happy and blessed?
And is not the sound preacher of the Gospel, who turns the hearts of the
Fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, and so
makes a people ready prepared for the Lord, the disposer of the chiefest Luc.
1. 17.
blessings that the Lord bestows upon his dearest servants.

And is not also the careful and watchful Bishop, that is a guide set over
the guides of the Lord's flock, and a Superintendent over the Lord's watchmen,
and is to command that they teach no other doctrine, nor mingle wild goards 1 Timothy 1. 3.
with the wholesome food that is appointed for those that 2 Reg. 4. 39. Tit. 1.
5.
are of the Lord's Family, and if any such thing be done, to redress the same,
is not (I say) such a one a singular, yea an honorable instrument under God;
that those so sruitfull labors of all inferior Ministers, may be made
powerful unto many for the salvation of their souls?

Now the labors of Ministers are then powerful, when the wisdom of the word
of God is made manifest by them, which is, when the right sense thereof is
explained, and justified by clear and sound arguments, and reasons. For he
that will urge the bare and naked words of the Scripture, without the true
sense and meaning thereof, is like to a soldier that will fight with a
scabbard without a sword. And he that will urge a sense thereof not justified
and cleared by sound and sufficient reasons, is like to one that will fight
with a sword without an edge. For they are the solid reasons whereon the wise
and holy doctrines of the divine word of God are grounded, that give light and
weight thereto, and are, after a sort, the very life thereof. And hereof it is
that all manner of learned Professors, especially among Christians, he they
orthodoxe, or be they haereticks, offer to justify their several opinions by
sound and solid arguments concluded in true syllogismes, and to that end
require public disputations. Now if all require the truth of their opinions to
be thus tried, then they may not in any case refuse and shame this manner of
trial.

Wherefore as Festus said unto Paul, when he had appealed Acts 25. 12.
unto Caesar: Have thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar thou shall go: So
say I unto all learned Professors of Christianity: have ye appealed unto
reasons concluded in true syllogismes for the justifying of your several
positions? by reason ye shallbe tried, and to the censure thereof ye ought to
stand.

And this I have sufficiently proved in the explication and confirmation of the
third proposition of the former part of this Treatise, by the approbation
thereof given unto me from your LOrdships own mouth, after you had duly
perused the same, being committed unto your Lordships just censure. Wherefore
according to the old Proverb, Scitum est Athletam placuisse Herculi; as he may
be taken for a sufficient Champion that is approved of Hercules: so that
Treatise may be esteemed to be furnished with sufficient munition, that is
approved of a wise Colonel.

And hereupon I am bold to crave to have it published under your Lordships
protection, that so it may be the better accepted, and that some of the Lords
soldiers may be strengthened and enabled thereby, with better courage to fight
the Lord's battles. And thus commending your Lordship to God and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance among
them that are sanctified: I rest

Your Lordships in all Christian love and duty JOHN TERRY.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have already (Christian Reader) in the two former parts of the Trial of
Truth, made it manifest, that the doctrine of the Church of England is
agreeable to the common grounds and principles of our Christian Profession,
contained in the Articles of our Creed, the Law of God, the Lord's Prayer, the
doctrine of the Sacraments, and in those other general rules of holy
Scripture, wherein are set down all such circumstances as are requisite to
every good work.

Now in this third part I endeavor to make it evident that the same doctrine
is agreeable to all the rules of right reasoning, and therefore also is
orthodoxe and sound: For the declaration and demonstration of the truth of
every thing, is nothing else but a declaration, and demonstration of a true
definition and division thereof, and of the causes and effects, and of all
other arguments that agree thereunto; as I have already proved in a little
Treatise, entitled The reasonableness of wise and holy Truth; and The
absurdity of wicked and foolish error, being the forerunner of this large
Volume.

Faith in holy Scripture is taken either for the quality and habit of Faith, or
for the doctrine of Faith. The holy Scripture deciphereth the quality and habit
of our Christian Faith by arguments taken out of all Logicake places as
follows.

The principal efficient cause of the quality or habit of Faith, is God, Phil.
1. 29. The isntrumental cause is the word of God, Romans 10. 17. The material
cause is an assent upon knowledge, John, 6. 69. The formal cause is a sure and
settled assent, grounded upon a sure and settled kgowledge, John 17. 8. Col. 1.
6. The final cause is the excluding of all glorying in our selves, and the
ascribing of all glory unto God Ephesians. 2. 8. Romans 3. 27. The effects of Faith
are, as all other divine graces and fruits of the spirit, Acts 26. 18. so an
holy confidence, and an assurance of God's love, and a comfortable boldness to
come unto God as unto a gracious and loving Father, Ephesians. 3. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
The subject wherein it is seated, is the mind. For the mind is the eye of the
soul, and Faith is the true sight thereof, Ioh. 8. 56. Acts. 26. 18. the
object thereof is all divine truths. Romans 15. 4. especially the Covenant of
grace, founded upon Christ, Ioh. 20. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 21. the attributes are, that
it is sound, orthodoxe, and Catholic; that is, one and the same in all the
true servants of God, which have bin, are, or shall be to the end of the world,
Heb. 11. 2. Ephesians. 4. 5. Things diverse are a slight opinion, Acts 26. 28. and a
temporary Faith, Mat. 13. 20. Things contrary are presumption, and fleshly
security either bred by confidence in te^porall prosperity, Isay 28. 15. or in
the outward pledges of God's love, Ierem. 7. 4. or in the outward show of good
works, Romans 9. 32. and 10. 3. Things priuatiuely opposite are ignorance, Ephesians.
4. 18. a blind Faith, Mat. 13. 19. and sophistical infidelity, 1 Cor. 1. 2^.
That which is plain contradictory, is flat Atheism, Sap. 2. 1. Act. 23. 8,
things like are a bodily eye, Ioh. 9. 39. a bodily hand, ^ Tim. 6 12. a bodily
mouth, Ioh. 6. 53. a bodily foot, 2 Cor. 5. 7. and bodily wings, Luke 17. 37.
Things unlike are unstable childishness, Ephesians. 4. 14, and wavering doubtfulnes,
Iac. 1. 6. The coniugates are to believe in God, and in Christ. Ioh. 14. 1: and
to be one of the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10: the notation or interpretation
of the name, is a sure and Fides, quia fiet quod dictum est.
certain accomplishment of that which Faith believes, Math. 8. 8. The
definition or description thereof is this; Saui^g Faith is divine wisdom, or a
certain knowledge, and a settled assent, and adhaerence to all divine verities,
necessary to salvation, especially to the covenant of grace, as to the means
of the chiefest good and highest happiness, 2 Timothy 3. 15. the division thereof
is into a weak and strong Faith, Romans 14. 2. The testimonies are the
confessions of the Martyrs and Confessors that have lived, do and shall live
to the end of the world. Apocal. 7. 10.

This is the delineation of the whole body of Faith, as it is drawn out by the
pensill of the Prophets and Apostles: the parts and members whereof which are
most controuersed, are further lightened and cleared in the first part of this
Treatise. As in the second part thereof, the reasons and arguments produced to
open and justify the several doctrines of Faith, are referred to all the
Topic places, as being the rich mines out of which they are dug.

The doctrines of Faith, set down in the books of the Prophets and Apostles,
are Logical, reasonable and wise; and the very first principles and grounds
thereof are 1 Pet. 2. 2
without any mixture of sophistical deceit. The high Priests pectorall,
wherein the Vrim and Thummim was put, and by the which God gave answer unto his
people, was called by the Hebrews Hosen, and by the Greeks See Alsted.
Praecog. Theolog. fol. 230.
Logeion, and by the Latins Rationale, for that the Lord's doctrines had in
them the most pure holiness of most exact Logic, or reason.

The Logic places which I follow in this Treatise, are delivered by Petrus
Ramus, who concerning the use of Logic has very much cleared the rules of
Aristotle our grand Master.

The exemplifying of Logic places by the Theological positions, I have taken
from Amandus Polanus, but with this difference: in that he sets down his
arguments declaratiue and demonstratiue, in bare sentences and propositions,
without further discourse; whereas in this Treatise they are further opened by
other arguments and reasons. For as learned and judicious Doctor Field
auouncheth in his Dedicatory Epistle to his first Book of the Church, the
doctrines wherein we differ from the Church of Rome, are grounded not only upon
the greatest authority that is, but also upon the most prevailing reasons that
ever persuaded men. And verily, if that most famous Orators judgment be sound,
there is no reason to give credit to that reason, whereof there cannot be
yielded a sufficient reason. Cic. lib. 4. ad Herennium.

The great Antichrist of these last times, (as testifies 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
the Apostle) which has brought in a great Apostasy from the Faith, shall be
consumed with the Spirit of the Lord's mouth, and shall be abolished with the
brightness of his coming: and so shall his Armies also, which (as Chrysostom
Chrysostom. bom. 49. in Mat.
says) are impious Heresies. For whereas the time of miracles is now long
since expired, whereby the Apostles and their successors in the Primitive
Church, got credit to the divine doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, and Heb. 2.
4. ^ Cor. 10. 4.
made it most powerful to the overthrowing of all Heathenish Idolatries, and
impious Heresies, it remains now that the Professors of the Gospel by the
glorious light of powerful arguments, taken out of God's book, and
justifiable by the exact rules of sound reason, make Truth victorious against
Antichrist, and all his impious Heresies: For where Truth is clearly
demonstrated, and rightly apprehended, it cannot otherwise be, but that it 1
Esd. 3, 12.
will mightily prevail.

Our most wise and learned Solomon, has already by his pen begun this regal
and Princely work, and has justified by clear and demonstratiue arguments,
that the supreme authority to command as well in Ecclesiastical as in civil
causes, rests in the civil Magistrate in his own Dominions and Countries,
and has sent his Book to all Christian Princes, the which (no doubt) shall
preuail at that time, when he that has the hearts of all Kings in his own
hand, shall know it to be most fit.

And why should it not then highly please, especially the Ecclesiastic Peers
of his Kingdoms, to follow so worthy and supereminent an example, in causing
all Theological doctrines in this our renowned Church, to be confirmed by
clear and demonstratiue arguments, iustificable by all the rules of sound
reason, and the sophismes opposed against them, reduced to the elenches, as in
part they have bin already by that famous late public Professor in Cambridge,
Doctor Whitaker. And if worthy ensamples of famous men of their own rank be
not to be neglected herein, have they not to be their Precedents the singular
Patrons of the Christian Faith, that lived in the Primitive Church, that penned
their learned Apologies, and delivered them up into the hands even of the
Heathenish persecuting Emperors?

And albeit that reprobate Julian did say of these Apologies, I have read them,
understood them, and despised them: yet the learned Bishops were not dismaide
therewith, but gave him this answer; thou have read the^ Zozom. l. 5. c, 18.
perhaps, but thou have not understood them; for if thou have understood them,
thou would not have despised them.

And verily whereas the vpholders of the Kingdom of Antichrist come with
strong delusion, and with all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, why should not
all such as are set in the defense of the Gospel of Christ, strive earnestly,
as the Apostle St Jude exhorts, for the maintenance Jude 4.
of the Faith which was once given to the Saints? yea, why should they not
strive for truth even unto death and defend Justice for life, seeing if they
do so, they shall Eccl 4. 28.
have God to fight for them against their enemies? Meroz has a double curse
for omitting this duty, and Iael has a double blessing for performing the
same, pronounced by an Angel of God from Heaven. Curse ye Meroz, Iud. ^. 22.
said the Angel of the Lord, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came
not out to help the Lord; to help the Lord against the mighty. Iael the wife
of Heber the Kenite, shall be blessed above other women dwelling in tents: for
she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workemans hammer; with
the hammer smote she Sisera, yea she smote off his head, after that she had
wounded and pierced his temples.

So let the words of the wise, which are like goads and Eccl. 12. 11.
like nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies which are given by one
Pastor, be as it were driven into the heads of all spiritual Siseraes, that
all Heresy and Idolatry may be pierced and wounded, and in the end utterly
destroyed. And so now also let all thine enemies perish O Lotd, and let all
that love thee and thy Truth, be as the Sun when he rises in his might.

And let all true Christian hearted Englishmen continually pray, that the Sun
of righteousness would never go down under the Horizon of this our Church of
great Britain; but that he would always shine over it by the bright beams
of his glorious Gospel; and bless it with the heavenly influence of his holy
Spirit, holding still the stars thereof in his right hand, and preserving the
Candle of his Word in the Candlestick thereof unto the world's end.

Thine in the Lord JOHN TERRY.

THE QVAESTIONS THAT are handled in the first part of this Treatise.
1 The Gospel is the only proper and immediate cause of true faith and love,
and of all other spiritual graces, and not miracles, nor temporal blessings,
or corrections, nor the holy lives and comfortable deaths of the dearest
servants of God, nor the authority of the Magistrate, nor the wisdom of the
Law of God, and therefore much less the reason of the natural man. 2 The Word
and Sacraments do not profit, unless the sense and use of either, be rightly
conceived and understood, 3 The means whereby we are to come to the right
understanding of the word of God is the light of true reason. For the opening
of the truth whereof these positions following are explained. 1 All quaestions
humane and divine are to be determined by the rules of right reason. 2 The
testimony of no author humane or divine is further to be approved, then as it
agrees with the grounds of true reason. 3 The holy Scriptures do teach and
demonstrate the greatest mysteries of godliness by arguments and reasons. 4
The Law and the Gospel are founded upon most forcible reasons: yea, the
permission of the fall of Adam by transgressing the Law of God, being the
occasion of man's recovery which is openened in the Gospel, is grounded upon
most forcible reasons. 5 The Professors of every Religion, allege reasons for
the justifying of their several devotions. 6 The soundnes and substance, and
as it were the very quintessence of all divine reason is most plentifully to be
found in the canonical Scriptures. 7 No truth in Philosophy is contrary to any
truth in Divinity. 8 Testimonies may be taken out of Philosoyhy, to give
witness unto truths in Divinity; and reasons may be produced out of the book
of Nature, to open and clear the doctrines of the book of Grace. 9 Where
there is no reason apprehended that may persuade to Faith, there ordinarily is
no Faith. 10 Where there is a clearer apprehension of the reasons that persuade
to Faith, there is the more settled assent, and the stronger Faith. 11 The
doctrines of Faith, and Godliness, are often repeated, and the reasons and
motions that persuade thereunto, are inculcated and urged again and again in
the Books of the Old and New Testament: that we may thereby understand that
the clearer and fuller apprehension of them, do beget a clearer and fuller
Faith. 12 We may by supernatural reason ascend above the reach of natural
reason. 13 That Faith is not the best and strongest that has the less number
of reasons, and the less perspicuous arguments to stay it up, but rather that
which has the greater number, and the more perspicuous.
4 Saving Faith is divine wisdom, or a certain knowledge, and a settled assent
and adhaerence to all divine verities necessary to salvation, and especially to
the Covenant of grace, as to the means of the highest happiness, and the
chiefest good. 5 A saving Faith is always accompanied with all other
sanctifying graces, as being the fruitful mother, and tender nurse of them
all. 6 The Christian Faith only does give vndeeeiuable assurance of the love of
God; and of aeternall happiness obtained thereby to all the sincere embracers
thereof. 7 The dignity and vtility of Faith, and the difficulty of obtaining
and increasing the same.
THE QVAESTIONS THAT ARE handled in the second part which are declared by
arguments taken from all the Topic places.
Quaestions handled by argument drawn from the efficient Cause. The Church is
not always glorious and notorious, as a City set upon a high hill. All the
works of the most holy in this life are stained with sin. The ignorance and
not the knowledge of holy Scripture, is the cause of all errors and sins.
From the material Cause. Not the sufferings and righteousness of any mere
man, but only of our most blessed Savior, both God and Man, are of sufficient
worthiness to satisfy for sin, or to purchase the inheritance of the kingdom
of Heaven. The Bread and Wine in the Eucharist are not transubstantiated into
the very Body and Blood of Christ. The righteousness prescribed in the Law
delivered by Moses, is that true righteousness whereby we are justified before
God, and not that righteousness which is said to be obtained by the undertaking
of Popish vows.
From the formal cause. We are not justified by those works of righteousness
commanded in the Law which are wrought by our selves, but for those which were
done by our Savior Christ in his own person for us, and are made ours by the
Lord's gracious imputation. The form and manner to attain to true
sanctification, is not to receive the holy Word of God, and the Sacraments,
only with our bodily senses; but rather with the powers of our Souls: nor to
travail far and near on pilgrimage to see and kiss holy Relics, but to
see and touch holy things, by the inward powers of our minds, which are the
proper subjects of sanctification.
From the final cause. Salvation and aeternall life is from our blessed
Savior, and not from any other person or thing. The outward Elements in the
Eucharist are not Bread and Wine in show, but in substance. There is no
miraculous turning of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist into the very Body and
Blood of Christ, nor any other the like miracle. Justification is by faith
alone, and not by faith and works joined together in that work. The faithful
after this life are not punished in the fire of Purgatory.
From the effects. The carnal eating of Christ's Body is nothing available to
aeternall life, but only the spiritual eating thereof by faith. Concupiscence
is sin even in the Regenerate. The works of God revealed in the Scriptures
do manifestly declare them to be the word of God, especially the work of
Regeneration, wrought by the wise and powerful doctrine thereof in the hearts
of all the sincere embracers of the same: and therefore they are not to be
received for such, only upon the testimony of the Church. The Soul of our
Savior Christ descended locally into hell.
From the Subject. Fasting or any outward thing does not sanctify any, but
only the inward graces of the spirit, and such things as do breed and
strengthen the same. There is no such place appointed for the faithful as
Purgatory is feigned to be. Christ is not corporally in the Eucharist, but only
in Heaven. The City of Rome is the mystical Babylon, and the titulary
Catholic Roman Church, is the certain seat of the great Antichrist of the
latter times.
From the adjuncts. The Word of God rightly understood, does give credit to
it is self, and does cause it self to be believed and embraced as the Word of
God, for the excellency of the divine doctrine contained therein; and not only
for the bare testimony of the Church. Kneeling is the fittest gesture of the
body at the reverent receiving of the holy Eucharist. Holiness does not consist
in vowing to abstain from riches, meats, and marriages, but rather in the holy
and lawful use of them. The Body of Christ is at one time but in one place.
Christ's Body and Blood ought not, and in truth cannot be often offered up to
God by the Mass Priests as a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of quick
and dead. Christ's flesh is not eaten with our bodily mouths. It is a property
only belonging to God to forgive sin. Enoch and Elias cannot come in their
own persons to resist Antichrist, and to be slain of him.
From things that be diverse. Regeneration is not wrought by the power of
free will, but by the operation of the spirit of God. None are elected for
foreseen works.
From things that be contrary. A true faith is not seated in that soul where
infidelity reigns, or any other sin. Salvation is not merited by our own
works.
From things that be opposite priuatiuely. The natural man has no free will
to that which is religiousty good.
From things depending upon relation. No divine worship or service is to be
given to any Angel or Saint.
From things that have the same proportion of reason. The faithful are made
righteous before God by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto them. The
faithful may as well know themselves to be endued with true love, as with true
faith. The Cup in the Eucharist is not to be taken away from the Lords people.
The pains of Popish penance, or Purgatory, cannot be satisfactory for the
least sin. Matrimony is lawful for the ministers of the Gospel. The nails
and spear wherewith our blessed Saviors most precious Body was tormented
grievously, are not to be worshipped with divine worship.
From things that have the greater proportion of reason. The sins of the
faithful shall not be punished in the fire of Purgatory. The Sacraments be not
instruments of grace, unless their uses be rightly understood. Images are not
to be worshipped with divine worship. The word of God is not to be read unto
the simple people in a strange tongue. In all matters that concern the divine
worship and service of God, no doctrine is to be received, which is not
warranted by the authority of the Canonical Scripture.
From things that have the less proportion of reason. The natural man has no
free will to that which is religiously good. Not the suffering, much less the
vowing of voluntary poverty is the way to perfection. The people ought to be
able to discern the doctrine of their teachers. Our whole justification is by
the free and undeserved mercy of God in Christ. The going on pilgrimage to
visit the relickes, of the Saints does not sanctify. The faithful have the
assurance of their own salvation given unto them. The least sins are mortal
and damnable. All things necessary to salvation are plainly delivered in the
Books of the Canonical Scriptures. The faithful embrace the Scriptures as
the Word of God for it self, and not only for the testimony of the Church. The
natural man has no free will to that which is religiously good. No man can
make satisfaction to God for any one sin. The people ought not to embrace the
doctrine of their teachers without trial. The faithful are saved by their
own faith, and not by the faith and works of any other. God did praedestinate
before all worlds some to aeternall salvation in Christ Jesus, and others to
aeternall damnation through their own sins.
From things that be unlike. No image ought to be made to represent the Divine
Majesty. All the works of Infidels are sins.
From things that be like. The true servants of God do know themselves to be
the true servants of God, God gives salvation in Christ, and not in any other.
Ungodly Hypocrites are no true members of the Church of Christ. The testimony
of God delivered in the Canonical Scripture, and not received by bare
tradition, is the sure evidence and ground of truth. The doctrine of the Romish
Church is a provocation to sin, and not the doctrine of the Churches that
profess the Gospel. Popish penance and Purgatory are contrary to the Article
of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins.
From such things as be coniugates. Jury is not to be esteemed an holy land.
The will of man is not by nature free in things concerning God. All the
faithful are Saints. The Bishop of Rome is not the universal pastor of the
whole Church. The Laws of God only bind the conscience.
From the etymology or interpretation of the name. True Religion binds only
to the observation of such things as are commanded by God: Whereas superstition
binds to the observation of such things as are beside and above the former.
The Laity ought to have liberty daily to read the holy Scriptures. The
faithful themselves, and also their Churches ought to be dedicated only to
God. The faithful know their own Faith, repentance, and love, and their
salvation in Christ Jesus. An implicit, that is, a blinded and a folded up
Faith, is not the true Christian Faith. The breaking of a Popish vow is no
sin. The Monks as they now demean themselves, are not true Monks. All the
faithful are saved by the mere mercy of God in Christ.
From the definition or description of a thing. The faithful have assurance,
both of the Lord's good will and love toward themselves; and also of their own
sincere faith and true love toward God. The bare testimony of the Church
cannot make sufficiently known any doctrine of Faith. A Bishop may be a civil
Magistrate.
From the division of a thing. The sign of the Cross is not a thing
absolutely evil, but may lawfully be used at the administration of Baptism.
From the whole to the parts, or from the generll to the special. Matrimony is
lawful for the Clergy even after the vow of single life. All Ecclesiastical
persons as well as secular, ought to be subject to the civil Magistrate. It
does belong to the civil Magistrate, in his own dominions to command all such
things to be observed of all his subjects, as concern the divine worship and
service of God, and therein he has the highest authority. The natural man
has no free will to that which is religiously good.
From the parts to the whole, or from the special to the general. The Church
of Rome gives divine honor to Angels and Saints. There are no persons
appointed by God for Popish Purgatory.
From divine and humane testimonies. The miracles and doctrine of the Church of
Rome are fabulous and false even by the testimonies of her own vulgar people.
Learned Writers.
the ancient Fathers. Canonical Scriptures.



THEOLOGICAL LOGIC.
CHAP. I.
QVAEST. 1.
1 The Gospel is the only proper and immediate isntrumental cause of our
conversion to God, and of our faith and love, and of all other spiritual
graces; and not miracles, nor the holy lives, and comfortable deaths of the
dearest servants of God, nor temporal blessings or corrections, nor the
authority of the Magistrate, nor the wisdom of the Law of God, and therefore
much less the reason of the natural man.

THe Gospel is the proper and immediate Acts 26. 18. Ioh. 8. 32. 1 Pet. 2. 23.
2 Cor. 3. 18. Romans 10. 17. 1 Ioh. 4. 19.
instrument whereby God does open our eyes, and turn us from darkness to light;
and from the power of Satan, to God; and does free us from the bondage of
sin, and does beget us again, and renew us into his own Image, from glory
to glory, as by the Spirit of God. Faith comes by the Gospel: For what can
give us a faithful assurance of Gods love, but such a pledge thereof as is
given us in the Gospel? Love is wrought by the Gospel displaying Gods love.
For if we love them that love Matthew. 5. 47
us, what singular thing do we? Do not the Publicanes even the same?

So repentance is wrought by the Gospel, and a godly sorrow Mar 1. 15.
for our devilish sins: For what can make us truly sorrowful for offending
so good and so gracious a God, and careful from the very heart to cease from
sin, and to follow righteousness; if the grievous agony, and dreadful death
of our blessed Savior endured for our sins, being revealed in the 1. Pet. 4.
1. Ioh. 12. 32.
Gospel, cannot effect the same?

Verily John the Baptist giving the knowledge of salvation unto the people for
the remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of God, whereby the day
spring from an high Luc. 1. 16.
has visited us, did turn many of the children of Israel unto the Lord their
God. So the Apostles going out into the whole world, and preaching the Gospel
to every creature, did cast down holds and imaglnations, and every high thing
that was exalted against the knowledge of God, and brought into captivity 2
Cor. 10. 4. Isa. 2. 2.
every thought to the obedience of Christ, and so converted the whole world
unto God.

But as for miracles, the holy lives, and comfortable deaths of the dearest
servants of God, the Lord's temporal blessings and corrections, the wisdom of
the Law of God, and the best reason of the natural man, all and every of these
may be as good preparatiues to cause us more readily to receive the Physic
of our souls: but the instructions of the wholesome doctrines of the Gospel
of Christ are the only right Physic, and the most sovereign confections that
are able to recover our spiritual health and life: For if we live an holy and
an heavenly Ier. 46. 1. Gal. 2. 20.
life, we live so by the faith of the son of God, who has loved us, and has
given himself for us: the which faith is wrought by the Gospel.

The former may be some impellent occasions to induce such as are not yet
effectually called to give an attentive ear to the most wholesome doctrines of
the Gospel of Christ, and to move such as are effectually called already, to
hearken more readily and reverently then before they have done. But they are no
helps to the Gospel it self for the working out of the conversion of any.
Because this word of Christ is not rightly received, nor does work in any one
effectually, but where it 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13
is received for it is own sake.

And verily concerning the power of miracles and of the Church, which is a
multitude of such as profess the truth, they are not able to convert an
Infidel, but to prepare him, and make him ready to embrace the Gospel, which
is the power of God Romans 1. 16 Aug. de utilitnt^ credendi. c. 16
to salvation to all that believe. Men (says S. Austin) that are not yet able
to discern the heavenly truth, that they may be lifted up to it, and suffer
themselves to be purged from their impurity, hindering them from it, have the
benefit of direction of authority, which stands upon two things; whereof the
one is the greatness of miracles and wondrous works done, the other is the
multitude of such as believe. Verily God would have all men saved, and come
thereto by the knowledge of the truth. But this knowledge of the truth is
learned out of the 1 Timothy 2. 4 Ioh. 8. 32 Col. 1. 5
Gospel, the word of truth. And therefore did the Lord cause so many strange
signs and wonders to be done by the first publishers and preachers thereof,
that the doctrine of the same Marc. 16. 20. Hab. 2. 4.
might be embraced as divine and heavenly, whereunto the Lord himself did
give such testimony.

For the which purpose also the Lord caused so many divine graces to shine in
the lives, and such admirable courage and comfort in the deaths, of such as
were the first Martyrs and Confessors in the Primitive Church, that that
doctrine might be received as divine and heavenly, which wrought such divine
and heavenly effects. The which were so evident and apparent, that the very
enemy was forced to give testimony thereto with these or the like words: These
be they which speak as they live, and live as they speak; this is assuredly
an holy profession, which brings forth such an holy conversation; this is a
joyful and comfortable faith, which breeds such joy and comfort amidst the
very terrors of death. O vndonbtedly great is the God of the Christians. Their
light did so shine before men, that they seeing their Mat. 5. 16.
good works, did glorify God the Author thereof.

So likewise why does the Lord sometimes cause the sweet dewes of his temporal
blessings to distill down upon his beloved Vineyard, and sometimes again
smite it with the sharp storms of his co^rections, but that thereby he might
prepare it to yield a fruitful and a plentiful Vintage? And why does he
suffer the Field of his Church sometimes to lie ley and unbroken up, and to be
at rest, and again at another time does break it up, and fallow it; but that
he might make it fitter to receive and nourish the Lord's seed, and in the end
yield a better harvest?

Yea as a wise and prudent Schoolmaster deals with his young and tender
Scholar, sometimes speaking him fair, and giving him an apple or a fig, that
so he may win him unto his will, and sometimes not only threatens him, but
uses also the rod, that so he may force and compel him thereunto; so deals
Christ our heavenly Master and Teacher, with us his dull disciples and
Scholars, sometimes seeking to allure us with a liberal largess of his
temporal blessings, carefully to hearken to the holy instructions of his Word;
and sometimes seeking to compel us thereto by his sharp corrections; the
which yet Psalm. 106. 45 Luc. 14. 23
are neither our School, nor our Schoolmaster, but the rod rather in our
Schoolemasters hand. The Church is our Schoolehouse, and Christ himself is our
Schoolmaster; and the Bible is the Book whereby we be taught: corrections are
the rod in Christ's hands, whereby we are forced to give an attentive ear to
the instructions of his word, by the which we are made wise and learned
Christians.

Prosperity ordinarily breeds security, and choaketh the Mat. 13. 22. Exodus 6
9. Eccle. 7. 9 Job. 3. 3. Ier. 15. 10.
good seed, and makes it unfruitful. So adversity makes many to murmr
against God, and to stop their ears against all good admonitions; yea, it
makes a wise man mad, as it may appear by holy Job and Jeremy, who were
thereby occasioned even to curse the day of their nativity. And therefore it is
a special blessing of God, when by prosperity we are stirred up to
thankfulness, and by adversity to repentance, and to take better heed to the
wholesome instructions of God's most holy word. Blessed is the man (said David)
whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach in thy Law, that thou may give him
patience in Psalm. 94. 12.
time of adversity, until the pit be dug for the ungodly.

And verily when in our adversity the Lord does teach us out of his Word the
use and end of afflictions, and makes us seriously to lay it to our hearts,
then is our adversity made profitable unto us by the blessing of God. I heard
Ephraim (says the Prophet) lamenting thus; Thou have corrected me, and I was
chastised as an untamed Calfe, convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for
thou art the Lord my God. Surely after I converted, I repented; and after I was
instructed, I smote upon Ier. 31. 18.
my thigh. In which words we may perceive that corrections of themselves cause
the professed servants of God to kick with the heel, and that until God by
his word instruct them, they are not effectually moved by their corrections
unto repentance and amendment of life. Wherefore when the Lord opens the
ears of any of his Servants by their corrections, it is by sending unto them a
Messenger one of a thousand to declare unto them the Lord's most exact
righteousness and severity even against the sin of his Elect, which cannot be
satisfied for the same but by the precious Blood of their Savior Christ, that
thereby they might be brought to Faith and Repentance. For then will the Lord
have mercy upon them, and say, Deliver them, that they go not down into the
pit; for I have received a reconciliation. Job 33. 24.


So then it is still the power of the Gospel of Christ, sounding in the
mouths of his faithful Ministers, that is able to work the conversion of a
sinner: afflictions may cause us more carefully to give attendance to the Word,
as in like manner may pains and penalties inflicted by the Magistrates, which
are the Lord's Lieutenants, ordained to this purpose, that they should by their
penal statutes even force their subjects to harken diligently to the
commandments of God.

Not that any can be forced to faith and repentance by any manner of penalty or
pain whatsoever, but by inforcements they may be driven to come to the
Assemblies of the Saints, where the Fishers of men cast out the net of the
Gospel, that at one time or other they may be brought within the compass
thereof, and so may be taken up into Noah's Ark. So then still it is the net
of the Gospel, and the hook of the Word, whereby men are taken and brought
unto God: afflictions sent of God, and penalties inflicted by the Magistrates,
are but the baits to make some bite at this hook, and poles to make them come
within the compass of this net.

Nay this work of a man's unfeigned conversion to God, cannot be wrought by the
terrors of the Law of God. For the Gal. 3. ^. 2. Cor. 3. 6.
spirit whereby we are begotten again, and made the children of God, is not
received by the preaching of the Law, but by the hearing of faith. The Law is
the letter that condemns and kills, causing a sinner to fly from God, as
from an angry and offended Judge. The Gospel is the ministry of
righteousness and life, revealing the light of God's countenance shining in
Hos. 11. 4.
Christ, and opening his Fatherly affection and love, whereby he draws his
Elect unto him.

The most that the Law of God can effect either by the aequity of the holy
precepts thereof, or by the severity of the threatenings denounced therein, is
happily for a time to stay sin, undoubtedly it has not power enough to slay
it: it may stop for a while the current of sin, and cut down some of the boughs
thereof, but it cannot empty the fountain of sin, nor pluck it up by the very
roots.

Much less can humane wisdom work the reformation of sinful men, it may
make them perhaps cover their sins, but Humana sapientia, ut plurimum
effici^t, non abscindit vitia, sed abscondit. Lact. Inst. l. 3. c. 26.
cannot enable them to cast out their inbred corruptions. The uttermost it can
work (as Lactantius testifies) is to drive corruption inward, and to make it
hide it self for a while; but by making men outward conformitans, it makes
them in truth no better then dissembling hypocrites.

For the reason and the wisdom of the natural man could not find out many
particular transgressions committed against the Law of God, nor sound the depth
of his judgments, much less could it reach to the height of his mercies, and
the most strange and incredible expiation that the Lord appointed for sin.
This Mystery required a supernatural revelation, and could not be revealed but
by the doctrine of the Gospel. Wherefore when the world by her wisdom, knew not
God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to
save them that believe. For the Gospel is the powerful voice of our great
Shepherd, whereby he calls and recalleth 1 Cor. 1. 21, Ioh. 10. 3.
all his wandering sheep, and brings them home to his own fold. The Gospel
is the banner of Christ, whereby he brings back his fugitive soldiers, and
draws them to his Can. 2. 4. Mar. 1. 17.
own colors. The Gospel is the net which plucketh us up out of the Sea of
our sins, and pulls us into Christ's ship, and waffeth us along to the safe
haven of our everlasting happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Gospel is
that voice of Christ that raises us up out of the death of sin, to the life
of Ioh. 6. 25.
righteousness; yea it is that aqua vitae, that water of life that works in
us an holy life, and quickneth us to everlasting Ioh. 4. 14
life.

The Gospel is that Zephyrus, that life-breathing wind Cant. 4. 16.
that blowing upon Christ's Garden, causes the spices thereof to flow out. The
Gospel has in it those sweet deawes and showers, which dropping down upon the
dry grounds of our hearts, causes them to yield a plentiful harvest: The
doctrines Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
of the Gospel are those good sciences, that being grafted in our hearts, make
us to become fruitful trees, meet to be planted in the Paradise of God.
Lastly, the Gospel is that Iac. 1. 21.
spiritual and heavenly enchantment, that does metamorphise and transform us,
being as beasts in qualities and conditions, into the qualities and conditions
of men;, yea of holy and sanctified men. For in it is drawn forth such a lively
picture of our own Isai P 1. 6.
vileness, and of the excellency of the Lord, and of the strangenes of the
remedy, making manifest the greatness of the malady, that therein we all
beholding as in a mirror, the glory of God with open face, are changed into
the same Image from 2 Cor. 3. 18,
glory to glory, as by the spirit of God: Being thereby auerted from our
selves, and converted to God; weaned from our selves, and won to God: forced to
leave our selves, and to cleave to God; yea to loath our selves, and to love
God. Wherefore let 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Jew and Gentile, and whatsoever Heretics preach only, or at least
principally the Law of Moses, or the Law of nature and Nations, because they
acknowledge not the imputed righteoousnes of Christ Jesus, which is published
in the Gospel, but look to be saved by their own works. But let the
ministers of Christ, which are the Ministers of the Gospel, preach the Mar.
16. 15.
Gospel to every creature, following herein not only the commandment, but
also the example of their heavenly Lord and Master, who testifies of himself
on this manner, saying; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me, Luc. 4 18.
that I should preach the Gospel to the poor he has sent me.

And verily not only blessed are the feet of them that bring Romans 10. 15
glad tidings of those good things that God gives to his by the preaching of
the ^ospell, but also blessed are the cares of Mat. 13. 16.
all such as reverently and religiously hearken thereunto, seeing thereby they
attain this high privilege to be made the Elect Rom 3. 2 Ephesians. 2. 3.
and chosen people of God: For by nature all being borne in sin, the children
of wrath, and inheritours of destruction; by preaching and hearing of the
powerful doctrine of the Gospel, such as are of the number of the Elect and
chosen people of God are borne again, as by an immortal seed, and are made
the children of God, and inheritours of the Kingdom of 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Heaven.

CHAP. II
QVAEST. 2.
The Word and the Sacraments do not profit, unless the sense and use of
either be rightly apprehended and understood.

THe power and efficacy of things, consists not in the letters and words
wherein they are expressed, but in the things themselves, being rightly applied
to those uses where unto they are ordained by God. To ascribe an operative and
working power to bare letters or words, has bin condemned by all wise and
religious persons, not only in such as have bin bewitched with devilish
force^ies, but also in such as have bin blinded with gross and palpable
superstition. The seven sons of one Scaeva a Priest, are branded with the note
of aeternall infamy, for that they took upon them to name ou^r them that Acts
19. 13.
had evil spirits, the name of the Lord JESUS, saying, We adjure you by JESUS
whom Paul preaches.

As the Scribes and Pharisees are condemned of gross and palpable
superstition, for that they did ascribe a sanctifying Mat. 23. 5.
power unto the Law of God, written upon their garments. They did not
understand (says S. Jerome) that these things are Ierom. in Mat. c. 23.
to be carried in their hearts, and not on their bodies, seeing Libraries and
chests have the books, but not the knowledge of God. The like (says he) do
even now superstitious women amongst us, who have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, in little Gospels, and in the wood of the Cross, and in
other things of the like nature.

Neither was this superstition found only among some silly women, but also
among some of the Priests whom S. Chrysostom Chr^s. in Mat. hom. 43.
sharply taxes, saying; Tell me thou doting Priest, is not the Gospel daily
read and heard of men in the Church? Whom then it does not profit, being
received by the ears, can it save being hanged about their necks? For wherein
consists the virtue of the Gospel? In the forms of the letters, or in the
understanding of the sense? If in the figures, then do thou well to hang it
about thy neck: but if in the understanding, then would it do the more good
being placed in thine heart, then hanged about thy neck.

Neither have the Sacraments, which are visible words, any supernatural grace
annexed to the outward Elements, but as Aug. in Joh. hom 89. 1 Cor. 11. 29.
they represent unto the mind an invisible grace, and shadow out and suggest
divine things to the understanding, that so they may be viewed and reviewed
again and again; and that they being once rightly apprehended, may be still
apprehended better and better. How is it (says S. Austin) that water does
touch the body, and cleanse the soul, but by the means of the word? Aug. in
Ioh: hom. 80.
And that not because it is pronounced with the tongue, but believed by the
heart, the right use of the sacred sign, being so Verba sunt signa rerum.
conceived, as it is opened and taught in the word.

And verily to what end were both Words and Sacraments Sacramentum est visibile
signu^ invisibilisgratie. Aug. de doct. Christian. l. 4. 6. 8
ordained, but that they being signs of things, they might open unto us the
things whereof they are signs? Insomuch (as S. Austin says) it skilleth not
how polished the tongue be that we speak in, but how sit it be to make
manifest our mind and meaning. For that as a wooden key may steed us more then
a key of gold, if it be more sit to open that which is shut; so a base and
simple language may do us more good then a learned and polished, if that it
make known unto us that which was unknown. And therefore the divine service
of God that is to be performed by the people of God, is to be delivered in
their vulgar tongue, that they may understand what they do.

The which thing is so behoofull and necessary, that the Apostle commanded,
that such as uttered divine mysteries in strange tongues, which were given even
by the miraculous operation of the Holy Ghost, should keep silence in the
Church, unless the meaning of the speech were presently expounded, 1 Cor. 14.
28.
that so the hearers might receive edification thereby. For all things in the
Church ought to be done to edification, and no word ought especially there to
be uttered idly or in vain, And Isai 45. 9
therefore whereas words uttered in an unknown language are without profit
and vain, they are not to be uttered in the Church of God. Yea albeit the
words themselves be understood, Legere and non intell gere est negligere.
yet if the sense and meaning of them be not rightly conceived, they are (as
our Savior says) as seed sown by the Mat. 13. 9.
high way side, which can yield no manner of fruit.

And verily as not the words, but the meaning of the Law is the Law; so not the
words, but the meaning of the Gospel of Christ, is the Gospel of Christ. The
Scripture (says S. Jerome) consists not in the reading, but in the
understanding. And again Hier. advers. Luciferianos. Hier. in cap. 1. e^ist.
ad Gal.
(says he) let us not think that the Gospel consists in the words of the
Scriptures, but in the sense, not in the outward show, but in the marrow; not
in the leaves of the language, but in the root of the reason.

Wherefore Chrysostom's advise is very behoofull, that we should diligently
watch, or rather (says he) we have need of Chrysostom. in Ioh. hom. 39
the grace of God, that we insist not upon the bare words, seeing thereby
heretics fall into error. For as the right sense of the Word of God, makes
it to be the true Word of God; so a wrong sense forged by man, makes it to be
the word of man: yea a cursed gloze thereof, made by the suggestion of that
cursed serpent Satan, clean corrupts the Text, and makes that which in the
syllables and words is the very Word of God, to be in the corrupt sense, the
very word of the Devil.

And therefore such as be careful not to fall into error, nor to turn the
Word of God into the Word of the Devil, must Tertul. advers. Prax.
(as Tertullian advises) exercise themselves to the sense of the matter, and
not to the sound of the words. Yea if they will receive any profit at all by
the Word of God, they must give all diligence, that they may attain to the
right sense and understanding of the same. For the word profits not unless
it be Heb. 4. 2.
mixed with Faith, Now a right faith stands upon a true understanding of that
we believe. For we cannot give a right assent of faith to that which we do not
rightly understand. And therefore the weaker or stronger our apprehension of
the mysteries of the Word of God is, the weaker or stronger is our Faith; As it
appears in the very Apostles themselves, who living with Christ himself, and
being often taught by him the mysteries of godliness, yet were a long time very
weak in Faith, for that they were very weak in knowledge. But when our
blessed Savior after his resurrection had opened their minds, and had made
them to understand the sense of the Scriptures, Luc. 24. 45
then they attained to a greater measure of Faith. For growth in the right
knowledge of the word of grace, does bring with 2 Pet. 3. 18.
it growth in grace it self.

Wherefore it is no mean mercy, when God does bestow upon any persons, the
true and certain knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, seeing it
is a sure sign that he Mat. 13. 11.
has admitted all such into the covenant of grace, in whose hearts he has
written his holy Laws, by giving them the right understanding of them. For the
soul of man is as a Table Ier. 31. 31. 2 Cor. 3 3. Prove. 7. 3. Apoc. 20. 12
board, or as a register or a book of records: and the firm conceiving of a
thing in the mind, and the sure laying up thereof in the memory is as the
drawing or grauing in a Table board, or as the writing of it in a book of
record. And therefore when the divine doctrine of the Word of God is rightly
apprehended by our understanding, and firmly laid up and settled in our
memory, it is (as it were) printed and graven in our souls, and so does
thereby ass^re our Consciences, that we are the beloved people of God. For
give in sincerity entertainment in the best rooms of thy soul to the Word of
God, and thou do Ioh. 14. 23 Ephesians. 3. 17.
withal give entertainment to Christ. For Christ does dwell in our hearts by
Faith. He is not received and eaten with our bodily mouths, because he is not
our bodily food, but with the mouths of our souls, when sweetly and
profitably we lay up in our memories, that his flesh was wounded and pierced
for Aug. de doct. Christian. l. 3. c. 10. Tertul. de resur. carnis.
us.

So Tertullian: Christ is devoured by hearing, chewed by understanding, and
digested by believing. For real things are not in our minds by any corporal
contiguity of their real substances, but by a spiritual participation of them
by their Res non sunt in animis, sed rerum notiones.
real notions. Neither do our Sacraments avouch a mingling of persons, or an
uniting of substances, but after a spiritual and a mystical manner, And
therefore Christ's Body being not a bodily, but a ghostly food, is not received
but by the powers of our souls, being endued with a true Faith.

For the Lord does bestow his several gifts and blessings Cyp. de coena Dom.
Quicquid recipitur ad modum recipientis recipitur.
upon his several creatures, according unto their several natures and powers,
whereby he has made them capable thereof, causing them all to move, and to
work according to those powers and faculties where withal he has endued
them. He nourishes nourishable things by their nourishing powers, and does
minister many comforts to his creatures that have sense and motion, by causing
them to apprehend the same by their sensitive and motive faculties. So likewise
does he bestow his gifts proper to men, which are reasonable creatures, by
making them known unto them by the discourse of reason, and by causing them to
apprehend and embrace the same, by their understandings and wills, which are the
proper faculties of reasonable creatures.

As for example, the Lord works a care in many natural men, to lead a civil
and a righteous life, by causing them to apprehend and embrace those arguments
and reasons which are of force to persuade to a civil and a righteous life. As
in like manner he opens the hearts of such as he calls to the estate of
grace, by causing them carefully to attend to the divine Acts 16. 14.
doctrines of the Word of grace. For the Spirit of God leads them not as
blind men, which are led by their guides in the way, that they see not
themselves, but he opens their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan, to God; that they may receive remission of
sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ.

Insomuch that the minds of the Faithful are first sanctified Acts 26. 18.
by a true and right apprehension of the love of God in Christ, made manifest
unto them by the light of the Gospel, and their wills are inflamed with a
seruent desire to be partakers thereof before they be made the sincere Servants
of Christ. For (as Austin Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 2. cap. 3. Aug.
hom. 15. de verb. Apost.
says) God works our salvation in us, not as in stones that have no sense,
or as in those creatures to whom he has not given reason and will. For (as the
same Father also teachetb elsewhere:) He that made thee without thee, does not
make thee Just without thee. He made thee not knowing (what was done unto
thee:) but he makes thee just, being willing (and witting to that work which
is wrought in thee.)

There are two parts of our salvation or deliverance from sin; whereof the
one is a deliverance from the very being and Heb. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 24, Isa 63.
3 1 Cor. 1. 13. Act. 20. 28 1 Pet. 1. 19
bondage of sin, and the other from the guilt and punishment thereof. Now
albeit concerning our deliverance from the guilt and punishment of sin, our
most mighty Savior has performed that alone by himself, even by the shedding
of his own most precious blood; yet concerning that other part which
consists in the d^liuerance from the being and bondage of sin, he does
effect it by diue^s motives, set down in his holy Word, whereby through the
effectual operation of his holy Spirit, he does make his Elect desirous and
willing to cast off the grievous yoke of Satan, and to have all their very
thoughts brought unto obedience to the commandments of God.

Wherefore it was not without cause that the Prophet Daniel Dan. 4. 24.
exhorted Nebuchadnezzar to redeem his sins with righteousness, and his
iniquities with mercy toward the poor, that so there might be an healing of
his error. For as he that is overcome of sin, is in bondage to sin; so he
that breaks 2 Pet. 2. 19.
the bonds of sin, and casts off the yoke thereof, may rightly be said to
redeem, and to save himself from the same. Take Redime to captum quam queas
minimo. 1 Timothy 4. 16.
heed (says the Apostle to Timothy) to thy self, and to thy doctrine, and
continue therein, for in so doing thou shall save thy self, and them that
hear thee. Verily, as sin is the sickness and death of the soul, so
righteousness is the health and life thereof.

And therefore whereas contraries are cured by contraries, Contraria cura^^ur
contrarys.
by righteousness our souls are cured of their sins. As it is apparent by the
words of Daniel beforementioned; Redeem thy sins with righteousness, and
thine iniquities with mercy toward the poor: lo let there be an healing of
thine error, by which words we are taught, that by righteousness our souls are
healed of their sins.

Wherefore all such as hearken attentively to the doctrine of the Gospel, and
are thereby brought to says and righteousness, Luc. 1. 17.
whereby they are purged from their sins, may rightly be said to work out
their own salvation, and to redeem and save Phil. 2. 12.
their own souls; for that they are instruments under the grace of Christ,
for the effecting of this so worthy a work.

And verily as the ignorance of the powerful truths of the Gospel, breeds
folly, and folly leads into all iniquity, and Eccl. 7. 27.
is the porter that opens the door to all impiety; so the true knowledge of
the mysteries of godliness breeds wisdom, and 2 Timothy 3. 15.
wisdom delivers from the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward
things, and from them that leave the Prove. 2. 10.
ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness, and so is an entrance
and portall to piety, and to all other divine Prove. 4. 7.
virtues.

So then in the work of regeneration and deliverance from the being and
bondage of sin, both the saithfull teacher of 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 1 Phil.
2. 12.
the Gospel, and hearer also are co-workers with God, and yet hereof they are
not to be proud. For what have thou that 1 Cor. 4. 7
thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why gloriest thou, as if
thou had not received it? Of our selves we are dead in our sins, and
altogether unable to move our selves to the working out of Faith, and an holy
life, but are merely passive Ephesians 2. 1. Romans 5. 6
in our spiritual resurrection, until God by his Spirit put good thoughts
into our minds, and holy desires into our hearts, yet then we our selves
begin to think well, and to desire that which is good, albeit not of our
selves, but by the gracious working of God's most holy Spirit: By the grace of
God (says the Apostle) I am that I am: and his grace which is in me, was not
in vain: but I labored more abundantly then 1 Cor. 15. 10.
they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. I labored (says
the Apostle) more abundantly then they all, in working out the work of the
salvation of many, but yet not I as of my self; or by any natural power that
was in me, but by the work of the grace of God which was with me.

For so he does declare his meaning to be in the third chapter of his second
Epistle, where for that some among them called in question the truth of his
Apostleship, he boldly avouches that their regeneration and conversion to
God, wrought by his ministry, but by the power of Christ, was a most evident
demonstration thereof. Such trust (says he) have we through Christ to God:
not that we are sufficient of our selves to th^nke any thing (belonging to the
work of our own salvation, or to the salvation of any other) as of our
selves, but 2 Cor. 3. 5
our sufficiency is of God. The Faithful then must have an holy mind, and an
holy will, before they can be the holy ones of God: yet it is neither of these
that they have of themselves, but of the p^werfull grace of God. We will (says
S. Austin) but it is God that works in us to will: we work, but it is God
that Aug. de gratiae and libero ar^. c. 16
works in us to work, and that of his own good will. Thus to believe and to
profess is beh^ofull and expedient for us, this is according to godliness and
truth, that an humble and lowly confession be made by us, and that all be given
and ascrib^d to God, seeing our life is in greater security, when we ascribe
all to God, and do not commit our selves in part to our selves, and in part to
God. So then it is a most certain truth, that in our regeneration and
deliverance from the being and bondage of sin, it is God that works in us
every good thought, word and work, and also that herein we our selves are
co-workers with God, as it may appear by this, even for that this work
proceeds after so slow and slack a manner.

Adam indeed was made perfectly holy and righteous, and that in a moment, even
at his first being and existing, because the Lord Almighty and all-sufficient,
wrought himself, and by himself, that holiness and righteousness that was
in him; but now the Faithful are herein ioint-workers with God, and therefore
this work goes forward slowly, because of the small measure of grace that is
given to them, and the great power of the remnants of their inbred corruptions,
which continually strive against the work of grace, and hinder greatly the
proceedings thereof.

The faithful in diverse places of Scriptures, are compared to stars in
respect of their profitable and fruitful uses, but may they not also be
likened unto them in respect of their manifold imperfections and aberrations?
Their proper motions are but slow, yea some of them very slow. For some of them
finish their course in a year, one in two year, one in twelve year, one in
thirty year; and all that be fixed in the fitmament in forty nine thousand
years. Neither keep they their right course always under the Ecliptic line,
but sometimes turn to one side thereof, and sometimes to the other; neither are
these their courses still direct and forward, but also sometimes retrograde and
backward in their cycles and epcicycles, toward their apogeion, and toward
their perigeion, giving sometimes a cheerful aspect, and sometimes an
opposite and disastrous stowne. So is it with the faithful, they are slow in
the entire accomplishing of any one holy motion, yet the motions of all the
powers of their souls and bodies will not be made perfect, until the glorious
comm^ng of Christ unto judgment. Verily while they live here in this world,
they follow not continually the straight course of Christ, the Sun of
righteousness, under the Eclipticke line of his holy Word, but somettimes they
turn to one side, and sometimes to the other; neither do they always keep a
direct course, and go on forward in the way of godliness; but sometimes they
are retrograde and go backward, and sometimes running in a maze, being
doubtful and uncertain which way to take; sometimes they are in their
apogeion, and sometimes in their perigeion; that is, sometimes they are lifted
up with heavenly meditations, and sometimes pressed down with earthly cares,
and sometimes they give a cheerful aspect to the good proceedings of others,
and sometimes they become their clean opposites, and cast upon them a
disastrous frown.

Wherefore it behooves the faithful to give all diligence to work out their
salvation, not only with hearts trembling at their own imperfections, but also
by being fearful to ascribe to themselves the glory of willing or working any
thing that is good, seeing (as the Apostle adioyneth) it is God that works
Phil. 2. 13.
in you the will and the deed, and that of his own goodwill. And yet they
themselves must understand, desire, and accomplish that which belongs to the
honor of God; and to their own, and the Churches good, if they will be the
accepted servants of God.

The Church of Rome does lay this as an heinous offense unto our charge, that
by us the nature of man is greatly disgraced, in that we teach, that men are
become brutish without reason, and as dead stocks and stones without sense and
life; because we teach, that by nature they have not liberty, list, nor life
unto any thing that is truly and religiously good. And why do they not bring
in the same indictment against the books of the Canonical Scriptures? which
teach, that every man is a beast in his own knowledge, and that our hearts are
stony, until Ier. 10. 14 Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ephesians. 2. 1.
they be made flesh: and that we are stark dead in trespasses and sins; and
therefore have no sanctified will, sense, nor life, until Christ does quicken
us by his holy Spirit, and raise us up to an holy life?

Our doctrine then herein is none other then the very doctrine of the Holy
Ghost; neither do we hereby disgrace the nature of man, but show how man by
his own fault has disgraced himself, and into what misery he is fallen by
his own folly. And this we teach only concerning the estate of the natural
man, before he be renewed by the Spirit of God.

Whereas the Church of Rome forbids the faithful themselves Romans 15. 4
to search the Scriptures, which yet were written for their learning; and
keeps them from them under the lock and key of an unknown ton^ue; and in her
divine service, reads them unto them in a strange language, and inioyneth
them to receive their Fatih upon their Preachers word and credit, without all
examination and try all, commanding them to believe blindfully as the Church
believes. Yea a great Cardinal is bold to avouch, that it belongs no more
to the people to ask a reason of their teachers doctrine, then it does to an
house to know Cusan. exercit. 6. page 547.
why his Master turns his head this way or that way.

Wherefore it is the Church of Rome that makes the very Faithful themselves
like to the horse and mule, in whom there is no understanding, contrary to the
precise commandment of the Holy Prophet, it is the Church of Rome by forceing
the Psalm. 32 9
people to pray in an unknown tongue, that causes them to offer up to God the
lips of calves, and to patter like pyes and parrets: yea whereas by nature all
men being degenerate, and turned into lions, bears, wolves, and tigres, are
not recovered out of this their wretched estate, but by the sanctified
knowledge of the divine Writers of the most powerful Gospel of Jesus Christ;
the Church of Rome keeping the^ from the same, keeps them from that whereby
they should be recovered out of this their miserable and brutish condition. And
for the justifying of her doing so, there is alleged by some of her followers,
this Commandment of Christ: Give not holy things to dogs, nor cast pearls
before swine. Mat 7. 6


Now then let all indifferent men judge who makes men beasts, whether the
Professors of the Gospel of Christ, or the followers of the Church of Rome.
And let all such persons labor both to understand, and put in practice the
divine mysteries of Faith and godliness, who will not be condemned by God
himself to be brutish and unreasonable Creatures.

CHAP. III.
The means whereby we are to come to the right understanding of the Word of
God, is the light of true reason: for the opening of the truth whereof, these
propositions following are explained.

QVAEST. 1, 2, 3, etc.
1 All Questions humane and divine are to be determined by the rules of reason.
2 The testimony of no Author, humane or divine, is farther to be approved then
as it agrees with the grounds of right reason. 3 The holy Scriptures do
declare the greatest mysteryes of godliness by arguments and reasons. 4 The
Law and the Gospel are founded upon most forcible reasons: yea the permission
by God of the fall of Adam, being the occasion of the strange means of man's
recovery which is opened in the Gospel, is grounded upon most forcible
reasons. 5 The Professors of every Religion, allege reasons for the justifying
of their several devotions. 6 The soundnes and substance, and as it were the
very quintessence of all divine reason is most plentifully to be found in the
Canonical Scriptures. 7 No truth in Philosophy is contrary to any truth in
Divinity. 8 Testimonies may be taken out of Philosophy, to give witness unto
truths in Divinity, and reasons may be produced out of the book of Nature, to
clear the doctrines of the book of Grace. 9 Where there is no reason that may
persuade to faith, there ordinarily is no faith. 10 Where there is a clearer
apprehension of the reasons that persuade to faith, there is a more settled
assent, and a more strong faith. 11 The doctrines of faith and godliness are
often repeated, and the reasons that persuade thereunto are urged and
inculcated again and again in the books of the old and new testament, that
we may thereby understand, that the clearer and fuller apprehension of them
does beget a clearer and fuller faith. 12 We may by supernatural reason,
ascend above the reach of natural reason. 13 That faith is not the best and
strongest that has the less number of reasons, and the less perspicuous
arguments to stay it up, but rather that which has the greater number, and the
more perspicuous.
WHereas the Word of God profits not unless it be Heb. 4. 2
mingled with Faith: that is, unless it being rightly understood, procure a
wise and a settled assent, it stands all in hand to seek out the true
means, whereby they may come to the right understanding thereof, if that they
desire to reap any benefit thereby.

The truth is, that the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, being the Lord's
Secretaries, or Registers to set down in writing all divine and heavenly
doctrines, necessary to salvation, were instructed by the immediate revelation
of the Spirit of God, that so they might be freed therein from all error. But
for any other person to challenge the same privilege, were but a fantastical
and an Anabaptisticall illusion. For even the Bishop of Rome himself, who is
magnified by his followers as the only man that has all divine and humane
Laws locked up in his breast, and is by them accounted the only unerring
Interpreter of holy Scripture, and the infallible Judge of the right sense and
meaning thereof; yet is by his chiefest Vpholders restrained to the means,
without the which he must not look to attain to the right and true
understanding thereof. The high Bishop (says Bellarmine) must not expect
revelations, but use Bellar. de council. l. 1. c. 11. Canus locor. theolog. l.
5. c. 5.
ordinary means. For [as Canus affirms) the holy Writers only set down
Catholic doctrines by the immediate revelation and inspiration of God, and
therefore needed not outward helps thereunto: Whereas it behooves Bishops to
use the ordinary course by weighing of reasons, and by employing their
diligence.

Yea Cameracensis is bold to avouch, that both it is impossible Came sent.
quaest. 1. art. 2.
to assent, without a reason to persuade thereto, ot to give any other manner
of assent, then the force of the reasons are, that procure the same. And
therefore whereas we ought to give the fullest assent to all doctrines of piety
and godliness, which are delivered in the Word of God, we ought most diligently
to search out the strongest reasons, that may thoroughly induce and persuade
thereunto. For (as S. Jerome testifies) the Gospel Hier. in c. 5. ep. ad Gal.
does not consist in the leaves of the Words, but in the root of reason. And
undoubtedly by arguments and reasons, all truths are not only lightened and
cleared, but also justified and confirmed. For when is any proposition true,
but when one part Vera est propositio. quando pradicatum convenit subiecto. In
omni legittima pred catione pred catum est genus, species, proprium, ant
accidens, Basil. sermon. 8. in Psalm. 108.
there of agrees with the other, but when one is a reason and an argument of
the other? Seeing then reasons and arguments are the causes of truth, we are to
seek out the right reasons of all things, if that we will come to the knowledge
of the truth.

There is much obscurity (says S. Basil) in the divine books; but if with the
hand of the mind thou do knock at the gate of the Scripture, and do
diligently sift those places that are hidden, by little and little thou shall
begin to understand the reason of the things that are spoken, and it shall be
opened unto thee, not by any other but by the word it self, unto the censure
whereof we ought all to stand: For all things are clear and euldent in the
Scriptures to such as with an holy discourse according to reason, will hear
the Word of God. For as the eye of the body does discern the differences of
all visible things by the light of the sun: so the eye of the mind does
discern the differences of all intelligible things by the streaming beams of
true reason, proceeding from Christ, the Sun of all true wisdom and
understanding. And therefore in all Universities and Schools of good learning,
where wisdom and the knowledge of the truth is sought for after the best
manner, in all Lectures, disputations, and conferences, not only errors are
confuted, and doubtful things opened, but confessed truths also are further
cleared and confirmed by arguments and reasons.

And verily there is no man that makes profession of learning and wisdom,
and trusts to the goodness of his cause, D. Morton de ^qui^oc. fol. 83.
that does not willingly submit the same to this manner and kind of trial.
Logic (says a most learned and judicious Author, and now a most reverend
Bishop in our Church) being the Art of discoursing and reasoning, is the Art of
Arts, and high tribunal of reason and truth it self: which no man in any
matter, whether it be case of humanity or divinity, can justly refuse. And as
another wisely admonishes: the faithful Christian must remember, that he
seek the truth without partiality, and that the place to seek it is the
Scripture, and the means to find it out is the right use of true reason. Yea
(says he) it is not unknown to any of our English Romanists, that Doctor
Fulke long since desired to have all questions controversed between Papist and
Protestant, to be brought to this issue, and and to be tried by syllogismes,
the very iudgment-seat of true reason. And no mar^aile seeing God himself, who
is all wisdom, reason, and truth, and needs not to come to any manner of
trial, (For the only opening the eyes of his greatest enemies, Wisd. 5. 6.
to behold the aequity of all his words and works, will cause themselves, will
they, nill they, to clear him, and to condemn themselves) yet offers this
plea even to the idolatrous Heathen, standing in defense of their Heathenish
gods, saying: Stand to your cause, bring forth your strong reasons, says the
King of Jacob. let them tell us what shall come hereafter, that Isa. 41. 21,
we may know that they are gods: As if he had concluded against them with this
syllogism; The true God knows what shall come to pass hereafter, yea, world
without end: but your Heathenish gods do not know, nor can foretell what shall
come to pass in time to come; therefore they beno true gods.

And verily, as Wisdom, so Truth seeks no corners to Pro. 1. 20.
hide her self in, but cries without in the open streets, and sets up her
questions upon the gates of the greatest Schools; yea, they settle such a
certainty of all Divine and humane knowledge in the hearts of their followers
and friends, that they refuse not trial nor judgment; no not in the midst of
all their enemies.

He that does evil (maintayning errors, either in faith or Ioh. 3. 20.
manners) hateh the Light, neither comes to the Light, least his deeds should
be reproved: but he that does the truth, comes to the Light, that his deeds
may be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. For what does
make things manifest but light? And what is light but truth, Ephesians. 5. 13. (...).
2 Cor 4. 2. Psalm. 43. 3.
the bright beams whereof will not suffer it self to be hid? And what is
truth, but the agreement of the reasons, with the things themselves, whereby
they are made manifest and known? This evidence of true reason is that which
enableth the professors of every humane art and science, to stand in the just
defense of their several professions: and therefore does it much more enable
every faithful and wise Christian to stand to the justifying of his most holy
Religion. Is it not (says Chrysostom) a great absurdity, that the Physician,
Tanner, Clothier, and all manner of Crafts-men generally shall be able to
contend for the worthiness of their Sciences, and that a Christian shall not be
able to give a reason of his says? Whereas these Trades being Chrysostom. in Ioh.
hom 16.
neglected, bring but damage to our wealth, and the other being despised do
hurt the soul. And yet (says he) so mad are we, that we bestow upon the one
all our cogitations and cares, nothing regarding the most necessary and firm
munitions of salvation: Albeit it be commanded us that we should be prepared to
give answer to every one that asks us a reason of that faith that is in us.

For albeit Novices and young beginners in every mystery Oportet discentem
credere.
cannot at the first sufficiently understand the first principles thereof, and
therefore must admit them for truths, upon the bare credit and authority of
their Teachers: yet in process of time they must conceive the reason of every
rule, it that they desire to attain to any sufficient skill therein: so in our
Christian profession, they that be as children, must be contented to be fed
with milk, and to be taught the first principles of Religion, and grounds of
the Catechism: and yet they that will become men, must be able to take
stronger meat, and to understand the reasons of all Divine Doctrines, for the
further strengthening and confirming of their faith.

And verily by all Doctrines delivered by men, it is a truth Non quis sed quid
spectandum.
generally confessed by all, that not so much the party that speaks, but that
which is spoken ought to be respected: and not the bare and taked authority of
any, but the sufficiency of the testimony it self ought to sway altogether,
and the weight Salmeron Jesuit^ in c 5. ep. ad Romans
of reason whereon it is grounded. For the efficacy of reason, is better then
all authorities. And of this judgment, are all wise men, as well Heathen, as
Christians. I am thus resolved (says Plato) not now, but always, that I am
not to enthrall Plato in Critone.
my judgment to any of my friends, but to reason: yea, to that reason which by
discourse appears to be best. Whose opinion was seconded by the chiefest of
all his Scholars, that is by Aristotle. Plato (said he) is my friend, but
truth (that is Aristonoral. l. 1. c. 3.
made known by reason) is more my friend.

So our wise and Christian Philosophers; What will thou Lact de vero Dei
simulachro. c. 20.
do quoth Lactantius? will thou follow thine Ancestors, or reason rather? So
St. Cyprian, we are not to prescribe by custom, but to convince by reason;
yea, let there be gathered together in a general council, the chiefest of
the Bishops and Doctors, and of all other learned men of the whole Christian
world, and let them also be such as rightly embrace the true Catholic and
Apostolic Faith; and give a just censure also in matters of never so great
weight and moment, yet are we not of necessity bound to stand to their verdict.
Or else Saint Austin was out of the way, when he stood upon this plea Aug Cont.
Maxim. l. 3. c. 14.
with Maximinius the Arrian. I will not (says he) allege the Council of Nice
to prejudice thee, neither shall thou produce the Council of Ariminum to
prejudice me; I will not be bound to yield to the authority of the one, nor
thou to the authority of the other: but by the authority of the Scr^ptures, as
by most indifferent witnesses, not proper to either of us, but common to both;
let matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, be compared
together, and so let trial be made of the truth. For he had learned to yield
that honor to those only books of the holy Scripture, that are called
Canonical, Aug ep 19. ad Hieronymum.
that he did assuredly believe, that none of the Authors of them did err any
whit at all: But as for all other, albeit they did excel in learning and
holiness, yet he would not rest upon their judgments, unless they did
confirm the same by the authority of Canonical Scripture, or by some reason
agreeable unto truth. And verily faith is not to be judged by the persons, but
the persons by the faith. For (as Tertullian says) faith is not therefore
sound and Catholic, because it is professed by such and such persons: but
such and such persons are to be deemed sound and Catholic, for that they
profess the sound and Catholic faith.

Ramus and Scribonius, men of no small judgment and learning, have taught that
all manner of testimonies, be they Divine or humane, are of themselves
i^artificiall arguments; and that the doctrines proved thereby, have their
credit and authority, rather from the qualification of the persons, whose
testimonies they are, then from the bare and naked testimonies themselves. So
the Emperor Adrian in his rescript: credit is to be given to him that gives
the testimony, and not to the bare testimony: And verily we do not embrace the
testimony of God set down in the books of the Scriptures with that reverent
manner as we ought to do, unless when we give assent thereunto, we dee it
not so much for the bare testimony it self, as for that it is the testimony of
the most wise and holy God, which cannot deceive or be deceived: For then we
rightly honor him and his truth. Hereof it was that Christ received not the
witness of John, as it was the testimony proceeding from a mere man: but he
received it as the testimony Ioh. 5. 33.
of such a man as was endued with the Spirit of Eliah, and sent before himself
to prepare his way. Nay, he says of his own bare and naked testimony
considered by it self; If I should bear witness of my self, my witness
were not true. Ioh 5. 31.
And yet concerning the same, as it is the testimony of the Son of God, the
very essential wisdom of his heavenly Father, he says, though I bear
record of my self, my record is true: Ioh. 8. 14.
for I know whence I came, and whither I go. And hereof it is, that both God
and Christ are so often mentioned in the holy Scripture with their honorable
Titles, that so the credibility of their persons, may yield the more and
greater credit to their Doctrine.

Andy et as if this were not sufficient enough, the very doctrine it self that
proceeds from God, and is set down in the holy Scripture, is cleared and
justified by many arguments and reasons. And verily how otherwise could the
holy Scripture enable the wise and learned professors of the Christian Faith,
to confute all Heathenish and haereticall errors, and to justify all Divine
and Heavenly Truths, not only to the Gentiles, and Haeretickes, but also to
the faithful themselves, unless it did minister plenty of all sound and
evident arguments for the effecting of the same? The Gentiles refuse the very
words of the Canonical Scriptures, and the Haeretickes reject the right and
orthodoxall sense of them; and therefore neither of them can be convicted, but
by the evidence of reason: yea, how can the faithful themselves give a sure
assent unto the Doctrines of the holy Scriptures, unless they apprehend such
arguments and reasons, as are sufficient motives to induce them thereunto? And
hereof it is, that in all sound and Orthodoxe Sermons, made either to breed, or
to increase and strengthen Faith unto the doctrines observed in the words of
the Text: there are annexed sound and sufficient reasons for the opening and
confirming of the same doctrines. And this is the cause why preaching is
preferred before reading and Catechizing, as being the more ordinary means
both to beget and strengthen Faith; for that in preaching many reasons are
produced as many lights for the better clearing and justifying of all Truths,
and for the fuller convincing of all errors and haeresies, the which thing is
not done either in reading, or in Catechizing.

There is, I confess, no efficient cause of Gods will, but his will it self:
for there is nothing without God that makes him to will or to work: for then
God should not be the first mouer, and the first cause of all things; but
therefore he wills Romans 9. 19.
because he wills. And yet far be it from any Religious heart, to think
that the most wise God, wills any thing without good and sufficient reason;
or that he speaks any thing idly, or in vain. The Word of the Lord, is the
Fountain Eccles. 1. 5.
of Wisdom: and therefore opens all Divine truths by their right and
proper reasons. And all the works of God are done in number, weight, and
measure: he has given to every several creature according to it is kind, it is
several nature with properties and qualities fitted thereunto. And he has
ordained every thing to consist of such and such causes, faculties, and powers,
as were best agreeing to such and such things, and most powerful to enable
them to produce such and such effects, for the producing whereof, they were
ordained by God. The which causes and effects, powers and faculties, qualities
and properties when they are found out; then there is a right knowledge of the
things themselves. Now what are causes and effects, powers, qualities, and the
like, but reasons and arguments whereby all things are made open and manifest,
and so are rightly apprehended and known.

Look we into the sacred Scriptures, and we may see therein how the Lord does
lay open unto his people, the mysteries of godliness; yea, even that great
mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, being the principal
subject of those divine books: by assigning his efficient cause, God the
Father, Matthew. 3. 17. and his Mother the Blessed Virgin Mary, the daughter of
David the King, Luke 1. 31. His material causes, his Divine and humane
Natures, Matthew. 1. 23. His formal cause, the uniting of his humane nature by
personal union unto his divine, Ioh. 1. 14. his final cause, the working out
of man's redemption, Gal. ^. 4. His effects, our reconciliation to God, Ephe. 2.
18. with our deliverance out of the bondage of sin and Satan, and our
translation into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Ioh. 8. 36. His
attributes according to his Divine nature, infinite wisdom, holiness,
righteousness, and the like, Col. 2. 3. and according to his humane nature,
such a measure of all divine and heavenly graces, as are far above the
perfections of any other creatures, Ioh 1. 19. The time when he was borne, even
when the Scepter was taken away from Judah, and all regal authority was in the
hands of strangers, Luc. 2. 1. The place where he was borne, Bethlehem, Matthew.
2. 5. The place whither he fled into banishment, Egypt, Matthew. 2. 13. The
place where he was brought up, Naezareth, Matthew. 2. 23. The places where he
lived, preached, wrought his miracles, and dyed, Galile, Samaria, Jury, and
Jerusalem, Luc. 13. 24. The place where his body was laid after his death, a
Sepulcher that was in a Garden, wherein never any body was laid before, Ioh.
14. 42. The place whither he ascended, after his resurrection, and where he
sits at the right hand of God, and from whence he shall come to judge both
quick and dead, the highest Heavens, Act. 2. 32. Diverse things from him, all
creatures in their defects and imperfections, Ioh. 1. 23. Things like unto him,
all creatures in their good properties and gifts, Genesis 1. 26. especially
typical persons, as Melchisedecke, Heb. 6. 2. Isaac, Genesis 17. 16. Sampson,
Iud. 16. 30. Jonah, Matthew. 12. 40. and all the high Priests, Heb. 9 9. Typical
things, the brazen Serpent, Ioh. 3. 14. The mercy seat, Hebr. 4. 16. Especially
the Sacraments both of the Old and New Testaments, 1 Cor 10. 4. His
description, Heb. 1. 2. His distribution by his Prophetical, Priestly, and
Kingly offices set down in the greater part of that Epistle; the interpretation
of hi^ Name Jesus a Savior, Matthew. 1. 21. Of his Name Christ anointed, Cant
1. 2. Of his Name Emmanuel God with us, Matthew. 1. 23. His Conjugates, a Savior
bringing salvation to all that are saved, Act. 4. 14. His testimonies of God
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. Of the Angels, Luk 2.
11. Of all the Prophets, Act. 10. 4e. And of his greatest enemies, even the
Devils themselves, Matthew. 8. 23.

The principal parts of the Word of God, are the Law and 2 Cor. 4. 2.
Gospel, both of which are grounded upon the evidence of reason and truth. Law
(says Cicero) is the higest reason: The Cic. l. 1. de. leg.
which if it be true of the wise Laws made by wise men, much more is it true
of the most wise and righteous Laws made by Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
the most wise and righteous God. And verily it is the reason of the Law, that
is the life of the Law, and binds the conscience to yield obedience. For if
the Law be contrary to reason, it binds such as are subject thereunto, only
to endure the penalty thereof, and not to perform the thing therein commanded.
For (as Tertullian says) if a Law will not be tried Tert. in Apol. Quod ad
omnes attinet ab oinnibus debet approbari.
it is justly suspected, and if it being not tried and approved, yet is forced
upon any, it is wicked, seeing no Law does owe to it self the justifying of
the equity thereof, but to them of whom it does require obedience.

And therefore wise and moderate Princes do use to call together a general
assembly of all the States and Commons of their Kingdoms, that upon just
causes and reasons, duly weighed and examined, both hurtful Laws may he
taken away, and wholesome Statutes enacted for the general good of their
Kingdoms and Countries. The which Statutes when they are published, are many
times set forth barely without their reasons, least happily they might grow
into too great a Volume: But it is not so with the Laws of God, especially
with those of the first Table, for they have sundry reasons adjoined to them,
as lights to make manifest the aequity of them, and as Orators, to persuade
obedience thereunto. And verily there was great reason why it should be so,
seeing by the fall of Adam, the true knowledge of them is greatly defaced in
all his posterity. Whereas the Laws of the second Table which concern our
duty toward our neighbor, are for the most part barely delivered, because
they are known by their own light, and that to the most barbarous people that
live on the face of the whole earth. As it may appear by the History of the
West-Indinas, who are reported presently to have approved and embraced the
aequity of those Laws, when they were at the first proposed unto them.

And yet behold how behoouefull it is even for the faithful themselves to have
many reasons set down before their eyes, for the procuring of ready obedience
to be yielded even unto these commandments: in that the Spirit of God has
caused the Prophets and Apostles, being the expounders thereof to set down in
their Canonical writings, many most forcible and effectual argument, for the
procuring of a more ready obedience to the same. And verily experience it self
does show Veritas docendo suadet.
that truth does teach by persuasion, that is, by arguments and reasons, as
being such motives and inducements: as best befitthe reasonable and generous
nature of man. Whereas brute Generosus animus poti us ducitur quam trahitur.
beasts that want reason, are to be compelled by force and violence. And
therefore the Law of God in the original is called Thorah, that is, a Doctrine
or Teaching, for that it does teach and instruct the people of God by the
Divine aequity and reason that is contained therein.

Now if the Law of God which is in part naturally known had need to be further
opened by arguments and reasons, how much more had the doctrine of the Gospel,
which is above the reach of natural reason? St. Austin has delivered certain
reasons why it was just and right, that God should willingly suffer the fall of
the first man; whereof the principal one is the manifestation of his infinite
and endless mercy and goodness in providing that strange and admirable means
of man's recovery which is revealed in the Gospel. We (says St. Austin) Aug.
de corr. and great. ca. 10.
most soundly confess, and most firmly believe, that God, (who created all
things exceeding good, and did foresee that evil things would arise out of
good, and did judge that it did beseem his omnipotent goodness, even out of
the evil to draw that which is good, rather then not to permit evil) did so
ordain the estate of Men and Angels, that in the same he might make manifest.
First, after what sort their free will would work, and then what the benefit
of his own grace could effect, and also how far the severity of his Justice
would extend it self.

In which words, three things are delivered, why God permitted the fall of man.
First, that it might be known that the most excellent among the creatures,
being but in a measure capable of goodness, may fall away from the same:
Whereas the Creator only being infinitely good, cannot but continue so for
ever. Secondly, that it might be made manifest, that there is no evil so
great, but that the Lord can provide in his endless goodness, a remedy for
the same. Thirdly, also that it might be known, that there is no sin
committed by any one whatsoever, but that God in his Justice will punish the
same with all severity. So then God appointed this strange means of man's
recovery, that is revealed in the Gospel, both that he might make manifest the
severity of his Justice, in that rather then the sins of his Elect and chosen
children should escape unpunished, he punished them with that severity upon
their kind suerty, that it made him sweat water and blood: as likewise that he
might make known the unsearchable riches of his endless goodness, in that to
spare us most wicked Traitors and Apostataes, he spared not his own most
dearly beloved Son. That herein we might behold the omnipotent power,
wisdom, and goodness of God, in that out of sin the evil of all evils,
procured by the most wicked suggestion of Satan, to this end that God might be
dishonored in the highest degree, and man utterly overthrown and destroyed,
the Lord has not only drawn unto himself the highest measure of most
admirable glory in his strange Justice, and unspeakable mercy, but also the
greatest happiness to man, by binding him most nearely unto himself, by the
strongest bonds of the greatest love that could be, and in giving him the
greatest assurance of his everlasting salvation. So that in respect thereof, we
may rightly break out with that ancient Father, into this strange exclamation.
O happy fall of Adam, which was the cause of ordayning so strange and admirable
a means for man's recovery.

And how can we think that the truths of the Law and the Gospel, want sound
and sufficient arguments and reasons to justify their holy and heavenly
Doctrines; seeing no Idolaters, Haereticks, or Schismatics, will seem so
absurd and void of judgment, but that they will pretend some show of reason,
for the better coloring of their erroneous untruths. As it is apparent by the
common practice of all the professors of every blind devotion and wicked
superstition. The Idolatrous Jews Ier. 44. 17.
alleged in the defense of their Idolatries: So have done both we and our
Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem: and then had we plenty of victuals, and felt none evil; but
since we left off to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, we have had searcenesse of all things, and have
been consumed by sword and by famine. And at another time, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of Ier. 7. 4. Ier. 18. 18.
the Lord. And again the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel
from the wise, nor the word from the Prophets. So Ioh. 4. 20.
the Schismatic Samaritans alleged for themselves, our Fathers worshipped
in this mount. Like as the Idolatrous Heathen Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 10. c. 32.
Orig. contra Celsum.
used most commonly thus to reason; That which is more ancient and long before
our days cannot be false. And again, has God at the last after so many ages
bethought himself?

And do not the Idolatrous Papists in these times stand upon the like shows?
As the Church, the Church, Christ's Vicar, Peter's Successor, our Fathers, our
Ancienters: O they were good men, and did many good works: and who sees not
what manner of men these new Gospellers are? So the mere Mal. 3 14.
Worldling, Epicure, and Atheist: It is in vain to serve God: for what profit
is it that we have kept his Commandments, and have walked humbly before the
Lord of hosts? Therefore we count the proud blessed: for they that work
wickedness Wisd. 2. 1.
are set up, and they that tempt God, are delivered. And again, our life is
short and tedious, and in the death of a man, there is no recovery, neither was
any known to have returned from the grave: For we are borne at all
peradventure, and we shall be hereafter as if we had never been: for the
breath is as a smoke in the Nostrils, and the words are as a spark raised out
of the heart, which being extinguished, the body is turned into ashes, and the
spirit vanishes as the soft air: Come therefore let us enjoy the pleasures
that are present, etc.

Yea, the very Omnifidian who follows faith, not for conscience, but for
company, who will take no manner of pain to seek out the true faith, by
searching after the grounds thereof, is not thus mad without some show or
shadow of reason. For (says he) I am an unlearned man, and am to follow my
Calling, and to leave the discussing of quaestions of learning to the learned.
I am ready to come to Church, and to do my duty to God, and to live justly and
peaceably with my neighbors. Why? the learned themselves cannot agree about
the points of Faith: and how then shall such an one as I am be able to discern
it, and to find it out?

The truth is, that God wrote his Law in the heart of Adam, and thereby set in
his mind such a light of reason, that he had a right judgment in all things:
But Adam was not contented with this treasure of wisdom, and this measure of
knowledge extending it self to all that was good, but he would needs know
evil also; that he might by experience try what would be the event thereof.
And thereupon he forsook God the Father of light, and betook himself to be
instructed by the Prince of darkness. Whereby it came to pass, that he fell
from truth to falsehood, from faith to fancy, from the knowledge of good to the
knowledge of evil, from the light of Divine logic and reason, to divellish
sophistry. Yea, hereby the wily and crafty Serpent stored him and his posterity
with all manner of captious and deceiuable sophismes, and so enabled him not
only to know, but also colourably to defend all falsehood and untruth.

Against the which so desperate a mischief, the Lord provided a sovereign
remedy, by causing all Divine verities necessary to salvation, lightened and
fortified with all manner of sound arguments and reasons to be delivered to his
Church; first, by word of mouth, and afterward by writing in the books of the
Canonical Scripture, that so, when the enemy should come ready furnished, and
prepared with strong delusion, and with all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness, the desender of the Truth on the contrary side might also be
armed with all manner of weapons offensive and defensive, that so he might be
enabled to stand fast and firm against all the assaults of the enemy, and to
get over him a glorious victory.

And hereof it is that the book of the holy Scripture is called the Bible,
that is, the book of books, or the only book; for that all manner of Divine
wisdom is contained therein. The reasons and argument; set down in this
book, for the clearing and fortifying of all Divine verities, are of such
validity and strength, that therefore this book is called by Saint Hierome, a
reasonable mountain, where we may Hieron. in Hag.
cut down choice and sit timber, for the building up of the house of Wisdom.
Yea, the first rudiments and principles thereof are of such soundness and
solidity, that Saint Peter 1 Pet. 2. 2. (...). 2 Pet. 1. 16. (...). 2 These. 3.
2. Chrysostom. hom. 9. in ep. ad Col.
calls them reasonable and undeceivable milk. In which words he opposes
them to the principles of all erroneous professions, which the same Apostle
terms sophistical fables. For the which cause the maintayners of those
sophistical positions, are called by the Apostle Saint Paul, absurd or
unreasonable men; as the sincere imbracers of the Doctrines of the Scriptures
are termed by Saint Chrysostom reasonable sheep, for that they are able to
discern the voice of their shepherd, from the voice of a stranger. And hereof
also it is that the Apostle Saint Paul calls the service of God prescribed in
this book, a reasonable service. For that (as Tertullian (...). Non exigebat
Deus quae siebant sed propter quod fiebant Tert. l. 3. cont. Marc. (...). Heb.
11. 19.
teaches) God does require therein not so much the work wrought, as the doing
it upon those grounds and reasons, for the which it should be done. One most
singular work of this service of God, being done by one of the most singular
servants of God that ever lived; even the offering up of Isaac by his father
Abraham, was (as the Apostle says) performed by him as a Logi^ian by the help
of Metaphysicall and supernatural reason.

And no marvel (seeing as in the same place the Apostle teaches) (...). D.
Downam. l. 2. c. 7. Of Christian Warfare.
the true Christian faith is grounded upon such a demonstratiue syllogism,
that is able (as Austin expounds the words to convince the judgment, and
after a sort to force the mind to yield thereunto a most settled assent: who^
one of our learned and religious Doctors follows, saying: that faith is
called (...), that is, a manifest demonstration, for that it does not only
show a thing probably, but does convince it with strong arguments, and makes
that clear and manifest, which was otherwise obscure and secret, and therefore
is called a demonstration of things not seen.

And if it be not reason, that does season our service done unto God, and make
it sauory and well tasting unto him, why Leu. 12. 13. Mar. 9. 50. Coloss. 4. 6.
was salt to be added to every sacrifice? and why are all the faithful
commanded to have salt in themselves? Yea, and that their very words should be
poudred with salt? And was it not for this cause that one Eccholius, in the
Primitive Church, when he had fallen away again and again from the true
faith, and reasonable service of God, unto absurd and impious Idolatry, at his
last return cast himself down flat upon the ground before the Congregation,
saying, trample upon me unsavory salt.

That reason should be our guide, not only in such things as concern the
Divine service of God; but also in all our actions whatsoever, Jesus the son
of Siracke teaches, saying, Eccl. 37. 16.
Let reason go before every enterprise, and counsel before every action; Yea,
Aristotle saw thus much by the light of natural reason, that is, that every
virtuous action must be done upon knowledge, and upon good advise had with
right reason, Scienter, consulto, constanter.
and upon a settled purpose to be constant therein. Wherefore there was great
reason that the great and wise G O D should enrich his own book with all
manner of divine and heavenly reason, that so it might be able rightly to guide
all his sincere and faithful servants in the performing of all manner of
virtuous and Religious actions.

And verily it is in that abundant manner so filled and furnished with this
heavenly treasure, that (as Luther says) it were no great matter, if all other
books containing the doctrines of faith, and an holy life, were on a light
fire, if this one book were rightly understood. For there is more Divine
learning, wisdom, and reason in this little book, then in all the large
volumnes that ever were written; Witness, not only the explications of the
divine doctrines hereof made by our blessed (...)

that ^low most plenteously out of the full fountains of the Isa. 12. 3.
wels of life, we ought to drink our full draught, and ever to have them ready
at hand to satisfy our spiritual thirst. Upon Psalm. 1. 2. Josh. 1. 8. Deuteronomy.
6. 7.
the one we may look once and again, and then set them aside until some fit
opportunity: but we must be continually looking upon the other, and never let
them upon any occasion go from us for any long time, or to depart out of our
sight.

It is recorded of Themantes a Painter, that herein consisted the excellency of
his skill, in that out of his draughts, many more things were to be collected,
then were therein fully expressed, even so is it to be seen in the books of
the Prophets and Apostles, which draw out unto us the most lively image of the
most gracious and glorious God, and of his most goodly and beautiful works,
wherein albeit at the first view, and in their outward show there be nothing
offered to our sight, worthy of any great admiration, yet when they are
thoroughly viewed and looked into; it is strange, and almost incredible what
great delight will be raised up by the due view of that profound wisdom, which
does lie hid under a bare (as it seems) and a naked narration. For as it is
reported of a Country called Eleusinia, that it does offer still some new
matter to such Travelers, as come again and again, to review and to revise
it: so is it most true of the Divine Books of the sacred Scriptures, that has
the learned Doctor of the Church of God looked into them never so often, and
so attentively, and Nnnquam ad te accedo quin recedo doctior.
profited also therein never so much, yet if he come to reuise them; yea, if he
still diligently look into them, he may still see and learn more and more.

And therefore it is not without cause that Chrysostom gives this garland
unto the most fruitful Vine of the Divine Scripture, above all other Cedars of
the wood, that it is so full of fruit, that all the grapes thereof can never be
gathered; and that it is so rich a corne-field that all the ears thereof can
never be clean gleaned nor contained within the barnes of our narrow and
straight hearts. So that albeit the most learned and wise be daily occupied in
the study thereof; yet there will somewhat remain to be learned further out of
it; Yea they shall plain^ly find thereby, that most of the things that they
have already learned therein, may be yet again learned better and better.
Wherefore it was not without cause that Gregory Nazianzen 1 Cor. 8. 2.
and Basil (as Ruffinus testifies) did lay aside for thirteen years all
books of sEcular learning, that they might give themselves wholly unto the
study of the Divine Scripture. As Jerome likewise testifies of himself, that
there were full fifteen years past, since any profane Author came into his
hands, and if happily (says he) as we speak to the people, any of their
sayings, come into my mind, we remember it as an old dream coming upon us,
when we are asleep.

Yet let us not here mistake this learned Father, as if he deemed all the wise
sayings of the Philosophers to be mere dotages and dreams: seeing all truths
in Philosophy came from the same Author, from whom do proceed all truths in
Theology, Ve^o nil verius.
and are all of the like verity, albeit they are not of the same authority.
Wherefore the depositions of profane Authors are not lightly to be rejected,
and set at naught, when they bear witness to the truths in Divinity; seeing
our blessed Savior would not have such inhibited to cast out devils Mar. 9. 39.
in his Name, which yet did not follow him as his own disciples did.

For as in matters of Controversy, where truth is to be determined by men's
oaths; if there be such a number of deponents as the Law requires, it is
sufficient, albeit it be not amiss if there be more: even so in the decision
of questions that are divine, it is sufficient if the truth be confirmed by
evident testimonies and reasons taken out of the vn-erring book of God, yet if
testimonies also and reasons taken out of profane Authors bearing witness to
the same truths be added to the former, it is not prejudicial but beneficial
to the cause. For it is no disgrace to the Divine truth in Theology, the
sovereign Lady and Queen of all Sciences to have the truths of all humane
arts to attend upon her. Nay rather it is an evident demonstration of her true
Nobility: seeing she is waited upon with such a Princely train. Nay, her
certain truths cannot be fully opened, neither all the truths of any other
Science without some measure of knowledge in them all: For there is among (...).
them an (...), and such a strong link of assinity, the principles and grounds
of the one, lightning and strengthening the rules of the other, that no
perfection of knowledge can be had in any one of them without some measure of
knowledge in all.

Wherefore it is not to be seared that the principles and precepts of humane
arts, will thwart the principles and precepts of sacred Theology, seeing they
are in no wise contrary, the one to the other, no not in those very positions,
which yet seem to carry a show of contrariety. As for example. Of nothing,
nothing Ex nihilo nohil fit. Mundus sactus est e^nihilo. A priuatione ad
hab^tum non sit regressio. Mortui resurgent.
can be made (viz. by any limited and finite power) is not contrary to this.
The world was made of nothing (viz. by the infinite and illimited power of God.
So there is no recovery from death to life (viz. by any natural or ordinary
means) is not contrary to this the dead shall all rise (viz. by the
supernatural power of God.) And so in diverse other of the like kind. For does
not all reason, even in Philosophy acknowledge the undoubted, truth of this
principal in Divinity, viz. that which is impossible with man, is possible
with God, unto who^ nothing is impossible, and therefore that which cannot be
brought to pass by any natural power, may be effected by a supernatural. And
does not also all reason teach, that every truth agrees Verum vero consona^.
with every truth, and is contrary only to falsehood and untruth.

And therefore seeing every true argument, and reason does agree with that
whereof it is an argument and reason, and joined with it, makes a true
proposition, no true reason in any wise can be contrary unto truth. Why? does
not reason, experience, and Scripture also teach, that one fountain cannot
Iac. 3. 11.
send forth sweet water and bitter? And therefore seeing all natural reason,
as well as Scripture from God the Creator of nature, and the reuealer of the
Scripture, they cannot be contrary one to the other; unless that God may be
contrary to himself. Scripture indeed is contrary to the judgment of
corrupted nature, and may be new and strange to nature her self in her
integrity, but it can in no means be contrary thereunto. Aug de Ciuit. Dei l.
22. c. 1.
unto. So Saint Austin, truth was persuaded new to custom but not contrary to
reason. Nay, there is admirable consent and harmony, as a learned Author
testifies, between the natural Amand. Pol. lib. 2 Log. fol. 213.
parefactions of God and the sup^rnaturall: for from God is both reason and
Scripture; and reason being obs^ured by sin, and desiled with filthy errors,
the Spirit of God by the Scripture, does lighten again and free her from her
former aberrations. So Saint Ambrose, the light of nature being Am de suga
se^uli cap. 3.
dimmed, was to be cleared by the Law. To whom accords Saint Cyrill; The law
was given that thereby the light that Cyrill. in Ioh. l. 1. c. 11.
was in us should be increased. Wherefore let no reasonable man dispute against
reason, nor learned man against humane learning, unless he will endanger the
reputation of his reason and of his learning also.

A stranger which was not of the kindred of Israel, having shaven her self,
and cut of the hair of her eyebrows, and of her head, and having performed
all other things ordained in the Law to that purpose, might be joined to the
people of God, and be admitted into the Sanctuary: So Phis^osophy and humane
learning by her corrupt Doctrines, a stranger to the service of God, being
pruned from them by the sharp book of the Scripture, may yield some good
timber to the Lords Spiritual build^rs, for the rearing up and also for the
beautifying of the Spiritual House and Temple of God. Truth it is, that the
errors in Philosophy being wrongfully opposed against the truths in Theology,
and stiffly and obstinately maintained and defended, have made some of the
Philosophers the Partriarches of Haeretickes: and yet as true it is that the
truths thereof being diligently sought out by the studious, have had such as
have bin best instructed therein, the chiefest Patrons of all Divine verities,
and the strongest impugners of all Heathenish and Haereticall pranities. And
hereof it is that in all well-ordered Schools and Universities, young Scholars
are first trained up in the knowledge of the tongues and Arts, before they be
admitted to be students in Divinity.

And does not experience it self make this manifest, that the siner the
natural wit of any student is, and the more it is ripened with a greater
measure of all manner of humane learning, the fitter such an one is to
understand the heavenly doctrines of the divine Scriptures, and to diue into
the profundity of the mysteries of Faith. Po. (as S. Austin says) grace does
not abolish Aug. in Ps. 102.
nature, but make it perfect: neither does nature reject but embrace grace,
Yea, (as Tertullian truly teaches) God sent first nature to be our
Schoole-mistris, being afterward to send prophecy, that thou being first the
disciple of nature might afterward be more easily induced to believe
prophecy. For the book of Nature is as well the Lords book as the book of
Scriptures, and the truths written in the one, are as well the Lords truths,
as they that are written in the other. Neither is there (as Nazianzene says)
any knowledge of learning to be despised, seeing all Science whatsoever is in
the nature of good things.

Rather those that despise it, we are to account sluggish and clownish, who
would be glad that all were ignorant, that so their own ignorance might not be
espied. Verily all such persons are like the Painter, who having drawn out the
picture of Cocks, after an unseemly and evil favored fashion, set his Boy to
keep away all living Cocks from his shop, least by their coming near, his
rudeness and unskillfulness might more evidently appear. Wherefore it may
well beseem the savage Sarazons and the barbarous Turks, to believe Lud. viv.
l. 1. de veritate Religionis Christian.
grossly in their false Prophet Mahomet, and to have no learning, and to be
unable to discourse of any point of their religion, and well may the sword be
the final resolution of their sottish Alcharon, an argument concluding, in
Ferio, and taken out of the Butchers Shambles, as best beseeming such beastly
blood-suckers. And let it also agree to Henry Nicholas Henry Nicholas in the
Gospel of the Kingdom. cap. 23. scrip. ^arij.
Father of the Familists, to glory in the name of an unlearned man, and in a
scoff to term the skillful in the Scriptures, Scripture-wife, or
Scripture-men, and to warn his Scholars to beware of such. And let it agree
to wicked Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, and to fall away from God, to
make the basest of the people being unlettered persons to be his Priests, as
being in truth fitter guides to lead into all superstition and Idolatry, then
unto the right worship and service of God.

So let it agree to the Priests and Prelates of the dark kingdom of
Antichrist, to be like my Lord of Dunkelden, who knew neither old nor new Law;
and to their Doctors which taught, that the Lords Prayer might be as well to the
Virgin Mary as unto Christ; and to one of the Founders of their superstitious
orders: viz. to Friar Francis, who preached to the birds; yea, to the Popes
themselves, among whom some were so unlettered, (as Alphonsus says) that they
knew not Alphon. de castra lib. 1. ca 4 cont. hares.
the very grounds of the Grammar. And let these men be their supreme judges in
all controversies, who although they go awry in the premises, yet they cannot
err in the conclusion. For belike, albeit they take their aim never so much
amiss, and stand clean contrary to shoot at the mark, yet they cannot choose
but hit the white. And although they go never so contrary a way all the day
long, yet such admirable and unerring guides they are, that at night they are
still right, and at the place where they should be.

But the Lord requires of all such as should be pastors and feeders of his
slocke, and instructers and teachers of his people, that they be not young
nouices, and raw scholars, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
but ancient Students, and well grounded Divines; even such as are able to
teach truth and convince error: they must be learned Scribes in the Kingdom
of God, able to bring out of their treasury both new and old. Yea, it is very
fit and convenient that they have skill in profane learning, that they may
wound the enemy with his own weapon, and cut off Goliahs head with his own
sword, and build up the Temple of God with some stuff taken out of the ruins
of Babylon: For (as Saint Austin says) it is no small praise and commendation,
to Aug. de doct. Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 40.
rob the Egyptians of their sumptuous vestments, and of their silver and gold;
and to bestow the same things upon the adorning of the Lords Tabernacle, which
they abused by riot and pride, and to the beautifying of the Temples of their
false gods.

And verily, Moses being learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, was
thereby made mighty in words and deeds, or at the least was not a little helped
thereby in all his great and weighty affairs. As Daniel being instructed in
all wisdom, Dan. 1. 17.
and being taught the tongue and learning of the Caldeans, became ten times
wiser than all the Inchanters and Astrologians of Babylon, and was also
strengthened and stablished in the fear and service of the true God, more than
any other that lived in his time. And did not our Savior Christ give to his
Apostles, the first Preachers and Publishers of his Gospel in all the world,
by the immediate work of his Spirit, Act. 4. 13.
(for they were by education simple and unlearned) such a Luke 21. 15.
mouth and wisdom, that all their adversaries were not able to resist? And did
he not also give to the first renewers and reuiuers of the Gospel in these
latter days, such knowledge in the tongues, and in all manner of Divine and
humane learning, by blessing their great labors and pains, in the diligent
using of the means for the obtaining thereof, that thereby they became most
notable lights throughout all the Countries and Kingdoms of Christendom? For
they which have the greatest light in themselves, are the fittest persons to
lighten others; and they that best apprehend the grounds and reasons of all
humane and divine verities, can best inform and confirm others in all manner
of doctrines, both humane and divine. As it may appear by the parable of the
Talents, where Matthew. 25. 16.
it is assumed, that he that received five Talents, went and occupied with
them, and gained other five, as he that received two gained other two.

And yet it may not be denied, but that it may come to pass, that he that has
the meaner gifts, may do the more good, and sometimes persuade with more
fruit. As in the Council of Nice, when all the learned Bishops could not Ruff.
hist. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 3.
prevail with the Philosopher with all their pithy Orations and persuasions;
an unlettered Layike with a plain Narration, caused him to give over his
former errors, and to yield his assent to the mysteries of faith. But this was
an extraordinary Zozo. li. 1. ca. 13
work of the Spirit of God, opening the understanding of the Philosopher at
the plain declaration of the unlettered person, and leaving him before in his
natural blindness and infidelity all the time that the learned Bishops
reasoned with him. For as all the lights in the world cannot direct us in our
way, if we our selves be blind and want our sight; or as all the medicines in
the world cannot restore health, if that our diseased stomachs will not
receive them so the light of Gods word, be it never so clearly and never so
directly set before us, cannot guide us to God as long as we remain in our
natural blindness, and shut our eyes against the same. Neither can all the
balm of Gilead cure our spiritual Iere. 8. 22.
sores, if that we will not endure to have it applied unto them.

All means are nothing be they never so good, without the special blessing of
God; as on the contrary side, when it 1 Cor. 3. 7.
shall please God to bless the means, they shall prevail be they never so
mean. And verily, as in bodily wars it is as easy with God to save with few
as with many (albeit ordinarily the strongest army, and the best furnished,
wins the field and gets the victory) so in our spiritual warfare against
infidelity, superst^ion and idolatry; men of mean gifts by the Lords special
blessing may more prevail, then such as are endued with greater graces. And
yet as the better means are the better blessings of God, so ordinarily by his
disposition and providence, they do obtain the better effect. As it is
manifest in the Apostles, who for that they were endued with the greatest
measure of all divine and heavenly wisdom, converted more to the faith of
Christ then any other of their successors.

As did likewise those principal men, which were in these last days raised up
by God to be the reuiuers of his gracious Gospel, spread abroad in a short
time the bright beams thereof in many countries of this West and North parts
of the world. Daniel and his fellows may be better nourished with course
poulse, then some other with a good portion of finer food, brought unto them
from the Kings own table: and so some persons may be better edified with a
plain declaration of truth, lightened with one or two testimonies out of the
word of God, then by a great cloud of the same witnesses, and by many strong
and forcible demonstrations; but the cause hereof, is either in the weakness
of the spiritual stomach, unto the which milk does better agree then strong
meat: and in the dimnesse of the spiritual eye, which can see better with a
little light then with a great, or in the extraordinary work of God. For
ordinarily, the greater number and the bigger lights do give the greater and
bigger light, as the better and stronger food does yield the better and
stronger nourishment.

Wherefore the Preachers of the word of God being the Lords stewards, and the
disposers of the mysteries of God, who are therefore set over the Lords house,
that they should give to every one their portion of food in due season: had
need to provide good store of spiritual grain to be laid up before hand in
the baines of their enlarged hearts, that therewith they may feed the Lords
people to the full. As likewise for that they are the Lords Captains to
marshall his bands and companies against the Lords and their own enemies, they
ought to be furnished with all manner of spiritual armor, that so they may be
able to furnish other. And verily, for any one to take upon him to discourse
and reason without sound and apt reasons, and to argue without substantial and
sufficient arguments, is to take upon him to feed without food, to fight
without weapon, to lighten a thing without light, and to build without mortar,
timber, and stone.

Wherefore the most wise God has most prudently provided for the most
plentiful instruction both of Priest and people, not only by setting down in
his two books of nature and grace, all doctrines necessary for their
salvation, with great variety of all manner of reasons and arguments, for the
better clearing and confirming of the same; but also by often repeating and
inculcating of them: yea, by urging them again and again; he has given them
a plain admonition, that they should be most diligent to learn those thing,
over again and again, which he has been so careful so often to teach.
Verily, if we were such as we should be, it should be sufficient for us, that
the Lord did barely and only in the book of the Canonical Scriptures,
deliver the several doctrines of all divine vereties, giving testimony to each
of them but once by the pen of one of his unerring Secretaries; seeing when God
speaks any thing, albeit it be but once, we ought Chrysostom. aduersus
vituperatores monasticae vitae.
to receive it with all assurance, as if it had been spoken often times. For
although when humane testimonies are required, in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word must be established, and to him that brings not a
sufficient number 1 Timothy 6. 19.
of deponents, it is by strict law, as if he had brought none: yet for that God
is true and cannot lie, nor bear witness to any falsehood or untruth, or
command any thing that is unrighteous or unjust; therefore in his word which is
the infallible foundation of truth, if he give testimony to any thing but once
under the hand of one of his faithful registers, it is as sufficient, as if he
had testified the same by them all.

For if Pythagoras his he said it, was enough to his scholars, for that he was
a most learned and wise Philosopher: and the Ipse dixit.
Centurions come, go, and do this, was sufficient to his soldiers Matthew. 8.
9.
and servants, for that he was a most conscionable Commander: yea, if the Kings
witness my self, be a full warrant Test meipso.
to all his grants, because of his supereminent power and authority; then much
more the he said it of the most high God ought to be sufficient to his
disciples, and all that be of his school; and the come, go, and do this of
the most righteous Commander and Judge of the whole world, ought to be enough
to work a most ready and speedy obedience in all his true and faithful
servants: and the witness my self of the King of kings, and Lord of lords
ought to be taken as a most full warrant to all his grants, by all his loyal
and faithful subjects.

Wherefore herein we may behold the strange proceeding of our most great and
glorious God, remitting after a sort his own right, and submitting himself in
his great goodness to our weakness, and in his high and endless wisdom
providing a gracious remedy for our infirmity. For because we are blind to
conceive, and slow to believe, and hard to learn, and ready to forget the holy
mysteries of piety and godliness: therefore the Lord has caused not only
doctrines, and reasons and arguments to be set down at once in the book of
the divine Scriptures, but he has made them to be reitterated again and
again, that thereby they may become lights to our understanding, stays to our
faith, and helps to our frail and weak memory. So that albeit we are by
nature never so dull and blockish, yet the same lessons being often repeated,
and opened, and cleared again and again, we shall be thereby enabled by Gods
blessing, sufficiently to conceive, and faithfully keep them in good
remembrance. Pharaohs dreams were Genesis 41. 32.
doubled unto him, that the thing opened therein might get of him the better
credit, so the instructions of faith, and an holy life are doubled and trebled
in holy Scripture, that they might procure of us a fuller faith. So and so good
is our gracious God unto us, which are so and so unworthy of the least of his
mercies, that as he has stored the earth with great variety of bodily food and
physic, for the preserving and recovering of the life and health of our
bodies; so he has provided in the Scriptures great abundance of spiritual
food and physic for the maintenance and restitution of the life and health of
our souls.

One kind of bodily food, and one kind of dressing does not savor alike to
every stomach, and therefore God has provided variety of both: so one motive
to faith and repentance, nor the delivery thereof after one manner does fit
every ones spiritual taste and stomach, therefore has the Lord ordained
great abundance of both. Yea, as the Lord gave sundry signs and wonders to be
done by the hands of his servant Moses before the eyes of the children of
Israel, that thereby they Exodus 4. 8.
might understand that he was called and sent of God to be their deliverer out
of the bondage of Egypt, and that to this very end and purpose, that if they
would not believe nor obey the voice of the first sign, yet they might be
induced thereto either by the second or the third: So does the Lord furnish the
Preachers of the Gospel, whom he has appointed to be ministers of his mercy,
for the deliverance of his people out of the spiritual captivity of sin and
Satan, with great variety of forcible and powerful motives and persuasions to
repentance and faith, that if some of the same will not work and prevail with
them, yet other may.

For the which purpose also, he has caused the mysteries of godliness to be
set down, not only in common and usual phrases, but also in Metaphores and
Allegories, and has lightened them with similitudes and resemblances, apparent
and manifest to the most simple. So the Apostle teaches, that the 1 Cor 15 36.
dead shall rise to life and glory by the resemblance of seed, that after a
sort rotteth and death in the ground, before it springs up and grows to
maturity and ripeness. So elsewhere he proves the unprofitableness of
speaking in an unknown 1 Cor. 14. 1.
tongue, by the trumpet; which if it give an uncertain sound, none shall be
prepared to the war, and by some other the like things. So he likewise
proves, that the faithful ought not to seek for life and salvation by the
works of the Law, seeing Gal. 3. 15.
God has couenanted to give it to them in Christ Jesus: seeing to a man's
covenant or testament, when it is once made, nothing ought to be added or
detracted from the same; much less to the Covenant of God. So our Savior
teaches, that they are Matthew. 13. 23.
the holy doctrines of his good and gracious Word, that causes our hearts to
be good and gracious, even as it is pure and good feed, that makes the ground
bring forth pure and good fruit. And verily, our blessed Savior did illustrate
with parables all Matthew. 13. 34
his divine instructions which he gave unto the people, as being the best
means to bring them to the knowledge of the truth, and to their everlasting
salvation, which is procured thereby. For (as our Savior himself speaking
thereof, says) if I teach John 3.
you earthly things (that is, heavenly doctrines by earthly similitudes) and ye
believe not, how should ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? that is,
after an high and heavenly manner.

It is impossible (says Saint Denis) that the divine beam Dio^. de coeles.
hierar. l. 1. cap. 1.
should shine unto us, but under the variety of sacred couerings, for parables
are couerings until they be unfolded and expounded, but being expounded and
laid open, they make manifest and lay open unto us spiritual things: Christ
(says Chrsostome) did set out his doctrine by parables, that he might Chrysostom.
in Mat. hom 45. and in Ioh. hom. 33.
speak more significantly, and set it plainer before our eyes; for by the
resemblance of familiar things the mind is more stirred up, and does apprehend
the thing the better, being set forth as it were in a picture. This kind of
opening things is most pleasing, and sticks faster; for a similitude or
relemblance (if it be apt or sit) does show forth much wisdom, Yea, no man
doubts (as says Saint Austine) but by parables Aug. de doct. Christiana lib.
2. cap. 6.
things are more readily learned, and being sought out with some difficulty,
are the more acceptable when they are found. Wherefore our blessed Savior and
his Apostles used often parables and resemblances taken from earthly things,
for the better manifesting of their heavenly doctrines, and other like
arguments also, taken out of the book of nature, well known to every
intelligent man, that is found and entire in his outward senses. As when our
blessed Savior appeared to his Disciples after his resurrection, and they
supposed that they had seen a spirit, our Savior appealeth to the outward
senses, saying, handle me and see me, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as
ye see me to have. And when Thomas would Luke 24. 39.
not yet believe the testimony of his fellow Apostles, concerning the
resurrection of Christ; when he appeared unto them again, he spoke unto Thomas
saying, put thy finger here and see my hands, and stretch forth thy hand and
put it into my side, and be not faithless but believe: The which thing when
John 20. 28.
Thomas had done, he was so convinced even by the censure of his outward
senses, that immediately he cries out saying, my Lord and my God.

So the Apostle Saint Paul to convince the idolatrous Athenians of error for
the worshipping of their gods, with material images, alleges this natural
reason, taken out of one of their Act. 17. 29.
own heathenish Poets; saying, Seeing we are the generation of God, resembling
God by our immortal sp^rits, which cannot be resembled by any material image,
much less can the immortal and incorruptible God be resembled by any such
means. So among the Corinthians, when there was an abuse 1 Cor. 11. 14.
in some of them in wearing long hair, the Apostle to redress the same,
appealeth to the judgment of nature it self; saying, What, does not nature it
self teach you, that it is a shame for a man to have long hair? So our
blessed Savior, to persuade his Disciples to do good to their very enemies,
says, that nature does teach the Gentiles themselves to be good to their
friends, and that Christians being advanced above them by Matthew. 5. 45.
grace, should learn thereby to do good to their enemies; especially seeing
that sense and experience did plainly teach them, that God makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and his rain to fall on the just and
unjust. Wherefore errors may be confuted, and faith and piety persuaded, not
only by arguments taken out of the book of grace, but also out of the book
of nature. For neither sense nor reason, are contrary to religion, or enemies
to faith; nay rather right reason is a most fast friend to faith, and a most
valiant Champion for true Religion.

But yet here this most reasonable caution must be added, that when question is
of the extraordinary and supernatural works of God, we take not upon v^ to
measure them with the short line of natural reason, seeing that is not able to
reach unto the height, or to found the depth thereof. And therefore Sarah and
Zachary cannot be excused, in that when a child Genesis 18. 11.
was promi^ed to each of them by the Lord almighty at that time, when by the
course of nature it was unlikely, if not impossible Luke 1. 18.
that they should have had any; they cast their eyes upon the disabled power of
nature, and not upon the almighty power of God, and thereby offended through
unbelief. Whereas the blessed Virgin Mary in a case more improbable, cast her
eyes upon the power of the promiser, and so sanctified Luke 1. 49.
his holy name. As Abraham also in the former case, doubting not through
unbelief, but resting fully assured that he that promised him a child would
and could perform it, glorified God above that hope that nature could yield,
but under that hope that God which is supernatural, is able to satisfy Romans
4. 19.
to the full. Wherefore it is not impossible by reason, to ascend above reason,
and by the principles of an higher science, to have that selfsame thing
confirmed for a truth, which by the grounds of an inferior Art cannot be
proved.

Neither is faith it self then most commendable, when she has fewest reasons
to assist her, for then the Colliers faith were(...)

^taine and an undoubted a truth, that if any instance may be given against
the same in any singular person that lived under the Synagogue, as in Abraham,
Moses, David, and the like, we may be bold to stand to this resolution, that if
in these persons there was any eminency of faith above that which is to be
found in such as live under the Gospel, the cause thereof was in the
extraordinary working of the Spirit of God, which enabled them to use more
diligence in their weaker means, and thereby advanced them to greater gifts.

Now if against these things which have been delivered, it be objected, that
faith does not produce her actions by means of discourse, but by the immediate
operation and revelation of the Spirit of God: albeit, this has been most
abundantly confuted in all the former part of this Chapter: yet if it were not
so, this one reason is fully sufficient to convince the same. For where is
faith is that to the mind, which the eye is to the body, then it follows,
that as the eye does not apprehend his object immediately, but as it is made
conspicuous by means of some bodily light: so faith which is the sight of the
soul, does not apprehend truth, which is her general object, unless it be
made manifest by the light of reason, and means of discourse. The which is so
sure and certain a truth, that the Apostles themselves who had the knowledge
of all divine and humane verities, necessary for such as should be teachers and
instructers of the whole world; given unto them, not by their own labors and
studdy, but by the immediate revelation of the Spirit of God, yet had not this
their knowledge without discourse. As it is manifest by manner of handling and
deciding the question that was brought unto them; which was, whether the works
of the Law were to be joined with faith in Christ, in the case of justification
and salvation: For it is recorded, that after the question had been debated
among them with great disputation and discourse, the Apostle Saint Peter
determined the same, and that not without the allegation Act. 15. 7.
of many arguments and reasons. As Saint James caused some clauses to be added
thereto, but not without the producing of just grounds for the same. So when
the people of God were to be carried into captivity among the heathen, how did
the Lord, foreseeing that they should be intised to Idolatry, strengthen them
in the Faith and Service of the true God, and arm them against all contrary
persuasions, but by delivering unto them such reasons, as whereby they might be
fully persuaded, that their own God was the only true God, Ier. 10. 11.
and that the gods of the Heathen were but titularie gods, that Isa. 41. 21.
is, gods in name, and not in deed.

It is a truth confessed even by some of the chief pillars of the Church of
Rome, that all the greatest mysteries of Faith that are necessary to salvation,
are plainly set down in the Canonical Scriptures. Now I would demand whether
these doctrines there delivered, are treated and discoursed of there verbally,
and in bare words only, or really with sufficient weight of sound reason? And
verily how can any one reason without reason, and discourse without discourse.

That there is but one true God, even the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,
the Prophets Isay, and Jeremy prove by most sound and sufficient arguments in
the places cited a little before: That this one God is distinguished into three
persons, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; why may it not be both
justified and illustrated and made evident by sound and sufficient arguments
and reasons? For whereas God is essentially good, yea goodness it self
(seeing it is the property of that which is good to communicate it self to
other) why Bonum est sui communicativum. Pro. 8. 22. Ioh. 5. 26. Ioh 16. 15.
Ioh 15. 26.
may it not be believed as an undoubted truth, that God the Father gave his
aeternall essence to God the Son, begotten of him before all worlds? and that
God the Father and the Son, gave their aeternall essence to God the Holy
Ghost, proceeding from them both from all aeternity? Has God given to some of
his mortal creatures, power to beget things of the same essence and substance
with themselves? And may not the aeternall God beget an aeternall Son of the
very selfsame essence and substance with himself? And has God given to some
other of his creatures, as to grain of all sorts this power, that things of
the same essence and substance do proceed from them? And has not the
aeternall Father and the Son power, that an aeternall Spirit of the same
essence and substance should proceed from them both from all aeternity? Is not
this world with the creatures therein contained, a most lively glass, wherein
the most glorious Creator is shadowed out unto us? And every good thing that
has a real and an absolute being in the creature, has it not a real
existence in God? For God is most absolutely and fully perfect; and therefore
the perfection of all good things is in God in the highest degree of absolute
and full perfection.

And therefore seeing that paternitie, and siliation, and procession are good
things in the creature; why may they not rightly be said to be in God, in whom
is the fullness of all good things? Of all the creatures of this inferior
world, the soul of man is most principal, as the Sun is the chiefest of all
those goodly lights, that are planted above in the heavenly spheres: and
therefore they are the fittest among all the noble creatures, in some sort to
resemble unto us the glorious Trin^tie.

The reasonable soul of man, has a reasonable substance, which begets a
reasonable understanding, from which proceeds a reasonable will, and yet this
is but one soul: So Anima mundi est Deus.
God the soul of the world, and the life of all things, being aeternall begat
his aeternall understanding and wisdom before all worlds: from whom
proceeds from all aeternity the holy Spirit, with whom, and by whom, they
will and work all things; and this aeternall soul, wisdom, and will, is but
one God. So in the Sun there is a most singular pure substance, and a most
excellent luster and brightness begotten thereof, and residing in the same,
and glorious beams issuing from both: So in the most glorious Deity we may
behold God the Father, the Father of Light,; God the Son the Iac. 1. 17.
brightness of his Fathers glory: God the Holy Ghost by whose beams the Light
of the Gospel is made manifest Heb 1 3.
unto us: and yet this Father of Light, this brightness of his Fathers glory,
and this glorious beam issuing out of both, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
is but one and the selfsame God.

This even the greatest mystery of our Christian profession, was in part known
unto very Heathens themselves. For they auerred that Minerua the Goddess of
Wisdom was begotten of their great God Jupiter, without the help of Juno,
which came in all likelihood from this undoubted truth, that the second person
of the Trinity, the essential wisdom of God was begotten of the true
Jehovah, before all worlds.

Now, if any one being of a mo^e metaphysicall apprehension, desires to see
concerning that high mystery, other reasons that are more metaphysicall, let
him repair to the Lord of Plessis, in his books of the truth of Christian
Religion, and Zegedine in his Common places, and to Reckerman in his Systema
Theologicum. But if any one on the contrary side, judge that these few are too
many, I would request him to pardon me herein, seeing, if I had produced no
reasons for the opening of this truth; I had failed in the chief point of this
Treati^e, wherein is avouched, that all quaestions, humane and divine, may be
cleared and justified with arguments and reasons: And that the truth of this
assertion may yet further appear; let us proceed to the quaestion concerning
the resurrection of the dead, which is also supernatural, and take a view how
by great variety of arguments and reasons, the Spirit of God does open the same
in the Divine Scriptures.

The Doctrine of the Resurrection, is strange, absurd, and almost, yea,
altogether incredible in the judgment of the natural man; but most wise and
reasonable unto the Christian. Act. 17. 18.
The Apostle Saint Paul, in the fifteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, proves the same by many arguments Fides Christianorum resurrectio
mortuorum.
and reasons. As first, Christ is rison from the dead; therefore there is a
Resurrection.

Now that Christ is risen, he proves it; first, for that his Psalm. 16. 10.
Romans 9. 6.
resurrection was fore-tolde in the word of God, the which that it should not
take effect, it was impossible. Secondly, he proves it by the testimony of
those that saw and handled his wounds that were made in his body, both before
and after his death. Thirdly, he proves it by the effect of Christ's sufferings
and death, which was a full satisfaction for sin, and an abolishing of death,
and therefore an introduction of a Resurrection. For (...)

^dent that holy Scripture given by divine inspiration, is able by such
sufficient arguments and reasons in all the mysteries of piety and godliness,
to teach truth, and to convince error; 2 Timothy 3. 15.
that the man of God may be made thereby wise to salvation by faith in Christ,
that is, that the sincere and sound Christian, the true servant of God may
obtain a wise faith, and so may be saved. Yea, that a professor of any
Religion should voluntarily confess that the points of his profession cannot
be justified by reason, but must be taken for truths, without such proofs as
be without exception, argues a foolish and a blind sophister, rather then a
wise and a sound discourser; for to require and beg that things most
controversed and wholly doubted of should be allowed of by the adversary, and
taken Petitio principij.
for undoubted truths, is no better then to use a gross sophistical fallacy.

It is reported, profane Gallen thus to have censured our great Prophet Moses,
This man says many things, but proves nothing. As the Atheists of these our
last and worst times, have been bold to avouch that our Christian Faith is
void of all wisdom and reason. For so they avouch, that Ratio suadet, fides
fallet, credere quam fidere prudens mallet.

But the truth is, that there is more sound and weighty reason in the very
three first Chapters of the first book of Moses, then in all Gallen's large
volumnes; as there is more true wisdom and reason in the doctrines of the
Christian Faith, set down in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, then all
the Atheists; yea, then all the very wisest men in the whole world, are able to
apprehend; So that we may most truly avouch of our Christian Faith,

Ratio suadet, fides compellet; fidere
quam vivere prudens vellet.
Sound reason does persuade,
but true Faith will compel;
To such as hold faith fast,
lost life, for it is well.
As it is evident in many thousand Martyrs, who by the most powerful and
prevailing reasons of the Gospel, being settled in the Faith, willingly endured
the loss of their temporal goods and lives in defense of their holy and
Christian profession.

Wherefore to conclude this quaestion, seeing whatsoever things were written
afore-time were written for our learning Romans 15. 4. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
and are revealed for us and for our children for ever, all wise hearted
Christians may hence learn, not only to search out the bare and naked
Doctrines of faith and godliness, but also the reasons whereon they are
grounded. For they must not be still babes, feeding upon milk, and standing in
need to be Heb. 5. 12.
taught the principles of the Catechism, but they must desire to be able to
receive meat meet for men, and to digest strong food. They must not be still
as Lambs, wading in Ezekiel 47. 5. Psa. 119. 129.
the shallow places of the River of the water of Life, but they must be as
Elephants endeavoring to diue into the deepest profundities thereof, that so
they may be ravished with the wonders of Gods Law. For we may see an end of all
perfection, but the Lords Commandments are exceeding large.

For albeit we happily may so fully apprehend the learned discourses, that be
made by humane Authors, that we may write nil ultra, there is nothing in them
that we have not found out, yet when we have labored to the uttermost of our
power, and that all the days of our lives, to find out the right sense of
every sentence of holy Scripture, we may sit down in the end, and write plus
ultra, that is, that there is a far deeper Ps. 119. 96.
profundity therein, then the short Cables of our weak wits are any way able
to reach to the bottom thereof.

Yea, if it were possible that we had gained so much knowledge, as the Apostle
had, which was rapt up into the third heaven, Phil. 3. 8.
yet if we will follow him, we must labor still to know Christ, and the virtue
of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, that thereby we may
be more and more conformable unto his death. For unto the fullness thereof, we
have not as yet attained, neither are we already perfect. And therefore we must
after a sort forget that which is past, and endeavor our selves to that which
is before, and follow hard toward the mark, that at the last, even in the
last end of our lives we may apprehend that, for whose sake we our selves were
apprehended of Christ Jesus. And thus have we delivered the means whereby Faith
is begotten and confirmed, now we are to proceed to the definition and
description thereof.

CHAP. IIII.
Saving Faith is Divine wisdom, or a certain knowledge and a settled assent,
and adhaerence to all Divine verities necessary to salvation, and especially to
the covenant of grace, as to the means of our highest happiness, and our
chiefest good.

FAith (says the Apostle) is the full assurance of our understanding Col. 2. 2.
and knowledge in the mystery of God even the Father, and of Christ, which
brings with it all spiritual riches, and therefore causes the faithful to
esteem of it, as of the means of their highest happiness and chiefest good.

And again, Faith is such an excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord,
that makes the faithful to esteem all other things as dung in respect
thereof, which gives them such an assurance of their justification and
glorification through Christ, Phil. 3. 8.
that the high price thereof is the mark that they aim at in all their
endeavors.

This precious Faith (as Saint Peter calls it) has two 2 Pet. 1. 1.
singular effects issuing out of the same, which are, sanctification began in
this life, and an assurance of a full glorification in the life to come, The
which because they are the certain signs and marks of a true faith;
therefore the Apostle in diverse places does describe it by the same. True Faith
(says the Apostle) is a gift proper to Gods Elect, consisting in such Tit. 1.
1.
a knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness. And that we may
know by what divine truth in particular faith breeds godliness, the Apostle
has set it down elsewhere, saying. We all behold as in a mirror, the glory
of the 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Lord with open face, and are changed into the same image from glory to glory,
as by the Spirit of the Lord. We all (says he) that are endued with the eye of
faith, behold in Christ the mirror and miracle of the Lords matchless mercy,
the glory of Gods goodness and love, he being never more glorious then in the
same; with open face, in respect of the revelation thereof, made in former
times under obscure types and shadows, and by this clear fight of the Lords
most glorious love in Christ, we are renewed into his image in righteousness
and true holiness, according as it pleases the Lord to begin the same by his
Spirit, and to enlarge it also.

Now concerning the other effect of faith, the Apostle describes true faith by
it also, saying, faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen. That is, faith is such a gracious gift, as enableth the
faithful evidently to behold the invisible things of God, and especially his
unspeakable goodness and love; and gives them also, in him a sure
groundwork for the assurance of their full glorification, which as yet they
enjoy but in hope. Now in this Chapter we are to entreat of the definition of
faith, and of the singular effects, in the two next following.

Assent does follow apprehension, and therefore as a slight and a light
apprehension begets opinion, which is an unsettled and an unstable assent:
so a sure and certain assent of the mysteries of godliness ingendereth faith;
that is, a resolute and settled persuasion. For a settled assent proceeding
from a well grounded knowledge, is all one with saving faith, and divine
wisdom. As it may appear in that when the Word of God is said either
severally, to give the knowledge of salvation to the Lords people, Luke 1. 77.
or to give faith, Romans 10. 17. or to give wisdom unto the simple, Psalm. 19.
7. or jointly to bring to the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, Ephesians. 4. 13. Tit. 1. 2. Job. 6. 60. 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 4. 16. or to bring
the understanding of wisdom and knowledge, Prou. 1. 2. 9. 10. Col. 1. 9. Iac.
3. 13. or to make wise to salvation by faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15. one
and the selfsame effect is delivered under these diverse names. Which may also
further appear in this, that the Spirit of God which calls this divine gift
the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22. calls it also the full assurance of
the understanding, Col. 2. 2.

The mind and the understanding is the eye of the soul, and a sure and
settled knowledge of the mysteries of godliness, or saving faith, or divine
wisdom is the right sight of this eye. And hereof it is, that our blessed
Savior not only in his own person calling men to repent and to believe the
Gospel, is said to preach recovering of sight to the blind; Luke 4. 18.
But also sending out his Apostles to go into the whole world and to preach
the Gospel to every creature, is said to send them out to open their eyes,
that they might turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God, that they Act. 26. 18.
might receive remission of sins, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in him.

And therefore the opening of the eyes of the faithful whereby they truly
apprehend the mysteries of godliness, is called Vision, as the Spirit of God
which works this vision is called Prou. 19. 18. John 2. 20. 1 Samuel 9. 9.
an eye salve, and as the Reuealers of this doctrine in old time were called
Seers.

And verily the true fight, apprehension, and knowledge of the Covenant of
grace, and of all other divine doctrines of the word of God, is (as Origin
says) a special gift of God, proper to such only as are predestined to
this, even to walk Orig. lib. 7. cont. Celsum.
worthy of God, who has made himself known unto them. To the^ only it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to others it is not
given: For they seeing do see, and Matthew. 13. 11.
do not perceive, and hearing do hear, and not understand, lest they should
return and so be healed. The veil of corrupt opinions 2 Cor. 3. 14.
is not taken from their eyes, but only from theirs which are effectually
called and turned to Christ by the preaching of the Gospel. For they all
bohold as in a mirror the glory of God with open face, the veil or cover
being taken from their eyes.

Now if the faithful be those unto whom God has revealed John 9. 39.
himself, and has opened their eyes, and has made them to see, by giving to
them a true faith; then faith is a true s^ght, apprehension, and knowledge of
God, and of his goodness and love in Christ, and of all other divine verities
which are necessary to the salvation of a faithful man. And so was Faith
defined by the ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin, as Doctor Benfield
testifies in his third Chapter concerning saving Faith.

The Devils and all obstinate and impenitent sinners, as they have neither
saving Faith, nor divine wisdom; so neither have they any such sight,
apprehension and knowledge of the divine verities of Gods most holy Word, as
causes them to yield a sure and certain assent thereunto. The Devils in their
creation were Angels of light, and were sanctified with the clear knowledge of
all divine verities, but now they have lost John 17. 17. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in
Psalm. 118.
sanctity by falling away from God the Father thereof, and from truth the
mother and nurse of the same. The Devil (says our Savior) abode not in
truth, but is a liar and the father of lies; he made choice to misconceiue of
God, that he John 8. 44.
was unjust, hard, and cruel, and he is so blinded and hardened therein, that
he cannot, nor will not be removed from the same. As it may appear in that he
refused to stand to the censure of our Savior Christ, laying ever to his
charge injustice, and cruelty: saying, What have we to do with thee thou Jesus
of Nazareth? Art thou come to torment us before the Matthew. 8. 29.
time?

And verily, from that which preserved at the first, and still preserves the
elect Angels, (as Isidore testifies) that is, from the vision, and
contemplation, and settled persuasion of all those divine perfections that be
in God, especially of his infinite and endless goodness and love: the
reprobate Angels fell, and wholly deprived themselves thereof, and therefore
do not now know and acknowledge, that God is righteous, gracious, and good,
nor honor him by ascribing unto him these glorious perfections.

Now as the old Serpent has thus inuenomed himself, so has he with the same
poison infected the nature of Adam and Eve, and of al us which by ordinary
generation descend from the^: For he persuaded our first parents, not only that
God was not good unto them, for that he forbad them the use of the fruit of one
of the trees of Paradise, and withheld from them the knowledge of good and
evil, lest thereby they should become as Gods; but also that he was not
righteous and true, and that the evils wherewith he threatened them, if they
brake his Commandment, should not come upon them.

By which miss persuasion, they misconceiuing of Gods goodness and
righteousness, were hardened with all their posterity in this misconceit. In
so much, that now by nature there is none that understands and seeks after
God, there Romans 3. 10.
is none that believes his goodness, and imbraceth the means whereby they may
be made partakers thereof, nor fears his justice, and cease to stir up
his indignation and wrath. They believe not Gods goodness, but scorn the
faithful (as the wise man testifies) that do the same, thinking it to be a
thing impossible that any can have the assurance of Gods fatherly love. They
believe not Gods justice, for then they Sap. 2. 13.
would avoid sin, if it were but to escape the dreadful execution of Gods
vengeance due to the same. Our conscience (says Saint Cyprian) would be afraid
if it did believe, but because it Cypr. de simpl. Praelatorum.
believes not, therefore it fears not: If it did believe it would take heed,
and if it did take heed, it would avoid both the evil of sin, and the
punishment thereof. Wherefore (as says Saint Ambrose) the wicked go hence to
hell, that there they Am. in 1. ep. ad These. cap. 4.
may learn that to be true, which here they would not.

The persons endued with a temporary faith, draw nearest to such as have
obtained a true, saving, and justifying faith; For they come gladly unto the
holy assemblies, and hear the word willingly, and incontinently with joy
receive the same, but this they do upon some sinister respect, as for
curiosity of knowledge, or for vainglory, or for profit and preferment: and
while they obtain thereby their desires, they will seem to be zealous and
seruent professors; but when they are crossed in their purposes, then their
zeal draws cold, and the heat thereof is utterly extinguished: whereas they
that are endued Luke 8. 13.
with a true faith, receive the word with a simple, honest, and good heart, and
in all sincerity embrace the Gospel for the Gospels sake, even because it
opens the way to true happiness.

The Temporisers happiness, whatsoever outward profession he makes to the
contrary, is to enjoy earthly things, and therefore he will forsake faith and a
good conscience, and God also rather then he, will forsake them, but such as be
faithful men indeed, will not leave the grant of Gods endless love in Christ,
made over to them in the Gospel, no not to gain a vast world of glory, or to
escape a whole hell of misery. And this comes to pass for that the word of
God is of the one, but superficially received, and therefore at the last
withers and dies; Whereas in the other it takes deep root, and therefore
lives and flourishes in them continually; In the one it possesses as it were
the vnfensed suburbs of their senses, and the weak sconses of their
fantasies; but in the other it seateth it self in the well-defenced Cities of
their souls, and in the unconquerable Castle of a good conscience. In the one
it is entertained as a passenger, for a night, or as a soiourner, Acts 8. 37.
Coll. 3. 16.
for a season; In the other, it is received as an inhabitant, and as an owner
in his own home. In the one, it is as the Ioh. 2. ep. 3. Jude v. 13. Pro. 4.
18. 2 Pet. 1. 9. Ioh. 9. 39. Heb. 6. 3. Ioh. 6. 35.
flashing of a falling Star, in the other, it is as the light of the Sun,
which shines more and more until the perfect day. In the one, it is as the
dark glimpse of a purblind eye, in the other it is as the sight of the eye
that is begun to be well cleared, and in good part made sound and whole.
Lastly, in the one it is as the dainty dishes of a sumptuous feast, tasted of
but a little: in the other, it is as food so well chewed, ruminated, and
digested, that they which eat thereof, never hunger after any other food of
their souls, but content themselves with this only.

And verily, he that has once found this precious pearl, Mat. 13. 46. Genesis
15. 1.
will be ready to sell all to buy the same; he will with Abraham the Father of
the faithful, leave his Country and kindred, and all things else, that he may
have God his buckler, and his exceeding great reward: yea, in respect of the
invaluable recompense of this inestimable reward, he will with Moses, refuse to
be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and chose Heb. 11. 24.
rather to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, and will esteem the very rebuke of Christ greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt; It is then a sound and certain knowledge
of the Gospel, that breeds a stable and a settled faith; it is such a
receiving of the words of Christ, as whereby we surely know that Ioh. 17. 18.
Col. 3. 6.
he came from God, and so believe that he was sent from him.

And hereof it is, that as vnstaiednesse and instability is set Iac. 1. 6. 2
Pet. 3. 10. Romans 14. 22. Col. 2. 5. 2 Pet 3. 15. Col. 2. 7. Ephesians. 2. 20. Heb. 6.
18. Ephesians. 6. 13. Gal 5. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 58. 16. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Psalm. 81. 12.
down by the Spirit of God, as a true note of an unsound Faith: so stability
and steadfastness, is delivered as a sure token of a sound belief. And
therefore it is not without cause that the faithful are so often exhorted to
labor to be rooted and built upon Christ, and to lay sure Anchor-hold upon
him, and to be steadfast, and to stand fast in faith, and to seek to be
established therein: by the which so often inculcating of one and the same
exhortation, the Spirit of God labors to beat in thoroughly into our hearts,
this persuasion, that a sure knowledge, and a resolute assent to the doctrines
of Faith, makes a true faithful Christian: Wherefore seeing the true
Christian faith is a settled and steadfast assent to all divine verities
necessary to salvation, proceeding from a right and wise apprehension of the
arguments and reasons whereon they are grounded, then the implicit, veiled,
and blind faith commended so highly by the Church of Rome, is not the true
Christian faith that proceeds from God the Father of Light, but Ioh. 11. 9.
from the Devil, the Prince of darkness; because it makes men to fall into
the pit of error and sin; and so casts Ioh. 12 35.
them down headlong into the dungeon of destruction.

CHAP. V.
A saving Faith is always accompanied with all other sanctifying graces, and
namely, with constancy and perseverance, as being the fruitful mother, and
continual nurse of them all.

THe blessed Apostle S. Paul describes the faith of Gods Elect or saving
faith, by calling it the knowledge of the Tit. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
truth, which is according to godliness, for that it is the fruitful mother
thereof. As he calls the Divine doctrine of the Gospel, the mystery of
godliness, because it is the powerful instrument of God to procreate the
same. For it opens the unspeakable and unsearchable riches of the love and
goodness of God in Christ, and gives light and sight to apprehend the same,
and thereby begets true godliness.

The cause procreating and preserving of all holiness and happiness, both of
Angels and men, either in this life, or in the life to come, is the Vision,
contemplation^, and Apprehension of the Lords unspeakable goodness and love.
The plain and evident revelation and manifestation thereof in the Gospel,
opens the eyes of a blinded sinner, and gives to him the sight of a true
Christian saving says, whereby he turns from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan, to God, and Acts 26. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
works in him a reverent fear to offend the Lord, and a loving care to
perform all duties that do belong to piety and godliness. Behold (says
Saint John) what love the Father has showed us that we should be called the
sons of God. For this cause, the world knows us not, because it knowoth not
him. Dearly beloved, now we are the sons of God, but yet it does not appear
what we shall be; but this we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we 1 Ioh. 3. 1.
shall see him as he is. And every one that has this hope in him purges
himself even as he is pure.

In which words the Apostle avouches, that the Lord making himself known by
the doctrine of the Gospel not to the world, but to his Elect, and causing
the^ thereby, not only faithfully to believe and embrace his great love whereby
he has adopted them for his sons in Christ, but also by hope firmly to
expect their full and final glorification at his coming to judgment, does
thereby purge every one of them from the pollutions of sin, and so does
reform and renew them. The which reformation, because it does begin in the
mind, and from thence proceeds to the whole man, is called a renewing, or a
changing of the mind, and a returning to a (...), Resipiscentia.
wiser course. For when the understanding is truly rectified and reformed by
the sure and certain knowledge and apprehension of heavenly things, it will
master and overrule the will and the affections, and cause them to be employed
about Coll. 3. 2.
heavenly actions.

The illumination of the mind (says a learned Author) Morton of the three
fold estate of man.
being the first part of regeneration is the cause of all the rest of that
holiness that is to be seen in the regenerate man: even as our Savior Christ
himself teaches, saying; The light of the Mat. 6. 22.
body is the eye; if then thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be light;
but if thine eye be wicked, all thy body shall be dark. So likewise, if the
mind, which is the eye of the soul, Coll. 3. 10.
be truly sanctified and renewed with knowledge, there follows holiness in
all the faculties of the soul; but if it be darkened with blindness and
ignorance, there is nothing but sin in the whole man.

Neither can it be otherwise, For as it is impossible that a man should either
trust or hope in God, love, fear, and obey him, or perform any other duty of
holiness to God, whom he does not know in his love, mercy, goodness, power,
justice, and the rest of his attributes: so it is no less impossible that a
man should know and be fully persuaded, that God is true in his promises,
merciful, gracious, and just, and not be affected to him accordingly. He that
knows thee, O God (says Austin) loves thee more then himself August.
soliloq. cap. 1.
and leaves himself that he may come unto thee, and delight in thee.

Wherefore if any one make profession of true wisdom and Iac 3. 13.
knowledge, we may will him with Saint James, to make demonstration thereof by
his good conversation, and by his works performed in meekness of wisdom: or
which is all one, if he make profession of the true Christian Faith, we may say
unto him, Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will Iac. 2. 26.
show thee my faith by my works; seeing that faith that is without worke^, is
not a living but a dead faith. For a living faith does engraffe us into Christ,
and so makes us good trees Romans 11. 19.
which cannot be without good fruit. And verily so far forth Mat. 7. 17.
Tantum possumus quantum credimus. Cyp. ad Quirit. Tantum diligimus quantum
credimus Orig. in Eze. him. 22. 1 Ioh 2. 4. Qui non facit bonum non cred^t
bonum. Isa. 11. 6. Pro. 2. 10.
as the grace of God enableth us to believe; so far it enableth us also to
work; and so far forth as it enableth us to apprehend Gods love toward us,
so far forth it enableth us to love God, and to make the same evident and
manifest by our careful endeavor to do such things as are well pleasing in
his sight. He therefore that says, I know God, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; For he that does not
well, believes not well; and he whose knowledge bridleth not in some good
measure his brutish affections, he has not attained to that wisdom and
knowledge which the Spirit of God foretold, should be in all true and sincere
Christians. For when wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge
delights thy soul; then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding
shall keep thee and deliver thee from the evil way.

Of the infallible certainty and truth whereof, Lactantius was so thoroughly
persuaded, that he was bold to make this challenge to any that would except
against the same, by instancing in the most unbridled affections of all. Give
me (says he) Lact. diu^n. Instit. l. 3. c. 26.
a wrathful man, and a slanderer, and one that is of unbridled affections, and
with a few words of God, I will make him as weak as a Lamb; Give me a greedy
and a covetous pinchpenny, and I will make him liberal, giving out his money
with whole handfuls; give me one that is afraid of grief and death, and he
shall presently contemn the Gallows and the fire, and the Bull of Phalaris
also; give me a libidinous and an adulterous person, and thou shall see him
straight way sober, chaste, and continent; give me a cruel and a blood-thirsty
person, and presently his fury shall be turned into mercy; give me an unjust
person and an unwise, and a sinner, and by and by he shall be made just,
prudent and innocent, and with one washing all his sinfulness shall be
cleansed. Such is the force of divine wisdom, that it being once admitted into
the heart of man, it will at once dispossess folly the very mother of all
trangressions.

This truth was known to the Heathen themselves, who not only avouched that
Pallas the Lady of wisdom subdued the giants when they rebelled against God;
but also that Perseus by the help of Minerva the Lady of learning and all one
with Pallas, did cut off the head of Medusa, who by her looks did turn men
into stones. Under the which fabulous fictions this truth was delivered, that
they are the most powerful instructions of divine wisdom, that can subdue
our rebellious and Giant-like affections, and can make soft and meek our hard
and stony hearts. If ye continue in my word (says our blessed Savior) ye
shall know the truth, Ioh. 8. 31.
and the truth shall make you free.

It is then the knowledge of the truth which is all one with saving faith, and
divine wisdom, that freeth us from the bondage we were held under by our
natural errors and sins, and does purify our hearts, and sanctify our
minds, by causing Act. 15. 9. Ioh. 17. 17.
them to hea^ken most attentively to all just and equal motions, and to all
divine and heavenly counsels.

The truth is, that good counsels are no command to Counsel is no command,
vide: to fools sed dictum sapientisat est.
fools, which will not hearken to them, yet to the wise hearted they are of
great weight, and their advise with them does greatly prevail. The holy
Counsels of God arising out of himself, does cause him so perfectly to behold
the glorious beauty of that which is holy, just, and good, and so constantly to
cleave th^r^o, that it is altogether impossible that he should fall away from
the same, and do any thing that is sinful and evil. The continual intention
of contemplation, does cause the elect Angels and Saints in heaven to cleave
steadfastly unto God, and constantly to continue in his service. So the daily
meditation and recordation of the equity, and wisdom, and holiness, and
righteousness, of the divine and heavenly instructions of Gods holy word, does
cause the faithful in this life to be careful to avoid all occasions of
evil, and to embrace Psalm. 78. 7.
all prouocations to good. For it must needs be, that as the scale sinketh
down in the balance when weight is put into it, so the mind must yield it
captive unto truth (and by consequent unto virtue) when by the weight of sound
reason it is evidently cleared and confirmed; as Tully could teach in his
Academicall questions.

The mind of man is the absolute Monarch, and the highest commander of all the
powers of man's soul, in it self it does conceive and beget reason, and by it
self, and by reason, does bring forth the will, Amand. Pola. lib. 1. log.
cap. 11. which is nothing else but a desire flowing from the mind, Kecker.
Syst. Theolo lib. 1. fol. 68. So that how much more there is of the
understanding in any thing, so much more also there is of the will; and by how
much more also a good thing is known, by so much the more it is willed and
desired, Kecker. Syst. Theolo. lib. 1. fol. 28. As it is evident by the
doleful complaint that Saint Austine made against himself unto the Lord,
saying. Hence it is, O Lord, that I do not love thee so Aug. Solilo. ca. 1.
much as I should, because I do not fully know thee; yea, because I know thee
but a little, therefore do I love thee but a little, and therefore do I but a
little rejoice in thee.

And hence it is, that Angels and men have this prerogative Doctor Field of the
Church. lib. 1. cap. 1.
above all the residue of the Lords creatures, that they are able to will and
to desire any thing whatsoever it be; because the desire flowing from the
forms and resemblances shining in the mind, and apprehended in the
understanding, in that the forms and resemblances of all things may shine in
their minds, and be apprehended of their understandings, by reason of their
spiritual and immateriall natures, and therefore their wills and desires may
extend themselves to all things also. Yea, the mind of it self is only
partaker of reason, by the light whereof every thing is known, and is desired
accordingly; whereas the will is so only from the participation of the mind,
and therefore is not the ruler and commander of the mind, but is commanded and
ruled thereby. For the will cannot desire any thing at all, until it take
notice thereof from the mind, as of a thing which for such and such reasons is
so and so to be desired.

The will and affections, either as stout and stately Peers, or as cunning and
politic Counselors, or as violent and importunate suitors and solliciters
may sometimes dazzle the understanding by moving it to hearken to false
informations, and to wrongful suggestions, and so may after a sort ouerrule
the mind, and make it to yield to that which it ought not, and to command to
put the same in execution; yet still the mind is the supreme iugde that must
pronounce the definitive sentence before the will and affections, as under
officers can put the same in execution. For the will does not choose or refuse
any thing, that the understanding has not first determined, Zan^h. de oper.
Dei fol 886. Quod est affirmatio and negatio in intellectu, hoc est prosecutio
and fuga in voluntate, Arist. Moral. l. 6. c. 2.
that it ought either to be embraced or refused, as Zanchius affirms;
insomuch that that which is affirmed or denied of the mind, even that is
embraced or refused of the will.

For there are two original causes of all humane actions, the understanding
and the will, whereof the understanding as it is the first in place and work,
so it is that which must set the will on work; also (seeing there can be no
will or desire to that which is unknown) and therefore when any one sees that
which is good, and yet wills and does that which is evil, he cannot do so,
until the mind being seduced, takes that which is evil to be good, and so
sets the will on work to desire the same: for the will cannot desire that
which it takes to be simply evil, but either that which is good indeed, or at
the least seems to be so. And therefore there must be Kecherm. Syst. Theol.
l. 2. f 219.
first an error in the understanding, before there can be an offense in the
will. So Solomon; do they not err, that imagine Prou. 14. 22.
evil things? So the wicked themselves confess, when they are forced to
acknowledge the truth: We (say Sap. 5. 6.
they) have erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousness has not
shined unto us, the Sun of understanding rose not upon us: For as
Philosophers, Schoolmen, and experience it self does teach, the will does
ever follow the last judgment and conclusion of the practicke reason, and that
which the mind by the advice of reason judges and determines to be acted,
that must the will endeavor to act.

As if the mind resolve, that our chiefest happiness consists in the
plentiful possession and fruition of all earthly profits and pleasures, then
will the will and affections be wholly set upon earthly things; but if it
resolve that our highest happiness, and our chiefest good consists in our
communion with God, and in the clear manifestation of his love in Christ, then
will our hearts be lifted up to God, and fixed on Christ, and settled upon
heaven and heavenly things. For (as Saint Austine says) free will is a servant
to sin, or to grace: An evil mind makes an evil will, a mind endued with
grace, communicates grace to the will. For does folly set all things Mala men's
malus animus.
out of frame? and does not wisdom frame and order all things aright? Does
darkness cause men to stumble and fall? John 11. 9. Heb. 3. 12.
and does not light keep men upright, and preserve them from falling? Does
infidelity withdraw men's hearts from God, and corrupt their wills and
affections? and does not faith join men nearly unto God, and sanctify their
wills and affections with all manner of divine and heavenly graces?

Wherefore as all carnal Gospellers and loose Libertines, so our Roman
Catholics are greatly deceived, in that they think that a saving and
justifying faith may stand with reigning sins; for then should the selfsame
persons at the selfsame time be the children of God in respect of their
minds, sanctified with the knowledge of the truth, and with saving faith; and
the children of the Devil in their wills being polluted with dominering sins,
but where saving faith gets the sure and safe possession of the mind, it
not only expels infidelity out of the castle of the understanding, but also
casts out all sin and iniquity out of the forts of the will and affections,
that they shall no longer rule and reign there. For saving faith does
regenerate us and make us the sons of God, Gal. 3. 26.
as the Apostle affirms, and so renews us to his image in holiness and
crew righteousness; and therefore will not suffer us to give place to wilful
and reigning sins, and presumptuous transgressions: Whosoever (says Saint
John) is borne 1 John 3. 9.
of God sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin,
because he is borne of God: that is, whosoever is borne of God, commits no
such sins whereby the Word of God is choked and extinguished in him, because
it is an immortal seed which lives and indureth for ever where it is 1 Pet.
1. 23.
once rooted and settled; neither can he sin because he is borne of God:
That is, sin, which is the work of the Devil, cannot so far forth
prevail, as to annihilate his regeneration which is the work of God, because
God is stronger then the Devil, and will maintain his own proper work in
his own children, against the malice and mischief of Satan.

For let the Devil set his chiefest instruments on work to draw Gods children
from their faith and obedience to God, yet they shall not finally prevail
against them. So Saint John, Little children ye are of God, and have overcome
them; for 1 John 4. 4.
greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. For albeit they be
little and weak in themselves, yet they are strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, and are enabled thereby to stand against all the assaults
of the Devil. Ephesians. 6. 10.


And verily, he that truly beholds, and duly considers, what this great
dignity is, to be translated out of the bondage of Satan into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, he cannot with purpose of heart serve sin any
longer, and enthrall himself again unto the tyranny of Satan, but he will
resign himself wholly over to God. How can we (says the Aposte) Romans 6. 2.
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? When Joseph that of a poor
slave, being made chief ruler over all Genesis 39. 9. Fixum etenins quicu ique
geret no^ hunc ^go nolle crediderim Christo cum m^ricate mori. Coster.
that great estate which his master was possessed withal, was tempted by his
lewd mistrisse to defile his masters bed, How can I (said he) do this
wickedness, and sin against God? How much more then will all such as are
endued with true Christian faith resolve and say, when they duly consider their
great dignity, in that of the bondslaues of Satan they are made the sons of
God, and inheritours of the kingdom of heaven: How can we give over our selves
to wilful and presumptuous sins, to the great dishonor of our loving and
most gracious God, who has advanced us to so great dignity and honor?
Undoubtedly they cannot but thus resolve with themselves, their sure belief of
so great a favor, thoroughly settled in their hearts, will not suffer them to
give themselves over to the service of sin, but will cause them fully to
resolve to continue and persevere in constant and continual obedience unto God.

And in this respect, the estate of all such as are reconciled unto God by
Christ, albeit it be subject to many infirmities, is far more happy then
Adams was in his absolute and perfect purity. For (as Saint Austine says) the
first liberty was a Aug. de corrept. and great. cap. 2.
possibility not to sin, but ours is much greater, being such as that we
cannot possibly sin; that is, give our selves over to be bondslaues to
reigning sins. For to Adam was given grace to persist in grace if he would,
but to us it is given, that we be made willing, and that by our will we conquer
our concupiscence: to him was given ability, if he himself would have used it,
but to us is given not only to be able, but also to be willing to use our
ability. For the will of the Saints is so forcibly moved by the Spirit of God,
that therefore they are able, because they will; and therefore they will,
because it is God that works in them that they be willing.

For if in so great infirmity, wherein perfect virtue was requisite for the
suppressing of pride, they were left to their own will, that by the help of
God they might persist if they would themselves, and that God himself did not
work in them the very will that they would: among so many and so great
tentations, the will by reason of her weakness would soon relent and give
over. A remedy therefore was provided for the infirmity of man's will, that it
should be so moved by divine grace, that it should never decline or separate
it self from the same: and therefore albeit it were weak, yet it should never
utterly fail.

Now that Saint Austine did not mistake herein, it is manifest by the testimony
of God himself, set down by the Prophet Jeremy in most direct words to that
purpose; I will Ier. 32. 40.
(says the Lord) make an everlasting Covenant with them, (meaning his
faithful ones under the time of grace) that I will not turn away from them to
do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. So then now under the Covenant of grace, divine grace is not so
offered to the faithful, that they may either choose or refuse it if they will,
but thereby they are made both willing to receive it at the first, and resolute
also to persevere therein constantly, even to the end: and therefore by the
Spirit of God, they are called trees which shall not cease from yielding fruit.
Ier. 17. 8.
Whereby it is manifest, that grace lightning the understanding with a true
faith, does sanctify the will with all other virtues, and establish it also
with constancy and perseverance.

Wherefore a well-grounded knowledge of the mysteries of godliness, divine
wisdom, and saving faith do never go alone, but take their train with them,
and are always accompanied with all other divine and heavenly virtues. And
thus much concerning the necessary combination of saving faith, with all other
divine virtues. Now it remains, that we make manifest what comfortable
assurance of Gods favor and love, faith also gives to all that truly believe.

CHAP. IIII.
The divine doctrine of the Christian faith does give to the sincere imbracers
thereof a saving faith, and an assurance thereby of Gods favor and love, and
of eternal happiness and blessedness.

THat which all erroneous professions do promise, that the Gospel of Christ
does perform, even a sure faith, and a faithful assurance of the favor and
love of God, and of eternal happiness and blessedness. For herein is
revealed the Covenant of grace, grounded upon a strong foundation, even upon
him that is Immanuell, God with us, a most powerful Reconciler of men unto
God, and a most gracious procurer of Gods favor and love. For man's sin being
committed against the infinite majesty of the most glorious Deity, could not be
done away but by an infinite satisfaction; and Gods love and everlasting
happiness consisting therein, being blessings of an inualuable worth, could
not have been purchased, but by an inualuable price. Now this infinite
satisfaction, and inualuable price could not have been tendered but by such an
one that was true man joined in one person to the true God, that so he might be
a meet Mediator between God and man.

And so he himself testifies, saying, I am the way, the truth, John 14. 6.
and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me: It is then by Christ's
means that we believe in God, and have an assurance of his favor and love.
For to him God gave after his shameful death, which he suffered for our sins,
a glorious resurrection; as an ample testification of his full satisfaction
made for them all, and of his victorious conquest over death, that so we might
have faith and hope in God. Wherefore if 1 Pet. 1. 21.
God has plainly opened unto us the work of our redemption, and
reconciliation wrought by Christ, which is the foundation of the Covenant of
grace, wherein God offers himself to be a gracious God, and a loving Father
to all such as embrace it with a true faith; it cannot be, but if that with a
true faith we apprehend this gracious Covenant, we should rest thereby
thoroughly persuaded of the Lords inestimable favor and love toward us.

Now that the undoubted truth thereof may evidently appear, let us observe
these three circumstances: First, the time when this assurance is given:
Secondly, the means whereby it is wrought: Thirdly, the witnesses that give
evidence to the certainty and infallibility thereof. Now concerning the first,
when God by the light of the Gospel does open our eyes, and make us to behold
the light of his countenance shining unto us in Christ Jesus, and thereby does
not only inform our understanding, but also reform our will and affections,
even then in some measure he gives unto us this comfortable assurance, that he
has admitted us among the number of his children, and has matriculated us
into the University of his Saints, and has entered our names into his book of
life.

For that which our blessed Savior avouched of Zacheus, when he willingly
received by love Christ's person into his house, and his doctrine by faith into
his heart: This day is salvation come to this house, for as much as this man is
become Luke 19. 9.
the son of Abraham; that is to be auerred of all persons whatsoever, that
readily embrace the faith that was in Abraham; seeing all such as have their
hearts purged by faith, are Romans 4 12. Gal. 3. 26. 2 Timothy 2. 21.
undoubtedly thereby made the sons of God, and vessels of honor, sanctified
and meet for the Lord. Now (says Saint John) we are the sons of God, even as
many as by an 1 John 3. 2.
effectual calling are brought to a wise and understanding faith, and to an
holy and upright life. So Saint Bernard; At Bern. ^p. 107.
the rising of the Sun of righteousness, at our justification, (that is,
when we are made inberently just and righteous, for so he takes the word in
this place) the secret that was hidden from the beginning, concerning those
that are predestinate and shall be blessed, begins to appear out of the
depth of eternity, whilst a man called by the fear of God, and framed to
righteousness by love, presumes that he is of the number of the blessed,
knowing that whom he has justified, them also he has glorified.

In the which very place (that we may come to our second circumstance) Saint
Bernard advises the person that is made an holy and just man, to take for the
opener of this mystery of his salvation, the Spirit making him righteous and
just; and thereby testifying to his spirit that he is the child of God. For
(says he) who is a just man, but he that being beloved of God loves him
again? Which comes not to pass, but by the Spirit of God, revealing by
says the eternal promise of God for his salvation to come, the which
revelation, (that is, the ground or means of the which revelation) is nothing
else but the infusion of spiritual grace, by the which the deeds of the flesh
are mortified, and the man that has it, is prepared to the kingdom of heaven,
together receiving by one spirit, that whereby he may presume that he is
beloved, and loves again.

So then when the Apostle avouches, that the Spirit of God bears witness to
our spirits that we are the children Romans 8. 16.
of God, that he does (says Saint Bernard) by nothing else but by the infusion
of spiritual grace, whereby the deeds of the flesh are mortified, and the man
of God is quickened unto an holy and heavenly life. So Origin; The testimony of
the spirit, Orig. in 8. Cap. ad ^om.
is an hability given by the Spirit not to do all things for fear, but for
love toward God. So Ambrose also, upon the same words of the Apostle, calls
it an hability given by the Spirit of God, to lead a life fitting the name of
the sons of God, whereby our heavenly Fathers mark is seen in us. And this
these holy men learned of the holy Apostle Saint Peter, Give (says he) all
diligence to join to your 2 Pet. 1. 10.
faith, virtue; to your virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to
temperance, patience; to patience, brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness,
love, etc. and hereby make your calling and election sure, for if you do such
things ye shall never fall.

For whereas God has promised to be a gracious God, and loving Father to all
such as trust in him, love him, and fear him, and are careful to observe his
Laws, and are truly sorrowful for their daily transgressions and sins; How
can it otherwise be, but that the faithful having by their dutiful conuersing
with God in the holy exercises of hearing his holy Word, and of prayer,
obtained these graces in some sufficient measure? How can it, I say, otherwise
be, but that thereby they should be certainly persuaded that God is their
loving and gracious God, and that they are his beloved people? For it is
impossible that the promises of God made to his people concerning this matter,
should be void and without effect. Walk (says the Lord) in my Statutes and
keep Ex. 20. 19.
my judgments, and do them, and sanctify my Sabbaoths, and they shall be a
sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am your God. Of the
certainty and euidency of the truth thereof, the Apostle Saint Paul was so
confident, that he appealeth to every faithful man's experience among the
Romans concerning the same; saying, Know ye not that to Romans 6. 16.
whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye are, to
whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness? The faithful then being well witting to their own hearts that
they have given themselves to God, and are careful to perform the works of
faith, love, holiness, and righteousness according unto the rule of Gods
word, in obedience unto God, do so thoroughly know hereby that they do an
acceptable service unto God, and that they are his obedient servants, that they
do greatly rejoice therein with the Apostle; This is our rejoicing, even the 2
Cor. 1. 12.
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, etc.

Now if it be objected that the faithful know not their own hearts, nor the
true nature of these divine graces, nor the right notes and marks of the holy
works that proceed from them, and therefore albeit they are endued with these
graces, and perform these works, yet they cannot know that they are the
servants of God; We answer, first, that that objection is in direct terms,
flat contrary to the testimony of the Prophet before alleged, where the
faithful being commanded to do their works according to the rule of Gods
Commandments, being from their hearts made careful thereof, are thereby
assured that they are the obedient servants of the Lord. Secondly, we answer,
that all men do in part know their own hearts, and their thoughts, words, and
works, and that the faithful do in some measure know the true nature of all
heavenly graces, and the right notes of their true fruits.

All men do know themselves in part, because God has given to all a
conscience to be a witness together with themselves, not only of their words
and works, but also of the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
very thoughts and purposes of their hearts, as the names of conscience do
sufficiently declare. For no man knows our (...), Conscientia.
hearts but God, and our selves, and therefore conscience is a knowledge that
we have of our own ways together with God. Every one then by the light of his
conscience knows Men's non potest non intelligere quod intelligit. Nemo nescit
se velle quod vult. Prou. 14. 10.
what he himself knows, and understands what he himself understands,
and perceives what he himself thinks, desires, wills, speaks, or
does. Every one knows (says Solomon) for what his own heart is sorrowful,
and in what it rejoices, and none else but God only; Even the very wicked by
the means of their consciences, are made witting to their own ways; How much
more are the faithful by the light of the word? For by the clearenesse of the
heavenly doctrines their hearts are opened, and they are enabled Act. 16. 14.
in some good measure to know themselves and to know God, Heb. 18. 11. John 6.
45. Act. 2. 17.
and to understand what belongs to a sound faith, and to an holy and godly
life. For the faithful know that such an apprehension and knowledge of Christ,
as causes all things to be as dung to them in respect thereof, is a sure sign
of a sanctified mind, lightened with the clear sight of a true faith. They
know that to desire to enjoy the love of God above all other things whatsoever,
and to be willing and ready to converse with God and with Christ in the daily
and religious exercises of the word of God, and prayer, and to love the
brethren because they love God, and are beloved of God, are true tokens of true
Christian love.

They know also, that to be truly sorrowful for offending so loving and
gracious a God, as he has declared himself to be in Christ, and in that
respect to fear to offend him, and to be careful to walk in all his
righteous Laws, are sure signs of true repentance, and of the right fear of
God, and of sincere holiness and righteousness. And they knowing in their
own consciences that they have by the gracious work of the Spirit of God,
such a faith, love, repentance, fear, and righteousness, know that they are
in Gods favor and love, and that they are his faithful servants: We know
(says St. John, speaking in the name of all the faithful) that we are of God,
1 John 5. 29.
and that the whole world lies in wickedness; We know that the Son of God
is come, and has given us a mind to know him which is true, and we are in him
that is true; that is, in his Son Jesus Christ, this same is very God and
eternal life. And again, we know that we are translated from death 1 John 3.
14.
to life, because we love the brethren. And that he speaks thus in the name
of all the faithful, we may understand in that in the like asseueration, he
changes the person; saying, If ye know that God is righteous, know ye that he
that does righteousness is borne of God, by the which testimonies of the 1
John 2. 29.
Apostle it is manifest, that the faithful knowing that they are endued with
the true knowledge of Christ, and with true love, and with true righteousness,
know thereby that they are of God, and that they are his elect and chosen
children.

For as a true friend among men, does bestow such favors and gifts upon him
whom he entirely and tenderly loves, as the receiver understands what they
are and their worth also, that so by manifesting his great kindness he may
win mutual and reciprocal love: so God the friend of friends, gives his
spiritual graces unto all those whom he has loved in Christ, and chosen in
him before the foundation of the world, and makes them to understand what
these his principal blessings are, and the end why he gives them, even to
assure them of his fatherly favor and love. Yea, he makes them sensible of
this gracious work of his Spirit in their own hearts, when he effects the
same by the powerful operation of his own holy Spirit, and works a true
sense and feeling thereof in the receivers themselves, as it has already been
declared in the opening of the second question of the first part of this
treatise, and shall be further cleared also in the second part hereof. For
that the faithful should not doubt of Gods love toward themselves, he gives
his own sanctifying Spirit, and their own sanctified spirits to testify the
same, that against the sufficiency of their testimonies, no man can take any
just Romans 8. 16.
exception.

In the Law (says our Savior) it is written that the testimony John 8. 17.
of two men is true. Of what an undoubted truth then is that thing, which is
witnessed by a sanctified conscience whereas the testimony of conscience
without this qualification, Conscientia mill testes.
is in stead of a thousand witnesses? Now if the witness of a sanctified
conscience be of such validity, which yet is but an humane testimony, what is
the witness of God himself? Now this is the witness of God (says the
Apostle) that not 1 John 5. 9.
only he has given unto us eternal life, but also that he has by his Spirit
given unto us our faich to testify the same to our own souls, and that to
this end, that we might know that we have eternal life, and that we might
believe (viz. by a faith daily growing stronger and stronger) in the name of
the Son of God.

The which thing cannot be but effectually wrought, if the faithful would
daily and duly consider, that the promise of blessedness made by Christ to all
that believe, was by God delivered not only by word of mouth, but also by an
oath, John 5. 24.
and after the same manner was redeliuered to Christ, and that to this end, that
by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible Heb. 6. 17.
that God should lie, we might have strong consolation; and not only so, but
also was set down under his own hand again and again in all the books of
the old and new Testament: and further yet, was ratified and confirmed by many
feales of diverse Sacraments.

Wherefore no marvel though the faithful in former ages have often openly
made profession of this their comfortable assurance of Gods love, publishing
and proclaiming, that God was their God and they his servants, and that Christ
was their Christ in particular, and that by his Blood, shed precisely for
themselves, they were justified from all their sins. O my soul (says David)
thou have said (and said it again and Psalm. 16. 2.
again) unto the Lord, thou art my God; for so it follows in the same
Psalm, and in diverse others, The Lord is the po^tion of mine inheritance, and
of my cup thou shall maintain my lot, my lot is fallen unto me in a very good
ground, I have a goodly heritage. So Psalm. 18. I will love thee dearly, O
Lord, my strength, the Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my
God, and my strength in whom I will trust, my shield, and the horn also of my
salvation. So Esaias, O Lord thou art my God. So Thomas; My Lord, my God. Esaias
25. 1. Ioh. 20. 28. Hos. 2. 23.
So all the faithful since the coming of Christ in the flesh; I will say unto
them that were not my people, thou art my people, and they shall say, thou art
my God. And verily, as when Ahab said to Benhadads servants, Is my brother
Benhadad yet 1 Kings 20. 33.
alive, they took advantage thereby saying, thy brother Benhadad: so whereas
God calls himself in particular the God of the faithful, and them in like
manner his people and his servants; why may not the faithful call not God only
their God, but themselves also his servants after a special manner, making
thereby a thankful confession of their own high dignity which the Lord their
God has bestowed upon them? It was not pride then and presumption, but a
thankful and dutiful acknowledgement of Gods most singular goodness toward
himself that made David sound out with a loud voice, and double the same
again and again, Behold Lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the
son of thine handmaid; thou have broken my bonds, that is, thou have
delivered me from the bondage of sin and Satan, and have made me the servant
of righteousness; and therefore I may safely assure my self that I am thy
servant. So old Simeon; Lord now let thou thy Luke 2. 29.
servant depart in peace, according to thy word. So Elias; O Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known 1 Reg. 18. 36.
this day that thou art the God of Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that
I have done al these things at thy commandment. So the Apostles; Simon Peter a
servant and an Apostle of Jesus 2 Pet. 1. 1. Iac 1. 1. Jude 1. Romans 1. 1.
Christ. James a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Jude a servant
of Jesus Christ. Paul a servant of Jesus Christ. They knew that they served
Christ faithfully in the preaching of the Gospel, and in all other duties
enjoined to Act. 27. 23.
them by Christ; and therefore they were bold to publish and proclaim
themselves to be his servants, and Christ himself to be their Lord. So
Tertullian writing in the defense of the Tert. in Apol.
Christian faith against the Gentiles; The religious (says he) among you,
seek for safety where it cannot be had, etc. but I cannot pray for it but to
him of whom I know that I shall obtain it, because it is he that is able to
do it; and I am the party to whom it is to be granted, because I am his
servant, and do worship him alone.

Now as every faithful man knows that God is ^is God in particular, and that
he himself is Gods servant; so he knows the same blessing to be wrought for
him by Christ, being in particular his Redeemer and Savior, who has tendered
to God a full satisfaction for the discharge of his sins. So protests the
mother in the name of all her children; My beloved Cant. 2. 16.
is mine, and I am his; and whom may we join next to the mother, but her best
and dearest daughter? My soul (says Luk: 1. 47.
he) does magnify the Lord, and my spirit reioiceth in God my Savior. So Job;
I am sure that my Redeemer lives. So David, Job 19 25. Psalm. 19. 14.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer. So Saint Paul; I
live by the faith of the Gal. 2. 20.
Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. So an ancient
Peer of the Church, whose works have been thought by some, worthy to be
fathered upon Saint Austine; I come more sweetly to my Jesus then to any of the
Saints. So Saint Austine himself in his Epistle to Dardanus; O good Jesus, O
the Redeemer of my soul, wherewithal shall I requite thy clemency, or
satisfy thy goodness, for not shedding better blood for thine elect, then
thou did for my sins.

So Saint Cyrill upon these words, Let his blood be upon us and our children;
To what end should I have wealth, and hope for the inheritance of the goods of
this world, seeing already I am heir of thy most precious blood, and redeemed
with thy most glorious death? Why should not I very much esteem of my self,
seeing thou have shed as much blood for me, as thou have done for all the
world? So Saint Bernard upon these words of our blessed Savior, I have
earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer; O good Jesus,
O the love of my soul, who among mortal men does desire to make his life
perpetual, as thou did desire to loose thine for me? What delight will thou
take in the world to come, with thine elect; seeing here upon earth thou did
call that day wherein thou did suffer, Easter: that is, a great and solemn
festival day? O good Iesi, O the Redeemer of my sou^e, do not I happily owe
thee as much as all the world owes thee, seeing I have cost thee as much blood
as all the world has done?

Lastly, we may join to these, Saint Ambrose, as one that is joined with them
in the same faith. I will not (says he) glory Ambros. de Jacob and vita beata.
cap. 6.
because I am just, but because I am redeemed will I glory; I will not glory
that I am void of sin, but for that my sins are remitted unto me; I will
not glory for that I have profited any, or for that any has profited me, but
for that Christ is an advocate to the Father for me, and for that his blood was
shed for me.

By all which confessions which these holy persons made of their faith, we may
perceive that it is the proper work of true faith, not only to believe that
Christ is our Savior in particular, and that he shed his blood as precisely
for us, as well as for any other of the residue of the faithful, but also that
thereby our sins are forgiven in particular unto our selves.

For it is not enough (as Saint Bernard says) to believe that Bernard. Ser. 2.
de Annunciat.
thy sins cannot be done away but by him against whom thou have offended, and
who himself cannot offend, but thou must proceed further, and believe also,
that thy sins are forgiven even to thy self. To doubt of the most singular
virtue of the blood of Christ to purge all the sins of all the faithful,
were infidelity: even so for any one that believes himself to be one of the
faithful, to doubt whether his sins are forgiven to himself, is to betray
his hypocrisy, seeing whatsoever he professes, yet either he believes not
himself to be one of the faithful, or else he believes not the truth of the
promise of the pardon of sin, that God has made by all the Prophets Act. 10.
43.
to all that believe.

Why? Manasses himself that was a grievous murderer of Gods dear Saints, and
a greater Idolater then many of the Heathen; yet when he felt Gods mercy in
giving him repentance, he was persuaded that God was his God and loving Father,
and had saved and del^uered him from all his iniquities and sins. No marvel
then that Ezechias the Father of Manasses, Esaias 38. 17.
who walked before God in truth, and with a perfect heart, and did that which
was good and acceptable in his sight, and therefore knew himself to be
accepted of God, did make this profession after he was delivered from his
dangerous sickness;; saying, Behold, for felicity I had bitter grief, but it
was thy pleasure to deliver my soul from the pit of corruption, for thou have
cast all my sins behind thy back. No marvel likewise that David a man
after Gods own heart, resolving with true sorrow of soul to confess his
sins, had a certain assurance of the pardon of them, as he himself
testifies: saying, I thought I will confess my sins against my Psalm. 3^. 5.
self, and thou forgauest the iniquity of my sin: For the which benefit
being so gracious and great, he calls upon his soul again and again to be
thankful unto God in the best manner that possibly he could do; saying,
Praise the Lord, Psalm. 1^3. 1.
O my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name. Praise the Lord,
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth all thy sins,
and heals all thine infirmities.

There be two things that hinder this comfortable assurance in all the
faithful more or less, especially in the time of some grievous tentation. As
first, the small measure of faith, and other spiritual graces, and the great
strength of their earthly and carnal affections. And secondly, the remnants of
distrustful fear of utterly falling away from God, caused by their manifold
and daily falls; but the small measure of faith, and of other graces of
sanctification, ought not to hinder the assurance of the faithful; because a
little faith is a true faith, as well as a great faith; seeing more or less
does not change Magis and minus non variant speciem. John 3 16. Apocol. 3. 8.
the nature of a thing: a little faith then is as true a sign of Gods love as
a great, the Covenant of grace being made not only with them that have a great
faith, but a little also, even with all that truly believe. The Church of
Thiatyra had but a little strength, yet she was accepted with God as well as the
other Churches that had greater: For works of piety are accepted with God
according to that a man has, and not according 2 Cor. 8. 12. Matthew. 13. 23.
to that he has not. The ground that brought forth fruit thirty sold, is
commended for good ground as well as that which brought forth a great deal
more. And the servant Matthew. 25. 23.
that gained two talents, is praised by his master as well as he that gained
five. For God will not despise the day of small Zach. 4. 10.
things, neither will our meek and mild Savior Christ break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Matthew. 12. 20.


Moreover, when the Lord does promise that he will be a gracious God to all
that believe, repent, and return unto him, love him, and fear him, and walk
in his ways, he does not respect the perfection of these graces, nor the worth
of the works that proceed from them, but these promises are all founded upon
the worthiness of Christ, who is the foundation Act. 3. 26. Gal 3. 18. 2 Cor.
1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 6.
of the Covenant, and upon the perfection and merit of his obedience: For all
the promises of God are in him, yea, and in him, Amen. And all the faithful
are accepted in him as all their divine graces, and fruitful works are
spiritual sacrifices well pleasing to God by the sweet odor of the sacrifice
1 Pet. 2. 5. Apocal. 8. 3.
of Christ. The small measure then of faith, and of all other graces of
sanctification, ought not to discourage the faithful, nor yet their sins of
ignorance and infirmity; seeing the sacrifices Leuit. 4 2. Numb. 15. 24.
under the Law appointed by God himself, being shadows of the sacrifice of
Christ, do assure them that they shall be fully pardoned by the perfection and
merit of the sacrifice of Christ. Yea if any one truly repent, and be heartily
sorry for his sins that have been willingly and wittingly committed, yet
there is a sacrifice of expiation and reconciliation appointed Leuit. 6. 1.
Ezech. 18. 22.
even for all such sins, and a promise of pardon to all such sinners. For as
no sin is venial, if it continually please; so no sin is mortal if it
heartily displease. And albeit sin remain in the faithful as long as they
live, yet if godly sorrow wounds it, a godly death shall utterly destroy it:
And if in any one, sin be deadly wounded, and at the last utterly destroyed,
how can it work such a persons destruction?

Now albeit the faithful many times fall, yet they never utterly fall away,
seeing the Lord orders a good man's going, and Psalm. 37. 24.
makes his way acceptable to himself; so that though he fall, yet he shall
not be cast away, seeing the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand. For God has
bound himself under the Covenant of grace, that he will not leave his
faithful servants to stand or fall at their own choice, but that he will
stablish their wills by his grace, that they shall never will and resolve to
continue perpetually in sin, and utterly to fall away from God, as it is
delivered by the Prophet Jeremy. Ier. 32. 40.


Now whether this assurance be the form or the effect of a true faith, we need
not to be too peremptory herein; undoubtedly the Apostle seems to set it
down as an effect of faith; By Christ (says he) we have boldness and
entrance, with confidence Ephesians. 3. 12.
by faith in him. By faith then we have boldness to come unto God, as to a
loving and a gracious Father, and have confidence in him that he will assist
and aid us in all our necessities; says then breeds boldness and
confidence, but it is no more the one then the other, seeing it is the mother of
them both: Verily, there is a trust or a confidence whereby a faithful man
does undoubtedly believe, and is confident that GOD is a gracious God to all
that believe and embrace the Covenant of Grace; repent, love, and fear God,
and walk in his Laws and Commandments; be they Jew or Gentile, Male or
Female, Bond or Free, and this confidence is the very form of faith, if it be
not altogether one with it. But that trust and confidence whereby a faithful
man is persuaded, that God is to him in particular a gracious God, and a loving
Father in Christ, arising upon the action of the soul reflected upon it self,
and upon it is own spiritual estate, and taking notice of all the Divine
graces of the Spirit, wherewithal it is endued, is not faith, but an effect
thereof, even an habit, or rather an act of a sanctified conscience, lightened
with a true faith; as our most Reverend Diocesan, now a Citizen with the Saints
in Heaven has avouched in the second part of his Defense against Dr, Bishop
fol. 269. and Reverend Mr. Perkins, in his Treatise of Conscience. The sum of
whose doctrine is comprehended in this Syllogism.

If whosoever believes, repents, loves, and fears God, and has a sincere
care to walk in all his commandments, is most assuredly in Gods love, and
shall undoubtedly be saved, then whosoever knows assuredly that he believes,
repents, loves, and fears God, and has a sincere care to walk in all his
Commandments, knows assuredly thereby that he is in Gods love, and that
undoubtedly he shall be saved.

But I know (says every sincere and faithful Christian) by the act of mine
own conscience reflected upon my self, that I believe, repent, love, and
fear God, and have a sincere care to walk in all his Commandments.

Therefore I know assuredly that I am in Gods love, and shall undoubtedly be
saved.

Now to give a sure and a certain assent to the mayor proposition grounded
upon the undoubted truth of Gods promises, made to all the faithful in Christ
Jesus, and to be confident of the infallibility thereof, is of the very
essence and substance of faith; but to assume the minor proposition, and
thereupon to infer the conclusion, is an act of a sanctified conscience,
lightened with a true faith.

The Church of Rome commends doubtfulnesse of salvation, as a property
beseeming Christian humility and fear, and condemns the infallible
assurance thereof of haereticall security and presumption. And yet this Church
assi^eth her followers, that will submit themselves to be guided by her Canons,
that thereby they shall be brought into favor with God, and so undoubtedly be
made happy and blessed. That so we may know that she is Babel the Mother of
confusion, for that she does by the contrariety of her actions and positions
ouer-throw her own principal grounds.

A Romish Catholic must live in fear and suspense of the full pardon of his
sins by faith in Christ's blood, and yet if he receive absolution from a
Romish Priest, or a Pardon from the Pope, he must rest assured thereof: A
Romish Catholic must not rest assured of his justification and salvation by
the righteousness of Christ, imputed unto him by the free and undeserved grace
and mercy of God, but if he be careful to fulfill the Law of God and the rules
of their religious orders, he shall rest assured that he has not only
merited his own justification and salvation, but also that he has
supererogated thereby for the good of other. Nay, by murdering of Princes and
overthrowing of states even against their oaths and alleagiance, they may not
only merit heaven, but deserve happily (if it so please the Pope) the dignity
thereof, a Canonized Saint.

But to erect so great a building as is the assurance of our justification and
salvation upon so weak and rotten foundations, is in truth presumptuous and
intolerable folly and madness. For if we would respect, I say not the works
of righteousness, wrought wholly, or in part by our own free will, but the
principal fruits of the Spirit of God, and the best duties that the faithful
are enabled to perform thereby, are not these Gods special gifts, making us
indebted unto God, and therefore deserving nothing, much less justification
and salvation at Gods hands? but if we would consider them as pledges and
pawnes of Gods love, procured for us by Christ Jesus, and as the first fruits
of that heavenly inheritance, which he himself has purchased for us, how can
we but rest assured to be brought in the time appointed by the Lord, to the
possession of that, whereof we have so certain an earnest, and so sure a
pledge.

In pasting over temporal Land from man to man, we esteem much of good
security, which highly commends even an hard bargain: A sound title, and a
good conueyance, from such and such persons, to such and such other, makes the
security to be sufficient. The goodliest possession that can be passed over to
any of the sons of men, is the glorious manner of the celestial Paradise,
the true title thereunto is Christ and his righteousness, the conueyance
thereof, is the Word and the Sacraments, which give Christ to all that believe,
and the sure and certain earnest of the same, is the first fruits of the
Spirit. But to our Romish Catholics, the righteousness of our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ, performed for us in his own person, and imputed unto us
by the Lords most free and undeserved mercy, is a mere nullity, and new no
justice, and the apprehension thereof by faith, is a fantastical apprehension
of that which is not a false faith, and an untrue imputation, as our masters of
Rhemes have taught. For their Rhem. in c. 3. ad Romans
title to the heavenly Paradise, is the merit of that righteousness which is
wrought by themselves, and their conueyances are the Popes Indulgences and
Pardons, and their Priests Absolutions and Masses, and the devotions of the men
of their Religious orders. But what is their security for all this? verily
nono at all; for they are commanded to live still in fear and doubtfulnesse,
because they know not how much they fail in the measure, and manner of the
fulfilling of this righteousness, and whether or no they shall be enabled to
persevere. And verily no marvel that their security for their heavenly
happiness is so small, or none at all, seeing their pay for the same is in
such light and clipped money, yea in such base and counterfeit coin, and their
conueyance thereof so feeble and weak.

The faith of our Romish Catholics, as they themselves teach, is such a faith
as may be in the devils, and therefore no marvel but as the devils believe
and tremble, so they do believe and Iac. 2. 19.
tremble also: but whereas the pay made for the purchase of the celestial
Paradise unto all faithful Christians, is the absolute and perfect
rigteousnesse of Christ performed for them, and the conueyauce thereof unto
them, is the Lords gracious grant thereof set down in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, and sealed with the seals of the holy Sacraments, both
of the Old and New Testament, therefore the true faithful Christian needs
not to fear and to doubt of his salvation, seeing he has so good evidence for
the same. For seeing Christ has delivered them out of the hands of their
enemies, that they should serve the Lord without fear, in holiness and
righteousness Luke 1. 74.
all the days of their lives; why should they fear, or doubt to enjoy the
fruit of this deliverance wrought by such a person, and by such means.

Assuredly they do not as the Apostle testifies, speaking in the name of all
the faithful; Ye (says he) have not received Romans 8. 16.
the spirit of bondage to fear again, but ye have received the spirit of
adoption, where by we cry Abba, Father, the same spirit bears witness with
our spirit, that we are the Sons of God; if we be children, we be also
heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. This joyful and comfortable
security of all true and faithful Christians; Saint Cyprian sets Cypr
contra Demetriadem.
down after this manner. There is (says he) with us strength of hope, and
steadfastness of faith, and amidst the ruins of a decaying world, a courageous
mind, and a constant virtue, and a patience always joyful, and a soul
always secure of God to be our God. Thus does both Scripture and Fathers set
forth that comfortable security which GOD by his Spirit, has settled in the
hearts of his faithful servants.

The security then which they condemn, is that whereby men are made either
awl^sse of falling into temptations, or careless of using the means appointed
by God to withstand tentations, or bold of their own strength in using the
means, and so negligent thereby to crave continual aid and assistance from
the Lord; for if we fearing to fall into tentations, use carefully the means
appointed by God to withstand the same, and distrusting our own strength, call
continually to God for his aid; then as the Apostle himself commands we
ought in all things to be secure or without fear; being Phil. 4. 6.
thoroughly persuaded of this, that the event of all things shall be happy, and
that God will turn all to our good. Romans 8. 26.


And verily the true Christian faith drives away distrustful fear out of the
soul of every true and sincere Christian, and makes manifest unto him the
soundnes and vprightnes of his own heart, seeing otherwise it could never lead
him to true happiness; Yea (as the most learned Dr. Fotherby, our late most
Reverend and most loving Diocesan, Lord Bishop of Sarum, lib. 1. Cap. 12. Fol.
1 22. Has showed out of diverse of the books of the wisest among the Heathen)
true happiness has bin esteemed for a man to have his soul free from terror
and fearfulness; nay, without this freedom and security, it is most certain
that it cannot enjoy so much as a shadow of any foelicity or any sound comfort
and true contentment, seeing true contentment, and sound comfort and joy is
founded in a courageous confidence of the heart, and in the quiet security and
tranquillity of the mind.

To be full of fear and terror, is a property belonging to a 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
slave, yea, it is a b^senesle and slauishnes^e contrary to true confidence and
courage: Fear (says the Apostle) has Cura quasi cor vreas.
painfulness, and it br^edeth that care that burns and scorcheth the heart,
and ^ormenteth the soul, and it hastneth those Apoc. 21. 8.
that willingly entertain it toward the horrors of hell, and excludes them
from the joys of Heaven.

How then ought all the sincere Professors of the Gospel, to be thankful to
God, for that he hat sent his Gospel unto them, and has opened theeir eyes
thereby, so to apprehend his unspeakable love in Christ, revealed therein,
that thereby they are effectually stirred up to love God? especially seeing (as
the Apostle says) there is no fear in love, but perfect love 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
casts out fear. For as a chaste spouse is not jealous of her kind husband,
and a dutiful son is not so fearful as to think that his tenderhearted
Father will withdraw his love from him: so the true Church of Christ being his
beloved Spouse, and her legitimate children being the children of God, will not
be fearful and distrustful whether God will change his kind affection
toward them, and withdraw from them his tender love. Nay, undoubtedly the
true Church is always ready to profess and say, My beloved is mine, and I am
his; he is my beloved and still loves me, and therefore I will continually
love him, and rejoice for ever in his constant love: And so undoubtedly the
legitimate children of the true Church, are ready and willing to confess with
their elder brother Saint Paul; We live, yet not we now, but Christ liue^h in
us, and in that we now live in the flesh, we live by the faith of the Son of
God, who has loved us and given himself for us.

And verily such a confession is set down by the Wiseman in the name of all
the Saints: Though we sin (say they all) Sap 15. 2.
yet we are thine, for we know thy power, but we sin not, knowing that we are
thine. In which words four remarkable points of doctrine are deliu^red unto
us: First, that the Saints in this life, avouch that they are the Lords, in his
favor, and in his love; and that we may understand how certainly they are
assured thereof, they double the same asseueration, saying, that they do not
go by guess, or stand upon blind hope, but that they know indeed that they
are the Lords. Secondly, the means are ^et down whereby they know that they
are Gods even because he has given to them a true knowledge of himself: We
are thine (say they) for we know thy power. Thirdly, they avouch that their
sins of ignorance and infirmity, do not take from them this assurance of
their faith; For (say they) though we sin, yet are we thine: Fourthly, they
avouch that this assurance of Gods love is a most powerful means to keep
them that they do not willingly give themselves over to sin: For (say they)
we sin not, knowing that we are thine. And therefore herein also the
judgment of the Church of Rome is contrary to the plain and direct evidence
given in by all the Saints, in that they affirm that the assurance of Gods
love is a spur to sin, whereas the Saints avouch, and that no doubt upon
their own experience, that it is a bridle to restrain from the same. Grace
concealed from such as are left to their own headstrong affections, may be an
occasion that many are carried headlong into sin: but grace revealed gives
grace, reuoketh from sin, and provoke unto all good works. The grace of
God (says the Apostle) that brings Tit. 2. 11.
salvation unto all men has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live justly and soberly and
godly in this world,

Wherefore in that the Church of Rome not only wills and commands her
followers to doubt of their salvation, and to fear whether they be in the
estate of grace, but also disgraceth the security of salvation given to the
faithful, by the Gospel of Christ, being the powerful instrument of God; to
work faith and grace, it is evident that she is the mother of infidelity, and
not of faith, and that she leads her disciples to hellish horrors and
terrors, the just reward of fearful infidelity; and not to joy unspeakable
and glorious, the happy fruit and 1 Pet. 1. 8.
issue of a confident Christian faith, as Saint Peter testifies.

And thus have I showed in the clearing and demonstrating of these three last
propositions, what manner of knowledge that is, which I affirm to be all one
with saving faith; as first Phil. 1. 10.
a wise discerning knowledge, where by we so apprehend Gods love in Christ
revealed unto us in the Gospel, as that we esteem and embrace it as ou^
highest happiness and our chiefest good. Secondly, a sanctifying knowledge,
whereby we are not only set in a right course, but also are guided to walk
constantly in all holy ways, that so we may be made Tit. 1. 1.
meet to be partakers of Gods love. And thirdly, a comforting and chearing
knowledge whereby we have a certain assurance of Gods fatherly love in this
present life, (albeit not Romans 8. 15.
without many conflicts with distrustful fears) and shall at the last be
brought to the quiet and peaceable possession 1 Ioh. 5. 19.
thereof in the life to come.

CHAP. VII.
The vtility and dignity of faith, and the great difficulty to attain
thereunto.

THe utility and dignity of faith does hence appear, in that it causes the
faithful to behold in Christ as in a miraculous mirror of Gods matchless
mercy, an incomparable treasure of his unspeakable love; and to cleave
constantly to it, as to their highest happiness and chiefest good, and makes
them desirous from the very bottom of their hearts to make manifest their
thankfulness unto him, by their sincere obedience to all his Commandments,
and brings also peace of conscience unto them, by giving them an assurance of
the pardon of their sins, and of their receiving into grace and favor with
God.

And not only so, but also for that it causes them continually to fight
against their spiritual enemies, that would make them to break their Covenant
with God, and in the end gives them a full conquest over them al. This is
(says the Apostle 1 John 5. 4.
speaking to the faithful) the victory, that is, the principal weapon whereby
the victory is gotten, and the world overcome, even your faith.

And therefore it is not without cause that the Apostle Saint Paul exhorts
the faithful, that above all they should take unto themselves the shield of
faith, because thereby they Ephesians. 6. 16.
might quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. And verily, faith is the first
and the chiefest of all those divine and heavenly graces that are wrought in
the hearts of Gods children by the holy Ghost, and it is the fountain and root
of all the rest, and therefore in diverse places where they are named together,
it is first named, and has the primacie, and as it were, the right hand of all
the rest; by faith Christ does dwell in our hearts, by whom God and all his
blessings are made ours. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Ephesians. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 3.
23.
Faith (says Saint Austine) is Christ in us, and that heavenly Sun is
impaired or increased according to our faith, Aug. in Psalm. 1 2^. And again,
Faith is the very soul of the soul, and the life thereof, Aug. in Ioh. hom.
49. Because it ioineth us to Christ the Author of life, and brings with it
all other divine graces wherein our spiritual life consists, Aug. de
Praedest. sanct. cap. 7. And hence it is that the whole Law is said to
appertain to faith, if a true faith be understood, Aug. de Fide and Oper. cap.
22.

And in this sense, faith may be called our whole sanctification, for that it
works our whole sanctification; as infidelity is called the proper, and
after a sort, the only sin, because it is the original of all
unrighteousness, Aug. cont. Ep. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3. For what good thing is
there that is not obtained by faith? By faith we are justified, Romans 5. 1. By
faith we are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. By faith we are made the sons of God, Gal 3.
26. By faith we are incorporated into the heavenly Jerusalem, and by it as by a
cognizance or badge we are distinguished from all other societies. The
Catholic Faith (says Saint Austine) does distinguish the just from the
unjust, not by the Law of works, but of faith; without the Aug. ad Bonif. lib.
3. cap. 5.
which, those very works which seem to be good, are turned into sin. Now if
it were but in these respects, faith might challenge the chiefest place of
precedence and honor in the assembly of all her princely Peers; but much more
may she do it, for that in her own proper work she is employed in beholding,
embracing, and magnnifying of all the divine excellences and perfections that
be in God, wherein consists the most proper and peculiar glory and honor of
God.

By works (says Chrysostom) we obey God; but faith Chrysostom. hom. 8. in ^p.
ad Romans
entertaineth a meet opinion of God, and glorifieth him, and makes him much
more to be admired, then does the showing forth of good works: Works commend
the doer, but faith commends God only; and what it is, it is wholly his, for
it reioiceth in this, that it conceiueth great things, which redound to his
glory. Wherefore no marvel that the Lord himself has such a respect to
faith, that all his gracious and glorious works and words, tend either to the
begetting, or strengthening of the same. For why has the Lord accomplished his
most glorious works of the Creation, Redemption, and sanctification, but that
they might be testimonies of his goodness, mirrours of his mercy, seals of
his special Act. 14. 17. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Apoc 7. 2. Ephesians. 1. 14. Cant 1. 3.
Hos. 11. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 13.
grace and favor, pawnes and pledges of his fatherly kindness and love, that
so he might draw us and bind us unto himself, and cause us to trust perfectly
in this his favor and grace, which is thus and thus ratified and confirmed
unto us? So why did our most blessed Savior send forth his Apostles into the
whole world, to preach and publish to all creatures these so ioifull tidings of
such inestimable favors as are contained in the Gospel but that the whole
world might be converted to the faith, and might believe, and to be saved. As
for the same end has he caused the same to be penned for all posterities, that
thereby there might be wrought a saving Mark 16. 16. John 20. 31.
faith in the hearts of all the children of God, even to the worlds end.
Wherefore without all doubt faith is a most singular gift of God, seeing ^e
has ordained such singular means for the effecting and working thereof; yea,
it is a most rare blessing, and hardly gotten, seeing where these singular
means are best used, even there of^ntimes appears little fruit.

When Esayas more like an Evangelist then a Prophet, had published this
doctrine of faith, even to the Lords own people, what was his own testimony
concerning his success thereof, Esaias 53. 1.
but this? Lord who has believed our report, and to whomis the arm of the
Lord renealed? Nay, when our blessed Savior himself came in his own person to
preach these glad ridings of the Gospel, even with the mouth and tongue of the
Son of God, and after so wise and powerful a manner, that his very enemies did
wonder at the gracious words that came out of his mouth; and were forced to
confess, That never man spoke as he did. Yea, Luke 4 22. Ioh. 17. 46.
after he had wrought many strange and wonderful signs for the further
confirmation thereof, yet all this took so small effect that by the testimony
of Saint John, being an eye witness of all these things; then also was
fulfilled the former prophecy, Lord who has believed our report? Yea, their
infidelity John 12. 37. Mark 6. 6.
was so great, that our Savior Christ marvelled thereat.

And yet behold a thing more to be marvelled at, that the Apostles themselves
who continually heard our Saviors divine and heavenly doctrine, and daily saw
his wonderful works, were yet so hardly brought to the faith, that our
Savior after his resurrection forced to reprove them most bitterly for it;
saying, Oh ye fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken. No marvel then, that albeit Luke 24. 25.
the Gospel be published and revived in these last days, before the coming of
Christ to judgment, by many singular and excellent instruments, yet when the
Son of man comes, he shall not find faith on the earth. Luke 18. 8.


The truth is, that it is an easy matter to believe lies, because they are
agreeable to our corrupt nature, but the doctrine of truth teaching the
assurance of Gods love in Christ, is a strange paradox, contrary to the common
opinion of men. We (says the Apostle) ^each Jesus Christ crucified, a
stumbling 1 Cor. 1. 23.
block to the Jew, and foolishness to the Grecian. Or be it that a slender
assent, and a formal approbation of the doctrine of faith, proceeding from
some slight apprehension thereof, may be somewhat general where it has been
long time taught by the Preacher, and commanded by the Prince; yet a settled
persuasion proceeding from a sure and sound apprehension, is undoubtedly a
strange and wonderful work of God. Without all controversy (says the
Apostle) great is 1 Timothy 3. 16.
this mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, and believed on in the
world; yea, the agreement of faith, with the heart of man, is esteemed by Saint
Austine to be one of the greatest miracles of our Christian profession.

And verily, if either we look upon the profane worldlings, we shall see them
scorning at the assurance of the faithful, Sap. 2. 13.
which causes them to glory that God is their Father, and has adopted them
for his Sons: Or if we cast our eyes upon the faithful servant of God
himself, when he is in any great spiritual conflict, we shall soon see how
ready he is to let loose the sure hold of his hope, and to plunge himself into
the gulf of despair, because he is guilty to himself of offending so good
and so gracious a God, by his own manifold and great iniquities and sins.

Wherefore, albeit we have attained to such a measure of faith as was given by
Christ to his own Apostles, yet had Luke 17. 5. Mark 9 24.
we need continually to pray, O Lord increase our faith; and to say with the
Father of the possessed child, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief. Yea, as
Saint Austine admonishes, Tota opera nostra in hac vita est sanare oculum
cordis vnde videtur Deus. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 18.
Our whole work in this life, must be continually employed about the cure of
the eye of our heart, whereby God is seen; that is, our faith. The which
lesson he learned of our Savior Christ, who when the people demanded of him,
What they should do, that they might work the works of God? Answered them,
saying, This is the work of God, that ye believe John 6. 26.
on him, whom he has sent: and so his beloved Disciple has taught us also.
This is the commandment of God, 1 John 3. 23.
that ye believe in the name of the Son of God, and love one another as he
gave commandment. Wherefore the calumination of the carnal professor, and of
the Roman Catholic, made against the doctrine of the Gospel, is unjust and
untrue: which is, that an easy way is laid open by the professors of the
Gospel, to life everlasting; and heaven set at a very small rate, for that
they teach, that God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
to the end that Ioh. 3. 16.
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. Yea,
our Catholic Romanists may justly be challenged for doing great and
intolerable wrong to our Christian says, in that they so vilisie and debase
the same, that they make it common, not only to the reprobate, but also to the
very Devils themselves; whereas in Tit. 1. 1. Act. 13. 43.
very truth it is proper and peculiar to Gods elect, yea even to such as are
ordained to life everlasting.

THE SECOND PART OF THEOLOGICAL LOGIC.
The questions that are handled in this second part concerning the doctrines of
faith, and are cleared by arguments drawn from all Topicke places, Are these,

QVEST. I.
The Church is not always glorious and notorious, as a City seated upon an
high hill.

GOD would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth,
Arguments drawn from the efficient cause. 1 Timothy 2. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and by the voice of truth uttered by the Church, the pillar and ground of
truth, he does call to him such as are to be of the truth, and does cause the^
to hearken unto the truth, and to be led thereby into the everlasting
habitations. Psalm. 43. 3.
Now truth and falsehood are nigh neighbors, and dwell near each to other,
(for where God has his Church the devil has his Chapel) and their houses
in outward show differ little, saving that for the most part the forefront of
falshoodes habitation is gloriously set out, garnished and trimmed; whereas the
door of truth is plain and homely. Whereby it comes to pass, that
falsehood (...)

in the right way of truth and righteousness) the testimonies of the Lord are
sure, and give wisdom to the simple. For does pure seed breed Tares or pure
Corn? And does wholesome food breed noisome or wholesome humors? Undoubtedly
light and sight preserve from stumbling and falling; it is Ioh 11. 9. Matthew.
22. 29.
darkness and blindness that cause both: Ye err (says our blessed Savior
to the seduced Sadduces) not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God. Even
as their seduced Fathers erred in their hearts, because they knew not the Lords
Psalm. 95. 10. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de Lazaro.
ways. The ignorance of the Scripture (says Chrysostom) brought in
haeresies, and a corrupt life, and made a confusion of all things.

Wherefore it is a note of an evil person, to hate the light, Ioh. 3. 20.
lest his deeds should be reproved, as it is a badge of an haereticke, to
accuse the Scriptures of ambiguity and obscurity (as Irenaeus affirms) for
that in truth they do without ambiguity Iren. l 3. c. 2.
and obscurity, give definitive sentence against their haeresies. From the
which badge and cognizance, if the Romish Church will be set free, let her
purge out of the books of her dear darlings, the slanderous accusations of
the Scriptures which are in them, and let her give a general liberty to the
lay people, to have the Scriptures in a known tongue, that so they may the
more easily attain to knowledge; and let her not any longer commend a blind
faith, nor teach that faith consists rather in ignorance then in knowledge.

QVEST. IV.
Not the sufferings or righteousness of any mere Man, but only of our blessed
Savior, both God and Man are of sufficient worthiness to satisfy for sin,
and to merit the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.

As in Adam was the common nature of all men, he being Arguments drawn from
the material cause.
the root, all other the branches, that so he might be a fit person with whom
the legal Covenant might be made: which was that if he would stand steadfast in
obedience to the Law of God, which was written in his heart, and the which he
was enabled to perform; he should conueigh over his nature, holy and pure to
all his posterity, and be translated from an earthly to an heavenly Paradise:
but if by his fall he stained and polluted it, he should conueigh it over to
them stained and polluted, and make himself and all that by ordinary
propagation came from him subject to all miseries and woes: So in Christ Jesus
the second Adam was the common nature of man, he being the root, and the
faithful the branches, and upon him Romans 11. 17. Ioh. 15. 5. Gal. 3. 17. Act.
3. 26.
was grounded the Evangelical Covenant, that the sufferings which he endured,
and the righteousness which he performed in our nature, not for himself, but
for us, should be available to all that are united unto him by a true faith,
both for their deliverance from that condemnation which was due unto them in
respect of their sins, and for the purchasing unto them of the glorious
inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Unto all such as seek to be saved and justified by their own works, our
Saviors answer is, If ye will enter into life Matthew. 19. 16.
(viz. by this door) keep the Commandments: but to all such as inquire and
desire to enter into life by the right door, they must look to the answer
given by the Apostle to the Iaylor, demanding how he should be saved? Believe
(said he) in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy household (that
Act. 16. 31.
join with thee in the true faith.) So Saint Peter to the same demand; Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name Act. 2. 38.
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. So our blessed Savior himself, The Kingdom of God is at
hand, repent and believe the Gospel. Now Mar. 1. 15.
what this Gospel is, that Christ himself first preached in Jury and
commanded his Apostles to preach to the whole world, The Apostle Saint Paul
shows, saying; God has made Jesus 2 Cor. 3. 21.
Christ sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

In all the which Testimonies we are given to understand, that we have great
cause to repent us for all our works which are nothing else but sins, which
are so odious to God, and so dangerous to our own souls, that unless Christ
had made himself a sacrifice for them, we could not have been freed from
death and damnation: and as concerning that righteousness unto the which
everlasting life was due, that we could not find in our selves, but Christ was
to perform it for us also; otherwise we could not be partakers of life
everlasting. For there must be a due and an equal proportion between the
satisfaction and the debt, and between the price, and the thing purchased, if
in justice the one and the other, shall discharge and deserve the one and the
other. But there is no equal proportion between the sufferings and
righteousness of a mere man, and between sin and the love of God, and
aeternall happiness consisting therein, but only between the sufferings and
righteousness of our blessed and glorious Immanuel, God and Man.

For the effect proceeding from the cause cannot exceed the (...). Arist. Eth.
l. 2. c. 1.
virtue and power thereof, seeing the dignity and worth of the one, arises out
of the worth and dignity of the other. Now the works of Christ proceeded from
his humane nature, personated in his Divine, and both his natures did concur
in effecting the most gracious and glorious work of the redemption of man;
whereas the faithful are not personally united to the Son of God, or to the
Holy Ghost, nor have the spirit above measure, but have the remnants of
original sin still staying in them, and stayning their best works, and
therefore not the works of Christ wrought in us by his Spirit, but those that
he performed in his own person for us, are fully satisfactory for all our
sins, and absolutely meritorious of the Crown of Glory.

QVEST. V.
The Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, are not transubstantiated into the Body
and Blood of Christ,

Bread and Wine in their natures and substances are the visible signs and the
material parts of the Eucharist, and therefore are not transubstantiated into
the very Body and Blood Aug. de Consecra. did. 2 hoc est quod dico.
of Christ, neither in truth can they be without the destruction of the
Sacrament it self. For (as Saint Austin says) every thing while it
subsisteth, retains the nature and truth of those things whereof it
consists. At the first institution of the holy Eucharist, the Evangelists,
and the Apostle do testify that 1 Cor. 11. 24.
our blessed Savior took bread, and when he had given thanks, brake it and
gave it to them, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body which was given for you,
Do this in remembrance of me. It was Bread then in nature and substance, that
our blessed Savior took at that time, and it was the very selfsame thing
that he consecrated by thanksgiving, and brake and gave to his Disciples,
saying, Take, eat, this is my Body, that is, this is that I ordain to be the
Sacrament, or sacred sign of my Body. For the word coming to the Element,
does not abolish it, but consecrate it to an holy use, and so makes it to be a
Sacrament; seeing it does not change it in nature and substance, but in use.
And verily (as S. Ambrose says) If there be such force in Ambros. d^ Sacra. l.
4. c. 4.
the words of the Lord Jesus, that the things which were not (at his very word)
begun to be, how much more can it work this, that they shall be the same (in
substance) that they were, and (yet) be changed into another thing (in use.)
For this Bread (says Chrysostom) is counted worthy to be called the Lords
C^rys^st ad Caesar. Monach.
Body, albeit the nature of the Bread remains. Yea, as the Divine and Humane
natures in Christ being united together by personal union, remain in their
proper essence and substance Gelas cont. Eutich.
without being confounded or changed the one into the other.

Even so (as the ancient Fathers have taught) in the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ, the visible Elements Theodor Dialog. 2.
mystically joined unto the invisible grace, do not depart from their former
nature and substance. For he that honored the signs which we see with the
names of his Body and Blood, did not change the nature (of the signs) but did
add grace to nature. And therefore the Apostle did often call it by the same
name of Bread, after it was consecrated to be the Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.
of his Body.

But for that our Romanists do so press the bare words of our blessed
Savior, we may justly demand of them, in what words of our Lord shall we
find, that he took Bread, either to abolish the substance of it, and to make
the bare and naked shows thereof to be the outward signs in the Sacrament,
and and to bring his body into the place of it, or to turn the whole substance
of it into the substance of his Body? Yea, where shall we find in these words,
This is my Body, that this does signify either Christ's Body it self, or an
Indiuiduum vagum, that is, an undetermined particular; or else as their own
glosle grossly affirms, nothing at all? And verily the words of Christ and
explications thereof, taken out of other like places of holy Scripture, are
nothing with them, for that unless they be sowly wrested and turned, they will
nothing at all further their turn.

QVEST. VI.
The righteousness of the Law delivered by Moses, is that true righteousness
whereby we are justified before God, and not that righteousness which is said
to be obtained by the observation of Popish Vows.

The moral Law is Gods aeternall and unchangeable righteousness, it
commands us to love the Lord with all our heart, soul and strength, and our
neighbor as our selves; which are duties most righteous and just. To the
singular excellency of the which Law, Moses, the first penman thereof, bears
witness saying, What Nation is so great, that has Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
Laws and Ordinances so righteous, as is all this Law that I set before you
this day? And to the righteousness that is obtained by the perfect observation
thereof, he likewise bears witness, saying, This shall be our righteousness
even before the Deuteronomy. 6. 25.
Lord our God, if we take heed to keep all these Commandments, which he has
commanded us. As to the most ample reward obtained thereby not only the
Apostle bears witness, saying, Do this and thou shall live; but also our
Savior Christ Romans 10 5. Matthew. 19. 17.
himself; If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. But this
blessing is not promised, but to the total and continual observation thereof,
seeing the failing in either, brings Deuteronomy. 2. 29. Gal. 3. 10.
the contrary curse.

Wherefore when all the Posterity of Adam was disabled by his fall, fully to
keep all these Commandments; Our most blessed Savior came in our nature to
fulfill them for us, Gal 4 4.
that so he might procure unto us righteousness and life. And so our blessed
Savior himself testifies, saying, I came not to Matthew 3 31.
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. For by the Gospel the
Law is not made void, but established. For if our Rom 3 31.
Savior Christ had not thoroughly fulfilled for us that righteousness that is
required in the Law, unto the which the promise is made, he had not procured
for us righteousness and life. Wherefore intolerable is the pride and
presumption of the Founders of the Religious Orders of the Church of Rome,
which teach that their rules lay open, a way to a more perfect righteousness,
then is contained in the Law of God; and that their superstitious Votaries can
thereby not only merit for themselves everlasting life, but also do many
works of supererogation available for the salvation of other men.

QVEST. VII.
We are not justified by those works of righteousness commanded in the Law of
God, which are wrought by our selves, but by those which were wrought for us by
our Savior Christ in his own person, and are imputed to us, and made ours
through faith.

Moses (says the Apostle) describes the righteousness that Arguments drawn
from the formal cause.
is of the Law, that the man that does these things shall live therein: But the
righteousness that is of faith, speaks on this manner: Say not thou in thine
heart, who shall ascend it to heaven? for that is to fetch Christ from above:
Or who shall descend into hell? for that is to bring Christ from the dead, but
what says it? The Romans 10. 5.
word is near thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart, and this is the word
of Faith which we preach. For if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. For with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the
mouth he confesses to salvation. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes
in him shall not be confounded. In which words is set down the diversity that
is between the Law and the Gospel, in prescribing the means whereby we are
delivered from death, and made partakers of everlasting life. Do (says the
Law) that which is prescribed in me, and thou shall live: and do it in that
manner, that thou never transgress, and then thou shall be free from all fear
of death. Whereas the Gospel says, Believe that Christ dyed and descended
into Hell for thee, to assure thee of thy deliverance; and that he having
performed all righteousness for thee ascended into Heaven, the place where
righteousness is rewarded and crowned, to take possion thereof for thee, and
thou shall be delivered from the horrors of Heil, and be made pertaker of the
joys of heaven. So when the Iaylor demanded of Paul and Silas, what he should
do that he might be saved? they answered, Believe in the Act. 16. 30.
Lord Jesus (that he fulfilled all righteousness both in suffering and obaying
for the salvation of all that rightly believe) and thou shall be saved.

And verily whereas there is but one manner and form of obtaining
Justification and Salvation for all that are justified and saved seeing
children dying in their Infancy, and all such as are not effectually called,
until the end of their lives, cannot be justified and saved by the works of
righteousness wrought by themselves, but by the righteousn^sse of Christ
performed for them, and imputed unto them by a true faith; therefore all the
residue of the faithful servants of God are justified and saved after the same
manner. And so our blessed Savior teaches in the parable of the Husbandman,
that went Matthew. 20. 9.
out and sent laborers into his Vineyard, whereof some were sent at the first
hour, some at the third, some at the sixth, and some at the last hour, and yet
they all received the same wages. The which parable Saint Ambrose expounding,
says; Ambros. de vocat Gent lib. 1. cap 5.
that such as were hired at the last hour, represent such as are called to the
Lords service at the end of their lives, whom he has chosen without works,
and upon whom he does rather power forth the riches of his Grace, then yield a
reward unto their labors, that they also who have labored and sweat the whole
day, and continued their whole life in the service of God, and yet receive but
their Penny with the other, may thereby understand that they also rather
receive a gift of grace then a wages of hire due to their works.

Now if it be replied that Infants and such as are called at the end of their
lives, are justified and saved for the works they would have done, if that
they had lived a longer time; the answer is made by S. Austin, that rewards
and punishments Aug. de bono perseuerant. cap. 9 cp. 15. And de Praedestin.
Sanctorum. cap. 12.
are not rendered to works that men would or could do, but to such as are
actually done. For otherwise Tire and Sidon, yea, all the damned should be
saved, seeing at the day of judgment, they would all repent if they might, and
if their repentance would then serve the turn. Wherefore if we seek for
righteousness by the works of the Law, performed by our selves, as the Jews
did, and as the Romanists still do, we shall assuredly fail therein, as they
did; but if with the Gentiles we embrace righteousness and life by faith in
Christ, then undoubtedly we shall attain to both.

QVEST. VIII.
The form and manner to attain to Sanctification, is not to receive the holy
Word of God, and the Sacraments, with our bodily senses, but with the powers of
our souls; nor to travail far and near on pilgrimage to see or kiss holy
relics, but to see and touch holy things with the inward faculties of our
minds, which are the proper subjects of Sanctification.

Nothing can be in any respect profitable, unless it be applied in that
manner, and to those uses whereunto it is profitable; but the word of God is
given unto us for this use, that it should open unto us the mind and will of
God, and (as Aug. in qu^st. veteris and noui Testamenti.
Saint Austin says) the visible Sacraments were ordained for such as were
environed with flesh, that by the steps thereof they might ascend from such
things as are seen to such things as are understood. Wherefore the word of God
hanged about our necks, or delivered in words, not understood, cannot 1 Cor.
14. 6.
profit but is delivered in vain. And so teaches the Apostle, And now my
Brethren if I come unto you speaking with tongues (not understood) what shall I
profit you?

Verily, the word (not understood) is an Oister whose shell is not opened, and
as a candle which is not lighted, and as a Matthew. 13. 19.
lamp without oil, and as seed sown by the high way side. In like manner,
the outward elements in the holy Sacraments being not applied to those uses
whereunto they were ordained by the institution of Christ, are but bare signs
and empty figures, they are not instruments of spiritual grace: but let the
word come to the element, and lay open the right use of it, then it becomes a
Sacrament, and a feale of the righteousness Romans 4. 11.
that comes by faith. For as he is not a Jew, that is one outward; so neither
is that Circumcision which is outward in the Romans 2. 28.
flesh: but he is a Jew that is one within, and the Circumcision of the heart
in the spirit, not in the letter, is the true Circumcision, whose praise is not
of men but of God. Sanctified means ordained by God to sanctify the soul,
must be apprehended Hag. 2. 13.
by the powers of the soul: Seeing holy things (as says the Prophet) touched
only with our bodily senses, do nothing at all further the sanctity of our
spirits.

And hereof it was, that our Savior himself forbade Mary to touch him with
her bodily hands, (for that she esteemed John 20. 17.
too highly thereof;) But (says he) go to my brethren and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. That is,
apprehend ye with the hands of your faith, that by my means God is become your
loving Father, and gracious God, and then ye have apprehended me with a right
hand. So not by going a long journey on pilgrimage we draw nigh unto God, but
by prayer proceeding Act. 10. 4. Precibus non gressibus itur ad D^im Bern. Ep.
319.
from an humble and faithful mind. For we clime up to God by prayers and not
by stairs: And therefore all that will show themselves truly religious, must
(as Bernard teaches) travel on pilgrimage not toward the earthly but the
heavenly Jerusalem, and that not with their feet, but with their affections.

QVEST. IX.
The manner of receiving Christ in the Eucharist is not carnal but spiritual.

The faithful that lived before the Incarnation of Christ, (as the Apostle
says) sed upon the same heavenly Manna and 1 Cor. 10. 3.
bread of life as we now do; but they did not eat the flesh of Christ with
their bodily mouths, neither then do the faithful so now. And verily,
whereas by the ministry of the word and baptism in our new birth and
inchoation of our sanctification, we receive not Christ after a bodily manner,
but after a spiritual; and yet are thereby regenerated and quickened to an
holy life: Why then, is not the growth and increase of our sanctification by
the ministry of the same word and Eucharist, wrought and accomplished after
the same manner?

Verily, Saint Austine so thought, and therefore said, that Aug. in John tract.
26.
man is inuisibly fed, because he is inuisibly regenerated; He is (says he)
inwardly a babe, and inwardly renewed; and in what part he is newly borne, in
that part he is also fed; and therefore exhorts the faithful not to prepare
their jaws, but their hearts. Yea, (says he) why preparest thou thy teeth and
thy Aug. de verb. Dom secundum. Luc Ser. 33. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 25. De
consecrat. did. 2.
belly? Believe and thou have eaten. Nay it is not lawful (if their own
gloss say the truth) to presle the body of Christ with our teeth; and if we
entertain any such gross conceit, we err more dangerously then ever
Berengarius did.

And verily, it was the common opinion of the ancient Fathers, that Christ was
not a bodily, but a ghostly food. So Chrysostom; This food feeds not the
body but the soul, Chrysostom. in Job. hom. 4.
yea it is the proper nourishment of the soul. And therefore (says he) when
we come to the Eucharist, we whet not our teeth to bite, but we break the
sanctified Bread with a sound faith. So Saint Ambrose de ijs qui initiantur
mysterijs. cap. 9. And how can it be otherwise? For seeing our conjunction with
Christ, is not carnal but spiritual, our feeding upon him cannot be carnal
but spiritual. Our conjunction with Christ (says Saint Cyprian) does not
mingle persons, nor unite substances Cypr. de cana.
(viz. After a bodily manner) but it does combine affections and conioyne wills
with the affection (says Saint Bernard) Christ is touched, and not with the
hand; with the Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 26.
desire, and not with the eye, with faith and not with the senses. So Saint
Ambrose; We touch not Christ by our bodily hands, Ambros. l. 10. in 24. Luc. de
hora dominicae resurrectionis.
but by faith, and therefore neither upon the earth, nor in the earth, nor
after the flesh ought we to seek Christ, if we will find him. And this very
lesson he learned of the Apostle, For henceforth (says he) know we Christ no
more after the 2 Cor. 5. 16.
flesh; but if any man be in Christ, let him be a new creature. For by the
qualities of the new creature planted in our hearts, whereof faith is the
principal, we are joined unto Christ, and not after a bodily manner.

QVEST. X.
Justification and Salvation is wrought only by Christ, and not by any other
whosoever.

Sacraments were ordained to this end, that by visible Arguments drawn from
the final cause.
signs apt to resemble invisible graces, a plain and evident testimony might
be given by the one unto the other. As in the Lords Supper by Bread and Wine
being the aptest creatures to nourish us in this temporal life, this doctrine
is cleared and confirmed unto us, that justification and life everlasting is
given unto us only by Christ, who is the true Manna that came down from
heaven, and the very Bread of eternal life. The which thing is repeated and
inculcated again and again in the sixth of Saint John, that so we might be
thoroughly persuaded Ioh. 6. 33.
of the undoubted truth thereof. As likewise in Baptism, by Water being a most
fit creature to cleanse our bodily uncleanness, is showed and ratified unto
us, that it is the most pure and precious Blood of Christ that is able to
cleanse 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
us from all our sins, which defile our souls. Whosoever then ascribe our
justification and salvation not only to Christ and his Blood, do derogate
from the testimonies of the holy Sacraments; Yea, they which ascribe these
gracious blessings to the external Sacramental Elements, which are the proper
effects of the invisible Grace signified by them, do as much as 1 Pet. 3. 21.
in them lies, cause these outward Elements to give testimony flat contrary to
that whereunto they were ordained by Christ himself.

QVEST. XI.
The faithful ought to be certainly assured of their own salvation.

The Sacraments were not only ordained to show and signify unto the
faithful, that their justification and salvation is only by Christ, but also
to be seals of the same unto them, Rom 4. 11.
and to give them the assurance thereof in their own hearts. The which thing
if it be true in the Sacraments of the Old Testament, much more is it so in the
sacraments of the New, seeing they are instruments of greater grace. The cup of
blessing 1 Cor. 10. 16.
(says the Apostle) which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? That is, ought not we that believe in Christ be as thoroughly persuaded
of our spiritual participation of Christ, the food of our souls, and of
eternal life in him by faith, the mouth of our souls; as we are assured that
we are partakers of the outward elements of Bread and Wine, and of our bodily
nourishment thereby in this temporal life? and especially whereas the names of
the outward signs are changed by the Spirit of God, and receive the names of
things signified, as the Bread is called the Body of Christ, and the
participation of the Bread, the participation of his Body: and that to this
end, that the religious receivers of these holy mysteries should not look to
the nature of the things that are seen, but believe the change made by grace,
in that they being Sacraments, are not now common creatures, but holy pledges
and seals of our communion with Christ and all his Theodor. diol. 1.
blessings; therefore the faithful receiving the one, should rest assured of
their participation in the other.

So reasons Saint Bernard; A Ring is simply given for a Bern. de Carra. Dom.
Ring, and it carries no further signification with it; it is also given to
advance a man to some place of dignity and honor, or else to settle one in the
possession of an inheritance, insomuch that he that has received it, may say;
This Ring is nothing worth, but it is the inheritance that I seek and aim at.
After the same manner (says he) the Lord drawing near his death, had care to
set us in the possession of his grace, to the end that his invisible grace
might be given by some visible sign, and for that end are all Sacraments
ordained.

QVEST. XII.
The outward Elements in the Eucharist, are not Bread and Wine in show, but in
substance.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was odrayned to this end, that by the
feeding and nourishing of our bodies by the outward Elements, our souls might
be assured of our spiritual feeding upon Christ, and of aeternall life
obtained thereby. Now if we were willed to feed upon the empty shows of Bread
and Wine, and to cherish our selves therewith, might we not justly conceive
that we were bidden as it were to a Iuglers feast, to have our senses deluded,
rather then to have our bodies nourished? And what assurance could our souls
have thereby of their spiritual nourishing by the Body and Blood of Christ?
Sacraments (says Saint Austin) if they have no Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonifacium.
likeness with the things whereof they are Sacraments, can be no Sacraments at
all. Wherefore seeing the bare and empty shows of Bread and Wine have no true
similitude with the substantial Body and Blood of Christ, they can in no wise
be the external signs and Sacraments thereof.

QVEST. XIII.
There is no miraculous turning of Bread and Wine in the holy Eucharist into
the very Body and Blood of Christ, nor any other miracle at all.

That which the Apostle avouches of the miraculous gift of tongues, is true
also of all miracles; that is, That they are for 1 Cor. 14. 22.
a sign, not for them that believe, but to them that believe not. And
therefore miracles must be open and manifest, even to all such as have but the
sound use of their outward senses, that they may perceive in them the power and
might of the omnipotent God, giving testimony thereby of the divine truth of
Mar. 16. 20.
that heavenly doctrine which is confirmed by such divine witnesses. Heb. 2. 4.
But in the Lords Supper, there is no turning manifest to sense of Bread and
Wine, into the Body and Blood of Christ, seeing the forms and also the
qualities of Bread and Wine remain there still, and therefore in it there is
no such miracle.

And verily Sacraments were not ordained for Infidels to Act. 8. 37.
convert them, but for the faithful to confirm them in the faith. And
therefore (as Saint Austin says) they may have reverence, as things religious,
but they are not to be wondered at as things miraculous. And whereas neither the
book, entitled the Miracles of holy Scripture, ascribed to Saint Austin, nor
Nazianzen, entreating of the Miracles of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, do mention any miracle done by him in his last Supper, it is manifest
what was the judgment of the true and Orthodoxe Church in their times
concerning the same.

QVEST. XIIII.
Justification is given by the free mercy of God in Christ, and not mericed by
our works.

As all other the good gifts of God, so Justification especially is freely
given to the faithful in Christ, to this end, that they should not glory in
themselves, nor trust in the worthiness of their own works, but in the most
free and undeserved goodness of God in Christ, who is made unto us of God 1
Cor. 1. 30.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, that he that
glories should glory in the Lord. And that we should in no wise doubt of the
truth thereof; the Apostle urges and inculcateth the same again and again;
By grace ye are saved Ephesians. 2. 9.
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of
works, lest any man should boast. And again, All have sinned and are deprived
of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his Romans 3. 24.
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, that our glorying in
our own works should be utterly excluded, and that we should glory only in
Christ.

QVEST. XV.
The faithful after the end of this life, are not punished in the fire of
Purgatory.

The end that moves a kind and a tenderhearted Father to chastise his dear
child is his amendment, insomuch that if he Pro magno peccato paululum
supplicij satis est Patri teri estri quanto magis Caelesti? Esaias 40. 2. Luke
15. 31.
once perceive that he is amended indeed, then does he immediately cease from
punishment: but the dear children of God immediately upon their deaths cease
wholly from sin, and are thoroughly reformed; therefore their heavenly Father
which does greatly rejoice even at the first beginning of the amendment of his
prodigal children here in this life, does not cause them when they are fully
reformed after death to be further grieved with the long enduring of extreme
torments in the fire of Purgatory.

For (as Saint Bernard says) if all sin be perfectly taken Bern. in Ps. qui
habitat Ser. 10.
away, which is the cause of all evil, the effect, that is, the punishment
thereof, must needs cease. In the Primitive Church when grievous pennances
were imposed upon enormous sins by the Church Governors, they were imposed to
this end, that thereby the parties offending might be brought to true and
serious repentance. Insomuch that when the offender was found to be truly
humbled for his sin, were it never so heinous, none or very little penance
was imposed upon him, or if it were imposed, it was soon released. As it may
appear, not only by the Apostles readiness to forgive the incestuous
Corinthian 2 Cor. 2. 4.
upon his serious repentance, albeit his sin was very heinous; but also by
the history of an incestuous woman, who had bin brought with child by her own
son: of whom it is recorded that she was so deeply displeased with her self
for this her enormous and monstrous crime, that taking in her arms the very
child, which was both the fruit and witness of her wickedness, she went
openly to the Bishop as he passed along to the Church with a great train, and
kneeling down before him, confessed her fact, and craved for it at his hands
condign punishment. The Bishop perceiving by the outward demeanor of this
paenitent person, the great anguish of her heart, for her great sin, enjoined
her some abstinence for some forty days, and so departed; but the poor
paenitent person thinking this paenance to be too too light for her so heinous
and capital a crime, repaireth to the Bishop at another place, and with bitter
tears puts him in mind again of her most odious and enormous sin, and
requires at his hands a more heavy punishment, but the Bishop well perceiving
her great sorrow and unfeigned repentance, lightneth the sentence of her former
paenance, and inioyneth her some abstinence for some three days.

How much more when we judge our selves even in this 1 Cor. 11. 31.
life, we shall not be judged of the Lord, but when we cease from sinning, the
Lord will cease from punishing. Wherefore if in this life, when other may take
encouragement to sin, by the impunity of others, and besides, the most
paenitent sinner that is, does not wholly and fully cease from all sin; yet
God and his Ecclesiastical Ministers do remit both sin and punishment, upon
the sight of the sinners unfeigned repentance and amendment of life: without all
doubt the Lord of all mercy will much more do the same in the life to come,
and not extremely torment his own servants in Purgatory fire.

QVEST. XVI.
The carnal eating of Christ's Body, is nothing available to eternal life,
but the spiritual.

When our blessed Savior had taught his Auditors, that Arguments drawn from
the effects.
unless they did eat his flesh, and drink his blood, they could have no life
in them, and the carnal Capernaits were greatly offended therewith, because
they thought that he had commended unto them, a bodily and a carnal eating of
his flesh, he answered, It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing Ioh. 6. 63.
(not intending hereby to recall his former words, My Flesh is meat indeed,
and my Blood is drink indeed) but to give them to understand, that it is a
spiritual eating of his flesh, that is available to everlasting life, and not
a carnal, seeing that profits nothing.

And verily it is not the bodily seeing, touching, or eating of Christ, that
can do us any good, but the spiritual seeing, touching, or eating of him by
faith, which is the eye, the hand, and the mouth of the soul. For when a woman
having an issue of blood, came behind Christ, and touched the hemme of his
Luke 8. 49.
garment, and was immediately healed of her issue, at that very time the people
thronged him, and trod upon him, and received no benefit thereby. And why? the
woman touched him with the hand of her faith,, and was healed thereby, as our
Savior testified, saying, Oh woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee, even
as thou will; but the people were maimed and lacked that hand. And so Saint
Ambrose understood our Saviors words: Christ (says he) healed them that
touched him by faith, Amb. in Luc. l. 6. cap. 8.
whereas to them that wanted faith, the touching of Christ or his garments, was
no benefit at all. Yea, the blessed Virgin her self was more happy in
conceauing the faith of Christ in her heart, then in conceauing his flesh in
her womb, (as Austin says:) And so he had learned of our blessed Savior
himself; Aug. de sancta Virgin cap. 3. Luke 11. 27.
for when it was said unto Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
Pappes that thou have sucked: Nay rather said he, Blessed is he that hears
the word of God, and keeps it. For by the Word reverently received, we
obtain faith, and by faith Christ is received into our hearts, and takes
Apoc. 3. 20.
up his habitation there. Now, if by our bodily mouths to receive Christ into
our bodies, be a thing altogether unprofitable, then our most wise Savior
commanded it not to be done at the celebration of the holy Eucharist, for he
commands nothing to be done in the Lords service that is unprofitable.

Why then does the Church of Rome, so eagerly contend for their
transubstantiating of Bread into the Body of Christ, and receiving of it into
their bodies by their bodily mouths, but for that albeit this thing be
unprofitable to Gods servants, yet it is not unprofitable to them; not only by
magnifying of their power, for that they are able to create their Creator, but
also by enlarging their reuennewes, seeing they have turned the Bread into the
Body of Christ, and are able to offer him up in their Mass, as a propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of quick and dead, the which thing cannot be but much
available to themselves, which are sure to be well paid for their pains.

QVEST. XVII.
Concupiscence is sin, even in the Regenerate themselves.

Why is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin. So the Apostle,
By sin death entered into the world, and Lam. 3. 37. Romans 5. 12.
therefore all sickness and other miseries that lead thereunto. Unto the
which seeing even sanctified Infants, which have received the Sacrament of
regeneration, and are free from all actual sin, are subject, therefore
concupiscence in sanctified infants is sin, unless we will lay to the charge
of the most righteous Judge of the whole world, that he punishes such persons,
that are without all fault. Yea whereas infants give no consent to their
natural corruptions, and yet are punished for them: therefore concupiscence is
sin, albeit consent is not given to it. See S. Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 45.

QVEST. XVIII.
Faith, repentance, and love, with all holy works proceeding from them, do
not deserve any thing at all at Gods hands, but make the faithful endebted to
God for the same.

If Abraham (says the Apostle) were justified by works, he Romans 4. 2.
has wherein to rejoice, but not before God. For gifts and benefits do not
make the doner any whit endebted to the receiver, but they deserve at the hands
of the receiver, and make him endebted unto the doner. But faith, repentance,
and love, Phil. 1. 29.
and all holy works proceeding from them, are the free gifts and blessings of
God, wrought in them by the operation of 1 Cor. 12. 11.
the holy Ghost, and therefore are called, the fruits of the Gal. 5. 22.
Spirit.

Wherefore hereby the faithful deserve nothing at Gods hand, but are made the
more indebted to God. So reasons Saint Bernard, None by good works can
deserve eternal life Bern. Ser. 1. de (...).
at Gods hands, seeing all the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the
glory that shall be revealed, albeit one person could endure them all. The
merits of men are not such as unto the which eternal life is by justice due,
and that God should do wrong to them, if he did not reward them there with.
For that I may not let pass, that all merits are Gods gifts, and that man is
thereby rather made a debtor to God, then God to man, what are all merits being
compared to so great glory? And therefore David cried out, Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified.

QVEST. XIX.
The works of God revealed in the Scriptures do manifestly declare them to be
the word of God, especially the work of regeneration, wrought by the Divine
and powerful doctrines thereof in the hearts of all such as faithfully and
sincerely embrace the same, and therefore they are not to be received as such
only upon the testimony of the Church.

Known unto God are all his works from the beginning Act. 15. 18. 1 Cor. 2.
11.
of the world, and to none other besides himself; and therefore he only is
able to reveal them. Wherefore seeing the works of the creation, redemption,
and Sanctification, which are the most gracious and glorious works of God, are
plainly revealed in the books of the Holy Scriptures; therefore the doctrines
of the holy books are faithfully to be embraced, as undoubtedly proceeding
from divine revelation. And verily who could so distinctly and particularly set
down the manner of the creation of man, and of all the rest of the creatures,
but he that having the fullness of being in himself, could give such a manner
and measure of being to them all, as should manifest his great power, wisdom,
and goodness toward man, for whose sake principally the world was made.

And who could lay open the fall of man, from his estate of holiness and
happiness, wherein he was created, and the manner thereof, but he only, from
whose obedience albeit man could depart, yet he could not depart from his
presence, nor so much as dazzle his sharp and clear eyes, albeit he could
clean put out his own? but who could open a means of man's recovery from this
his miserable and wretched estate, whereinto he is fallen by his own folly,
but he that was only able to work his recovery? It is evident that sin
being an offense committed against the infinite Majesty of the most glorious
Deity, requires a satisfaction no less then infinite. Now who could so much
as imagine that God being so grievously provoked, and so highly offended with
man, should send his own Son to become man, that in man's nature he might
suffer death for man's delivery from death and condemnation? For doubtless one
will scarce die for a righteous man, for a good Romans 5. 7.
man it may be that one dare dye; that then such a person, who when he was in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, should die for
such persons, as were not only neither righteous nor good, but above measure
unrighteous and evil: and that he should die such a death as proceeded from
the intolerable wrath of so highly incensed a God, against most execrable and
cursed sins, Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed? Isay. 53. 1.


Surely the Gospel wherein this work is revealed, is Divine and
supernatural, exceeding all humane and natural apprehension, and could not be
revealed but by him, that could work beyond the power of nature. The which
thing does more evidently appear hereby, in that wheresoever it is plainly
revealed, and sincerely embraced, it does deliver all such from the most
grievous bondage of sin and Satan, and does most effectually bring them back
again unto God. For (as Lactantius says) Let humane wisdom stretch it self
to the uttermost, yet it can but cause men to cover their sins, it cannot
enable them to cast them out, whereas the Gospel, which is the Law of the
Spirit of Life, not only freed Saint Paul from the Law of sin and death, but
also converted Romans 8. 2.
the world, and that in short time from infidelity to faith, from sin to
righteousness, from Satan to God; albeit it was most mightily resisted, not
only with all the wisdom and learning, but also with all the power and
authority of all the wisest and greatest men of the world: and therefore it
cannot be denied, but that it is the most mighty and powerful word of the most
mighty and powerful God. The heavens declare themselves to be the works of
God, in that they cause the earth which is so bare and barren at Winter, to be
clothed in Summer with all manner of herbs, flowers, and grain, and to
abound with all variety of fruit; and does not the doctrine of the holy
Scriptures much more evidently declare it self to be the most powerful word
of the most powerful God, in that it beautifieth the bare and barren soil of
our souls, with true wisdom, righteousness, and holiness, and with all
manner of spiritual graces?

It was an evident effect of the divine power of the mighty word of the
omnipotent God, that thereby in the Creation all things received their essence
and being, but of an evil man to make a good man, yea, to make one that is
brutish and diabolical, to become reasonable and Angelical, is a far
greater work then the Creation of the whole heaven and earth (as Saint Austin
teaches.) And therefore seeing this so strange a Aug. in Job. tract. 72. Isay
11. 9.
work is wrought (as Isayas says) by the doctrine of the Canonical
Scriptures, hereby it is sufficiently proved that the book of the Scriptures,
is the book of God.

Wherefore no marvel that the Apostle Saint Paul, when 2 Cor. 3. 1.
the truth of his Apostleship, and Apostolical doctrine was questioned by some
among the Corinthians, so confidently avouches that he stands not in need of
any testimonial from men for his approbation and justification, seeing their
own conversion wrought by that word which was written in their hearts by his
Ministry, was a most sufficient demonstration that his Apostleship and
doctrine was from God. The great works wrought here by our blessed Savior, in
the time of his being on earth, did sufficiently declare him to be the true
Matthew. 11. 5. Ioh. 5. 36.
Messiah; and shall not the greater works wrought by his word, since his
departure out of this life, plainly demonstrate it to be the very word of the
Son of God himself?

Wherefore if the blind Papists, the most sightfull and spiteful enemies of
the sincere Professors of the Gospel of Christ, shall still avouch that they
cannot know that the doctrine of the Scriptures is the doctrine of God, but by
the testimony of the Church, we answer them as the man cured of his blindness
by our most blessed Savior, answered the blind Pharisees, when they made
protestation that they knew not whence our Savior was, Doubtless (says he)
this is a marvelous thing, that ye Ioh 9. 30.
know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. So do we also
answer; Doubtless this is a marvelous thing, that ye know not whence the
Scriptures are, but by the testimony of the Church; and yet they have, do, and
shall open the eyes of the minds, and sanctify the affections of the hearts
of all Ioh. 17. 17. Ioh. 7. 17.
such as have been, are, or shall be, the people of God, and shall thereby
make them know, that they are of God. Wherefore hereby these blind Papists
plainly manifest themselves to be none of the Lords people, seeing they openly
profess that they neither know nor can know the graces of sanctification
wrought in their hearts, by the Spirit and word of God, giving thereby
testimony to it is self, and to the conscience sanctified therewith, that it it
of God, but that they receive the same so to be only upon the testimony of the
Church.

QVEST. XX.
That the soul of our blessed Savior after his death descended locally into
Hell.

It is no impeachment unto our blessed Saviors victory and triumph, that he
humbled himself to descend in soul into hell, the dreadful prison appointed
for all impenitent sinners. For as he triumphed over al his enemies on his
cross, Col. 2. 15. So he was not daunted with the hellish horrors of that
dreadful dungeon, when he descended into hell, but victoriously triumphed over
them all. Yea, the more in his humane nature he was humbled, the more great and
glorious was his victory, and triumph. It was Sampsons greater glory, that when
he was enclosed in Assah, a strong City of his enemies, he lifted aside the
posts and bars of the gates of the City, and so set himself free, and being
bound with cords and ropes, brake the^ asunder, Iud. 16. So it was the greater
glory of our spiritual Sampson, that being in body in the prison of the grave,
and in soul in the deep dungeon of hell, yet he delivered himself from both
at his glorious resurrection. And as this was most glorious for Christ, so it
was most profitable for us, that place our whole hope and confidence in him. It
is a confessed truth that whatsoever our blessed Savior performed in our
humane nature, he performed it for us. He fulfilled for us all righteousness,
unto the which heaven was due, and ascended into heaven to take possession
thereof for us, and to assure us of our assumption into that place of aeternall
happiness. So likewise he endured for us whatsoever was agreeable to the most
severe Justice of God to lay upon him, in respect of all our sins, and
descended into hell, and delivered himself from thence, to assure us that he
had made satisfaction to the uttermost mite for all our debts, and had procured
for us deliverance from hell. So teaches the Apostle, Romans 10. By setting
down the different way that the Law and the Gospel show; whereby we may
attain to righteousness and heavenly happiness, the reward thereof, and may
also be delivered from sin, and from hellish misery due to the same; Moses
(says he) thus describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man that
does that which is commanded therein, shall live thereby. Do this (says the
Law) and thou shall live. But do it totally and continually: For cursed is he
that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to
do them. Gal. 3. 10. But the righteousness (says he) that is of faith, (that
is, that righteousness which our Savior Christ has performed for us, and is
revealed not in the Law, but in the Gospel, and is apprehended and obtained by
faith) speaks in this wise: Say not in thy heart who shall ascend up into
heaven? For that is to bring Christ from thence. Or who shall desce^d into the
depth of hell? for that is to bring Christ from the dead. That is to say, the
righteousness that Christ has fulfilled for all that believe in him (the which
the Apostle calls the righteousness of faith) assures the faithful that
they need no more doubt of their ascending into heaven, then of Christ's
ascension, seeing he ascended into heaven to take possession thereof in their
nature, and for their behoof: nor of their deliverance from hell, then of
Christ's deliverance, seeing he delivered himself from thence, to assure them
of their deliverance. For the question here handled by the Apostle, is not how
we may be delivered from the grave, or from a temporal death, and may be made
partakers of a temporal life; but how we may be delivered from that death that
is endured in hell, and how we may be made pertakers of aeternall life and
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven. For observe the discourse of the Apostle;
The Law (says he) says; sin not at all, and thou need not at all fear
(not the grave but) hell, the prison appointed for the punishment of sin: and
fulfill all righteousness, and thou need not to doubt of thy coming to
heaven, where righteousness dwells and reigns for ever. But the
righteousness performed for us by Christ, and obtained by faith, says, No more
doubt of thine ascension into heaven then of Christ's ascension; nor of thy
deliverance from hell, then of Christ's deliverance: seeing whatsoever Christ
has done, he has done it for them that are united unto him by a true faith,
and thereby have full interest both in his sufferings, and in his
righteousness, which he has endured and performed for them.

Now then let me demand of any faithful man, what greater assurance he can
have of his ascension into heaven, then the ascension of Christ, who ascended
thither, there to prepare a place for all his, as he himself plainly
testifies, Ioh, 14. 2. So upon the like consequence may it also be demanded,
what greater assurance can a faithful man have for his deliverance from hell,
then this, that Christ being in hell before the grand executioner of the Lords
vengeance for sin, in the prison that was ordained for those debtors, that
were no way able to make satisfaction, that Christ, I say, that was made sin
for us and our surety, and a debtor in our room, was delivered from thence,
what stronger assurance, I say, can there possibly be to all the faithful for
the clear discharge of all their debts, and the full satisfaction for all
their sins, and their most certain deliverance both from the place, and also
from all the torments of hell? Verily that reverend man Mr. Perkins is of this
judgment, as he has delivered in the exposition of the Creed, that there
cannot be any stronger evidence given unto the faithful, to assure them of
their deliverance from hell, then this, that Jesus the Son of the Virgin
Mary, that went down into the place of the damned, returned after this death
from thence to live in all heavenly happiness for ever.

Object. 1.
But (says he) I cannot be of that opinion, that Christ locally in soul
descended into hell, seeing the Evangelists who set down the whole history of
his sufferings and actions, make no mention of any such thing. Solut.
I might answer, that whereas an history is a relation of things visible, and
seen; therefore as Moses in the history of the creation, made no mention of
the creation of Angels, being a thing not to be seen; so the Evangelists in
the history of the redemption, might make no mention of the local descending
of the soul of Christ into hell, and yet both these are most certain truths.
But we may rather resolve, that both our Savior Christ being well witting to
the weakness of the faith of his dearest servants, would not omit the
performance of that action, that he knew to be most available to the
confirmation thereof; nor the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, the relation
of the same in their Canonical writings. For does not the Prophet David making
mention of Christ's resurrection, avouch that his soul was not left in hell the
receptacle of souls, as well as that his body was not left in the grave being
the place appointed for bodies subject to corruption?

And does not the Apostle Saint Peter teaching the same truth, allege the
same place of the Psalmist, for the confirmation thereof? Psalm. 16. 10. Act. 2.
27. For albeit it belongs to the body properly to arise, yet that there may
be a resurrection of any dead person from death to life, the soul departed
must also be brought from the place whither it was before conveyed, and placed
again in the body, or else there can be no resurrection thereof to life.
Wherefore the Apostle to prove the truth of our Saviors resurrection, shows
out of the Prophet, that as his body was raised out of the place of corruption,
so his soul was not left in hell, but brought back again from thence, that
his resurrection might be wrought thereby. For Nephesh properly and principally
signifying the soul, why should it not be so taken in this place, where there
Analogum per se positum flat pro famosiori significatione.
is nothing to restrain it to a signification that is less proper? And
specially seeing the Apostle Saint Peter, who well knew the meaning of the
Prophet, and was to expound him in a plain manner (for all the New Testament
is but a plainer explication of the doctrines that were before delivered more
darkly in the Old) interprets Nephesh not by (...), (...), or (...), but by
(...): that is, not by person, body, or dead body, but by soul, Act. 2. 27.

Object. 2.
But it is avouched that Christ's soul was presently upon his death, carried up
into heaven, and therefore could not descend into hell: because Christ says to
the penitent theife, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luc. 23. 43.
Solut.
I answer, that our Creed teaches us that Christ dyed, and then when he was
dead, and his soul was departed out of his Body, what became of them both,
viz. that his Body was buried, and that his soul descended into hell. And now
must this plain Article be inuerted both in words and in sense, and we willed
to believe that at that very time he ascended into heaven, when our Creed
says, that he descended into hell; But some will say, does not our Savior say
to the thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise? With me, therefore
with my soul. How follows that? The inference rather should be this: With
me, therefore with my Divine Nature: Seeing the principal Denominatio sequitur
principalem partem.
part gives the name, and not the less principal. And especially whereas
concerning the humane nature of Christ, he himself after this time wherein
these words were spoken, testifyeth, saying: I have not as yet ascended to my
Father, Ioh. 20. 17. Moreover, how should our blessed Savior have so fitly
paralleled his type Jonah, who was both in body and soul in the belly of the
Whale, if he had not been after the same manner as well in soul as in body,
in the belly of hell, and in the bowels of the earth, Matthew. 12. 40.

Object. 3.
Now if it be further objected, that our Savior needed not in soul to descend
into hell, seeing all things belonging to man's salvation were finished by him
when he hanged on the Cross: Solut.
the answer is, that when our blessed Savior spoke these words (all things
are finished) all his very sufferings were not then ended. For he was not then
dead nor buried, nor had continued three days and three nights in the bowels
of the earth, in the state of a dead man. Besides the circumstance of the place
does plainly convince, that our blessed Saviors meaning in these words, was
that all things were foretold by the Prophets, that should be done unto the
Messiah before his death, were done unto him and so finished, excepting this
one, They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty, they gave me vinegar to
drink: and therefore that this Prophecy might also be fulfilled, he said, I
thirst: Whereupon when they had given him vinegar mingled with gall, and he
had tasted thereof, he said: All things are finished: that is, all things that
were to be done to the Messiah before his death: even all these things (says
our blessed Savior) are done now to me. And verily it is most evident and
plain, that the principal drift and scope of the Evangelists, is to
demonstrate and to make evident, that all things that were foretold by all the
Prophets, concerning the true Messiah, were fulfilled in our most blessed
Savior Jesus Christ, Ioh. 20. 31. and therefore that he was the true Messiah.

QVEST. XXI.
Fasting, or any outward thing does not sanctify any, but only the inward
graces of the Spirit, and all such things as do enter into the heart of man.

That which goes into the mouth defiles not the man, but Arguments drawn
from the subject. Matthew. 15. 11.
that which comes out of the mouth defiles the man. For whatsoever goes
into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught; but
those things that come out of the mouth proceed from the heart, and they defile
a man, For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witnessing, slanders, and the like, and these are
the things that defile a man. Hence we thus reason, that as meats do not
defile a man, because they enter not into the soul, but sins that enter in,
and dwell there, and there contriue all their evil designs: so meats nor any
other such outward thing does sanctify the heart, because they enter not in
there, but only the divine graces of Gods Spirit, and the spiritual means
appointed by God, for the effecting of these holy and heavenly graces.

QVEST. XXII.
There is no such place appointed to the faithful after this life, as
Purgatory is sai^ to be.

The faithful are pilgrims here in this world, and have 2 Cor 5. 6.
heaven for their home and country whether they come, when their pilgrimage
here in this world, with their lives comes to an end; they pass not then
from hence to Purgatory, but to Heaven; as it may appear by the history of
Lazarus, and Luke 16. 22, 23, 43.
of the penitent thief. And of the comfortable assurance hereof, are all the
faithful partakers, as the Apostle testifies, speaking in the name of them
all and saying, We know that if our 2 Cor. 5 1.
earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building Heb. 11. 10.
given of God; that is not an house made with hands, but eternal in heaven.
And verily our most blessed Savior at his departure out of this world,
ascended up into heaven, there to prepare a place for all the faithful. For he
did not this for the Apostles Ioh. 14. 2.
only, as he prayed not for them alone, but also for all such as should
believe in him through their word. Where he further Ioh. 17. 20.
testifies that his will was, that they all should be with him, even where he
himself is, and that they might see his glory, which cannot be meant but of
the place of glory.

QVEST. XXIII.
Our blessed Savior is not corporally present in the Eucharist, but in Heaven.

When some of our Saviors own Disciples were offended at those words of his
(Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you) thinking that he had spoken of a gross and carnal eating of his
flesh with their bodily mouths, Jesus said unto them, Does this offend you?
what then if ye should see the Son of man ascend up where Ioh. 6. 62.
he was before? By which words he gave them to understand that his carrying of
his body at his Ascension into Heaven, would teach them if they were Eagles
with the mouths of faith to mount up thither, and there to feed upon him with
the Luke 17. 37.
mouths of their minds, and not to dream of a gross and carnal feeding
upon his flesh with their bodily mouths. So reasons Saint Austin, when ye
shall see the Son of man Aug. in Ioh. tract. 27.
ascending were he was before, then verily ye shall perceive that he gives not
his body to be eaten, after that manner as ye conceive: Then verily ye shall
understand, that the grace of Christ is not consumed by chewing it in the
mouth. So likewise Ath^n. in illud, quicu qu^ dixerit v^rbum. etc.
Athanasius says, that Christ for this end warned them of his ascension into
Heaven, that he might draw them from thinking upon his Body, and that they
might thereby learn, that the flesh which he spoke of was a caelestiall meat
from above, and a spiritual nourishment to be given by him, The words which I
speak unto you are spirit and life; the which (says he) is as much as if he
had said, This Body which is in your sight, and is to be delivered to death for
the world, shall be given you for meat, that it may be spiritually distributed
to every one of you, and be an assurance, and a preservative to raise you up to
eternal life.

QVEST. XXIIII.
The City of Rome is the mystical Babylon, and the pretended titulary Roman
Church, is the most certain seat of the great Antichrist of these last times.

The Apostle Saint John describing in her colors that Babylon Apoc. 17. 18.
which was to be the certain seat of the great Antichrist of these last times,
avouches in plain words, that it is the very City, that in his time reigned
over the Kings of the earth, the which was the City of Rome. The truth whereof
is so evident, that our Rhemists themselves in their notes upon that Chapter
do subscribe thereunto, but they think to help the matter by excepting that
Rome was Babylon under the government of the persecuting Emperors: but that
exception will not serve their turn, for by the plain censure of Saint John,
Rome must be the Royal Seat of the great Antichrist of these last times.
Wherefore they except in the second place, that albeit the great Antichrist of
these last times shall sit at Rome, yet he may sit there in the Princes throne,
and not in the Priests chair.

But Chrysostom precisely affirms that Antichrist shall Chrysostom. in 2. Ep
ad These. cap. 2.
take upon him the Empire both of God and men, and therefore shall sit in the
Priests chair as well as in the Princes throne. And so it was signified by his
two bornes like to the Lambs; Apoc. 13. 11.
and so it is claimed by themselves, by their double keys and swords given in
their Arms, and carried before them: and so it was really acted by Boniface
the eight, who one day showed himself unto the people in his Papal attire,
and the next day in the robes of an Emperor. And it has a long time been
practiced by them all, and is still defended by most of their followers, as a
sovereignty that justly belongs unto them. And was not this most plainly
foretold by the Apostle, that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God (not
in the Temple of God at Jerusalem) seeing that was utterly to be destroyed, and
never to be built again, but in the Temple of God, seated in the greatest City
of his Antichristian Dominion, that is in Babylonish Rome; and that he should
exalt himself, above all that is called God, and worshipped, that is, above
all civil and Ecclesiastical Governors, of whom it is written, I have said,
ye are Gods; Yea, and that he should sit in the Temple Ioh. 8. 34.
of God as God, that is, as Gods Lieutenant General, and Christ, Vicar
universal, not only in earth, but also in Purgatory and in heaven also, as it
is signified by his triple Crown. And does he not by his Indulgences take upon
him to open the doors of Purgatory at his pleasure? And by Canonizing of
Saints, does he not take upon him to give greater or lesser dignities in the
Kingdom of Heaven?

No marvel then that he takes upon him to dispose of temporal Kingdoms and
earthly crowns, and to possess and dispossess Kings of their Regalities at
his own will: For this great Antichrist in his transcendent pride, will not
content himself with the honor and dignity of a great star, as all the
ancient Bishops of Rome were wont to do, but he will advance himself into the
throne of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, that all the greatest stars
both in the civil, and also in the Ecclesiastical Government, may take their
light and authority from him. For if we will believe his Parasires, his
supremacy is so much greater then the Emperors, as the Sun is greater then
the Moon.

QVEST. XXV.
The word of God rightly understood does give credit to it self and does
cause it self to be believed and embraced as the word of God for the
excellency of the divine doctrines contained therein, and not only for the
bare testimony of the Church.

Behold (says Moses) I have taught you ordinances and Arguments drawn from
the attributes or adjuncts. Deuteronomy. 4. 5.
laws, as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do even so in the
land whether ye go to possess it. Keep them therefore and do them, for it is
your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the people that shall hear all
these ordinances, and say, only this people is wise and understanding, and a
great Nation. For what Nation is so great, that has Ordinances and Laws so
righteous, as all this Law is, that I have set before thee this day? In which
words Moses proves that his doctrine which he delivered unto the children of
Israel was of GOD, because it was a wise and a righteous doctrine able to
justify it self to be so even in the judgment of the Heathen themselves,
which did rightly understand and apprehend the same. And verily as it was
foretold by Moses, so it came to pass many ages following.

For even then when the children of Israel had lost their worldly estate,
glory, and country it self for their transgressing of this most wise and
righteous Law of their most wise and righteous God, and had made themselves
vile and contemptible in respect of their vile and base designs, yet these
vile and base captives gave Laws to such of their glorious Conquerours, as did
labor to understand the wisdom and righteousness of their Laws. In so much
that they being Aliens unto them in Nation, yet became Proselytes and Allies
Victi victoribus leges dabant Aug de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 11.
unto them in their holy profession. Yea, the further degenerate posterity of
this people, who had heartened and hardened themselves to transgress these
wise and holy Commandments of God, that they might observe their own absurd
Matthew. 15 3. Luke 4. 22.
and sottish traditions, did wonder at the gracious words that proceeded out of
our Saviors mouth, when he opened unto them the high wisdom and holiness of
those divine doctrines that were delivered unto their Fathers, by Moses and the
Prophets, and gave this testimony unto him, Never man spoke Ioh. 7. 46.
as this man speaks: No marvel then that when the Apostles were sent by our
blessed Savior, to open these wise and righteous counsels of God to all
creatures, they soon subdued the whole world, and brought some of all
conditions and callings therein unto the obedience of the faith of Christ.

In truth the strange Miracles that were wrought by their Ministry gave
testimony to the doctrine that was preached by them that it was divine, and so
procured audience thereunto, but it was the word of faith it self that bred
faith. Miracles were means to bring many to the outward court of the Temple of
God, and to the door of Christ's Church, but it was the key of the knowledge of
the divine mysteries themselves, Luke 11. 52.
that unlocked the Church doors, and opened an entrance unto them into the
house of God. For it is the heavenly wisdom and righteousness of the Divine
doctrines of the Word of God that can cause us to receive the vision for 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
the vision it self, and to embrace the word, not as the word of man, but as
it is indeed the word of God. The holy and religious behavior of the teachers
and professors of the truth may with the woman of Samaria bring many unto
Christ, and persuade them to hearken to the doctrine of faith: but the
holiness and equity of the doctrine it self will cause all such as rightly
apprehend the same, to profess with those conuerts of Samaria, and to say, Now
we believe not any longer by reason of the bare words of the Teachers and
professors of truth, for we heard it our selves, and have felt such a divine
power therein, that we willingly subscribe thereto, for that most sufficient
evidence that it gives to it self.

And so does Stapleton avouch concerning all the faithful, Stap. doct. princ.
lib. 8. cap. 22.
that they being at the first induced to believe for the voice of the Church,
and lightened with the bright luster of divine inspiration, do not any longer
believe for the voice of the Church, but for the divine light it self. And
verily all such as are once brought to the faith, and settled therein, ought not
(as Austin Aug. de Catechis rud. cap. 25.
teaches) measure religion by the professors thereof, but by the equity and
sanctity of the doctrine it self, neither ought they to judge of the doctrine
by the persons that profess the same, but of the persons by the doctrine. Yea,
they should be so fully grounded and settled in the truth, that if their
teachers and instructers would dissuade them from it, they should not hearken
unto them, nay if an Angel from heaven should preach Gal. 1. 8.
unto them another Gospel, they should hold him accursed.

QVEST. XXVI.
Kneeling is the fittest gesture of the body, at the reverent receiving of the
holy Communion.

Kneeling is the fittest gesture of a faithful and humble Christian, when he
offers up his prayers to God, especially when he requesteth at Gods hands his
greatest blessings. But at the receiving of the holy Communion, every faithful
and humble Christian, joins with the Minister, when he prays, saying, The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ that was given for thee, preserve thy body and
soul to everlasting life; therefore he ought to do the same most humbly,
kneeling upon his knees. Moreover, whereas our blessed Savior by the mouth of
his Minister commands every faithful Communicant to take and eat his body,
(seeing every Commandment of the Lord ought to be turned into a Prayer, when
we go about to put the Commandment in execution, that the Lord by his Spirit
would vouchsafe to enable us to perform the same, so that we may do that
which is acceptable in his sight) we ought all of us also turn this
Commandment into a prayer, and to make this prayer in a most suppliant and
humble manner to the Lord.

QVEST. XXVII.
Holiness does not consist in vowing to abstain from riches, meats, and
marriage, but in the lawful and holy use of them all.

All the creatures and ordinances of God are good, and are created and ordained
for the good of man, and therefore ought holily to be used, and not refused, as
they may do us any good. So reasons the Apostle, Every creature of God is
good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving,
for 1 Timothy 4. 4.
it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Then in their due time and
holy use all kind of food, riches, and marriage, are lawful and good, and to
bind our selves from the holy use of them, is not lawful, much less does it
possess the superstitious Votary with some singular holiness above other, or
advance him to the highest degree of the greatest perfection.

QVEST. XXVIII.
The Body of Christ is at one time but in one place.

The divine and humane nature of Christ with their inseparable and
incommunicable properties and attributes, albeit they be united by personal
union, remain still in him diverse and distinct without confusion or abolition,
as the Church long since has made it manifest against the damnable heresy of
cursed Eutyches. For if the humane nature of Christ be endued with the
proprieties of the divine, as with omnipotency, omniscience, or with the
hability to be present in all or in many places at one time, then does it
become the very divine essence it self, seeing nothing is accidental in God
but essential. But the humane nature of Christ cannot be changed into his
divine, and therefore it cannot be omnipotent, omniscient, or present in all,
or in many places at one time. Christ could not be (Saint Austin says)
concerning his bodily presence Aug. cont. Faustum l. 20. c. 11. Cyrill. in Ioh.
l. 11 c. 3. Vigil. cont. ^utychem.
at one time in the Sun and in the Moon, and on the Cross. So Cyrill,
Christ could not be conversant with his Apostles, after that he had once
ascended. So Vigilius writing against Eutyches; The flesh of Christ when it was
on earth, was not in heaven, and now because it is in heaven, certainly it is
not on earth. Yea, so far it is from being on earth, that we look for Christ
after the flesh to come from heaven, whom as he is God the Word we believe to
be with us on earth: but by your opinion (says he to Eutyches) either the word
is comprehended in a place as well as the flesh, or the flesh is every where
together with the word: seeing that one nature does not receive any contrary or
different estate. Now, to be contained in a place, and to be present in every
place, be things diverse and very dislike. And therefore for so much as the word
is every where, and the flesh of Christ is not every where, it is clear that
one and the selfsame Christ is of both natures, that is, every where
according to the nature of his Divinity, and contained in a place according to
the nature of his humanity. This is the Catholic faith and confession which
the Apostles delivered, the Martyrs confirmed, and the faithful persist in to
this day. Wherefore the Church of Rome has made an Apostasy from the
Catholic faith, in that she teaches that the flesh of Christ is both
together in heaven and on earth, and not contained in one certain place, but
is in all places wheresoever the Eucharist is administered, albeit it be
administered in innumerable places at one time.

QVEST. XXIX.
Christ's Body and Blood ought not, and in truth cannot be often offered up to
God by the Mass Priests, as a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the
dead.

The often offering of the same sacrifice does argue the imperfection thereof,
as the Apostle says: As the doing again and again of one and the selfsame
work, does show that it was insufficiently done at the beginning. For no wise
man will go about to do the same work the second time, which was sufficiently,
yea perfectly done at the first, lest it be said unto him: Act not that which
is acted already. No wise stage player will attempt Noli actum agere.
to come upon the stage where Roscius is, and to act the same Interlude that he
acts. As no Historiographer of any judgment, will take upon him to write
that selfsame History that Livy, Caesar, or Salust have already written. And
shall then every Mass Priest be so presumptuous, as to take upon him to offer
up Christ as a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of quick and dead, where
as that one oblation of Christ made once by himself was so sufficient and
perfect, that thereby he brought in eternal redemption, and made perfect for
ever them Heb. 7. 25. and 10. 14.
that are sanctified?

What? will they put our dear Savior to death again, and shed his blood?
surely this they must do, if in their Mass they will offer him up a
propitiatory sacrifice for sin, seeing that cannot be performed without a
blou^y death. For justice cannot be satisfied for sin, unless that which is
due be rendered thereto. But the wages and hire due to sin is death. The Romans
6. 19.
which is so evident and undoubted a truth, that the Apostle is bold to avouch,
that if our Savior himself should have often offered himself to God as an
expiatory sacrifice for sin, he Heb. 9. 26.
should have often suffered and dyed. But our blessed Savior dyed but once
neither needs he, nay, neither can he dye any Romans 6. 9.
more; therefore he cannot be offered any more as an expiatory sacrifice for
sin. Wherefore in that the Mass Priests do still presumptuously undertake
to offer up Christ as an expiatory sacrifice for sin, what do they therein,
but as much as in them lies, murder and slay Christ again, and shed his
precious blood, and greatly derogate from the dignity of that sacrifice, that
he himself did offer at his death?

QVEST. XXX.
Christ's flesh is not eaten with our bodily mouths.

The pretended eating of Christ's flesh with our bodily mouths by the members
of the Romish Synagogue, is impious and wicked against Piety, Religion, and
nature it self, causing our Christian faith to be scorned and abhorred of the
Heathen, and therefore it was never intended, much less commanded and
commended by our Lord himself. Our Sacrament (says Cyrill) does not command
the eating of a man, Cyr. ad object. Theodor.
drawing the minds of the faithful to gross conceits after an irreligious
manner; for as concerning these words of our Savior Christ (Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you) Saint
Austin affirms Aug de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16.
that seeing there seems therein an impiety to be commanded, therefore they
are not to be understood literally, but mystically and spiritually. And verily
the gross mistaking of these words by the Church of Rome has caused some of
the heathen to condemn Christians of more barbarous impiety and inhumanity
then was used in the impious and inhumane Anthropophagi: for that they did eat
but the flesh of ordinary men, whereas the other pretend that they eat the very
flesh of their God.

QVEST. XXXI.
Enoch and Elias cannot come in their own persons to resist Antichrist, and to
be slain of him.

Enoch and Elias cannot be slain of Antichrist, seeing their bodies be
glorified, and therefore immortal, and not subject unto death; And if they
should assume other bodies, then were they not the same persons, because they
had not the same essential parts. Moreover, if a soul may assume diverse
bodies, with which of them shall she be united at the day of the general
resurrection?

QVEST. XXXII.
It is a property only belonging to God to forgive sin.

When Jesus said to the sick of the palsy, Son thy sins Mar. 2. 5.
are forgiven thee; and some of the Scribes sitting there, did thus reason in
their hearts, Why does this man speak blasphemies? who can forgive sin but
God alone? He perceiving that they thus reasoned in themselves, said unto them,
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the Palsy, Thy sins are forgiven
thee, or to say; Arise, take up thy bed and walk? Whereby he gave them to
understand, that by a word, to cure both the sicknesses of the soul and the
body, was a property belonging to one and the selfsame power, even to God.

And therefore that seeing he did make it appear even to their outward senses,
that by his word he did cure the diseases of the body, they should have
acknowledged his divine power, whereby he was also able to cure the sins of
the soul. For as Chrysostom and Hillary teach, our Savior in these Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Hom. 30. Hillar. in Mat. cap. 9.
words did not confute their opinion, that God only can forgive sins, but
proves unto them by his manner of curing of bodily diseases, that he himself
was God, and therefore did in no wise blaspheme, when he took upon him to
pardon sin. Wherefote seeing by this censure of our blessed Savior, it
belongs to the selfsame power to cure the sickness both of body and
soul; therefore seeing that neither the Pope by his Indulgences, nor his
Priests by their Masses, can cure the diseases of the bodies, much less can
they cure thereby the sins of the souls, seeing that also is a greater and
an harder Cure.

QVEST. XXXIII.
Regeneration is not wrought by the power of our own free will, but by the
operation of the Spirit of God.

As many as received him, to them he gave this dignity to be Arguments drawn
from things that be diverse. Ioh. 1. 3.
the Sons of God; Even to them that believed in his Name: which were borne
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
By the which manifold denial of the power of man's will to be of any actiuity
of it self, in the work of regeneration, our blessed Savior would give us to
understand, that he is too too wilful, that will yet contradict the same. And
how does our free will help to bring us to God, seeing (as our Savior
testifies) No man comes Ioh. 6. 44.
unto him unless he be drawn?

Now if we must be drawn when we are brought unto God what forwardness and
freeness is there in our selves? Surely (as Austin says) Christ therefore
uttered these words, that Aug. in Enchir. cap. 32.
we should be persuaded that there is no free will or merit in our selves: for
who is drawn or forced if he be willing? The truth is yet (says he) that no
man comes to Christ unless he be willing, but he is wrought upon by a
strange manner by him that knows how to work within men, even in their very
hearts, not that they should believe against their will (which is impossible)
but that they being by nature of themselves unwilling, should by his grace, and
by the operation of his Spirit be made willing. For it is Gods grace that does
prevent us, and of unwilling makes us willing, and afterward does assist us
when we are willing, least we will in vain.

Undoubtedly in the performance of every good work done by us, we our selves
both will and work: but this we do not of our selves, for it is God that
works in us both the will Phil. 2. 13.
and the deed, and that also of his own good will. For if we take any good
work in hand, It is God (says the Apostle) that Phil. 1. 6.
begins the same in us, and it is he also that does finish the same.
Wherefore seeing when we are first called to the estate of grace, we are
unwilling to yield thereunto, our will then of it self does not further the
work of the Spirit of God in our Regeneration, until it be first altered and
changed by God.

QVEST. XXXIV.
None are elected for their foreseen works.

It is not of him that wills (says the Apostle) nor of him Romans 9. 16.
that runs (viz. that he is elected to eternal life) but of God that takes
morcy. For so God says to Moses, I will have mercy on him to whom I will show
mercy, and I will have compassion on him on whom I will show compassion. And
this the Apostle further shows by the Lords different kind of dealing with
Jacob and Esau, being borne at the same time, and of the same parents; For
before they were borne, and when they had done neither good nor evil, (that
the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by works, but by
him that calls) it was said unto her, The Elder shall serve the younger, as
it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Whereby it is evident that
our election does not depend upon fore seen Ephesians. 1. 4.
works, but upon the free mercy of Christ.

QVEST. XXXV.
A true saving faith is not seated in that soul where Infidelity reigns or
any other sin.

A true saving faith being an infused habit, a principal Arguments drawn
from such things as, are contrary.
grace, and a singular fruit of Gods most holy Spirit does never sort her self
but with her princely Peers, she never joins hands with Infidelity or any
other her associates, which are the corrupt fruits of the impure flesh. For,
What fellowship 2 Cor. 6. 14.
has righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion has light with
darkness? What concord has Christ with Beliall? What part has a Believer
with an Infidel? So much more may we say, what part has faith with
Infidelity, or with any other reigning sin?

For these are not only so unequal, but also so contrary each to other, that
they cannot be mated and matched together. Ye cannot (says our Savior
Christ) serve God and Matthew. 6. 24. 1 Cor. 10. 21.
Mammon. Ye cannot (says the Apostle) be pertakers of the Table of the Lord,
and of the table of Devils. The true saving faith is not an idle fancy, but
works by love. It is not fruitless Gal. 5. 6.
and dead, but fruitful and living, and producing the operations of a
spiritual life. For if all things obey humane wisdom, Iam. 2. 22.
if a wise man frame to himself his own estate, if he domineer over the
influences of the stars, if he overrule his own unruly affections, and
ouer-master his own masterlesse lusts, then surely as powerful and active is
the true Christian faith, which rightly may be called, and is indeed an
heavenly wisdom. Now a saving faith or heavenly wisdom is pure, Iac. 3. 17.
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruit; and
therefore is not seated in that soul where Infidelity reigns, or any other
sins which pollute the soul wherein they are seated, and fills it with all
evil fruit.

QVEST. XXXVI.
Justification and Salvation are not of works, neither can they be deserved by
them.

Grace and merit, favor and desert, are so contrary each to Romans 4. 4. and 11.
6. Ephesians. 2. 8. Audigratis, tace de meritis. Primas. in Ep. ad Romans cap. 3. Bern.
in Cant. Ser. 17. Aug. in praefatione in Ps. 31.
other, that whereas Justification and Salvation proceed from free Grace and
Favor, therefore the Apostle in diverse places infers that they cannot
proceed from the merits of our own works. So Primasius, when thou hear
grace named, make no mention at all of merits. For (as Bernard says) there is
no means for grace to enter, where merit has taken the possession. And
therefore as Saint Austin admonishes, if thou will needs be estranged from
grace, then boast thou of thy merits. And this inference they had learned of
the Apostle, who tells the Galathians, that as many as would join the works
of the Law to the grace of Christ in the matter of Justification, They were
abolished from Christ, and fallen from Gal. 5. 4.
grace.

Yea, if we had not sinned, but continued in our innocence, and had kept all
the Commandments of God, whereunto God had bound himself by his promise, to
render the reward of eternal life, yet in confidence of the merit of our
works, we could not have said rightly unto the Lord; Pay that thou Aug. in Ps.
83. Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 15.
owe, but perform that which thou have promised. For (as the same Father
says) God has not made himself a debtor to us by receiving any thing from
us, but by promising us that which best pleased himself. But now since our
best actions are so stained by some sinister respect or other in the doing of
them; that (as Gregory says) even an holy man does see his Greg. in Ioh. l. 9.
c. 1.
very virtuous works to be vicious, if they come to be scanned by a just
Judge; then they are so far off from deserving of any reward at Gods hands;
much less of Justification and Salvation, that rather in strict Justice they
merit condemnation. For so Saint Austin is bold to pronounce of them. Woe Aug.
confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
worth the commendable life of man, if thou Judge it without mercy. In what a
woeful case then are all proud Papists, which will not be justified and saved,
but by the merit of their own works, seeing thereby they be abolished from
Christ and are fallen from grace, and from the fruit and benefit of both.

QVEST. XXXVII.
The natural man has no free will to that which is religiously good.

By nature we are all spiritually dead in trespasses and sins; Arguments
drawn from that which is opposite priuatiuely. Ephesians. 2. 1.
And therefore as a man that is bodily dead, is able to perform no action that
belongs to a natural life: so cannot we perform any action that belongs
to a spiritual and supernatural life, until we be quickened and raised up
again by the Spirit of Christ. We are now all by nature deprived of all Romans
5. 6.
spiritual power and strength. We are not sufficient of our selves to think
any good thing as of our selves; Much less to will or 2 Cor. 3. 5.
to work any such thing. We are (says one Prophet) foolish Ier. 4. 22.
children, and have no understanding we are wise to do evil, but to do will
we have no knowledge; We are now all by nature the Gal. 4. 25.
children of the bond woman, and not of the free. The time was when in Adam we
had all freedom of will to make choice either of good or evil; but since that
in him we made choice of that which was evil, we are so hardened therein, and
in such Romans 6. 20.
bondage and slavery to our corrupt lusts, that we have no inclination at all,
or free motion unto righteousness. For (as Aug. de correp. and great. c. 13.
Austin says) our will as it is now by nature free, and not made free by
grace, is free from righteousness, and only in bondage to sin. For liberty
without race (as the same Father teaches) Aug. Ep. 89.
is not liberty but contumacy, that is, a wilful obstinacy in that only which
is evil.

QVEST. XXXVIII.
No religious worship or service is to be given to any Angel or Saint.

Let not (says Saint Austin) the worship of the dead be Arguments drawn from
such things as depend vp^n relation. Aug. de Vera Re^ig. c 55, Aug contra
Faust. Manich. lib. 23. c. 21. Synod. Mogu^t. c. 46.
unto us a matter of Religion. For they are to be honored for imitation, but
not to be adored for Religion. And again, we worship the Saints with charity,
but not with service, neither do we build temples unto them. For according
unto the censure of the Synod of Ments: the Saints which have shut up the
course of their lives with a blessed end, ought worthily to be honored of us
as the worthy members of Christ's body, but not with that honor which is due
unto God, but with that reverent regard of society and love, wherewith holy men
may be honored of us here in this life. The like is to be said concerning the
worship of Angels. I fell (said Saint John, confessing his own double fall) at
the Angels feet to worship him, but he said unto me, See thou do it not, for I
am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren which have the testimony of
Jesus, Apoc. 19. 10. c^. 22. 9.
worship God.

By which words of the Angel uttered once and again we Seruus est domini
seruus.
may justly collect, that seeing a servant among men is a servant of his Lords
only, and not of any one of his fellow servants, and is bound to serve the one
only, and not the other: therefore seeing all the faithful have but one Lord,
all Angels and Saints being their fellow servants, they ought to deuote
themselves E^hes. 4. 5. and 2. 29.
only to the Religious service of God, and not unto the service of any Angel
or Saint.

We take it to be a great absurdity and indignity also, for one that is
admitted into the family of an earthly King, to betake himself to the service
of a subject: and is it not a greater indignity for one that by baptism is
admitted into the family of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to betake him
to the service of an Angel or Saint? In Oxford we are sworn, Non suscipere
gradum Simeonis; that is, when we have taken an higher degree of dignity in the
Schools, not to take a lower degree: And shall we then, when we have received
this high degree of honor to be admitted among the servants of the Almighty
Creator of heaven and earth, shall we, I say, debase our se^ues so low, as to
seek for admission into the service of a weak creature? Let the Romanists
then, if they list, deuote themselves unto the service of the Saints and give
to them (...) divine worship, but let the true servants of God be careful to
give divine service only to God.

QVEST. XXXIX.
The faithful are made righteous before God, by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to them.

If by the disobedience of the first Adam many were made Arguments drawn from
things that have the same proportion of reason. Romans 5. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans
8. 34.
sinners, why by the obedience of the second Adam may not many be made
righteous? If our sins were imputed unto Christ when he was pure from all
sin, why may not his righteousness be imputed unto us, albeit we be stained
with all sin? If Christ's sufferings and death are made ours, and we thereby
are delivered from condemnation: Why may not his righteousness as well be
imputed unto us, that we may thereby obtain our Justification? especially
seeing he was 1 Cor. 1. 30.
made as well righteousness for us, as he was redemption. Nay may not his
righteousness, which was subject to the Law Gal. 4. 4.
for us, be imputed unto us by the Lords endless goodness and mercy that we
may be made righteous thereby: as well as the surplussage of the righteous
works of the Saints, who yet were not crucified for us, may be imputed by the
Popes 1 Cor. 1. 13.
Pardons and Indulgences, to all such as will pay well for them?

QVEST. XL.
The faithful may as well know themselves to be endued with true love, as with
true faith.

Doctor Bishop avouches that the faithful cannot so well know themselves to
be endued with true love, as with true faith, for that faith is seated in the
understanding which is the lighter, and love in the will which is the darker
part of the soul. As if the spiritual soul had situation of parts, as well
as the material body: Or as if the distinct powers of the soul were not
therefore said to be placed in the distinct members of the body, because in
them there are diverse originalls of her manifold Organicall instruments,
whereby she produces her manifold and different operations whereas she
her-selfe is wholly in the whole body, and in every part thereof.

But be it so, that the soul as well as the body, may be compared to an house or
Temple, in the which there may be Rooms, some lights, and some darker, yet
may not the same clear Candle of Gods word, lighten our will as well as our
understanding, and so make known unto us our love, as well as our faith? Yea,
whereas the will is reasonable by participation from the understanding, the
understanding hiding nothing from the will, whereof it has notice it self;
why then is not the will lightened with that selfsame luster as the
understanding it self is? nay, whereas the light of natural reason adds her
axioms to the instructions of the word of God, for the opening of the nature
of love rather then of faith, why Dilectic est simul viuendi, fruendique
electio. Anima est non vbi animat, sed vbi am^t. Prou. 14. 10.
should not love be better known then faith? The heart (says Solomon) knows
the bitterness of his soul, and the stranger shall not intermeddle with his
joy. The heart of a man knows what it loves and ioyeth in, as well as what
it hates, and is offended withal.

Verily if our Savior Christ had not well understood, that Simon Peter's own
heart was well witting to it self, of his great love that he bare unto him, he
would not have demanded of him again and again, Simon Iohannah, love thou
me Ioh. 21. 15.
more then these? neither would Peter have so confidently answered him, Lord
thou know that I love thee? So if the Church had not known and felt even
the vehement pa^gs of her love toward her Bridegroom, she would not have
sent word unto him by her Messengers, that she was even Cant. 5. 8. Aug in Ps.
49.
sick of love. There is (says Saint Austin) a kind of glorying in the
conscience, when thou know that thy faith is sincere, thy hope certain, and
thy love without dissembling. In Saint Austins judgment then our hope and love
may be known as well as our says, seeing otherwise we could not rejoice in
them. When Abraham was ready at the commandment of GOD, to have slain his
son Isaacke, Genesis 22. 12.
GOD calls unto him, saying, Now I know that thou fear me, (viz. with a
filial fear that proceeds from love) seeing for my sake thou have not
spared thine only Son. GOD (says Saint Austin) knows all things Aug cont.
Maximin. lib 3 c. 19.
before they come to pass, it was not then that GOD first knew that Abraham
feared him. But as the Spirit of GOD is said to pray and to groan, because he
makes us to pray and to groan: so GOD is said to know, when he makes us to
know. Now I know then is as much as if he had said, Now I have made thee to
know, or I have made it known (to others also) that thou fear me. The
which truth may further appear by the very name that Abraham gave to the
place, where the Lord spoke unto him at that time, and by the addition joined
thereto. For Abraham called the name of the place, The Lord will see, as it is
said this day, In the mount will the Lord be seen. Now the Lord does see his
faithful servants by taking notice of their sincere minds toward him, and by
providing for them, and bestowing on them all necessary blessings: and the Lord
is seen of them in the spiritual gifts of faith and love, and all other
graces given unto them for the manifestation of his fatherly love and affection
toward them.

For when God by the light of the Gospel does so make manifest unto the
faithful, his fatherly love in Christ, that they esteem it as their highest
happiness, and do in all sincerity desire to enjoy it as their greatest good,
they cannot but know that they believe and love God, seeing these are the most
certain properties of them both. Now as a faithful man may know that he
loves God: so he may also know that he loves the brethren. By this (says
Saint John) we know that 1 John 3. 14.
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren. Whereupon
Saint Austin speaks after this manner: Let a Aug. in 1. Ep. Ioh. tract. 3.
man look into his heart, and see if he have love, and then let him say, I am
borne of God. Now to what end does Saint Austin command a man to look into his
own heart, and to seek to find love there, if in seeking he cannot find and
know whether it be there or no? If then the Lord has given to any one the
sincere love of God and of his Christian Brethren, he may know that he is
endued therewith, and thereby he may know himself to be in Gods love, to his
own unspeakable comfort and joy: the which being a great grief and corrasiue
to the Devil, he therefore seeks by all means to hinder the same.

QVEST. XLI.
The Cup in the Eucharist is not to be taken away from the Lay people.

A man may as well ordain a Sacrament, or any essential part thereof, as he
may take away the one, or the other: but no man nor Angel can ordain a
Sacrament, or any essential part thereof (seeing he cannot make any grant or
give any assurance of these spiritual blessings and gifts which are only in the
Lords hands, and at his own disposition) neither ought he then to mangle or
maime any part of the evidence, that God has given to the faithful for their
better assurance thereof. But the Cup of the New Testament is an essential
part of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, whereby the pardon of
their sins is sealed up to the faithful, therefore it ought by no means to
be taken away from the Lay people. Yea, whereas the faithful are as well
partakers of the Blood of Christ, as of the Body, why should they not also be
as well partakers of the visible sign of the one, as of the other? Act. 10. 47.
Can anyman (says S. Peter) forbid water that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? So upon the like reason it
may be said, Can any man forbid the Lords people to be pertakers of the Holy
sign of his blood with the Priests, seeing they are partakers of the Blood it
self, as well as they?

Especially seeing all the people of God ought to be most ready and willing to
shed their own blood in the defense of the Faith of Christ, why should they
then be deprived of the Sacred sign of his Blood, whereby they are to be
strengthened and confirmed for the courageous performance of that so great and
weighty a work? How do we (says Saint Cyprian) Cypr. ad Cornel. lib. 1. cap.
2.
teach and persuade the people to shed their Blood for the confession of the
name of Christ, if we deny them the Blood of Christ, that is, the Sacrament of
his Blood? For none can take from them the participation of the Blood it self.

QVEST. XLII.
Matrimony is lawful for the Ministers of the Gospel.

It is as lawful in the time of the Gospel for the Ministers thereof to use
the same remedy against sin, and to enjoy the same helps and comforts of
this life, as it was for the high Priest and the residue of his brethren under
the time of the Law. But Matrimony was ordained for the avoiding of
fornication, Genesis 2. 18.
and for to be an help in things concerning this life unto the Priests under
the Law, and why should it not be so under the Gospel? The Gospel requires
in the Ministers thereof as great if not greater labor about their spiritual
work, then was required of the Priests under the Law, why should they then not
have the same helpers, as they had, to supply their rooms for the better
dispatch of their temporal affairs, that so they may have the more leisure to
be employed about their spiritual businesses? And are not the Ministers of the
Gospel, especially in these last and worst days, subject to the like
temptations of sin, as others were in former ages? why should these then be
more debarred from the remedy then they were? especially whereas the
Commandment of the Apostle is given generally to all. For the avoiding of
fornication, 2 Cor. 7. 2.
let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband;
but where the remedy against this sin is the authorized permission thereof by
man with a Si non cast, tamen caute; there I must needs confess, is far
less need of the remedy appointed by God.

QVEST. XLIII.
The Nails, Spear, and Cross wherewith Christ's precious Body was tormented,
are not to be worshipped.

The Soldiers that used the Nails, Spear, and Cross, to torment the most
precious body of our most blessed Savior, are not to be worshipped, why then
should the Nails, Spear, and Cross be worshipped, which were the instruments
of the routragious cruelty? The Nails and shoe of an horse that strikes
therewith, and kills any mean person but casually, are by the Law found
guilty of the death of him that is slain therewith; how can we then otherwise
judge of the Nails, Spear, and Cross, which were of a malicious purpose used
to shed our blessed Saviors most precious Blood, and to take away his life
from him? for can that which is applied to a most wicked and ungodly use, be
thereby sanctified and not grieously profaned?

QVEST. XLIV.
The sins of the faithful shall not after death be punished in the fire of
Purgatory.

A true friend, that howsoever he endanger himself, will Arguments drawn from
the greater proportion of reason to the less.
stead his dear friend that relieth upon him in his great extremity, will not
fail him in a case of less danger. Neither will our Savior Christ the
fastest friend to his faithful ones that possiby can be, having by his own
death delivered the^ from the everlasting torments of hell fire, suffer them to
be tormented in the fire of Purgatory, if there were any such fire. Neither
will God, that for Christ's sake does freely pardon his faithful the sum of
10000. talents, cast them into a most horrible dungeon, for the small debt of
an 100. pence. Undoubtedly he that freely pardons them their sins which are
the greater evils, will not retain the punishment which is the less. And what
manner of pardoning were this, to forgive the fault, but not to remit the
punishment? Yea what manner of justice were this, to punish where there is no
fault? but a fault pardoned is no fault. Wherefore seeing our most merciful
God in Romans 3. 25. 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
Christ does presently in this life give to all faithful and penitent sinners,
the free remission of all their sins for Christ's sake, undoubtedly after
their deaths he will not punish them in the fire of Purgatory.

QVEST. XLV.
The Sacraments do not confer grace by the work wrought, unless their uses
be understood.

The word of GOD is a more principal instrument of grace, then the Sacraments
are. For otherwise our most wise and holy Savior, while he conuersed in this
world, would not have wholly omitted the administration of Baptism, and Ioh.
4. 2. Luke 4. 16. 43. 1 Cor. 1. 17.
have given himself continually to the preaching of the word, and testified
also that he was sent for the dispatch of that business. Neither would he have
sent forth his Apostles not so much to Baptize, as to preach the Gospel;
unless the preaching of the word had been the principal work best befitting
his principal Ministers. Neither would the Apostle Saint Peter, after that he
himself had so effectually preached to Cornelius Act. 10. 42.
and his company, that the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the word, have
commanded them to be baptized (and that in all likelihood by some inferior
Minister) in the name of the Lord, but would have baptized them himself. And
verily the Sacraments were added to the word; for the further strengthening of
the weak faith of the Believers, and not for the confirming of the authority
of the word, seeing from it they receive their power and efficacy, when their
right use is made known thereby. For how comes it to pass that the water in
Baptism, touches the body and cleanses the soul, but by the working of the
word? Neither are the Sacraments so forcible instruments to bring Christ to us,
as the word is. The Gospel (says Saint Hierome) is the Body of Christ, and
Hieron. in Psalm. 147.
these words of our Savior (Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his Blood, ye shall have no life in you) may be more rightly understood
of the receiving of Christ in the Word then in the Sacraments. And verily how
was the whole world persuaded to embrace Christ? by the preaching of the
Gospel? or by the administration of the Sacraments?

The truth is, that our most loving and gracious God, by his Evangelical
covenant made with Abraham the Father of the faithful, and in him with all his
spiritual seed, does give unto them Christ Jesus their Savior, and in him
eternal life and blessedness, and does open and manifest the same by causing
this his grant to be set down in the Gospel written in the books of the Old
and New Testament, as in the authentical evidences thereof, and to be sealed
by the Sacraments, as by his own seals, the which he has ordained to be
delivered to his people, as his own deeds by the hands of his faithful and
painful Ministers. Now which is the chief instrument to ratify unto the
faithful this gracious grant? the deeds and evidences themselves, or the
seals annexed thereto? that is, the Word or the Sacraments? Undoubtedly the
Word, seeing without the grant written, the seal added to a blancke, is
nothing worth. And yet the word it self does not profit, unless it be mixed
with faith, the true sense thereof being rightly Heb. 4. 2.
apprehended, and a settled assent yielded thereto: and so neither can the
Sacraments profit unless the use of them be rightly 1 Cor. 11. 29.
apprehended, and discerned by a true says. Moreover, here also we may
perceive who in the execution of their Ecclesiastical function come nearer to
Christ and to his Apostles; whether the Ministers of the Gospel in their
painful preaching, or the Popish Priests in their continual saying of Mass.

QVEST. XLVI.
No Images are to be worshipped with divine worship.

If any images and representations of God are to be worshipped with divine
worship; then the best and truest images of God, even such as were framed by
God himself, were so to be worshipped: but men which are the best and truest
images and representations of God, made and framed by God Genesis 1. 26.
himself, are not to be worshipped with divine worship, much less any images
of God made by man. The Church of Rome makes images of three faces, to
represent thereby the glorious Trinity: but the Apostle teaches, that we which
are the generation of God (viz. in our souls rather then in our bodies) Act.
17. 29.
ought not to think that the Godhead is like to gold or silver, or stone
graven by the art or inu^ntion of Man. Wherefore the Church of Rome which
worshippeth such Images, does not therein so much as worship the Image of God,
but the invention and fiction of her own brain. Now if the Images of God are
not to be worshipped with Divine worship, much less the Images of any men. Nay
if holy men themselves may not be worshipped with Divine worship, much less
may their Images and Pictures be.

QVEST. XLVII.
The word of God is not to be read unto people in an unknown tongue.

Such as in the Primitive Church uttered Divine Mysteries in strange tongues,
which were given them by the miraculous working of the Holy Ghost, were
commanded by the Apostle 1 Cor. 14. 28.
to be silent in the Church, unless the meaning of the words were presently
expounded, that so the hearers might receive instruction and edification
thereby: much more now such are to be silenced in the Church, which utter
Divine mysteries in an unknown tongue, which they have not received by the
miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, where there is no exposition thereof.

QVEST. XLVIII.
In all matters that concern the worship and service of God, nothing ought to
be taught, or to be believed, which is not warranted by the testimony of the
Canonical Scriptures.

If Saint Paul himself taught nothing concerning Christ, but that which was
delivered by Moses and the Prophets, Act. 26. 22.
then ought none other of meaner gifts and privileges teach any thing that he
has not received from the Canonical Scriptures. So reasons Origin, Paul as
his custom is (says he) will avouch that which he teaches out of the holy
Scriptures, wherein he gives an ensample to the teachers in the Church, that
they should produce such things as they teach the people, not grounded upon
their own opinions, but strengthened with the testimonies of God. For if such
and so great an Apostle did not think that the authority of his own word
might suffice, unless he knew that those very things were written in the Law
and in the Prophets which himself delivered; how much more should we little
ones observe this, that when we teach, we utter not our own, but the meaning
of the Holy Ghost? Against the which most wise advertisement, if we presume to
offend, albeit we were such as the glorious Angels, Saint Austin is bold out of
the pen of the Apostle to denounce against us a most terrible curse. If
(says he) I will Aug. cont. (...). Pelag. l. 3. c. 6.
not say we our selves, but if an Angel from Heaven shall teach concerning
Christ and his Church, or concerning any thing else that does belong to faith
and life, any other doctrine then that which is contained in the Legal and
Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. Accursed then is the Church of
Rome and her children, who affirm that their unwritten traditions are of
equal authority with the doctrine of the Canonical Scriptures, and command
them with the like reverence to be embraced and received.

QVEST. XLIX.
The natural man has no free will to that which is religiously good.

If the Church her self had need still to pray to her dear Bridegroom, Draw
me after a sort unwilling; that thou may Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 2.
make me willing; draw me drowping, that thou may cause me to run, then
certainly all such as are not endued with such spiritual graces as the Church
is, may justly be challenged for persons not almost, but altogether unwilling
to follow God and to walk in his ways. And if every one of the true members
of the Church, had need to confess unto God and to pray, Thou have corrected
me, and I have received thy correction Ier. 31. 18.
as an untamed Bullock, convert thou me and I shall be converted, for thou art
my God; Then how far off from any willingness and readiness to turn unto
God, are all such as are not yet effectually called to the estate of Grace, but
are strangers from God, and from the Covenant of mercy?

QVEST. L.
Not the suffering, much less the vowing of wilful poverty is the way to
perfection.

The possession of riches, which are yet Gods good blessings, and testimonies
of his goodness and love, is not the way Act. 14. 17.
to perfection, much less the vow of poverty, or poverty it self, which is
the rod of Gods correction, and a sign or token of his displeasure, as all
other crosses and calamities are. Poor Lazarus was brought into the bosom of
rich Abraham, both which were rich in God and poor in spirit. Mark this
(says Saint Austin) that ye do not, as commonly men Aug. ad Hillar. Epist. 89.
do, blame rich men, and put your trust in a poor estate, for if a man should
not put his trust in his riches, much less in poverty.

QVEST. LI.
The people ought to be able to try and to discern the doctrine of their
Teachers.

Do ye not know (says the Apostle) that the Saints shall 1 Cor. 6. 2.
judge the world? If the world then shall be judged by you, are ye not worthy
to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels?
how much more then the things of this life? So may we reason also, that if the
faithful people of God shall judge the world and the very Angels themselves,
much more, may they boldly take upon themselves to try and discern the
doctrine of their Pastors and Teachers.

Our most blessed Savior thought it no disgrace to himself to have his divine
doctrine examined of the people by the rule of the Scriptures; nay, he that
requires the same at their hands, saying. Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think to have life, Ioh. 5. 39.
and they are they that testify of me, and bear witness to my doctrine that
it is of God. Yea, the Lord so approved the Beraeans for that they received the
word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures; whether those things which
Saint Paul Act. 17. 11.
taught them were agreeable thereto, that thereby he brought many of them to
the faith.

It is then no presumption in the people to examine the doctrine of their
Pastors and Teachers, seeing it is not only approved but commanded by the
Lord, and enjoined the Corinthians also by the Apostle. I speak (says he) as
to them that have understanding, judge ye what I say. The refusal 1 Cor. 10
15.
hereof by the heretic Auxentius was sharply reproved by holy and Orthodoxe
Saint Ambrose. Auxentius (says he Amb. Ep. l. 5. in oratione cont. Auxentium.
speaking to the people) knowing you not to be ignorant of the faith has
shunned your judgment, and has chosen four or five heathen men. Then in that
he has chosen Infidels, he is worthy to be condemned of Christians, because he
rejected the Apostles precept, where he says, Dare any of you having ought
against another, be judged under the unjust, and not rather under the Saints?
Ye see then that which he has offered is against the authority of the
Apostle. But what speak I (says he) of the Apostle? when the LORD himself
proclaims by his Prophet, Hear ye me, O my people, that know what
belongs to judgment, in whose heart my Law is. God says, Hear ye me, O
my people, that know judgment; Auxentius says, You know not how to judge. Ye
see then that he contemns God in you, which refuses the sense of this
heavenly Oracle. For the people in whose heart the Law of God is, does judge.
And do not the Popish Priests likewise join with this impious Arrian
Auxentius in refusing to stand to the Oracle of God, while they refuse to have
their doctrine examined and judged by the people, whether it be agreeable unto
the divine doctrine of the Canonical Scripture?

QVEST. LII.
Our whole Justification and Salvation is by the free and undeserved mercy of
God in Christ.

The Apostles plain asseueration, that we are justified freely by Romans 3. 24.
the grace of God through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, has forced
the Church of Rome to avouch that there is a double justification: The first by
grace, and the second by the merit of our own works. But his doubling is flat
contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel. For the Apostle plainly avouches
that not only at the first we are reconciled unto God by Christ, and are
brought into his favor and love, and are justified and saved by his Blood: but
much more that we are brought to the end of our salvation, and to our full and
final glorification by the very same means. God (says the Apostle) sets
out his love toward us, seeing while we were yet Romans 5. 8.
sinners Christ dyed for us, much more then being justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath by him. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life. In the which words of the Apostle, it is manifestly
and distinctly set down, that as it is the grace of God in Christ whereby we
are reconciled unto God and justified at the first: so it is the very selfsame
grace of God in Christ that does save us at the last. And Greg. Moral. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
so a Bishop of Rome it self in her better times has taught, saying, The
first grace begat me in faith, being naked, and the very self-same grace shall
save me being naked, and take me up into glory. Wherefore if we desire to be
partakers of the fruit of our redemption wrought for us by Christ, let us not
so meanly think thereof, as if he should have begun it only by his obedience,
and left it to be finished by our selves. Let us not imagine that he paid but a
part of our ransom, and a parcel of the price that was to be tendered to God
for the full purchase of the glorious inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and left it to our selves to discharge the rest.

Or if we cannot but confess that he paid the whole sum, and the full price
let us not impute to the God of all mercy and the most excellent Patron and
Pattern of all Pity, such an hard and unjust kind of dealing, as if he should
exact again a new payment at our hands, for that which was fully purchased and
paid for before. Undoubtedly if our title to the heavenly inheritance by the
obedience and righteousness of Christ be sufficient and good, why should we
seek after any other title?

Seeing Law and reason teaches us this, that that thing Quod semel neum est
non potest ampliue fieri meum. Quisemel factus est dominus, non potest ex alia
causa fieri dominus. Quia nomo potest acquirere dominium rei suae.
which is once justly mine, cannot be made more mine: And he that is once made
a right owner of a thing, cannot again by another title be made owner of the
same thing: seeing no man can get again the Dominion of that, which was his
own before. If then our first title to our Justification and Salvation, by the
free and undeserved mercy of God in Christ, be good and sufficient, then we
cannot afterward lay any claim, thereunto by the broken and forged title of
our own works.

QVEST. LIII.
The going on pilgrimage to see or to touch the true relics of the Holiest of
the Saints, does not bring any sanctification at all.

The seeing and touching of holy persons themselves, does not sanctify any,
much less the seeing or touching of their relics. They that receive Christ
by faith, are made the Sons Ioh. 1. 12.
of God, and are renewed to his image in righteousness and true holiness: and
not such as embrace and kiss him with their bodily hands and mouths: for then
Judas the Traitor should have been made a Saint. Wherefore if we desire to have
any benefit by visiting the Saints, we ought daily and diligently to visit the
Scriptures, wherein the pictures of their piety are most lively painted out,
that so we may be ravished with the admiration thereof, and be stirred up to
follow them by an holy imitation.

And so concerning the Saints which lived since the Apostles times, if we be
desirous to visit them also, we ought to get their learned books which are
the best Images of their Alma^s speech is the image and glass of his mind.
Erasm. in praefat. Hieron. ad Guili Warramum.
holy souls, that by their sound and Orthodoxe doctrines which are set down
therein, we may be directed in the right way of piety and godliness. But so it
is (says Erasmus complaining of the superstitious folly of many of his time)
we kiss the shoes of the Saint; and their handkerchers, albeit loathsome for
filth: but as for their Books which are their best relics we relinquish,
having little regard of them. Their Coat or Shirt, we lay up in a chest adorned
with gold and precious stones, but as for their writings, upon the which they
bestowed much labor and in the which still lives (here with us) that which is
in them their chiefest good, we leave them to be consumed with worms and rust.

QVEST. LIVE.
The faithful that are sanctified by Regeneration, may and ought to assure
themselves of their full and final glorification.

If God was found of the faithful when they sought him not, and made himself
manifest unto them when they asked Romans 10. 20.
not after him, much more when they turn unto him, he will turn to them,
when they draw nigh to him, he will draw nigh Iac. 4. 8. Matthew. 7. 7.
to them, when they seek him, he will be found of them. For if when they were
enemies, they were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more may
they rest assured of his love, being reconciled unto him, and made his steadfast
friends. If God for Christ's sake offered them a pardon being Traitors and
Rebels, and standing up in arms against him; certainly he will suffer them to
enjoy the benefit of that pardon, when they have humbly submitted themselves,
and are become his loyal subjects.

If God does forgive unto his all their grievous sins, which they willingly
and wittingly committed before their effectual Calling to the estate of grace,
will he not forgive their sins of infirmity, which they afterward commit
against the resolute purpose of their own hearts? if he did deliver them from
domineering and raiguing sins, will he not in the end deliver them fully from
all such sins, whose power and strength are already in part weakened by their
daily repentance and steadfast faith? The Lord (said David) that delivered 1 Samuel 17. 37.
me out of the hand of the Lion and the Bear, will also deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistin. Unto the which words happily the Apostle alluding,
says of himself, And I also was delivered out of the hand of the Lion; And
thereupon was confident that the Lord would deliver him from every evil work,
and would preserve him to his heavenly Kingdom. 2 Timothy 4. 15.


God has promised thee, O man (says Saint Austin, speaking Aug in Ps. 148.
to all such as are sanctified by regeneration) that thou shall live for ever,
and do not thou believe it? Oh (says he) believe it, believe it. For that
which he has done for thee already, is a greater matter then that which he
has promised. For he has given his only begotten Son, who is far more
excellent then thousands of heavens, at the dearest rate that may be to
purchase for thee everlasting life; and do thou think that this purchase
made by such a person at such an high rate, can ever possibly be made void?
Especially whereas for his Sons sake be has adopted thee, which were by
nature the slave of Satan, the child of wrath, and inheritor of everlasting
destruction, into the number of his sons and heirs, and renewed thee in part
to his own image, in holiness and true righteousness: and do thou yet
doubt whether he will give thee the inheritance of a son? Undoubtedly he that
for thy Saviors sake has in part sanctified thee to live a sober, just, and a
godly life in this world, will for his sake bring thee to an eternal and an
everlasting life in the world to come.

QVEST. LV.
Our least sins are damnable and mortal. Arguments drawn from the lesser
proportion of reason to the greater.


If all our righteousness be as a menstruous Cloth, Ioathsome and odious to
God, and deserve Gods curse (because it wants that fullness of faith,
feruency of love, simple sincerity and full freeness from all sinister
respects which the Law of God requires at our hands) then what do those
thoughts, words, and works, which are merely sinful, deserve, albeit Esaias
64. 6. Job 9. 31. Gal. 3. 10.
they be never so small? Undoubtedly no sins that are merely so, can be
smaller or less hurtful, then the imperfections of our best works, and yet
these being transgressions of the Law of God, deserve Gods curse and
malediction, and therefore all sins that are merely so, cannot but deserve
the like woe. So reasons our blessed Savior, If the light which is Matthew. 6.
23.
in thee be darkness, how great is the darkness it self? And so Saint
Bernard. If all our righteousness be as unrighteousness, Bern. Sermon. in fest.
Sanct.
then by a stronger reason what shall our sins be?

QVEST. LVI.
All things necessary to salvation, are plainly delivered in the Ganonicall
Scriptures.

There is no wise man among men, but that he will be careful in his last Will
and Testament, that all things therein be set down plainly, distinctly, and
fully, which concern either the legacies which he bequeatheth to his children,
or the duties that he requires at their hands, that so all occasion of discord
and debate may be clean taken away. And can we then imagine that our heavenly
Father being so wise and so provident as he is, and so desirous to preserve
unity and peace among his dear children, would not set down plainly,
distinctly, and fully in his Will and Testament, what be those great and
gracious gifts that he does in his tender kindness and love bestow upon them,
with the means whereby they shall attain to the same, as likewise what be all
those necessary duties which he requires at their hands? So reasons Optatus,
Christ has Optat. l 5. cont. Parm. Donat.
dealt with us, as an earthly Father is wont to do with his children, who
searing least they should fall out after his decease, does set down his Will
in writing, under witnesses, that if there arise any doubt among them, they
should go to his Testament. He whose word must end our Controversies, is
Christ, let us then go to his Testament.

QVEST. LVII.
The faithful for the divine wisdom of the holy Scriptures rightly
understood, believe them to be the Word of God, and not only for the bare
authority of the Church.

If the Gentiles instructed by the light of natural reason, did certainly
perceive the book of the creatures to be Gods book, by the glorious
attributes of God made manifest therein: much more the faithful lightened with
the Lamp of Romans 1. 19.
divine grace, may plainly perceive the book of the Scriptures (wherein God as
a familiar friend without casting of a mist does speak to the heart, not only
of the learned, but of the unlearned also, as Austin says) to be Gods book,
by the divine Aug. Ep. 3 ad Vol.
and heavenly wisdom delivered therein: and therefore they need not build
their faith upon the bare testimony only of the Church. And so reasons the
Prophet David, The Psalm. 19. 1.
heavens (says he) declare themselves to be the works of the glorious God,
even by their heavenly influences and divine operations: How much more does the
Law of the Lord by the divine wisdom and righteousness thereof, and by the
most powerful and excellent works that are wrought thereby, declare and
demonstrate it self evidently to be the most wise and righteous word of the
most wise and righteous God?

QVEST. LVIII.
The natural man has no free will in heavenly things.

Man's will is but feeble and weak for the compassing of earthly businesses,
that are of any weight or moment: therefore in heavenly matters the strength
thereof is small, or rather (as the Apostle says) it is none at all. So
reasons the Wiseman, Romans 5. 6. Sap. 9. 13.
What is man that he can know the counsel of God? or who can think what the
will of the Lord is? For the thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and their
forecasts uncertain; because a corruptible body is heavy to the soul, and the
earthly mansion keeps down the mind that is full of cares: and hardly can
we discern the things that are on earth, and with great labor find we out
the things that are before us; Who can then seek out the things that are in
heaven? who can know thy counsel, except thou give him wisdom, and send thy
holy Spirit from above?

So Saint Austin, It is an absurd thing that we should think Aug. de predest.
Sanct. cap. 26.
that God frames the wills of men for the settling of earthly Kingdoms, and
that men frame their own wills for the obtaining of the Kingdom of heaven. The
Prophets complaint taken up against the Jews, with whom he lived, and who
took themselves to be Gods people, is true against all men as they are
naturally corrupted, My people are foolish and have Ierem. 4. 22.
no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do well they have no
knowledge. Now if we have no understanding of that which is good, then
doubtless we have no will thereunto, and if we be so foolish that we will not
be persuaded of the truth hereof, it comes from him that so befooled our
first parents Adam and Eve, that he made them believe that if they would
forsake the direction of the most wise God, and fall from him, they should be
as Gods, knowing good and evil; whereas in truth they thereby became devils,
and deprived themselves and all their posterity of all knowledge of that which
was truly good, and of all will thereunto.

QVEST. LIX.
No man can make satisfaction to God for transgressing of any of his holy Laws.

If a Fellon that has stolen but a sheep, cannot make satisfaction by his
repentance or by any good work, be it never so great, for this trespass
against the Law of his Prince, albeit it be but once committed, but must be
condemned and suffer for it, if he cannot read as a Clarke, or be not relieved
by a gracious pardon from his Prince: much less can any one by his repentance
or any other good work, satisfy for any trespass committed against any one
of the holy Laws of God, but he must be condemned and suffer for it, unless
he can read the Covenant of grace, written in his own heart, and find
therein the pardon of his sins, procured unto him by the most precious Blood
of Christ. Wherefore howsoever the proud Romanists by their own devised works
of satisfaction satisfy and please themselves, and their blind followers, yet
they shall be never able thereby to satisfy and please God.

QVEST. LX.
The people ought not to embrace the doctrine of their Teachers without trial.

It is no wisdom in matters whereon our whole estate in this world
consists, to commit them wholly to thecare of others, and not to look into
them our selves: how much less wisdom is it in matters of faith, whereon
depends the salvation of our souls, to suffer our Teachers to deliver unto
us for the groundwork thereof what doctrine they list without due examination
and trial, especially seeing that the Spirit of God commands us otherwise to
do. Let thine Eyes (says Solomon) behold the right, and let thine eye-liddes
direct thy Pro. 4. 25.
way before thee. Ponder the Path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be ordered
aright. So Jesus the Son of Syrach, Take counsel Eccl 37. 13.
of thine own heart, for there is none more faithful unto thee then it. For a
man's mind is sometimes accustomed to show him more, then seven watchmen that
sit above in an high tower. We must not then trust our Teachers eyes but our
own, nor rest wholly upon the warning of our watchmen, but keep watch and
ward our selves over our own souls.

The welfare of every ones own soul concerns himself most, and therefore
it lies upon himself to look to himself into the doctrine that he receives
from his Teachers, that it be wholesome and sound, and powerful to beget and
increase a true faith, because thereon depends the welfare of his own soul.
And verily if a man may tell money after his bodily Father, and not trust his
eyes in the tale thereof; how much more may he examine the doctrine of his
ghostly Father, whether it has upon it the right stamp, and whether he has
delivered his just and full tale, especially seeing the Lord does enable him
thereto if he belong to the Covenant of Grace. For this is the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel, after those Heb. 8. 10.
days says the Lord, I will put my Laws in their mind, and in their heart
will I write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every one his brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least of the^ to
the greatest of them.

By the which words it is not meant that there shall be no teachers under the
Covenant of Grace (for there shall be teachers and learners, Doctors and
Disciples unto the end of the world, and that not without great cause) but that
the Disciples and Learners under the time of Grace shall have such a measure of
Knowledge given unto them, that they shall not embrace the doctrines of faith
upon the bare word of their Teachers, but upon their own sufficient knowledge
and judgment, yea, they shall all be endued with such a sound judgment, that
if any would teach them any strange doctrine, and seek to mislead them into
errors, they shall not hearken unto Ioh. 10. 5.
them, nor give care to such deceivers.

QVEST. LXI.
It is not safe to trust to the Priests Masses, nor to the Friars Prayers, nor
to the Popes Pardons, pretending to disburse the surplussage of the Saints
works, and to neglect to seek after such a faith of our own, as may make us
fruitful in all good works, and give us interest in Christ, and in all his
gifts.

Drink thy water of thine own Cisterne, and of the River out of Pro. 5. 15.
the midst of thine own well. Let thy fountains flow forth, and the rivers of
waters in the streets, but let the^ be thine, even thine only, and not the
strangers with thee. Now if it behooves every one to endeavor to get some
temporal living of his own, and not to trust to the beneficence of another
(seeing even a poor man's Eccl. 29. 24.
life in his own Lodge, is better then delicate fare in another man's) then
much more every wise Christian ought not to trust to the Priests Masses, nor to
the Friars Prayers, nor to the Popes Pardons, although they promise the
disbursing therein of the surplussage of the Saints good works, but to provide
for himself a true Christian faith, that may incorporate him into Christ, and
make him fruitful in all good works. For the just shall live by his own
faith, and by the Lamp thereof Heb. 2. 4.
be directed in the right way to the Kingdom of God: whereas the oil thereof
will not be sufficient to serve himself for that purpose, and others also:
every one therefore ought to buy of Christ, Gold tried in the fire, that
thereby he Matthew. 25. 1.
himself may be made rich, and white raiment, that he may be clothed, and
that his fi^thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint also his own eyes with
eye-salue, that he may see. Yea, let every Apoc. 3. 18.
one prove his own work, and so he shall have rejoicing in himself, Gal. 6.
4.
and not in another; for every one shall bear his own burden.

QVEST. LXII.
God did predestinate before all worlds, some to everlasting salvation in
Christ, and others to perish through their own sins.

Has not the Potter (says the Apostle) power of the Clay, Romans 9. 21.
to make of the same lump one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? And
shall not God himself have liberty to show his wrath, and to make his power
known by suffering with long Patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction, and to declare the riches of his mercy upon the vessels of mercy
which he has prepared to glory? In a great house are not only vessels of
Gold 2 Timothy 2. 20.
and silver, but also of wood and of earth, some to honor and some to
dishonor; So why may not the Lord have in this his great house of the world,
some regenerate by his holy Spirit, made to have pure and golden souls, meet
to be partakers of heavenly glory, and others marred by their own malice, and
so made impure and unclean spirits, meet to be punished with the torments of
hell?

(...) last judgment, some shall rise to everlasting life, and some to shame
and perpetual contempt. And why may not we as well say, that everlasting fire
and perpetual contempt, was prepared for the one before any time was, as that
ouerlasting life and eternal glory was prepared for the other before the
foundation of the world was laid?

For verily God does nothing upon any new advise occasioned by some new
accident: For nothing is new unto him, unto whom were well known all his
works, even from the very beginning of the world. But he acts all things in
their Act. 15. 18.
times appointed by himself, and brings all things to the same ends, and by
the same means, as he himself has decreed from everlasting. The Philosopher
gave this glory to God, Nihil sit frustra, frustra autem fit quod fine caret.
that nothing was created in vain, not having an end whereunto it was
ordained, and means to bring to the same end. For there is no wise workemaster
here among men, that will go about any thing, but that he will first determine
with himself both concerning the end of his work, and also the means whereby
it may be brought thereunto. Which of you (says our Savior Christ) minding to
build a towr^, sits not down Luc. 14. 28.
before, and counts the cost, whether he be sufficient to perform it?

Wherefore it cannot possibly otherwise be but that the most wise and provident
Creator of heaven and earth, having purposed from all eternity to create man
the chiefest and excellentest of all the rest of his works, should decree with
himself from all eternity, both concerning the end whereunto he would create
him, and also the means whereby he would bring him thereunto. And therefore
whereas all that are endued (...) changeable goodness, or his uncontrollable
might and power. For his goodness being unchangeable and his power
uncontrollable, if he ordained all to life, why did he not bring them all to
that happy estate, whereunto he had ordained them all? To say that he could
not, disableth his power; to say that he would not, impeacheth his goodness;
to say that he desposeth of them neither this way, nor that way, but left them
to their own disposition, derogateth from his supreme wisdom; yea, that he
being the Potter, should not dispose of his own Clay, but leave it to the Clay
to dispose of it self; himself being as a neuter, neither bending this way
nor that way, takes away from him all divine providence.

Wherefore it ought not to be denied, but that as God electeth some to
salvation in Christ, and calls them to be partakers thereof by a true faith,
and preserves them thereby through his mighty power, that they never fall away
from that happy estate, to the end that they should ascribe unto him the whole
glory of their eternal blessedness: so likewise it cannot be justly denied,
but that God leaves other in their Infidelity and sin, to run on wilfully
and obstinately in their own demnable ways, that so they might be forced to
acknowledge and cousesse God to be most just herein, and themselves to be the
total cause of their own destruction. Sap. 5. 7.
For as events, which in themselves may or may not come to pass, are called
co^tingent, for that they proceed from contingent causes, albeit they could not
but come to pass as they were foreseen and fore-appointed by the
unchangeable wisdom and will of God: even so all sinful actions, albeit they
be ordained of God to come to pass by his permission, yet they are not to be
said to be wrought by his operation, and albeit they may be said to be willed
by him, yet none of them all is instilled by him.

For God made man according to his own image, and instilled into his soul all
divine and heavenly graces, and gave him hability to continue therein, and left
him to his own choice, to stand or to fall at his own free will; but he did
not so stablish him with his grace, that he could not become willing to fall
away, because he was no way indebted unto him, and bound to perform unto him
that favor.

Much less when all mankind fell away in Adam, was God bound to restore all,
but some according to his own good pleasure he calls by his Spirit and Word
to the estate of Grace, and gives them faith to embrace his endless goodness
in Christ Jesus, and so makes them partakers of everlasting blessedness: and
other he justly leaves in their own wretchedness, whereinto they are fallen
by their own fault, and suffers them to perish in their own sins. And why
might not the Lord justly do so? An earthly Father may give to his son some
Stock to Trade withal, and then leave him to his own government, to try
whether he will play the good husband or no; and might not our heavenly Father
give to Adam, and in him to us all, that were then in his loins, some portion
of his heavenly grace, and so leave him, and us in him to our selves, to try
whether we would settle our selves to continue in his love, or whether we would
set light by his goodness, and fall from him to sin and Satan, to our utter
ruin and destruction?

Undoubtedly, as God in his eternal Counsel, did appoint that bodily diseases
should come into the world, to detect on the one side the weakness of the
creature, and his folly in abusing many things to his hurt and destruction,
that are of themselves profitable for his preservation; and on the other side
to make manifest his own wisdom and goodness, in that he has provided
great variety of helps to man, both for the preventing, and also for the full
curing of all manner of noisome maladies: so did he in like manner decree that
he would permit man to cast himself into many spiritual diseases, to detect
on the one side, his frailty and weakness, who takes occasion many times
thereby to fall, whereby he might have been stayed upright; and on the other
side to make manifest his own wisdom and goodness, by appointing many
Antidotes against sin, and such a strange restoratiue to cure sins, as man
himself could not so much as dream thereof.

There must be Haeresies (says the Apostle) that they which are approved may
be known: even that they may be known 1 Cor. 11. 19.
whether they be as chafe which will be carried away with every blast of vain
doctrine, or whether they be as found and good Corn, and will abide settled and
constant in the truth. And verily the grounds of truth are never better sifted
by her followers and friends, nor sound and solid reasons more diligently
sought out for truths defense, then when she is most mightily and cunningly
oppugned with many erroneous and haereticall untruths. Neither are the Lords
spiritual Captains and Soldiers evermore watchful over their own souls,
and careful to provide all manner of spiritual munition, and to give
themselves to all manner of holy and religious exercises, and to crave
continually in their fervent prayers the help of God, then when they f^ele
most of all their own weakness, and the great force of Satan's temptations,
and his powerful prouocations to draw them into sin.

Yea, they are never more grieved and offended with themselves for their
sins, then when they feel themselves most grievously wounded with the
dangerous strokes thereof. And verily the Lord would never have suffered the
evil of sin to have been, unless he had known it meet and convenient to
make manifest his great wisdom and power in drawing good out of evil, yea,
the greatest good out of the greatest evil. The Lord I say would not have
suffered man to have fallen into sin, unless he had purposed to have
magnified his goodness toward his Elect, to the highest extent that possibly
could be, by giving his only Son to take man's nature upon him, that therein
he might make satisfaction for their sins, and after that manner, recover
them to Gods favor and love, that they should never fall away from the same.

In respect of this so matchless a mercy, that God should give his only Son
to be such a supersufficient satisfaction for all our sins, and to be such an
vnauferable pledge of his endless love, we may with that ancient Father, make
this strange exclamation, saying, O unhappy sin, how happy have thou been to
us, in that thou have been the occasion that such a Savior has been given
unto us! Wherefore God forbid that it should be thought to be any disparagement
to God, to say, that God decreed in his eternal counsel, to permit sin to
come into the world, seeing in his eternal Counsel Christ was a Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world, that in him all the faithful might have a
most sovereign remedy against all their sinful maladies. For the remedy could
not have been thus decreed, unless the malady had been so also.

QVEST. LXIII.
No Image ought to be made to represent God.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the Arguments drawn
from things that be unlike.
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in
the waters under the earth. For an Image is made to be a similitude or
likeness, and so to resemble that for the representation whereof it is made.
But no creature that may be represented by a bodily Image is like unto God, and
therefore no Image of any such creature, is meet to be made to represent God
thereby. So reasons the Prophet, Behold the Esaias. 40. 15.
Nations are to God as the drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the dust of the
balance; Yea, all Nations are before him as nothing, they are counted to him
less then nothing, yea as mere vanity. To who^ then will ye liken God? or
what similitude will ye set up unto him? Among all the creatures of this
inferior world, the nearest to God, and the meetest representation of him, is
the spirit and soul of the regenerate man, endued with holiness and true
righteousness, the which things cannot well be represented by any bodily
shape, and therefore much less the unmatchable Majesty of the incomparable
Deity. And so the Apostle has taught, saying, For as much as we are the
generation Act. 1^. 29.
of God (representing him by our spiritual nature, which cannot well be
resembled by any bodily shape) we ought not to think that the Godhead is like
unto gold, silver, or stone graven by the art or invention of man. Wherefore no
Image or bodily shape ought to be made to represent God.

QVEST. LXIIII.
All the works of Infidels are sins.

Nature is common to all men, but not grace. By grace the faithful are
ingrafted into Christ, and are made good Trees bringing forth good fruit. But
the best among the Infidels is as a Bryer, and the most upright sharper then a
thorn hedge, Mich. 7. 4. Romans 11. 24.
they are by nature wild Olives, yea they are as Trees twice dead and plucked
up by the roots, the which if they seem to bring Jude v. 12.
forth fruit, that fruit of theirs soon withers away and comes to no
thing, and so the end proves that they are altogether without good fruit.
Wherefore all the works of Infidels are fruitless and sinful works.

QVEST. LXV.
The true servants of God know themselves to be the true servants of God.

As any one that is admitted into another man's service, and Arguments drawn
from such things as are like.
has a settled purpose to discharge his duty faithfully unto his Lord and
Master, must needs know that he is such an ones servant, yea that he is his
faithful servant: even so every true believer that is entered into the Lords
family, and has this grace given unto him to be careful in all simplicity and
sincerity 2 Cor. 1. 12.
to perform all those duties that the Lord requires at his hands, cannot be
ignorant that he is the servant of God, yea that he is his faithful and
sincere servant. So reasons the Apostle; Know ye not to whomsoever ye give
your selves as Romans 6. 1^.
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of
sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness? And this the Apostle
spoke of all true Christians in the Church of Rome that had but ordinary gifts,
and not of such only that had this comfortable knowledge given unto them by an
extraordinary revelation, if there were any such there.

QVEST. LXVI.
God gives salvation to the faithful in Christ, and not in any other.

As it is sacrilege to add to a ma^s Testament or solemn Covenant, so much
more is it to add unto Gods. Now Gods Testament Act. 3. 25.
or Covenant is this, that he gives salvation to the faithful for the
obedience of one, that is, of Christ. And therefore all such are not better
then sacrilegious persons, which add to this Covenant the works of the Law
performed by themselves, as the meritorious causes of Gods favor and love, and
of their own happiness and blessedness. So reasons the Apostle, saying,
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, if it Gal. 3. 15.
be but a man's Testament or Covenant, when it is confirmed, no man does
abrogate (there from) or add thereunto. To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made (viz. In thy seed shall all Nations be blessed) he says not
(says the Apostle) and to thy seeds, speaking of many, but to thy seed, as of
one, which is Christ. And this I say, the Law which was four hundred and Genesis
22. 18.
thirty years after, cannot disanull the Covenant that was confirmed a fore of
God, in respect of Christ, that the promise should be of none effect. And
therefore all such of our Romanists, which will needs add to eternal
blessedness given freely in Christ, the meriting thereof by their own works,
are justly chargeable as guilty of grievous sacrilege, because they add to
the covenant of God.

QVEST. LXVII.
Ungodly persons are no true members of the Church of Christ.

As Botches and Sores, and all corrupt humors are to the body of Man: so are
all ungodly persons to the Church, Isay 1. 5.
which is the mystical Body of Christ. But Botches, and Sores, and corrupt
humors, are no members of man's Body; but when they are taken away, the Body is
eased and made whole and sound also: So ungodly persons are no true members of
the Church of Christ. But (as Saint John says) are the limbs and 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
members of the Devil, howsoever they themselves are persuaded to the contrary.

QVEST. LXVIII.
The testimony of God set down in the Canonical Scriptures, and not received
from unwritten Traditions, is the only sure evidence and ground of truth.

As in buying and selling of temporal commodities every honest subject will
be content to stand to the measures, weights, and balances that are marked
and sealed with the mark and seal which is allowed by the Kings Law, and to
receive for current all such coin as bears the Image and Matthew. 22. 20.
superscription of the Prince, and to refuse all other; so every good Christian
is religiously to embrace that doctrine that bears the stamp of the
Canonical Scriptures, and is liable to those measures, weights, and balances,
and has just cause to refuse all that which will not hold weight by them. So
reasons Saint Austin, Let us not bring forth deceitful Aug cont. Denat. l.
2. c. 6.
balances, whereinto we may put what we will, and after our own lust say,
this is heavy, or this is light, but let us produce the divine balance out of
the holy Scriptures, as out of the Lords storehouse, and into it let us put
that which has weight, or rather let us not put in any thing there, but let us
reuise and recognize that which is there weighed already.

Verily before the Scriptures were written, the people of God were to receive
all those doctrines which God revealed to his servants the Patriarchs, by
visions and dreams, and were delivered by unwritten Tradition from the father
to the son, and from the Predecessor to the Successor. But when such as had
the place and credit, even of Prophets delivered (...)

our trepasse brings us very great danger, yea, the very overthrow of our
whole state: but where we can easily make an amends, or the party trespassed is
as much or more in our debt, there we are not so careful for the speedy
avoiding of every trespass: Now the doctrine of such as profess the Gospel,
is, that the very least sin is mortal, and cannot be purged but by the most
precious Blood of our Savior Christ; whereas the Church of Rome teaches that
there are but seven that are principally to be called mortal sins, and that
the residue then are venial, and so small, that they may be done away by
paenance, Purgatory, Pardons, Masses, and Trentals, yea by a little sprinkling
of holy water, and by saying of Aue-Maryes and Pater-Nosters, and the like.
Yea, they avouch that the works of their Saints are so many and of so great
price and worth, that by the surplussage of them satisfaction may be made for
the sins and trespasses of other men, according as it shall please the Pope
in his Indulgences and Pardons to dispense the same. Wherefore their followers
need not to be over fearful to offend God, and to transgress his
Commandments, at the least by small and light offenses, seeing they are able
so many ways, and after so easy a manner to tender a satisfaction unto God,
and to render to him a sufficient amends.

QVEST. LXX.
Popish paenance and Purgatory cannot stand with this Article of our Christian
Creed, I believe the remission of sin.

As the Lord of a Manor is not said to forgive a trespass, when he sets an
amercement upon the head of the trespasser; and as the Creditor cannot be said
to forgive the Debtor, when for the debt he casts him into prison: no more
could God be said to forgive our trespasses and to remit our debts, if either
in this life he require satisfaction at our hands by the works of Popish
paenance; or after this life, cast us into the prison of Purgatory, there to
endure the punishment due to our sins.

QVEST. LXXI.
Jury is not now to be esteemed an holy Land.

The Jews themselves are now an unholy and a detested Arguments drawn from
the Coniugates, that is, from such things as agree in nature and in name.
Nation, and therefore Jury is now to be esteemed to be an unholy and detested
Land. While the Jews were an holy people, and did faithfully perform those
holy duties that their most holy God required in his most holy Laws, then Jury
where this holy people inhabited, was worthily accounted an holy Land; but when
they became an unholy people, and defiled their hands with the blood of Christ
and his Martyrs, those their unclean works polluted and defiled their very
name, and caused it to be had in detestation. And why also did they not as well
defile their very Land and cause it to be had in execration? Surely God
himself had it in execration, when he sent into it the abomination of
desolation, that is, Mat. 24. 15. Luke 21. 20.
as Saint Luke expounds and explaineth it, A destroying army to bring it to
utter desolation, that being an evident argument that the Lord had that Land in
extreme abomination. Now if God himself had Jury in extreme abomination,
then undoubtedly it is no holy Land.

QVEST. LXXII.
The will of man is not by nature free.

The faithful themselves are not free indeed, until by Christ Ioh. 8. 36.
they are made free, how then can their will be free, as long as they continue
in the state of nature? So reasons Saint Austin, Aug. ad Bonif. l. 1. c. 3.
Why do miserable men dare to be proud of their free will before they
themselves be made free? or of their own strength, Aug. de corrept. and great.
cap. 13.
if now they be made free? seeing free will not freed, is free from
righteousness, and a slave to sin.

QVEST. LXXIII.
All the faithful are Saints.

Such only are Saints in the Church of Rome that are Canonised by the Popes,
or at the least are thought by them to be worthy to have their names put into
the Romish Calender. But all the faithful (whereof an huge number are not thus
dignified by the Pope) are sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians.
4 24. Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Luke 10. 29. Apoc. 20. 12.
has put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, and are called by the very name of Saints by the Apostle, and their
names and deeds also are written in heaven, and in the book of life;
Therefore all the faithful are to be taken for Saints by all the faithful,
whatsoever mean reckoning the Church of Rome makes of them.

QVEST. LXXIIII.
The Bishop of Rome is not the Universal Pastor of the whole Church.

Some Popes do not at all by preaching of the Word of God, seed so much as the
people of the City of Rome it self, and none of them all have such gifts as
whereby they are enabled to feed the Universal Church: therefore some of them
are no feeders or Pastors at all, and none of them are the feeders and Pastors
of the Universal Church. And how can they justly challenge the office of Saint
Peter, seeing they so much neglect the trebled charge given to Saint Peter by
his Master Christ, who gave him the dignity that he might perform the duty
annexed thereunto?

QVEST. LXXV.
The Laws of God only bind the conscience.

There is but one Lawgiver, that is the Lord of the Conscience, and therefore
his Laws only bind the same. So reasons Saint James, There is but one
Lawgiver that is able to Iac. 4. 12.
save and to destroy (viz. the soul) and therefore there is but Matthew. 10. 28.
one Lawgiver that can give laws to the soul: and that one Lawgiver is God:
For God only searches the heart, and takes notice of all the aberrations
thereof, and can punish them with condign punishments. So reasons the Lord
himself. The heart of man is deceitful and wicked above all Ier. 17. 9.
things, who can know it? I, the Lord, search the heart and try the raynes,
even to give every man according unto his ways, and according to the fruit of
his works.

All Magistrates civil and Ecclesiastical, are his under-officers, not to
make laws, but to command that the Lords laws only be put in execution in all
matters that concern the substance of his spiritual kingdom. For as
concerning the laws that they have authority to make in matters of
circumstance belonging to the spiritual kingdom, and in matters both of
substance and circumstance belonging to the temporal government: they must be
squared by those general rules that are set down by this one Lawmakers in the
authentical records of his canonical Scriptures. And being so framed they are
not for their particularities to be esteemed so much man's laws, as they are for
the general grounds of them to be accounted Gods own ordinances. And being so
made they bind the conscience, Romans 13. 5. Exodus 16. 8. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
as the Apostle testifies, and they that refuse to be subject to them do not
cast away man but God, that he should not raign^ over them.

QVEST. LXXVI.
True religion binds only to the observation of such Canons and rules as are
made by God himself in matters of substance, whereas superstition imposes
other also, which Arguments drawn from the Etymology, or in^erpretation of the
name. Religo a religando. Aug. de veca religione cap. 54.
are above and beside the former.

Religion has her name (as S. Austin says) for that by certain rules and
precepts given by God himself it does enclose and keep in, as within certain
limits and bounds, all such as desire to perform that religious service which
is acceptable to God, least they should go astray and wander out of the right
way that should bring them to God. Whereas superstition Superstitio quasi supra
statutum. (...). 1 Timothy c. 2. 3.
has her name for that she is so bold foolish hardy as to thrust those things
upon Gods people which are above and besides the Laws and statutes of God. Ane
therefore it was not without cause that the wise man so seriously advises all
such as desire to be esteemed of God as his religious servants, to take good
heed when they go to the house of the Lord to perform that religious service
which is acceptable in his sight, that they be prepared most readily and
reverently to hearken Eccl. 4. 17.
to the word of God, that so they may both learn and keep that which is
therein commanded unto them, and that they presume not to offer to God the
sacrifice of Fools, that is, that kind of service which is sucked out of
their own or other men's foolish brains, and is above and beside that which is
commanded of God.

QVEST. LXXVII.
The Laitic ought to be admitted to the daily reading of the holy Scriptures.

If Religion has her name a relegendo, that is, from often Religio a
relegendo. Cicer. de natura deorum lib. 1
reading, because the doctrines which concern religion should be read over
again and again, (as Tully, whose judgment concerning the original of
Latin words is not to be contemned, judges) then the Christian Magistrate
must not only suffer, but also command all his subjects, if he desire to have
them to be truly religious, daily to read the holy Scriptures, for that they
contain the sum and substance of all true religion: yea the chief
Magistrate himself, albeit the care for the whole common wealth lies upon
him, and therefore has cause to busy his thoughts thereon continually, yet
must not let the book of the Law of God depart out of his mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that he may do according to all that is written
therein, if he will have his ways made prosperous, Josh. 1. 8.
and if he will have good success in his temporal affairs.

QVEST. LXXVIII.
The Faithful themselves and also their Churches ought only to be dedicated
unto God.

The congregation of the faithful themselves, and the places of their public
assemblies for the performing of divine service are called the Church or Kirk
from (...), which signifies that which is the Lords. Whereby we are given to
understand, that the one and the other should be only dedicated to the Lord,
seeing they are the Lords. So reasons the Apostle, You are not your own, for
ye are bought with a 1 Cor. 6. 20.
price, therefore glorify the Lord both in your bodies, and in your spirits,
for they are Gods. And verily for this end and purpose not only the people of
God are called The Lords peculiar, but 1 Pet. 2. 19.
their Churches also are called Basilicae, that is, the Kings, for that they
should be dedicated and consecrated to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

QVEST. LXXIX.
The faithful are witting to their faith and love, and to their salvation in
Jesus Christ.

The conscience of all men is as a Register, wherein all their (...)
Conscientia, I know what I know.
thoughts, desires, words, and works are truly recorded and safely kept. And
the testimony of this record is as sure, as is the testimony of a thousand
witnesses. Hereby every one may well know and be assured that he
understands that which he understands, that he wills that which he
wills, that he loves, that which he loves, and that he hates that which
he hates.

The faithful then having by the light of the Gospel, the eye of their
understanding opened so to behold and apprehend the infinite love and goodness
of God in Christ offered therein, that they esteem and desire it above all
other things, and are thereby unfeignedly stirred up to love God, and to cleave
unto him, and to be sorrowful for offending of him and to be wary and (...)

Wherefore (as the Wiseman says) A wise heart gets Pro. 18. 16.
knowledge and the care of the wise seeks learning. For wisdom rests in
the heart of him that has understanding: Yea, right understanding is wisdom
it self, and is one of Wisdoms proper names. For the wisdom of the
prudent, is to understand (...). Pro. 14. 8. Pro. 14. 15.
his way whereas the folly of fools is deceit. And why? A fool believes
every thing, and is careless to try his own standing, and therefore his
footing must needs fail, and his fall is without all hope of recovery, but the
prudent will consider his steps, and see sure ground before he will set
forward one foot. And so the Apostle advises, saying, Take heed that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, and for that it
is a matter of great moment so to do, he doubleth his exhortation, saying,
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but Ephesians. 5. 17.
understand what the will of the Lord is. That if any will not yet be advised
hereby, but will blindfully go on in such ways that he knows not, he may
justly blame his own folly, when he falls into the pit of his own
destruction.

QVEST. LXXXI.
The breaking of a Popish vow is no sin.

Sin is as it were a shooting awry from the mark that (...). 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
God has set up unto us in his commandments, whereunto we ought to aim in
all our actions, or it is a passage over those bounds and limits that God has
set out unto us to keep us within our compass in performing those duties that
he requires at our hands: but Popish vows are not commanded by God, neither
in the Old nor in the New Testament: but are the ordinances of Friar Francis,
Dominicke, Loyola, and the like; therefore the breach of them is no sin.

QVEST. LXXXII.
Popish Monks, as now for a long time they have demeaned themselves, are no
Monks.

That is, Monks, are such as live solitarily and apart from all (...) quasi
(...).
company, but our Popish Monks live not solitarily but in great Cities, and
dwell together in great troops and companies. And hereof it was that S. Jerome
writing to Paulinus that took upon him the profession of a Monk, thus
reasons with him: If thou desire to be indeed, that which in name thou art
Si Monachi cur tot? si tot iam quomodo soli? O turba ^ solis quae simulas
monadem.
called, a Monk, that is one that lives alone, why do thou dwell in
Cities, which are not habitations of solitary men, but of many that live
together? Therefore seeing that popish Monks live not alone, they cannot be
true Monks.

QVEST. LXXXIII.
All the faithful are saved by mere mercy through the redemption that is in
Christ.

Servants (as S. Austine says) had their names at the first for that they were
saved alive in war by the mere mercy of the Aug. de Civ. dei lib. 19. cap.
15. Servus quasi in bello servatus.
Conqueror, when as by the Law of arms they might have been justly slain.
Wherefore all men by nature being Gods enemies fighting under the banner of
Satan against God, justly deserved to be destroyed by the sharp sword of the
Lords justice. And therefore seeing the faithful when they were worthy to be
destroyed, were not only spared by Christ, but also ransomed with the loss of
his own life, they must acknowledge themselves by a double right to be his
servants and must ascribe the whole glory of their salvation only to him.

QVEST. LXXXIV.
The faithful are well witting to themselves both of Gods love and favor
toward themselves, and of their own faith and love toward God.

Friendship (as Aristotle defines it) is a mutual benevolence Arguments
drawn from the definition or description of a thing. Amicitia est mutua
benevolentia non latens.
not lying hid: For true and sincere friends do communicate Counsels, show
kindnesses, bestow gifts each upon other, as testifications and prouocations
of their mutual and reciprocal kindness and love each to other. Wherefore
since God does vouchsafe to enter into a league of amity and friendship with all
his true and faithful servants, and being fully reconciled unto them in
Christ, does become their entire and fast friend, therefore he does make
manifest his love and good will toward them, by opening unto them all his
counsels, and by bestowing upon them the manifold gifts and graces of his
spirit, that thereby he may kindle in their hearts reciprocal love, and cause
them to make manifest the same by their faithful acceptance of so great
favors, and by their careful performance of that divine worship and service,
which they know to be acceptable in his sight.

And verily all such as sincerely love are most carefully busied about this,
even how they may make their good will and love surely and certainly known to
them whom they love. And here of it is that our Savior Christ speaking unto
his disciples, in them to all his faithful servants, says, Hence forth call I
you not Servants, for the servant knows not what his master Ioh. 15. 16.
does; but I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my
Father have I made manifest unto you.

Now if Christ does make manifest unto the faithful all things especially that
belong to the confirmation of their faith, and to the strengthening of their
love and obedience, then undoubtedly he does make known unto them, their
election to eternal life, their sanctification wrought in them by his Spirit
and Word, and the certainty of their glorification in the life to come. For
otherwise they cannot trust in God and love him, unless they first feel in
their own hearts, the sure and certain pledges of Gods love toward
themselves. So the Apostle Saint John, We love him, because he loved us first,
and have 1 Ioh. 4. 16. and 19.
known and believed his love toward us.

QVEST. LXXXV.
The bare testimony of the Church cannot make known unto the people any
doctrine of Faith.

To know a thing is to understand the causes and reasons Scire est per causas
scire. Quaestio an sit alia est a quaestione quid sit.
thereof. A man may know by the testimony of another that there is such or such
a thing, but he cannot know what it is, unless he know the definition thereof,
wherein are set down Definitio explicat quid sit res.
the true causes of the thing, whereby the thing it self is made known. It is
not then the bare testimony of the Church, that can make known unto us any
doctrine of faith, unless the causes and reason, thereof be opened and cleared
unto us out of the word of God.

QVEST. LXXXVI.
A Bishop may be a civil Magistrate, or any other sufficient Ecclesiastical
person.

A civil Magistrate is such an one as is placed to govern in the Temporal
estate by such as have power by the Laws and customs of the Land to give unto
him that authority. And a good civil Magistrate is he that is endued with
those qualities which God requires in every good Magistrate; viz. That he be a
man of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and Exodus 18. 21.
hating covetousness. And he that is thus qualified is called of God to be a
Magistrate seeing Gods calling of any person unto an office, is nothing else
but his induing of him with those gifts, whereby he is made fit to execute the
same.

Whosoever then is thus called by GOD and by man, Heb. 5. 4.
to be a Civil Magistrate, may lawfully take upon him this authority. But our
Bishops and some other Ecclesiastical persons are called by our Prince to this
place of government, and if they be also such as the Apostle requires Bishops
and Pastors to be, then they are likewise called of God. And such 1 Timothy 3. 2:
Tit. 1. 7.
an one, as Mr. Fox in his book of Martyrs does sufficiently prove, was
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, a pattern for all Pastors, yea an Idea for
all Bishops to imitate and express.

And verily albeit the offices of Civil and Ecclesiastical governors, be
distinct and diverse in themselves, yet they may be co-incident in one person.
For otherwise God himself would not have made Eli and Samuel, being
Ecclesiastical persons, the chief Temporal governors among his own people,
nor made the high Priests to be ordinary Assistants unto the Civil (...)

Matrimony to be the means for the avoiding of fornication and adultery, all
such of the Clergy as have not the gift of Continency, ought to use the
remedy of lawful Matrimony, yea after the taking of the vow of single life.
For if no promise, vow, compact, or covenant made against Law is of any
validity, or ought to be kept, then the vow of single life made by all such
that have not the gift of Continency, being against this Law and Commandment
of God, (For the avoiding of fornication, let every man have his wife, and let
every woman have 1 Cor. 7. 2.
her husband) is of no validity or force to bind any person, be he votary or
no votary, to the observation thereof. And as for the Law, that is made by any
man whosoever he be, to bind them that have not the gift of Continency to
keep their vow, it is no Law at all, seeing it is unjust and unrighteous, and
contrary to the holy and righteous Law of God.

QVIST. LXXXIX.
All Ecclesiastical persons are subject to the Civil Magistrate.

Let every soul be subject to the higher power, for there is no Romans 13. 1.
power but of God; and this Commandment is given by the Apostle, in general
unto all; Now if all in general ought to be subject to the higher power, then
every one in particular, be he Laike or Clerk. So reasons Saint Bernard,
writing Bern ad Epis. Senes. Ep 42.
to a Bishop: If all, then yours: Who has excepted or exempted you out of the
number of all? If any do so endeavor, he is no better then a deceiuer. Do
not build upon their counsels, who being Christians, either will not follow the
doings of Christ, or esteem it a reproach to be subject to his sayings. These
are they that are wont to say, preserve the honor of your Sea are yo of less
power then was your Predecessor? Such things they: but Christ otherwise
commanded, and did also. Give (said he) to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to
God that which is Gods. So reasons also Saint Chrysostom upon the Chrysostom.
in Ep. ad Romans Hom. 23.
same words of the Apostle. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.
Albeit (says he) thou be an Apostle, albeit thou be an Evangelist, albeit thou
be a Prophet yea whosoever thou be; For this subjection does not overthrow
godliness.

QVEST. XC.
It does belong to the Civil Magistrate in his own dominions, to command all
such things to be observed of his subjects that concern Gods divine service,
and his subjects happiness, and herein he has highest authority.

The Civil Magistrate is the Lords Liefetenant to see all his Laws observed
and kept, and therefore in special, those which concern Gods service, and the
happiness of his own Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
subjects. At the Coronation of the King, the book of the Law of God by Gods
special commandment was to be delivered into his hands, the which book he
was to have before, as he was a good servant of God, that he might meditate
therein Psalm. 1. 2.
day and night, and so be made fruitful in all good works. But at his
Coronation he was to have it as a King, that he might cause all his subjects
to observe the same, and that wholly and not by halfes. And thus much even
natural reason taught the Philosopher to avouch. The Civil Magistrate (says
Aristotle) Arist. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 2.
is the supreme governor in his own Country, and he ought to provide as in
general, for the good of all his subjects, so in particular, that they might
enjoy the means whereby they might be made happy and blessed.

Now no people can be happy and blessed, unless they have communion and
fellowship with God, and sincerely perform unto him all such things as do
concern his divine worship and service. Wherefore the Civil Magistrate, is to
provide that those Laws be taught and made known to his subjects, in the
which the means are laid open how they may have Communion and fellowship with
God, and perform unto him that religious service that is acceptable in his
sight, if that he desire to have them happy and blessed. The which every good
King ought to desire unfeignedly, even as he tendreth his own good, seeing the
happiness of the subject is the happiness of the King.

QVEST. XCI.
The natural man has no free will in divine and heavenly things.

If all the imaginations of man's heart be only evil, and that continually,
and that in the eye and judgment of him that Genesis 6. 5.
searches the heart and cannot be deceived: then the natural man has no will
to think, much less to will any thing that is good. For man is become (says
Chrysostom) totallie sin, Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 1. Esaias. 1. 6.
and therefore in his whole understanding and will. And this he learned of the
Prophet Esaias; The whole head is sick, and the heart is heavy, from the sole of
the foot, to the crown of the head there is nothing whole therein. What good
ability or freedom then is in the will to that which is truly good?

QVEST. XCII.
The Church of Rome gives to the Saints divine honor.

Religious faith, prayer, and devotion are principal parts of Arguments drawn
from the parts to the whole, or from the special to the general. Ioh 6. Psalm.
50. 15.
that divine service and honor which is due unto God, and is given unto him by
all his true and faithful servants. But these religious duties are by the
Church of Rome communicated to the Saints, unto whom they make their prayers in
their wants and necessities, and trust to be relieved by their means, and for
that purpose deuote themselves to their service: and therefore they give unto
them divine honor.

QVEST. XCIII.
There are no persons appointed by God for Popish Purgatory.

All persons are either believers, or Insidels and unbelievers. Now neither of
these when they receive from GOD their discharge to depart out of this world,
have by his appointment any pass for Purgatory. Concerning the believer, be he
weak or strong in faith, so he be sound and sincere, our blessed Savior
testifies, and that by a solemn and a doubled asseueration, that he has
everlasting life, and shall not come into Ioh. 5. 24.
condemnation, but is passed from death (not to the pains of Popish Purgatory
but) to life, that is, to the unspeakable joys of heaven.

And as for all unbelievers, they are condemned already, viz. Ioh. 3. 18.
in Gods decree, and in his holy word, the undoubted record thereof; and hell
is their place, being the prison appointed for all condemned persons, and there
they are to be reserved against the judgment of the great day: And therefore
none at all are appointed by God for Popish Purgatory. And verily there is no
way detected in the holy Scripture that leads thither. For there we find
but two ways, whereof the one is Matthew. 7. 13.
narrow and leads to life, that is, to heaven; and the other broad and
leads to destruction, that is, to hell. And therefore if our Popish
paenitents would needs pass along to Purgatory, there to make full
satisfaction to God for their sins, which they have not thoroughly satisfied
for by their works of paenance, they shall be able to find no way that
leads thither.

QVEST. XCIIII.
The miracles and doctrine of the Romish Church are fabulous and false by the
testimonies of her own vulgar people. learned Writers.
the ancient Fathers. Canonical Scriptures.



It is an approved saying, that the voice of the people is the Arguments drawn
from humane and divine testimonies. 1 Cor. 14. 22.
voice of God, the which in Gods matters is true of Gods people, and in matters
subject to sense and natural reason is true in all such persons, as have in
them sense and reason sound. Wherefore seeing miracles may be discerned by sense
and natural reason, and therefore are appointed for Infidels, which have no
other means to apprehend the truth of them: the judgment of (...)

^quity, and that in every controversy that is between them and Camp. Rat. 2.
Possevin. Biblio^hes: Select. l. 7. c. 18.
us, is wholly for them, and directly against us. The which if it were true, why
was their Index Expurgatorius made, and therein order taken to put out diverse
things one of the books, not only of diverse writers of their own side, but
also out of the monuments of the ancient Fathers.

What? Do any that trust to the goodness of their own cause, and to the
fullness of the witnesses produced by themselves, maime, and mangle, and
curtall, and abridge their testimonies given under their own hands, and set
down in record by themselves, and so suffer them not to tell out to the end
fully and wholly their own minds? Verily hereby it is plain and manifest that
all antiquity is not fully and wholly for them, and therefore that such of them
at least that make boast thereof are of the number of such haereticks as sin,
being condemned by Tit. 3. 11.
their own consciences.

Yea whereas they Father upon diverse of the greatest lights of the Church
diverse Treatises that never came from them, as the Liturgies of S. James, S.
Mark, S. Denis, and the like, and as the Decretall Epistles, fathered upon
diverse ancient Bishops of Rome, and produce out of them diverse testimonies for
the justifying of diverse points of their Idolatry and superstition, hereby it
is manifest that their cause is very bad, in that it cannot be maintained but
by such counterfeit and forged evidences.

Lastly to conclude, if that the governors of the Church of Rome were not well
witting to themselves in their own consciences, that the testimony of God
himself delivered in the books of the Canonical Scriptures, was not directly
against them, why do they refuse them as authentical, and as supreme judges
in those tongues wherein they were first penned, by the special and immediate
revelation of the spirit of God, and allow them that dignity only in the
language of the vulgar Interpreter, who was a man subject to error. And why
do they charge them being thus translated to be obscure, ambiguous, and
doubtful, and thereupon refuse the Text it self to be the supreme Judge,
unless it be taken in that sense as it is expounded by the Churches gloss, so
making the gloss better then the text, and seating it in the place thereof.

Yea why do they yet charge the Text it self being thus expounded by their
Churches gloss to be an insufficient Judge, unless there be joined unto it,
as fellow Benchers, and Peers equal with it in authority, the books
Apochrypha, and unwritten verities and traditions.

Undoubtedly, as it is a very strong presumption, that he which disgraceth the
Laws of his Prince is guilty of trespass committed against them, and so
liable by them to condign punishment: so is it an evident argument that many
of the doctrines of the Church of Rome are condemned by the Canonical
Scriptures, because they are so disgraced by her, dear children with diverse
reproachful imputations.

For it is the fashion of Heretics (as Irenaeus says) when they are reproved
by the Scriptures, to reproach and disgrace Jren. l. 3. cap. 2.
them, as if they were not right, and as if they were uttered ambiguously, and
as if the truth could not be learned out of them by such as know not
traditions. And therefore Tertullian calls them fugitives from the light of
the Scriptures, and further Lucifugae scripturarum Tertull. de carnis resurr.
testifies that if that were taken from them, which they have common with the
Ethnickes, and if they were brought to determine all their controversies by the
Scriptures only, they could not prevail.

And so I beseech God, that our Romanists the defenders of all Antichristian
heresies, may no longer prevail, but that their madness may be made manifest
to all men. Amen.
FINIS.

