THE TRIAL OF TRVTH: Containing A PLAIN AND SHORT DISCOVEry of the chiefest
points of the Doctrine of the great Antichrist, and of his adherentes the
false Teachers and Heretics of these last times.

Math. 16. O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, and can ye
not discern the signs of the times?

2 Thessalonians. 2. Let no man deceive you by any means: for (the Lord shall not
come) except there come an Apostasy first, and that man of sin be revealed,
the son of perdition, who is an adversary, and is exalted above all that is
called God, or worshipped, so that he as God sits in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God,

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Bible Ann. Dom. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD HIS VERY GOOD Lord, HENRY Bishop of
Sarum.
RIGHT Reverende Father, and my very good L. I am bold in your Lordshippes name
to present to Christ his Church these my travailes undertaken in defense of the
same against her capital enemy the great Antichrist, especially seeing your
Lordship is our Coronell under whose conduct we, that are leaders of small
bands under your regiment, are marshalled along unto these our military
services, and are encouraged to fight the Lords battles. Wherefore I am most
humbly to crave not only your Lordshippes approbation herein, but also your
special protection, that so the better success may ensue.

And I am most earnestly to exhort all those which are Leaders with me of
smaller companies, that they would submit themselves dutifully to the
government of their Lieftenant general, and Coronels appointed over them for
their spiritual services, that they take them for their governors and not for
their enemies, and that they be preast and ready to put in execution their
lawful designmentes, (howsoever some of them perhaps may conceive, that
there might be devised some better course for the menaging of these affairs.)
For doubtless whersoeuer the General and Coronels be not readily obeyed by
their under Officers, but deemed and judged for deadly enemies, there must
needs arise sedition and mutinies, and so in the end, unless it be prevented,
the utter overthrowe of the whole army. As therefore, my brethren, we would
be loath to be the means to weaken and dissolve the Lords bands, and to
strengthen and increase the force of the enemy, let us so stand upon our
several watches, that we keep our selves to our own colors, and discern our
chiefest Patrones and Protectors from our most dangerous and deadly foes, and
distinguish our Fathers, that have begotten us through the gospel, from such
as would bastardize us, if they could, and rob us of our caelestiall and
heavenly inheritance. Yea whereas the enemy by strong leagues and
confederac^es, and by all means that policy can devise, or industry bring to
pass, has long time sought to strengthen himself that he might bring us to
utter destruction: how ought we with one heart and one soul join together
for our own preservatio^, and especially for the furthering of the glorious
gospel of Christ our Lord, and for the establishing of his kingdom? We know
all very well that by peace and unity small things become great, as by discord
and dissension great things are brought to nothing. And therefore I cannot but
greatly reverence that godly affection of that religious and reverend father in
God THOMAS COOPER late Bishop of Winchester, who lying in his death bed, when
sense, reason, and judgment began to fail him, yet this desire did not wax
weak, but his importunate will (if I may so term his holy and godly zeal
there in) was, that set prayers should be appointed for the peace of this our
Church, and for the establishing of Christian love and unity among our selves
The which thing, as I take it, would the more easily come to pass, if we would
duly weigh with our selves, that government and ceremonies (about the which we
contend) are only in general Calvin. in J. ep. ad Cor. c. 11.
commanded in the word of God: but what special kind of government is fittest
for every time and country, and what ceremonies in particular belong to order,
comelines, and edification, these things are not left in the power of private
persons (for that would tend to confusion and all disorder, and cause
Controversies to be endless) but to the power of such as be in authority, and
the determination of their wholesome laws.

The articles of faith says Tertullian be the law of faith: Tertul. d^ virg.
vt^ad.
this law remaining, other matters of discipline and conversation do admit
the novelty of correction, the grace of God working, and profiting the Church
to the end. Wherefore as I would exhort our Leaders of smaller companies to
acknowledge and reverence their greater Commanders, and to submit themselves to
their governeme^t; so I would also most humbly beseech those which are in
higher place and authority to embrace with love their inferior Officers, which
are desirous to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. And Hosts
iudicandi suns qui contrae remp. arma ferunt. non qui suo iudie cio tueri
velint remp.
that they will not over hastily adiudge all those to be factious and mutinous,
who differ a little in judgment from the^ in the ordering of the battle, and
in the manner of performing of this or that piece of service; if they fly not,
nor turn their backs in the skirmish, but advau^ce their ensigns
courageously, and employ their forces ma^fully against the enemy. The time has been Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 23.
when that the diversity in fasting (and so no doubt in other matters of the
like kind) has been thought to have been a co^mendatio^ to the unity in faith.
The time has been when heady Idem. lib. 5. Cap. 26.
Victor seeking a victory to himself and so hindering the conquest and triumph
of the truth, has been overruled by a discrete Irene persuading peace, that
so the gospel might get the greater victory. The time has been when rash
Iosuah provoking meek Moses to put to silence Eldad Numb. 11. and 28.
and Medad for prophesying in the host, and not being present as it were
before his Consistory, received the cheek for his labor: Enviest thou for my
sake? I would to God all the LORDS people could prophecy, and that the Lord
would put his spirit upon them. For if Christ Ph. 1. 18.
be preached any manner of way it ought to be the matter of great joy to every
true and sincere Christian: And if to us this dispe^satio^ be committed, woe,
woe unto us if we preach not the 1. Cor 9. 16.
Gospel: but if we be instant herein in season, and out of season, and feed
Christ's sheep again and again, for that they are redeemed with his own
blood, happy are we even by the testimony of the Lord himself, seeing we are
possessed with his love. And happy also is the estate of those sheep which
have Ioh 21. 15.
a faithful sheapheard to go in and out before them, and to lead the^ alonge
into the pastures of righteousness: as lamentable is the case of those
Co^gregations which are as sheep scattered abroad without a sheapheard; as
wretched is the estate Math 9. 36.
of that ground, which has no skillful husbandman to manure the same. Surely
the harvest is great and the laborers are but few and therefore we must make
earnest suite to the Lord of the harvest that he would thrust forth laborers
into his harvest. And may we not as truly say, that these battles are hot, and
that the leaders thereof on the adverse part are many, expert, and cruel and
therefore that there is great need that all the Leaders of the Lords armies
should be stirred up and encouraged each by other to stand up in the breach and
courageously to withstand the force of the enemy? The which thing if any of
the^ shall either be unwilling or unable to perform, order had need to be
taken presently for such, least the army thereby should be brought in great
danger.

And verily (right Reverend in the Lord) it is lamentable to behold what great
massacres, blindness, and ignorance, superstition and Idolatry do make as yet
in the midst of many Congregations, who are laid as it were wast and
desolate, for want, as it may be supposed, either of hability, or else of
industry in their Leaders which should withstand the force of these enemies.
How many are there even among those which outwardly notwithstanding conform
themselves to law and order, who feed still upon poiso^, for want of wholesome
food to be so divided, that they may be able to receive the same: and like
silly sheep are still ready to stray hither and thither and to become a pray
to the greedy wolf, for want of such a sheapheard as should still go in and
out before the^, and direct them along in a right course? For is it not with us
(who are in this our Church as it were the feet of the Ministry) as it was
with that image represe^ted to Nabuchadnezzar in a drea^e, whose feet were
part of iron and part of clay? For there are in many (the Lord be blessed for
the^, and increase the number of the^) the strength of iron, whereby they are
enabled to stay the people upright, and to keep the^ in obedience to God and
to their Sovereign: and there are others like moultring clay having little
power to strengthen themselves, and less hability to stay others.

Thus am I bold to intimate the estate of Christ's sheep unto your Lordshippe
being our great shepherd, who not only by your antority do require our
watchfulnes and diligence over our several flocks, but also by your own
example do persuade us thereunto verifiyng by your practice the truth of that
saying of one of your L. most famous Predecessors; that, as an Emperor should
die standing in the field, so should a B. in the pulpitte. The high and chief
Bishop of all our souls visit your Lordship daily with his mercies, increase
his graces and blessings upon you, and preserve you both in body and soul to
his own honor, and to the benefit of his Church. Amen.

Your LORDSHIPPES, as duty binds me, to command JOHN TERRY.

To the Christian Reader.
AS it is a necessary duty (good Christian Reader) for every member in man's
body, even for the meanest and basest as well as for the most principal to
perform their common service for the common benefit and preservation of the
whole: even so it is as needful for every member of the Church and common
weal, be he higher or lower, greater or less, to walk painfully in his
several calling, and in obedience to God, who has thus or thus placed him and
carefully to discharge that duty which the Lord requires at his hands. For
there are none of Gods blessings, be they in comparison of the greater of never
so low a rate and estimation, but that they are worthy that we should employ
our cares and cogitations about the lavvful obtaining, increasing, and
preserving of the same: and there is no talent so small committed to any, that
is carelessly or co^temptuously to be flunge aside, tied up in a napkin, or
buried Math. 25.
in the ground. Should a little light be clean put out, whereas it may fit some
little ca^dlesticke, and serve to lighte^ some little house? Or should a man of
mean stature, when he is assaulted by his enemy, stand nothing at al upon his
own defense, but cast away al manner of weapon, because he is not able to use
Hercules clubbe? Our Savior Christ (which Isa 42 3. Mat. 21. 16.
breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the smoking flax) rejected not
the testimony of very children crying in the temple and saying, Hosanna, the
son of David, but gave strength unto it with Have ye never read; out of the
mouths of babes Psalm. 8. 2.
and sucklings thou have made perfect thy praise. Little David unable to bear
the weapon of a man of war, being 1. Sam. 17.
strengthened by the Lords aid, prevailed against great Goliath. And experience
does teach that in martial services, a mean soldiers bullet may strike some
chief man of the adverse part, and so further the winning of the field, and
help to the getting of the full victory. The Lords hand is not shortened, nor
his spirit tied: the planting and watring of such as have the greatest gifts
is nothing, unless God 1. Cor. 3. 7.
give the increase: and the labors of the meanest Minister of Christ may be
profitable to his Church, when it pleases the Lord to give a blessing
thereunto. Yea the meaner the instrument, the greater is the glory of him that
works by the same, when all men that see it shall say, this has 2. Cor. 47.
the Lord done: and shall perceive that it is his work. Upon these grounds
have I been emboldened (good Christian Reader) albeit but a mean soldier to
come into the field with the residue of the Lords army, to the succouring, if
it be but of one soul, or to the rescuing of one captive out of the enemies
hands.

Many things do plainly co^vince the B. of Rome and his adhere^ts as the most
capital enemies of Christ's Church in these last times and ends of the world.
For howsoever they pretend themselves to be the only preservers, yet in truth
they are most greavous destroiers of the Catholic faith: and albeit they make
a show as if they were the chiefest pillars, yet they are the greatest pullers
down of the Church of Christ: and although they glory of their perfect consent
and agreement with the doctrine of Christ, yet in truth they maintain many
flat and direct co^tradictio^s against the very grounds and fou^dations of the
doctrine of Christ. The shortest su^me and abridgment of the doctrine of Christ
is, Repent, and believe the gospel. Repe^ta^ce and Faith. Whereof the Marc. 1.
15.
one is occasioned by the due consideration of our own most manifold and
greavous corruptions, the other by the apprehension of the Lords most singular
and endless goodness. And therefore the scope of the whole Scripture te^ding to
teach repe^ta^ce and faith, te^deth likewise to these two ends, on the one side
to display and lay open the incomparable excellencies and perfectio^s that be
in God, that by the beauty thereof we may be most earnestly stirred up to desire
reconciliatio^ and fellowship with him, to place our whole hope and confidence
in him and to ascribe unto him al honor and glory: and on the other side to
discover the infirmities and corruptions of man, that thereby he may be induced,
al self love set aside, to distrust, deny, and renounce himself, to ha^g down
the head being co^fou^ded in himself and cast down to the bottomless pit of
hell. So the Prophet I say setting down the mighty working of the gospel at
the coming of the Messiah testifies that thereby the high looks shall be
humbled, and the Isa. 2. 17. and 24. 23.
loftines of man shall be abated, and the Lord only shall be exalted in that
day: yea that the Moon shall be abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord
shall appear: that is, that such things, as in our selves seem beautiful as
the Su^ne, shall be covered with darkness, and dashed over as with a coa^e, in
respect of the brightness of Gods most admirable goodness shining in the face of
the glorious Messiah. And wha^ else also means the Prophet ^zechiell in
saying, that when Ezech. 16.
the Lord has confirmed his everlasting Covenant with us, and is pacified
toward us, the^ we shall remember our ways and be ashamed, and never open our
mouths any more in respect of our shame? Wherefore if we will be partakers of
the fruit of the gospel, we must be moved thereby to look thoroughly into our
own corruptions, and to cast down our eyes as it were upon our own foul feet,
that so we may have our part in that sha^e which is the path way to worship and
honor. We Eccl. 4. 21.
must not be gazing upon our peacockes tails, nor beholding the Su^ne when he
shines, nor the Moon walking in her Job. 31. 26.
brightness: that is, we must not admire ourselves no not in respect of our
temporal or spiritual gifts, lest our own hearts do flatter us in secret, and
so induce us to kiss our own hands. Surely this is an iniquity to be
condemned, seeing it is a denial Hab. 2. 4.
of the Lord above. For he that lifts up himself, his heart is not upright:
for the just shall live by faith: which teaches us not to admire ourselves, or
to trust in our selves, but to go out of our selves and to trust in God, and to
place our whole hope in the riches of his grace, and in the fulness of his
goodness. And in truth we can hardly detract to much from man (in whose flesh
dwells no good thing, and all the imaginatio^s Romans 7 18. Genesis 6. 5.
of whose heart are only evil continually) that so he may be brought to cast
away al self love, pride, and confidence in himself, and take to himself his
due deserved co^fu^ion and shame, and be unfeignedly humbled as he ought to be:
As on the contrary side we ca^ as hardly ascribe to much to Gods goodness, or be
overlavish in extolling the hight length, breadth, and depth of the love of
Christ that passes knowledge, that so the pledges of his endless favor may
raise us up to a true and lively faith, and to give him that glory that is due
to him. And why should mire that lies in the street be so gready to be
seaso^ed with sugar and spice, and a vile piece of a rotten post to be gilded
over with fine gold? why should wretched and sinful man be desirous to enlarg
his own estimation and by advau^cing and lifting up himself prepare a way to a
most dangerous downfall? So God be glorified, we ought not greatly regard what
becomes of us, seeing all is due to him, and nothing to us. And verily the most
blessed servants and saints of God being purged and cleansed from all
corruptions, and being admitted to the vision of God, and to bebold not his
hinder parts, but even to see him face to face, and so to behold his
unspeakable glory, as far forth as the creature is capable of the same,
albeit they are so highly advau^ced, yet they take their crowns from their
own heads, and cast them down before the throne, saying: Apoc. 4 10. and 11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honor, and glory, and power: for thou
have created all things, and for thy wills sake they were and are created;
never ceasing day nor night to sing holy, holy, holy, Lord God Apoc. 15. 4.
almighty: who shall not fear thee and glorify thy name, for thou only art
holy? Yea our most glorious Lord and Savior Christ Jesus himself, who was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, and endued with the
spirit with out measure, who is advaunced to the right hand of GOD, and has
all power in heaven and earth given unto him, and is appointed judge of quick
and dead, when he shall have finished the work of his Mediator-shippe, and
shall have placed all the elect of God in the peaceable possession of that most
glorious kingdom which he has purchased for the^ with his own blood, the^,
as he is man, he shall deliver up his kingdom to God, and be subject to him,
and that to this end, that God may be all in all, all glory and honor, power
and 1. Co. 15. 28
praise being worthily ascribed only to him. Whereby it is evident that God can
never be sufficiently magnified in respect of his incomprehensible goodness and
glory; as on the contrary side man can never be sufficiently humbled and
abased, especially in comparison had unto God.

And yet the members of the Church of Rome, fearing belike that Gods great
grace should be to highly magnified and that to much should be yielded
thereunto, and being loath (as it seems) that man should take to himself
that due deserved sha^e that belongs unto him, will have neither Conc. Trid.
sess 6. cap. 1. Can. 7.
al our works before our co^versatio^ being do^e without faith to be condemned
for sin, nor all our good works after our Cap. ^. con. 25. Cap. 2. can. 4.
conversion to be stained so much as with any ^ental sin, neither all our
very sins to be damnable and mortal nor yet our conversion it self to be
wrought only by the spirit of regeneration, but also by the power of our own
free will: neither our salvation to be ascribed to the only death of our all
sufficient Savior, but also to our own merits and deserts. The Prophet Cap.
11. can. 32. Psalm. 115. 1.
David was of another spi^e: Not unto us, O Lord (says he) not unto us, but
unto thy n^e give the praise, for thy loving mercy and for thy truths sa^e,
Oh, (says Aust.) God does prevent thee in all things, prevent thou also his
wrath: How? Confess that all good thou receivest of him, and all evil Sermon.
10. de ver. Apost.
from thy self. But the Church of ^ome regards not this wholesome counsel of
this learned Father, she will not have her children to disgrace themselves so
much, as to confess themselves void of al goodness and replenished with all
evil: neither will she have the free mercy of God in Christ so far fo^th
m^gn^fied and extolled, as i^ all the due deserved glory of al celestial graces
were to be ascribed thereunto: and therefore God in his just wrath has given
her over to her own blindness, that making her boast that her faith No
manerreth more then he that thinks he never erreth.
cannot fail, yet she teaches diverse and manifold errors contrary to all
the grounds of the Catholic faith. For many grievous and damnable are the
heresies, wherewithal the Bishop and Church of ^ome are most truly and justly
charged by us, which profess the Gospel of jesus Christ: for the removing
whereof the words indeed of the scripture are alleged by them; but the
question being of the right sense thereof, albeit the children of that Church
pretend for the justifying of their interpretations the consent of fathers
Stap. doct. princ. li. 7. ca. ^ ^ 8 10. ^ l. 10. cap. 11.
the common testimony of the faithful, and the decrees of councels, yet at the
last only, or at the least principally, they rest upon the definitive sentence
and censure of the Pope. So that the question being whether the Pope be
Antichrist, the full and final decision thereof must in the end as they teach)
be devolved to the Pope himse^fe, and he must be the Judge in his own cause
Now what is this, but ask my fellow, nay ask my self, whether I am a thief?
Whereby they make manifest unto the whole world the great weakness and
wretchedne^ of their own cause, which cannot otherwise be justified and
approved, unless the guilty parties themselves be suffered to pronounce the
definitive sentence. Whereas our Savior Christ testifies of himself, saying:
If I should bear witness of my self, my witness were not Ioh 5. 31. Ioh.
8. 54.
true. And again: If I should honor my self, my honor is nothing worth. If
then our Savior himself would not be believed upon his own bare word, b^t
had his doctrine confirmed by his Fathers voice from heaven, by the testimonies
of the Prophets, and by his own miracles: what pride possesses the Popes
heart, that he will not submit himself as Christ did, and be tried as he was
tried? Now herein the Antichristian presumption of the Bishop of Rome in
exalting himself above our Savior Christ being manifestly detected, with the
great nakedness and wretchedness of his cause, his friends to shadow and darken
^he same, have raised Camp. rat. 2 Poss. Bibl. select no. 7. cap. 18.
up a mist of a most notorious slander against us, as if we were those parties,
that would be tried by none but by our selves, and would allow in no manner of
controversy the judgment of any Interprete^, but Luthers, Melancthons,
Caluins, Bezaes or the like. The which thing if it were true, we see no reason
why we may not justify the same far better, then they can their depending upon
the Popes chair. For these me^ were painefully exercised in praier^, reading,
and meditation, and were furnished with the knowledge of Arts and tongues
which are great helps to the attaining unto the right interpretation of holy
scriptures. Whereas it is averred by men of their own profession as a thing
notorious, that many of their Popes have not understood the Alphonsus li. 1. c.
4.
grounds and principles of the very Grammar it self: and of those that have
been learned, the greater sort have been expert in points of policy, rather
then in sound and profound Divinity. Now right interpretation of holy
scriptures being obtained from God not extraordinarily by revelation in these
days, but ordinarily by means, let all indifferent persons judge whether the
unlearned or politic Popes, or the other so well studied and learned men were
like to be the better Interpreters of holy scriptures. But indeed we stand not
upon this exception, but constantly avouch that this their accusation is a most
impudent and shameless slander raised up in all likelyhoode even against their
own consciences, as it may appear by the appeal of that reverend Father
John Juell in diverse controversies between the^ and us made unto all approved
antiquity cited and censured even by themselves. For we like of the
testimonies of Fathers, Camp. Rat 5.
Church and Councels, and have just cause in many points to allow of their
decisions: but we tie not the truth necessarily unto them, but unto the spirit
of truth, who being the Author, is also the best interpreter of holy Scripture,
having therefore plainly set down in them all necessary points of faith,
that the plain and easy places thereof, might be as lights to the dark and
obscure, for the better opening and explaning of the same.

Yea as in all Arts and Sciences there are some principles and grounds
undeniable and vnavoideable, having open and manifest truth in themselves
evident to the light of nature shining in us, and winning credit to themselves
by their own perspicuous verity, by the which the certainety of al other
precepts of less perspicuity and authority is to be tried: eve^ so in Theology
also there are certain principles and grounds, having open, confessed, and
undeniable truth in themselves, such as are the Articles of the Apostles
creed, unto which the interpretations of darker places are to be referred, and
by which the doubts and controversies in matters of faith are to be decided.
For these are even as great torch-lightes, lightning both themselves and others
also. And as any having but mean skill in that craft, if he set but the level
to the work, shall soon see whether it be right: or if he rub the metal upon
the touchstone, he shall quickly perceive what it is: even so to any that is
but meanly experienced in the doctrine of Christ, if he compare his faith to
these grounds of faith, he may soon perceive whether he hold a sound faith.
For as in Law, and Physic, and in all other libe^al Arts and Sciences the
painful stude^t may attain to a sufficient knowledge of the same by the help
especially of their maine grounds and principles, albeit there be no unerring
Interpreter able to decide al doubts and controversies therein: even so in
Theology, albeit there be none unerring Interpreter among me^, yet the studious
and devout Christian may attain to a sufficient knowledge of al such points of
faith as are necessary to salvation by the help of the maine grounds and
principles of faith. Or may we suppose that the God of all, but especially of
such as believe, has bin more careful for the naturalma^ by leaving those
principles which stand upon their own ground, that so he may attain to the
knowledge of all such Arts and sciences which are profitable for the
maintenance of this temporal life: that he has not left the like principles
and grounds for the regenerate man, whereby he may attain to the knowledge of
al such things as do concern eternal life? And if Aristotle be judge in
Philosophy, Galene in Physic, Justinian in the law, albeit many of their
rules and precepts he diversely expounded by their Interpreters: even so albeit
there be diverse expositions of holy scripture, yet God forbide but the holy
scripture of God the most clear and pure fountain of truth should be the
judge of faith, and that especially by the maine grounds of faith therein
contained. The which are therefore named by the ancient Fathers the key A b^
sermon 38. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. cap 2. and 3. De Temp. Sermon 119. So r.
hist. Eccles. lib. 5. Cap. 10.
and rule of faith, for that the perspicuity and plainnes of the^ does open as
it were a door into all the mysteries of faith. And hereof it was, that not
only Theodosius the Emperor used the^ as a means to end all controversies in
his time: but S. Austin also, being to expound the first book of Moses, called
Genesis sets the^ down in the forefro^t of his work, as a rule whereby he
means to frame al his interpretatio^s: that if they miss in the meaning of
any particular place, yet they may not err in the substance of faith because
he avoucheth nothing but that which is agreeable to the grounds of faith. So
likewise Tertullia^ and Iraene that lived near the Apostles See Kemnis. Exa
Trid. Conc. de traditionibus.
time, when certain heretics charged the scriptures (as the members of the
Church of Rome do now) that they were in sufficient, dark, and ambiguous, and
that the truth could not be found out by them without traditions, they joined
issue with the^, and referred themselves to the judgment of that doctrine,
which the Apostles delivered by tradition to the Churches: the su^me whereof
they relate, altogether as it were, eve^ as it is set down in the Apostles
Creed, being the very pith and substance of that faith, which was delivered
first by mouth by the Apostles themselves, and afterward set down in their
writings, that it might be the pillar and fou^datio^ of faith: and al
interpretatio^s of scripture they require to be agreeable to this entire and
perfect body of truth, as they had learned of the Apostle S. Paul, that al
prophecy should be Romans 12. 6.
suitable and proportionable to the faith. Unto the which Testimonies of these
learned Fathers, I add the judgment of Beza and Ke^nitius quoted before, that
al indifferent persons may perceive, that we walk in the sa^e ways, that
these learned Fathers have trod out unto us, and used the same means to
attain to the right interpretation of holy scripture, and to a sound and
catholic judgment in matters of faith. No humble Sermon. in c 3. Cant.
christian (says Beza) if he desire to be taught, ca^ be deceived in the
interpretation of holy scripture, if he diligently co^fer place with place
according unto the example of our S. Christ, and the Math. 4. 7.
practice of the ancient Councils: and if with all he refer the whole unto
the correspo^de^cy of the articles of our faith, which we call our Creed,
being the su^mary abridgme^t of every fu^dame^tall point of our Christian
religion. Most notable also to Sermon 4 de Incarnat. Dumini.
this purpose is that of Leo: If any (says he) shall preach unto you any other
thing besides that which ye have learned, let him be accursed prefer not
wicked fables before evide^t truth: and whatsoever it shall happen that ye read
or hear contrary to the rule of the Catholic and Apostolic Creed, account
it altogether damnable and divelish. By which testimony of this learned Father
we may gather, that the doctrine of faith set down in the Creed is that
evide^t truth which was delivered by the Apostles, and whatsoever is contrary
to the same is a wicked fable and to be accursed, as being no better then flat
damnable and divelish. Wherefore (good Christian reader) if thou would not
willingly hold that faith which is fabulous, accursed, damnable, and devilish,
examine thy faith according to those grounds, which are both easy, short, and
perfect, least thou should plead ignorance in thy self, or length and
tediousnes in the work it self. Be not over credulous in this matter of so
great moment, nor so simple as to receive any points of faith, which are not
agreeable to this rule of faith, No although that they be ta^ght by that Church
which makes her boast that she cannot err, and that the faith of her chief
governor ca^ never fail Nay rather if thou will be a sound scholar in the
school of Christ, learn to yield that reverence and honor only to the
books of Aug ep 91. ad ^litron.
the divine scripture, that thou firmly believe that none of the Autors of the^
erred any whit in the penning of the same: give this prerogative only to the
word of God, that it has his sufficient warrant and credit in itself,
because it is inspired of God and proceeds from him which cannot err,
deceive, or be deceived: and as for the writtings of all other, albeit they
excel in wisdom and holiness, receive the^ not because they have thus judged,
but for that they are confirmed by the authority of the Canonical scripture, or
by some reason agreeable unto Hom. 13. in 2. ep ad Cor
truth. And verily it is an absurd thing (as Chrysostom says) in a money matter
not to trust an other, but to tell that eve^ after a man's own father, and in
matters of far greater moment, which concern Gods glory, and the salvation
of our own souls, in a simple and sottish credulity to follow the judgments
of other men, whereas also we have a most exact balla^ce and rule, even the
ce^sure and determination of the divine laws. Yea whereas we are precisely
comanded to prove all, and to approve the best: and ^. Th. 5. 21. 1. Ioh 4. 1.
1. Cor. 14. and 32.
not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God
or no: for that the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets and
therefore by trial to be found true before they be believed. Neither is it any
disgrace to the judgment of man, to be subject to the ce^sure of Gods spirit,
already set down in the canonical scriptures: for eve^ the spirit of God
speaking in S. Paul was co^te^t to be tried by the sacred scriptures, that is
in truth by himself; and the Berea^s at co^me^ded Act 17. 11. Apoc. 2. 2.
for doing the same: as the Ange^l of the church of ^phesus is also commended
for examining the^ which said they were Apostles and finding the^ liars. So
likewise our Savior Christ the wisdom of God, in whom were hid all the
treasures of knowledge, wills his auditors to search the scriptures, and Ioh.
5. 39.
so to try by the^, whether he taught any other doctrine the^ was contained in
these sacred books: for in them (says he) ye think to have life, and they
are my depone^ts and witnesses: Neither does he desire any better lurers to
give evide^ce concerning the truth of his doctrine. And S. Hierome foretells
of the faithful of these last days, that they shall not suffer In Nah. c. 3.
themselves any longer to be kept in ignorance by their blind guides, but shall
ascend up to the mountains of the Apostles and Prophets, that by the clear
light of their infallible doctrine they may be directed in the right way to
their eternal salvation. Wherefore as many of us as desire to be saved by
coming 1. Tim. 2. 4.
to the knowledge of the truth, let us follow the commandment of Christ and
his Apostles, and the example of the noble Berea^s, and of the faithful of
these last time; let us asce^d up to the mountain of the Apostles and
Prophets, and take them to be our guids in all our ghostly and spiritual
affairs, and let us by their Canonical writings, especially by the
fou^datio^s of faith in the^ contained, as by a most certain and sure rule,
try the doctrine of al me^ and angels, and of al particular Churches
whatsoever, be they French, Duch, Spanish, or Italian. I hat law that will not
be tried, is worthily suspected, and that doctrine which flies the light, is
the doctrine of darkness. For truth seeks not corners, it would not be covered
under a bushel, but set on a ca^dlestick, she would not have her face masked,
lest she should pass unknown, she would appear with open cou^tena^ce, that so
she might be justified of all her children. For thy furthera^ce herein (good
Christian ^eader) in this short treatise (the which if it give but occasion to
some other to handle the same matter in manner more suffi^ient, I need not
account my labor to be lost) I have laid purple to purple, that it might the
better be discerned, as also the cloth of the contrary color: that is, I have
joined to the Articles of our Christian Creed, the points of our Christian
faith agreeable thereunto, as also such erroneous and heretical positions,
which are repugnant and contrary to the same. The which thing being so
behouefull and necessary, it had bin convenient that some one of great gifts
had been employed therein, neither could his learning and eloquence have been
more advanced, then in being handmaides in so profitable a service. But now it
pleases the Lord to send this present unto thee by the hands of a simple
servitour, and in a rude and unpolished speech as in an earthen platter or
wodden dish, that so the meat may relish for the meats sake it self, and
not for the fairenes or goodlines of the dish. But first thou must purge and
free thy taste from the corrupt humors of partiality, and of al obstinate and
wilful resolutio^s: neither must thou presume to appointe of thy self what
shall be sweet, and what sour, but suffer the Lord himself only to be thy
taster therein: and so thou may also in thy course both taste and see how
gracious the Lord is, and at the length attain to the blessedness of al such,
as place their whole hope and confidence in him. The Lord for his mercies sake
disperse more and more the gross misles of al spiritual blindness and darkness,
and open thine heart, as he did the heart of Lidia, and give thee
understanding in all things, Act. 16. 14.
granting unto thee the spirit of truth to lead thee into al truth, for his
own glory, and thine unspeakable comfort and joy.

Thine in the Lord, JOHN TERRY.

The principal uses of this Treatise.
FIrst here the Reader may behold the points of faith, with the errors
repugnant thereunto, referred to the Articles of our Christian faith, and to
the residue of the maine grounds and principles of our Catholic profession.

Secondly in this collation he may perceive both the particular points of
faith to be a light for the better understanding of these grounds of faith, and
also the grounds of faith, to give greater strength for the confirmation of
the particular points of faith, and for the confutation of the erroures that
are contrary thereto.

Thirdly, whereas the people for the most part cannot read the holy scriptures,
nor so well understand and keep in memory the sentences taken out of the
Apostles and Prophets, as they can these grounds of our Christian profession,
by reason of the more familiar use of the same, therefore the particular
points of faith being made open and known unto them the more easily by this
collatio^, they may the sooner hereby be brought to the knowledge of the truth,
and also confirmed and established in the same.

Fourthly whereas the most venomous Doctrine of Antichrist is the more A
preservatiue for the simple against the polloned doctrine of the Romish
Antichrist being offered unto them in a cup of gold, that is, under the name
the of Catholic, faith.
read^ly received, for that it is delivered in a cup of gold, that is under
the name of the Catholic faith, even the simple and unlearned may receive by
this collation a most sovereign preservative against the same. For it is an
undoubted truth agreed upon of both sides, that these grou^des of faith are
Catholic and Apostolic, and therefore that all such doctrines as are not
agreeable thereto, but are contrary to the same, are neither Catholic, nor yet
Apostolic. How then, (may even a simple man say to such as would seduce him to
the Popish religion, under the pretense of reco^ciliatio^ to the Catholic
faith) ca^ that doctrine be Catholic, which teaches it to be sufficient to
believe in gross, and as the Church believes, whereas the scope and end of my
Catholic Creed is, that I not only know and understand, but also be able to
make a distinct confession of the very hardest points of the Christian faith?
Secondly he may say, how can that doctrine be Catholic, which teaches me to
doubt of particular faith, whereas the Catholic Creed teaches every
faithful Christian constantly to profess without wavering, I BELIEVE. Thirdly
be may aa^e, how can your Romish doctrine be Catholic, which teaches me to
believe in the Church and in the Saints, whereas my catholic Creed teaches
me to believe the Church, and not in the Church, but only in God: Lastly to
omit the rest, whereas my Catholic Creed teaches me, that Christ only
suffered and died for my sins, and that he is my only Redeemer and Savior,
how can your Romish doctrine be Catholic, which teaches that the Saints also
suffered and died for me, and that their sufferings being applied unto me by
the Popes Pardons, are both SATISFACTORY for my sins, and also MERITORIOVS of
eternal glory? wherefore pretend no longer your Romish doctrine to be the
Catholic faith, seeing that it is directly contrary to the maine grounds and
Articles of the Catholic faith.

Lastly by this treatise it may be perceived, how the Bishop of Rome and his
aaherentes have brought in that great Apostasy from the faith foretold by the
Apostle, and have also fulfilled all the other prophecies which d^ concern the
great Antichrist, and therefore that he is most truly and justly charged by
the professors of the Gospel, to be that very grer^ Antichrist.

THE TRIAL OF TRVTH.
CHAP. 1.
1 That all fundamental points of faith are contained within the articles of
the creed, by the judgment of diverse catholic men that lived in former
ages: and that all such are to be taken for false prophets, which teach any
other faith then is contained in these grounds of faith.

2 That the people ought to examine the doctrine of their pastors and teachers
by the rule and level of the canonical scriptures, and the grounds of faith
therein contained.

3 That all points of faith necessary to salvation are plain and easy to
every faithful and humble christian, who is sufficiently exercised in the word
of God.

4 That the people ought to understand the several points of their faith, and
not believe in gross and blindefully as the church believes.

THIS word Symbolu^, signifying a sum The Symbol or creed of the Apostles.
and an heap co^gested together, or a sign, or badge to discern one from
another, teaches us that in these articles of our faith is contained the whole
sum of such things as are to be believed of every true and faithful
christian, whereby both the teacher of the true faith may be discerned from
the false, and a right believer from a wrong. The creed (as testifies an
ancient writer) is a perfect August. ser. 115. de tempore.
collection and sum, plain, short, and full: that the playnnes might help
the weakness of the hearers, the shortness their memory, the fullnes their
instruction. Unto whom consents Cassianus: the creed (says Lib. 6. de In^
car. domini.
he) is called a collection or sum, because whatsoever is plentifully
dispersed throughout the body of the divine scripture, is here all collected
and knitte up together in a perfect brevity: the Lord herein as a most loving
father providing both for the slowenes, and also for the dulnes of some of his
children, that the simple and weak mind should not be troubled to
understand, that which also it might easily keep in memory. Russious says
that In exposit. Symboli.
this creed is called a sign or badge because in the apostles (as it may
appear by the Acts of the Apostles) many of the circumcised Jews did feign
themselves to be the apostles of Christ, and either for their bellies sake, or
for gain, went forth to preach, setting out the gospel of Christ not with
that sincerity and integrity, as it was delivered by the apostles. Therefore
(says he) the Apostles made this creed to be a mark, whereby it might be
known, who did preach Christ truly according unto the rules of the apostles.
Now by these interpretations of the name Symbol made by these ancient and
learned fathers we may observe these four things. 1 First that seeing in
their judgments this creed contains a perfect sum of our christian
faith, therefore the doctrines of the church of Rome concerning pilgrimages,
pardons, purgatory, the papal supremacy, and the like, being neither expressly
set down therein, nor necessarily to be drawn out of the same, are no
fundame^tall points of our christian religion. Nay, may they not admit this as
a sufficient exception against them all? they are none of my creed, therefore
I need not believe them. Nay, further: does no^ this vehemently urge and
press our Romanistes with the badge and mark of false prophets, in that they
teach other fundamental points of faith, then are delivered in this sum of
faith? 2 Secondly we learn that seeing the people, that were co^verted to the
faith of Christ in the primitive church, were by this rule to examine and to
discern the doctrine of the true teachers from the false, that even so the
faithful people are now also by the same rule to examine and to discern the
doctrine of their pastors and teachers, and not in a sottish and brutish
simplicity to pin their faith upon their sleeves, and without all examination
and trial blindfully to follow whithersoever they lead them, and to believe
as they believe. Nay they are to be thankful to their most gracious God, who
has provided for the^ so good a means, whereby they themselves, albeit weak
and simple, yet may discern truth from falsehoode, and rest on their own most
assured knowledge, embracing the substance of christian religion, not for
company, but for conscience: yea the devil raging, and the limbs of
Antichrist threatening, and our great and manifold sins deserving, that God
should take again from us the use of his word how ought especially the simple
so to lay up in their hearts the true sense and meaning of these articles of
our creed that it may never be taken from them: but that even thereby they may
be enabled against all their adversaries to justify their sound and christian
faith, and be made ready to confirm and seal it with their blood? 3 Thirdly
we learn that seeing the articles of our christian faith were set down with
that shortness and plainnes, that all the faithful, be they never so simple,
might understand them, and keep them also in memory (all points of faith
necessary to salvation or at the least the hardest points being in them
contained) therefore all things necessary to salvation are plain and easy
even to the simplest amongst the Lords people, if so be Prove 8. 9. and 9. 4.
Hebr. 5. 14.
they be desirous in all holy humility to understand the truth, and are
sufficiently exercised in the word of truth. 4 Fourthly we learn that seeing
these articles were set down plainly for the capacity of the simple,
therefore they ought nor to be debarred from the right understanding of them,
and detained in the darkness of ignorance, as it shall be further declared in
the next chapter. Now on the contrary side the church of Rome teaches that
all points of faith necessary to salvation are not set down no not in the
large volumes of the canonical scriptures, much less within the straiter
bounds of this short sum of faith: that the people should not presume to
examine and discern the doctrine of their pastors and teachers: that the
doctrine of faith is full of hardenes and difficulty, and above the capacity of
the Lords people, and therefore that they must content themse^ues to be without
this knowledge, persuading themselves that ignorance is the mother of devotion;
as may well be of their blind and superstitious devotion.

CHAP. 2.
That it is not enough for the lay people to believe in gross and blindefully
as the church believes, but that they ought to understand the several points
of their faith.

IN the Lords prayer we are taught to call (...) in (...) al^tie ^er of heaven
and earth etc.
God not my father but our father to teach us in charity to presume such to be
Gods children, which call upon one common father together with us, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ our sole and only mediator. But in our creed we
are taught to say not we believe but I believe, to teach us that it is not
the faith of any other, but every ones own particular faith, which joins
him unto the house-holde of faith, and causes him to be admitted among the
members of the faithful. For as by believing that such a one, or such a one
takes a very good course to make cloth, or to manure the ground, makes not
an other man a good cloth maker or husbandman unless he know the like
courses himself, and be able also to practice the same: even so it makes not
a faithful christian to believe as such or such a faithful man believes,
except he himself hold a right faith. For an others faith can make me no
more faithful, then an other man's charity can make me charitable, or an other
man's patience can make me patient. The just shall live by his own faith: and
Hab 2. 4.
not by the faith of any other. And so we are taught by the general confession
of all the articles of our christian faith which is to be made of every
faithful christian, that the true christian catholic faith is, not to believe
in gross and blindfully as the church believes, but distinctly and
particularly, both concerning God, that he is one in substance and essence,
distinguished into three persons the father, the son, and the holy ghost, and
also concerning his works, that he made us, and not we our selves; that he
redeemed us and not we our selves, and that he sanctified us, and not we our
selves. Where unto agrees the creed of Atha^asius: Wherein it is most
pere^ptorely avouched, that not not only the learned but the unlearned also,
even whosoever will be saved, not as in the last place but before all things
neither as a matter only convenient, but as a thing most necessary, must hold
the catholic faith, and that he must believe and confess the mystery of the
unity in trinity and of the trinity in unity, with that other great missery of
godliness also, God manifested in the flesh. For as with the heart man Rom 10 10
believes unto righteousness so with the mouth he confesses to salvation. So
that the true faith both instructs the heart with knowledge and directs
also the tongue in the confession of the same. For as Jerome faith of the
scripture that it consists not in the reading but Advers. Lucif.
in the understanding: so we may say that the catholic faith consists not in
the words wherein it is express, but in the catholyke sense and meaning: and
therefore not the bare reciting of the words of the creed, but the right
understanding of the of the sense and meaning thereof makes a sonnde and a
catholic christian. This is everlasting life (says our Savior Christ) to
Ioh. 17. 3.
know the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The which knowledge
when the Apostles were to preach to other, they are said to have received the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: and the same knowledge when they were endued
withal themselves it was a token and sign unto them that they were then
received among the number of the faithful. Unto you (says our Savior Christ
unto his disciples) it is given Mark. 4. 11.
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but unto them which are
without, all things are done in parables: that seeing they may see and not
discern, and hearing they may hear and not understand; least at any time they
should be converted and their sins should be forgiven them. A manifest
distinction between the children of light and the children of darkness: unto
the one is given the key of knowledge which opens the door into the kingdom
of Luke 11. 52.
heaven: the other are left in their blindness and darkness, to fall thereby
into the pit of eternal destruction. For the father of light brings his
children of light, by the light of his word, to the kingdom of light: and the
prince of darkness, brings his children of darkness, through the darkness of
ignorance, to his kingdom of darkness. Wherefore well may it agree to the
Idolatrous Athenians to have an altar dedicated to an unknown God and Act. 17.
23.
to profess a blind kind of service of God. And well may it beseem the
schismatic Samaritans to worship as their fathers worshipped, Ioh. 4. 20.
and to believe as their progenitors believed, and in truth to believe and
worship they wo^e not what: Surely the faithful servants of the true God
know what they worship having for the warrant thereof the infallible word of
the everliving Lord, and therefore salvation is from them. For the true
christian saving faith is a wise, intelligent and an understanding persuasion,
it is not a blind, blockish and a brutish fancy: a blind faith is no faith, and
a blind confession is no confession. Be not (says the prophet David) like the
horse and mule, in whom there is no understanding. Psalm. 32. 9 1. Cor. 14. 20.
Beloved (says the Apostle) be not children in understanding, but in malice be
ye children, in understanding be ye of perfect age. And again, be not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is. If thou Ephesians. 5. 15. 1.
Cor. 14. 16.
praiest (says the same Apostle) in an unknown tongue how can the unlearned
say Amen, and ratify it with his consent? even so if any professing themselves
members of the visible church know not the particular points of the christian
faith held and taught in the same church, how can they faithfully believe the
same, or how ca^ they rightly consent thereunto? Surely as the seed that falls
on the high way and is devoured up of the fowls of the air, can never give
hope of Math. 13 4.
any good harvest: so the word of God the seed of faith not understood, can
never make us fruitful unto the Lord. Wherefore it was a most godly wish of
Moses the man of God: O that all the Number. 11. 29
Lords people could prophecy and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them.
And good cause had the children of the captivity after their return to their
own country greatly to rejoice before the Lord, not only for that the law of
God was distinctly read, and soundly and sincerely expounded unto them, but
especially for that the Lord had opened their eyes and had caused them to
understand the same. For all such as the Lord will have to be saved, he will
have the^ come Neh. 8. 12. 2. Tim. 2. 4.
thereto by the knowledge of the truth. And therefore this is also set down
as a mark of all such as the Lord will receive into the covenant of mercy by
Christ: Behold this is the covenante that I will Ier. 3^. 34. ^b. S. 11.
make with the house of Israel after these days says the Lord, I will set
my laws in their minds, and in their hearts will I write them, and I will be
their God and they shall be my people: and they shall not teach each one his
neighbor saying, know the Lord, for they shall know me even from the least
unto the greatest of them. The which promise how it was accomplished by the
preaching of the gospel in the primitive church, Theodoret may witness one for
all. We do manifestly show you (says Theod. de ^rat. gr^c. affect. ^. 5.
he) the great power of the doctrine of the Apostles and prophets, for the
whole face of the earth, under the sun is full of such words: and the Hebrew
books be not only translated into the Greek, but also into the Roman,
Egyptian, Parthian Indian, Arabian, S^y^hian, Slavon, and in a word into all
tongues which the nations use to this day. You may everiewhere see our doctrine
understood not only of such as be teachers in the church, and instructers of
the people, but also of tailers, weavers smithes and all artificers: yea also
of women, and not only of them which be learned, but of victuallers, pudding
makers, handmaides, and servantes. Neither those men only that dwell in
cities but husbandmen also understand the same: one may find ditchers and
heard-men and planters of vineyardes disputing of the trinity and of the
creation of all things, and having better knowledge of the nature of man, then
Plato and Aristotle had. Now if in the primitive church this were an evident
testimony of the great power of the glorious gospel of Christ, that it was
able to settle the knowledge of the greatest mysteries of christian religion in
the hearts of such as were but of the meanest and basest callings; and if it
were a commendation then for such as were the meanest and simplest among the
professors of the gospel of Christ, that they were able to discourse and
dispute even of the deepest points of their christian faith: how is the case
altered now in these our dates? as if the same word had lost his former power,
and were not able through the anto^s blessing to bring to pass the same
effect: or as if that which was then so commendable in the professors of
christian rel^gio^, were now to be condemned for curiosity, pride, and
presumption, a^ our Rhemistes would bear the world in hand in their preface to
their transla^ion of the new Testament.

CHAP. 3. division 1. and 2.
1 Whether every faithful christian may assuredly know whether he believes
aright, and has a true justifying faith or no?

2 Whether every faithful christian knowing that he is in the faith, may know
also assuredly whether he himself has remission of sins and eternal life
by faith in Christ?

THese questions because they lay open unto us the I believe.
ma^ke whereunto all true christians do aim, even our association with Christ
and the fruits thereof, being the most sure and strong foundation of all
christian comfort and consolation, I will therefore by Gods most gracious
assistance handle them somewhat more at large, and use the more words in the
opening of the same. And first concerning the first. No man ought to make
profession of that before God and his congregation, which he knows not
assuredly whether it be so or no: (for that were but mere dissimulation and
hypocrisy, and as it were a deluding and mocking of God) but every true
christian ought to make profession of his faith even before God and his
congregation after this particular manner, I believe: and therefore he ought
assuredly to know that he does believe. And so (says S. Austine) the Epist.
112.
faithful man does see his own faith, whereby he does answer without
doubting, I believe. Secondly, it were bootlesse for a christian man to examine
himself whether he has a true justifying faith or no, unless upon due
examination and trial, he might be able sufficiently to discern the same: but
the faithful christians are commanded to examine themselves: Prove your
selves (says the Apostle) Noses teipsum. 2. Cor. ^3. 5.
whether ye are in the faith or no, examine your selves: know ye not your
own selves, that Jesus Christ dwells in you unless ye be reprobates? The
Apostle in this place speaks of that faith, whereby Christ dwells in the
hearts of the faithful, which can be no other then the true justifying faith: or
if he did speak of the doctrine of faith, yet his reason were as forceable as
otherwise. For if it be needful for us to examine our selves, whether we hold a
right opinion and judgment in the doctrine of faith, the^ much more it lies
upon us to prove our selves whether we faithfully rejoice in the same doctrine,
and place our chiefest comfort and happiness therein 1 Pet. 1. ^.
which is an evide^t mark of a true justifying faith: otherwise our right
opinion in matters of faith will be to us, as it is to the devils themselves,
only to our greater condemnation. Furthermore as one may understand by the true
nots of justice, patience, and such like whether he be a just and a patie^t
man, even so by the notes and marks of faith, he may assuredly know whether he
has a sound faith. The which notes and marks of a right faith, and of a true
faithful christian Romans 15. 4.
should not have been set down in the Lords book (wherein whatsoever things
are written, they are written for our learning) but that the faithful by
examining the^selus thereby, mightht assuredly perceive and understand, that
they held a right faith. The marks are these

1. First the hearty and unfeigned love of the word of God. For a faithful man,
knowing the great benefit that co^eth to himself by his true faith, not only
makes great account thereof, but also entirely loves and embraces the mea^es
whereby it was begotten at the first, and whereby it is daily stre^gthened and
increased: Now faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of god. The word
therefore is deerer unto the faithful To. 10. 17.
the^ gold, yea the^ much fine gold sweeter also the^ the honey, and the honey
co^be, Psalm. 19. A. 10. and 1. 2.
all the day long does he study in it, and meditate thereon day and night: and
thereby he does beco^e as a tree planted by the water side, which brings foth
his fruit in due season, whose leaf does never wither. In deed originally we
are defiled with sin, and are by nature the children of wrath, until Ephesians 2
3. James 1. 18.
the Lord of his own good will begette us again by the word of truth, and so
make us his beloved children Our hearts are as barre^ ground bearing Matthew. 1 ^.
nothing but weeds and trash until we be manured by the Lords husba^dme^, and
have received the pure seed of the word: yea 1. Pet. 2. 25
we are all as sheep going astray, and wa^dring in the ways of death and
destruction, until we are reclaimed by our great sheepheards voice, and so
brought home to Christ's fold. Now if we gladly receive the seed of the word,
and fructify thereby accordingly, hereby we may be assured that we are
that good ground, which does receive blessing of God. And if we harke^ to this
our great shepherds voice, and not to the voice of a stranger, hereby also we
may assure ourselves, that we are Christ's heap, and that we belong to his
stock. Good cause therefore have the faithful servants of Christ to love and
embrace the word of God, not only for that it is an immortal seed whereby they
are begotten to an immortal life, and of barren ground are made fruitful, and
of wa^dring sheep are reclaimed home to the fold of Christ, but also for that
it contains the ba^ds of the covenant of our peace with God, and the
evidences for the assurance of the remission of our sins, and of our
inheritance in the kingdom of glory. There is no wise man that is to enjoy
any temporal lands or possessions either by copy, or by Indenture, or by
deeds of gift, but that he will make good accounte of all such evidences as
concern the same, and learn also the contents thereof, that so he may know
the justness of his title to such possessions. And if at any time he be
unjustly molested, and kept from the enjoying of any of those lands, he puts
the ma^ter in suite and speaks for justice: and making proof of his title by
the view of his evidences, sentence passes on his side, and so he obtains
his right and lawful possessions. It has been thought in the time of
darkness that if a man had been buried in a cloister, and in a Monks coule,
having a cross, and a pardon put into his grave with him, that those things
had been a sufficient safe conduct to fence him from the fenne, and that they
had been as good an assurance for the silly soul to pass from hence to
heaven, as a pasport subscribed with a Justices hand, and ratified and
confirmed with his ^ne and allowed, is a sure protection with us, for a poor
trav^ling man to preserve him from al manner of molestation. But (...) the light
of the gospel has appeared, it is manifest and known, that these are but
forged evide^ces and of no validity: for that no creature is able to bestow so
great gifts as are the remission of s^nnes, deliverance from hell, and the
inheritance of eternal glory, or give any assurance for the obtaining of the
same: it is God only that can make a grant of these graces, and the assurance
thereof, that he has made unto the faithful in his holy and sacred word, are
the only evidences that can fully warrant our just title and right to the same.
The which thing as it is well known unto the whole company of the Lords people,
so it was thoroughly settled in the heart of a faithful brother not long since
departed from us in the Lord, a George Wrisly bacheler of law and fellow of new
College in Oxford.
fellow while he lived of an honorable foundation, but now a fellow citizen of
the saints, and enjoying the privileges of a far more honorable society: who
by order of his house was a stude^t of those laws which are pleadable in the
co^sistory before an earthly judge, and can give us some protection here in
this world; but by his godly choice he was also a student of those laws, which
are only pleadable at the bar of the highest judge, and can warrant us the
assurance of greater blessings. And therefore he lying in his death bed, and
feeling himself sick unto death, and knowing that his time was now come of
his present appearing in that place, where he was to lay in his claim to his
heavenly inheritance, called for his evidences which did concern the same,
that is, he called for his bible, which he had before daily used in his health,
and read the fifteenth chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, and
therein beholding how sin was fully satisfied for by the death of Christ, and so
abolished; and sin being abolished, death must needs be vanquished; (for that
it has all his strength from sin) and so being assured of his deliverance from
death, and of his right to the possession of eternal life: laying these his
evidences open upon his breast, and clas-^ping the^ close to his heart with both
his arms, yielded up immediately his faithful soul into the hands of his most
loving Savior, and now rests undoubtedly under the altar praising and
lauding God continually. For no doubt to him belongs the heavenly
inheritance, which unfeignedly loves and embraces all such evidences, as do
concern that heavenly inheritance: and he has most assuredly right and
interest in everlasting life, who highly esteems and religiously embraces
that eternal will and testament of our great and gracious God, wherein is
beq^athed unto all the faithful the gift and legacy of eternal life: and he
shall most certainly enjoy the incomparable benefit of the covenant of grace,
who has fulfilled the condition thereof, by having the law of God planted in
his heart and firmly settled in his inward man.

The second note is a full resting upon God, and a placing of our whole trust
and confidence only ^n him, according to the direction of this our christian
creed, I believe in GOD. For he is not to be accounted faithful that
believes in any other, but he that believes only in God. And it is onething
to believe: here is a God, and another thing to believe God, and another also
to believe in God. He that believes in God shall never be confounded: seeing
he is made Romans 10. 11 Ioh 1. 42. Mat. 16. 18.
thereby a living stone, as Peter was, built upon a most sure foundation and
strong rock, hell gates shall never prevail against him, they shall never
bring him to eternal confusion. They that travail (says Job 6. 18, 19. 20.
Job) in the quarters of Tema and Seba in the time of a drought, and seek for
some refreshing for themselves and their beasts to the rivers that overflowed
and made a great flowde in the winter time, return confounded without succor,
for that the waters of those rivers are dried up. So it is with all such as
trust in creatures, they dig to themselves pits even Ier. 2. 13.
broken pits, that can hold no water, and have recourse to dried brooks: and
therefore in the end are utterly confounded for this their vain and fond
choice. For they that follow lying vanities, forsake and Ion. 2. 8.
abandon their own mercy. Now al such (as Samuel avoucheth) 1 Samuel 12. 21.
as turn back from God to any whatsoever, turn but to lying vanities which
cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are but v^nity. But they that trust in
God come to a full fountain, the streams whereof never fail, but keep on still
their constant course, and therefore such are never confounded.

3 The third is, to make the incomparable dignity of the death of Christ, the
only means whereby we come unto God, and the only sure ^ker of our hope
and faith. And verily so heinous and grievous is every transgression and sin,
committed against the infinite majesty of the most glorious Deity, that nothing
was able to make amends for the same, but that which was also of infinite
price: and therefore it was necessary that the son of God should give
himself a ransom for our souls, that so we might be assured of a sufficient
sum for the full purchase of our redemption. He that will seek to make
payment to the justice of GOD with any thing else, then with the death of
Christ for our most odious and heinous sins, does bring but base money and
counterfeite coin: and he that seeks to appease his wrath with any other
propitiatory sacrifice, is so far of from finding favor, that he may be sure
to drink the deeper of the cup of the LORDS wrath, and to suppe up the
very dregs of his heavy displeasure. I am the way (says our Ioh. 14. 6.
Savior) the truth and the life no man can come to the father but by me.
Christ is that only Immanuell whereby God is made at one with us: and he is
that one mediator by whom we obtain peace and reconciliation. All the
sacrifices of the law were but shadows and representations of him, his
death is the only true and sovereign sacrifice. The slaying of beasts did
manifest our guiltiness, and declare by our sins how we were guilty of
death: the son of God the author of life suffered a most bitter and shameful
death, that he might bring us unto a most joyful and glorious life. Lay hold
of him, lay hold of life: trust firmly on the favor of GOD through him, and
that faith shall never make thee ashamed: treasure up in thy heart the most
comfortable tidings of his gracious gospel, and desire therein more and more
to know him, and the power of his resurrection, and thou do treasure up
for thy self eternal life. We know (says Saint John) that we 1. Ioh 5. 19.
20.
are of GOD, and that the whole world lies in wickedness. And why? we
know that the son of God is come and that he has given us a mind to
know him which is true, and we are in him which is true, that is in his
son Jesus Christ: this is very God, and eternal life. If thou knew (says
our Savior Christ) to the woman of Samaria) the gift of God, and who it is
that says unto Ioh. 4. 10.
thee, give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given to thee the water of life. For if we do but once truly taste of this
water of life, we shall so vehemently ^hust after the same, that we shall
never be fully satisfied until we have drunk our full draught. Wherefore
where the incomparable virtue of Christ's most Aug. de doct Christ. li. 3. cap.
16. Tertull. de resurrect. cap
precious death is sweetly and profitably l^ide vvpe in memory, there is a
communicating with his passion and a partaking of his flesh: yea where there
is a true desire to devour the same with hearing, to chewe it with
understanding, and to digest it by believing, there is the root of a true
faith, and they that clean and stick thereto, they are living and fruitful
branches that are engrassed into the true vine. For (as our Savior himself
avoucheth) where the dead body is, Luke 13. 37.
thither do the Aegles resort. The dead body is CHRIST crucified, the
mountinge Eagles are the faithful Christians: and therefore wheresoever Christ
crucified is rightly known and reverently embraced, there undoubtedly is the
true christian: to whomesoever God does reveal his ^onne and gives them
hability to make a sincere confession of him, blessed are they with Simon the
son of Jonas: for flesh and ^loud^ has not revealed Math. 16. 18.
this unto them, but their father which is in heaven: yea blessed Math. 13. 16.
are their eyes which so see, and blessed are their ears which so hear: and
blessed are their hearts whom the Lord has thus opened, and lightened them
with the glorious beams of the Sun of righteousness. Assuredly where this
Sun of righteousness thus shines, there are the children of light: and where
so precious a foundation is laid, there is the church firmly built: and they
that faithfully clear to this head corner stone, declare themselves to be the
elect and choice stones of the Lords own temple.

4. The fourth is Ioh. 8. 56.
with Abraham the father of the fai^full to rejoice when we behold the day of
the Lord, yea so to rejoice that we esteem our calling to the estate of
salvation in Christ to be our greatest happiness and blessedness, and all other
things, which seem most precious to flesh and blood, to be most vile, vain,
and as it were nothing in respect of the same. This is evident in the woman
representing the church, who being clothed with the Sun, is said Apo. 12. 1.
to tread the moon under her feet; for that in respect of Christ the sun of
righteousness she despises all earthly and transitory treasures, which are as
mutable and changeable as the moon. One of whose children (such a mother such
a son) protested of himself that he esteemed to know nothing but Jesus Christ
and him crucified: and 1. Cor. ^. 2.
that he made no other reckoning of al other things but as of damages and
losses in respect of the inestimable gain he obtained by him. Phil. 3 7.
And of an other of the^ it is recorded that he chose rather to suffer
adversi^y with the people of God, the^ to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 1. 24.
esteeming the rebuke of Christ Jesus, greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt, for that he had respect unto the recompense of the rewa^d: which was,
to be made the son of God by faith in Christ, being without comparison a
far greater p^erogatiue, then to be called the son of Pharaos daughter, and
to be heir apparent to that great and glorious kingdom of Egypt. The riches
of this world are glorious Math. 13. 45.
in our eyes, until we have had a fight of the riches of the kingdom of god:
but when we have found that pearl of price, the^ we are contented to sell all,
to buy it, that is, when we have once tasted how sweet the Lord is, and have
drunk but a little draught of that water of life, all the pleasures and
prefermentes of this world will grow out of tail with us and become unsavory
in respect of the same. And therefore as it is a note of a man of earth to have
his heart glued to the things of this ea^n, and to be greedy to devour the
draffe thereof: so to have our hearts set upon heave^ly things, is a token and
mark of an heavenly mind, and of a Aug. de Charitate.
person that belongs to the kingdom of heaven, Let every one (says Austine)
examine himself what he loves, and thereby he shall perceive to what city he
belongs: if he love the world and worldly things as fl^lenes, riches, and
honor, he is a citizen of Babylon: but if he love God, he is a citizen of
Jerusalem.

5. The last is in respect of that infinite and endless love of God which is
confirmed unto us in Christ Jesus to desire by all means possible to show a
dutiful thankefulnes unto him, both by loving the things which he loves, and
by honoring the persons which he honors. If ye know (says S. John) that
God is righteous, know ye also, that he which 1. Ioh. 2. 29.
does righteously is torn of him. For if we resemble Gods image in holiness,
wisdom, and righteousness, then assuredly we are Gods children: if our fruit
be good, we are good trees: and if the streams of our actions run clear and
pure, then it is certain and sure, that the fountain of our hearts is purified
by faith, and that so we belong to the number of the faithful. So likewise
that a loving affection toward our brethren in Christ is an infallible mark
of a true christian, our Savior Christ himself teaches; by this (says he)
shall all men know, that ye are my desciples, if ye love one another. Ioh. 13.
36. 1. Ioh. 3. 14. Aug in ep. Ioh Tract 5
So S. John: by this we know that we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. Let every one (says S. Austine) return home
into his own heart, and if he find there brotherly love, let him be secure:
for he is already passed from death to life, he is already upon the right
hand. To love a man, for that he is a man, is a point of humanity: to pity a
man, because he is in misery, is the duty of mercy: but to embrace a man, for
that he is a christian man, is a point of christianity. Math. 11. 41.
He that receives a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall have a prophets
reward: and he that receaueth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man,
shall have a righteous man's reward: and whosoever shall give to one of these
little ones to drink a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple,
verily I say unto you, he shall not loose his reward. For he that honors
Gods graces, which he bestows upon his children; declares thereby that he
himself has his part and portion in those graces: and he that loves Gods
servantes, for that they are beloved of God, shows himself also to be
beloved of God. So then these being the sure and certain signs of a true,
saving, and justifying faith, if we may assuredly know that they be in us
(albeit they be in us but in some measure) that is to say, If we assuredly
know, whether we unfeignedly love the most precious word of God, and place our
whole trust and faith only in God, taking the incomparable dignity of the
death of CHRIST duly pondered and weighed to be the mother and ^urce of this
our steadfast faith, if we rejoice in our gracious calling to the estate of
salvation in Christ as in our greatest and chiefest blessedness, and in respect
thereof are ready and willing to love the things which he loves, and to honor
the persons which ^e honors, the^ we may also assuredly know, that we have
obtained a true, saving, and justifying faith, and that we belong to the number
of the faithful. But these things we may assuredly know whether they be in us
or otherwise, especially upon due examination and trial. 1. Cor. 2. 21 Romans 2.
15. (...) Conscientia. I know what I know.
For howsoever we may counterfeite and deceive others, who cannot look into the
secret corners of our hearts, yet we cannot deceive our own sp^rites and
consciences, whereby we are w^ting to our own ways (as the very names thereof
do sufficiently declare) unless we will wilfully claspe them and close them up.

And yet the counsel of Trent has peremptorily defined, Con. Trid. c. 9. de
fide justified.
that none can know by the certainty of ^aith, but that he may be deceived,
that he has obtained grace: that is (as I take it) that he has attained to
the estate of grace. Yea our Rhemistes are so shameless, The. in. 4 c. 1. ep.
ad. Cor.
that they are bold to avouch, that the very Apostle S. Paul du^st not, assure
himself that he was justified, neither could take upon him to be judge of his
own heart and cogitations, whether they were pure 2. Tim. 4 7. 2. Cor. 1. 12
and 11. 23. Rom 7. 25.
or no: contrary to the most evident and plain asseve^ations of the Apostle
himself in diverse places of his own epistles: yea contrary to the plain
words of that very verse, whereon they ground this their observation: where the
Apostle testifies that he had found his conscience clear, and his cogitations
pure, I am not (says he) guilty in conscience of any thing. And with as
great untruth is that just and holy man Job charged with the ignorance of the
estate of his own soul, and with a doubtful fear even of all his works. For
albeit he might fear both in respect of the imperfections of his best
works, and also in respect of his unknown and secret sins (for who
knovveth how of^e he^ offends?) and especially at that time, when the
Lords hand was so heavy upon him: yet what an assured testimony he had in
himself of a good conscience, and what an undoubted assurance of his own
righteousness, justice, fortitude, chastity, purity, equity, uprightness,
compassion, mercy, liberality, bounti^ulnes, magnanimity and humility he
himself testifies most excellentely and at large: and if such as know the
same would not give testimony thereto, yet Job. 29. and 31.
he assures himself, that God will witness the same, and thereupon rests
as fully contented. And verily it has been an ordinary practice of the dearest
saints and servantes of God, b^ing best vvitting to themselves of their own
innocencye, sincerity, and uprightness in performing their duties both to God
and to man, not only when they have been falsely accused and slaundered, but
otherwise also to make protestation thereof even before the Lord to move him
to take their cause being the cause of his faithful servants into his own
hands, to clear them, and to succor them, and to increase Psalm. 7. 8. 26. 1.
his graces and mercies upon them. Judge me O Lord (says David) according unto
my righteousness and according unto the innocencye that is in me and again:
Judge me O Lord for I have vvalked innocently etc. and verse the eight of the
same Psalm, O Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honor dwells: O shut not up my soul with sinners, nor my life
with the bloodthirsty, in whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is full
of gifts, and concerning the assurance that he had of his own faith, the spring
and fountain of al good works he likewise testifies saying, Have mercy upon me
O God, have mercy upon me, for my soul trusts in thee, and under the
shaddowe of thy wings shall be my refuge, until this tirannie be over Isa 38.
3.
past. So Ezechias: Remember now O Lord, how I have wa^ked before thee with an
upright heart, and have done that which is acceptable in thy sight. Remember
me (says Nehemiah) O my God, in go^dnes, according Ne^. 5. 9. and 13 22.
to all that I have done for this people. And again, Remember me O God
concerning this, and pardon me according unto thy great mercy. Pray for us
(says the Apostle) for we are assured that we have a good Heb. 13. 18.
conscience, desiring to live honestly in all things. And in truth how could
the actions of the faithful have been pure and good, except they had been
done in faith, and in obedience to God, and upon an assured knowledge that they
were well pleasing unto him? How otherwise could they have been so bold, and
that in lue of that service which then they performed unto him, to have
required at the Lords hands that reward, which he has promised to his faithful
servants? Or if they themselves were not fully persuaded of their most
comfortable faith and godly life, and of the sincerity of an upright
conscience, how came it to pass that the light thereof was so great that their
most deadly and malicious enemies were forced to give testimony thereto with
these or the like words? These be they, which speak as they live, and live as
they speak: this is assuredly an holy profession, which brings forth so
holy a conversation: this is a joyful and comfortable faith, which yields
such joy and comfort amidst so great and grievous torments, and in the very
terrors of death it self: O truly great is the God of these christians. Their
light did so shine before me^, that they did see their goods works, and
glorify their father which was in heaven: and therefore they did much more
assuredly see them themselves. Wherefore to conclude this first question: A true
and a faithful christian man is not ignorant of the estate of his own soul, nor
stands in fear of al his actions: he ^s not in doubt of the purity of his
cogitations, nor yet uncertain of his obtained grace: he clearly beholds
the light of his own holy life and conversation, and both by the marks and
fruits of his christian faith grows into a steadfast assurance thereof, being
thereby enabled to make an undoubted profession of the same, according unto the
direction of this our christian creed, I believe.

Now the first question being thus determined, the second follovveth: whether
a faithful christian knowing assuredly, that he has obtained a true,
saving, and justifying faith, may know also assuredly that ^e is in the favor
of God, has remission of sins, and a just title to the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven. Andradius the maintainer of the Tr^dentine faith, seems
to yield thus much, that if we could assuredly know, that we had faith,
repentance, and love, we might also assuredly know, that we were in the
favor of God, and had al our sins remitted unto us. But of the former he
greatly doubts, nay he boldly avoucheth with Duraeus li. 8. de paradoxi^.
other of his fellows, that we cannot attain to any steadfast and certain
assurance of the same. Now the^ seeing that the members of the church of Rome
know not assuredly whether they believe or no, or belong to the number of the
faithful servants of Christ, it is no mervaile that they know not, that they
are in the favor of God, neither acknovvledge the great mercy of Christ
toward themselves in remitting unto them their iniquities and sins.
Whereas no doubt the faithful servauntes and children of GOD feeling his law
written in their Heb. 8. 10. 1 Ioh. 5. 20.
hearts and knovving that he has given them a mind to know him aright, and
to perform in some measure the well deserved duty of obedient servauntes
and loving children, and that according unto his own prescription in his most
sure and undoubted word, do know also assuredly thereby, that they themselves
are under the covenant of mercy, and in the estate of grace, and that God is
become their loving father in Christ, and has cast al their sins into the
bottom of the sea.

This question then concerns not the unfaithful and unbelievers, whether
such may know whether they are in Gods favor (for doubtless they may persuade
themselves the clean contrary) but the faithful believers only: unto who^ for
the better stre^gthning of their steadfast assurance diverse helps are
ministered by the Lord in his word. For as in the co^veianc^ of earthly lands
and possessions, when any thing is to pass from man to man, the grant is set
down in vvriting, and signed and sealed with the hand and seal of the party
that makes the grant, and subscribed with the hands or marks of the
vvitnesses present for the same purpose, that so the party to whom the
grant is made, may have good security for those lands, which are after this
manner passed over unto him: and as in those evidences the cause of the grant
is sometime signified, for the better confirmation of the conveiance: even so
our most gracious and merciful GOD purposing of his infinite and endless
mercy in Christ to give assurance to the faithful of remission of sins and
everlasting life, has caused not only the grant thereof to be set down in
the holy scriptures under the hands of diverse as it were public Notaries,
but also the cause of the said grant: as, So GOD loved the world (not so
and so had we deserved, and such or such a sum had we given) but So Ioh.
3. 16.
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son (who is the
only purchaser and price of the purchase also) that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish but have life everlasting. And that we might be most
thoroughly persuaded of the unchangeable vvil of the LORD concerning this his
grant, he commanded it to be proclaimed not in Jury alone, nor any one corner
of the world, nor to one people only, but gave in charge to his ambassadors to
publish the same throughout the whole world, and to entreat thereof with
every creature: Go ye (says our Savior) into the whole world, and preach
Mar. 16. 15.
the gospel to every creature: he that shall believe and be baptized shall
be saved: he that shall not believe, shall be condemned. And this grant
being thus proclaimed he signed it as it were with his own hand, by giving
testimony thereto by diverse strange signs and wonders, which could not be
vvroughte but by his own singer: and further ratified the same by his holy
Sacraments, as it were, with his own sacred seal: ^dding therenuto the
blood of all his holy Martyrs and vvitnesses which they most willingly shed
for the full confirmation of the truth of the same. Neither wants it also
the testimony of the son of God given after a sort upon his solemn oath:
Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my Ioh. 5. 24.
word and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life and shall not
come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life, unto all which
testimonies we may add also the witness that has been given thereto even
by all the prophets: For to Christ give all the prophets witness, that through
his name all that believe Act. 10. 43.
in him shall receive remission of sins.

Now then seeing this doctrine of the gospel of Christ is ratified unto us by
so many witnesses, we ought not only to be fully persuaded of the truth thereof
in general, that whosoever believes shall be saved but also in particular
that I, and thou, and he, which believe, shall assuredly also be partakers of
eternal salvation. For the general is no otherwise true, then it may be
verified in all the particulars: And if I, and thou, and he, which believe
cannot be assured of our salvation, then it cannot be true that whosoever
believes shall be saved: seeing the drift and purpose of the general was to
contain under it all the particulars. If a Prince in the time of a ^utiny or
rebellion should cause a general pardon to be proclaimed to all that would
submit themselves, and accept of mercy, who is so simple that does nor
understand that the scope of the general pardon is to assure every one of the
rebels in particular, that he may enjoy the benefit thereof, if that he will
submit himself and accept of mercy. The most mighty Lord of heaven and earth
has caused to be proclaimed a great Iubile, the acceptable year, an year of
release and pardon even to all disloyal and rebellious sinners whoseuer they
be, and whatsoever their offenses have been, if that they will accept and
faithfully embrace his mercy offered unto them in Christ Jesus: ought not then
every particular christian, to whom the Lord has given grace faithfully to
embrace mercy in CHRIST, assuredly persuade himself of the remission of his
own sins, and of life everlasting? It is written (says Cyprian) the just
shall live by faith: (there is the general) Now (says he) if thou be just
and live by faith, and if thou rightly beleeuest in GOD, why do thou not
willingly embrace death, whereas thou art to be with CHRIST, and ought
to be SVRE of the promise therein: (there is the use and benefit, which every
faithful christian ought to embrace, and to apply particularly to his own
conscience. ( Does God (says he) Cyp, sermon. 4. de mortalitate.
promise unto THEE at thy departure out of this life, eternal life, and do
thou waver and doubt of the same? in which words we may perceive that the
general promise does belong to every faithful man in particular, as well as
if his own name had bin set down in the same, and that he ought in no case to
doubt, but assuredly to persuade himself of the benefit thereof) for to be
doubtful and not fully assured were to be utterly (says he) ignorant of God,
and to offend Christ the teacher of faith with the sin of infidelity, and for
one which has a place in the church, not to have faith in the house of faith.
Wherefore it is not a falling a way by presumption, but a^ standing by faith,
for every faithful christian, to strive to assure himself particularely of
the remission of his own sins and of life everlasting. Otherwise why did the
Apostle assure the Iaylor in particular of his eternal salvation if he did
faithfully embrace the glad ^idings of the gospel? Believe than in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy house hold. Act. 16. 31.
And why else did our Savior himself the teach, and giver of faith, seeing
their faith which brought unto him the man sick of the paulsy, (with the faith
no doubt of the sick party himself) assure the sick party in particular of
the remission of his own sins, man thy sins are forgiven thee? So likew^se
to the penitent Luc. 5. 20. Luc. 7. 48.
woman thy sins are forgiven thee, thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.
As also to the faithful and penitent the se: to day shall Luc. 23. 43.
thou be with me in Paradise. And why e^se ^cheth the church of Rome her
self, that her priests in hearing auricular confession can, Conc. trid. de.
part. and fructu poenit. c. 3.
and do by the authority of the keys committed unto them in their sacrament
of penance (upon the view^ belike of that faith and repentance of such as open
their sins unto them) give unto them the remission of their sins in
particular assuring them thereof to the great consolation of their spirits,
and to the peace and quietness of their consciences? For if other men which
cannot look into my heart and conscience so well as my self, can upon the
view of my repentance and faith remi^te unto me my sins, or at the least but
assure me thereof unto the peace o^ my conscience and consolation of my
spirit: then no doubt but my self which can far better look into mine own
conscience, and behold mine own faith and repentance then any other,
(especially when Ih^u^receaued instruction of such a^ know how to minister a
word^ in due season) may thereby assure my self of the remission, of mine own
sins, and of my deliverance from eternal Hebr. 2. 4. Mark. 16. 20.
condemnation. And why did the Lord himself with signs and wonders, and with
^vers miracles and gifts of the holy ghost give testimony unto the gospel
when it was first preached, and confirm this joyful ^idings of salvation in
Christ sent to all that believe, but that every faithful man thereby might
undoubtedly be assured of the remission of his own sins and of his just
title to the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven? What shall we think that
the divine power of God would, as it were, subscribe to that doctrine which was
not heavenly and divine? or that the truth it self would warrant a lie, and
that with such strange signs and wonders? Neither has the Lord only
confirmed this doctrine of the gospel of his son with strange wonders
wrought by his own hand: but also he has ratified the same with holy
sacraments as with his own seal annexed thereunto. And verily if circumcision,
much more Rom 4. 11.
baptism and the Lords supper may worthily be called seals of the
righteousness that comes by faith. The cup (says our Savior Christ) Luke
22. 20
is the new testament in my blood: that is to say, a seal and an assurance of
the grant of the remission of sins and eternal life given unto you through
my blood, which is the sum of the new testament. And to what end tends both
these sacraments of the new testament, but to assure all the faithful that
they having put on Christ have their sins washed away through his blood: and
that their souls are fedd with very Christ the heave^ly Mannah and Galat. 3. 2^
bread of life, whereby they are sustained to everlasting life? The cup of
blessing (says the Apostle) which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break is it not the communion 1. Corinthians.
10. 16.
of the body of Christ? that is to say, there all participatio^ of these
outward elements and visible signs, are they not most certain pledges and
assurances to all the faithful of their spiritual union and communion with
Christ and all his blessings? And was not this the judgment of those godly and
learned fathers of the council of Nice in that they will, that this holy
sacrament of the Lords supper should be sent unto penitent persons lying in
their death beds which stood as yet excommunicate for apostasy, or for some
other notorious crime, that by the participation of that celestial food they
might be assured of their communion with Christ and his church, and of the
remission of their sins and eternal life, and so enabled to pass over in
peace, the end of their laborious and painful life. The which most
comfortable doctrine is most co^veniently set down in our English liturgy at
the celebration of these holy mysteries in these words: The body of our Lord,
that was given for THEE, preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life: The
blood of our Lord, that was shedd for THEE etc. For hereby every faithful
christian that reverently receives this holy sacrament may assure himself,
that the spiritual life, that is now begun in him, and shall be made
perfect in the world to come, (...) wrought by the special love of Christ now
dwelling in him by a true faith: so that he may boldly say with the Apostle
both ^n his life, In that I now live, I live by the faith of the son of God
who loved Gal. 2. 20.
Me, and gave himself for Me: and also at his death, I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; hence forth 2. Tim. 4.
7.
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness etc. And from whence also
proceeds that joy in the holy ghost, and that peace of God that To. 14. 17.
and 5. 1.
passes all understanding, which is felt in the hearts of the faithful
servantes of Christ in their greatest crosses and most greevous afflictions,
but of a faithful persuasion of the remission of their sins and
reconciliation which God procured for them by the death of Christ? Otherwise
also how could they serve the Lord Luc. 1. 74. Ephesians 3.. Heb 10 22. Iaco. 1. 6.
without fear, and come unto him in their prayers with boldness, yea in
assurance of faith, without wavering and without doubting? Yea how could they
come unto him not as unto an offended and an angry judge, but as to a loving
and a merciful father saying, O our Father which art in heaven? And from
whence else proceeded their solemn protestations, that they did assuredly
know that they were in the estate of grace, and in the favor of God, and that
God was their God in particular, and after so stable and steadfast a manner,
that nothing was able to sever them from his love? We know that we are of God.
I know that my redeemer lives. My spirit 1. Ioh. 5. 19. Job. 19. 25. Luc 1.
77. Psalm. 18 1. and 116, 16.
rejoices in God my Savior. The Lord is my strength, my castle, my deliverer,
my God: and on the other side: Behold Lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant,
and the son of thine handmaide. Yea so great a stay and comfort had the
prophet David in this assurance of his own ^aith, that he protests, his
adversities being so many and so Psalm. 27. 13.
grievous as they were, he should utterly have fainted, but that he did believe
verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the li^ing. The which most
comfortable assurance of faith was such a stay also to the blessed Apostle S.
Paul, that howsoever an whole army of Rom 8. 37.
tribulations did press sore upon him, yet he protests that he was a
conqueror, yea and more then a conqueror through him that loved Rom, 8 37.
him: being most assuredly also persuaded for the time to come, that neither
death nor life, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come should be able to separate him from the love of God, which was in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Neither was this comfortable assurance of faith a
special and an extraordinary prerogative granted only to some principal
persons among the faithful; but a gift in some measure common to the whole
church. For all the children of the church being the children of God are led by
the spirit Rom 8. 14. 2. Cor. 2. 12^
of God: whereby they know such things as are given unto them of God. And they
are all indifferently commanded in the Lords prayer to call God their father:
the which name they cannot sincerely use, unless they be persuaded in some
measure of faith that he bears a loving and a fatherly affection toward
them, having received them into favor for his Christ's sake, and given them a
place among the number of his children. And why 1 ^oh. 5. 13.
else says S. John writing to the whole church in general, these things I
write unto you that believe in the name of the son of God, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in the name of the
son of God? So S. Paul writting to the church of the Corinthians in
general: Prove your selves: know ye not your own selves, how that JESUS
CHRIST dwells in you, unless ye be reprobates? and in his former epistle:
K^ovve ye not that your 1. Cor. 6. 15 19.
bodies are the members of Christ? Know ye not that ye are the temples of the
holy Ghost which is in you, whom ye have of GOD, and that ye are not your
own? By the which testimonies of Christ and his Apostles it is evident, that
not a few only, but also every m^mber of the universal church, in their
times, and according unto the measure of their faith, may assuredly know that
they are Christ's, that they are the true members of his mystical body, and the
temples of his h^ly spirit, and that God is become their gracious father, and
has made them inheritours of his heavenly kingdom.

Now the faithful being the adopted sons of God in Christ, and having God to
be their merciful father, have no just cause to doubt of their continuance in
the favor of God, and in the estate of grace and salvation in Christ Jesus.
For the fountain of this grace in them, is as a fountain of living water, the
streams whereof Ioh. 4. 10. 14. Psalm. 1 3. Ie^. ^7. 8. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
never wax d^ie: and they become as good trees planted by the water side, whose
leaves never wither who never cease from yielding fruit: they are borne again
not of mortal seeae, but of the immortal seed of the word of God which
lives and lasts for ever: and they are Ioh. 6 35.
fed also with the incorruptible food of the bread of life, the virtue
whereof is never consumed: he that ea^eth thereof does never hunger, and he that
drinks there of does never thirst. Many and great enemies indeed they have:
but he that is in them is greater 1. Ioh. 4. 4.
then he that is in the world, and therefore they can never be fully
vanquished. Our Savior himself does continually appear to make intercession
for them before the throne of his heavenly father. Heb. 7. 25.
whose petitions the father will never deny. Yea he himself is always present
with them even to the end of the world, walking in the midst Mat^. 28. 20.
Ap, 1. 20.
of them, and holding them in his right hand, neither is there any able to take
them out of his hand. Yea where this sun of righteousness begins to shine,
there the light thereof is never vt^e^ly darkened: Esa 60 20.
for this sun never goes down. To the first man (says Austin) Aug. de
bono qerseu^c. 12
was given an ability to persevere only, if he himself would have used the
same: But to the elect now is given perseverance it self. Christ has
appointed them that they go and bring forth fruit, and that their fruit
abide: and therefore who dares be so bold as to say, pe^adventure it shall not
abide. The Lord has settled his fatherly Romans 11. 29 Ioh 13. 1. Math. 16. 18 1.
Ioh. 2 19
love and affection upon them, he will not repent of it, nor revoke it but
continue it even to the end: he has built them upon a most sure rock, hell
gates shall never prevail against them: he has incorporated them into the
heavenly Jerusalem the city of GOD, they shall alvvay continue members of that
society. Who then dares be so bold as to say, peradventure GOD will not
love his faithful servantes to the end: peradventure hell gates shall prevail
against them: peradventure howsoever they are now for the present, yet they
shall not continue in that celestial society. Verily, ^f the faithful were
left in their own hands to stand by the right and power of their own
strength, there might be great doubt of their constancy and perseverance. But
they are committed to a more faithful keeper, their life is hid with Christ in
God, and they are Col. 3 3. 1. Pet. 1. 5.
preserved by his power unto eternal salvation. Or if the continuance of the
Lords favor and love did depend upon the merits and deserts of the
faithful, and not upon the Lords own most constant and unchangeable goodness,
there might be just cause of fear lest the LORD would withdraw his mercy
from them. But he that knowing the great frailty and weakness, yea the foul
falls and faults of his elect and chosen children before the foundation of
the earth was laid, and therefore before he had made any promise of good things
unto the^, did yet in his unspeakable mercy and goodness step as it were over
them all, and bound himself, being before most free, by his gracious promises
made unto them; no doubt but the same unspeakable mercy and goodness will cause
him being now bound, and so a debtour, in respect of his truth and
righteousness also, to step over all those stumbling blocks, when they are
cast in his way, for the steadfast and stable performance of all such things,
as were in great grace and mercy before promised. For (as the Apostle
teaches) the promises made unto the faithful are founded upon grace, that so
they might be sure: they are not founded Romans 4 16.
upon the ^ottering stay of man's frailty, but upon the immovable and
unchangeable rock of the LORDS own love, and therefore they are immovable
and unchangeable.

Neither is this doctrine (as it is unjustly chardged by the enimyes of faith)
the mother of pride, or of carnal security and dissolutenes of life, but the
most sound doctrine of the christian faith, and the most direct way to sincere
piety and godliness For is not this a necessary due^y of every true and
faithful christian, which is engraffed and incorporated into CHRIST, to
believe and confess that by the virtue of his death he has full
reco^ciliation with God, remission of sins, and an inheritance in the
kingdom of glory: yielding most hearty thanks unto GOD for this his most
gracious calling unto the estate of salvation in CHRIST jesus, and magnifying
^is unspeakable goodness for the same continually? Nay, not to acknowledge this
willingly were plain infidelity, and gladly not to make profession the of were
great unthankfulness: so far is it of, that this doctrine can be justly charged
to be the nurce of pride, or the mother of haughty and dive^ish presumption,
being in deed the true nurc^ of all sound comfort and ^oy, and the natural
mother of all holy and faithful presumption. Presume (says Saint Austine)
Aug. s^rm. 28. de v^. b. ^omini.
not of thine own doing, but of the grace of CHRIST; for by grace ye are
saved, as says the Apostle: this is then not pride, but faith; to make open
profession of that which thou haste re^eaved, i^ not presumption, but
^evotion. I vvi^ not glory (says Ambrose) Am^. d^ lac^b^ and vi^a b^ata cap.
6.
that I am just, but, that I am redeemed, for that will I glory *neither
will I glory for that I am void of sin, but for that my sinne^ are remitted
to my self: I will not glory for that I have profited an^e, or for that a^e
has profited m^e, but for that CHRIST is an advocate with the father for ME
and that his blood vv^ sh^dde for ME. Wherefore Bernarde speaking to the
faithful* If thou (says he) beleevest that thy sins cannot be done avva^e
B^rn. s^r. 1. de annu^iat.
but by hi^, against whom alone thou hal^ offended, and who himself cannot
offend, thou do well: but thou must proceed further, and believe also,
that thy sins are forgiven even to thy self. For to doubt of the most
singular virtue of CHRIST'S blood to vvash and cleanse the stains of all the
sins of the faithful, were infidelity: or not to doubt thereof, but to
doubt whether it be avail^able to purge and cleanse THINE iniquities and
sins, is to bewray thine infidelity in another degree, even in that thou
beleevest not thy self to belong to that number, nor yet to be partaker with
them of their mercy. Wherefore to teach the faithful that they should be
persuaded of the remission of their own sins through the death of Christ,
is to pluck up the roots of infidelity; it is not to teach pride, but faith;
nor to open a gappe to all ^inne and wickedness, but contrariwise most
effectually to provoke to repentance, love, and thankfulness, and to the
practice of all other christian duties.

And in truth we cannot be rightly offended with our selves for offending so
merciful and gracious a God, until he has given us some sense and feeling of
his unspeakable mercy toward us in assuring us of the pardon of our offenses
and sins, Neither can we unfeignedly love the Lord, and desire to be
thankful unto him as we ought to be, until we be persuaded that he loves us,
and bears a kind affection toward us. Neither yet can we wholly resign our
selves to God, until we perceive that we are not our own, but that we are
bought with a price, that so we should 1. Cor. 6. 20
sanctify the Lord, both in our bodies and in our spirits, which are the
Lords. My beloved (s^ith the spouse) is mine, and I am his: he has Cant. 2.
16.
given himself to me, and has assured me of his love: and therefore I give my
self to him, and assure him of mine obedience. We love him (says Saint
John) because he loved us first. For as 1. Ioh. 4 19.
one fire kindles another, and one heat raises up another: so the ^i^y heat
of the Lords kindness and love, felt in the hearts of the faithful, does kindle
again the fi^e of their love and thankfulness toward God, causing them to
busy all their thoughts and cogitations, how they may after the best manner
perform this there bounden duty and service to God* When the Lord by the
prophet had mentioned his great mercies bestowed upon his people of Israel, the
prophet stra^t-waies in the person of the people breaks out into these words:
Wherewithal shall I come before Mich 6. 6.
the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Likewise David upon the
like consideration: What shall I render unto the Psa 116. 12. and 103. 1.
Lord for all his benefits bestovved on me? and again: Praise the LORD, O
my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name: praise the LORD, O
my soul, and forget not all his benefits: who forgiueth all thy sins, and
heals all thine infirmities: vvh^ saves thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. In which words we may perceive,
that the sense and feeling of the Lords mercies, in re^tting to the prophet
David his manifold sins, was in him as a great and vehement flame kindling in
his very heart and soul a most fervent and zealous desire of magnifying and
extolling the Lords mercies. So Mary loved Luc. 7 47.
much, because many sins were forgiven her: ^eeling first the great
abundance of Gods love toward her self in pardon^ng her manifold and
grievous sins, which caused in her as it vv^re a reflection and reciprocation
of her love toward God for those his great and endless mercies. And surely if
the small kindenes of a man and that toward his enemy does oftentimes ^eape
coals of fire on his head, turning malice into meekness; Romans 12. 20
and currishnes into kindenes, and so overcomming evil with goodness: how much
more the infinite love of God in pardoning our manifold and grievous sins
being once felt within us, will it not possess our souls with his love, and
win al our affections to his obedience? Surely it vvil cause us to rejoice if
we may suffer any tribulation for his names sake, or perform any other duty
whatsoever, that may be grateful and acceptable unto him. We rejoice (says the
Apostle) in tribulations, knowing that tribulation Romans 5. 4.
brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and
hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the holy Ghost. And to say the truth who ever were greater enemies to carnal
security and dissolutenes of life, more zealous followers of Christ, and more
religious embracers of true piety and godliness; then such as above all other
have felt the love of God most abundantly toward themselves, in assuring
them most undoubtedly of the forgiveness of all their sins, and of their
inheritance in the kingdom of glory? Wherefore this doctrine which teaches
the faithful to raise up themselves to a steadfast assurance of Gods mercies
tends neither to pride, no^ to dissolutnes of life: but that doctrine which
teaches to doubt of Gods favor, is no better then a flat stepmother to faith,
and a natural nurce to infidelity. For he that will rightly come unto God, must
come unto him without doubting: whereby we see that faith Iac. 1. 6.
and doubtfulnesse cannot well agree together. So when God promised Abraham a
son in his old age, adding further that Rom 4. 2^.
in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed: M^t ^4. 31. Romans 14
23 In Gen 4^. The popish faith ^ke to the Infidel Poets.
he doubted not (says the Apostle) through unbelief: showing thereby that
doubtfulnes arises of infidelity. Wherefore, for any that professes himself
to belong to the number of the faithful to doubt of the performance of any of
the Lords promis^s in general, or in particular of the promise of
forgiveness of sins, and eternal life made to all that believe, does argue a
very small faith at the least, if it do not convince the party of ^latte
infidelity. Non si mihi Iuppiter ipse s^n ^at, ^am s^crem hoc contingere pon^.
Wherefore as Martin Luther truly avouched, if there were no other errors and
heresies in the doctrine of the church of Rome, but even this that they teach
that the faithful, which are justified before God, ought not yet assure
themselves of (...) own justification, and of their own undoubted calling
unto the estate of grace, but remain still pensive and doubtful of the
remission of their sins, and of their interest in the kingdom of glory; yet
this alone were a sufficient mot^ue to make a separation from her, as being the
mother of infidelity, and not of faith.

Div. 3.
That we ought to believe only in God, and not in the church or in any
creature.

THose things which the Gentiles offer up in sacrifice, they I believe in God.
I believe the church.
offer to devils, and not to God: the Jews, and all heretics believe not in
the true God, but upon an Idol of their own imagination: the superst^tious
believes in creatures, the Epi^ure has his belly and pleasure for his God,
the Machiavellion his policy, the covetous worldling his Mammon: only the
faithful christian believes in God, and reposeth in him all the hope of his
felicity, he seeks to him only in all his necessities, and gives him the
thanks for all benefits whatsoever. If there were any other that could do so
great works for us, as are those of the creation, redemption, and
sanctification; or if there were any that were partners with God in the same;
then were there some cause why we might believe in them, and devote our selves
to their service. For the articles of our creed do teach us therefore to
believe in God, for that it is he that has made us, and not we our selves,
nor any other; for that it is he that has redeemed us, and not we our selves,
nor any other, and for that it is he that sanctifies us, and not we our
selves, nor any other; and therefore that we have ^ust cause to believe in him
and in none other, and to serve him and none other: especially whereas he is a
jealous God, and will give his glory to none other: and as he has no partner
with him in his work, so will he have no partner with him in that honor
which is due unto him in respect of the same. Wherefore blessed is the man that
trusts in God, and whose hope the I^r. 7. 5.
Lord is: and cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arms, and so turns away from the true God. It is not then without cause that
our creed teaches us to believe in God, and not in any creature, to believe
the church and not in the church nor in any members of the church, We believe
(says Pas^h^sius) the church as the Pasch. l. 1. despiritu sancto. Aug. tract.
29. in Ioh. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 2. ^nsymb. Rhem. in ep. ad Romans c. 10 and in ep
ad Philem. 2. Cor. 12. 7.
mother of regeneration, we believe not in the church as the a^tor of
regeneration: Far be from us this blasphemous opinion, for it is not lawful
to believe no ^ot in an Angel. We believe Peter, (says S. Austin) we believe not
in Peter, For to believe in Peter or Paul were to bestow upon the serva^t the
honor due unto the Lord. And yet our Rhemis^es are so bold as to avouch, that
it is lawful to believe in the saints and so in the church, albeit it be but a
congregation of such, as are or have been subject to manifold infirmities.
The which infirmities the Lord suffered to remain in his chiefest servantes
and saints vvhilest they lived, that they should not be lis^ed up above
measure but be humble and lowly as they ought to be. And without all doubt
for the very like cause were some of the same infirmities registered also by
the very direction of GODS most holy spirit, and published to all posteritye
least we also should conceive too great an opinion of them, by making them
our patrones and LORDS, by seeking unto them for their protection, by devoting
our selves unto their service, and by placinge our hope and trust in them*
Neither did the spirit of GOD for this cause lay open only the infi^mityes of
the saints, but also concealed many of those high revelations that ^. Cor. 12.
6
were shevved unto them, and many also in all ^y^elihoode of the strange
works that were wrought by them, l^st they should have been exalted above
measure and ex^olled above the degree of servantes in the opinion of men. For
it is the LORD of these worthy servantes that must increase: Ioh. 3. 30. Ps.
^6. 4^ and ^8 3. Eccl. 43. 30 1. Pet. 1. 13
who indeed is so great, that he cannot vvorthely be praised; yea whose
greatenes cannot sufficientlye be comprehended, much less magnyfied on that
manner as it ought to be, and on whose grace we ought perfectely to trust*
whereas the greatest amongst the children of women must decrease especially
in themselves (fighting against pride which ove^ Superbi^ in virtute timenda.
threw Adam, and the Angels and still assaulteth even the best) never so much
as imagining with themselves, that they can be so humble and lowly as they
ought to be. For Gods grace is sufficient for them, which assures the^ of the
release of their sins, but takes not clean away all their infirmities, but
suffers them to feel the prick and sting thereof, that thereby they may be
most earnestly stirred up to put of swelling pride, and to put on holy
humility. God (says Austine) Aug. cont. Pel. l 3. c. 13.
does (...) his just ones for the fulfilling of perfect righteousness, for that
as yet they are in danger to be pu^ed up with pride: that while none living is
justified in his sight, we may owe thanks unto his mercy, and by holy
humility may be cured of pride the principal cause of many mischeifes. Truth
it is that our Savior affirms Ioh. 14. 12.
that such as believe in him shall do greater works then those that he
himself did, vvhilest he conversed here in the flesh. Whereby our Rhemistes
do endeavor to justify all those straung wonders that are reported to be done
by their canonized saints. But be it that many more signs were done by the
ministry of the Apostles among the Gentiles for the confirmation of the
doctrine that was strange unto them, and therefore required stranger signs
for the mooving of the unbelievers to the embracing thereof, then were done by
CHRIST himself among the Jews, because they received the books of the
Prophets wherein his doctrine was sufficiently confirmed: yet it has pleased
the spirit of God to have recorded in holy scripture more miracles done by
Christ himself, the^ were done by the ministry of the Apostles. Yea it has
pleased the spirit of God (as was said before) to have testified the concealing
of strau^g revelatio^s showed to the Apostle S. Paul himself, least that any
should conceive of him more the^ were meet. With what spirit the^ was the
author of the Lege^d led, that has blazed abroad so many strau^g wonders
reported to be done by their doubtful and demy-saints, to draw the people no
doubt into such an admiration of them, as that thereby they might be moved to
believe in the^? What? shall we imagine that the same spirit (which would have
the strau^g revelatio^s of the Chrysostom. Hom. 5 in Math. Aug. de. mirabil. sacra
scripturae l. 1. c. 35.
Apostle concealed to that end for the which the sepulcher of Moset was kept
secret by God, least the people should have worshipped him) would have as strau^g
or stranger wonders to be published as done by the petty Saints of the Romish
church for the farther advau^cing of their estimation: Nay, may we not justly
think that as the Devil did strive with Michael about the body of Moses, that
his ^yr. in deuteronomy. 34.
sepulchet might be known, that so he might be worshipped: even so that it
(...) the selfsame spirit that has stroven so earnestly to bl^ze ab^oade
the incredible wonders of the Romish Saints, that so the people might be
moved to vvorshippe them, and to place their hope and trust in them? For the
spirit of CHRIST as it proceeds from him, so it teaches that doctrine which
he taught, and seeks to glorify him, by setting Ioh. 16. 14.
forth his greatness, that so the faithful might trust perfectly in his
grace, and rest themselves only upon his sufficiency: and it teaches the
chiefest among the saints to account it their greatest honor to honor their
Lord Christ, and to give testimony Apoc 19. 10.
unto him: (for to give testimony to Christ is a sure note of the spirit of a
true prophet) that so they may be honored of him with a room among the
residue of his servauntes. And verily if we will rightly worship the
saints, we must learn by Aug in psa. ^.
their appointment not to vvorshippe them, but to vvorshippe him that ma^e
heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein. Yea we m^st endeavor to
vvorshippe God as they have given us an example, by follovving Apoc. 19. 10.
and ^2. 9. Act. 10. 26. and 14. 15.
them in the steps of their sound and christian faith, and of their ho*ly
and godly life: and this is the greatest honor that we can do unto them, which
is most grateful and acceptable to them, and most b^n^ficial unto our selves.
And as for those strange legendary wonders, let us leave them to him and his
adherents who was to come with great signs and lying wonders, and to be
discerned Mat. ^ 24. Chrys^. in Mat hom. 49. Aug. de vni^ ^l. ca. 16.
in part by this means. Neither need we being thus forewarned by Christ
himself greatly be astonished and amazed thereat, or esteem better of many of
them, then Austine did of the Donatistes miracles: the which he esteemed to be
either flat forgeries of seducing men, or else delusions of lying spirits.

Div. 4.
That we may not pray to the saints departed, nor seek to them, that by their
mediation we may come unto God, and by their means obtain our petitions.

Upon the question of faith in the saints depends the quest^o^ I believe in
God. I believe the church
of their invocatio^. For if we must only believe in God, then we must also
pray only only unto him: and if we cannot trust in the Saints, not hope to be
helped by their means, to what end should we make our prayers unto them, and
seek unto them in our necessities? How shall they call upon him (says the
Apostle) in Romans 10. 14.
whom they have not believed? Surely that were to beg at a wrong do^, and as
it were to seek to suck water out of a s^nt. Wherefore if we will have our
prayers to take effect, we must make the^ to him that is able to hear, and
also to fulfill and accomplish the same. But God only is omnipotent filling al
places with his majesty and power, searching the very secrets of our hearts
and reins, and beholding even with what affection we conceive our
supplicatio^s: and he also is only omnipotent and able to accomplish our
desires: the which properties are so peculiar to God as he is God, that no way
they ca^ agree to any creature. The saints are neither present in many places
to hear all the prayers that are made unto the^, neither are they able to look
into the heart, to see whether such prayers are made in hypocrisy, or else with
an holy and godly sincerity. If the souls of the departed could be here
present in this world, my godly Aug. de cura ^ro mort. ca. 13.
mother (says S. Austine) would never leave me: but true it is that the
Psalmist says when my father and my mother for sooke me, etc. But if our
parents be not present with us, what are other that they should know our
estate* Thou art our father (says Esaias) for Abraham knows us not, and I
s^aell h^th forgotten us. Now if ^o great Patriarchs did not know the estate of
their own posterity, How should others know and be helpers unto theirs?
Wherefore we do no wrong to the Aug. li. de pastore c. 8.
holy mountains, that is, to the saints, when we say our help is not from the
mountains but from the Lord that made heaven and earth: the mountains
themselves do teach the same: and will not only not be offended with thee for
it, but will love thee for the same and favor thee the more: but if the pu^
thy hope in them, they will be sorry. The truth is, that the Lord commands us
in all our wantes and necessities to seek unto him, who is our only savior
and deliverer, the only fountain and wel-spring of al good things. Call upon
me in the day of thy trouble, and I will del^ver Psa. 50. 15.
thee, and thou shall glorify me. Come unto me (says our Savior) all Mat 11.
28.
ye that are laden and grievously oppressed, and I will ease you. The name of
the Lord (says Solomon) is an impregnable tower, the righteous shall ^e Pro.
18. 10.
unto it, and shall be delivered. He then that speaks unto God for succor
gets himself as it were into an invincible fort, where he is sure to be
free from all danger: and he that makes his suite unto the Lord, comes not
to a beggarly benefactor, but unto a rich and a bountiful Founder, who is rich,
not to some, but to all that call upon him.

Neither need thou doubt of his render affection toward thee; his goodness
is infinite and so is his compassion, far greater then the kindness of any
father or mother, or then is the compassion of any of the saints: the more thou
feel thy self burdened with the weight of thy sins, the readier is he to
ease and refresh thee: and the more unworthy thou art in thine own e^es, the
worthier thou art in his sight: and the more humbled thou art in thy self, the
nearer thou art to be exalted by him. Come thy self unto him, take no
associate but only a faithful and a penitent heart, and thou shall always have
free access. Our Savior Christ when he would not hear his own disciples on
the behoose of the woman of Canaan, gave audience unto her at her own suite,
and granted her her petition and request. Tell me (says Chrysostom Chr^s. hom.
12. de Cana^a.
entreating of this woman) how durst thou come unto Christ, where as thou art a
wicked and sinful wretch? I know (says she) what to do. Behold (says he)
the wisdom of this woman. She prays not James, Ioh, or Peter, or any of
the company of the rest of the Apostles: she seeks no mediator for her
self, but for all these takes repentance for her associate in steed of a
mediator, and goes directly to the very fountain it self. For therefore
(says she) he descended, and took our flesh upon him and became man, that I
might be bold to speak unto him himself. For (as Ambrose also teaches) we
need not make friends to come unto God, as a Amb. in ep. ad romans ca. 1.
man must do that will come unto a Prince; we need not a spokes-man to
procure Gods favor, who knows right well every ones good deeds; but we must
bring unto him a devout mind. Where his meaning is, that the faithful, who are
reconciled unto God by Christ, have no need of any other mediator to procure
the^ Gods favor; and not, that they do not still stand in need of Christ to be
their mediator, be they never so righteous, or never so holy. For (as he
himself else where testifies) Amb. lib. de Isaac and anim^.
Christ is our mouth (still) whereby we speak to the father: our eye by the
which we see the father: cur right hand which presents us unto the father:
without whose intercession neither we nor any of the saints have any communion
with God. So says Cyrill also, none comes to the father Cyrill. in Ioh. ca.
16.
but by the son, by who^ we are brought to the father by the spirit: and
therefore he calls himself a door, and a way, and says none comes to the
father but by me. For as there is but one God, so there is but one 1. Tim. 2. 5.
mediator between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ: and therefore if
any man sin we have not Peter or Paul or the glorious virgin, but we have Jesus
Christ our advocate, and he is the propitiation for our 1 Ioh. 2 1. Heb. 7. 27.
sins. For it is he that has an eternal priesthood always living to make
intercession for us: and it is he that is ascended into heaven there to appear
on our behoof before God, to be as it were our Lawyer in that celestial court,
to prefer our petitions, and to solicit our suits continually. Yea it is he
that is that Angel of the covenant the Apoc. 8. 3.
does put the sweet odours of his obedience unto our prayers, whereby they are
accepted before God, and made a sacrifice of a sweet savor unto his divine
majesty. And verily in whom should we be accepted before God, but in his
dearly beloved son in whom he is well Mat. 3. 17.
pleased? And for whom should our Savior make intercession but for them, whose
redemption he has wrought by his own blood? who surely will not now post
them of to any other advocate, not commend their suites to any other
sollicitour: and therefore thrice wretched were they if they would seek to
any other then only to him, who has taken their causes into his own hands.
Wherefore if we look for a good effect in all our prayers, and an happy
success in all our affairs, we must commend us and ours only to God, and that
in the name of our only mediator, and not in the mediation of any other.

Div. 5.
That it would be an impeachment to the Lords omnipotency, if sin^ should be
done, himself in no respect willing, but altogether nillinge the sam^e.

THe almighty creator and governor of heaven and earth Almighty. Job 9. 12. Ma
h. 8. 8. Eccl. 3. 14. Esa. 14 24. Genesis 50 20. Romans 8. 28.
whose will has his forth in all things whatsoever, whose decrees cannot be
reversed, no^ his power resisted, who is even in that self same thing most
singularly good, wherein man is most notoriously evil, who can drawlight out of
darkness, and turn evil into good, has made sin it self that proceeds
not from himself but from the devil, not only an occasion to destroy Aug.
co^. Pet. l. 3. c. 13
pride and to plant humility in the hearts of his saints, but also a way for
the manifestation of his most severe justice in the punishment thereof, and of
his endless mercy in pardoning the same, and of his infinite wisdom in
appointing such a means for man's delivery from sin, whereby he shows
himself both perfectly merciful, and perfectly just. And in these respects it
may be said that God wills, albeit he never iust^fieth sin, but
disalloweth, hates, and interdicteth the same, and that upon the Aug. Ench. ad
Laur. c. 100.
pain of eternal damnation. Great are the works of the LORD (says S.
Austine) and most exquisite in regard of the in omnes voluntates ^ius.
manifold respects of his will: so that by a strange and unspeakable manner
that is not done BESIDES, which is done AGAINST his will: because it should
not be done, if he did not suffer it; neither does he suffer it nilling, but
willing. And yet the church of Rome teaches that God in no respect wills
sin, but that the sinner performs the same wholly and altogether against his
will. Contrary to the judgment of the wiseman: How might any thing endure if it
were not thy will? Wisd. 11. 22. Romans 9. 19. Aug. Ench. ad La^. c. 96.
Contrary to the Apostle: who has resisted his will? and greatly preiudicing
thereby the Lords omnipotency according unto the plain and direct censure of
S. Austine in this very case. It is not to be doubted (says he) but that God
does well, in suffering whatsoever is done evil, in that he does not suffer
it, but in his justice: and now verily that which is just, is good. Wherefore
albeit these things which are evil, in that they are evil are not good, yet
notwithstanding it is a good thing, that not only good, but that evil should
BE also. For unless it were good that e^ should BE, it should not be permitted
to BE of the omnipotent good: to who^ without all doubt as it is an easy
matter to do whatsoever he will, so it is as easy a matter to stay
whatsoever he will not. The which thing unless we firmly believe, the very
first foundation of our christian faith will be greatly shaken wherein we make
profession that we believe in GOD the father almighty. Neither is he for any
other cause truly called omnipotent or almighty, but for that he is able to
to do whatsoever he will, and the effect of his will is not hindered by the
will of any other creature whatsoever. So then God wills the actions of the
wicked: for he could stay them if he willed them not, and had not appointed to
draw good out of them, by making them a means to manifest his justice in the
authors destruction. And so the Apostle teaches in plain words that the
wicked and reprobate which are hardened in their sins by the malice of Satan
and by the corruption of their own nature, are not hardened by the bare
permission only but also by the will and appointment of God. He has mercy
(says the Apostle) Romans 9. 18. Nihil si^ fr^s^ra. Frustra fi^ quod fine car^t.
on whom he WILL and whom he WILL he hardens. The Philosopher could say
that nothing in this world is made by God rashly or vainly, not having an end
whereunto it is created, and means to bring it to the same end. For there is
no wise worke-master here among men that will go about anything, but that he
will first determine with himself concerning the end of his work, and the
means whereby it may be brought thereunto. Which of you (says our Savior Luc.
4. 28.
Christ minding to build a tower, sits not down before and counts the
cost whether he be sufficient to perform it etc. Wherefore it cannot be but
mere madness, yea open blasphemy to avouch that the most wise and mighty
creator should appoint to make many that should m^r^e themselves, and not to
appointe the end whereunto they should come, and the means whereby they should
be brought to the same. For to say that God ordained them to life, but altered
his purpose upon their alteration, i^ to rob God of his unchangeable
goodness, and of his wisdom and foreknowledge also: to say that God disposed
not of them neither this way nor that way, but left them only at their own
disposition, is to say that the ordering of the clay is in it self, and not in
the potter that fashioneth the same: or to say, that God merely permits
their eternal destruction, and their sins whereby they are brought thereunto,
neither willing nor nilling the same, neither in^ning to the one nor yet to the
other, is to make the Lord a newter in the ordering and governing of this
present world, and to open a gappe to flat Epicurisme.

Div. 6.
That God has not committed the protection of his church to the Saints
departed out of this life.

THe same power that made al things, is only able to sustain Maker of heaven
and earth. Col. 1, 17. Psalm. 36. 6. and 104. 1.
all things, and so it does. And therefore God is not only called the maker,
but also the preserver both of man and beast. The eyes of all wait upon him,
and he gives them their meat in due season: he watreth the hills from above,
the earth is full of the fruit of his works. For God is not as many unnatural
parents which send their children abroad into the wide world, leaving them to
themselves either to sink or to swim: nor as the Ostrich, who after she
has laid her eggs in the dust, clean forsakes them, caring nothing at all
what becomes of them: but he keeps as it were continual watch and ward
over all his creatures (clothing the Lillies, feeding the Fowls, and not
suffering so much as a Mat 6 ^0. and 10. 29.
Sparrow to fall to the ground without his will) and therefore much more over
his elect and chosen children, guarding them with his fatherly protection, and
environing them with his as^isting power 1. Pet. 5. 7. Job. 1. 10.
as with a most strong and ^incible wall, and not suff^ing so much as an hair
of their heads to fall to the ground without his providence. He rides upon the
heavens for their help, and upon the Deu. 33. 26.
clouds in his glory: his eyes are bent upon them continually, so that they
never go out of his sight, Yea behold he that keeps Israel Psalm. 121. 4.
does neither slumber nor sleep: the Lord himself is their keeper, he is
their defense upon their right hand, and their preserver from all evil. Job.
34. 13.
He has not passed over this his authority to the saints, nor joined any of
them with himself in commission: he has not made them our patrons and
defenders (let our Rh^mistes say wh^t Rhem. in. c. 2 ^p. 1 ad Tim and Apoc c 2.
they list to the contrary) as Saint George for England, S. Denis for Fr^nce,
S. Andrew for Scotland. The saints whil^st they lived were Gods instruments
here in this world for the good of his church, and they served their times as
it is said of David: Now they Act. 13 36. 2. Sa. 12 23.
are departed hence they are not sent back again to be regentes over
countries, or to be disburlets of these the Lords earthly and temporal
blessings: For they rest from all such labors, being always before the throne
of God, serving and praising him there Apoc 7. 5. and 13. 14.
for ever, and therefore well may they content themselves to leave the
affairs of this world to such as still live in this world, and not to have any
more portion for ever in all that is done under the Eccl 9. 6.
sun, seeing that they have so liberal and ple^tifull a portion in the
things that are above the sun. Surely king David while he lived Psa. 73 25.
here in this world knew no patron besides the Lord himself: Est. 14. 3. Is.
6. 16.
Who^e have I in heaven but the^: Nor yet did Queen Ester know any other. Lord
help thou me, which have no helper besides thee. For Abraham knew the^ not,
and Israel had forgotten them.

Chap. 4. Div. 1.
That our Savior Christ according unto his divine nature is (...) one and the
same God with the Father.

THe godhead, deity, or the divine nature is of none but of it self, being the
original cause and fountain of all being and subsisting unto all, as these
names Iah and In Jesus Christ his only son^.
Jehovah do also insinuate. And the divine nature of our glorious God and Lord
Jesus Christ is the same divine nature which is in the father, and he himself
is one and the same God with the father, and therefore (...) and of himself;
howsoever the wicked brood of the great Antichrist the grau^d enemy of Christ
does charg this doctrine with wicked blasphemy. Christ, as God, is of himself:
as God the sone, is of Rhemist. in. Ioh. cap. 1. Campian. Rat. 8.
the father, begotten after an unspeakable manner of his divine nature and
substance before al worlds. And so speaks an ancient father: Christ to
himself is God, but in the re^tio^ to his father is the sone and so begotten
of the father.

Div. 2.
That our Savior Christ was incarnate by the holy Ghost, and took his humane
nature only of the seed of man, and not of the seed of any grain by having
it transubstantiated into his body.

IF the doctrine of transubstantiation be true (as it is determined Incarnate
by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary. Se^. 3. sub Iulio 3. ca^. 4 cap. 2.
and concluded by the council of Trent) that by the consecr^tion of bread and
wine, the whole substance of bread and wine is turned into the very
substance of the body and blood of Christ: And if the words of the
institution of this holy sacrament (this is my body) be to be understood
li^terally, really, substantially, then our Savior CHRIST took not flesh
only of the blessed Virgin Marie, but also of material bread, that becoming
really and substantially his very body. And therefore is Christ's body called
bread (if that vvve will believe our masters of Rhemes) for that it is made of
bread. So they Rhem. in ca. 6. Joh.
have their Christ not only of the seed of Abraham and David, but also of the
seed of such corn and gra^e as growet^ and springs out of the earth.
Neither do we envy them this their breaden CHRIST, whose body is daily made
by Sacerdo^ est creator suicreatoris. Qui creavi: ^e sine me ^am creatur
mediante me
a sinful priest through the pronuntiation of a fevve words; let them
ch^vv him and champe him even as they list: for we content our selves with
that Christ to be our Savior, who was incarnate by the hol^ Ghost (and not
by the words of consecration) and took his flesh only of the blessed Virgin
Mar^, and not of the seed of any grain.

Div. 3.
That our Savior Christ according unto his humanity is of a nature finite and
circumscriptible, and not present in all or in many places at one time.

THe church of Rome by her doctrine of the real presence Bo^ne of the virgin
Mary.
does take away from Christ the nature of a true humane body, and so
overthrows the truth of his manhood, in that she avoucheth that his body
there really present is uncircumcised, and not contained in space or place.
For Aug. ep 57. Q^ ^bi est, non est.
take away a place from bodies, and they shall be no where: and if they be
no where, they be not at all. Yea whereas it is an undoubted and confessed
truth, that both the divine and humane natu^es of Christ with their several
properties remain still in him distinct and unconfounded, and seeing that it
is a property of the humane nature of CHRIST being a mere creature together
with all other creatures earthly and heavenly to be finite and contained
either within the compass of one place, or within the limits and bounds of
their finite nature; as on the otherside it is a property of the divine nature
not to be contained within the compass of any one place, but being infinite
and incomprehensible to fill all places with majesty and glory; (and to fill
many or all places belongs to the self* same nature which is in it self
infinite and incomprehensible, and no way to a finite and limited nature)
therefore the church of Rome by her doctrine of the real presence avouching
CHRIST'S body to be in ten thousand places at one time (which is a property
belonging unto his deity) is justly condemned for renewing the heresy of
Eutiches in confounding the properties of Christ's nature, and in taking away
the truth of his humanity.

Div. 4.
That as it is heretical to worship Judas or the Jews; so the instruments
which they used, as the nails, spear, and cross in renting and tormenting
Christ's most precious body.

OUR Savior Christ was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God himself, he being Suffered under Ponti^s Pilate.
most just in punishing him who had taken upon himself all our iniquities and
sins; Pilate, Judas, and the Jews yet being most unjust in working the death
and condemnation of our most innocent and guiltless Savior. And therefore
wicked was the opinion of certain heret^kes called Cain^, which worshipped
Judas and the Devil for the procuring of the death of Christ: seeing they
endeavored to hinder and not to further the salvation of man: even as Ph^raeus
Iasons enemy thought to have slain him, when by opening with the thrust of his
weapon the place of his most dangerous and deadly impostume, he was the means
to cure him of that his malady. And wicked also is the doctrine of the church
of Rome, which teaches to worship the nails, spear, and cross which were
the instruments of their outrageous cruelty in renting and tormenting his most
precious body: and to reverence the Greek and the Latin tongues, because in
them was written his accusation which was most false and untrue, that he did
usurp the temporal kingdom of Jury, whereas he kept himself Ioh. 6. 15. and
18. 36.
close from the multitude when they would have made him king; and made open
protestation even to Pilate that his kingdom was not of this world. For that,
which is applied to a wicked and ungodly use, is not thereby sanctified but
wickedly profaned.

Div. 5.
That Christ suffered both in body and soul the pains that were
proportionable to our sins.

Two things were requisite in our ^aviors suffering^ that they Suff^d.
might be a sufficient satisfaction for our sins. First a proportion of the
sufferinges to the greatness of the sins: secondly a right to translate them
upon the parties, for whom they were sustained. 1 The great and high proportion
of the sufferings of Christ proceeds from the excellency of his divine
nature, which gave virtue and dignity to the same: 2 and the right to translate
them upon man, proceeds from the hum^ne nature, in which they were sustained,
that so they might be availeable for man's sins. For in that man, which had
sinned, was according to the purpose and counsel of God to be redeemed, and not
the angels, therefore nor the seed of Angels, but of man, was to be taken, that
so in the very nature of man that had sinned, the pains for man's sins might be
endured, and so satisfaction made for ma^s tra^sg^ssions. And therefore, as
Christ was to take our whole nature upon him, that so he might be a mee^ person
Aug. cone. F^l. ca. 13.
to redeem the whole: so the m^anes of our redemption being his sufferings, as
he was to take both body and soul, so he was to suffer both in body and soul,
that so he might redeem both body and soul, especially man's soul being the
p^ncipall in committing the offense, and the body being but as it were an
accessory thereunto, the soul was principally to be punished in respect thereof,
neither had it bin agreeable unto justice, that the principal should have
wholly escaped, and that the accessory should have bin extremely punished. And
certainly our Savior Christ, being ready presently to enter into those his
greatest pains and punishments which he was to endure for man's tra^sgressio^s,
testifies of the extreme anguish of his soul, saying. My soul^ is heavy unto
death: and before he Mat. 26. 3^.
came into his enemies ha^d^, that buffered him, crowned him with thorns,
scourged him, nailed him upon the cross, and so tormented his precious body,
he suffered his bitter and dreadful agonye in the garden, the which was so
grievous and burdensome unto him, that it caused him to swette both water and
blood, and to cry out again and again in that his extremity, Father if it be
possible let this cup pass from me; even this cup of thy wrath that I am
so deeply to drink of, that so it might pass from all the elect: the which
he calls his hour that is hi^ judgment Mat. 27. 46. (...). 12. 27.
and condemnation, the which he came into the world to sustain, that so he
might procure our absolution. The which agony continued with him no doubt also
on the cross, where he sustaining the punishment of our sins, which had
deserved to be forsaken, cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
So great is the weight and burden of sin (howsoever to a fool it seems to
be but a pastime) that it being laid upon our Savior himself pressed and
bruised him so sore, that it caused him in the griping grief of his heavy
heart, and in the bitter anguish of his sorrowful soul, thus and thus to
complain unto his God. So infinite and unspeakable was the kindness and love of
our most gracious and merciful redeemer toward us such unthankful and
wretched sinners, that he took from us this so weighty a burden, and laid it
upon his own shoulders. O what great comfort does come unto every faithful
christian out of these discomforts of our blessed Savior? What a glorious life
does arise out of his most shameful death? and what an endless bliss out of
his most ex^crable curse? O what strong assurance have we hereby, that all our
debtes are discharged to the uttermost mite, and all our sins so punished
even to the full, that we need not stand in fear now to be punished our
selves for the same, or to be forced again to make satisfaction either in the
Popish rigorous co^sistory, or the fire of painful purgatory? So great a price
do we justly set upon our Saviors most doleful sufferings, and so highly do
we esteem of his most precious and inv^lu^ble pains: and yet our masters of
Rhemes are not ashamed to lay to our charge, that we do not so much Rhem. in
Math. c. 27.
disgrace as blasphe^e the same, for that we teach that not only in body but
also in soul, he sustained the pains that were proportionable to our sins.

Div. 6.
That Christ's obedience and suffe^nges (...) excellency of his person, but
also (...) selves were meritorious of eternal ^ory.

THe value of Christ's actions, albeit (...) ^cy of his person, yet it rests
not (...) derived from thence into the very actions, and subsisteth as it were
habitually in the works themselves. For the more excellent and perfect the
worke-master is, the more excellent and perfect is the work in it self that
proceeds from him. And therefore that obedience and righteousness which our
Savior Christ performed for us, being done in and by his humane nature, which
was endued with the spirit of holiness above measure, and also by the will,
power, and efficacy of his divine nature, which is in^t holiness, purity, and
perfection it self, how can it be, but that in it self, it should be of
inestimable holiness, purity, and perfection, and truly meritorious of eternal
glory? For albeit a man might weigh all the drops of his most precious
blood, and count the ^ust and full number of all his anguishes and pains, yet
his most fervent zeal toward the glory of GOD, and his infinite love to
manes salvation, which moved him thereto, has a breadth, length, depth,
height, which passes knowledge and cannot Ephesians. 3. 18.
be measured, it is endless, infinite, and unsearchable, and therefore being
laid in the balance with the crown of eternal glory, it is able to
cou^terpoize yea to weigh down the same. The works of Gods saints here in
this life come short of this perfection, albeit they proceed from GODS most
holy spirit: for they are wrought also by man, that has many imperfections
2. Cor. 12. 7 1. Cor. 13 9
and wantes, and are never performed either with that fervency of zeal to the
glory of God, or with such abundance of love See Mysteryes of mou^^ Calv^ the
Preface.
to our neighbors good, as they ought to be: and therefore they are neither
satisfactory for sin, nor yet meritorious of eternal glory, as are the most
worthy works of our only redeemer. In thee and in me (says Augustine)
are of greater or less value and weight the perfume of our works, because a^
some time we do them with greater devotion then at other times, but in the
son of God it is not so: For his love and charity was so great to redeem
us, that neither time did increase it, nor trouble made it col^e. Likewise the
works of one holy man, and the torment of one holy Martyr may be measured
and weighed with the works and torments of an other, because there is no man
so holy in this world, but by Gods grace there may be an other as holy, yea
holier to. The heir of eternity does not enter into this accounte neither does
he come under this sca^tling: he is not weighed as we are weighed, nor
measured as we are measured: because it would be a far easier matter to
po^ze the mountains, then to bound out the limits of his merits. How is it
possible to measure his merits, whose holiness, purity, and perfection does
exceed all measure? Above in the resting place of the Trinity and in the depth
of the Divinity the son of GOD has his measure and weight: for that his
merits are so great and the doloures which he suffered so grievous, that
there are no doloures of martyrs to compare with him, nor holiness of angels
to measure him by. And how can it otherwise be, seeing that ^r blessed Savior
did merit more by feasting in the wedding and with Zachoeus, then the great
Saint John the Baptist did by fasting in the wilderness? Moreover it being
granted, that the works, which the son of God did as man, had their limits
and end, yet the charity by which he did them, had no end, and if to that which
he did suffer there was found a measure, yet to the love, wherewith he did
suffer, there was found no measure. Thou might O my JESUS measure and
weigh the blood, which in the moun^ of Calvary thou did shed, but who
can be able to measure and weigh the love, with which thou did shed it?
And although the blood should be weighed with powndes and ounces, yet who
is able to find out vveightes to weigh thy bowels? In the balance of the
sanctuary nothing was weighed, but that which was of the sanctuary: so in
the balance and weight of CHRIST, nothing is weighed but the works of
CHRIST: for if thou would weigh any other thing with him, all the
holiness of the Angels and all the torments of the Martyrs would not weigh so
much as one d^oppe of his blood. Seeing then that we cannot weigh our selves in
the balance of CHRIST, he c^e to weigh himself in ours: where in one balance
we did put our F^ites, in the other he did put his pains, which before his
Father was of so great weight, that it was sufficient to s^isfie for our
offense. Who could sati^fie for our fault, if he should not lend us his
pain and punishment to pay our debt? And yet the members of the great A^rist,
who have sold themselves to deface the incomparable dignity, and the most
ample sufficiency of the mos^ precious ^ath of our almighty and sufficient
Savior, have not only weighed in the same balance the works of the
saints, and ma^ched them in meriting with the works of Christ, (albe^t they
have g^uen them as it were for manners sake the upper hand) but also they have
denied such excellency to rest in his obedience and sufferings, Rh^m. in. c. 8.
ep. ad^rom.
that in themselves they should be meritorious of eternal glory, or any whit
comparable thereunto.

Div. 7.
That CHRIST'S obedience and sufferings are the only meritorious cause of
eternal glory

THe Apostle to show that we have perfect reconciliation with God,
forg^uenesse of sin, and full redemption by Suffered. Col. 1. 15.
by the blood of Christ, sets down the excellency of this our most glorious
Savior, who spared not to shed his blood for us: as that he is the image of
the invisible GOD, the first begotten of all creatures: that by him all things
were created in heaven and earth, whether they be thrones, domi^o^s, or powers;
yea that it pleased the father, that in him all fulness should dwell. So the
Heb. 1. 1.
apostle to the Hebrew, to show that Christ is the perfect purgatio^ of our
sins, sets down the excellency of his person, that he who is he^re of al
things, by whom also the world was made, being the brightness of his fathers
glory, and the engrave^ form of his person sustaining all things by the might
of his power, has by himself purged our sins. In respect of the greatenes
of the which price that was given for the ransom of our souls, Saint Peter
says, 1. Pet. 1. 18.
that we are not redeemed with corruptable things as with silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of CHRIST as of a lamb undefiled and
without spotte. So then our redemption was not valued at gold and silver, it
was not set at solowe a rate, neither was it purchased with so small a
price: but he that was The greatness of the sacrifice that was offered for sin.
the only begotten SON OF GOD, the second person in the glorious TRINITY,
of the same substance, might, and majesty with the father, having taken upon
him our humane nature, and joined it in one person with his divine, and having
sanctified ^t above measure by the infinite purity and perfection thereof, and
in it having fulfilled all righteousness, not only by doing, but also by
suffering whatsoever was ansvvereable to the most exact and severe justice of
GOD for all our sins; this even this so singular a person thus and thus
qualified has by himself purged our sins, and given himself a ransom for
our souls. Behold then here the greatness of that satisfaction that was made
for our sins, the sum of that ransom that was paid for our souls, the
quantity of the price that was given for the purchase of the kingdom of
glory. In respect of the inestimable 2. Cor. 6. 20
value whereof the Apostle says: Ye are bought with a price: with a price with
a witness, with such and so great a price, that all the holiness of all
saints and angels is no way matchable or comparable thereto. How is it then
that sinful and wretched man should conceive so high an opinion of the worth
of his own works, that he should so much as but imagine, that he himself
could make satisfaction for those sins, and purchase that kingdom, that was
valued at so high a rate, and purchased with so great a price? Surely if it be
mere madness to imagine that here in this world we may purchase for an
halfepeny, that which is justly valued at ten thousand pounds: then it is as
great madness to imagine, that we are able by our own works to purchase
heaven, for the which was given the Son of GOD himself: seeing all our best
works are not as an halfepenny to ten thousand pound in respect of Christ and
his righteousness. Therefore no marvel though the Apostle S. Paul who had
labored more painefully in the Lords vineyarde, and endured more crosses for
the Gospel of Christ the^ any of the rest of his fellow Apostles, yet dares
not thrust himself in as a party in this work, but utterly disclaymeth and
renounceth it, saying: Was Paul crucified for you? Surely no; but a 1. Cor. 1.
13
person of far greater estate, excellency worthiness, dignity, and perfection.
For albeit precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Leo epist 8^.
ad Palastinos.
saints, yet the slaying of no innocent person is the propitiation of the
world: the just have themselves received and not given crowns, and the manhood
of the faithful has been patterns of patience, and not endowmentes of
righteousness: their deaths indeed have been rare and singular, but yet none
of them therevvithall has discharged another debt, whereas there is one LORD
CHRIST, in whom all are dead, crucified, and raised up again. And Augustine
says: CHRIST is for me a Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 47.
door unto you, for ye are his sheep purchased by his blood: behold your
price which is not given by me, but is de^lared and preached by me. And in
truth no man can deliver his brother, (no not so much as from Psalm. 49. 7.
bodily death) nor make atonement unto God for him: For it cost more to redeem
SOVLES. For what recompense can a man give for his Mat. 16. 26.
^vvne soul, much less for the soul of any other? Wherefore far be it
from the humility of al true and faithful christians that they should so
highly esteem of their own holiness, as if thereby they could make
satisfaction for SIN, or merit the crown of eternal GLORY; whereas the
chiefest amongst the SAINTS duly and truly vveighing their own vvorth,
have judged themselves unworthy of the very least of the LORDS mercies. O GOD
(says Jacob) of my Genesis 32. ^.
father Abraham, and God of my father I saak, which sa^dst unto me, return
unto thy country, and unto thy kin^ed, and I will do thee good, I am not
worthy of the least of thy mercies. Likewise John the Baptist Ioh. 1 27.
confesses of himself, that he is no^worthy to loose so much as the very
^atche^ of Christ's shoe: and the Centurion, that he is not worthy so much as
to receive CHRIST under his roof^. Now if these Luc. 7. 6.
men so holy and high in favou^ with GOD, who have wrestled and prevailed with
the Lord himself, being as great as any borne of women, and of so rare and
singular a faith as has not been found no not in Israel; if these, I say,
did truly acknovvledge themselves not worthy of the Lords meanest blessings,
no doubt the^, but they did also acknowledge with the prodiga^on themselves not
worthy to be called Gods sons, nor worthy of remission of sins and eternal
glory. And verily as all the Lords blessings, so especially these of the
greatest value descend unto the ^aithful only by gift (and what is so free as
gift?) and flow merely from the full fountain of the Lords most free and
undeserved mercy in Christ, and not from themselves and their own merits. All
have sinned (says the Apostle) and are deprived of the glory of God, Romans 3.
23.
but are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus. And again, the wages of sin i^ death: but everlasting life Romans 6. 23.
is the gift of God through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. ^astly, by grace ye are
s^ved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Ephesians. 2. 8.
gif^e of GOD, not of works, least any ^an should b^ast himself.

The which with the like testimonies being so evident for our justification and
salvation bestowed upon us freely in Christ, have, as it may be thought, forced
the children of the church of Rome to devise a double justification: the first
proceeding from Gods free mercy in Christ, the second from our own merit: and
deserts. But this distinction they learned not of the Apostle, who affirms
that not only at the first we are brought into favor with God by Christ, and
freely justified by his blood, but also that much more we are brought to the
end of our salvation and to our full and final glorification by the same free
and undeserved mercy of God in Christ. For so is the Apostles ^llation. God
(says he) sets out his love rewards Rom 5. 8.
us, seeing whose we were yet sinners Christ died for us: Much more then being
now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath by him. For if when we
were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of his son, much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. By which words it is
evident, not that the faithful, which are at the first ^ustified by Christ's
blood, are made able to justify themselves afterward by their own works,
and to procu^e their own salvation by their own merits, but much more
(says he) shall they be preserved in the same grace, and brought to their
salvation by CHRIST and by his life. And verily if our first justification by
Christ be sufficient, what need we seek for a second justification by our
own works? And if our title which we have to the kingdom of heaven by
our Saviors death be good enough, what need have we to speak for any other
title? Can that which is once justly mine, be made Quod semel (...) potest
mihi ^quiri pluribus causia.
by any other title more mine? Either can a man have many ^ust titles to one
thing? Surely there be two heavens and two salvations, as well as there be
two iust^fications. For howsoever it be avouched in the word of truth, that
God will reward our works with the inheritance of his heavenly kingdom,
yet we must not think that so great a reward being bestovved upon so sorry a
service does proceed from the merit and worthiness of our own works, but
from the mere mercy of him that does so accept of us and of our works in
Christ, as that he does crown them with eternal glory. The which being
bestowed upon our works of charity is yet still called an inheritance (Came
ye blessed Mat. 25. 34.
of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of
the world) that we may still know and acknowledge that it is not a purchase
made by our own works, but an inheritance freely bestowed upon such as are
adopted into the number of the sons of God by faith in Christ. For as for the
straitest of our works if they were squared by the level of the law, they
would be found in some respect crooked: and those things which seem in us to
carry most weight, if they were weighed in the balance of Gods justice, they
would appear too light: our best righteousness being in some force unrighteous,
and our greatest perfection stained with imperfection. Our knovvle^ge (says
the Apostle) is un 1 Cor. 13. 9
perfect, and our charity is imperfect, and therefore to be done away in the
place of perfection: not that the inward graces themselves are then utterly
abolished (for they follow us in death, and Apo. 14. 13.
never fail us, when all earthly treasures b^dde us adevv) but that the
imperfections, which remain in the greatest graces of the most perfect here
in this world, are to be done away in the world to come, and the
foundation of the kingdom of GOD, which is begun to be laid here in this
life, to be made perfect in the life to come. The perfection (says Saint
Hierome) of all the just in Hie. l. 1. c^ Pelag.
this life is imperfecte perfection: yea all our righteousness (as faith the
prophet) is as a menstruous cloth: and therefore the most Esa. 64 6.
holy that live here, should wash themselves with snow water and make Job. 9.
30. August. de tempore ^erm 49.
themselves most clean, yet their own clothes would make them fil^hy. In the
resurrection (as says an ancient father) we believe that we shall fulfill all
righteousness, in respect whereof all that we do in this life is but very
dounge. Our humble righteousness (says Bernard) of we have Bern. sermon. 5 de
verb. Es. They of the Council of Tre^t have thought themselves better then
these fathers: cursing al such as be of their judgment. Ses. 6. c. 16. c. 25.
any at all, is perhaps sincere* but not pure: except perchance we imagine
our selves to be better then our fathers, who affirmed no less: truly then
humbly, that alour righteousness was a^ a stained cloth: for how (says he) can
that righteousness be pure, which cannot be without fault? Where first we may
observe, that he terms our righteousness, which we attain unto here in this
life, humble: secondly he thinks it to be so small, that he seems to doubt,
whether there be any such thing at all: thirdly he calls it sincere perhaps:
fourthly no^ pur^ without all doubt: fifthly he affirms this even of the best:
lastly he avoucheth it to be a mere impossibility to be otherwise; how can
that be pure? Wherefore it may not seem st^ange that which Gregory
teaches, that the holy man does see his very virtuous work to be vicious, if
it come to be scanned of a just judge. And that Austin threatens vengeance
and woe against the same: VVoe worth the commendable life of man, if God should
judge it without mercy. Now if Greg. in Job. l. 9. c 1. Aug. l. 9. Confess. c.
13.
our very perfection be imperfect, and our purity impure, and our righteousness
as a menstruous cloth, and as very dounge; if our virtue be vicious, and our
commendable life deserve a Woe, the^ when the Lord does reward his faithful
servantes, he does not the same for the worthiness of their works, but of his
mere mercy, grace, and favor. And so our Savior himself teaches us in the
parable of the husbandman that went and sent laborers into Math. 20. 1.
his vineyard, whereof some were hired at the beginning, some at the middle,
and some at the end of the day, and yet each of them received the same wages
and the same hire. Upon occasion of which parable Saint Ambrose says, that
such as were hired at the latter end Amb de vocat. Gen^. l 1. c. 5
of the day do represent unto us those which are called to the Lords service at
the end and vpshotte of their lives, whom he has chosen without works, and
upon whom he does rather power forth the riches of his grace, then yield a
reward unto their labors: that they also who have labored and swette the
whole day, and continued their whole life in the service of God, and yet
receive but their penny with the other, may thereby understand that they also
rather receive a gift of grace, then wages o^ h^r^ due to their works. For
there is but one wa^ to li^e for all the are saved: and therefore if any of the
faithful be saved by mere merry (...) without the merit of their own
works, then no d^ubt but all are saved after the same manner. And verily it
would go very hard even with the best, if they should be put to w^e the
g^rlande of glory by the^ own worthiness before they should wea^e i^: Loose it
in deed we could easily, and that in the s^te of our greatest innocence and
perfection, but recover it again we never could, but only by the means of
our powerful Redeemer.

When Fabitu Maximus had won the city Tarentum which Cicero d^ senec^te.
Salinator before had lost, being forced by the enemy to hide his head in the
castle; Salinator met him, and said unto him: By my help^ Fabi^ thou have
won Tarentum: True, (quoth Fabius smiling) For if thou had not lost it I
could not have recovered it: and even so may it be replied to the proud and
vain glorious Papists, that are not ashamed to boast, that by the means and
merit of their own works Christ has restored to them again the kingdom of
he^ven; that in very deed, unless we by our own works had lost the same, he
should have had no need to have recovered it, A certain noble man's son (as
it is reported) coming to his father for maintenance, was sent by him to
demise certain lands to such whose estates were now expired: who coming to
the place appointed and sitting in court, demised to each one his estate for a
penny: Now might these men justly boast of the fruit of their penny; or of the
kindenes of that noble gentleman, who let them renew their coppies for so
small a sine? Surely he h^d been a very ungrateful tenante that would have
done so, and altogether unworthy of so great a favor. We had all in Adam
forfeited our estates in the kingdom of heaven: whatsoever the best of us can
give toward the renewing of the same, it is but as a penny to a good
coppy-hold. Seeing then our most gracious God has so tenderly loved us, that
he has given us his only begotten son, who has purchased it again for us
by his own death, and so has renewed again our estates therein, wilwilling
us that we should earnestly endeavor to show our selves dutiful and
thankful unto him that has been so merciful and gracious to us, telling us
also again and again that this our labor shall not be in vain in the LORD,
and that it shall not be lost which we employ in his service, but that he will
crown it with eternal glory: shall we now ascribe this crown of glory to
our simple endeavors which we employ in his service, or to his infinite and
endless goodness, who has purchased it for us with his own blood? Verily he
were too too unthankful a wretch, who vvoulde ascribe it to the merit of
his own works, and not to the mere mercy of his gracious redeemer. The
Apostle Saint Paul who, if any, had to glory in the merit of his own
works, yet disclaymeth them all in the matter of salvation saying: GOD forbid
that I should glory in any thing save in the cross of JESUS CHRIST. For he
Gal. 6. 14.
knew that GOD had made him unto us wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. 30
sanctification, and redemption, that he which glories should glory in the
LORD. He knevve that there was no other fo^dation of his salvation to be
laid, then Jesus CHRIST and him 1 Cor. 3. 11.
crucified: and that there was no other name given under heaven whereby we
might be saved but only the name of our blessed Act. 4. 12.
Savior: Not the name of our own or other men's works, o^ Masses, Dirigesses.
Pardons or the like: seeing if it might have been wrought by any such means,
CHRIST had died in vain, he might then have spared all his pains, and avoided
Gal. 2. 21.
all those most grievous torments which he endured for man's redemption.
Especially if it be true, which they teach, that the good works of the
regenerate, if not in themselves, yet in respect of the spirit whose fruits
they are, are of infinite price, satisfactorie for sin which is infinitely
heinous, and aunsvvereable to the joys of the kingedome of heaven; then it had
been sufficient for our Savior CHRIST to have bestovved his spirit upon the
faithful, by whose infinite purity their works being sanctified, they might
have been thus enabled to save themselves, and so his own death had been
but superfluous for the vvorking out of man's salvation. But if it be a most
heinous impiety to avouch Christ's death to be superfluous, and that he died
in vain, then let us all which look for any benefit by his death, ascribe
the glory of eternal life only to him who is therefore called, Ioh. 6 35.
Apoc. 22. 2 1 Ioh. 5. 20. Col. 33.
the bread of life, the tree of life, author of life, yea life it self: for
that our life rests only in him that is our only just title to eternal
life. Take hold then of CHRIST, take hold of life, reach forth thine hand to
any other thing, and thou reachest it to vanity, and take hold as it were
of thorns and of fire. Look not for life but where it dwells. Our life is
hid in CHRIST with GOD: death reigns in the whole world beside, and
leads every creature to the bondage of corruption. If thou look up into
heaven without this reconciler, there will appear nothing but displeasure
and wrath: if thou cast down thine eyes upon the earth, there thou shall
see nothing but fearful confusion: If thou call to Abraham he knovveth thee
not: if to the wise virgins, their oil is not sufficient for themselves, and
for thee also: if to Saint Paul, he was not crucified for thee: if to the
most blessed Virgin, she was not anointed nor yet appointed to be thy
Savior: The universal company of all those that are made partakers of the
kingdom of heaven do take their crowns of glory from their own heads,
and cast them down at the Lambs feet, acknowledging thereby of whom they
hold them, giving the glory of their salvation only to GOD and the Lamb,
saying: Salvation is of GOD that sits upon the throne and from the lamb.
With the which catholic consent of all the holy Apoc. 4. 10
saints we may content our selves, and satisfy our consciences
sufficiently, how many and how mighty soever they be here in this world,
that will not subscribe to this holy and heavenly confession. And verily we
being built upon CHRIST our immovable rock, we need not seek for the
stay and strength of any other foundation: being possessed with the
maintenance of this most bountiful Founder, we need not beg for an
exhibition of any other benefactor: being furthered in all our suites by his
mediation, we need no other letters of commendation: having re^aued from him
our satisfecit and quiet^ est, we need not greatly care for the Popes
indulgence and pardon: being cleansed from all our sins by his blood, we
need not make any reckoning of our purging in purgatory: being clothed with
the most odoriferous garments of his obedience, we need not add thereto the
patches and rags of our own righteousness: being enriched with his
treasures, we need not make much account of our own trash: and having his
sufferinges and death for the warrant of our right to the kingdom of heaven,
we need not seek for any further assurance, or for any other title to that
happy and heavenly inheritance. Neither indeed does the true church the spouse
of CHRIST seek for the same to any other then to her kind and loving
bride-grome, she contenteth her self with his love, and satisfies her self
with his sufficiency: it is enough to her that she is flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone, even the body and fulness of him that fills all in all.
Wherefore if Jesus Christ be our whole, entire, only, and sufficient Savior;
if there be no other name and power where by we may be saved, as the greatness
of that ransom which he only gave for our redemption does sufficiently
declare; if the death of Gods dearest saints come short of that price, the
which being endured for the confession of the faith of CHRIST is the very
crown of all their works; if they were not worthy of the least of the
LORDS mercies, but were made partakers of them all most frankely and freely in
CHRIST JESUS; if through him they were not only at the first reconciled unto
GOD and received into favor, but also preserved in the same, and brought to
their full and final glorification; lastly if their works were rewarded
with eternal glory, not for the merit and worthiness of the same (in that the
best of them examined in justice deserved a curse rather then a blessing) but
for the mere mercy of him who so well accepts of them and of their doings
in his vvel-beloued son: then we may conclude that not the best works of
the LORDS dearest saints, but the obedience and death of his dearly beloved
son is the only meritorious cause of eternal salvation. And therefore that
the church of Rome by joining the saints to CHRIST in the work of our
salvation, and by making them by their own merits their own Saviors in
part and others also, and so by robbing of him, unto whom all is due, of the
whole and entire glory thereof, is justly by all the faithful members of
CHRIST dispossessed of the name of the true church, and rightly charged to be
the very throne of that enemy of Christ the great Antichrist.

Div. 8.
That Christ's soul descended not into Limbus Patrum to deliver the Fathers.

THere was one place for all the faithful after their death, which departed
before the coming of Christ in the flesh: He descended into hell. 2. Reg. 2.
11. Luc. 16. 22.
But Elias at his departure was carried up into heaven, and not down into
Limbus: and Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom, which can be no part nor
region of hell, as it may appear by these circumstances. First these two
places where Lazarus and the rich man were, are said to be far off one from
the other, and to have an huge distance set between them, which is not so
likely to be between two places which both (as they say) are situated under
the earth. Secondly it is said that there is no passage from the one place to
the other, whereas the devils themselves pass higher, even to those that live
here upon earth. Thirdly it is called a place of comfort where Lazarus was
refreshed and comforted: whereas in all likely-hoode there is very cold
comfort in any coast or region of hell. Moreover CHRIST was in the ^ore
knowledge of GOD alambe slain from the beginning of the world, and Apoc. 13.
18
his death was then as effectual to the Fathers to open to them the kingdom
of heaven, as it is now to us; seeing he is yesterday and today, and the
self same for ever, and therefore Heb. 13. 8.
the self same Savior and opener of heaven to them, as to us, they receiving
the same end of their faith, as we 1. Pet. 19.
do, even the salvation of their souls. For the Fathers were the children of
God by faith in Christ, as well as the faithful since the ascension of Christ,
and therefore heaven, as their inheritance, was due unto them at their
departure out of this life, and therefore they were not debarred from the
same. And what shall we say, that they vvalked in the broad way that leads to
hell, or in the narrovv way that leads to heaven? And therefore at the end
of their life being the end of their walk, were they not placed in rest, in
that their long longed for and desired country, which was prepared for them of
God? And was not this present life to them, Heb. 11. 16.
as it is to us, a time of sowing, and a place of warfare and fight: and the
next life a time of reaping and harvest, and a place of crowning and
triumphing? Now there is no reaping nor triumphing out of heaven: and therefore
the fathers, after their seed time and vva^fare ended here in this life, were
doubtless brought to heaven being the place appointed for their joyful harvest
and glorious triumph. And certainly as all those whom Christ has now
reconciled are either in heaven or in earth, as the Apostle testifies; even so
they were also in the first ages of the church Col. 1. 20.
under the fathers: and therefore as there are none now in purgatory fire, so
there were none then in Limbus Patrum. So Saint Aust. hypog. lib. 5.
Austine: the first place the catholic faith by the warrant of divine
scripture believes to be the kingdom of heaven, the second hell, where every
apostata and infidel is tormented: And as for any third place we are
utterly ignorant thereof, neither do we find any such in holy scripture.

Div. 9.
That our Saviors resurrection is as strong an argument against his bodily
presence in many places, as in all.

BEllarmine uses this argument of Christ's rising and leaving He arose again
from ^he dead.
the sepulcher against the Vbiquitaries who affirm Christ's body to be
present in all places; whereas it may as well be urged against him and his
fellows, who teach that his body is in ten thousand places at one time,
even wheresoever there is any (...): seeing that nature which may be in so
many places at once, may as well be truly in all places. And if it cannot
stand with the verity of CHRIST'S body being a creature finite and limited
to be every where, neither can it stand with the truth thereof to be in
many places at one time.

Div. 10.
That Christ needs not to descend bodily to us, seeing we must ascend by
faith unto him, that so we may be partakers of him and of his passion.

AS our Savior Christ used this argument of his ascension to He ascended into
heaven. Ioh. 6. 62.
teach his disciples which murmured at his doctrine, that it was not a gross,
carnal, and bodily eating of his flesh that he urged as necessary to eternal
life, but a spiritual partaking thereof by faith: that at his ascensio^ they
should see, that he would take away his flesh from them, and place it in heaven
at the right hand of God, and not leave it here to be grossly devoured with
their mouths, and swallowed down into their stomakes even so may we now use
the self same argument against the church of Rome, which teaches the real
presence of Christ in the Eucharist: Christ has by his ascension taken up his
flesh into heaven, and has placed it at the right hand of God, and therefore it
is not to be sought for here on earth, as if it might be either carnally
touched with our hands, or really received into our stomakes. For so does
Austine and Athanasius use this argument of Christ's ascension. When ye shall
see the son of man (says Austine) ascending thither, where he was Aug. in
Ioh. tract. 27.
also before, then surely ye shall see, that he gives not forth his body
after that manner as ye take it, yea then shall ye perceive, that the grace
of Christ is not consumed with morsels. So Athanasius: Therefore does Athan. in
illud Evangelii, Quicunque dixeri^ verbum in filium hominis.
our Savior Christ mention his ascension into heaven, to draw from them their
carnal cogitations: and that they might learn, that the flesh whereof he
spoke was a celestial food from heaven, a spiritual nourishmente which he
himself gives. The which argument these learned fathers vvoulde never have
used, if they had known or believed the doctrine of the church of Rome, which
teaches that our Savior having by his ascension taken away his bodily
presence from us, yet continually causes his body to be made of bread in the
sacrament of his supper, that so it may be carnally, albeit invisibly received.
But this invisible presence they did not see nor believe, and therefore they
condemned all carnal eating with the mouth, and allowed of the spiritual
receaving thereof only by faith. By faith (says S. Ambrose) Christ Amb. in
Luc li. 6. ca. 8. de filia princ. Synag, resuscitata. and li. 10. cap. 24. de
hora dominicae resurrectionis.
is touched, by faith he is seen: he is not touched with our body, nor seen
with our eyes. And again: We touch not Christ by corporal handling, but by
faith: therefore neither on the earth, nor in the earth, nor after the flesh
ought we to seek Christ, if we will find him. I am the bread of life (says
our Savior Christ) Ioh 6. 35.
that came down from heaven. He that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he
that believes in me (not he that seeks to eat my flesh and drink my blood
with his mouth) shall never thirst. So then to come to Christ by faith, and to
believe in him. is so effectual a manner of eating of his flesh, that thereby
it becomes to the faithful receiver an incorruptible food, the virtue
whereof is never consumed. How (says Austine) shall I possess Aug. in Ioh.
tract. 50. and 25.
Christ being now absent? how shall I send up my hand to heaven to take hold
of him sitting there? Send up thy faith, and thou haste possessed him. And
again: Why preparest thou thy teeth, and thy belly? Believe and thou have
eaten. He must fly on high (says Chrysostom) that will come Chrysostom in 1.
Cor. hom. 24.
to this body, yea to heaven it self, or rather above the heavens: for where
the body is, there the Eagles be. And this was the judgment of the whole
church in purer ages, when at the receiving of these holy mysteries, the people
were warned to lift up their hearts, and they Sursum corda.
were to answer, we lift them up unto the Lord. Whereby they were admonished
even at the receiving of this holy sacrament not to seek Christ's body here
below on earth, upon the Lords table under the shows of bread and wine, but
to lift up their hearts to heaven to the Lord of life, that so they might
possess him which is life it self.

Div. 11.
That Christ being placed at the right hand of God is made Lord of heaven and
earth and protector of his church, and not any saint or saints departed.

Christ's sitting at the right hand of God is the dignity and He sits at the
right hand of God. Man. 28. 18. Phil. 2. 11. Act. 2. 36. Apo. 19. 16.
authority whereunto he is advanced, to be as it were Lord governor of heaven
and earth: as himself testifies, All power is given to me in heaven and in
earth. In respect whereof every knee must bow to him, and every tongue
confess, that Jesus is the Lord, yea the Lord of Lords, and king of kings.
Whereby it is evident that he is patron and protector of his church, to rule
it by his spirit, to direct it by his word, to instruct it by his ministers, to
enrich it by his graces, and in the end to give it a full and final conquest
over all her enemies. For it is he that ascending up on high led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, and declared himself Lord of heaven it
self, by pouring down the heavenly treasures of his holy spirit in the shape
of fiery tongues upon his Apostles, whereby they were not only endued with all
celestial Act. 2. 1.
wisdom, and with the knowledge of all tongues, but also furnished with all
other gifts meet for the discharge of so weighty an office. Neither has this
great state of states dispossessed himself of the seat of his kingdom, and
given over the regency of heaven and earth: he has not resigned his office to
any of his servants, nor surrendered his right to any of the saints, nor so much
as granted to any of the^ the advousen or gift of any of his blessings: but he
holds the scepter still in his own hand, reserving all his graces in his
own gift, and keeping them all at his own disposition. For it is he that
still has the keys of David, that opens, and Apoc. 1. 13.
no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens: He walks in the midst of
the seven golden candlestickes, and holds the seven stars in his own right
hand, ordering all things as it likes him best, and as it seems good to his
heavenly wise dome. Against the which royal and sovereign authority of this
our one and only Lord, the church of Rome offends, in that she joins the
blessed Virgin with the rest of the Saints partners with him in these
regalityes, by making them protectours of his church, disposers of his graces,
and defenders of the faithful against their mighty enemies. For unto the
blessed virgin thus they pray: Thou art the sure hope of the miserable, the In
prosa missae de conceptione.
mother of the orphans, the releife of the oppressed, the helper of the
diseased, yea all in all unto all. Neither do they most injuriously make her
CHRIST'S mate and fellow only, as, her their Lady, as well as him their
LORD, and her Queen of heaven, as well as him King: but also in other of
their prayers they place her most blasphemously a commander above him in this
his regal and princely authority: O happy In prosa quae incipit, Mariae
praeconie. Roga patre^. Iube natu^.
childe-vvife purging our sins, by thy motherly autoritye command the
Redeemer. And again, beseech the Father: command the son.

Div. 12.
That Christ's second coming in the flesh is not secret n^ privy, but shall be
open and manifest to al mankind.

THere are two cominges of CHRIST in the flesh mentioned in holy scripture: the
first whereof was in humility, From thence he shall come to judge both the
quick and the dead Zach 9 9. Heb 9. 28.
that by his offringes and death he might work out our redemption, foretold
by the prophet: Behold the king comes unto the meek etc. The second shall
be in glory to judge all flesh. This second coming of CHRIST in the flesh is
put out of his place by the doctrine of the church of Rome, in that she
teaches that in his bodily presence he comes to them continually in the daily
sacrifice of their Mass, and that to be eaten and devoured of the very wicked
and ungodly, that I may say no more. And this coming of CHRIST they will have
to be close, secret and invisible, that the prophecy of our savior might be
fulfilled in them: There shall be Math. 23 24.
(says he) false Christ's and false prophets which shall show signs and
wonders, so that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect:
behold I have told you before; wherefore if they say unto you behold he is
in the desert go not forth: behold he is in the secret places, believe it
not. For as the lightning comes out of the East, and s^neth into the West, so
shall the coming of the son of man be. In which words of our Savior we may
observe these two things: First that the haeretickes of these last times shall
avouch a close and secret coming of Christ, saying, Lee he is here: Lo he is
there. Lo he is really present under the shows of bread and wine, secretly
and covertly here in this corner, where this Mass is said, and there in that:
whereas Christ comes not secretly and covertly now in his flesh, but his
second coming shall be, as the lightning which shines from one end of heaven
to the other. Secondly they shall come with strange signs and lying wonders
to confirm thereby as it is likely, their strange and false doctrine. Now what
heretics of those last times have maintained a secret and an impossible
coming of Christ in the flesh, and have sought also to confirm the same See
Acts and Momuments. Vol. 2. Fol. 1^48.
with such strange signs and lying wonders, but only the dear children of
the church of Rome? Wherefore howsoever these men condemn for Heretics all
such as do any way withstand their corrupt doctrine, yet we may justly charge
them to be the heretics of these last times, and that by the judgment Aug. de
vnitate ecclesi^ c. 11.
of that learned Father Austine. After Christ had spoken these words (says
he) he presently ascended into heaven, thereby forearming us against the
heretics, which in succeeding ages should arise and say, Lo he is there,
whom he has thus warned us not to believe. Neither is there any excuse
remaining for us, if we believe them against the fore-warning of Christ so
clear, plain, and manifest, that there is none so slow and dull of heart,
that can justly say, I understood it not.

CHAP. 5.
That our free will works not together with Gods spirit in our c^version,
unless it be to hinder and cross the same.

WE are al of us originally shapen in wickedness I believe in the holy Ghost.
Psa. 51. 5. Ephesians 2. 3. Ioh. 3 5.
and conceaved in sin by nature the children of wrath and inheritors of
eternal destruction: in so much that unless we be borne again of water and
of the spirit, we cannot see the kingdom of God. And this our first estate and
condition, wherein we are all naturally borne, being termed Genesis 6 5. Ron. 7.
18.
the flesh and the old man, is so wholly evil, and void of al good, that it is
not so much in some part to be amended, as to be clean cast of, mortified, and
killed: and our second estate, being called a second birth and a new creature,
signifies not Col. 3. 5. Ephesians 4 22.
some altering of the corrupt qualities of the soul, but after a sort a full
changing and renewing of the same. In which work of our deliverance we are so
far of by our free will to have any inclination or readiness thereto, that we
hate the light whereby we should be Ioh 3. 20. and 6. 44.
directed, and will not come to our deliverer, except we be drawn; the flesh,
that is, our corrupt nature no way furthering but hindering this work. For it
lusts against the spirit; and the law of the Gal 5. 17. Romans 7 23.
members, eue^ after it is in part subdued in the regenerate, still shiueth
against the law of the mind: the very wisdom of the flesh being enmity with
God, and condemning his heavenly doctrine Romans 8 7. 1. Cor 1. 23 Liberta^sine
gratia non est libertas, seac^tum^cia. Aug. ^p. 89. Job 21 14. P^al. 8 4. Aug.
ad ^nifac. li. 1. ca. 19.
of extreme folly. Moreover we are also by nature so wilfully wedded to our
corrupt will (for liberty without grace is not liberty but co^^macie) that we
will none of the knowledge of the Lords ways: but as the deaf adder we stop
our ears at the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely. And so great
is the obstinacy of the wicked, that they will do wickedly and will not
understand, until the spirit of God of unwilling makes willing, of obstinate
obedient, and of rebellious pliable and tractable. The Philosophers make reason
a queen, and teach that if we would follow her, we should not err: and in
truth the Lord made her a queen at the first, but by yielding unto the
suggestion of the subtle serpent, and by casting of the Lords commandment, of
a queen she became a captive, and of a free woman she was made a slave. The
means to be recovered out of the which misery, is not to have an high conceit
of our reason and wisdom, and to place them in the throne to rule and to
govern, but to place that word which is inspired of God in the seat of
government, and to give up all rule and authority thereto: and to make our
reason and understanding with all the faculties and powers of our minds,
handmaides and servants to this honorable Lady, who so will make us again
kings and priests unto God, and place us as Lords over al our corrupt
affections, and tread Satan himself under our feet. For he that made man at
the first, is only able to new make him again, being now marred by his own
madness. I know (says the wise man) that God made man Eccl. 7. 31.
righteous, but they have sought many inventions: yea God made man according to
his own image in all holiness, wisdom, and righteousness, and lighted such a
lamp of divine reason and understanding in his mind, that he was not only
enabled thereby to rule himself and his own affections, but also to order in
great wisdom the whole host and army of all the creatures. But he being not
contented with this so great measure of light, would further become as God
knowing good and evil: and therefore thinking that his light did burn too
dim, he would needs deliver it to the Devil himself to be topped, who
topped it clean out, leaving nothing but the smoking snuff thereof, and so
made him, who was before a child of light, a limb and member of the kingdom
of darkness. And now the case of all the children of Adam is such, and so full of
blindness and ignorance of God, that if any of Sap 13. 1. 1. Cor. 8. 2.
them thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to
know: and if any of them seem to be wise, they must become fools that they
may be wise: that is, they must acknowledge and bewail their 1 Cor 3. 18
own folly and blindness, and seek again to the father of light, that he
would by his spirit of illumination lighten the eyes of their spiritual
understanding; they must have continual access to that glorious word, which
is a lantern to their feet, and a light to their Ps. 119. 105 Isa. 6. 20.
paths, and kindle their candle again thereat: to the law and to the
testimony they must continually resort, if they speak not according to this
word, it is for that there is no light in them. Their heart is altogether out of
frame until it be fashioned again, and as it were new wrought by the spirit
of God: their silver is nothing but gros^e dros^e, until it be purged by this
fire: their coin is no better then clean counterfeit, until it receive this
stamp: they are grown out of the Lords mark, he cannot acknowledge the^ for
his own, until they be marked again by the spirit of the living God, who is
therefore called his seal, wherewith his saints are Ephesians 4. ^0. Apoc. 7. 3
signed against the day of redemption, for that it does imprint in them the
image of God. And certainly in this article of our creed the spirit of God,
the third person in the glorious Trinity, is called holy, not so much for that
holiness does infinitely rest in himself, as it does also in the Father and the
son, but rather for that he is the a^or of all holiness in the children of
God, and the means whereby they are borne again, the Father and the son
working the same by the holy spirit. For the whole sanctification of our
mind, will, and affections and of our whole body and soul, is wrought entirely
1. Cor. 12. 11.
(and altogether by the operation of this holy spirit: who before regeneration
works in us alone, and of unwilling makes willing, subduing our affections
to the obedience of his will, who before stood out as traitors and rebels: and
after regeneration works Gr^tia opera^, coopera^. 2 Cor. 3 17 Ioh 8. 34. R^m
6. 16. (...) and 5.
together with us, giving strength to our will, that it may thereby work also.
So that if the question be of free will in the regenerate, we grant that
their vvil is free, for that it is made free by the spirit of liberty but in
the unregenerate we truly teach, that their vvil is a bondslaue to sin and
Satan, withstanding the work of Gods spirit, until their conversion be
wrought thereby. For it is this Lord that does prevent us, of unwilling
making us willing; and then assisteth us when we are vvilling, least we vvil
in vain. Now contrary to this most evident truth, the church of Rome curses
al those, who affirm free-vvil to be altogether lost, or that it does not
concur with God^ grace in our conversion.

CHAP. 6. Div. 1.
That the true church the spouse of Christ has a steadfast assurance of the ^ue
of her bridegroom toward her, making it the foundation of her most
comfortable faith: being also thereby induced to harken to his undoubted and
known will, and to esteem highly of of his holy word, and in no case to
disgrace or disanull the same.

THE description of the true catholic and I bele^ue t^ holy catholic church.
apostolic faith set down in these articles of our christian creed does
evidently declare, that they are only to be accounted faithful that hold this
faith: and the company of the faithful being the true church, that they are
also to be esteemed the true Church. Now this true catholic and apostolic
faith (as has been before declared) is, that we believe in God the Father the
Creator, the Son the Redeemer, and the holy Ghost the Sactifier: and that we
believe also that by this faith we being engr^ed in to Christ and so reconciled
unto God, (...) incorporated into the heavenly Jerusalem, and made members of
the holy catholic church, and a communion of sain^s, and so obtain remission
of sins, and shall attain to the resurrection of the body, and ^o li^e
everlasting, as the very order and coherence of these articles does also
insinuate. The Devils themselves and many also of the r^proba^e believe the
mystery of the Trinity, and the truth of the doctrine concerning the works of
the creation, redemption, and s^ctification, but they look for ^o benefit to
redounde to themselves by the fame, therefore they believe and tremble being
excluded from all hope. But this true catholic faith teaches the faithful so
to believe the doctrine concerning God and his works, that they believe also
in particular that the benefit thereof belongs to themselves being already
received into the household of faith, and made members of the holy catholic
church. For otherwise then by this faithful persuasion how could they be
induced to believe in God, and to place their assured hope and confidence in
him? For to believe that God is a father, redeemer, and sanctifier to other,
and to doubt whether he be such a one to me also, were but a cold comfort, and
a very faint and feeble motive to induce me to believe in God, to devote my
self to his service, and to associate my self to his church. Wherefore it is
not to be doubted but that the lively members of the holy catholic church
having an holy assurance of the grace and favor of God toward themselves,
and being resolved that he is now become their loving father in Christ, and
has cast all their sins into the bottom of the sea, do thereby believe and
rejoice in Gods mercies, and so grow daily by little and little into a steadfast
and a^ assured persuasion of their full and final glorification.

But the church of Rome teaches her children not to seek for any assurance in
particular of the favor of God, and of the remission of their sins by the
death of Christ, but still to doubt and to be in suspense thereof, and so by
keeping them from the true faith, excludes them out of the number of the
faithful, and so by consequent out of the true church. Whereas the true church
the spouse of Christ, having a steadfast assurance of the love of her
bridegroom, is thereby induced not only to trust confidently in him, and to
love him again, but also to testify the same by harkening most reverently
unto his undoubted will, and resting her self only upon his most sure word,
and yielding all ^ Pet. 1. 19.
obedience to the same. And hereof it is that this true church is sometime
called Gods feilde, wherein the most pure seed of his Math. 13. 3.
holy word is sown, and not the darnell and cockell of men's inventions:
sometime his sold wherein are his sheep which harken only Ioh 10 5.
to the voice of their shepherd, and not to the voice of a stranger:
sometimes Gods family and household, wherein he rules alone, all authority Ephesians
2. 19.
of commanding being yielded to him: sometime the mother of the faithful
having her children begotten by the immortal seed of the word of God, and
nurced also by the sincere milk thereof drawn out of her two breasts, which
are the old and the new testament. Lastly Aug in ep. Ioh. tract. 3. Apoc. 8.
20.
she is called a golden candlestick, for that she rests not on her own
light, but holds out the candle of the word of God to al such as are of his
family and household, to direct them thereby in the ways of the Lord, and to
detect unto them all stumbling blocks and by paths, which might cause them
either to stumble or fall, or else to wander out of the right way. And the
very name (...) that is, a convocation or congregation, does signify a
company wakened by the shrill call of the voice of a crier out of the drowsy
sleep of ignorance and sin, and employed in the works and the ways of
piety and godliness. By all which appellations is signified that the true church
has her children begotten only of the immortal seed of the word of God, and
nourished with the sincere milk of the same; directed by the light thereof,
and always ruled by that authority, wakened thereby when they fall a sleep,
and reclaimed when they begin to wander, and made fruitful also to all good
works.

Now the church of Rome has her children begotten also of the corruptible
seed of men's traditions, and ruled by her own decrees and decretals: for she
will not have them harken only to the voice of the true shephearde uttered in
the sacred scriptures, nor to be obedient to the commandment of the master of
the family only therein contained, nor to be guided by the candle only of
that undoubted will of God: she deemeth that food to be to hard meat for
them, and therefore she sets before them the festivityes of her golden
legend, so causing the prophecy of the Apostle to be fulfilled, who said that
the time should come, that men should turn away their ears from the truth
and 2. Tim 44.
should be turned unto fables. Moreover she adds to the Canonical
scriptures the books Apocrypha, and her unwritten verities to the written
word: and whereas the holy scripture is profitable after so sufficient a manner
to teach that the faithful christian the man of 2. Tim. 3. 17
God may thereby be made absolute and perfect, she denies this sufficiency
and perfection thereof: and whereas the spirit of truth calls this word a
light, she calls it dark: and whereas he avoucheth it to be easy to him
that will understand, she charge it to be an obscure and hidden doctrine even
to the Lords own chosen and peculiar people: yea whereas our blessed Savior
the very wisdom of God speaking to the multitude commands them to search
the scriptures, yet she very flatly forbids the same. Ioh. 5 39.
Where by it is evident that seeing she thus disgraceth the holy scriptures
inspired of God that undoubted word of the bridegroom, and his last will and
testament sealed with his own blood (calling light darkness, and darkness
light) and harkeneth not wholly ^sa. 5. 20.
to his decrees therein contained, neither suffers him to strike the stroke
and only to rule therewith in his own family, repealing and disanulling his
direct co^mandeme^ts; that therefore she is not to be esteemed, the chaste and
faithful spouse of Christ, but a cursed harlot and a faithles adulteress. The
which thing that it may more evidently appear, I will here set down sixteen
distinct and direct oppositions between the true church and the false,
between the faithful servantes of Christ, and the Sinagogue of Satan the
limbs of Antichrist.

Opposite. 1.
The faithful especially under the reign of Antichrist fly only to the
scriptures as to the only sufficient judge for the deciding of all
controversies, and that according unto the precise commandment of Christ and
the ensample of his faithful servantes: whereas seducing and seduced heretics
take away this key of knowledge, and shut the gates against the truth, not
only defaming the faithful for the study of holy scripture, but also
disgracing those most holy books themselves for that their erroures are in
them reproved, and adding also unto them their unwritten verities, and their
wilworshippes of their own devising.

IN doubts and controversies of Christian religion the spirit of God sends us
neither to the Bishop of Rome, neither to any other Bishop or Bishops, nor yet
to Councels, nor to any inter pretou^s to rest our faith upon their
resolutions, but rather wills us to try the spirits whether they be of God
or no, and no further 1. Ioh. 4. 1. Aug cont. ^rescon. l 2. cap 31.
to believe them, then they bring warrant for their doctrine out of the holy
Canonical scripture. For not without cause (as Austine says) was the
ecclesiasticali Canon ordained with most wholesome vigilance, unto the which
certain books of the prophets and Apostles do appertain, whom in no case
we dare to judge, and by whom we may freely judge of the other writings
of believers and infidels. For should not a people enquire of their GOD? To
the law Isa. 8 19 o^ Opta. l. 5. ad Part.
(says Esaias) and to the testimony? In earth (says Optatus) there can be no
judgment of this matter, we must seek^ for a judge from heaven: but why
knock we at heaven, when we have his will here in the Gospel. Then the
Pope by the judgment of Optatus is no competent judge, nor any other Bishop
or Bishops here on earth; for that either they be ignorant in the cause, or
else partial or given to sides; but only GOD himself in his Canonical
scriptures. And verily for such as will not admit of GOD to be their judge,
where shall we find a competent judge? Surely our Savior Christ, when
controversy was between him and the Pharisees concerning the truth of his
doctrine, appealeth not to any interpreter, but to the judgment and sentence of
God in the scriptures: Search Ioh. 5. 39.
the scriptures (says he) for in them ye think to have life, and they are
they which testify of me. Let the divine scripture (says Basile) be asked
Bas. in ep. ^a Eust.
concerning these things, and let the decision of truth proceed altogether
from it. I beseech you (says Chrysostom) let us set aside what seems Chrysostom.
hom. 13. in 1. Ep. ad Cor.
to him, or to him, and let us seek for all these things out of the
scriptures. The writings (says Constantine) of the Evangelistes and Apostles,
and the oracles of the ancient prophets do instruct us plainly what Trip.
hist. l. 2. Cap. 5.
we ought to understand and believe of Gods pleasure. And therefore all
contention set apart, let us seek the solution of these things that be
propounded out of the scripiures of God. When ye shall see (says the author
Op. imper^ in Math. hom. 49.
of the imperfect work upon Matthew) wicked heresy, which is the army of
Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the church, then they that are in
Jury let them fly to the mountains, that is, they which are in christianity
let them betake themselves to the scriptures. And a little after. Why does he
command all christians to betake themselves then to the scriptures? Because
since the time that heresies have possessed the churches there can be no proof
of sound christianity, nor any other refuge of Christians that vvoulde know
the true faith, but the divine scriptures. And again, The LORD knovving that
in the last days there would be such a confusion of things did therefore
command that the christians then living being desirous to hold the sincerity
of the true faith should retire to nothing but to the scriptures. For otherwise
(says he) if they rest on any thing else, they shall stumble and perish, and
not come to know the true church, but shall fall into the abomination of
desolation which stands in the holy places of the church.

And so verily has this prophecy been fulfilled in all the members of the
church of Rome, who are now fallen into the abominatio^ of desolation standing
in the holy places of the church, embracing Antichrist in steed of Christ, for
that they refused to to be directed only by the divine scriptures which are
only able to stay us upright, and to preserve us from all errors and heresies
2. Tim. 3. 15.
and from all the power of the kingdom of darkness. As on the other side the
sincere embracers of the Gospel of Christ have hereby been preserved from the
snares of Antichrist, in that according to the prophecy of S. Jerome they have
fled to the mountains of the scriptures, and have made them their place of
refuge. Hi^onymus in Nahum Cap. 3.
Before (says he) the coming of the Messiah etc. the people shall be ra^sed up
and shall prophecy, who before under their masters were lulled asleep: and
they shall go to the mountains of the scriptures, and shall find there Moses
and Iosuah the son of Nun, the mountains the prophets, the mountains the
Apostles and Evangelistes; and when any slieth to these mountains, and is
occupied in the read^ng of the same, albeit he find none to teach him, yet
his care shall be approved, ^hr that he did fly unto the mountains.
Contrarily (as Chrysostom Op. imp. in Matt. hom. 44. Luc. 11. 52.
says) Hareticall Priests shut up the gates of truth (taking away with the
Pharesies the key of knowledge) for they are assured if truth be once known,
their church will soon be forsaken, and themselves thrown down from their
priestly dignity In evangelio regni. ca. 23. and 33. Scriptura rij.
to be esteemed no better of then other men. Henry Nicholas master of the
family of Love glories in the name of Unlearned, and in a scoff terms the
learned in the scriptures scripture-vvise or scripture-men warning his scholars
to be ware of such: whereas he and his like should soon have been descried in
former ages, Lucifugae scripturaru^. Tert. de resur.
and noted in their faces with a black coal, if it had once appeared, that
they shunned the light of the sacred scripture. For it is not the conference of
the scriptures that is the path-vvaie to haeresie, but the ignorance of those
holy writings. Ye err (^aith our Savior the teacher of truth to the
seduced Sadduces) not knovving the scriptures: out of whom there most
sufficiently Mat. 22. 29. Chry. hom 3 de Lazaro.
he confuteth their heresy. So Chrysostom: the ignorance of the scripture
has bredde haeresies, and has brought in a corrupt life, and has turned all
vpside down. And therefore they are impudent and shamles haeretikes who
when they are reproved out of the scriptures, set themselves (as Irenaeus
says) to Iren. l. 3. cap. 2.
reprove the scriptures, as if they were not right, and that they are uttered
ambiguously, and that the truth cannot be learned out of them by such as know
not tradition. For if GOD be faithful Bas. in asce^. sermon. de fi^e.
in all his works (as Basil says) then it is a manifest falling away from
the faith, and a note of pride, either to reject any of those things which
are written in the Lords books, or to bring in any things which are not
written, but are either received by tradition from other, or else are sucked
out of our own brains: yea that is the vilest (as Austine says) and the
basest kind of Aug. de ve^ rarel. ca. 38.
Idolatry when men vvorshippe GOD after their own fancies, observing that
for a religion, which their deceiving and swelling minds imagine. Nay, it is
no less an offense to frame God after our own Hill. in. Ps. 1.
fancy, then to deny him. And therefore it is not without cause that Saint
Austine is so bold to say, that if any one concerning any Aug. co^t lit.
Petil. l. 3^. 6.
thing whatsoever which does belong to our faith, and our life, albeit he be
an Angel from heaven, shall ^each you any thing besides that which ye have
learned out of the scriptures of the law and Gospel, let him be accursed.
Wherefore the church of Rome in that she restrains the people from the
reading of the scriptures, disgracing those holy and heavenly books, and
reproaching such as are studious of the same, denying also the sufficiency of
the doctrine therein contained, and adding thereto her unwritten verities, and
her vvil-vvorshippes of her own devising, is most justly charged to have
fallen from the faith, and to have sorted her self both with old and nevve
haeretikes, to have spotted her self with the vilest and b^st kind of
idolatry, and with the denial of the true GOD, and therefore to be held for a
cursed company, and for the Congregation of the malignant.

Opposite. 2.
Dumb and dead images are blind and wrong guides, which turn us out of the
way of truth and verity: but the writings of the Apostles and prophets are sure
guides, and un erring teachers, appointed by God to be our instructers, and to
set before our eyes, and after a sort to painte out unto us in most lively
colors all those things which concern the true worship of God, and the
salvation of our own souls.

IMages are teachers of lies, especially such as are made to represent Hab 2.
18. Ier. 10 8. Aug. de ^iv. Dei l 4. c. 31 Idem de co^sens. Ev^ng. lib. 1. ca.
10. Lact instit. lib. 2. ca. 19.
the sacred Trinity which cannot be represented, for that it is invisible and
incomprensible. And therefore al such images do both diminish the fear of the
divine majesty, and also teach errors concerning the same. Wherefore they
have deserved to err who have sought CHRIST not in the sacred hooks, but on
painted wales: and may vvorthily be judged to have no religion at all, or at
the least no sound and sincere religion. For all sound and sincere religion is
to be learned, not of dumb and mute images, but out of the canonical and
sacred scriptures, which Romans 15. 4.
were not only written by the appointment of god that they might be our
instructers and teachers, but also were so penned by the direction of his
Spirit, that they are very profitable and availeable thereunto: yea they are
so profitable to this purpose that they are able to fence us against all
corruptions both in doctrine and 2. Tim 3 15 and 16.
manners, and to make us wise unto salvation through faith in Christ. For in
them are most lively drawn out the true images of a sound faith, and of an
holy and a godly life, unto the which if we will compare the counterfeites of
the same drawn out by men, we shall easily be able to give a true judgment
thereof. O foolish Galathians (says the Apostle) who has bewitched Gal. 3. 1.
you, that ye should not obey the truth, to whom Jesus Christ was before
your eyes painted, and even crucified among you? And in deed Christ is best
painted out before the eyes of the people by the doctrine of his painful
pastors and teachers, and not by the pensile of the artificial painters. Such
a faithful teacher was John Hus, of whom it is recorded that having
painefully taught in his church called Bethlehem the gospel of Christ, dreamed
a little before his death, that he had drawn out there diverse goodly images,
the which being defaced by the limbs of Antichrist, he further dreamed that
he saw the same more lively drawn out again by better painters, whereby
was fore-signified the preaching of the learned and godly preachers of these
last times. And verily where the dignity and power of Christ's death is
sufficiently set out by painful preaching, there is no need of painting it
in pictures and images made and framed by artificial painters. It was the
Devils work to cause that kind of teaching to cease, which was made the
means ordained by God both to convert the infidels, and also to confirm the
faithful in the truth of the gospel, and to bring them out of the kingdom of
darkness into the kingdom of light; that he might bring in his kingdom of
darkness by the corrupt teaching of blind and dumb Images. Wherefore
seeing that the church of Rome allows still of these her lay men's books
which the prophets call teachers of lies, and will not have all truth to be
learned only out of the book of books the book of truth, no mervaile that
she has so shamefully embraced lies, and so fowly fallen away from the truth.

Opposite. 3.
The doctrine taught and penned by the prophets and Apostles has no need of
any nevve miracles, seeing it is sufficiently confirmed already by old: but
the Turks Alcharon and the Popes Decretals have need to be confirmed with
new miracles, for they contain new doctrine.

Our faith is never so honorable, nor GOD so well pleased with us, as when we
seek no signs for the confirmation thereof: when the word of God has such a
persuasion in our hearts, and we have so deeply tasted of the sweetness thereof,
that we are ready to say to al miracles, Get you hence. Blessed were they
when miracles were in use, that by miracles were brought to embrace the true
faith: but more blessed are they that embrace faith for it self, and not for
that it is testified by miracles. {Blessed no doubt was Thomas, for that he
saw, and believed: ^h. 20. 29. ^ Cor. 1. 22 ^ Cor. 14. ^.
but blessed are they (rather) which see not, and yet believe. The unbelieving
Jews sought for a sign, and had also in admiration strange tongues, which
were appointed for unbelievers to convert them to the faith: they that are
already converted have no need of the same. When they were offered of God he
shevved his compassion on man's infirmity: now he has taken them away, he
shows greater mercy in that he strongtheneth our faith without them. And
verily if the word it self being now acknowledged to be the word of God,
be not able to win credit to the doctrine therein contained, neither will
we believe though one rose from the dead. Signs ^uk. 16 31. ^ar. 16. 20.
^eb. 2. 4.
wrought by divine power were divine witnesses to give testimony to the
doctrine that it was divine: now the doctrine is received as a divine
doctrine, what need is there of witnesses still to testify the same? He is a
monster (says Austine) that as Aug. de civ. Dei l. 22. c. 8
yet seeks for a miracle. The doctrine in truth of Antichrist and of all
false prophets has need of new miracles, because their doctrine is strange
and new: and the Devil (as the spirit of Mat 24 24. ^. Thessalonians 2. 9 ^hrys. in
Mat. hom. ^9.
Christ has foretold) shall be ready to furnish them with great variety
thereof, that so he may prevail the more by them and lead the greater number
thereby into error. Wherefore in that the church of Rome boasts greatly of
her miracles, and takes exception against our doctrine for want thereof,
thereby she betrayeth her infidelity, and bewrays her self not to be the
church of Christ, but the very seat of the great Antichrist.

Opposite. 4.
The faithful servauntes of Christ by the preaching of the word of God having
their secret sins dis^layed and their consciences touched to the quick, and
feeling in their hearts the divine power and majesty, purity and perfection
thereof lightning their minds, sanctifying their affections, and converting
their souls do fall down (as the Apostle says) and worship God, and say,
that God is in you of a truth, acknowledging the preachers of that word to be
Gods ministers, and 1. Cor 14. 25.
the word it self to be Gods word, whereof they have so good proof and so
sufficient warrant in their own hearts: whereas faithless hypocrites having
felt within them no such divine power of Gods heavenly word, do not believe
it to be the word of God, for the words sake it self, but for the outward
testimony and witness of the church.

THE mighty and powerful word of Christ is the scepter of Heb. 1. 8. and 4.
12. Isa. 11. 4. Apo 19. 15.
his kingdom whereby he rules and reigns in the hearts of his loyal and
obedient subjects: and the most sharp sword whereby he subdueth and utterly
destroys all his enimes. By it he beats down, in the hearts of his
chosen, infidelity, Idolatry, pride, and unthankfulness, and whatsoever lifts
up it self against God: and planteth faith, piety, humility, and an hearty
desire of sincere obedience and thankefulnes unto God. In this word being laid
open the infinite and inestimable dignity of the sufferings and death of
Christ, whereby full reconciliation is obtained with God, and satisfaction made
for sin to the uttermost, and a perfect purchase made of the kingdom of
heaven, how are the faithful encouraged with full assurance of faith to come
unto God, and to place their whole trust and confidence in him? As by the
dreadful denunciations of Gods wrath against all iniquity and sin set down
in this word, especially by that severe execution of the justice of God in the
death of Christ, in whom the sins of all the elect were so severely punished,
that in unspeakable mercy they might be most freely pardoned unto themselves,
how are the faithful touched to the quick, pricked at the very hearts, humbled
and after a sort cast down into hell, that they might be lifted up again by
the Lords mercy, and taste and see how gracious the Lord is? So like wise when
the infinite wisdom, equity, justice, righteousness, integrity, purity,
sanctity, vprightnes which is in every one of the commandments of God is
made known in some measure to every of the faithful, how does it win all
his affections to the love of this law, and cause him to lay it up fast in his
heart as a most precious and invaluable treasure? O the^ (says he with the
prophet David) the law of the Lord is an undefiled law, (...). 19.
converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom
unto the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the
commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes: the fear of
the Lord is clean, and indureth for ever, the judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether: And more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold, sweeter also then the honey and the honey comb. The Samarita^s who at the
first were induced to believe in Christ (upon the testimony of the woman which
said unto the^, come and see a man, which has told me all whatsoever I did: is
not he the very Christ?) when they had heard the^selue, the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth, and had felt in their hearts the power of his
doctrine, the^ they said to the woman that first brought the^ to Christ: Now we
do not believe for thy words, for we have heard him our selves, and ^h. 4. ^om
13. ^ug. Conses. ^ib 8. ^ap. 12.
do believe that he is the very Christ. So Austin when he was a co^te^tious and
carnal Manichee would not believe the gospel but for the testimony of the
church: but when by the divine oracle being admonished to take the book of God
into his hands, and to read therein, he had read: Let us walk honestly as in
the daytime, not in gluttony and drunkenness, nor in chambering and wantonness,
nor in strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it: this did seem so holy, heavenly,
and divine a doctrine unto him, and such an admiration and alteration it
wrought in his heart, that the^ no doubt he did not believe for the bare outward
testimony of the church, but for the divine fruit, virtue, power, and purity
of the divine word of God, that he himself had felt in his own heart.
Wherefore in that the children of the church of Rome do teach and avouch that
they do not, nay cannot believe the divine scripture to be the word of GOD,
but for the testimony of the church, it is manifest that they have not felt the
divine power thereof in their hearts, nor have been translated thereby out of
the slavery of Satan into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Opposite. 5.
The mighty and speedy prevailing of the Gospel of Christ, both at the first
publication thereof by the Apostles of Christ, and also at the renovation of
the same in these last days, and that without any earthly helps or
furtherances, yea maugre the malice and spite of the Devil, who set all the
power and policy of the world with might and maine to suppress and to root
out the same, declares the great ^fficacy of this most mighty truth, which
thus has hitherto, and will still prevail.

IT is a thing worthy to be observed, that the mystery of iniquity 2. These. 2. 7
began even in the Apostles times, creeping in by little and little, being
long in working before it came to the full. So that albeit the spouse of Christ
remained a pure virgin whiles the Apostles Eusebius. l. 3. Cap 32. Niceph. l. 3.
Cap 16.
lived, yet as soon as they were dead, she began to be corrupted, and wicked
erroures began then not only to be sown, but also to take root in the
Lords field. The which erroures albeit they were sometimes withstoode, and
for a time repressed by the learned and religious fathers that lived in those
days, yet being countenanced out by the blind zeal and superstitious
devotion of the multitude, and by the cunning plots and policies of their
autors and abettors, at the length began to be received for catholic: as it
may in particular more evidently appear by the historical observation of the
rising, increasing and growing to the full of that one presumptuous heresy of
their Papal supremacy, Whereas the strange and wonderful prevailing of the
gospel of Christ as at the first publishing thereof by the Apostles
themselves, even so at the renevvinge of the same in these last times (albeit
it was vvithstoode with all the learning of the great Rabbyes and Doctors
through out all nations, and persecuted by the sword of such as were in
authority, and defamed also with all manner of shameful and ignominious
reports) does manifestly declare that it is the most powerful doctrine of the
almighty ^b 4. ^4 ^ Esd. 4. 4^.
GOD, and that strong and puissant truth that must prevail: according as it
was most lively set forth in the prophecy of Daniell by the little stone cut
out without hands, which ^n. 2. 34.
brake that goodly and glorious image in pieces, and became it self a great
mountain, so that it filled the whole earth, wherefore if quick and speedy
prevailing be an argument of the miraculous power of God giving thereby
testimony unto the truth, according unto Augustines opinion, and Bellarmines
also, then is the doctrine (...). 22. de (...) dei c. 5.
of such as embrace the gospel the very truth, and the doctrine of Popery a
fardell of lies, for that the one prevailed with speed, and the other crept in
by little and little.

Opposite. 6.
The powerful truth of the gospel breaks of all familiar use with the
Devil, and stops the course of his Satanicall illusions, which have great
forth in his kingdom of darkness, he being very familiar with his
familiars.

IN the night, Lions, Bears, and other savage beasts with the venomous
serpents do bestirre themselves seeking their pray, but when the day
appears they hide themselves in their dens and holes, and so man has the
safer passage to betake himself to his labor: even so in the night of
ignorance and error the roaring Lion, red Dragon, and subtle Serpent
bears the sway, and the spirits of darkness mightily bestirre themselves
to establish and strengthen their kingdom of darkness; but when the light
of the gospel begins to break forth, and the day star of righteousness
once arises, then the powers of the kingdom of darkness are shaken, and the
captains thereof put to flight. For Satan is no way able to vvithstande
Christ, Dagon cannot stand before the arc, nor superstition endure the
strength and power of true religion. So that where the truth opens her
mouth and teaches, there the Devil is driven out of the chair and put to
silence. When CHRIST sent forth his seventy disciples to preach the gospel
unto the Jews he testifies of the effect thereof saying: Lo I savve Satan
lik^ Luk 10. 18.
lightning fall down from heaven: So when the Apostles went forth to preach
the gospel to every creature, the oracles of the Devil were stricken dumb,
and his common apparitions restrained, and he was bound for a thousand
years. Likewise Apoc 2. 1.
when Paul had preached two years at Ephesus, the word of Act. 19 19.
GOD so mightily grew and prevailed, that many that used curious arts,
brought their books and burned them before all men. After the same manner
when the gospel began to be preached again in these last days, the
apparition of spirits has ceased, and the art of coniuring has decayed,
which was so common in former ages under the popish kingdom, that the books
of that black science lay open in some libraries publicly to be read, and
the mysteries thereof were almost known, and practiced also of every priest
that was but meanly learned. And what ordinary apparitions of spirits then
were, what familiarity with Robin-good-fellovve, the Faires, and the like, all
old men's and women's tongues can yet testify sufficiently. Whereby it is
evident that it was the truth of God, that was first taught by the Apostles
amongst the Gentiles, and now renewed again in these last days: and that
both Gentilisme and Papisme are the very proppes and pillars of the Devils
kingdom, and the professors thereof his great familiars and friends.

Opposite. 7.
The faithful have their fierce and furious affections cooled and softened by
the Lords most meek spirit and mild word, and of tigers, bears, and wolves
are turned into doves, lambs, and sheep: but the unfaithful delight in
cruelty and blood.

When the Samaritans refused to entertain Christ; James, and John said unto
him, Lord, will thou that we command Luke 9 54.
fire to come down from heaven to consume them, as did Elias? but Jesus
rebuked them saying, ye know not of what spirit ye are: for the son of man
came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And the wisdom that is from
above (even from the spirit of wisdom) is first pure, ^ac. 3. 17.
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, etc. yea so full
of mercy, that it mooveth the righteous to show mercy to his very Pro. 12. 10.
beast, whereas the very bowels of the wicked are cruel. And therefore as
Solomon discerned the true mother from the false, for that she chose rather to
loose her dear child, then that her child should ^ King. 3. ^3.
loose his life: so may we discern the church the true mother of the
faithful, from the false church their cruel and hard hearted stepmother. For
in that the church of Rome, when she ruled the sword among us, spared neither
age, sex, nor calling, but brought al to the fire that defied her impieties,
yea many also that relented from the truth, and consented with her in her
Idolatries, as it is to be seen in diverse places of the Acts and Monumentes
of the church of England: and in that her associats yet for all this, yea for
all their deep and dangerous conspiracies and treasons so often attempted
against our Prince and country, enjoy both life and liberty also among us, all
that have eyes may easily discern, who resemble the savage and blood ^hirsty
wolves, and who the mild and meek sheep: who the tigerlike and hardhearted
stepmother, and who the natural and kind mother of the faithful: who the
cruel and merciless whore of Babylon embrued with the blood of the Lords
saints, and who the ^po. 18 24.
merciful spouse of Christ, that cries to God for the pardon of her most
grievous and cruel persecutors. ^ct. 7. 60.


Opposite. 8.
The sting of conscience, which some have felt, which were either persecutors
or revolters from the gospel of Christ, is a manifest demonstration of the
impregnable power of the gospel of Christ which cannot be vanquished, and of
the light thereof, which cannot be put out.

THe extraordinary judgments of God, and especially the Sea Acts and Momuments
vol. 2. fol. 1902.
gnawing worm that has been felt* not only in the guilty consciences of
some of the great persecutors of the gospel of Christ, but also of some that
have been revolters from the same, for some worldly, carnal, and earthly
respects, both in the Primitive church and in these later ages also, does
manifestly co^vince, that this doctrine of the gospel proceeds from the Romans
2. 16. 2 King. 10. 10 Math 5 18.
judge of all flesh, and shall condemn all the condemners thereof; yea that in
the end it shall force themselves to pronounce the sentence of just
condemnation against their own souls. Whereas no such examples may truly be
found among those, which either by their authority have restrained, or by the
^ight of the truth have been reclaimed from their popish heresies.

Opposite. 9.
True religion teaches the faithful to devote themselves to the worship of
one true, and all sufficient God, and not to give religious worship to any
creature.

THe worship of God is called Religion, for that it does relige Aug. de vera
rel ca. 54. Idem de co^s^n. Evang. li. 1. cap. 18.
and bind us to one GOD. And therefore the Roma^es, who received into their
Panthcon the Gods of all the nations whom they subdued to their Empire, having
subdued the Jews refused their GOD, being the true and only God, for that
they understood that he vvoulde be worshipped alone, or not at all. What
religion then is that which does not teach to worship God alone, but to
worship with religious worship saints and angels also, ye their dead and
senseless images? Verily S. Austine avoucheth, ^g. Ep. 44.
that no dead person is worshipped of Catholic christians. Wherefore the Romish
religion is not catholic, nay it is not to be counted religion at al, for that
it does not bind us to one God only, but wills us to give religious
worship to dead creatures also.

Opposite. 10.
The true worship and service of God is not clogged with a number of outward
ceremonies and bodily observations, but consists in a pure and sincere
spirit: Neither is it bettered more by one place, then by another.

THe hour comes (says our Savior Christ) and now is, when (...). 4. 23.
ye shall neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the father, but
the true worshippers shall worship him in spirit and truth, for the father
requires such to worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worsh^ppe him,
must worship him in spirit and truth. And therefore when the church began
to decline from the spiritual worship and service of God, and to corrupt
the same with a multitude of ceremonies, it was no small grief to the godly
that then lived, as it it may appear by the complainte that Saint Austine made
to Ianuarius. For bodily exercise (even when it is ^ Tim. 4. 8.
best used) profits little, it is godliness that is profitable to all things,
and has the promises both of this life and of the life to come. And (as the
same Apostle testifies) the kingdom of God consists not in meat and ^om.
14. 17
drink (nor in any outward or bodily observation) but in righteousness, peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost: and he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of men. Now ^on vox (...) votum. ^acra auru^
^n requi^nt. ^gnei sacer^tes and au^i calices.
this principal kind of serving of Christ in spirit and truth, which is most
acceptable to God and most approved of all good men, is willed to stand aside
by the church of Rome: for she will have her most goodly and solemn service of
God, and that upon her greatest feasts to consist in all manner of melodious
music, in singing, quavering, and orgaine playing, in glistring copes, and
sumptuous vestimentes, in creeping to the cross, and kissing the pax, and in
bowing and bending to dumb images, in long prayers mumbled up without
understanding in a strange tongue and nu^bred upon beads, in wearing this
attire and that attire, in going bare-foote, in sackcloth, and woll-ward, in
abstaining from these and these kind of meats, and in an infinite number of
the like bodily exercises. Wherein she plays like some wanton children and
lustful women, which feed so long upon earth, or ashes, or some other like
trash, until their stomakes loath all manner of good and wholesome
nourishmentes. But these are naught also but false appetites and unnatural
lusts, tending in the one to the corruption of their bodies, and in the other
to the destruction of their souls. Moreover whereas our Savior Christ has in
plain words avouched that the true worshippers of God shall not worship at
Jerusalem; the church of Rome that she may either show her self to be
contrary to Christ, or else her children not to be the true worshippers of
God, sends the^ on pilgrimage to Jerusalem there to worship, esteeming that
to be a chief point of high devotion: yea she has caused not only great
treasures, but also much christian blood to have been wasted for the recovery
of that country out of the infidels hands, calling it still the holy land,
albeit the Lord long since has rejected and defied it, and has as it were
spit in the very face of it, and has polluted it with his extraordinary
plagues, because of that cursed peoples extraordinary sins. And seeing that
the name of a Jew has long since been a name of reproach and detestation,
even an abhorred and an accursed name, why is not the name of Jury also to be
had in the like curse and execration? Surely the Lord himself (as the
Evangelists do testify) has had it Math. 24. 15 Luc. 21. 20.
in extreme detestation, and set therein the abomination of desolation, that
is (as S. Luke expounds the same) a fierce army making utter desolation,
which testifi^d that the Lord had utterly abhorred it, and had made the most
dreadful destruction thereof to be a witness of the same. And therefore it is
the duty of Monks (as Bernard says) to go on pilgrimage not toward the
earthly but the heavenly Jerusalem, and that not with their feet, but with
Bern. Ep. 319.
their affections. For with pure and sanctified affections we draw ^igh to God,
and to the holy and heavenly Jerusalem.

Opposite. 11.
The faithful are in heavines through manifold tribulations if need require:
which is, when either God himself afflicts them to try ^ Pet. 1. 6.
their obedience and patience, and to humble them for their manifold
infirmities and sins; or when Tyrants persecute them for their most holy
faith. But as for all voluntary tortures and torments they leave the same to
infidels and heretics who thereby seek after a greater opinion of godliness
and devotion before men.

THe Gentiles did offer up their sons in fire unto Idols, and did ^ Reg. ^.
28. ^v. 21. 5.
cut and lance themselves until the blood followed: the which voluntary
tortures the Lord precisely interdicteth his own people. Contrary to the which
interdiction the dearest darlinges of the church of Rome, as likewise such
among the Turks as would seem most devout, use to scourge and to whippe
themselves, diverse ways tormenting their own bodies, and not sparing their
own flesh. Whereby it is evident that they have ^ol. 2. 23.
not only sorted themselves with the Gentiles, and some of the old heretics,
but also with these of the last times, who through hypocrisy hunte after a
show of most rare holiness in these outvvard ^. Tim. 4. 1.
things, preferring these their wil-worshippes and voluntary devotions before
faith, repentance, and the fruits of the spirit, imagining thereby to ascend
to the highest degree of the greatest perfection, and to be esteemed the only
religious of all other.

Opposite. 12.
The faithful soldiers of Christ furnish themselves against their ghostly
enemies with such weapons, as are taken out of the Lords armoury: whereas the
counterfeite christian furnishes himself with such as are framed in the
devils forge, and in the shop of man's invention.

THe faithful which fight under the banner of Christ even all the members of
the militant church, knowing the great force of their fendish foes, seek
according unto the exhortation of the Apostle to be strong in the Lord and in
the power of Ephesians. 6. 10.
his might, putting on to that purpose all the armor of God, that so they may
be able to stand against all the assaults of the Devil: they stand and their
loins girded about with verity, having on the breastplate of righteousness, and
their feet shodde with the preparation of the gospel of peace: above all they
take the shield of faith, whereby they may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked, and the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit which is the
word of God, praying always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the
spirit, and watching thereunto withal perseverance. Whereas the soldiers of
Satan's companies are forbidden for the most part to enter into the Lords
armory wherein are the weapons of all the Lords worthies wherevvith they
prevailed against all their enemies, and to fence their souls with that armor
of proof whereby they may be preserved from Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 43. Hier. in
Mat. ca 23. Number. 9. 11. Tert. de Idola. Lact. instit. l. 6. ca. 2.
all deadly wounds: it is enough for them to arm themselves with holy books
tied at their girdle, but, not laid up in their hearts: with holy relics,
such as defiled those that touched them under the law: with holy candle lighted
at noonday to drive away belike spiritual darkness: with holy breaede to put
away the famine of the soul: with holy water to wash away the spots of the
spirit: with holy bell to fray the hell-hound with that sacred sound: with
crossing and crossing again this and that member, and with anoyling the
instruments of the five wits: with holy cream, holy salt, holy spitile, and
with as holy exorcismes and coniurations as were used by the seven sons of
Sceva the priest: with holy grains, agnus deies, crucifixes, with burial in
an holy cloister, in a Monks coule, or a Friars frocke, with Act. 19. 13.
a pardon cast into the grave with the body for the safer passage of the silly
soul (albeit it had passed and received judgment before) and with other such
furniture of their own framing, as if those things which are without could
sanctisie a man, and fence him from the wounds of sin: as if the subtle
serpent were some silly fool that could be driven away with such
scarre-crowes, or some weak and feeble foe that could be overturned with such
bulrushes.

Opposite. 13.
The faithful are not puffed up with pride in respect of Gods graces, but
rather hang down their heads in respect of their own infirmities, ascribing
to God the glory of all good things.

IF when we have done all that is commanded us, we must say that ^uc. 9 54
we are unprofitable servantes, then when we fail more or less in all, what
just occasion have we with the humble Publican to stand aloof, and to hang
down the head, and to beat the breast, being ^zr 9 6. ^zech. ^6. 33. ^an ^. 7.
full of confusion in regard of our own iniquities. Now as the faithful
thus cry out shame and confusion against themselves, so they ascribe
righteousness to God in all his corrections, and endless mercy in all his
blessings, magnifying and extoling his glory in both. And verily he that
seeks the glory of him ^oh. 7. 18.
that sent him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. But in Aug in
^oh. Tract. ^9.
Antichrist (says Austine) there is unrighteousness, and he is not true,
because he will not seeke^ he glory of him that sent him. Let us all then
which pertain to the body of Christ, beware lest we fall into the snares of
Antichrist, and let us not seek our own glory. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 19.
If one cover (says Chrysostom) a wolf with a sheep skin, how may
another know him, but by his voice, or by his action? The sheep bleateth
looking down* ward, the wolf looks upward and howleth against heaven. He
then that utters the voice of humility and confession according unto God, is
a sheep: but he that howlethout blasphemies against God, and against the
truth is a wolf. Now how the doctrine of the church of Rome teaches to lay
aside the humility of a sheep, and to take to our selves the pride of the
wolf, to advaunce our selves, and not to give the glory of all things only
to GOD, see before in the preface to the Christian roader.

Opposite. 14.
The faithful Christian as in general he gives the glory of all good things
only to Gods mercy and goodness, so especially of his eternal salvation,
resting only upon the mediation and merit of Christ's passion for the
obtaining thereof, and not upon his own or other men's works.

What worthy thing do we, that thereby we may be Wal^ensis contra Wicle^um.
made partakers of heavenly glory, whereas the Apostle says, I think that
the passions of this time are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed?
Therefore I reckon him to be the more sounder divine, the more saithfull
catholic, and more agreeable to holy scriptures, who does flatly deny any such
merit. And verily our Savior Christ was only able to give a sufficient price
for that heavenly purchase as all the faithful from the beginning of the world
have undoubtedly believed: Apoc. 19. 10
so that it is a sure token of the spirit of a true prophet to give testimony
thereunto. We have (says Austine) Jesus Christ our Aug. in Epi. Ioh. tract. 1.
advocate, and he is the propitiation for our sins: he that holds this
holds no heresy: he that holds this, makes no schism. And if the very
Apostle Saint John had said (says the same Father) If any man sin, Aug
cont. Epist^l. Pa^ l 2. Cap. ^.
ye have me for your advocate, and I obtain pardon for your si^es; What
faithful person would have endured him? Who would have taken him for an
Apostle of Christ, and not for a very Antichrist? And yet the church of Rome
(the less catholic, and the more haereticall, schismatic, and
Antichristian is she) teaches us not to rest upon the mediation and merit of
Christ's passion as the only propitiation and satisfaction for sin, and the
only meritorious cause of our salvation, but also to trust^n our own merits,
and in the works of supererogation performed by the saints, and in their
prayers, and intercessions.

Opposite. 15.
The sincere professors of the catholic faith acknowledge Christ to be now
only in heaven according to the flesh, whither he is ascended, and from whence
they look for him to come to judgment: whereas seduced and seducing heretics
See fol.
will needs have him to be here also now in earth, albeit he be seated above
the highest heavens.

THe flesh of CHRIST, when it was on earth, surely it was not in heaven, and
now because it is in heaven, certainly Vigil. contr. Eut l. 4 Cap. 4.
it is not in the earth. Yea so far is it from being in earth, that we
look for Christ after the flesh to come from heaven, whom as he is GOD the
Word, we believe to be with us on earth. Then by your opinion either the word
is comprised in a place, as well as the flesh, or else the flesh is every
where together with the word, seeing one nature does not receive in it self
any different or contrary estate. Now, to be contained in a place, and, to be
present every where, be things diverse and very dislike: and for so much as
the Word is every where, and the flesh of CHRIST is not every where, it is
clear that one and the same CHRIST is of both natures: that is, every where
according unto the nature of his Deity, and contained in a place according unto
the nature of the humanity. This is the catholic faith and confession which
the Apostles delivered, the martyrs confirmed, and the faithful persist in to
this day. And therefore whereas the church of Rome teaches that the flesh of
Christ is in heaven and in earth together at one time, and confounds the
distinction of the properties of the two natures of CHRIST by teaching him
according to the property of his humane nature so to be contained in a place,
that he is also in ten thousand thousand places at one time, What does she
thereby but condemn the catholic faith and confession delivered by the
Apostles, confirmed by the martires, and continued among the faithful unto the
time of Vigilius?

Opposite. 16.
The catholic faith by the warrant of the word of God acknowledges but two
places after this life: and the contrary opinion proceeds from See Aug. ^uch
ad L^ Cap. 6. and 7.
a blind, albeit it seems a kind affection.

LAstly to omit other things which might be alleged to this purpos^ (for
there are so many oppositions between the doctrine of Christ and Antichrist,
as there are maine grounds of our christian profession, as it may appear
throughout all the parts and parcels of this treatise, the catholic faith
teaches, that there are but two places after this life. So Austine: Aug. H^pog
Lib. 5.
The first place the catholic faith builded upon, ^iuin authority believes to
be the kingdom of heaven, the second to be hell, where every apostata and
infidel is tormented: And as for any third place, we are utterly ignorant
thereof, neither do we find any such in the scriptures. And what shall the
church of Rome be still esteemed to be catholic which will not allow of this
point of the faith neither, which yet S. Austin^ allowed to be catholic?

Div. 2.
That the church of Christ is not always visible

Our creed teaches us to say, I believe, and not I see the I believe the holy
catholic church.
catholic church: that is, howsoever the members of the true church are not
alvvaies visible, nor their companies conspicuous, yet I believe that GOD has
his church and congreg^tion in some place or other which rightly and sincerely
worshipeth him in spirit and truth. And therefore this church as it is sometimes
likened to the Moon in her full brightness, so it is sometimes compared to the
same greatly obscured, and after a sort loosing her whole light: And as it is
sometimes resembled to a city built upon a hill, which is admirable for her
exceeding beauty and glory: so it is sometimes also compared to a cottage in
a vineyarde, and to a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and to a besieged c^ty
defaced and wasted with extreme misery, and to a country over^ and after a
sort dispeopled by the sword of the enemy. As it came to pass not only
among the Israelites in the time of Elias, but also in the kingdom of Judah
in the time of Isayas; who complains that al manner of corruptions in all
estates of me^ were so grievous, and had made so great havocke, that had not
the Lord reserved unto himself a small re^nant, they had been made as So^oma
and like unto Gomortha, And (...) 29.
how stood the case with the church in the beginning of the Apostles times?
was it not such that it gave just occasion to Saint Paul to renew again the
same complainte? Yea this remnaunt was so small at our Saviors death, that it
has been deemed by some, that the church was only then in the blessed Virgin:
and in David's and Ieremies time this company also was so inconspicuous, that
one of them cries out, (...) 1.
Help Lord, for there is not one godly man left: and the other is willed by
the Lord himself to run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and
to inquire, if there were one that executed judgment and embraced truth, and
he would spare all for ones sake.

Div. 3.
That hypocrites and ungodly persons are not the true members of the holy
catholic church of Christ, which is the congregation of the predestinate.

THe true church is holy, and so are all the true members thereof, for that they
are united and joined together by the bands of one holy and pure spirit. (...)
1.
For if the ungodly were members of this church she were to be called unholy
in respect of them, for that their number is always the greater ^as she is
called (...)
holy in respect of the godly, for that they are the better part. Wherefore all
ungodly and faithless dissembling hypocrites, as they seem only to be holy,
and are not; so they seem also, but are not in deed the true members of the
holy catholic church. For how can they have the church to be their mother,
which are not begotten again of the immortal seed of the word of God which
lives and lasts for ever? How can, I say, those be members of the holy
catholic church, and have her for their mother, who have not God for their
father, who as they honor not God as a father, neither endeavor to resemble
his image, so he does not acknowledge them for his sons, nor accept them as
inheritours of his heavenly kingdom? And does not our creed reach us also,
that this holy catholic church of Christ is a commun^on of saints, who have
in this life remission of sins, and shall attain in the life to come, to a
glorious resurrection, and to l^e everlasting? But the wicked and ungodly
dissembling hypocrites the sons of the bond woman, which are base-borne and
bastard brethren, they have no part nor portion in these blessings of God with
the sons Gal. 4. 30.
of the free woman, which are the elect and chosen children of God, and the
true members of the holy catholic church of Christ. Wherefore the church of
Rome greatly disgraceth this holy catholic church of Christ, in that she
would allow an interest in her to impu^e and ungodly dissembling hypocrites:
as on other respects she advaunceth her to high, in assigning her that
privilege that she cannot err, and granting that ability unto her children,
whereby they may perfectly fulfill the law of God.

Div. 4.
That the church may err in matters of faith.

THe Apostles and prophets had their doctrine from God not only mediately by
instruction, but also immediately by revelation: Holy.
but revelations are now ceased, and the church has her doctrine now mediatly
only by instruction out of the divine and sacred scriptures: and therefore the
church may err, albeit the Apostles and Prophets were free from error. For in
learning out of the scriptures, the dullness and blindness of our capacity
oftentimes misseth of the true sense and meaning thereof, which is no
impediment, when as the spirit of God by revelation uses not the
blockishnesse of our understanding to bring us to the knowledge of God, but
does immediately by his power sh^dde it in our hearts, or else teaches us by
such as are instructed immediately. (...) 2.


Div. 3.
That every member of the church breaks the law, and does not perfectly
fulfill the same.

NO man loves the Lord with all his heart, power, and strength, so that all
his ^ffections, cogitations, and thoughts are only employed in the Lords
service, and in obedience to his commandementes, and therefore no man perfectly
fulfilleth the whole law. For our love does so follow ou^ knowledge, that no
man can perfectly love God, that perfectly knows not his love and goodness
toward us: but in this life we know but in (...). 13. 9
part, we understand but in part, we see as through a glass and in a
dark speaking, and so our love also is but in part, it is no wise so perfect
as it ought to be. Wherefore that perfect love being not in any which the
law requires, that which wants thereof is sin ^p. 29.
and a breach of the law and commandments of God. For to love the Lord
withal our heart, soul, and strength is not a point of perfection counseled
only in the gospel above the law, but a necessary duty commanded in the
law: and therefore our Savior calls it in sl^tte terms not only a
commandment, (...) ^2. 38.
but also the first of the commandments. Wherefore all being guilty of the
breach of this commandment, there is none that is able to fulfill the whole
law, much less to do any work of supererogation, more then is commanded in
the law of God.

Many proud debtours, having not as yet wasted their whole stocks, but being
only declining and ready to fall, conceive so well of themselves and of their
own ability, that, when they look but upon the particular bills of their
debt, they conceive some hope to recover, and to be able in time to discharge
all: but when they cast them all together, and so take a view of the total
sum, that appears by and by to be so great, that thereby they are clean
dismaide and discouraged, and utterly excluded from all hope. But the pride of
our Romish banke-ruptes is in a far higher degree, in that the sum of all
the commandments containing the sum of our whole debte, be it never so
great and never so huge, yet it does not move them to acknowledge their
inhabilitie, but they still imagine themselves to be able to fulfill the whole
law, and so to discharge their whole debte, yea and more also, with the
surplussage whereof being due unto them The meanest in the church of Rome are
taught that they may fulfill all the commandementes, whereas the very best in the
church of Christ more or less fail in all.
upon a reckoning and an accountes, they think themselves able to help
toward the dischardge of the debtes of others also. Whereas in truth if
we vvoulde duly look into the greatness of the duty, that is required at
our hands in any one of the commandments, we should perceive the very
debte of every one of these particular bills to amounte and grovve to so great
a sum, that as long as we live here in this life, (such is our spiritual
penury and beggary) we are never able to discharge the same. 1. Command. For
who is there even among the most perfect and just, that never prefers
profit, or pleasure, or the satisfying of one affection or other before
justice and righteousness, and before his love and obedience to God, thereby
placing them after a sort in Gods throne? 2 who alvvaies so highly conceives
of the incomprehensible majesty of the almighty Jehovah as he ought to do,
and of his incomparable and unmatchable glory that cannot be resembled by any
similitude without great impeachment and derogation to the same? 3 Who
conceives so reverently of the infinite power of the most mighty creator of
heaven and earth, that he never takes his glorious and dreadful name in
vain, but ever uses it with such reverence and fear, as is due unto it? 4
Who sanctifies on that manner the Sabbath day, that ceasing altogether from
satisfying his own will, he suffers the Lord by his holy spirit and
sacred word wholy to vvo^ke in himself, and so employeth himself only in
his service? Yea who is it, that keeps a perpetual Sabbath unto the LORD? 5
Who is it, that so honors his p^rentes and the rest of his superiors in the
Lord, that he never so much as murmureth and ^dgeth at their lawful
authority? 6 7 8 9 Who is so far of from murder, adultery, thef^ and from
bearing false witness, that he never transgresses in any of these not so much
as by hatred, carnal lusts, covetous desires, or lie^? 10 Lastly who has his
whole heart so possessed with the love of God and his neighbor, that he never
delights no not for a moment of time in any thought or desire contrary the
evnto? David a man after Gods own heart, who is said after a manner to have
fulfilled all his will, and whose posterity is commended for walking in his
steps, after that he had most highly magnifi^d the law of God as holy and
righteous altogether, and had testified that in keeping thereof there was
great reward, adds immediately: but who can tell how of te he offends.
O cleanse ^l. 19. 12.
thou me from my secret sins. As if he had said: I know that I, even I my
self not seldom but often offend against this righteous and perfect ^avv:
yea further I acknowledge my frailty to be so great, that I am persuaded how
that some times I commit also faults some or other, which escape my knowledge,
and are secret from me. Wherefore if we say we have no sin, (we cannot but be
charged ^oh. 1 8.
as transgressors of this law) we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. For not only Saint Ambrose has confessed of himself ^b. de sa^mentis li ^
^ap. 6.
that he did sin continually, but the Apostle Saint James has testified of
all; that in many things we offend all: not some of us (says he) but all of
us offend, and that not in a few, but in many (...). 3. 2.
things: from the number of which offenders he excepted not himself (albeit
he was had in great admiration even of the enemies of the christian faith for
his most just and upright life) nor any of the rest of his fellow Apostles. Yea
Adam himself before his fall, being entrenched as it were within the
fortification and castle of his own complete and perfect innocence, the
wales whereof being as walls of iron, and the gates thereof as of pure
brass, a may den-hold that was never taken, never shaken by any shot, never
weakened by any battery, having never sustained any manner of breach in any
part or parcel thereof; our great grandfather, Adam himself. I say, being
here set upon, withstoode the assault a very short time, but straite-waies
yielded, suffering the same to be soon surprised, and himself to be taken
prisoner by the enemies force. Now this hold of innocence which is restored
unto us again by our most powerful redeemer, and wherein we the posterity
of Adam are seated and placed, is nothing so strong and sure in it self, as it
was at the first, when it was delivered unto Adam. The gates thereof are
very vveake, and the walls thereof of small strength to keep out the force and
fury of the enemy. For now he enters in at the gate of the eyes by pride and
covetousness, of the tongue by lying and slaundring, of the hands by bribing
and stealing, of the taste by gluttony, drunkenness and exces^e: now he
attempteth to take the same by carnal security, and at another time by
murmuring grudging and impatiencie: he puts it still in danger by idle
words, vain imaginations, carnal lusts and earthly affections. Many
breaches are quickly made, and the whole hold soon battered, unless it be
continually succored by the Lords power, and still rescued by his aid. For
how can the weak Lamb stand against the bloody wolf, or the silly sheep
against the roaring Lyo^? No mervaile then that we be sometimes vvounded, and
sometimes forced to give ground, and be driven from our place and standing in
these our ghostly and spiritual skirmishes! No mervaile though oftentimes we
transgress the most holy and righteous law of God, and turn out of the
direct way of his commandments! Well may it agree with the church triumphant
in heaven, resting in the place where righteousness dwells, and enjoying the
security of the full conquest and victory, to be free from the danger of al
wounds, to attain to the fullness of all righteousness, and to be most glorious
without spot and without wrinckle: how beit surely the church militant
remaining in this wicked and sinful world, where she is still so fiercely
assaulted, is sure never long to escape without blows, never to be pure from
all stains, never to be free from all sins. Now sin being a transgression
of the law and a breach 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
of the commandment, therefore there is none to be found that perfectly
keeps the whole law, and exactly fulfilleth all the commandementes.

Div. 6.
That the spirit of God the spirit of truth is not alvvaies annexed to the
outvvard face of the visible church, and to such as have the chief rooms
therein, much less to any particular church, as to the church of Rome, or to
any other..

BEFORE the ascension of our Savior Christ it was true ^olike.
that the Psalmist says: In Jury GOD was known, his name was great in
Israel: he had not dealt so with any (...). 75. 47. 20
other nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his laws. And therefore
the Apostles were willed for a time not to (...). 10. 5.
go into the way of the Gentiles, nor to enter into the cities of the
Samaritanes, but to go only to the lost sheep of the house (...). 15. 26.
of Israel. Yea it was told the woman of Canaan by our Savior himself,
that it was not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto dogs:
Whereby he signified that the Israelites only were received by GOD into the
number of his elect and chosen children; and that all other nations were as
hogs and swine, vvallovving in the mire of ignorance and sin, and
therefore most odious and abominable before GOD. But now by the death of
CHRIST (...) 2 14. (...) 28. 19. (...) 10 34. (...) 3. 28. (...) ^. 10. 12
the partition vvalle is broken down, and the Apostles commission is enlarged
to go and teach all nations, and to preach the gospel to every creature. For
there is now no more respect of Jew then of Grecian, but all are one in
Christ Jesus: and Gods favor is so procured to all, that as he is Lord of all,
so he is rich unto all (...) 23.
that call upon him. And now is the hour come that the true worshippers
worship not God in the mount of Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem, but worship
him (every where) in spirit and truth. For now the true service of God and the
sincere faith of Christ is not tied to any one place or country, but lies
open to all nations: and the church of Christ is now catholic, not annexed any
more to any one people, but dispersed abroad through the whole world: neither
are the large kingdoms of ^er non ^frica, ^undus.
Africa the Lords only field wherein the pure seed of his word is sown,
much less the small territories of the city of Jllud esse^ includere orb^m in
vrbe.
Rome, but the universal globe of the whole earth. And yet when of all the
families and kinreds of the earth the Lord had called out and chosen only the
posterity of Abraham, and when the church of Christ was annexed to that one
people alone, the service of God was not the^ so tied to the^ which had the
rooms of the chief professors thereof, but that the law did sometimes perish
from the priest, and counsel from the ancient, and the Sun went down upon
their prophets, in Ier. 7. 4. and 18. 18. Mich. 3. 6.
so much that night was unto them for a vision, and darkness for a divination.
As for example in our Saviors time, those that should have been the
principal pillars of the church, were the chief subverters thereof: and they
which had the rooms of the master builders, rejected the chief corner stone,
and sought the Mat. 21. 42.
utter ruin and down fall of the LORDS house. And as it thus happened to
the Sinagogue of the Jews, even so also it befell the church of CHRIST, when
Arrianisme overflowed the outvvarde face thereof, in so much that. Liberius
himself Hier de eccles scriptoribus in Fortunatiano.
being then Bishop of Rome yielded thereto, and confirmed it with his
subscription. At what time nothing was esteemed a matter of greater piety,
and more befitting the servaunt of CHRIST, then to follow unity, and not to be
divided from the communion of the world: when the christian world Hier.
adversus Lucife^ianos.
sighed and vvondred, that of a Christian it was become an Arria^. Wherefore
no mervaile that diverse particular churches planted by the Apostles themselves
have not been so firmly seized of the truth, but that they have been long
ago cast out of the possession thereof: no marvel though they having
rejected the faith of CHRIST, have themselves also been rejected from being
the people and Church of Christ.

Now that which happens to many, may also happen to any, yea to Rome it
self, and the church thereof, seeing they have no Cypr. ad Pomp. cont. epist.
S^eph. Hier. ad Princip. Marcel. ep. Tim. 1.
greater charter or priveledge of not erring, then any other partilar church.
Certainly Cyprian knevve none: for he avoucheth of the Bishope of Rome, that he
maintains heresy against the church. Hierome knevve none: for he says that
the fountain of the Roman faith was defiled with mudde, and that the faith
commended by the Apostle was violated in most things, (albeit our Romanists
greatly boast that no good author has ever testified of the failing of faith in
the church of Rome.) Nay the Apostle himself knew none: for writing to the
church of Rome by name, he tells her plainly that she should not be proud
of her standing, nor insult against the church of the Jews for her fall: for
of (...). 11. 21
God (says he) spared not the natural branches, take thou heed also that he
spare not thee. For if they which were Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, being borne under covenant of mercy, and descending from most holy
progenitors had no such perpetuity in the favor of God, nor assurance for the
continuance of the true worship and service of God amongst them, but that
they might utterly fall from both: then surely such as descended from impious
and idolatrous parents, and were strangers and alians from the covenantes of
grace, being of the Lords endless goodness received into favor, can have no
such assurance of the Lords mercy, but that in success of time the posterity
may fall away from that grace, whereof their progenitors were made partakers
And if the true worship and service of God was not unseperably tied unto Siloh,
Sion, or Jerusalem, wh^ presumption is it in the church of Rome to make such
boast the her faith cannot fail; as if the truth were necessarily annexed to
that city, and the spirit of God as it were entailed to Peter's ch^ire: or as
if God were in bonds still to keep that See upright, whatsoever else became of
all other christian churches. Verily of them it may be verefied that which
Terasius Archbishop of Constantinople testified of their like: that the heresy
of Macedonius was more tolerable then theirs, in that he avoucheth the spirit
of God to be serva^t to the father and the son: whereas they after a ^ort make
him their servant to convey over continually the certainty of faith, from the
predecessor to the successor. What? may a man in his death bed dispose of the
inward qualities of his soul, as he may of his temporal goods and
possessions? May any one make over by deed of gift unto an other his
faithful heart and sincere mind? or bequeath by will and testament his piety
and godliness? These things are personal and appropriated to the person on
whom they are bestowed, they pas^e not from hand to hand, they remove not from
subject to subject: these gifts are not parted by death but accompany us
continually, when all other things bid us adue, when all all other things fail
they fail not, when all other things are left behind, they cannot be left,
there is no conveyance to be made from one to an other of these goods. For Non
na^ci^ur Christiani, se^ fimus.
virtue is no inheritance, it descends not from the father to the child: the
child takes his bodily substance from his parents at his first birth, but as
for the substance of virtue, if he receive it, he receives it by a second
birth. Now if these gifts come not by descent from the father to the son
that succeeds him an nature and in substance, and in the very covenat of
grace also: much less do they come by descent unto him that succeeds only
in place and office. It is true indeed that Elias promised Elizaeus that was
to succeed him in his prophetical office, that if he saw him when he wa^
taken out of his sight, he should have his spirit doubled upon him: But Elias
knew that God having appointed Eliz^s to succeed him in his prophetical
office would have him endued with such a measure of his spirit, that so he
might be meet ^or the execution of the same: moreover his promise was made to
the person of Elizaeus alone, and not to any of his successors But the church
of Rome will have the stability of Peter's faith to be conveyed over to all his
successors, and that to the worlds end: yea she will have it annexed to Peter's
chai^e, and to his very consistory and judgment seat. For when it is proved,
that many of the Popes in person were Apostataes from the faith, Lyra in Math
c. 16. Conc. Basil. Op. ^inod. Non locus virum honestat. Qu^ mal^s est vbique
mal^ est.
yet (say they) whenever they sat in judgment upon the decision of any
doubt, and upon the determination of any question, they were so directed and
guided therein, that they did never pronounce any definitive sentence against
the truth. As if the very place did sanctify the person, and suddenly change
his former resolution; or else did force him to pronounce sentence against his
own settled conscience and judgment.

But what an assurance the Bishop and church of Rome have that their faith
cannot fail, it may appear by this, that the truth Verum vero consonat.
always being like to it self, and one truth evermore agreeing with another,
diverse of the very maine grounds of their faith are directly contrary each to
other. As first, the church cannot err: and yet the faithful themselves, (by
whom the truth is preserved in the church, when it is preserved, unless we
imagine that it, may be better preserved by such as are but mere dissembling
hypocrites) may altogether and that finally fall from God, and so by consequent
from the truth.

2 Secondly, the faithful being in danger to fall away wholly from God, yet are
still in possibility to be renewed by repentance (for that repentance is only
denied to such as sin against the holy Ghost) and yet they are not to be
rebaptized: whereas if they did wholy fall away, at their reconciliation and
regeneration, they should be admitted again to the sacrament of regeneration.
Or thus: The faithful, that are borne again of the incorruptible seed of the
word, and are made the sons of God by faith in Christ, may wholly fall away
from this grace: but yet so that they may be renewed again by repentance, and
recover again a true faith, and so be borne the second time the sons of God:
And yet (as they themselves also teach) as we can be but once borne the sons
of Adam, so we can be but once regenerate and borne the sons of God.

3 Thirdly, the children of the faithful in baptism are devoted to the service
of God only, as being only baptized in his name: and yet they may (as they
teach) be devoted also to the service of the saints.

4 Fourthly, all the infants of the faithful have their sins in baptism fully
washed and cleansed, and are made members of the holy catholic church, and so
are effectually called to the estate of grace: And yet I hope they vvil also
teach that these be (...) 20. 1.
not all called at the first hour.

5 Fifthly, they call their sacrifice of the Mass an unbloody sacrifice: and
yet they teach that Christ's blood is there really present. And if they ^ay that
it is called an unbloody sacrifice, for that the blood is there present after
an unbloody manner, they might then as well call it an vnbodily sacrifice also,
for that, as they teach the body of Christ is there also, but not after a
bodily manner: whereas in truth a true body, and true blood, have always the
manner and condition of a true body, and of true blood.

6 Sixthly, they teach that by the words of consecration, transubstantiation is
made: and yet the nature of the bread is abolished and gone, before the first
word thereof (THIS) is uttered by the Priest: For in the words of consecration
whatsoever this word (THIS) does signify, in any case it must not signify
true and real bread.

7 Seventhly, Matrimony (as they teach) is an holy sacrament and conferreth
grace: and yet it is with them a profanation of holy orders: (as if one grace
did disgrace another, and as if one holy thing were a profanation to another)
and that single life, which undoubtedly gives no grace, is an holier estate
then the estate of Matrimony: whereas it may be well known of every young
scholar, that single life is no virtue, but continency and chastity either in
single life, or else in matrimony.

8 Eighthly, they teach that grace sometime works alone in us, which Gratia
operans, ^ooperans.
needs must be, if it be at all, in our conversion: and yet they teach, that
our free will works together also with Gods grace, even in our very first
conversion.

9 Ninthly, they vaunt most confidently themselves to be the only catholics,
and their faith to be undoubtedly the sound faith, and they determine most
peremptonly that the true catholic justifying faith, consists only in
believing the truth of the articles of our christian creed: and yet they teach
that neither they are, nor yet ought to be assured, that they have obtained a
true faith.

10 Tenthly, they teach that we ought most assuredly to believe the truth of
Gods general promises: as, whosoever believes in him shall never be
confounded: and yet they say that it is presumption for this or that particular
man which believes, to persuade himself assuredly that he shall never be
confounded.

11 Eleve^thly in their pardons, shriftes, and exhortations to religious
actions they take upon them to forgive to particular persons their sins: and
yet they also to whom particularly they forgive must s^il doubt whether their
sins be forgiven For all their catholics must still stand in doubt thereof,
unless it be otherwise opened unto them by revelation.

12 Twelfthly they teach that they can fulfill the law, and more also, (the
which thing cannot be performed without grace, yea without great grace) yet
they thus assuredly knowing that they fulfill the law, cannot yet for all that
assuredly know that they themselves are in the estate of Romans 14 23
grace: whereas not only the Apostle, but a very heathen man ca^teach the^, that
unto every good actio^ (and therefore much more to so many, as whereby the whole
law is fulfilled, and more also) it is a necessary circumstance that is
required, that it be done upon an ^er. co^^nsta^.
assured knowledge.

13. Thirtenethly they teach that the fulfilling of the law is an ordinary
duty that is to be performed of the common and vulgar sort of people, and
therefore that their relligious men must strive to ascend to a fa^re higher
degree of greater perfection: and yet they teach also that the common people
cannot attain unto the understanding of the sacred scriptures. which contain
for a good part but an exposition of the law: and yet, as I take it, it is a
far harder matter to do, then to understand that which is right.

14. Fourtenethly they teach that all points of faith necessary to salvation
are not contained in ^he holy scripture; and yet they allege scripture for
all points which are necessary to salvation. And therefore all such points
may be proved out of the scriptures, or else they greatly abuse the scriptures
even by the testimony of their own consciences in alleging them against
their me^ning only for show and not for truth.

15. Fiftenethly some of them teach that Election, which is the precedent cause
of the first justification, depends upon foreseen works: and yet that the
first justification it self is free, and depends not at all on works.

16. Sixtenethly they teach that the Saints are not Mediators of Redemption;
and yet that the works of supererogation done by the saints are both
satisfactory for the sins of other, and also meritorious of eternal glory,
which are the proper works of the Mediator of Redemption.

17. Seventenethly they say, that it is blasphemous against the dignity of
Christ's blood, which he shed for our sins, to avouch that he suffe^ed also
in soul, for the whole raunsoming of our souls, and for the full satisfying
of the most absolute and perfect justice of GOD: as if one of CHRIST'S
sufferinges did derogate from the other But it is no blasphemye against the
dignity of CHRIST'S sufferinges with them to teach that our own souls must
either suffer for our sins the most extreme pains of purgatory or endure
here the sharp rigor of their popish penance, or else procure trentals of
Masses together with the sufferings of the saints to be bestowed upon us by
the Popes indulgences and pardons.

18.Eightenethly they teach that imputative righteousness is a vain and a
frivolous fancy: and yet the imputation of the surplussage of the merits of
the saints is not vain, but a great gain unto them: yea it is a very sound
and profitable doctrine, if not to the cooling of men's souls, yet to the
warming of the Popes kitchine.

19. Ninetenethly the fire of purgatory is sometimes so greavous with our
Romanistes (belike when they would have their Masses and pardons well paid
for, to deliver poor souls out of the same) that our fire is but a painted
fire unto it, and that the torments thereof differ nothing from hellish
torments but only in continuance: and yet sometimes with them again it is as
it were a place Rhem. in Apoc c. 14.
of rest.

20. Lastly our Rhemistes teach that sin, (be the pleasure thereof Rhem. in c
8. ep. ad Romans
never so short,) deserves damnation, because it is an aversion from God, and
proceeds from the Devil: the which thing is true in every sin, and
therefore every sin damnable and mortal: And yet these men themselves
maintain their old distincttion of sins venial, and of sins mortal.

Wherefore seeing that the doctrine of the church of Rome Rhem. in Mat. cap. 5.
contains such contradiction, and contradictions cannot be both true, it is
evident that the spirit of truth is not so annexed to Peter's chair, but that
the church of Rome may err, as well as other churches planted by the same
Apostles: yea hereby came in that great apostasy and falling away from the
faith foretold by the Apostle, when the greater number of those that professed
themselves Christians, especially in these western parts of the world, did
so highly conceive of the Bishop of Rome, as that they took him to be that
invincible rock, upon the which the church was builte, and against the
which hell gates should never prevail: Whereas he being to vveake to stay
himself upright, and to withstand so mighty and powerful enemies, was
less able to hold up the huge building of the universal church, and to
guarde and defend it from so dangerous foes: But failing himself, and
falling under his own burden, he was the occasion of ruin to all such as did
^g. ep. lib. ^ist. 32.
stay themselves and rest upon him. And so had Gregory a Bishop of Rome
signified before to Mauritius the Emperor (at what time he endeavored to make
the patriarch of Constantinople universal Bishop and head of the whole
church) that if there were but one head only, the ruin of that head would be
the ruin of the church: and that if any should arrogate to himself that name
in the church, the universal church must needs come to ruin, when he
which is named Universal, did fall.

Div. 7
That by our spiritual union with CHRIST, he and his righteousness is made
ours, and so surely imputed unto us, that we become thereby righteous before
GOD, and not by the righteousness of any of the saints.

GReat is the prerogative and dignity of all such, as are admitted unto the
society of Christ's church, and are received (...) com^ion of ^tes. (...). 1.
3. (...). 3. 28. (...). 5. 30. (...). 2. 16. ^or. 1. 30
into the fellowship of his faithful Congregation. For the church has
fellowship with God, and is espoused to Christ, and made one with him, eve^
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: in so much that she justly lays
claim unto him saying, my beloved is mine, and I am his, as being spiritually
married unto him, and having interest in him, and all his blessings. By which
union and communion it came to pass that Christ being one with his church
became a debtor in her place, and paid that which he never took: and being
innocent in himself, was made guilty for her, and being most pure in himself
was made sin for her, and bare her iniquities on his ^or. 5 2^ (...). 2 22
(...). 3. 18 (...). 3. 9.
own body upon the tree: that she likewise being poor of her self might in
him be made rich, and being naked of her self might be clothed with his
innocence, and being destitute in her self of perfect righteousness, might be
made the righteousness of God in him, and so become perfectly righteous. For as
CHRIST by imputation was made sin for us, and suffered death not for his
own, but for our iniquityes: even so by imputation are we made righteous in
him, and so become partakers of eternal glory. Now the faithful are not
after such a manner linked together, they are not espoused each to other, as
Christ and his church: the Apostle Saint Peter could not unite the church so
nearely to himself by his spirit, that his death and sufferinges might be
accepted as done for her redemption. And yet see the blindenes of the shameless
whore of Babylon: It is a strange paradoxe with her that we should be made
righteous by the righteousness of CHRIST, imputed unto us by the mercy of GOD,
and applied unto us by a true faith: but it stands with good reason that we
may be made righteous by the righteousness of the saints, imputed unto us by
the Popes savor, and applied unto us by his Indulgences and Pardons.

Div. 8.
That GOD only has authority to forgive sin, as it is sin, and a
transgression of his own law.

THE hurt, that comes to a private man by sin, a private man may release;
a^, the prince may pardon that damage The forgiveness of sins.
that comes thereby to the common weal But sin, as it is properly sin,
and a breach of the law of God, and so a great dishonor to him, and a most
greavous injury unto his d^ine Majesty; so it is only an offense against god
(against thee only have ^sinned) and therefore may only be for^en by him: as he
himself also Psalm 51. 4.
testifies: It is I, it is I, that does (...), and that for mine ow^e take.
And therefore Ber^ ^aking to the faithful Isa 43 25.
says: if thou beleeuest that (...) but by (...) Bern. sermon. ^ De
Annuntiatione.
who^^ alone thou have ^ed, (...) well. For as no man ca^ forgive an other man's
(...), (...) offense committed against another: so none can forgive sin as it
is sin, for that so it is an offense only against God, making us debtours unto
him, and offenders against his sacred majesty. Yea as it is high treason for
any subject to take upon him to remit the offenses which are committed against
the common weal, for that it is an intrusion upon the princes right, and after
a sort an usurpation of the dignity royal: so no doubt but that it is high
treason against the king of heaven and earth, for any creature to take upon him
to forgive sin, as it is sin, for that it is an intrusion upon the Lords
right, and an usurpation of his dignity royal, Who can (...). 2. 7.
forgive sin but God only? So said the Pharisees, when our Savior took upon
him not only to cure the sicknesses of the body, but also to pardon the sins
of the soul. But what replied our Savior to this demand? Whether is it
easier to say, thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, arise, take up thy
b^doe, and walk? In which words he does not confute their opinion (as
Chrysostom and H^la^y reach) (...). in ^ hom.
but reproves them for charging him with blasphemy, in that by healing all
diseases by his word, he declared himself to be true God, and therefore that
he had authority also to forgive sin albeit (...) Mat.
such authority belongs only unto God. His reason is this. It belongs to
the selfsame authority as well by his own power to forgive sin, as to cure
the diseases and sicknesses of the body: but (says our Savior) ye might
perceive, that by mine own power I cure the sickenesses of the body (the
which thing being done by the ministry of the Apostles, was not done by
their own power, but by the power of (...) 12.
Christ: for so God only works the same, as al other miraculous things also,
because he only is omnipotent) therefore ye might also (...) 136. 4.
acknowledge in me, unless ye were wilfully blinded, the divine power of
God, and that I do not blaspheme in taking upon me to forgive sin. For as
for that authority of forgiving sins given to the ministers of the (...) in
Mat ^6.
gospel, it is after the same manner as the priests under the law had
authority given them to make clean or unclean: now they were not enabled to
make clean or unclean, leapers or no leapers, but they had knowledge given
them to discern, and authority to pronounce, who were such and such, and upon
their sentence, so the parties were to be taken of all the residue of the Lords
people. Even so the Ministers of the gospel are to discern whose sins are
remitted, and whose retained: and to assure the penitent soul, the broken and
contrite spirit, that his sins are forgiven him even of the Lords as on the
other side to denounce against the careless and impenitent sinner the Lords
most heavy but just vengeance.

Div. 9.
That the faithful obtain the release of their sins by free forgiveness
through the death of Christ, and not through their own satisfactions.

THe Lord of the manor is not said to forgive the trespass, The forgiveness
of sins.
that takes the amercement set upon the head of the trespasser: neither may
the creditour be said to forgive the debtour, that exacteth the debt, or
casts the debtour in prison until he make satisfaction. No more could God be
said to forgive us our sins, and to remitte on ^sses and debtes, if he did
either here in this life require satisfaction for the^ at our hands by the
works of penance; or after (...) us into the prison of purgatory there to
make satisfaction. But we believe the remission of our sins, and the free
^giuenesse of our debtes and trespasses: and so the whose gospel teaches,
that they are freely forgiven in respect of ourselves, but not freely to our
Savior Christ, who paid full dear for the release of them, even that
inestimable price of his own blood. It is he that bare our sinne^ in his own
body on the tree: the chasttiement of our peace was (...) upon him: 1. Pet 2
24. Isa 53 5. H^ 9. 12. 10. 14. 7 25 Heb. 1. 3. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
he gave his soul ^n offering for sin: he gave himself (...) some for
many: by one ob^ation of himself once made he has found eternal
redemption, and made perf^ct for ever them that ^ee ^fied: he has purged our
sins by himself (and not by v^) by his own blood (and not by our
satisfactio^s.) And verily it is this blood of the (...) wherwithall our
garments are thoroughly cl^nsed from all spots) and are made perfectly pure and
white: it is this blood that is the sovereign Apoc. 7. 14.
salve for all our sores, and the only effectual medicine which is able to
cure all our spiritual and ghostly maladies. And if we take any thing else,
we take quid proquo, we take that which will not ease, but will in the end
increase our grief. And therefore i^ we will find ease indeed, we must
provide to have always this physic in a readiness, that whenever we are
wounded by our ghostly enemy, we may apply to our selves a speedy remedy. If as
of^ (says Saint Ambrose) as this blood is shed, it is shed for remission
(...) sa^ ca 6.
of sins, I ought always to receive it, that my sins always may be
remitted unto me: yea I which always sin, ought always to have this
me^icine. His meaning is that Christ's blood is the only remedy against sin,
and the sacrament thereof a means to strengthen our faith, and so to unite us
more and more unto Christ, and to apply this physic to our souls, and
therefore that we ought to have continual recourse thereto; that so not by the
outward sign, but by the invisible grace, that is, by the blood of Christ it
self, we may be continually cured, and made perfectly hol^. And if (...) ^ri^
p^^ c. 2.
after our baptism we be after a sort driven from this ship board by the
storms and te^pests of our own corruptions, we must not catch after a second
table of penance to take hold thereof that so we may be preserved by the power
thereof from sinking down in the sea of our sins, but we must recover our
selves to our former stay, or else we shall be drowned in the bottomless gulf of
our iniquities. The Angel of the church of Sardis, after that he had been
called to the estate of salvation in Christ, and confirmed therein by the
sacrament of baptism, had fallen into the sea of most dangerous sins: now how
was he to be recovered out of the same? The spirit of God sends him not to a
second table of penance to t^ke hold thereof, that by the power th^rof he
might be delivered: but remember (says he) how tho^ have received, and heard,
and hold fast and (...) 3 3.
repent. Now no doubt but he had received and heard, and therefore was to hold
fast, that to the penitent and humble sinner Christ's blood is the purgation of
all his sins, and that by the mediatio^ of his death he does obtain remission
of the^ not only when he is received into favor at the first, but even to his
lives end, being thereby still p^e^erued in the same grace, and obtaining the
forgiveness of hi^ day^y offenses For so S. John setting down the means,
whereby the faithful themselves are continually cured of their daily
infirmities: If any man sin (says he) we have Jesus Christ (...) 2 1.
(...). 5. ^0.
our Advocate, and he is the propitiation for our sins. So the Apostle Saint
Paul shows, that not only when we were enemies, we were reconciled at the
first by the death of Christ, and obtained the release of our grosser offenses,
but much more being once reconciled and made the children of God by CHRIST,
we are still preserved in the same grace, and obtain the forgiveness of
ou^maller offenses by the same means. The truth is, that none are cured of
their sins by Christ, which continue still in the same, and do not daily
fight against them with daily repentance: but yet the physic is one thing
whereby the soul is cured, and the disposition of the soul another thing,
whereby the soul is prepared, that so the physic may effectually work.
The preparatiue is one thing, and the physic is another thing: the physic
is only the physic, and nothing else. Our Savior CHRIST is our only
physic and physician also: Repentance after a sort may be called the
preparatiue: and the Minister of the word may be to us in steed of the
Apothecarie, or as ^he physicians man that is sent to us with the purgation.
The purgation it self is made of none other ingredientes but of the most
bitter panges of our Saviors own passion: not of the roots of our hearty
repentance, neither yet of the fruits of our christian faith: that is,
whatsoever our sins be, and whensoever they be committed, we obtain not
the forgiveness of them by our own merits, nor by the satisfactions of any
other, but only by the free and undeserved mercy of GOD, and by the most
precious satisfaction of the death of CHRIST. All have sinned (says the
Apostle) and are deprived of the glory of GOD: but are justified (from their
sins) freelye Rom 3. 23.
by his grace, through the redemption that is in CHRIST JESUS. And in truth
otherwise our case were most miserable. For in the parable of the debtour the
sum of one thousand Mat. 18 24.
talents, declaring the infiniteness of our debt, does openly proclaim our
insufficiency and inabilitie to discharge the same: as also the words annexed:
when he had nothing to pay: and I forgave Psalm. 130. 3. Job. 93. Psa. 143. 2.
thee all thy debt. For verily if God should mark what were done amiss, who
were able to abide it? And if he should call us to an accounte, who were
able to aunsvvere one for a thousand? And therefore our best plea is: Enter
not into judgment with thy servants O Lord, call us not to reckoning, put not
our bills in suite, for we are no way able to make payment, we are no way able
to make satisfaction.

Div. 10.
That Purgatory is no article of the Christian faith

(...) resur^on of ^sh.
IF the deliverance of the souls out of Purgatory had been an article of the
christian faith, as it is judged to be by the church of Rome, then it had been
convenient that after mention made of the resurrection of the body out of the
custody of the grave, there should have been adjoined the deliveraunce of
the soul out of the prison of Purgatory: the torments there being so great,
as they say they be, the deliverance from thence being as great a blessing at
the lest, as the raising of the bodies out of their graves, should not have
been altogether unremembered, especially sin very much abounding before the
day of the general resurrection, and the Popes pardons nothing so much
regarded, and his charity without a fee being not usual and ordinary;
Purgatory then must needs be well filled, and so the deliverance from thence a
great benefit to many.

Div. 11.
That everlasting life is the free gift of God through CHRIST and noway
purchased by the merit of our own works.

(...) ever ^ng.
IF any thing be bestowed upon us by free gift from God, the^ surely
everlasting life is so bestowed, as the greatest gift proceeding from the most
bou^tifull giver, and the most excellent effect from the most excellent cause.
And why is God else accounted a most liberal, bountiful, free, frank, and
gracious benefactor, but that most liberally, bountifully, frankely, and freely
he bestows upon his faithful servantes the most precious crown of
eternal glory? When that bountifulnes (says the Apostle) and that love of
GOD our Savior toward man appeared, not by the works of righteousness
which we had wrought, but of his own mercy he Tit. 3. 4.
saved us. And verily the glory of this great bountifulnes must needs have
been much dimmed, if we had attained to salvation by our own merits, and
not by the LORDS only mercy. The wages, in deed of sin is death: but
everlasting life is the gift of GOD through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Romans 6. 23.
For our evil works are perfectly evil and therefore deserve eternal
death: but our good works are not perfectly good and therefore eternal life
is the free gift of GOD through CHRIST. and not a wages due to the merit of
our works. Otherwise why did the Wiseman say? Behold the righteous are
here recompensed upon earth: how much more the wicked and the sinner? What
does not the LORD as well love righteousness Pro 11. 31.
to recompense it, as he hates unrighteousness to punish the same? Yes
verily: but this is here spoken to this end by the Wise Man, that we should
understand, that the sinner most justly deserves this punishment, whereas the
righteous deserves not the revvard. And therefore it is not without cause that
just Job thus speaks of himself: If I have done evil, vvoe unto me: if I
have done righteously yet will I not Job. 10* 15.
lift up my head, being full of confusion because I see mine affliction. And
why? The evil works of the best are in an higher degree evil, then their
good works are in themselves good: and therefore in respect of the one, they
may be rustly cast down with the fear of eternal confusion and vvoe: but
in respect of the other, they ought not to be lifted up to glory in themselves
and in their own righteousness. Let us end with Bernard: My merit is the
LORDS mercy. And so, O LORD, grant unto us, appealling upon this ti^e to
the Bern. in ca^. Sermon. 61.
throne of grace, to enjoy the benefit of grace and mercy: and let the members
of the church of Rome, if they list, plead the merit of their own works,
and try the title of their own deseruinges at the bar of justice, and so
prove whether they shall stand in judgment or fall.

And so to conclude this treatise concerning the articles of our Christian
creed, seeing that the members of the church of Rome teach so many
contradictions against these grounds of ^a^re ^ely ^ikes, ^th^e ^tho ^d a^ike
of the catholic faith, let all the world judge what just cause they have to
boast, that they themselves only are the true catholics, and inheritors as it
were of the apostolic faith; and that their Popes faith cannot fail, not be
overcome by the gates of hell. The which thing if it were so, what need
were there with so great travail and study to seek for the decision of all
doubts, and the determination of all controversies in matters of faith from
GOD himself opening the same in the sacred books of the canonical
scriptures? what need were there so greatly to seek after the knowledge of
the arts and tongues, as being the keys that open the doors into the secret
chambers of these holy mysteries? Yea what need were there to crave the help
of all the god^ ^earned of all ages, and their directions set down in their
private vvittinges, or else at their public meetinges and assemblies in their
provincial or general councels? Certainly this were then to go the nearest
vva^e about, and as when one knovveth aslu edly where the game is lodged, not
to go directly to the same place, but to traise it out by a trouble-some
tracke. For if the Popes faith cannot fail, if he cannot pronounce sentence
against the truth, the nearest way to hold a right faith and to side with
the truth is in all matters of faith to look to his determinations, and to
rest our selves upon his oracles. And therefore also needles are the great ^ue
^pe ^s in^e cen ^ay (...)for ^ole ^e of ^stes
abours and travailes of many of the children of the church of Rome about the
opening and justifying of diverse points of their superstition and idolatry:
Whereas if they could with all their endevoures prove sufficientlye the
integritye and infallibili^ye of their Popes faith, they had vvonne the field
and gotten the full conquest, they needed not to strike one stroke more for the
further clearing of any other point of their doctrine. Neither should they
only by this means provide very well for their own security in matters of
faith; but also greatly strengthen themselves in their temporalities, and
mightily establish their earthly kingdom: as they may easily gather by that
great succesle they had therein, when this maine point of theirs was
generally held by the most part in former times for sound and catholic. For
then whosoever would be taken for a member of the catholic church, were he
king or Keazer, or whatsoever This new ar icle of faith concerning the Popes
authority and necessary subjection to be given thereto, is s^b. nefici. all t
the church of Rome, that her fiends would condemn her of great f^ly, i^ that
she would leave it fer all the articles of the Apostles creed.
he were, he was upon the necessity of his salvation to be builte upon that
Romish rock, and to settle his safety upon his triple crown, who was the
great commander in earth, purgatory, and heaven, he was wholly to be ruled by
him who had both swords temporal and spiritual, and to commit all into his
hands. And albeit by this means CHRIST himself was almost forgotten (for
what need was there to seek to him, when his Viceroy could do all) yet
this his Vicar general with all his under officers were veri^ well
remembered. And albeit fevve sought for entrance into heaven at the right door,
yet many came far and near, and brought all kind of keys of gold and
silver, lands and luelyhodes to open that door, whereof Peter and his
successors were thought to be the only, or at the least the chief porters.
For they ver^ly thought that if their pasport had been signed by the Pope, and
subscribed with SEEN AND ALLOWED, CHRIST would in no case have disalovved
thereof, but that they had been thereby most safe and sure, and out of all
manner of peril and danger. Hereby grew that high and royal state to the
kingdom of Antichrist: hereby were gathered into his storehouses the riches
and treasures of Kings and Princes: and Saint Peter's patrimony was in most
ample manner increased, nothing being thought to much that was bestovved upon
his holiness, albeit it were with the robbing, spoiling, and utter undoing of
the party himself, and of all his posterity. In so much that although the
spiritual kingdom of CHRIST was not hereby erected in all holiness, wisdom,
and righteousness yet an earthly kingdom was obtained for themselves in worldly
wealth, pomp and glory. But now behold the hand of the Lord: what is become of
this great Babylon which was a terror to all the kings of the earth? her
walls already are well battered, and down she must to the very ground, yea to
the bottomless pit of hell: when the sound faith of al sincere Christians
contained in these articles of our Christian creed, as an immovable rock in
deed shall remain unshaken, and shall give testimony of their engraffing into
him, by whose grace they continuested fast and immovable, and by whose power
they are preserved unto that eternal and everlasting kingdom which he himself
has purchased for them with his own blood. Now to this our almighty and all
sufficient king and Savior, be all honor and glory, praise and thanks both
now and ever. Amen.

CHAP. 7. Div. 1.
That the right sense of the word of God is always agreeable to his most holy
law, being the most exact rule of all true piety and godliness.

AS the true sense and interpretation of Gods (...) holi^ of the of (...) God
^eanes ^scerne ^ight ^e of di^ scrip^ from (...) wrong.
most holy word, and the points of faith drawn out of the same are always
agreeable to the articles of the creed which are the maine grounds of our
christian faith, and no way thwarte and contradict the same; for that God
himself the author thereof it true, and always true, and evermore like unto
himself: so they are holy, pure, just, and righteous altogether, even as God
himself, and his sacred law is holy and righteous altogether. And therefore it
is an overruled case, that when the litterall sense of any sentence of the
word of God favors or savoureth of any impiety, and so is contrary to the
law of God the rule of all true piety and godliness, then that litteral sense
is not the true sense, but the figurative, mystical, or spiritual. Except ye
eat the flesh of the son of Ioh. 6 53. A^g oe doct Christ ab. 3 cap. 16.
man and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. Here (says S.
Austine) our Savior seems to command an impiety: It is therefore (says he)
a figurative speech, willing us to communicate with the possion of Christ, and
sweetly and profitably to lay up in memory, that his flesh was wounded and
pierced for us.

Div. 2.
That neither faith, nor prayer, nor any other part of the honor which is due
to God, ought to be communicated to any creature.

THe law was written in two tables, to teach us, that the duty The divisio^ of
the law into two tables.
which we owe to God, and the duty which we owe to our neighbor, is distinct
and diverse, and that we should give unto God that which is Gods, and unto man
that which is man's. And yet faith, prayers, and vows, being the principal
parts of that service and honor which is due only to God, as Beda witnesses,
the church of Rome communicates with the Beda in Lu^. cap. 4.
Saints, and so bestows upon the creature the honor due to the Creator, and
confounds the duties which the Lawmakers himself has distinguished and
divided; contrary to the judgment of the church of Christ in former ages. The
saints which ^ynod. Mogunt. ca. 46.
have shut up the course of their lives with a blessed end, ought worthily to
be honored of us as the most worthy members of Christ's body, but not with
that honor which is due to God, but with that reverent regard of society and
love, wherewith holy men may be honored of us even here in this life. So
Saint Austine: we worship the saints with charity Aug. cont. Faust. Man.
li. 23. ca. 21. ^em^ verarel ca 55.
and not with service, neither do we build temples unto them. And again.
Let not the worship of the dead be to us a matter of religion: for they are
to be honored for imitation, and not to be adored for religion. And therefore
when information was given by the Jews unto the heathen magistrates against
the christians a little before the execution of that blessed Martyr Policarpe,
that they meante ^o steal Eusebius. hist. ecel. ^. 4. c. 19
away his dead body after his death, and to worship him instead of Christ,
their answer was, that they could never leave Christ, who had suffered for all
that were saved in the world, nor worship any other. For him say they we
adore as being the son of God; but the Martyrs as the disciples and followers
of the Lord we worthily love for their exceeding great good will unto their
king and master, to whom God grant that we may he companions and scholars.

Div. 3.
That the first table contains four, and the second only six
commandments.

THe church of Rome offends in dividing the last commandment (...) subdi^n
of (...) co^ma^^ents. ^um be^ Mar^re (...). a P^o ^to. (...) cate^e of (...) in
^lish. ^sima in ^ian.
into two, and in joining of the second to the first, and in some of their
prayer books and catechismes leaving it clean out, for the better shadowing
(as it seems) of their open and manifest transgression of the same
commandment: and for the more setting of that out of sight, which might gaull
and bite their guilty consciences, and break the necks of their dumble Idols.
But the distinction of the commandments depends upon the distinction of
the several duties therein contained; and therefore the first and the second
containing several duties, are to be set down as distinct several
commandments: but the last containing only diverse several members of one
general duty, if it had been to be divided, it should not have been into
two alone, but into diverse and sundry commandments.

CHAP. 8. Div. 1.
That we ought to devote our selves only to the religious service of one: true
and all-sufficient God.

Comma^. 1. THE ground of this commandment is: the Lord thy God is an
all-sufficient God, therefore thou shall have none other gods before him, but
shall devote thy self only to his service: as it may appear by the
introduction to this commandment: I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage: that is, I have
done for thee this great and wonderful benefit, as in like manner I have done
for thee all other things also, therefore as I only have stood by thee, so
thou shall only cleave to me, and as I only have showed my self to be thy
most gracious God, so thou shall shevve thy self to be my faithful servaunt,
by devoting thy self only to my service. Hear O my people (says the Lord by
the prophet David) and I will testify unto thee, O Israel, if thou will
hearken Psalm. ^1. 10.
unto me: there shall no strange Gods be with thee, neither shall thou
vvorshippe any other God. And why? I am the Lord thy God that brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, open thy mouth vvide, and I will fill it. That is:
I have not only performed for thee that great deliveraunce, but also I give
unto thee all other things whatsoever thine heart desires, and therefore
thou shall cleave to me alone, and devote thy self only to me. So to
Abraham: I am thy GOD all-sufficient: walk before me, Genesis 17. 1.
and be thou perfect: that is, cleave perfectly to me, and to me alone. I
am he that bestows all good things upon thee, and that after a most
plentiful and liberal manner, and therefore thou shall seek to none but only
to me. The which commandment when it was broken by the posterity of
Abraham, the Prophet Jeremy being amazed at the madness of that people, that
had ^ought to other then to that one, true, and all-sufficient God, and had
changed their glory for that which did not profit, breaks out into a very
strange and extraordinary exclamation saying: O ye heavens be ye astonished
at this, be afraid and utterly confounded says the Lord: for my people have
committed two (...). 12.
evils: they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters; to dig to
themselves pittes, even broken pittes that can houlde noe water. And for this
offense especially came so many and greavous destructions upon this people,
according as it was threatened also by Moses, even for that they forsook the
GOD of (...). 29. 26.
their Fathers which hade done so much for them, and did vvorshippe strange
GODS which had done for them flat nothing. Albeit they did not altogether
reject the service of the GOD of their fathers; yet for that they did either
worship other together with him, or did worship him after another manner
then he himself had appointed, therefore they are accused as if they had
utterly forsaken the GOD of their fa^hers, and had altogether rejected his
worship and service. By whose example let us take heed that we forsake not
the one, true, and all-sufficient God, (who is a full fountain of al good
things, yea al in all unto all,) by speaking unto any other then only to him,
and devoting our selves to their service. Especially whereas we have been
baptized in the name of one God the father, the son, and the holy ghost, ^r.
1. 13
and have most solemnly vowed our selves therein unto his sole and only
service; what madness is it willingly and wittingly to break this holy vow by
devoting our selves to the service of the saints, as if the ^ords service were
not honorable enough for us, or at the least not sufficient for us of it self
alone? Or if we esteem Gods service to be honorable enough and sufficient
for us, what need have we to betake our selves also to a meaner service by
becoming servants to our fellow servants? for who here in this world being
admitted to the Princes service, does afterward betake ^ipere ^um Si^s for^en
by (...) in the ^vers^ty (...) Oxford.
himself to the service of a subject? Or what scholar having taken the highest
degree in the schools, does afterward sue to obtain a lovver? And yet the
children of the church of Rome having in Baptism vowed themselves to the only
service of one GOD, do afterward devote themselves to the service of the
saints, do give them (...) and become their servantes by making them their
Patrones and Protectors, and by ascribing to their favorable help the good
success of their affairs. Camp ^p. ad Everg. Merc. Prepos. Gener. societati^
Jesu.
As Camp^an before he was apprehended here among us glories of himself, that
he, from his youth being devoted to Saint John the Baptist, was thus and thus
protected by his aid.

Div. 2.
That we ought not to resemble or worship God in any image or similitude.

2. THe ground of this commandment is; the true GOD is in comprehensible and
incomparable in majesty and glory, and therefore not to be likned or resembled
to any creature whatsoever without great disparagement, and most heinous
derogation unto his glory. The which thing we may learn of the Lord himself,
who having set down in diverse of his works his own incomprehensible and
unmatchable majesty with the vanity and as it were a plain nullity of all his
creatures in respect thereof, thereupon infers: To whom will ye liken
God! or what similitude will ye set up unto him? for whereas all the Isa. 40.
18.
creatures are nothing in respect of him, therefore he cannot rightly be
resembled by any of them. And for this cause it was that the LORD, when he
delivered his law unto his people, as he himself testifies, would not
appear unto them in any likeness or similitude, lest they should corrupt
themselves by making Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
any similitude or image of God, the Lord in that place co^de^ning it for a
greavous corruption to make any resemblance or representation of himself. The
which enormity yet for all this, when it was committed by the children of
Israel in the wilderness, When they turned even their glory into the
similitude of a cal^e Psa. 106. 20
that eats ^ay; the LORD was so highely offended therevvith, that, had not
Moses his servante rose up in the gappe, his feirce wrath would have broken
forth against them to their utter destruction. As also when the same enormity
was committed by the Gentiles, when they in like manner turned the glor^e of
the incorruptible God, into the similitude of an image (...). 1. 23.
of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and of
creeping things, albeit they did it ignorantly through vnbelei^e, yet the LORD
was so highly offended therevvith that he delivered up the offenders into a
reprobate sense, punishing that their enormous sin with a most great and
greavous punishment. And yet the church of Rome teaches not only to make
images to rese^ble God, but also to worship and adore the same.

Div. 3.
That we ought not to swear by the saints or other creatures, but only by
the true God.

3. THE ground of this commandment is: GOD is infinite in might, puissance,
and power, and therefore we must not in any case take his glorious and
dreadful name in vain, but use it always with all reverence and fear. The
parts of this commandment are two. 1. First because GOD is infinite in power
the searcher of the heart, the maintainer of truth and justice, and the
avenger of all falshoode and wrong, therefore in such cases as justice and
truth cannot couveniently be found out but by oaths, we must as it were
appeal unto GOD, and call him to witness and judge what is truth and right by
taking an oath only in his name. 2. Secondly our taking of an oath in GODS
name must not at any time be done lightly or vainly, but seriously and
religiously, and that in matters of moment and weight. (...) in ^h. c. 23.
Now contrary to the first point of this commandment the church of Rome
offends, in that she allows and likes of s^vearing by saints, thereby
after a sort placing them in GODS throne as searchers of the heart, judges of
right, maintainers of truth and justice, and avengers of falsehode and wrong.
For (as Chrysostom says) ^ys. in (...). imperf. Math. ^. 12.
he makes himself an Idolater whosoever swears by any thing besides GOD,
and sins double: First, because he swears, and then because he makes him
God by whom he swears.

Div. 4.
That all the Lords people ought especially upon the Lords day religiously to
frequent the public assemblies, and ^oyne together in their common prayers,
and in preaching and hearing Gods most sacred word, that thereby they may be
stirred to the exercise of all christian duties, and so therein not serve their
own ^ustes, but keep that day holy unto the Lord.

THE ground of this commandment is: God is infinite in wisdom, and only
knows himself and all such things as belong to his own worship and service:
Neither is he rightly known of us, but so far forth as it pleases him to
open himself 1. Cor. 2. 11 2. Tim. 3. 16 2. Pet. 1. 20
by his spirit speaking unto us in his word, and so revealing himself unto us.
And therefore are we commanded on the Lords day to rest from all our bodily
labors, and much more from such exercises as tend to the stirring up of our
corrupt lusts, and to the satisfying of our fond fancies, and to come with the
residue of the Lords people to the public assemblies in the Lords house,
that his holy spirit may sanctify our spirits, and by his holy word stir
and excite us unto all holy exercises, and so cause us to keep the Lords day
holy unto the Lord. Contrarily the church of Rome depriveth the people of the
benefit of public pra^er, and of the word of GOD, by locking them up from
them in a strange tongue, and so takes away the means whereby that day
should be sanctified, and in steed thereof has brought in such abuses, as
whereby it cannot be but greatly prophamed. For the practice of her great
Masters in former times has been to solemnize the great feast of the Lords
Nativity with a LORD of misrule: as if our Savior had come in the flesh to
deliver us from obedience to all good laws, and to procure a dispensation for
all disorder: as also to celebrate that other great feast of VVhitsuntide (at
what time our LORD and Savior CHRIST Jesus to make manifest his great power
that he had in heaven and earth sent down in form of cloven tongues his holy
sp^rite upon his Apostles) with a freer use of all such exercises, as kindle
the coals of unclean lusts, and blow the bellows to al filthy
communication, which are things well-pleasing to the unclean spirit, but most
offensive to the holy Ghost, and no way tending to the sanctification but
rather to the profanation of the Lords day. Whereas the purpose of the church
of Christ, in forbidding Marriages about the times of the three great
solemnities of Christians was, lest by the more free use of these earthly
pleasures and delights which abound most commonly at marriage feasts, the
peoples minds should be somewhat hindered from the careful preparation to
receive the holy sacrament, which was most usually celebrated at those times,
and from the thankful commemoration of those great benefits which are then
also especially to be most religiously remembered. Moreover whereas the Lord in
this commandment gives a special charge to all his people that in no wise
they forget, but carefully remember to observe and keep holy the Sabbath day
by frequenting the public assemblies, and by joining with the congregation in
prayer and in hearing the word of God, and in causing those of their families
to do the like: as also on the other six da^es to walk paine^ullie in their
several callings to his honor, and the good of his people, what shall we
think of the Monks, Eremites, and An^chorists of the church of Rome, which
are had in so high reputation for their extraordinary, and, as it is thought,
Angelical holiness, which live in the open and manifest breach of both the
parts of this commandment? For they both forsake the public assemblies,
contrary to the Apostles (...). 10. 15.
commandment, on the Lords day and do not perform on the other six days the
painful work of any profitable calling to the Lords church: and yet they
are put in great hope by their holy mother the church of Rome, that by omitting
these so necessary duties so straightly enioined by the Lord himself, for the
better perfourming of their own vvill-vvorshippes, they are in the readiest
way to the greatest perfection.

CHAP. 9.
5 That the Pope cannot exempt the clergy from secular jurisdiction, nor
license any Princes subjects to withdraw their loyalty and obedience, and to
take arms against their sovereigns.

6 That the Pope cannot make it lawfu^l, much less meritorious to lay violent
hands on the Lords Anointed.

7 That the Pope cannot authorize stews, and incestuous marriages disallowed
by God.

8 That the Pope cannot make good the sale of Masses and Pardons, but that it
shall be condemned for the^t before God.

9 That the Pope cannot license any to conceal the truth, or to avouch any
thing contrary thereto, especially when they are commanded by the Magistrate
and that upon their oath to open the same: nor yet to break faith and promise
made, no not to heretics.

10 That concupiscence entertained and liked for a while, albeit it get not our
full and settled consent, is sin.

COncerning the commandments of the second table, which lay down our duty
toward our neighbor, and belong to the preservation of humane society, the
church of Rome is an o^ender also against the same, neither can she being
charged therevvith justly and truly plead not guilty. 5 For against the fifth
commandment she offends by exempting ecclesiastical persons from secular
jurisdiction, and by discharging (as she thinks it expedient) all manner of
subjects, from their oath of obedience made unto their natural Princes, and
in exciting them also to take up arms against them, and so to stand out in
open rebellion. For this is not to honor the parents of our countries, Romans
13. 1.
and to yield subjection to higher powers, albeit they be heathenish and
persecuting Idolaters.

6 See Cardinal de Como his letter to Will. Parry
Against the sixth commandment she offends in teaching it to be not only
commendable but also meritorious to murder even the Lords Anointed: the
which outrageous villainy many other murders also are like to follow, all
true subjects (especially such as by special oath, hand, and promise of
association are bound more precisely thereto) being ready to adventure their
lives and livings for the avenging of the death of their liege and loving
Sovereigns. But this heard hearted steppe-dame little regards the lives of
many, being ready at all assayes to embrue her self over with blood, so that
she may bring to pass her plots and purposes.

7 (...) lu^d tur^ est ^dor ex ^alibet.
Against the seventh she offends in allowing, or at the least in tolerating
of open stews, for her great revennew she receaveth by them: and in
dispensing with incestuous and unlawful marriages, belike upon the former
respect.

8 And albeit she has no color nor shevve to allow of theft done by
violence, yet she her self waxes vvonderfull rich by that which is done by
fraud and deceit, in that she persuades the Laity to pay well for her
Masses and Pardons, thereby robbing them of their lands and goods: for
certainly this is no better then cunning cousonage, yea then statte theft
before God. If any Priest (says Saint Augustine) ^e verb ^ecun^ Math. 19 ^0.
47.
not contented with the wages which he has by the commandment of Go^ for
his service at the altar, does play the merchaunt, and set to sale his prayers,
and to ready to receive the very vviddovves rewards, such an one is to be
accounted rather a merchandizer then a Clerk. Neither may we allege; No
man can charge us with invasion, no man can accuse us of violence: as if
oftentimes flattery did not get a greater boo^y from widows then force.
And it skilleth not before God, whether by force or subtlety thou gettest the
goods of others, so thou enjoy them by either.

9 Now how this painted Babylonish harlot, which boasts (...). tract
(...) con. 1. ^6. ^se po^s this? ^ee (...) heart (...) suffi^
so much of fidelity and truth, likes in deed of true and faithful dealing
between man and man, how far she is of from all treachery, perjury, and
lies, it may appear in that she allows her base children being brought
even before the Magistrate to pretend ignorance, when they know the matter
right well, but as they say, not to open it to SVCH: in that also she
allows well of breach of faith and promise made to such as she accounts
and condemns for heretics. Whereby we may perceive how well she
leads her followers to the Lords hill, and to the holy tabernacle of his
heavenly kingdom, whereunto none are admitted but such as swear to their
neighbor and disappoint him not, though it be to their ^vvne hinderaunce.
Psalm 15. 4.


10 Lastly, albeit the law being spiritual sets down a rule to our souls
and spirits, and to all the very motions and affections of our hearts,
forbidding all such as tend either to the dishonor of God, or to our
neighbors hurt, yet the church of Rome teaches that concupiscence if it get
not the full consent of our will, and a settled resolution to accomplish the
same, is not a transgression Romans 7. 7. In ipsa deliberatione ^acinus est,
tametsi ad actum non perveneris. Cic. off. l. 3. Nam scel^ ^nira se tacitum qui
concipit vllum, Facti crimen habet. Horat.
of the law of GOD, neither can be justly condemned of sin. Whereas the
Apostle testifying of himself, that he had not known conc^pis^nce to be
sin, except the law had said thou shall not lust, means not in all
likely hoode that kind of lust, which is joined with a full consent of the
will: for so he being brought up at the feet of a learned Doctor in the
law, should have had less knowledge then the very heathen themselves, of
whom some could say, that the very consultation to sin was sin, albeit it
came not to execution: and that a bare purpose to do evil makes guilty of
the deed done.

CHAP. 10.
That by the law there is no entrance to life, but only by faith in Christ
Jesus, that the law detecteth the deadly wound of sin, but ministers not
the sovereign salve, causes not favor but wrath, not a blessing but a curse,
directing us to Christ to trust in his death, and not suffering us to rest in
our selves, nor yet to trust in our ^vvne righteousness.

COncerning the uses of the law it is manifest The uses of ^e law.
that the law was given to teach us how far we are endebted to God, being
an obligation wherein we are bound and that under a great forfeiture, to love
God vvithall our heart, soul, and strength, and our neighbors as our selves.
Whereby we may easily collect how unable we are to discharge this ^ebt. For
in the regenerate themselves the flesh albeit it be subdued in part, yet it
still rebelleth against the spirit: Romans 7. 23.
neither is it utterly vanquished and overcome, but is one of those enemies
that we must still fight against, until the final end of our spiritual
warfare, which is not until the last gasp of this tra^sitory life. So that
all the time of our continuance here in this world the law of God is
impossible in respect of the flesh: and such an Romans 8. 3. Act. 15. 10.
heavy and weighty burden, that none of the faithful were ever able to bear:
and therefore this way to life is clean shut up (do this and thou shall
live) because of the impossibility of the condition. And yet the church of Rome
teaches that we may in this life fulfill the whole law, and discharge our huge
debt, yea and make payment in part also for the debt of other. Furthermore the
law thus opening that perfect righteousness which the Lord requires at our
hands, and our inability to perform the same, is therefore said to bring us to
the knowledge of our sins: and sin provoking wrath, Romans 3. 20. Rom 4. 15.
Gal. 3. 10.
it is said also to work wrath: and the wrath of God being not unarmed, it is
also said to make us subject to the curse: and for that the faithful, thus
beholding their great danger, are thereby stirred up to seek for deliverance,
it is called our school m^ster that brings Romans 10 4. Gal. 3. 24.
us to Christ, which is our only deliverer and redeemer. Contrary to all which
most evident uses of the law set down by the Apostle, the church of Rome
teaches, that the law brings us not so much to the knowledge of our sins in
the transgression thereof, as to the knowledge of our perfect righteousness,
which is obtained by the full keeping and observing of the same: and so
consequently not to wrath but to favor, not to the curse but to the blessing,
not to death but to life, to trust in our selves and in our own righteousness,
and not to glory alone in the death of Christ, as in the only meritorious cause
of our great deliverance.

Thus has the Bishop and church of Rome not only undermined the foundations
of faith, but also has subverted the law of God, the rule and level of a
godly life. Now if he, that breaks Math. 5. 19.
the least of the commandments, and teaches other to do the like, shall
be called least in the kingdom God: what shall then become of that man of
sin and of his sinful generation? which 2. Th. 2. 3.
allow not only of the transgression of one of the least of these
commandments, but of every one of them little and great? yea what strange
either impudency or hypocrisy may we justly think to possess their souls;
for that they yet so greatly extol their own sincerity and rightnes, as if
truth, justice, and godliness did after a sort live and die with them, and as
if they were the Job. 12. 2.
only men that flowed and abounded with all good works, whereas they thus
violate and disanull the sacred and inviolable law of God, the rule and
level of all good works. Surely if sanctity in doctrine be a sure note of
an holy church, and impurity of an impure, as Bellarmine says, how impure
then is the church of Rome, whose impure doctrine thus offends against all
the rules of sanctity and godliness?

CHAP. 11.
1 That we ought to make our prayers only to God.

2 That we ought to sanctify the name of God by giving to him that glory
which is due unto him.

3 That we ought to promote the gospel of Christ, being the only means for
the erecting of his kingdom.

4 That all the faithful without exception, and not such as are of the
Religious sort only, ought to endeavor to fulfill the will of God, even after
that manner, as it is performed of the Angels in heaven.

5 That the faithful enjoy their daily bread ^y the most frank and free
gift of God, and not by their ^vvne merits and deservinges: and therefore
much more the release and remission of all their trespasses and sins.

6 That we ought neither to cast our selves, nor yet to cause other to full
into temptation, by refusing the means ordained by GOD for the better
vvithstandinge and subduinge of the same.

Our father which art in heaven.
THE Lords prayer being a most perfect and absolute form of prayer teaches
us in general two things: first to whom, and secondly for what we ought to
pray. The party, to whom we ought to pray, is God, who is now become our
loving father in Christ, and so most ready to grant our requests: he is
also said to be in heaven as holding the kingdom and dominion over all, and
so most able to fulfill our desires: and therefore good cause have we in all
our necessities to come, and to seek only to him and to no other. And so did
the faithful in the Primitive church as it may appear by Tertullian in his
Apology and defense of the Christians, that he made on their behoof against
the Heathen. You (says he speaking to the Infidels) seek your safety where
it is not, and ask it of them, by whom it cannot be given, neglecting him in
whose power it is: Moreover ye seek to destroy those Christians, who know
both to ask and obtain it also. For we Christians (says he) looking up to
heaven vvithour hands spreadde abroad, as being innocent; and with our h^de
uncovered, as being not ashamed; and without a prompter, as praying from the
heart; do all of us alvvates pray for all Emperors, that GOD vvoulde grant
unto them a long life, a safe Reign, a trusty Court, a faithful Council,
valiant armies, dutiful subjects; a peaceable governmente, with whatsoever
else that may be wished for either of Prince or people. These things I
cannot ask of any but of him, of whom I know I shall obtain them: For it
that is he alone that does perform the same, and I am he which should
obtain them, which am his servante, and do honor him alone etc. In which
words of Tertullian, we may observe a manifest distinction made betvveene
the true and faithful christian, and between the blind and supersticious
Idolaters: the one of them seeking to the one, true, and all-sufficient GOD who
is only able to help and succor them, and the other going and running to
such which are not able to perform the same. And verily if ye read over the
whole volume of the sacred scriptures, ye shall find no example of any of the
faithful that made their prayers to any strange God, or to any saint, or
Angel, or to any other creature whatsoever, but only to the one, true, and
all-sufficient ^ehovah: ye may find indeed the example of the damned spirit of
the rich glutton in hell, who being utterly excluded from Luc. 16. 24.
the favor of GOD, and from all hope of grace and mercy, appealed after a
sort from GOD to Abraham saying, O Father Abraham send thou I beseech thee
Lazarus, if it be but with one drop of water to coo^e my tongue, and so
somewhat to slocke mine intolerable torments.

And yet so gross and palpable darkness had over spredde the whole face of
the Romish church in these latter ages, that their profounde Doctors and great
Masters did not only teach the people to pray unto saints, but also to say
unto them the Lords prayer, which was made to this end to lead us only to
God. For the testification of which blindenes to all posterities, these ^imes
were made in Scotland concerning the same. Doctors of Theology of fowre-score
of years,
And old ioly lup^ the balde gray Friars,
They would be called Rabbi, and Magister noster,
And wot not to whom to say their Pater noster.
^res no^ colle^ Con^nt i^um ^ero, (...) sancti ^miles ^mo. See ^s and ^me^ts.
^2. Fol. ^.
Now concerning the matter of this prayer the petitions themselves, and first
concerning the sanctification of the Lords name set down in the first
petition, the first table of the law does teach us 1. first to acknowledge God
to be all sufficient, and therefore to cleave only to him: 2. secondly to
acknowledge him to be of incomprehensible glory, and therefore not to presume
to resemble him by any similitude: 3. thirdly to ascribe to him infinite power,
and therefore to swear only, albeit never vainly, by his name: 4. fourthly
to acknowledge him to be of infinite wisdom, and his word the conduite of the
same to derive it to us, and therefore to yield our selves wholly to it, to be
ruled thereby: And this is to give to God that which is Gods, to yield unto
him that honor which is due unto him, and so to sanctify his holy name;
according unto the exhortation of the prophet: Ascribe unto the Lord O ye
k^nredes of the people, ascribe unto the Lord worship and power: ascribe to
the Lord the honor due (...) 96.
unto his name, worship the Lord with holy worship. The articles of our
Creed do teach us also to ascribe unto God only the creation and government
of this world, and redemption and sanctification of the church, and so to
sanctify his holy name. And the whole company of heavenly spirits wondering at
the admirable power, holiness, justice, and truth which most gloriously shi^e in
all the works of God, do conspire together as it were with one voice to
sanctify and magnify the most holy name of the Lord saying: Great and
marve^lous are thy works Lord God almighty, ^c. 16. 3
just and true are thy ways O King of saints: who will not fear thee and
glorify thy name? for thou only art holy. Whereby we may perceive that the
whole body of the doctrine of Christ, and the whole study of his holy saints
tend to thi^ end, even to sanctify the glorious name of God by magnifying
his infinite greatness and goodness, which in truth can never be sufficiently
expressed, nor magnified in that manner as it ought to be. Now how the church
of Rome the church of the malignant does hinder the sanctification of the
Lords name, and darken and obscure his great glory, it has been before
touched in the setting down of those principal points and chief grounds of
our christian religion.

2. The second petition does teach us to pray for the planting and establishing
of the kingdom of God. Now this kingdom is tvvofold: the kingdom of grace,
and the kingdom of glory. Among the ancient Romans there was no passage to
the temple of Honor but through the temple of Virtue: and we that are
Christians are taught, that we must have our parts in the first resurrection
from sin, if we look to be partakers of the second resurrection, Apoc. 20. 6
and to be delivered from the second death. For we cannot asce^d to
Glorification but by the steps or stairs of Justification, and Vocation: Romans
8. 30.
that is, we cannot come to the kingdom of glory, but first we must be
partakers of the kingdom of grace. Now the word of grace, the word of life,
being the power of God to salvation to all that believe, is the only means
not only to erect, but also to establish this kingdom of grace. And therefore
Saint Paul taking his farewell of the pastors of Ephesus says: Now I commend
you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and
to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. The which word of
grace when it was committed to the Apostles, they were said to have received
the keys of the kingdom of heaven: the which also when it was rejected of the
Jews, they rejected together with it the kingdom of heaven. The which Word
of grace, seeing that it is kept by the church of Rome under the lock and keie
of a strange tongue from the common sort of christians, what is it but a ready
way to exclude them also out of the kingdom of God?

3. In the third petition all the faithful are taught to desire that Gods
will may be done of them all after that manner in earth, as it is done in
heaven of the holy angels, all of them according unto their measure of grace
tending and striving to this perfection. The which contending to the estate of
perfection the church of Rome reserueth only for her holy Votaries, and for
such as be of her Rel^gious orders, who that they may obtain a greater opinion
of holiness then any other, are said to be only in the way to this Angelical
perfection, all other estates and degrees of men belike being out of that way.

4 Now concerning the fourth and fifte petitions: if we have our very bread by
free gift from God^ (give us this day our daily bread) and not by the merit of
our own works, how then can we deserve remission of sins and eternal
glory? 5 yea if by our daily sins we add continually to the sum of our
debts, and must continually sue for the forgiveness of all our daily and
smaller offenses: how can we then make satisfaction for our grosser sins, and
merit also more of our creditors goods?

6 Lastly in the sixth petition the faithful acknowledging their great frailty
and weakness to withstand the temptations of sin and Satan, are taught to
fly continually to the Lords protection, and to fence themselves under the
shield of his power, that he may either keep them from the force of the
combat, or else deliver them by giving them strength to overcome. But the
church of Rome fears no such frailty in her religious Votaries, and therefore
^ Cor. 7. 2.
leaves them in the hands of their own lusts, by taking from the^ the means
ordained by God for the avoiding of the same: thereby causing them to tempt
God, by refusing the wholesome water ordained by him for the cooling of these
their fiery flames.

CHAP. 12.
That the grant of eternal life is given to the faithful only in Christ,
and not partly through him, and partly through their own works.

THe holy and sacred word of God does lay open The new Testament ^r Gospel:
^at is, the ^oyfull ty^ings of ^lvation (...) Christ jesus. Genesis 3. 24.
unto us two covenauntes of life made between God and man, the oue legal, the
other Evangelicall. The first whereof was made with man presently after his
creation, and had for the further confirmation thereof the fruit of the tree
of life for an holy sacrament, and a sacred assurance of the same; from the
most comfortable use whereof he was utterly excluded after the breach of that
covenant. The articles of this covenant were at the first written in the heart
of man, and after set down in the law of God, which declares that it depended
upon our own deeds. And therefore when the Pharisie which looked to be
saved by the works of the law, demanded of our blessed Savior, what he
should do to be saved: it was answered him, that seeing by the works of the
law he looked to be saved, he should perfectly fulfill the commandments of
the law: do this, and thou shall l^. But Luke 10. 28.
when man by his fall had broken this covenant, and so had stepped out of
this way that leads to life, and had gotten into the most dangerous ways
of sin and death, the LORD who is rich in mercy and of endless goodness
suffered him not long to wander therein, but soon reclaimed him, and made with
him a second covenant of life in the seed of the woman that should Act. 3.
25.
bruise the serpents head, and in whom all the families of the earth should
be blessed. And he appointed unto him certain sacrifices at the first for the
further strengthening and confirming of his faith, as afterward he gave to
Abraham the father of the faithful the sign of Rom 4 11.
circumcision as a seal of the righteousness before obtained by faith. The
articles of this covenant are more at large set down in the Apostles Creed;
but most briefly comprised in the Apostles answer to the ^aylors demand; what
shall I do to be saved believe thou Act. 16. 31.
(say they) in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy household. The
opposition of these covenants is set down by the Apostle: Moses (says he)
writes of the righteousness of the law, that he which does the same shall
live therein: but the righteousness which is of faith speaks Romans 10. 5.
on this wise: Say not thou in thine ^eart who shall ascend into heaven? (that
is, to fetch Christ from above:) either who shall descend into the deep?
(that is, to fetch up Christ again from the dead.) For if thou acknovvledge
with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and believe in thine heart that God
raised up him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. For the scripture says, vvh^soever believes in him shall not be
confounded. So the^ the first covenant was founded on our own obedience, the
second on the obedience of Christ: the first depends on works, the second on
faith, and not on works. And therefore it is certain that our delivery from
death, and our recovery to life by the second covena^tis only by Christ
apprehended by faith: unless we will add some third covenant of life partly in
Christ, and partly in our selves; partly by faith, and partly by works; and so
overthrowe that covenant of life which was made unto us only in CHRIST
Jesus. For as the making of the second Heb. 8. 7.
covenant was a disanulling of the first, so an establishing of a third must
needs be a disanulling of the second. Wherefore let all true Christians way
well with themselves this blasphemous doctrine of the church of Rome, who
has coined another nevve gospel, which brings to us the joyful tidinges
of remission of sins and eternal life partly through Christ, and partly
through our selves, and so has disanulled that covenant of mercy which was
made unto us only in Christ Jesus.

Neither only does this their doctrine of satisfaction and merits great wrong
unto our Savior Christ by disanulling the covenant of life made in him, and by
defacing of the sufficiency of his death: but otherwise also it is most
injurious unto God, and tends highly to the dishonor of his sacred majesty.

1. First it makes him like to a very unjust and hard Landlord, who having
granted an estate in a bargain unto a younger brother upon a sufficient fine
tendered by the elder, yet will not let the younger enjoy it, unless he fine
for it again himself.

2. Secondly it makes him like to a cruel Creditour, who having the debt
discharged to the uttermost by a friend, yet casts the poor debtour himself
into prison, until he there also in part make some satisfaction.

3. Thirdly it makes him like to a merciless Judge, who having punished an
of^ence with condign punishment, yet will have the offender punished again,
as if he delighted in the torments of the miserable.

4. Fourthly it makes him less merciful then man, who does remitte to his
penitent brother all manner of offense, and all manner of revenge also.

5. Lastly it ^inistreth matter to the malicious to the satisfying of his
malicious humor to the full, seeing as GOD does pardon us, so we are to deal
one with an other: and therefore if GOD does so forgive us our sins in
CHRIST, as that we must yet still either afflict our selves with the rigorous
works of Penance, or else be cast into the extreme torments of Purgatory,
then we may also so forgive our brother, as that we may yet procure his most
greavous punishment.

Wherefore let all true and faithful Christians abhor those abo^inations of
the whore of Babylon, yea let all such, as look for forgiveness of sin and
eternal life by the covenant of mercy in CHRIST Jesus, give the glory thereof
not to themselves or their own works, but only to the death of our
all-sufficient Redeemer. And yet let them have a most earnest care to show forth
their most holy faith by their godly works, (not as if they were part of the
satisfaction made for sin, or any parcel of the price given for the
purchase of eternal glory) but thereby to testify their thankefulnes to him,
who has paid the whole price for that purchase himself, and has made for
them a perfect and full satisfaction. For true faith is not idle nor dead, but
a living faith working by love: albeit this mother justifies without the
Fides iustificat ante partum. Roffensis.
help of her daughters, yea before their very birth as the truth has forced
an enemy to confess. For works do follow the justified man, they go not
before our justification: even as good fruits proceed from a tree which is
already good, declaring and not making the tree good. Wherefore if we which by
nature are wild olives, being ingraffed in Christ are made good olives; and if
we which of our selves bring forth sour grapes being planted into the true
vine yield a sweet liquor; if we be made good trees and pleasant plants such
as are settled in the caelestiall paradise; we owe that wholly to our engra^ing
into Christ by a true faith, and not in any wise to the fruits of our faith,
the which are only requisite and necessary duties, which are carefully to be
performed of all such, as are called to be pertakers of so great mercies. For
as in those lands and liuinges which are holden of temporal Lords, there are
besides the fines paid for the purchase of the first estates, certain rentes,
services, and other duties, which are also to be performed for the quiet and
peaceable possessing of the same liuinges: and yet he were but a simple tenante
that vvoulde imagine those rentes and services to be his whole fine, or any
part or parcel thereof: even so the faithful which have their estates
purchased for them by the death of Christ in the kingdom of heaven, must as it
were pay their rents and perform their services, and submit themselves to the
custo^e of that heavenly manor, and yet they must neither be so proud nor so
simple, as to think that these rentes, services, and duties are any part or
parcel of that fine, that was paid for the first purchase of that heavenly
inheritance.

Chap. 13.
That the very end and scope of the sacraments also is to teach the faithful
that remission of sin and eternal life is obtained only by faith in Christ.

UNTO the preaching of the gospel and Bap isme Eucharist.
doctrine of the new testament, were adjoined by our Savior Christ the
sacraments of the new Testament. For it pleased our loving and gracious
father not only to give us eternal life in his only begotten son; but also
by certain external rites and ceremonies to take us as it were by the hand,
and to put us into possession thereof. If we had been (says Chrysostom)
spiritual GOD Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 83.
vvoulde have given us these thing nakedly and spiritually: but now for that
our souls dvvell in bodies, he gives spiritual things under visible
creatures. Visible sacraments (says another) were In quaest ve teris
testamenti.
ordained for such as are environed with flesh, that by the steps thereof
we might ascend from such things as are seen, to things that are
understood. Saint Austine calls the sacraments Aug. ^ont. Faustum Lib. 19.
Cap. 16.
in general a visible word, as our Savior calls the cup in particular
the nevve Testament in his blood: because as the word and testament does
teach our ears that the blood of Christ is the purgation of all our sins,
and his body the bread of eternal life; even so do the sacraments represent
the same doctrine visibly to our eyes. For certain it is that in the right use
of th^se holy mysteries, by the reverent receauinug of the bodily creatures God
does ratify to the faithful his grant and donation of spiritual things,
that is of remission of sins, and of eternal life in CHRIST JESUS: and the
faithful in the religiou^ use thereof do again for their part after a sort
vow unto GOD, that they will seek for the same blessings only by Christ, and
not by any other means whatsoever Wherefore the members of the church of Rome
seeking for remission of sins and eternal life not only by CHRIST, but also
by their own merits and satisfactions may worthily be charged not only as
transgressors of the new Testament, but also as violaters of the holy
sacraments, and breakers of that solemn and sacred vow made at thereceauing
of these holy mysteries. Yea whereas in the religious use of the sacraments
GOD gives us CHRIST with all his blessings according unto the plain words
of the institution of the LORDS supper (take ye, eat ye, this is my body)
the church of Rome has turned this tipsie turvy, and will not so much,
receive CHRIST therein as a sacrifice already offered to GOD for them, but
will offer up him again unto GOD, and that as a propitiatory sacrifice both
for the quick and dead. In so much that this holy sacrament, being ordained
of GOD to testify the sufficiency of that sacrifice, which our Savior
himself once offered upon the altar of the cross, is clean perverted by the
church of Rome, and as it were forced to witness the contrary: and being
appointed to continue the memory of CHRIST'S death, and of the singular virtue
thereof in procuring the full and perfect redemption of man, by this means it
is abused to evacuate the cross of CHRIST, and to annihilate the virtue of
that perfect redemption. Thus have they turned this holy and blessed sacrament
into a sacrilegious and Idolatrous sacrifice: the which because it is grounded
upon their doctrine of Transubstantiation and the Real presence, I will
therefore add one word also for the confutation thereof.

The worshippers and adorers of their bredden CHRIST do charge us (for that
we deny Transubstantiation and their Real presence) to make CHRIST a liar,
and to deny his plain words, or at the least greatly to darken and obscure
them with tropes and figures. But that all indifferent persons may understand,
who they be that make Christ a liar, and darken and obscure his plain words,
I would demand of them but this one question: which is, In what outward
elements Christ ordained this holy sacrament of his body and blood? and what
therein be the visible signs of the invisible grace? whether bread and wine
in their nature and substance, or the bare and naked shows thereof? Verily
the Evangeliste^ with the Apostle do Mat. 26. 26. Luke 22. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 24.
testify, that our Savior Christ at the institution of this holy sacrament
took bread in his nature and substance, and not the bare and naked shows of
bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it to them saying,
this is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. And in
truth sacraments if they have not a certain similitude (as Austine says)
with the things whereof they are sacraments, Aug. ad B^nif. ^p. 23.
they are no sacraments at all, but loose the name and nature of sacraments.
Now true and substantial bread and wine have a certain similitude with
Christ the heavenly Mannah and true bread of life, and the bodily nourishment,
that proceeds from the very substance of these earthly creatures, does fitly
represe^t our spiritual nourishment that we have by Christ: but whitenes,
rednos roundnes, with the outward shows of bread and wine, what resemblance
have they either of Christ himself, or of the benefits that we receive by him?
wherefore it is not a giving of the lie to the Lord of truth, nor so much as an
obscure and hid kind of speech, but that which is most familiar and agreeable
to the nature of a sacrament, thus to interpret Christ's words (this is my body)
this bread is the sacrament or sacred Occam in 4. sent did. 13. Gardener in
Marco Ant^ Constable. De consecratione did. 2. c. timorem. Glossa ibide^.
sign of my body. Whereas in truth it is not only a great obscuring, but a
plain perverting of our Saviors words to interpret them with some of the
members of the Romish church: as this is my body, that is, this bread goes
away, and my body succeeds in the place thereof: or with other of them, this
my body is my body: or with a third sort, this Individuum vagum, this I cannot
tell what is my body: or this nothing is my body. Surely these doubtful and
strange interpretations of Christ's words, do not only obscure, but pervert the
same, deluding the hearts of the Lords people, and undermining the soundnes of
their faith. For how can they eat these outward shows? or what benefit could
they obtain by them if they could eat the^? was not this sacrament of the
Lords supper ordained to the same end, as all other sacraments are, even to
assure us of our spiritual union with Christ, and the interest that we have
thereby to all his blessings? and how is this herein ratified and confirmed
unto us? verily not by the bodily receiving of Christ's body, nor by receiving
of the outward shows of bread and wine, but by the reverent receiving of the
holy sacraments and signs of the body of Christ, and of his blood. And seeing
there is no bodily commixtion between Christ and the faithful, to what purpose
serves a bodily participation? seeing also (as they themselves teach) Christ
being bodily received of the wicked departs again from them: and being
bodily received of the faithful, yet is not thereby united unto them nor
received to life, but only when he is received of the^ by faith. Lastly, why
should the litterall sense of these words (this is my body) be so much urged,
which is impossible, barbarous, and blasphemous, See Thom. Bi^son. Epis.
Winton. part 4. fol. 733.
but that all the world might most evidently discern thereby, who is that
blasphemous whore of Babylon?

Thus has the Bishop and church of Rome set up many and manifest
contradictions against the gospel and the law, the creed and the commandments,
the grounds of faith and of a godly life, and so has brought in that great
Apostasy foretold by the Apostle, 2. The. 2. 3.
the which our Rhemistes themselves upon the same place do in the end resolve
to signify a revolt from most of the points of our christian religion, which
was to be brought in by the great Antichrist. For whereas all other
heretics, being in comparison but petty adversaries to Christ, have oppugned
but one, or two, or some few points of our christian profession, this
adversary has assaulted the whole body thereof, that so he might openly
proclaim himself to be that grande adversary of Christ, even that very great
Antichrist. And therefore we need not now look for the coming of such an
Antichrist, which shall seat himself in the temple of Jerusalem, seeing we
may behold him already come and placed in Peter's chair, and in the statly
palaces of the church of Rome. The which thing as it has bin sufficiently
declared already in the former parts of this treatise, so it remains further
to be made manifest by diverse other particular prophesies, (wherein the great
Antichrist is as it were drawn out in his proper colors, that so he might be
the better known and avoided) which are to be delivered in the chapter
following.

CHAP. 14.
1 That the great Antichrist and his adherents shall not be open enemies to all
professed Christians, but rather pretensed favorites and friends.

2 That the principal point of the Christian faith, oppugned by Antichrist and
his adherentes, shall not be the dignity and authority of the church, but the
virtue and perfection of the work of the redemption wrought by the head of
the church, with his priestly and kingly offices whereby he accomplished the
same, as being the chiefest foundation of our Christian faith.

3 That the principal point of his Antichristian doctrine, whereunto he and
his adherentes shall ascribe greatest perfection, shall be the vow of single
life, and abstinence from diverse kinds of meats, and other such
will-worshippes of their own devising.

4 That it is a manifest mark of the Antichristian pride of the B. of Rome
against God, in that he ascribes greater perfection to the rules of his
religious orders, then to the law of God himself: yea in that he takes upon
him to dispense with the law of Goa as if he were superior to God.

5 That it is a manifest mark of the Luciferlike and Antichristian pride of
the Bishop of Rome against all that is called God, and counted worthy of honor
here in his church, in that as a presumptuous usurper he exalts himself not
only against the Ecclesiastical, but also against the civil governors, yea
against general councels themselves, which after a sort represent unto us the
whole church.

6 That the Bishop of Rome in his Antichristian pride mainetaining his own
faith to be an immovable rock which cannot be shaken, his decisions to be
infallible oracles, which cannot err, his church to be eternal which cannot
perish, declares himself most manifestly to be that vain glorious whore of
Babylon which vaunteth her self, and says, I sit as a Queen, and am no
widow, and shall see no mourning.

7 That the seat designed by the spirit of God for the great Antichrist of
these last times is that city, which in S. John's time reigned over the kings of
the earth, and that was Rome: as it may be also con^ectured by the number of
Antichrists name shadowed in the figures 666, and expressed by Latein^s, that
is a Roman: or by Romijth, or Italica Ecclesia in the account of the Hebrewe
and Greek letters, and that is the church of Rome.

8 That a Papist, as a Papist, is a limb of Antichrist, and so no member of
Christ, and therefore has no interest in the work of our Redemption wrought
by Christ: of the which if he will be partaker, he must flatly renounce all
society with Antichrist, and fight the Lords battles against him under the
banner of Christ.

1 BEllarmine that great pillar of the heresies In praf^. lib de cont^ rel.
tom. 1. Act. 24. 14. Cyp l. 2. ^p. 3
and Idolatries of of the church of Rome endeavors by this means to fasten
on us (who believe all things that are written in the Law and in the
Prophets, and which our Lord Christ, who was before all, has delivered unto
us) the heresies that were to arise in these latter times, for that we
vvithstande boldly and constantly the most grievous corruptions of the church
of Rome. For (says he) the Devil the founder of all falshoode and lies, the
enemy of God and of all truth, the opp^gner and underminer of all the articles
of our Christian faith, as in former ages he has assaulted the first points
thereof which concern the mystery of the blessed Trinity, so to shevve his
hatred against all the points of the same, has now by us (as he would have
the world persuaded) in these last times endeavored the overthrovveof those
other articles, which concern the holy Catholic Church. But his collection
herein is sophistical: for that it is one thing to reprove the errors of
the Church of Rome that now is, and an other thing to deface the holy
Catholic Church: for that the church of Rome that now is, is fallen from
that faith, which was there first planted by the blessed Apostles Peter and
Paul, as it may appear to any indifferent person, that without partialiality
will compare the most part of that doctrine which she now mainetaineth,
but with that only which is delivered by the Apostle Saint Paul in his
Epistle to the Romans. The truth is that the Devil in the Primitive Church
made his chief battery against the doctrine of the most glorious Trinity; but
that his repulse therein was not such, as caused him altogether to give over
that enterprise. For ^ee has in some countries renewed the same assault
again in these days, and has labored a fresh to shake that very self same
foundation. And albeit he be an enemy to all the members of Christ's mystical
body, yet his chiefest malice is against the head: And Genesis 3. 15. 1. Cor 3 11
Mat. 16. 18.
for that the doctrine of our Redemption wrought by CHRIST it that invincible
rock vvhereon the church is builte, his chiefest assaults have been set
against the same by his Ministers the false Prophets and Antichrists of these
latter times; who are therefore in holy scripture not so much called (...) or
(...), as if they should utterly deny GOD, or oppugn the doctrine of the
blessed Trinity, as (...), for that they shall (albeit not in outward shows
but in effect and deed) evacuate the cross of CHRIST and the works of our
redemption wrought thereby. The great Antichrist (as says Saint John) shall
have two horns like a lamb; that is, shall pretend the two fold authority of
Christ the immaculate and undefiled lamb of God: and (as the Apostle
testifies) he shall sit in the temple of God as God, that is, as Gods
Leifetenant general and Christ's Vicar universal represe^ting his person and
executing his authority: and shall pretend himself to be the church of Christ,
or at the least shall arrogate to himself the chief ^eate Aug. de civ. dei
lib. 20. Cap. 19.
in the same, as S. Austine testifies, and Theodorete and P^masia^ upon the
same place of the Apostle. And verily if Antichrist when he came, had openly
rev^ed the old condemned heresies of the Arrians, Marcionites, Manichees and
the like, and had in flat terms denied either the natures or the offices of
Christ our Savior, what Christian would not soon have espied his wickedness?
and what faithful person would not straight ways have abhorred his
blasphemy? Therefore that the great Antichrist might the more easily bring in a
great Apostasy from the faith, and the sooner make drunk all the kingdoms
of the earth with the cup of his spiritual fornication and adultery, he was
to come like an whore with Apoc. 17 4 2. Th. 2. 10.
flattery and deceit, with strong delusion and all deceaueablenes of
unrighteousness, and to offer forth his poison in a cup of gold: that is, he
was in outvvard appearance to make g^ate shevve of the Gospel and faith of
CHRIST, and most gloriously to pretend, that he and his adherentes are the
only Catholics, and the only pillars of CHRIST'S church.

The ass, perceauing that all the beasts of the forest stooped and bovved
low before the Lion, vvrapped himself in a Lions skin, and in confidence
thereof came among them, and began to make an harrish noise, that so he might
receive honor of them: the lesser beasts beholding this bugge, fell down
before him and did him homage: but the greater and vviser beasts discerning
him by his voice, set him at naught, and laughed him to scorn. The Bishop of
Rome knowing what honor is due unto Christ and his church, has put on as it
were the Lions skin by pretending himself to be Christ's Vicar, and his
church to be the church of Christ. Now many men judging only by the outward
appeara^ce, have so taken him to be, and have honored him accordingly: but
other who have more thoroughly looked into the truth, have by the sound of his
voice and doctrine found him not to be the vicar nor yet the friend of Christ,
but eve^ his grand enemy the very great Antichrist. For they will not suffer
themselves to be deluded with colors and shows, seeing they will understand
and that by the caution given by their master Christ, that the heretics of
these last times shall come in sheep clothing, when inwardly they be
ravening wolves: and that, Antichrist, the head of Math. 7. 15. Greg. in ^ob.
l. 25. cap. 20 Hill. con^. Auxentium Chrys^in Math. Him. 49.
all hypocrites by the judgment of Gregory, shall feign piety, to draw to
iniquity: and that, under the cloak of the gospel (as Hilary says) he shall
be contrary to Christ, in so much that Christ shall be denied, when he is
thought to be preached. They know, by the admonition of Chrysostom, that they
must come to the divine scriptures only, that so they may rightly discern the
doctrine of Antichrist: seeing that if respect be had to names titles, and
profession, he and his adherentes shall profess themselves good Christians,
yea they shall pretend greater chastity and mortification of the flesh, then
shall be found amongst the true Christians. And so Sa^t Paul by the spirit
of prophecy had most evidently foretold that the heretics of these latter
times, that is Antichrist 1. Tim 4. 2.
and his adherentes should speak lies through hypocrisy, forbidding to marry,
and commanding to abstain from meats, that so by their hypocritical shevve
of continency and abstinence they might procure the greater credit both to
themselves, and to their doctrine. Wherefore ^t is but a cunning and crafty
collusion of Satan, to persuade the world that Antichrist his Leife-tenant
general should be an open enemy of CHRIST and his church, and make open
war against all professed Christians, that vvhiles they prepared themselves
against such an open Antichrist, they might suffer themselves vnavvares to be
overtaken by the subtlety and fraud of the true, but privy Antichrist. And so
certainly it came to pass: For as he caused the Jews, who professed
themselves to be the Lords only heritage, to refuse their true Messiah and
Christ, vvhiles he persuaded them to look for such an one, as should come
with outward pomp, earthly glory, and establish his kingdom by an high arm
of flesh: so he has prevailed with those that accounted themselves only to be
the members of the true church in these latter daie^, and has made them yield
to the spiritual bondage of Antichrist, whiles he warned them to beware of
such an Antichrist, as should proclaim open war, and be at utter defia^ce
with all professed Christians. But what said our Savior to Math. 16. 3.
the deceived ^evves? ye hypocrites ye can discern the face of the sky, and
can ye not discern the signs of the times? They that thus expected a
vvorldly Messiah should have diligently looked into the books of the
Prophets, and so duly examined the signs of the true Messiah, that finding
them thoroughly performed in CHRIST (as the drifts and discourses of the
Evangelistes do testify, and our Savior himself witnesses in these
words, all things are finished) should thereby have been induced to have
received him for the true Messiah. After the like manner Ioh. 19. 30.
all that profes^e themselves to be true Christians, and would not be deluded
by the subtle^ies of Satan, shoud be careful to discern the signs of these
times, and to observe the right notes and marks of the true Antichrist, that
so they might be able both to descry and also to avoid his most dangerous
snares. When the Pharisees, that looked that their Messiah should be a
temporal Monarch, demanded of our Savior Luc. 17. 20.
CHRIST, when the kingdom of GOD (the kingdom of the Messiah) should come,
he answered: The kingdom of God comes not with observation: Neither shall
men say, Lo here, Lo there; for the kingdom of GOD is within you. Whereby
he signifies, that the kingdom of the Messiah should not be with outvvard
pomp and earthly glory, but that by the preaching of the gospel he should lay
the foundation of a true faith and a godly life in the hearts of all his
people, and so establish within them his spiritual kingdom, consisting in
righteousness, peace, and ^oy in the holy Ghost. After the like manner may we
be bold to avouch, Romans 14. 1^
that the kingdom of Antichrist comes neither with observation, for that he
shall not be an outvvard and professed enemy to Christianity, but shall with
great subtlety undermine the foundations of a true faith and godly life, and
so erect his spiritual and Antichristian kingdom. And hereof it is that
Chrysostom calls Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 49.
(not bands and companies of armed soldiers) but heresies the armies of
Antichrist: and certain it is that al heretics that did arise from the
Apostles times, and did oppugn any point of faith, 2. Th. 2. 7.
are said to prepare away to the kingdom of Antichrist: for this Mystery of
^niquitie did work even in the Apostles time: And is called a Mystery, for
that it did work secretly, their poisoned doctrine being outwardly shadowed
with the profession of the true ^aith. And verelie how came Arrianisme it
self to overflovve the outvvarde face of the whole Hieron adver^.
Luciferianos. Leo. Epist. 81
visible church? Infidelity (says Jerome) was planted under the name of
faith. So in the time of Leo, how were heresies set abroach? you think
(says he speaking to the autors of them) that ye deal for faith, whereas
ye contend against faith: ^ee are armed with the name of the Church, and yet
ye fight against the Church. But especially in these last times, since
Antichrist began more and more to be disclosed, the old Serpent has
searched out the very depth and profundity of all his crafty devices, and
has bestovved all his art, cunning, and skill, to beautify his corrupt
doctrine with many fair glozes, and to painte it with many glorious colors.
An example whereof we have in that proud champion of this great
Antichrist, who marched forth not many years since like Golia^ the Gittite 1.
Sam. 17.
(who had an helmet of brass upon his head, and a brigandine vveighing 5000
shekels of bras^e upon his legs, and a sh^lde of brass upon his shoulders,
the s^fte of whose spear was like a weavers beam, who defiled the host of
the living GOD saying give me a man that we may fight together.) After the like
manner marched forth this other proud champion with his most stately furniture
(as he himself thought) and armor of proof, even with a most goodly and
glorious shevve of all Antiquity and Novelty, Law and Custom, Fathers and
Councels, Histories and all Monuments, Reasons natural and moral, together
with the whole armies and hosts of heaven and earth, and the bands and
companies of all the creatures great and small, and in confidence hereof he was
bold to blaspheme the truth of the gospel, and to revile the professors
thereof even all the Lords armies, and to provoke them all to an open combat.
Now there was sent forth against this Giant little David with a staff as it
were, a s^ing and a fevve Guilielmus Whitakerus.
small stones taken out of the clear streams of the sacred scriptures, and so
with this armor of the Lords he overthrewe this vain glorious Go^ah the
son of pride, and child of Antichrist, and with his own sword of Fathers,
Councels etc. he cut of his head and gave his carcass to be meat for the birds
of the air, and the beasts of the field, and made it manifest to all
indifferent persons, that this proud vaunt was nothing else but a glorious
show of vain words, and a puffing blast of a swelling spirit.

The Apostle S. Peter by the spirit of prophecy foreseeing the great
corruptions of these last and most dangerous days, sets down these notes
and marks of the false prophets and Antichrists, which shall seduce the most
part of the Christian world: 1 as first in general terms, 2. Pet. 2. 1.
that they shall prively and under the vizard of truth bring in damnable
heresies, Satan in them turning himself into an Angel of light, and not
showing himself openly as he is, but shaddowing his false-hood under the
cloak of truth: For with ^ei^edwordes (says he) shall they make merchandise
of the people, that is, under the pretense, as it were, of the Catholic faith,
the Holy Church, the consent of Fathers, Christ's V^car, Peter's successor.
Antiquity, Unity, Universality, they shall sell many ^oules to the Devil, when
they, which be deceaved by such means, shall persuade themselves that they
ga^e God.

2 Secondly, the Apostle sets down in particular what shall be the principal
of these damnable and privy heresies, even this that they shall deny the
Lora^ha^ bought them: that is, they shall deny the great virtue and sufficiency
of our redemption wrought by Christ, Quicquid eiu^ negaris, ipsum negavit. Aug.
in Joh. tract. 66.
which is in effect a ^at denial of Christ himself. For (as Austine
teaches) whosoever denies any thing belonging to Christ, denies Christ.

3 Th^dly, they shall come with so strong delusion, that they shall make drunk
with the cup of their spiritual fo^nication many of the countries and
kingdoms of the earth, whereby there shall fall out a great Apostasy from the
faith, the multitude following their damnable ways.

4 Fourthly, they shall speak evil of the way of truth, charging both the
profession thereof with error and heresy, and the professors of the same with
many most heinous and grievous crimes.

5 Lastly, Apo. 18. 13.
through covetousnes they shall make merchandise of people, and set out to sale
even their souls for gain. Now do not all these cognisaunces and badges of
these heretics and Antichrists of the last times agree most apparently to the
Pope and his Ministers? of whom we may say, that they seem to be friends, but
indeed Omnes a^ ici, and omnes inimici: servi Christi serv^un^ Antichrist^.
Bern. in c^atserm. 33.
are enemies: In show they serve Christ, but in truth Antichrist. For howsoever
in outvvard show they seem to esteem of the Lord that bought them, and of
the redemption wrought by his death, yet in effect they clean overthrow the
virtue and validity thereof, in that they teach that we must seek for a
second justification by our own deeds, and not content our selves with our
first justification by Christ: and that we must make satisfaction by the works
of Penance, or else in Purgatory for our own sins, as if Christ's
satisfaction were not sufficient: and that we must deserve heaven by our
own merits, as if Christ had not fully bought it with his blood. Now what
other thing (says S. Austine) do we Aug. de verb ^om. secund. ^oh. ser. 45.
fearein Antichrist, but that he shall honor his ow^e name, and cont^e^e
Christ's? And what else does he when he ^aith. I justify? For to seek to
establish our own righteousness, is to derogate from the virtue of Christ's
righteousness; and to seek justification by our own works, is to disalovv
the fulness of our justification by Christ: and is not this to honor our selves
with the dishonor of Christ, which is a mark of a very Antichrist? For as our
Messiah and Savior was an all-sufficient God, that so he might be an
all-sufficient Savior, so he vvil be acknowledged an all-sufficient Savior, or
no Savior; an entire, perfect, and only Redeemer, or no Redeemer. And therefore
in that the Bishop of Rome and his adherents do deny our Savior Christ to be
an entire, perfect, only, and all-sufficient Savior, they do in effect deny
him to be their Savior at al, according unto the prophecy of the Apostle S.
Peter. And yet have they set such a gloze upon this their most wicked doctrine,
and delivered forth their poison in such a golden cup, that a great number have
been deceived and led into error by them, and many have followed their
damnable ways: in so much that whosoever never so little opposed himself
against them, he was strait ways an Horetike and a Lollarde for his labor, a
fire and a faggot was to good for him, and whatsoever mischief they could do
him either in word or deed, all was thought to little. And did they not with
feined words deceive the world, whiles they taught that this doctrine of
meriting of salvation by our own works, was both a magnifying of the virtue
of Gods most holy spirit, by whose power and efficacy they are wrought, and a
great provocatio^ to piety and godliness, in that thereby we should deserve our
own salvation? yea did they not through covetousness make merchandise of the
people, whiles they taught that they had power to remit sins, and that they
had the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and that they could by their masles
and pardons deliver any soul whatsoever out of Purgatory, if that they were
well hired and pa^de for their pains? And did they not by their thus
merchandiz^ng of men's souls so well profit and gain, that they had gotten
into their own hands many of the goodliest possessions in Christendom, with
great abundance of riches and treasures, and had still at co^mande, as they
thought good, the purses and lively hoods of all Christians? Wherefore seeing
that all these marks of the he^et^kes and Antichrists of these last times do
so apparently fit the Pope and his Ministers, we doubt not but that we may take
them for those very parties: and that so much the more if we duly consider,
how in particular also they derogate from the priestly and kingly office of our
Savior Christ, whereby he accomplished the work of our redemption.

There are two points wherein his Priesthood consists, his sacrifice, and
his mediation. Concerning his sacrifice the Apostle teaches that as it was
appointed for all men once to die, and after death Heb. 9. 21.
judgment; so Christ was once offered to purge the sins of many: and that if
he should have often offered himself, he should have often suffered. As also
that this is a difference between the sacrifices of the Aaronical Priesthood
and the sacrifice of Christ, that they were often reiterated and repeated, for
that it was impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away
sins: whereas the sacrifice of Christ was but once made, neither needed indeed
to be made any more, seeing thereby he has brought in eternal redemption,
and made Heb 9 10. 12 14.
perfect for ever them that be sanctified. Now, as if our Savior Christ had
not by his oblation of himself once made brought in eternal redemption, and
made perfect for ever them that are sanctified; the Pope and his Priests will
needs offer him again in their Mass, the which they avouch to be
apropitiatory sacrifice both for Heb. 10. 18.
the quick and the dead, albeit as the Apostle has plainly testified, where
there is remission of sin, there is no more sacrifice for sin: but our Savior
Christ by his one oblation of himself once offered has procured a plenary and
full pardon for all our iniquities and sins, and therefore now there cannot
remain any more sacrifice to be offered for sin; especially whereas our
Savior Christ is our only Priest according to the order of Melchizedech, who,
for that he endures for ever, Heb 7. 24.
has an eternal Priesthood which cannot pass from him to any other: and
therefore all our Popish Priests, which will needs intrude themselves to be
partners with Christ in this office of his Priesthood and will offer him again
up unto God, are worthily to be condemned for usurpers of that honor, which no
way belongs unto them.

Now as they thus by their Priesthood and by their sacrifice of the Mass do
deface the Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ, so do they also derogate from
the same by their doctrine of the Intercession and mediation of Saints. For
whereas our Savior Christ has now long since ascended into heaven, and there
sits at the right hand of God, ever living to make intercession for us, and
whereas the virtue of his death and passion is always present before God,
procuring for us the favor of God, and a ready grant to all our requests, as
far forth as it is behouefull and co^venient for us: if this mediation and
intercession of Christ which is continually before God be sufficient, what need
have we to seek for the mediation of the Saints? But this mediation of CHRIST
in the judgment of Saint Augustine is so sufficient, and the resting only
thereon so sure a mark of a faithful Christian, that he is bold to make this
resolution therein: We have JESUS CHRIST our advocate, and he is Aug. in ep.
Ioh. tract. 1.
the propitiation for our sins: he that houldeth this, holds no heresy, he
that holds this, makes no schism. As likewise on the contrary side he is
bold to affirm, that if the very Apostle Saint John Aug. cont. Epist. Part.
Lib. 2. cap. 8
himself had said: If any man sin you have me for your advocat, and I
obtain pardon for your sins, that no faithful person would have
acknowledged him for an Apostle of Christ, but rather have defied him as a
very Antichrist.

3 Likewise concerning our Saviors kingly office and authority of making of
laws to guide us in such a course, as that we may walk, as it becomes
those, which are called to be pertakers of so great mercies, we know that we
are not our own but his, that has ransomed us with so great a price, that we
should be subject to his only laws, and yield our obedience only to his
co^mandementes. For we have no other Lord besides him who has authority to
impose laws upon us, we have but one Lord and lawgiuer who is able to save and
to destroy. Contrary to this royal and sovereign authority of Christ, the
Pope and his adherentes Ephesians. 4. 5. Iac. 4. 12.
have taken upon them to impose laws, rules, and orders upon the people of
God, yea and have given them praise and commendation that by observing the
same, they may do works of supererogation availeable for the salvation of
other men, and may win such credit as to be accounted the only religious of
all other, and may attain to greater holiness and perfection the^ may be gotten
by the law of God. So that albeit Moses himself, after that he had delivered
Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
the law of God to the people, testified of the dignity and exele^cy thereof,
that there was no people that had laws so righteous, as was all that law
which he had set before them: yet the Pope would bear the world in hand, that
the rules of Friar Frau^cis Dominicke and the rest do lead unto greater holiness
and perfection, the^ may be obtained by the law of God. Wherefore it is not
without 1 Timothy 3. 16 and 4. 1.
cause that the Apostle did fore signify, that as our redmption wrought by God
manifested in the flesh is the greatest mystery of Christian godliness: eve^ so
the prohibitio^ of meats and marriage (according to the rules of Friar
Frau^cis and the rest) should be the doctrine in outward show of greatest
excellency and perfection among false prophets of the last times, the limbs
and members of the great Antichrist, wherein the Pope and his adhere^ts most
injuriously derogating from the law of Christ our only spiritual Lord and king,
does show himself that man of sin, that son of pride, that very Antichrist,
who was to sit in the temple of God, and to advau^ce himself above God.

4 For what does he else, when he advau^ceth his orders and rules above Gods
law? and not only so, but presumethto dispense against the law of God, and to
set greater penalties upon the breach of his own orders the^ upon the
tra^sgressio^ of Gods co^ma^deme^ts, yea and flatly to repeal the precise
co^mandeme^ts of Christ? An example whereof we have in the Lords supper, the
which was ordained by him in both kinds, to assure the faithful of their full
and perfect spiritual nourishment they have by him, as S. Austin and some of
the Aug. in. tr. in Joh. 26.
Schole. me^ also have taught. The which glory of Christ to be our spiritual
nourishment unto eternal life, that it might be abolished, or at the least
obscured, the Devil by the Pope has maimed this institution of the Lords, and
has repealed his co^ma^deme^t (drink ye al Mat. 26. 27. Luc. 22. 20.
of this) in restraining the people from the use of the cup, albeit it be the
new testament in his blood: (whereof the people ought to be pertakers, as well
as the Priest:) and the Apostle has added, that Gal. 3. 15.
unto the testament of a mere man none will presume to a^de or abrogate, much
less to the testament of Christ our Lord (the Pope and his popelings only
excepted.) Whereas also this commandment being de livered in general terms,
and at the same time, and to the same per so^s (as that other commandment was,
take ye, eat ye, this is my body) must needs be of the same force, and bind
also to the same obedience. The which thing to be most true we need not seek
for any Gerard. Lorich. de Missa publica proreganda.
further witness, seeing we have the testimony of one of their own friends, who
is bold to term all such false Catholics, and most wicked blasphemers who
hinder the reformation of this noto rious abuse. And in very deed the case is
so clear and evide^t, that by the Bishops of Rome themselves who lived in
purer ages, the Leo. sermon. 4. de quadragesima.
abstaining from the cup has been condemned as an open error in the
Manichees: and strait iniunctio^ has been given, that such as abstain from
the one be driven f^rm the other, for that the Gelasius de consecratione did.
2. c. comp^rimus.
dividing of one and the self same mystery could not be done without most
greaavous sacrilege. Wherefore sacrilegious is the pride of al these late
Bishops of Rome by the testimony of one of their own predecessors, in that
they presume to divide those things which Christ has joined together, and to
maime and ^angle his new Testament, and to repeal his flat commandment: as
also for that in their greatest pomp this very sacrament, which they pretend
to honor as Christ taking it in truth to be very Christ, is carried before
them on an hackney, when they themselves are carried on men's shoulders, their
own throne is set above the altar, the cross which is carried upon the right
hand of kings swords and scepters (for that as they say divine honor is due
unto it) is notwithstanding laid under their feet: and in the lubile they
beat upon the gates of Paradise with a golden ha^^er, as it is expressed in
their Pontificals, and exercised in their soleni^ies. Now what are all these
things but the plain steps of the intolerable and Luciferlike pride of the
great Antichrist? For as he that seeks the glory of him that sent him is
true, and there is none unrighteousness in him: so in Antichrist there is
unrighteousness, and he is not true, because (as Aug. in Ioh. tract. 29.
Austine teaches) he will not seek the glory of him that sent him.

5 Wherefore the B. of Rome must needs be very near kin at the least to the
great Antichrist, in that he so highly advau^ceth himself, and so egerly
pursues his own glory, exalting himself not only against god and his Christ,
but much more against Christ's Le^fetena^ts the Ecclesiastical and Civil
governors (of whom it is written. I have said ye are Gods) and against the
most venerable assemblies Above all that is called God. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom.
35. Greg. ep. l. 4. ep. 32. and 34
of general councels, For ^e will needs have prima^ in earth, albeit he find
confusion in heaven. He will needs take to himself the name of universal
Bishop, that name of blasphemy whereby the dignity of all Preistes is
diminished, in that so much is arrogated to one after a frantike madness: yea he
will needs take it to himself, albeit it be against the meaning of the
Gospel, against all Churches, and against the ordinance of the Canons: albeit
in this pride is betokened that the time of Antichrist is at hand, he being
hereby followed, who despising the equality of ^oy among the angels, labored
to mount up to the top of singularity, saying, I will adva^nce my throne
above the stars of heaven, I will sit in the mount of the Testament even in
the North, I will get me up above the clouds, and wi^ be like unto the
highest. Neither does his pride stay here, but in all things he labors to
express his image, who not contenting himself with his Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, were it never so great, in the declining of the Roman Empire
was to thrust himself into the seat thereof, and to chale^dge to himself
both swords, Ecclesiastical and Civil, and to take upon himself both the
Empire of God and men. For so Chry^ostome has foresignified that toward the
declining of the Roman Empire Antichrist shall come: for this Empire Chr. hom.
2. in 2. c. ep. 2. ad These.
(says he) being so renouned, none will easily be subject unto him: but this
being void he will invade the power thereof, and take it to himself, in so
much that he will take upon him both the Empire of God and men. The which
authority has been now long since usurped even to the uttermost by the Bish.
of Rome, who as if he had been Lord of Lords, and King of Kings has taken
upon him not only to depose and to set up Kings at his own pleasure, but
also has practiced the like in the Empire it self. Neither yet has his pride
staid here, but has advau^ced it self one step higher even above the most
venerable assemblies of general Councels, who have the authority, and represent
the face of the whole church. For it has passed Bellar. de Con^. lib. 2 cap.
14.
on his side that his authority is greater then theirs, and that ^e is not
subject to their jurisdiction, to be cited, arraigned, or condemned by them.
His decisions must come forth with a Non obstante: whereas their decrees must
always be with a Salva semper: his faith cannot fa^le, he cannot ^dem. l. 4.
de ^ontif. c. 13. Rhem. in Luc. Cap 22.
err, at the least in the Consistory, and: herefore no man may say to him, Sir
why do you so? The which presumption is so intolerable, and so only
bee^itting the great Antichrist, that a man otherwise, as it is likely, of his
own faith and profession, has for this Avent. anna lium l. 6. ^ol. 683.
cause so proclaimed him to be, at the meeting of the Nobles and Prelates in
Germany; for that he spoke proud things, as if he were some God; for that he
laid new plots to establish himself a king dome; made and changed what laws
he listed, sacked, spoiled, deceived, killed, being that son of perdition which
they call Antichrist, in whose for head is written a name of blasphemy, I am a
God, I cannot err: In the temple of God he sits and reigns far and
wide.

6 And verily whereas it is the prerogative royal of the supreme and
vn^dgeable judge of all flesh, that he cannot err, lie or do unjustly, and
therefoe that he is not to be judged of any, neither may Job. 9. 12.
any man say to him what do thou? therefore in that the Bishope of Rome
takes upon him not to err in judgment, nor to be judged of any, he may justly
be charged for this cause to take upon him ^o be as God. And if in Ieromes and
Prospers Judgment the name Hier. ad Algas. quae. 11. Prosp. de provid. and
praedest c. 7.
of blasphemy written in the forehead of the whore of Babylon be (Romae
aeternae) eternal Rome, (for so the heathen call Rome, thinking that the Empire
thereof shall continue for ever) then much more this blasphemy is the proud
and presumptuous entailing of Gods spiritual and heave^ly graces to that city
for ever, in that they vant that their church is eternal and shall never fail,
and that their Bishops faith is an immortal and immovable ro^ke, against the
which hell gates shall never prevail. For what is this vaunt of the whore of
Babylon, I sit as a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no Apo. 1^. 7.
mourning (spiritual things in this revelation being signified under the names
of earthly) but as the Bish. of Rome vanteth of himself, The light of true
doctrine shall never be removed out of the cadlesticke of my church, and the
lamp of my faith shall never go out: but my church shall be the mother of the
faithful for ever and I their supreme governor and king, as being Christ's
great V^ca^ general here in earth, purgatory, and heaven, as it is sufficiently
to be seen by my glorious triple crown? And so as Adam fell by pride, when he
wloud needs be as God, knowing good and evil: and Lucifer when Genesis 3. 5.
he was not content with the dignity of an Angel, but would needs aspire to the
top of singularity: even so the Bish. of Rome fell, when he would needs advance
himself into Christ's seat, to be his Vicar Apo. 13. 11
general and Universal Bishop of the whole church: when he would needs take
two horns to himself like the lambs, and lay claim to both swords: when he
was not content with the dignity of a star, but would be as the sun of
righteousness himself, from who^ not only all the chief stars in all Pastoral
dignities, but in kings thrones also, yea in the very Empire it self, should
take their light, and receive their authority from his supremacy. We read in
Moses Genesis 1. 16.
that God made two great lights, the sun to rule the day, and the moon to
govern the night: and that is (if we will believe a Bish. of Rome) the Pope and
the Emperor: whose difference in degree and dignity (as some of their
Parasites have taught) is so much, as is the difference between the sun and
the moon. Now when the Bish. Apoc. 9 1.
of Rome thus advanced himself in his pride, then fell there from heaven a
great star: that is, one who had the place of a great Bishop in the church of
Christ, and whose predecessors had been indeed most notable stars, and
singular lights to Gods people, and had had the keys of the kingdom heaven;
And he became Vicar general to the prince of darkness, and had the key of the
bottomless pit, who with the gross mists of his corrupt doctrine obscured the
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, and brought in most palpable blindenes
and ignorance: for the which cause also he is worthily noted by Apo. 16. 3.
the name of a false Prophet, even for that he forgeth falshoode and lies.

7 Wherefore to conclude, seeing all the marks of the great Antichrist of these
last times do so appara^tly agree to the B^. of Rome, we may be bold to avouch
in these days that which Bernard did Ber. ep. 125.
in his time, that the beast to whom a mouth was given to speak blasphemies,
does now possess Peter's chair: and especially seeing it was so foretold by the
spirit of truth, that the seat of the great Antichrist of the last times
should be that city which in S. John's time reigned over the whole world, and
that was the city of Rome: the which is therefore Apo. 17. 18.
called by the ancient Fathers the western Babylon, for that the whore of
Babylon should sit there: the which thing is so evident and undeniable, that
our Rhemistes themselves subscribe thereunto upon the same place of the
Apocalipse: and therefore Rome and not Jerusalem is the certain 7 determined
seat of the great Antithri^t. As it may also not unfitly be co^ectured by the
number of Antichrists name shadowed in the figures and expressed by Lateinos,
which is a Apo. 13. 18. Ir. cont. ^i. 5.
Roman: or by Romijth, or Italica Ecclesia in the account of the Greek and
Hebrew letters, and that is the church of Rome. For Antichrist shall not only
invade the terrene state of the Empire of Rome as our Rhemists pretend, but the
church of Rome it self, seating him self in the temple of God, as God; that
is, as Gods Lieftenant, and pretending his authority: he shall be a star fallen
from that dignity wherein his predecessors were placed, and that worthily, as
being notable stars and lights in Christ's Church^ whereby it is evident, that
Antichrist shall in Rome possess both Jurisdictions as well the
Ecclesiastical as the Civil, the which being now long since performed by the
Bish. of Rome it is manifest that he is the very Antichrist.

8 Wherefore by all these things which have been before delivered it is evident
that a Papist, as a Papist, is a limb of Antichrist^ now a limb of Antichrist
cannot be a member of Christ, and he that is not a member of Christ cannot be
partaker of that salvation 1. Cor. 10. 21. 2. Coa. 6. 14
that comes by Christ, and therefore a Papist, as a Papist, cannot be saved.
Come you out therefore all from the kingdom of Antichrist, who appertain to
the kingdom of Christ, least if ye be partakers in their Idolatries and
sins, ye b^e partakers also in their plagues. O seek not any longer to
shadow him, whom out Savior has revealed by the brightness of his gospel,
nor to preserve him whom he has already in part destroyed with the spirit of
his mouth: fight no more against Christ, be not enemies any longer to your own
salvation: refuse henceforth to be leaguers and consederates with the whore of
Babylon, and return withal speed to the spouse of Christ. O pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, that ye may suck comfort out of her breasts, and be
refreshed with her consolations. And ye that are the Captains and soldiers
of the Lords armies sight ye courageously the Lords battles, and hate ye
that purple-coloured harlot, which has her garments died with the blood of the
saints: Hearken to that holy blood, that cries even to heaven for vengaunce,
and do ye also execution accordingly, never making stay of your fervent
zeal, until ye have brought her to her utter desolation. And so if ye fight
this good fight, and fulfill your course, and keep the faith, be ye most
assured that there is laid up for you a crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
which the righteous judge shall give unto you, and to all those that love his
appearing. Now to the immortal, invisible, and only wise God be all honor
and glory, dominion and power, praise and thanks both now and ever. Amen.

Psalm. 40. and 74. Let all those that seek thee be joyful and glad in thee,
and let all such as love thy salvation say always: The Lord be praised.


FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE TRIAL OF TRVTH: WHEREIN IS SET DOWN THE proper
fountain or foundation of all good works, and the four principal motives
which the spirit of God so often uses in the sacred scriptures to persuade
thereunto: together with the contrariety of the doctrine of the Church of Rome
to the same: wherein also are opened not only the causes of all true piety and
godliness, but also of all heresy and Idolatry, which is and has been among
Gentiles and Jews, and us likewise that are called Christians.

By JOHN TERRY.

He that commends himself is not allowed, but whom the Lord commends.

2. Cor. 10. 18. Whether we be out of our wit, we are it to God: or whether we
be in our right mind, we are it unto you: The love of Christ constrains us.

2. Cor. 5. 13. and 14. AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be
sold in Fleetstreete at the sign of the Turks head by JOHN BARNES, 1602.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Master Doctor RIVES warden of S. Mary College of
Winchester in Oxford commonly called New College, and to the residue of the
members that are, or have bin of that society.
IT is a truth generally confessed, (Right Worshipful and ye the residue
beloved in the Lord) that of all feasts, that is the most sumptuous and
dainty, which wisdom has provided for Pro^. 9.
her guests: the which consists of three courses, that is, of the
instructions of faith, of the precepts of life, and of the rules of discipline
and government. The two first courses of this worthy feast, especially the
first consisting of the instructions of faith, as they have bin seaso^ed and
served in by the Lords most skillful Cooks and sworn servants, and also as
they have been attempted to be distempered and even poisoned by the black
guard of Antichrists kitchen and the devils scullery, I have already set before
the Christian Reader, which vouchsafes to be a guest at wisdoms table, and
that under the taste of the Right Reverend Father in God my very good Lord the
Bishop of Saru^. And now that which was then wanting of the second service,
without the supply whereof this feast might seem to be somewhat sparing, as far
forth as I have been credited therewith, I present unto the church under the
approbation of the Right worshipful M. Doctor Riues la^e chief over^eer of our
common mother the University of Oxford, and remaining still a careful Guardian
of one of my special nurses the College of S. Mary of Winchester in Oxford
commonly called New College. Sir your kind affection toward me of long
time, and your friendly persuasion in moving me to publish to the benefit of
the church of Christ the first part of my private labors, and your adva^ceme^t
by God to the government of that College, (unto the which ^owe more then unto
any other place or person whatsoever, seeing there I had my being well, whereas
elsewhere I had but my bare being, or rather with my being, my being evil:)
have induced me so far forth to presume of your favor and good will, as that
I am bold to request your protection for the second part of these my travailes
and pains. For my hope is, the more that God has adva^ced you to worship,
that the greater will be your care to further all such means as do concern
his worship: and that you do esteem this to be your chiefest worship, that you
have received of the lord not only a mind to will, but also by reason of your
place, hability to perform many things that belong to the glory of God, and
to the good of his church Cicero said of Caesar that his high estate had
nothing greater, and his nature nothing better the^ that he was both able and
ready to preserve many. And Pliny said^ of Vespasian that the greatness of
his honor had changed nothing in him but this that now by his advancement he
was made able, as before he was willing to do good to many And Aristotle has
set down this as a difference between a king and a tyra^t, that the one seeks
the public, the other his own private good. Lastly the Poet could say, that
this was the great Hoc reges habe^t magnificum and ingens, nullus quod ra piat
dies, prodesse miseris.
and magnifice^t prerogative of princes, which no day could take from them, to
profit the miserable, and to protect the suppliant etc. Now Christian
magistrates know more then these heathenish persons did, which lived without
the knowledge of the true God, eve^ that they are the Lords Leifetenantes not
only to preserve the commodities of their earthly kingdo^ms for the good of
their subjects, but much more to maintain and establish among them the means
whereby they may be made partakers of the kingdom of heaven. And verily this
is a great dignity unto you, that God the full fountain of all good things
has made you a river to water the plants of a goodly nursery, and to minister
unto the^ al such things as might further their growth: and a carfull Guardian
to fence and keep them from all such things as might work their annoy ance:
that so many good trees might grow up therein, fit to be transplanted into many
places of this land, and to replenish the same with much fruit. We also, which
have bin heretofore plants in your nurserie, hope that your river will flow
forth far further, and extend it self even unto us, to water us with some of
your drops, and to be our fence and fortification, that the fruits of faith
and godliness that grow upon our branches may be the better preserved and
kept, until they come to maturity and ripenes.

And now to come to you my foster brethren, as I together with you expect
protection and direction from our common head, so as a fellow member I am
bold to put you in mind, that while ye may come to the full breast, ye
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, if ye have
tasted how sweet the Lord is, and what an honor it is to be borne of God, and
how great is the gain of faith and godliness; And that while the years of
plenty continue, ye follow the ensample of provident Joseph, and lay up in the
storehouses of your hearts all manner of spiritual grain, that when ye be
called abroad to be the ^ords husbandmen, ye may be able to sow the Lords
field with plentiful store of all good seed. Verily the harvest is great,
and the Matthew. 9. 37
laborers are ^ewe: and ye may well perceive by experience in your selves,
what a labor it is to bring into tillage the vntidy soil of one soul, and to
cause it to yield but a mean harvest: for undoubtedly in this kind of
husbandry especially is the proverb best verified: A great harvest, and a
little corn. And therefore also my brethren while ye are so near the Lords
a^mo^, and ^ay fit your selves with weapons of all sorts offensive and
defensive, furnish your selves now with all manner of munition against the
time that ye are to be sent to any special kind of service by any of the
Lords chiefest captains and commanders. Ye have in place of your Honorable
Founder the right reverend Father in God the Bishop of Winchester, one that
has bin of your own society, a famous and renowned Coronell, who has most
courageously fought the Lords battles and has fitted for you many notable
weapons, whereby ye may be able not only to encounter, but also to subdue and
vanquish the enemy: who has already called some of you, and is ready to call
other of you also, and to place you over no mean bands O most reverend and
renowned Bilson, thou have best deserved among al our company to have the
prehemine^ce, for that thy sword has hewn clean a sunder many of the
stro^gest and greatest Pillars of the Western Babylon O lift it up still
against the common enemy: and let it be as the bow of Jonathan and as the
sword of Saul, which never returned empty 2. Sam. l. 22.
from the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty. And so as all
the sheves of Iosephes brethren did stand about Iosephes sheife, Genesis 37. 7.
and did obeisance unto it: so shall al our swords stoop low to thy sword,
and shall be marshalled at thine appointment.

But to turn to you my brethren which are now as it were the Lords trained
soldiers, and out of whose company many captains are to be chosen for the
guiding and leading of many several bands: ye may behold and look upon the
ensamples of your own predecessors, even of such as have been of your own
society: And withal ye may somewhat respect your pay, which no doubt may be
good here, if that you endeavor faithfully to perform your service, but
especially you may assure your selves that you shall receive a large allowance
when ye come to appear before the great Lord of all hosts, and the high
general of all armies. Then if ye have fought the good fight, and kept the
faith, and finished your course, there remains for you a crown of
righteousness: and if this be given to every good soldier, what a large portion
may every captain expect?

But here by the way I would willingly put you in mind of this one thing,
which is, that many famous captains and courageous soldiers both in the
bodelie and ghostly fightes, have been brought to utter ruin and decay, by
leaving the pursuit of the vanquished enemy, and by turning too hastily and
greedelie after the pray. Wa^ not Hanniball and his army made weak and
effeminate by the spoils of Capua, which could not be daunted by all those
hard labors that they patiently endured in passing over the impassable Alps?
And how else was the large and ample Empire of the city of Rome, and of many
other great kingdo^es and countries overthrown? But to omit these great
commanders in bodily Religio peper^t divitias and filia devoravit matrem
wars, have not the most famous captains in spiritual services come to
ruin by the same means? What made the high Priests and Elders among the
Jews to destroy Christ, and to tread under their feet his heavenly
doctrine, but that they might retain the favor of the Roman Emperor, and so
might preserve their earthly estate? And did not the latter Bishops of Rome
neglect the true gift of gifts given unto their predecessors by Constantines
Lord, while they laid all their plottes, how they might most firmly ^ease
themselves and their successors of the pre^ended donation of the Emperor
Constantine? And what made them give over the careful seeking of that glorious
inheritance that St. Peter enjoys in the highest heavens, but their deep
devising how they might make the counterfeite and forged evidences of St.
Peter's patrimony to go for current and good? And whereof also did it proceed
that they clouted and patched together, but with all manner of worldly pollecie
and cunning, such an earthly religion as they now profess, but that they saw
it to be most fit for the better maintenance of their earthly kingdom? And
was not all this most significantly shadowed and drawn out unto us Apocal. 9.
by a star falling from heaven to earth, who giving over the care of heavenly
matters, and fastening his heart wholly upon earthly, became the head of the
black and dark kingdom of Antichrist, which can agree to none so fitly as to
the Papacy, whereof a Bishop is the chief prince, who is still accounted as a
most principal star above al other by many that think themselves to be the
only Christians? And not only this star is fallen by this means, but also
Apocal. 12. the dragon is said with this his tail of ambition and covetousnes
to throw down eve^ the third part of the stars of heaven, and to cast them to
the earth. Which he brings to pass when he persuades them to use all
unlawful means to bring them to their earthly preferments and commodities,
and also when he causes them to give over all their former labors in setting
forth and promoting the kingdom of God that so they may have more leisure to
seek their own, by neglecting the things that are Jesus Christ's. Wherefore
worthy of most Mr. Fox in his third consideration given to the professors of
the Gospel
honorable commendation and commemoration is that sincerity that was in
Wickeleife and others of those times, who went about bare-foote, and very
meanly cladde, preaching the joyful and glad tidings of the Gospel, thinking
it to be a sufficient reward to have liberty freely to publish the same, albeit
it were without all earthly reward. But here I pray you mistake me not: for I
think it no way to be unlawful for the ministers of the Gospel to enjoy
temporal possessions and honors: (seeing they are best worthy of them, that
know how to use them best, and are thereby made more careful to amend their
work, as they perceive their wages to be amended:) but these things are spoken
to this end, that al such as seek after earthly vanities by all sinister
means, and are moved thereby to give over their labors in preaching and
publishing the Gospel of Christ, may be co^victed in their own consciences,
and brought to acknowledge and to bewail their wretched estate: and that other
also seeing their fall may thereby be made more watchful and wary, least
they be taken in the same trappe: the which thing is so much the more
carefully to be observed by us all, seeing we be fallen into those times,
wherein Christ and his Apostles have plainly foretold us, that the danger,
whereunto Math. 24 38 Luke 17. 28. 2. Tim. 3. 4. 2. Pet. 2. 3. Apoc. 12. 4.
al shall generally be subject, and particularly such as be of the Ministry, is
this, even the love of the earth that shall draw away the most part of men from
the love of heaven, and shall make many of Demas his place and gifts to
forsake Paul and to embrace this present world, and with Judas to sell Christ
and that for a matter of no great gai^e. The faithful indeed are the right
heirs even of all the blessings of their heavenly father, but yet so, that
they must not be their own carvers, but seek for them by such means as he
has ordained, being resolved to be wholly at his disposition, and to content
themselves with such a portion as he best knows to be most meet for them.
And what need have they too greedily to seek after the temporal and
transitory goods of this world, seeing their portion is fallen unto them in a
very good ground, and they have a very goodly heritage: seeing God is their
Father, and Christ their brother, and the holy Ghost their comforter, and faith
their freehold, and truth their treasure, and godliness their gain, and goodness
their goods, and righteousness their riches, and piet^ their portion, and the
kingdom of God their ^herita^ce, and heaven the haven of their eternal rest
and blessedness, and the gracious promises of the gospel written in their hearts
the authentical evidences for their title and right unto these and all other
blessings of God. But these things are sufficiently known unto you, and
therefore I cease any farther to trouble you, most heartily beseeching the most
blessed God so to water you al with the ple^tiful streams of his heavenly
graces, that when ye have been as good trees bearing much fruit in the dry
wilderness of this barren world, ye may be transplanted by his gracious hand,
and set in his celestial and heavenly paradise.

Your Worships most assured in the Lord, JOHN TERRY.

To the Christian Reader.
OF many stu^bling blocks (good Christian Reader) that are cast in the way by
the servants of Antichrist to keep the people that they do not so much as turn
their eyes to behold, much less, settle their affections to embrace the
glorious light of the gospel of Christ: this is not the least that they are
not ashamed to charge, not only some principal and eminent persons, but
generally all the professors thereof with an huge sea of outrageous sins, and
a great drought of godliness and virtue: yea many points of the most holy
doctrine it self they avouch to tend directly to the corruption of good
manners in all states. But to omit their particula^ sla^ders raised up against
particular persons, which have bin fully answered by others, our severe ce^sors
of Rhemes, Rhem. in e. 7. Math. The professers of the gospel most unjustly
charged by the adversary to be sacrilegious prophan^, incestuous and men of
in^tiable si^
beside many grievous crimes which they avouch to be common with us and al
other heretics, charge us particularly with sacrilege against God and the
profanation of all holy things, and incestuous marriages: and these with the
other abominatio^s they would have the world believe to be in so high a degree
among us, as they are likely to be among all such, as are men of insatiable
sin. Now if the pulling down of Idols, and the destroying of Idolatry, and the
removing of the superstitious worship of creatures, and the restoring of the
pure worship of one almighty and alsufficient God in spirit and truth,
according unto the prescription of his own most holy word, be sacrilege, and
the profanation of all holy things: and if the abolishing of the common
stews, and the disanulling of the vow of single life, which was indeed the
cause of abominable pollutions and of unnatural and monstrous murders, and the
restitution 1. Cor. 7. 3.
of holy matrimony according unto the direct commandment of God by the pen
of the Apostle be incestuous pollutions; and if these and the like make us men
of insatiable sin, then we must be content to undergo this slander; seeing
herein we are made but conformable to our Master Ioh. 6. 48.
Christ, who was charged to have been in league with the Devil, whereas his
coming was to destroy the works of Mat. 11. 19.
the devil: and to have been a friend to Publicanes and sinners, being in
truth the greatest enemy to sin that ever was borne of flesh and blood. But
what manner of men are these themselves, which lay to our charge so grievous
crimes? yea what are their most holy and most godly Fathers the Sa^ctissimi,
pijssimi. Lyr. in Mat. c. 16 Platina in Romans c. 1. ^drian. Papa. In nomine
domini incipit omne malum. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 33. The most corrupt and
abominable lives of the chiefest enemies of the Gospel of Christ.
Popes, unto whose very beck they owe all obedience? Is it not recorded by
principal men among them, that many of them have been apostataes from the
faith and very monsters and misshapen creatures: such as succeeded not Peter in
feeding, but Romulus in manquelling: that they pretended the name of God and
the service of Christ, but under that name wrought all manner of mischief, and
did service unto Antichrist. Neither did this spiritual contagion stay in
their greatest personages, but spread it self abroad in all states and
callings. And no mervaile seeing the whole world does frame it self to the
likeness and liking of such as be in greatest power and authority: especially
where the vow of obedience without gaine-saying, yea without inquiring whether
it be lawful or no, is esteemed as one of the highest steps to the greatest
perfection. Whereby it came to pass that Rome it self the chief city of this
Empire became the mother of all abominations, and grew to ^uch ripenes and
perfection in sin, that she deserved the name of the western Babylon, where
the whore of whores eve^ the great Antichrist of these last times should sit,
who was to make drunk all the kings of the earth with the cup of his spiritual
fornications and adulteries. Unto the which place whosoever should have his
recourse, first he should see, and then he should be acquainted with, and the
third time he himself should become a wicked person. For there is liberty of
all other things, save only of true piety Romae omnia cum liceant non licet
esse pium. Ma^t.
and godliness. So outrageous and abominable have been the e^ormities of prince
and people in this church of Rome that they have poisoned after a sort the
very air where they lived, and have caused those, who in some respects, were
their favorites and friends, thus to have cast their own dunge in their own
faces, and to have dashed over their misshapen ^eatures with the black coal of
everlasting ^nfamy. therefore small cause has the viperous brood of this
venomous generation thus to hiss against us, and to spet out their poison
against our persons: for albeit we be not angels without spot, yet we be not
Englishmen J^alianate, that is, Devils incarnate: much less against our most
The holy doctrine of the gospel unjustly charged to be the seed of all
wickedness and sin. Luk 10. 20. The certainty of faith and the assurance of
election no hinderer but a fu therer of p^ety and godliness.
holy and pure doctrine, as if that were the seed of all wickedness and sin.

The certainty of our election to eternal life, and the assurance that we are
the children of God, and have our na^nes written in heaven, which is the most
forcible inducement of all other to cause us to rejoice in the Lord, and to
walk as the children of God, and to have our co^^ersation in heaven, they
accuse to be the mother of pride and pr^tumptio^, and of carnal socurity and
dissolutenes of life. What is it credible that when J continually call to my
remembrance and set before mine eyes, that God to assure me, that he is my
gracious God and loving father has created me, and sustained me from my
mothers womb, and has preserved me from these and these dangers, and has
bestowed upon me these and these blessings, and has made these and these his
creatures to serve to my use that I might the better serve him, yea and has
caused these and mine affections to have been good and profitable unto me, is
it credible I say that the assurance of this so great kindness and love should
breed in mine heart unkindness to God, and the neglect of his honor, and of mine
own good? Either is it credible that when I continually call to my remembrance
and set before mine eyes, that God, to assure me of my reconciliation unto
himself and of my receiving into his favor, has revealed unto me his son
Jesus Christ the pledge of his love and the means of my reconciliation, and
has opened unto me his perfect obedience to the whole law not for himself
but for my righteousness, and his invincible patience even the^ when he drank
so deeply of that so bitter cup of his painful passion, that it caused him to
sweat water and blood not for his own but for my sins, when I say this is
revealed by Culpamea: culpa mea: culpa mea maxima.
God to be done for me by so worthy a person, who according to his manhood
received the spirit without measure, and according unto his godhead was
infinite holiness, purity, and pe^fection it self, that so I might be assured
of so absolute a righteousness, and so full a satisfaction for all my sins, as
might stand before the most exact justice of God, is it credible I say that the
assurance of so great kindness and love should breed unkindness in mine heart, and
a carelesnes of embracing and holding fast so great mercy, and of continuing in
such love? Either is it credible that when I continually call to my remembrance
and set before mineeies, that God to assure me of mine adoption into the place
and number of his children has sealed me with the spirit of adoption, and has
by him sanctified mine understanding with the knowledge of his most exact
justice in punishing my sins with such severity upon my surety, that I might be
assured of mine acquitting from the same, and of his endless and unspeakable
mercy in sparing not his own son to spare me, and of his wisdom in making
his justice, and mercy so to conspire together for my fuller assurance of my
salvation wrought thereby; when hereby also my judgment and affections are so
rectified and sanctified, that I esteem to know nothing but Jesus Christ and
him crucified: and account all other things as losses and dong that I might win
Christ, and be found in him, and be made partaker of the fruit of his death,
and of the benefire of his resu^ection: is it credible, I say, that so great
kindness should breed unkindness in mine heart, and cause me to profane and to
tread under foot this holy blood, and to be grievousome to this so
comfortable spirit? Lastly is it credible that when I call to my remembrance
and set before mine eyes that God to certify me of his favor and love has
opened unto me in his word that great charter and grant of remission of
sins and of eternal life in Christ Jesus, and for my further assurance
thereof, has written his gracious promises as undoubted evidences thereof in
mine heart, that I might no more doubt of my most assured obtaining of these so
great gifts, then I need of the admitting and allowing of these evidences,
that he has given me to show for the ^ame, when I come to appear before the
throne of grace: is it, I say, credible that this so great security for mine
everlasting blessedness should with ^raw mine heart from the love of my
blessedness and cause me to wa^ke in cursed and damnable ways which tend to
eternal misery and woe? Sure I am that the goodlier our temporal possessions
are, and the better evidences we have to show for the same, and the kinder our
parents were that bestowed them upon us with charge not to pass them away in
any case, the more careful we shall be to keep the same, both for the love of
our most kind parents, and also for our own welfare and good: and shall the
assurance of the most glorious inheritance of the kingdom of heaven given unto
me by mine heavenly father, whose kindenes so much surpasses the kindness of
any earthly parents, as God himself surpasses man, make me careless to
keep so goodly and glorious an inheritance, and to perform the will and
commandment of mine heavenly father? Where Matthew 6. 22.
your treasure is (says our Savior Christ) there will your heart be also. And
therefore if this will not move me thoroughly to set mine heart and affections on
heavenly things, that I have so good evidence for them, that they are assuredly
mine, and that I shall undoubtedly reap by them such an huge harvest of
unspeakable bliss, what will then move and persuade me thereto? yea if hereby I
am allured and drawn unto sin, what is able to induce me to piety and
godliness? But this argument has been touched in the former and is more fully
handled in the latter part of this treatise: and therefore omitting now to wade
further therein, let us come to examine whether that other maine point of the
Gospel, I mean, Justification by faith without works, be any cause or
provocation to sin, as it is unjustly charged by the enemies of grace, and by
the favorites and patrons of their own merits.

In this question of Justification there are these three points to be
considered: First, before our effectual calling unto the state of grace, the
great sufficiency of our natural corruptions to procure wrath, and the great
insufficiency of our best works to prepare us and to make us meet to be
partakers of the Lords love. Secondly after our effectual calling the great
inhability of our faith, repentance, love, and of the residue of our works of
grace to merit remission of sins and eternal glory. Lastly the only
sufficiency of the obedience of Christ for the perfect accomplishing of this
great and weighty work of man's redemption. When the scripture teaches that
man by original sin is wholly corrupt, and that in us, that is, in our flesh
Romans 3. 1^. Romans 7. 18.
dwells no good thing, the purpose thereof is not to detract from man al
manner of good: (for the substance and the natural powers and works both of
body and soul are good, in that they are the Lords creatures and the
workmanship of his own hands: and the light of reason whereby we are taught
that there is a God, and that justice and equity is to be observed in the
ordering of our public and private affairs is also good, and was preserved by
God in the soul of man when he fell from God, that thereby he might be directed
and guided for the better managing of al such things as belong to the
preservation of this present life:) and therefore there are yet remaining in
man since his fall some things that are naturally and civilly good. But there
There is nothing in man by nature, that is religiously good.
is nothing remaining in him by nature that is religiously good: that can
prepare and fit us to the readier receaving of faith and repentance, and
further us to the performing of any such thing as belongs to the true worship
and service of God. For the very wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, Romans
8. 7.
(and therefore is no friend or furtherer of his service) yea it is not subject
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So that until we condemn our
own wisdom of folly, we cannot yield over our selves to be guided and ruled
by the wisdom of God: and until we wholly renounce our selves, we cannot be
admitted into the Lords family and household. Neither is it to be feared least
the regenerate man being lightened by the word of God to behold and to condemn
his own universal corruption, and embrace salvation only by faith, should
thereby be induced (as Campian Ca^p. rat. 8. The doctrine of justification is no
provocation or spur, but a strong bridle to all iniquity and sin.
avoucheth) to wallow still in the stinking and loathsome sincke of all
iniquity and sin, to accuse nature, to despair of virtue, and to withdraw
himself from the obedience of God. Nay the more great and grievous his sins
have been before his conversion, and the more clearly he sees and behouldeth
the same, the more they will stink in his own nostrels, and the sooner he will
loath and leave them also. And howsoever he be tempted to return with the
dog to his vomit, and with the hog to the wallowing again in the mire,
either by the remnants of his own corrupt nature, or by the instigations and
ensamples of others, yet he does not yield himself captive to these
temptations: but casting his eyes back upon his former corruptions both
original and actual, he does with David most severely condemn them and
himself also for the same, and does thereby sharpen and increase his unfeigned
and hearty repentance, and his settled purpose of amendment of life, as it is to
be seen in the one and fiftieth psalm. He takes not liberty hereby to offend
again, and to add unto the multitude of his former corruptions, but rather
protests with St. Peter to the contrary: Oh it is sufficient that we have
spent 1. Pet. 4. 3.
the time past of our life according unto the lusts of the Gentiles: Now seeing
that the Lord has made us to behold and to abhor our former rebellio^s, we
must resign the time of our life to come wholly to God: Yea the greater has
bin the number of our former sins, and the more the Lords mercy in pardoning
the same, the greater must be our care that we offend not any more so gracious
a God and merciful a father, by adding unto the huge heap of our former
iniquities. Indeed there have bin some carnal libertines in all ages, who
hearing that the greater our sins are, the greater is the mercy of God in
pardoning the same, have turned the grace of God into ^antonnes, and have said;
let us continue in sin that grace may abound. But as to the unclean al
things are unclean, yea the most holy and pure grace of God is an occasion to
increase their unclean and impure lusts: so to the pure al things are pure,
yea the multitude and greatness of their unclean sins causes them to loath and
abhor them the more, and to love him the more also, that has most franckly
and freely pardoned them all. There was (says our Savior to Simon the
Pharisee) a certain lender that had two debtours, and the one owed him 500.
Luke 7. 41.
pence, and the other 50. When they had nothing to pay he forgave them both:
which of them therefore tell me (says he) will love him most? Simon answered
and said, I suppose, that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him,
thou have truly judged. Whereby it is evide^t that the faithful, the more they
perceive the greatness of their sins, and how much they are endebted and
endangered unto God for the same, together with the great mercy of God in
pardoning them all, will not take occasion thereby to contemn God, and to cast
themselves again into the like dangerous sins, but will love God the more,
and take the greater care to testify the same by their duetifull obedience to
his commandments.

Now concerning the second and third points that are to be considered in this
question, it is most true that the Psalmist testifies, that no man may deliver
his brother, no Psalm. 49. 7.
not so much as from temporal death, nor make atonement unto God for him: for
it cost more to redeem souls: in so much that the Son of God himself was to
become man, that he might give himself a ransom for many. And therefore The
all insufficiency of any thing that is in man, and the all suffi^iency of the
death of Christ to per^orme the work of man's red^mption.
the scripture displaying the insufficiency of any thing whatsoever that can be
given by man him self for the satisfaction of his sins and for the
redemption of his soul, gives present testimony unto the most ample
sufficiency of the most precious blood of Christ for the full acco^plishment of
that work. For what if man could give his house full of treasure? yet we are
not redeemed with corruptible things as with silver and gould, but with the
most precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and without spotte. Or
what if he would offer up in sacrifice a 1000. rams, or a 1000. bullockes and
goats? It is impossible that the Heb. 10
blood of bullockes and goats should take away sins. And therefore when the
Apostle had avouched by the warrant of the Prophet, that the Lord would not
have burnt offering and sacrifice, nor the bodies of slain beasts, then he
gives testimony to the offering of the body of Christ as to the only true
expiatory sacrifice. Lastly what if one would offer up to God the spiritual
sacrifices of faith and repentance, and of all such works as are commanded in
the morallawe? Surely of these also the Apost^e has testified, that it was
impossible to the law in as much as it was Romans 8. 3.
weak by reason of our flesh, to work out the work of ma^s redemption, and
therefore that God sent his own son in the simtlitude of sinsul flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the slesh, that the righteousness of the law might
be fulfilled in us, and so we made righteous before God. For our faith,
repentance, justice, temperance and the rest, are but as broken and clipped
money, they are to light to weigh in the balance with our most heavy and
burdensome sins: and they are also but as one to a thousand toward the
discharge of our most huge debt. Moreover in the perfourming eve^ of our best
works, the flesh rebelleth against the spirit, and so staineth their purity
and blemisheth their glory: and our spiritual and inward man is but renewed in
part, so that we can do no good work with all our heart, soul, and strength in
that degree and measure as the law requires: now that which wants of that
which the law requires, is a transgression of the law, and therefore sin: and
sin defiling the work, wherein it is, causes our very righteousness to be
as a stained cloth, and therefore in that respect odious to God, procuring his
wrath, and making us subject to the curse of the law, and therefore not
meriting everlasting glory. Thus are even our best sacrifices but as the
offering up of the lame and maimed, and therefore of themselves cannot be, much
less make us, acceptable unto God. And thus are these garments of our own
righteousness both stained, and too short also to cover our nakedness: they may
be likened to the curtalled garments of David's servantes 2. Sam. 10. 5
which made them ashamed to come into the kings court, and to present
themselves in his presence. And verily if but one of our acquaintance being of
some good place happen to see us, when we have on a sluttish aperne, or a
foul ruff, or some base and regardlesse attire, how squeamish are we, and how
do we imagine, that we have done our selves some great discredit? How much
more then may we worthily blush and be ashamed to come into the presence of the
most pure and glorious God, who so extremely loatheth and abhors all
impuritie and uncleanness, being covered with the slubbered and curtalled
garments of our own righteousness? And how ought we to labor by all means
possible to put of and to lay aside these rotten rags in the case of our
justification, and to embrace and lay hold on Christ that we may be found in
him, not having Phil. 3. 9.
our own righteousness which is by the law, but that which is by faith in him?
For they are the precious and costly garments of his righteousness, that
arelarge enough to cover our nakedness, be it never so great: they are also so
clear, pure, and holy, that they are able to endure the presence of the holy
of holies, and to present us pure and holy in his sight.

So then the works of our faith, repentance, and righteousness cannot present
us pure and holy before God, nor make satisfaction to his justice for our sins,
nor me^ite the crown of eternal glory: but these so great blessings are
procured for us by the blood of Christ, and are given us most frankely and
freely by his mediation. Now if a master shall give unto his faithful servant an
estate in a living either by copy or lease freely without any fine or income,
will this kindness make him malepert and saucy, to set at naught his masters
commandment, and careless to pay his rent and to perform that suite and
service that is required at his hands? Neither is it credible that the
faithful servantes of God having an estate in the glorious inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven most frankely and freely granted unto the^ in Christ
without, nay, contrary to their own deservings, should thereby take occasion
to sin against God, and become careless to perform their obedience to his
law, being the rent, suite, and service that is double due unto him. So neither
is it likely that they well understanding the guiltines of sin to be so
great, that it could not be done away but by the blood of Christ, and the wrath
of God against sin to be so ^etled, and his justice so implacable, that rather
the^ the sins of his own elect should e^cape unpunished, he punished the^ with
so great severity eve^ upon his own dear son, should hereby be encouraged to
commit sin, and to receive into their boso^s such a venomous serpent whose
sting is so dangerous, yea almost incurable. Whereas on the contrary side if sin
we^ so small a matter that it might be done away by holy water, holy bread,
pardons, masses, pligrimages, alms, prayers, fastings, and by other works of
Popish doctrines provocations to sin.
popish penance: and if there were so rich and precious a gift of charity
infused into the heart of every faithful Christian, as that thereby he were able
to make God endebted not only to himslfe but to others also: then indeed we
needed not altogether to make so great a matter of committing sin and offending
God, seeing we could so many ways make satisfaction for the same, and make God
amends, and further also make him endetted unto us; as herevpo^ many men are
bold to trespass their neighbor, for that either already they are as much or
more in their debt and danger, or for that they can else in time to come easily
make the^ ame^des for their former trespass. But God can no way be pleasured
by us, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as if thereby any thing were added
unto him, and he made endetted Act. 17. 25.
unto us for the same. For as for the works of our faith, repentance and love,
we are thereby more and more endebted unto him: for that he works them in us
by his spirit: and he is no otherwise endebted unto us for the same, but only
for that of his own most free and undeserved goodness in Christ he has bound
himself by promise to give them a reward. And as for the least sin that is,
be it but a desire to The most heavy burden even of the lightest sin, and
the great deformity of the least iniquity.
steal a stick out of thy neighbors hedge, or to eat an apple of the
forbidden tree, seeing in doing the same either we set God so at naught, that
we utterly forget him and his holy commandments (Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house etc. and Cursed is he that continues not in every point of
the law to do it) whereas we ought most religiously to keep a constant and
continual remembrance thereof: Or if we remembering the commandment of God, and
the heavy curse annexed to the transgression of the same, yet bless our
selves, and promise our selves peace, when God menaceth war, and so give more
credit to the suggestions of Satan, then to the sacred testimonies and oracles
of God, harkening to the devil rather then to God, and preferring the devil
before God, seeing herein as much as in us lies, we rob God of his truth and
justice, and of his sovereign auctority over us, by refusing him to reign
over us, and making choice of the devil to be ruled by him, taking after a sort
the scepter out of the Lords hand and the crown from his head, and giving
them unto the Devil: if the Lord for this so intolerable an indignity should
deprive us utterly of his favor and love, and of all his gracious gifts and
blessings, and deliver us clean over unto the devil to be partakers with
him of al manner of curses and plagues, what should he do herein, but that in all justice and right is most due unto us? And how should he herein serve us
also, but even according unto our own choice? For the lesser the commodity or
pleasure is, for the which we are so soon persuaded to cast away God, and to
set his co^mandeme^ts at naught, the more manifestly is our vile corruption
convicted, in that we are so quickly hired to so wicked a work^ upon so base
and mean wages. And hereof it is that Samuel is bold to call the tra^sgression
of Saul (in sparing the Gigantum more bellare cum deo
best of the sheep and oxen, at the earnest motion, as it seems, of the
people, and that to this end, to offer sacrifice unto God) rebellion; for that
therein he did rebel against God, and join himself to that notorious rebel
Satan: and not only so, but he further likeneth it to the most odious and
abominable sin of Idolatry and witchcraft. And verily as the witch renounceth
God, and gives her self unto the devil: and the Idolater forsakes the
worship and service of God, and betaketh himself to the service of the Devil:
even so every sinner even in the smallest and least sin, as much as in
himself lies, casts away God, and makes choice of the devil: and therefore
if the Lord should utterly cast him of for the same, and deliver him over to
that cursed serpent to have his part with him in his torments and plagues, he
should do no other thing therein, the^ that which is most justly deserved. And
verelie had not our alsufficient Savior made full satisfaction by his most
precious blood for the least as well as for the greatest of the sins of the
elect themselves, and had not he procured a pardon for the same, they would
have been so heavy and burdensome unto them, that they would have pressed them
down to the bottomless pit of hell: Neither would their holy life either past
or to come have been able to have di^charged them of the burden thereof. For
if one, otherwise a very good subject, and of most civil and upright
conversation, falling into the company of loose and lewd persons, by their
counsel and persuasion do but join with them in one robbery, and so commit a
trespass, if it be but against one of the Princes subjects, and but against
one of the laws of the common weal; it is not his honest life past, and the
keeping of all the rest of the laws, and the doing good to many of the princes
It is a thing worthy to be condemned justly to be grievous to me^: what an
offense the^ is it to be grievous unto God?
subjects, and his duty never so well performed before to prince and country,
nor yet his hearty repentance, and his sincere promise of amendment, that can
discharge him from the same, but that law must proceed against him, and
execution must be done accordingly, unless a pardon be procured from the
prince: how much more if one sin against the incomprehensible majesty of the
most glorious deity by treading under foot the least of his commandments
shall the sentence of eternal comdemnation proceed against him, unless he
obtain the forgiveness thereof by the blood of Christ? For if one man sin
against another, the 1. Sam. 2. 25 Romans ^. 23. Eze^ 10. 20
iud^e may judge it: but if one sin against God, who shall plead for him? The
wages of sin (says the Apostle) ^ death. That soul (says the prophet) that
sins, that soul shall die. Bas. (...). Hier. ep. 14
What sin is it (says Basil) that any da^ call light? I know not (says
Hierome) whether we may call any sin light or small, the which is done with
the contempt of God. This then is our doctrine of justification, that our best
works are stained and stand in need of mercy: and therefore can neither merit
eternal glory, nor make satisfaction to God for the least of our sins: and that
the lightest of our transgressions would have been too heavy for us to bear,
yea they would have pressed us down to the bottomless pit of hell, had not our
most merciful Savior succored us herein, by removing them also graciously
from us, and by laying them upon his own shoulders. And if this doctrine
provoke to sin, I know not what can revoke from the same.

But now let us proceed to that other part of the slander wherewith all the
enemies of the gospel do charge the profession thereof, even with the great
penury and want of al good works. For not only the Rhemists do take from us
for the most part the sheep clothing; that is, the very outward show of
good works: but also the composer of the Ward word, upon occasion of some
civil behavior acknowledged to be in some of our Recusants, takes upon him
with the proud Pharisie not only to advance himself and his, far above us
base and vile Publicanes, but also he would have the world believe, that if
question were between them and us of good works, our chiefest captains would
straight ways relinquish the field, and not be so bold as to strike one
stroke. But this is but one of their Thrasonical brags. For I doubt not but a
mean soldier fighting under the ensign of the gospel of Christ may
encounter herein even their stoutest champions. For if either we respect the
sound doctrine, or the sincere practice of good works (for good words bring
forth good manners not only at their birth but also in their growth) it shall be
declared in the treatise following that the wholesome doctrine of good works is
most soundly delivered by us and not by them: and as for the practice let us
now briefly take a true view thereof even in the four cardinal virtues,
wisdom, fortitude, temperance, and justice, and let us in a word see whether
we have just cause to give ground unto them and to yield back one foot.

Concerning wisdom (which is the Lady and Mis. The professors of the gospel
are no whit behind the papists, but a great way before them in the holy
exercise of all virtues.
to all the residue of the virtues) not onl^ our doctrine but our practice also
is, that both priest and people have their daily resort to the word of God the
full fountain and welspring of true wisdom, and meditate thereon day and
night, that their hearts being continually moistened with the sweet drops
thereof, they may be made partakers of her fruits. And is it not a point of
true wisdom, for one that cannot of himself wisely judge of al things, to
make choice of a wise instructor and teacher? But the doctrine and the practice
of the church of Rome is to cause the people for the most part to reject the
daily reading of the word of God, and therefore what wisdom can there be in
the^? Ier. 8. 9.
yea it has not bin required, much less practiced by their priests and great
Bishops to be much busied in the Lords booke^ it has been thought to have bin
enough for them to have bi^ skillful in their portuise and in their
pontifical. It may shame (indeed) the priests of Italy, who truly, Aenaeas
Silvius comment. de dict. and fact. Alphon. regis 1. 2. 17 Eras. 1. 9. ep ad
Natal. Bed.
as it is well known, have no not so much as once read over the new testament:
whereas among the Thaborites (that is the Gospellers) ye can hardly find any
woman which cannot answer both out of the old testament and the new. And a
prove^be went current in Scotland not many years since testifieng the blindness
and brutishnes of some of their great Bishops: ye are like the Bishops of
Dunkelden who knew neither new nor old law. Now concerning true Christian
courage and manhood, it has been so great in many thousands of the professors
of the Gospel of Christ, and that even among such as were of the meanest trades
and occupations, that they have willingly lost both their liberties and lives
to give testimony unto the truth of their most holy faith: and the paucity of
the seedsmen of rebellion that have bin executed for treason against their
prince and country, and for the defense of the usurped jurisdiction of the
Romish Antichrist, may no way be compared and matched with them. And as for
the exercise of temperance and chastity it is well known to the whole world,
how we reverence the divine institution of holy matrimony and keep our selves
within the bounds of this ordinance of the Lord: Whereas among our Romish
votaries simple fornication has been accounted no sin; and it has been
thought to go well with them, if they lived Si no^ cast ^amee caute
charily, though not chastely. And how chastely some of their religious persons
lived among themselves, some of their fishpondes have testified sufficiently:
and concerning their secular priests, the tongues of such as lived with them
have witnessed, that very few wives in their parishes were left at the least
unattempted by these their ghostly Fathers: that I may omit the vowed
trotting on pilgrimage by many, that the barren womb might so be made
fruitful. Lastly concerning justice, equity, conscience, and an unspotted and
unblameable life, as it has been reported by Reinerius an inquisitor, and
that no doubt upon sufficient inquiry, of our brethren the poor men of Lions,
that they had a great show of godliness, and lived justly with men, and believed
al things well concerning God, and all the articles of the creed, save only
(says he) that they hated and blasphemed the church of Rome: so I doubt not
but that the like testimony may be given of all the sincere professors of the
Gospel, and that by the mouth of the very enemy, if that he will lay aside blind
malice, as Reinerius did, and simply and plainly declare the truth. At least
suppose, his conscience will not make us worse then, those of his religious
orders; of who^ it has bin testified long since, that they have fallen from
conscience to science, and from Petr. Rodulph. Tossian* histor. Seraph*
religion. 1. ^
science to be bareences. And what conscience I pray you, and what regard to
Gods commandments was in those that apprehended Thomas Sanpaulinus at Paris
upon suspicion of heresy, for that he reproved one for swearing in vain, and
never left him until they had brought him from the tortures of the rack to end
his life in fiery torments?

And yet these things are not spoken to this end, as if we meant to detract al
civil carriage from all the members of the church of Rome: nay, that the Devil
himself may have his right, we ingenuously confess and acknowledge the
outward exercise of many civil and politic virtues in many of them,
especially the most profitable works of piety liberality and mercy in founding
Colleges, Hospitals and the like. But yet so, that if they would take from
their Faulcons eyes the hood of self love and partiality, and look into one
little corner of the glass of that paineful labourer in the Lords vineyard
Master Doctor Willet, they might Andrew-Willet controv. gener. 19. error. 104.
see that the professors of the gospel are nothing behind them in those so
goodly and glorious works. How beit although we were not altogether matchable
with the^ in the outward work of these virtues, for that we are no way
matchable with them in those great dignities, privileges, offices, and honors,
and in those large and ample possessions which they enioied to the full: yet
they may know that the poor widows mite is as much and more also with
Christ, then all the large sums which were cast into the treasury by the
Scribes and Pharisees: especially if they were given as part of that pray
which under pretense of long prayer they got from poor widows. And from
whence I pray you, did most of those great Donatiues proceed, that were cast
into the treasury by our popish Pharisees? Is it not likely that they were
either part of that booty that they gained by thesale of their Masses and
pardons: or at the least some portion of the fleeces which they took from the
sheep for their little and course, yea no feeding at all of the flock of
Christ? And what then was this, but to rob Peter and to pay Paul? or it may
be, it was the bringing in of the price of an whore, yea perhaps of many whores
into Hagg. 2. 15. Deuteronomy. 23. 18
the temple of God, and the offering up of the unclean in sacrifice unto him.
And here by the way I would demand also of them, whether it be not as good and
as profitable a work both to church and commonweal to bring up our own
natural children begotten in holy matrimony at our own cost and charges in
some honest calling, according to our ability, and carefully to provide for
them convenient portions: as to leave large sums to our base children,
kinsfolk, servants, or any other whosoever, of whose good education as we
have not the like care, so of their good conversation we cannot conceive the
like hope? But yet here, least we be mistaken, protestation is to be made,
that as we think not that we are borne only for our selves and for our
children, so we teach not any to employ their goods to the benefit of
themselves and their children only, but also to the service of God, Prince, and
country, and of al other also, who are our neighbors, if they may be
succored and relieved by our means. Yea we constantly avouch that the more in
wisdom and discretion we employ that way, the greater treasure we lay up in
the safest place not only to our own best gain, but also to the greatest
commodity of our children. And as for those which have no children at al,
there is no doubt but that the more is required at their hands to be employed
to the benefit of other, if they will show their fidelity to him, whose
bailiffes they are in all that they possess, and be esteemed of him as his
faithful servants. And yet here it is to be remembered, that liberality is but
one duty among many, that are required in the commandments of God. it is but
one branch among many other also, that are to spring out of us, if we will be
good and fruitful trees: it is but part of that service that we must perform
unto God, if we will be acknowledged of him for his faithful servants. Neither
must we esteem him to be a good christian, albeit the world like never so well
of him, who is a swearer, drunkard, or whoremaster, if so be he be a good
alms man, and cares not who eats of his Liberality no fit cloak to cover
sin
meat: as if this were a cloak to cover al faults, and a sufficient amends
for all sins: for this is but a counterfeit and a shadow of liberality, it is
not true liberality indeed. For she is not an whore, but a chaste matrone:
she uses not to sort her self with such base companions: she sorteth her
self only with her princely peers, and keeps company with all the residue
of divine and heavenly virtues. Neither does her beauty so much consist in the
great glory of the outward work that is wrought, as in the readiness and
willingness of the mind of the giver: seeing not many rich, noble, and mighty
are effectually called, but the poor base and weak of this world which are
more glorious within with spiritual graces, then beautified with the show and
pomp of outward works. And yet whereas God has denied mercy to no state or
condition, those which are called being rich and noble must know, that the more
that is given unto them, the more shall be required at their hands: and that
they that sow sparingly shall reap sparingly: and seeing that God is so
liberal and bountiful in all respects toward them, they ought to be liberal
and bountiful for his sake, especially toward his sincere and faithful
servants. that so their Lord and Master may say unto them, go too ye good and
faithful servants, ye have bin faithful in a little, I will make you Lords
over much, enter ye into the joy of the Lord. And again Come ye blessed of
my father inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world: for I was hungry and ye fed me. Wherefore to conclude, it is evident
in part by those things which have bin hitherto delivered, that our doctrine of
the Gospel is no provocation to sin, and that our life is not utterly void of
the exercise of all good works: for then we should have greatly provoked the
Lord to have pulled down the hedge of this our vineyard, and to have removed
his candlestick out of the midst of us. But blessed be the Lord, the wall of
this our vineyard stands as yet, the bright candle of the sound doctrine of
faith and good works burns in the candlestick of this our Church of England,
the which is long since put out in the Church of Rome: and therefore howsoever
they greatly boast of the works of light, there can indee de abound among them
nothing but the unfruitful works of the kingdom of darkness. The which I
beseech those duly to consider of, who among them belong to the number of Gods
elect, that so unto them in all holy humility and godly sincerity taking a due
view of the doctrine of light, god may show so much mercy, as to lighte^ the
eyes of their spiritual understanding, and so translate them out of the
kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light. The which thing (I beseech
thee Christian Reader) to help forward with thy devout and daily prayers unto
God; especially that the ca^dlesticke of this our Church may stand steadfast and
vnremoved unto the worlds end, that Gods glory may more and more be
manifested in all the quarters and corners of this little Island, and many
children in all succeeding ages may here be continually begotten and borne
unto God. Amen. Amen.

Thine in the Lord JOHN TERRIE.

The sum of two of the most principal points of this second part contained
in this short prayer.
Conform us, O Lord, to thy will: and then will thou whatsoever thou will; give
us a true taste of the sweetenes of thy love in Christ: and then let all other
things be either sweet or sour unto us, as thou see it to be best for us
in thine heavenly wisdom.

THE SECOND PART of the trial of truth.
THe pearl of truth is so precious, and the treasure thereof so inestimable,
that God himself not only makes challendge thereto to be the author thereof,
but also takes it unto himself as one of his titles of highest honor. For as
it is bra^ded as a note of ^nfamy in the foreheade of the Devil, that he is a
lying spirit and a spirit of error, yea that he is a liar and Ioh. 8. 44.
the father of lies: so it is an honorable title wherewith Gods name is
sanctified: God is true, and every man a liar: and that as nothing Romans 3. 4.
Heb. 6. 18. Ioh. 14. 6. and 17.
is more possible to man then to lie, so nothing is more impossible to God.
Neither is it a small dignity unto our Savior Christ that he is called by the
name of truth and his spirit is said to be the spirit of truth: and that it is
testified of him, that one of the principal causes why he came down from the
father was, that he might bear witness to the truth: and why he ascended
again up to the Ioh. 18. 13.
father, even that he might send down his spirit upon his A postles to lead
them into all truth: and by the voice of truth to gather Ioh. 16. 13.
to himself a church and congregation, which should be a lover, embracer,
maintainer, and pillar of truth. For all such as Christ 1. Tim. 3 15
would have to be saved, he would have them come thereto by the knowledge of
the truth. And therefore he sends unto them the 1. Tim. 2. 4.
light of his word, and causes them with all constancy to embrace the same,
whereby they are enabled to know the truth, and the truth Ioh. 8. 32.
does make them free: Free from the slavery of sin and Satan, and from all
the powers of the kingdom of darkness: and the same truth does sanctify them,
being before polluted with blind infidelity Ioh. 17. 17.
and ignorance of God, and so makes them fellow citizens of the Saints, and
enrolleth them into the Lords family. So then the faithful embracing and
professing of the truth, being the ba^des of our communion and fellowship with
God, and an assured note of the Lords people: no marvel though all nations of
the earth, of what profession soever they be, be they Pagans, Turks, Jews, or
Heretics, make so bold a claim to the possession of truth, and be at open
defiance with all other, which will not yield unto their pretended title. And yet
there is but one truth and one faith, which The greatest chalengers are not the
rightest owners of truth. The testimony of God is the best evidence for truth.
is the sure anchor of our hope in God, and the direct way unto his heavenly
kingdom. Neither are they seized of the possession thereof, who make the
stoutest claim and challenge thereto, and seem to be most earnest in the
defense of the same, but rather such as can show for it the best evidence.

Now the best evide^ce for truth is the testimony of God, who is only true,
and cannot lie, who cannot err and be deceived himself, or in any wise
deceive others. And this is acknowledged by all: as it may appear by the
pretense made by the autors and inventors of every devotion; who have fained
either conference with some God or goddess, or some revelation from some
divine power to get the greater credit to their profession. So dealt Numa among
the Romans, Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians, and Solon among the Athenians.
The truth is that God who dwells in a light that no man can approach unto,
whom no man has 1. Tim 6. 16.
seen nor can see, whose voice is so terrible and glorious that no man can
hear it and live, who is only known unto himself, and who only knows
what is truth and what belongs to his own worship and service, has
revealed his will unto his faithful servants, and has made them his penmen and
scribes, and as it were the public notaries of his heavenly wisdom And these
public notaries we that be Christians believe not to be Solon, Lygurgus, Numa,
Mahomet, or the like: but the Prophets Apostles, and Evangelistes, even the
penmen and scribes of the word The penmen of the books of the old and new
testament are the only sure and infallible witnesses of truth.
of God contained in the books of the old and new testament. For as for
those lawgiuers among the heathen, it is acknowledged that they were great
learned and politic men, as being trained up in those arts and sciences,
which did flourish in those ages wherein they lived, whereby they were enabled to
set down many witty and skillful rules for the better managing of humane
affairs. But as for the most of our Prophets and Apostles they were simple and
ignorant men, brought up not in famous places and schools of learning, but in
mean, poor, and base occupations: and therefore the divine knowledge of all
heavenly wisdom, wherewithal they were endued most plentifully, must needs
be extraordinarily derived upon them from God himself the fountain and
wel-spring of all wisdom (seeing they obtained not the same by any ordinary
means:) and the miraculous gift of tongues bestowed upon them, whereby they
were enabled in all languages to open to all nations the wonderful works of
God, could not proceed but from him: who is the author of all languages and
tongues: as likewise the quick and speedy prevailing of this heavenly
doctrine, and the strong and effectual working thereof in the hearts of the
faithful, which made them young and old most desirous to testify their
exceeding great love to the same with the sheading of their decrest blood, does
manifestly convince it to be the most mighty and powerful word of the most
mighty and powerful God. Now as the persons, from whom the books of the old
and new testament proceeded, and by whom the doctrine thereof was so lovingly
embraced, declare them to be divine, so does the matter also in them contained.
For where are the deformities of all iniquities and sins so lively drawn
forth and set out in their colors, to move to a through dislike and hatred
of them, and to unfeigned repentance and amendment of life, as they are
described in these divine books? And where else may we find such a gracious
mediator to reconcile us to God, so great a price given for the purchase of the
kingdom of heaven, so ample and full a satisfaction for the discharge of al
our sins, such a sovereign salve for the curing of al our maladies, such an
effectual means to relieve our distresled consciences, and to secure us of the
love and favor of God, as are offered unto us in the holy scriptures? And
whereas the penmen of these holy books lived in diverse ages and countries,
does not the perfect consent and agreement of their precepts and instructions
manifestly declare by whom they were directed, even by him who is always one,
and the same, never differing or disagreeing from himself? So does the perfect
accomplishment of so many strange predictions foretold so many ages before
they came to pass, evidently co^vince, that these books proceeded from him,
unto who^ only were known al his own decrees and works before the fou^datio^ of
the world was Veritas docendo suadet. Tertul. co^t. Vale^t.
laid. Lastly the perfect purity and holiness of all points of faith set down
in these books, and that absolute equity and righteousness of all the precepts
of piety and godliness therein contained does plainly declare also, that they
proceeded from the holy of holies, even from him whose will is the rule of all
equity and righteousness. So that Moses the first penman of this holy write
might worthily make this challendge before all the world; What nation is so
great that has laws so righteous, as is all this law, that I have set Deuteronomy.
4. 8.
before thee this day.

Neither yet does the holiness only of the doctrine contained Holy doctrine
sincerely embraced cannot bring forth but an holy co^versation: or that which
is all one: a true faith cannot be separated from true love. 2. Cor. 13. 3
in these holy books declare that they proceeded from the holy of holies, but
also that holiness that is wrought in the hearts and consciences of all the
sincere embracers thereof, albeit they were before most impure and unholy. And
therefore the Apostle Saint Paul, when among the Corinthians some called his
doctrine in question whether it was of God, and his Apostleship whether it were
of Christ, appealeth unto the fruit and effect thereof wrought in the hearts and
consciences of such as were effectually called among them, and converted unto
the faith of Christ; who being before defiled with sin, odious before God, and
the children of wrath, were by his ministry regenerated, and sanctified, and
so made the children of God. What (says the Apostle) seek ye as yet
experience of Christ speaking in me, and whether my doctrine be of him or no,
seeing Christ thereby was not weak but mighty in you, working most powerfully
your conversion and salvation, etc. 3. he leaves to the false Apostles letters
of commendations from others, for that they had little or nothing in themselves
worthy of just and due commendation: but as for my self (says he) you are
mine epistle and letters commendatory, in that by my ministry ye have
received the gospel written in your hearts, which is the power of God to
salvation to all that believe. For albeit the doctrine of the cross of Christ
be a stumbling block to the Jew and foolishness 1. Cor. 1. 24
to the Grecian, yet to them that are called, it is the power of God and the
wisdom of God: yea it is mighty through God casting down holds, and
bringing under every high thing, and subduing it unto the obedience of the
faith of Christ: it subverteth all the power of the kingdom of darkness, and
enableth us to tread Satan under our feet. And what may the dancing of trees
at the sweet melody of the harp of Orpheus more fitly resemble, then the
relenting of men's hearts as hard as oak at the divine and heave^ly
instructions of wisdom? And what may better be signified by his bringing of
his wife from hell with his harmony, then the drawing of men out of the slavery
of sin, death, and hell by the power and efficacy of the word of God? And
verily as C^rce and Calypse, that is, the world plaieth the witch, and by the
inchauntments and sorceries of her impure and corrupt doctrine turns men into
hogs and dogs: so on the contrary side, the holy doctrine of Christ being
sincerely embraced vnlooseth all the enchantments of this bewitching world, and
turns hogs, dogs, bears and wolves into men, by causing them to lay aside
their unclean and brutish natures, and put on the condition of men, yea of men
of God, that is, of sanctified and holy men. The which strange and wonderful
metamorphosis, and turning of men in shape and nature, but beasts in quality
and condition, into the quality and condition of sanctified men, by the most
mighty operation of the word of Christ, was most plainly foretold by the
prophet Isay. The wolf (says he) shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Isa. 11.
6.
Leoparde shall lie with the Kidde, and the Calfe and the Lion, and the fare
beast shall feed together, and a little child shall lead them: and the Cow
and the Bear shall feed, and their young ones shall lie together, and the
Lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and the sucking cholde shall play upon
the hole of the aspe, and the weined child shall put his hand into the
cockatrice hole: there shall none hurt or destroy in all the mount of mine
holiness: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lords, as the
waters cover the sea. Behold then the great power of the most holy doctrine of
God, which altreth such as are savage and hurtful, as the most fierce and
venomous beasts, and makes the^ meek, mild, and gentle, devoted to the
maintenance' of the common society, and of the public benefit and good of
mankind. And hereof it is, that Lactantius is bold to make this challendge:
Give Lact. li 3. c. 26. divin. Institur.
me (says he) a wrathful man, and a slaunderer, and one that is of unbridled
affections, and with a few words of God I will make him as meek as a lamb:
give me a greedy and covetous pinchpenny, and I will make him liberal, giving
out his money by whole handfuls: give me one that is afraid of grief and
death, and he shall presently contemn the gallows, the fire, and the bull of
Phalaris also: give me a libidinous and an adulterous companion, and thou shall
set him straightwaies s^ber, chaste, and continent^ give me a cruel
bloodthirsty person, and presently his fury shall be turned into mercy: give
me an v^iust person, an unwise and a sinner, and by and by be shallbe made
just, prudent, and innocent: with one washing all his malice shall be cleansed.
Such is the force of the divine wisdom, that it being once admitted into the
heart of man, it will at once dispossess f^lly the mother of all transgressions.

To the effecting whereof there is no need of a fee, books, or watchings,
they are wrought freely, easily, and speedely, so Mercede libris, lucubrationib
9.
that our ^ares be open, and our hearts thirst after wisdom. Let no man stand
in doubt: for we set not out to sale the drops of rain or the Sunshine:
the full and plentiful fountain of God lies open to all, and this heavenly
light does rise to every one that has his eyes open to behold the same. And
indeed the word of weak and mortal men is weak and of small force and
virtue: but the doctrine of the mighty, powerful, and immortal God is mighty
in operation and sharper than any two edged sword, it Heb 4. 12. 1. Pet. 123.
Psalm. 19. 7.
pearceth even into our inward man, and begets in it an immortal life. The
Law of the Lord is perfect and converteth the soul: and therefore the divine
virtue and power thereof may be discerned by the divine effect that is wrought
thereby. For as evil words breed evil manners, and corrupt doctrine a
corrupt conversation, so good words bring forth good manners, and holy doctrine
an holy conversation. Bevvare (says our Savior Christ) of false Prophets
which come unto you in sheep clothing, but Math. 7. 25.
i^wardly are ravening wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits. In the
which words albeit in the judgment both of old and new writers, by the
fruits, wereby false Prophets are to be discerned, are meant their corrupt
opinions and doctrines (for that opinions and sayings as well as doings, be they
good or badde, are the effects and fruits of good and badde men:) yet for that
also that doctrine not delivered to others, but first conceaved by our selves,
is not the fruit, but the cause of faith; and faith engendered by sound
doctrine engraffeth us into Christ, and so makes us good trees bringing forth
good works as good fruit: and faith proceeding from evil doctrine, brings
forth evil works, as evil fruit, we will be contented at this time to
understand also by fruits, whereby false prophets are to be discerned, their
evil and ungodly works: Especially if it be added that works are no
otherwise known to be good or badde, then as they agree or disagree from the
precepts and rules of good works which are delivered in the canonical
scripture. For that is the most exact canon and rule whereby we must try both
ou^ faith and our works, and that faith and works are only to be approved,
which are agreeable and consonant thereto. And unless we keep our selves
most carefully to the trial of this judge, we may easily be deceived with
probabilities and shows. For according unto the admonition of our Savior set
down in the former rule, false prophets which inwardly are ravening wolves may
be attired in sheep clothing, that is, may have an outward show both of a
sound faith, and also of an holy and godly life. For the Devil is a most
cunning counterfeite, and the skilfullest Ape that ever was. He can alle^ge
scripture and the holy word of God to draw us from that pure doctrine of that
holy word: and he can turn himself into an angel of light, and make his
ministers to appear to be the children of light, and furnish them with the
outward show of the works of light: yea he can imitate the miraculous works
and wonders of God, to persuade the world that God himself by h^s omnipotent
and almighty power does give testimony unto his lies. The which thing is so
much the more carefully to be considered of us, for that we are fallen into
these latter days wherein experience has taught us that to be true, which
was foretold by Isidore and Gregory: that is, that the true Church of See M^.
Fox vol. 1. fol. 418.
Christ should want the glorious power of working of miracles before the
coming of Antichrist, that he might the more freely and without controlement
persecute her as a base object: and that Antichrist should come himself not
only with strange signs and wonders to get the greater credit and
admiration, but also with a certain show of holiness, that both the lighenes of
the reprobate might be detected, that are soon carried away with every show,
and also that the patience and stayednes of the faithful might be made
manifest, who will embrace the truth, albe^ it be not garnished with outward
shows, and set themselves against falsehood and lies, although they be never
so much beautified and adorned with the same

Herein the^ is commended unto us one special point of Christian wisdom:
that as Christ, who was endued with the spirit of wisdom above measure,
judges not according to the sight of Isa. 11. 3. 1. Sam. 16. 7.
the eyes, nor reproves according to the hearing of the ears, but judges
righteously: and as God himself looks not on the outward Good works in show
are not always good works in deed, but sometimes evil and what is the cause
thereof? not the work it self, but the manner of doing of doing of it makes
it faulty. Aug. de doct. Christ l. 3. c. 12. 2. Tim. 3. 5. The show of good
works may be greater among Hypocrites, Heretics and the ve. ry Infidels, then
among sound and sincere Christians.
appearance, but behouldeth the heart, so does the wise and prudent Christian
also. He judges of the works of man not according unto the glorious show of
the outward action, but according unto the pure sincerity of the inward
intention, neither does he so much respect the work done, as the manner
whereby it is done. For as the Philosopher can teach us, he is not a just man
that does just actions, but he that does them after a just manner: and as the
schoolme^ have taught, God is not a rewarder of nownes, but of adverbes, that
is, God rewards not the deeds that are barely just, but such as are done
justly. For a just deed performed, but not justly, is a just deed in show,
but not in substance. Now just deeds only in show and not in substance may
be found in false Prophets and seducing Heretics: yea they shall be found in
the Here^iques of these last times, who shall have a show of godliness, but shall
deny the power thereof. And verelie such as ^ open offenders and notorious
malefactors can hardly persuade others to like of that doctrine which
themselves profess, whatsoever it be: but such as are in outward appearance of
an holy life and conversation may greatly prevail and do much mischief, if
that they be teachers of falshoode and lies, and of erroneous and he^icall
doctrines. And this the Devil knows right well, and therefore oftentimes
makes his ministers to seem to be of an heavenly and Angelical co^versation,
that so he may by this means more easily bring in his divelish errors. And
has not our Savior told us, Luke 16 8.
that the children of this world are wiser in their generation then the
children of light? Mat. 23. 15.
And does not experience it self teach us, that they are not only more
painful and industrious compassing sea and land to make one of their
profession, but also more beneficial and bountiful, Exodus 32. 24
giving away their good^ and treasures, and robbing themselves and theirs of
their most p^etions and costly Jewels to make a golden calfe, or some other the
like Idol? The Apostle Saint Paul has testified that the Heretics of these
last times shall forbid marriage and command 1. Tim. 4. 2.
to abstain from meat in hypocricy, that so they might seem very abstemious
and chaste, and of a most severe and strait life. And Chrysostom has
witnessed l^kewise of them, that they Chrysostom. in matthew. hom. 49.
shall have a greater show of abstinence and continency, then shall be found
among the true Christians. And is it not recorded of The very Turks, that such
as are of their religious orders use wonderful austerity and rigor in
punishing their own bodies, that so they might seem great mortified me? And
did not Baals Priests use to lance themselves with knives, until they were
goared in their own blood? But what do I speak of rigorous 1. Reg. 18. 28
discipline found among Turks, Heretics and, Idolators? Were there not among
the heathen themselves as notable examples for the exercise of all manner of
civil duties, as ever were found among any Christians? Was not Aristides most
famous for justice, Socrates for sobriety, Appius Claudius for fidelity,
Fabritius for abstinence,, Scaevola for courage, Cato for severity, Cimon the
Plut. in vita Cimonis.
Athenian for liberality? Of whom it is recorded that he took away the moundes
and fences from his grounds, that the stranger and poor might take what
fruit they would to refresh and satisfy themselves there withal: besides he
prepared a large supper ordinarily, to the which any poor man might come and
receive sustenance: and if he met any ancient citizen in ragged and torn
attire, he commanded one or other of his followers to change his apparel
with him: and of his retinue that accompanied him, some carried large su^mes of
money, that if they met with any honest poor man they might give unto him all
that he needed. And yet what were all these so glorious and goodly works,
but bare shadows and counterfeites of virtuous actions, rather then virtuous
actions indeed? Yea what were they but Splendid a peccata. The best works of
the vnfaith^ull a^e no better then sins. Romans 11. 20.
beautiful sins? And as for the parties themselves, shall we therefore esteem
them to have been good trees, for that they had such an outward show of good
fruit? Surely the spirit of truth does testify of us, that we are all by
nature brambles, breers, and wild ^ues, until we be grasled into the true
olive. Now it is faith that does grafte us into the true olive, as infidelity
does break us of. Without says then we are no better then brambles, briars,
and wild olives. And wh^ Dee men gather grape^ of thor^es, and figs Math. 7.
16.
of br^ar^? Or does the wild olive bring forth a kind and natural olive?
Wherefore all these before named so famous and worthy personages in the eyes of
flesh and blood, for all their glorious show of goodly fruit living without
faith, without Christ, without God, being Ephesians. 2. 12.
al^ans from the ^omm^n weal^h of Israel and from the covenants of grace, must
needs undergo that heavy but i^st sentence of the Lord of the vineyard: Cut
down the unprofitable trees: for why Luke 13 7. Math. 3 10.
cumber they the ground? And again: Now is the a^e laid unto the root of
the trees^ therefore every tree that bringoth not forth good fruit is bow^n
down and cast into the fire. For if I give al my goods to the poor, 1. Cor.
13. 3
and have not love, it profi^th me nothing: that is, if this liberal fact of
mine proceed not from a sincere and hearty affection to the good of my
neighbor, as likewise if this hearty affection toward my neighbor come not
from a sincere love toward God, who is loved for himself, and in whom also
I love my neighbor, yea if this my love toward God flow not from his love in
Christ toward me, embraced and apprehended by a true and lively faith, all
this my releiving of the poor cannot releive my self, and all this my mercy
toward the needy cannot be a means to convey over unto me the Lords mercy.
For unless all my goodness be after this manner derived from God the only
fountain of all goodness, well it may unto men seem to be goodness, yet it
shall not have his allowance from God.

But now let us return again unto our Saviors rule: Beware of false Prophots
which come unto you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves: ye
shall know them by their fruits. True teachers, which with their hearts
sincerely embrace that wholesome doctrine which they profess with their
mouths, together with their faith full disciples and scholars, are as trees
planted in the paradise of God, and watered with the pure streams of the river
of the water of life that flows throughout the paradise of God, and so
receiving the blessing of God do there by bring forth fruit good in truth and
substance, and not in show only or outward appearance: whereas false teachers
as bastard plants settled in the wilderness of this barren and unfruitful world,
and wette with the venomous drops of the infected and deadly puddles of humane
devices and dreams, do thereby bring forth fruit sometimes wholesome and good
in show, but never in substance. For an infected fountain cannot yield forth
wholesome water: neither can a corrupt faith bring forth an vncorrupt life. For
the mind and understanding are the leaders and guides unto the will and the
affectious: and therefore if they be misledde with falsehood and error, and
wander and go astray in the bye paths of impiety and ungodliness, how can
they direct the will and affections in the right way of piety and godliness?
Verily unto whomsoever God in his justice has denied the knowledge of the
grounde^and principles of a sound faith, to them also he does deny the gift and
blessing of an holy life: seeing that selfsame holy doctrine that is the cause
of an holy faith is also the cause of an holy life, as it is made manifest in
the fourth motive. As on the contrary side unto whom God in his mercy has
given the faithful acknowledging and embracing of the grounds and principles of
a sound faith undoubtedly to them he does likewise grant the practical
knowledge of an holy life. For true faith and sincere love, which are the
mother and nurce of all good works, are as Hypocrates twins borne together
and living without separation: so that if one of them be strengthened, the other
receives strength also, and if one of them be weakened the other is weakened:
they go always hand in hand and be inseparable companions, and never break
company: give entertainment to the one, and thou must give entertainment to
the other; s^ut the one of them out of thy doors, and the other will in no wise
be thy guest, nor abide with thee the least moment of time. For albeit a bare
and naked knowledge of the grounds of faith may be severed from the practice of
a godly life, yet a faithful embracing and a sincere re^oiceing in them can
never be idle and unfruitful, but always is accompaned with good works, which
give witness unto the sincerity and Qui non fac it bonu^ non credit bonum.
soundnes of faith, and do sufficiently declare the holiness of the doctrine
from whence ^hey proceed. Holy doctrine embraced but in show and in hypocrisy
may be unfruitful, but being sin^ly received, it makes good trees which
cannot be without g^d fruit. Now then this being evident that good works are
the infalhble notes of a good faith, it remains that as in the former part of
this treatise we declared that faith to be only sound and catholic, which was
agreeable to the grounds of faith more briefly abridged in the Apostles Creed,
and set down more at large in the canonical seripture: so now we set down
those divine rules of an holy life which are delivered in the same books,
whereunto we must frame all our works, if that we desire to be assured that
they shall be allowed and approved of God.

The proper cause of all good works delivered unto us by the Not our own will
nor the will of any creature, but the will of God is the fountain and
foundation of all good works. Peccatum est (...). To do our works in humble
obedience to the will of God, to serve and please him therein is a sure sign
of a good work, and of the true service and servant of God. Ioh. 5. 30.
spirit of God in the canonical scripture, is a religious respect unto the will
of God in doing the same. For as rebellious disobedience against the will and
commandment of God makes an evil work, so sincere obedience makes a good.
Even when the will of God is the motive to induce us to the performance of all
our works, when they are done in obedience unto him as the duty and service
which he requires at our hands, yea when they are done also to this end and
purpose, that therein we way serve him according unto his own will: then they
are, without controversy, his right and acceptable service, and further
declare them, that so do the same, to be his loyal and obedient servants. For
how shall we know a loyal subject to his prince, and a true and trusty servant
to his master, but by their care and labor to serve and please them in their
ready obedience to their wills and commandments? even so we may soon know
and discern the loyal subjects and the faithful servants to the great Lord
and master of us al, if that al our works are done to serve and please him and
to show our co^formity to his will. Upon this ground did our Savior Christ
himself iust^fie and make good all his own proceedings. I can do nothing
(says he) of my self, as I hear I judge, and my judgment is just, because I
seek not mine own well, but the will of the father that sent me. So we that
are Christians, if we desire to have our works holy and good, we must learn
by the ensample of our master Christ in none of them to seek our own will,
and to walk in our own ways, but always to have our ^ies bent upon him, who
has set out unto us our limits and bounds. The which thing if we sincerely
perform, we shall be as dear unto our blessed savior, as if we were his
brother or mother: For who (says he) is Mat. 12. 50.
my brother and mother? Behold he that does the will of my father which is in
hea^ven, the same is my sister, brother and mother. And whom will he admit
unto the kingdom of heaven? Not every one (says he) Mat. 7. 21.
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of beave^, but
he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. And verily if Gods
will be dear to us, we our selves shall be dear unto him: if we be c^refull
to fulfill his will, he will be careful to fulfill our will: if we endeavor
to please him, he will endeavor to please us: if we be ready to perform all
that is in his heart, he will be ready to perform all that is in our heart, yea
he will give us more then we can wish or desire. The cause of our blessedness is
our communion The cause of our blessedness is our communion with God. True
blessedness is our conformity to Gods will.
with God, and our reconciliation unto him by the blood of Christ, whereby he
is become our loving father, and has adopted us into the number of his
children. And true blessedness it self, which is here in this life begun in
the children of God, and shall be made perfect in the life to come, is nothing
else but their sanctification by his holy spirit, and illuminatio^ by his holy
word, and their conformity to God both in their minds and understandings, and
also in their affections and wills. For when Gods wisdom is our wisdom,
and Gods will our will, and Gods pleasure our pleasure, pleasure, when the
faith that God commends is our faith, and the works that he commands re
our works, when we have unfeignedly sought to conform our selves wholly to the
most exact rule of the Lords will, and to be holy as he is holy, then do we
see as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed into
the same Image from glory to glory as by the spirit 2. Cor. 3. 18.
of God. For as sin is our greatest wretchedness because it Sin makes a
people miserable.
makes us most unlike unto God the holy of holies, and most like unto the
devil that unclean and impure spirit: even so true sanctity is our greatest
glory, because it makes us most like unto the Lord of glory. Seeing then our
works are right which are squared out by the squier of Gods will, seeing our
serving of God according unto his own pleasure is his wellpleasing and
acceptable service, yea seeing our conformity to the will of God is our
greatest blessedness, it is no marvel that the spirit of God, who is of his
most privy and secret counsel, does often urge in direct terms this will of
God as a most strong and effectual motive and inducement, to persuade us
thereby unto the careful and diligent performance of all good works. This is
the will of God (says the Apostle) even your sanctification: that every one
know how to possess 1. These. 4. 3.
his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lusts of concupiscence as
do the Gentiles which know not God. As if he had said: your sanctification
and your possessing of your vessels in holiness and honor, is the thing that
God wills and commands, and therefore ye ought most religiously to embrace
the same to test^fie your obedience to his will. And again: Rejoice evermore
pray continually, 1. These. 5. 16
in all things give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
toward you. So the Apostle St. Peter exhorting them, to who^ he wrote, to
repentance and amendment of life, tells the^ that 1. Pet. 4. 2.
it is sufficient, that before they were called to the knowledge of the will of
God, they had spent the time past of their life after the lusts of the
Gentiles: now (says he) as much time as remains for us to live in the flesh,
we must live not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.

And if we would further be instructed in what works especially it is the will
and pleasure of God to have us employed, they are the works of the moral and
not of the ceremonial law, Sacrifice and offering (says the Prophet) thou
vvould^st not have, bu^ Psalm. 40. 7.
mine ears have thou opened: Burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin have thou
not required, then said I, Lo I come: In the volume of thy book it is written
of me, that I should do thy will o my God, I am content to do it, yea thy law
is in mine heart. The which performing of the Lords will, rather then the
offering of many sacrifices, being the principal part of the service of God, as
it was in some measure done by David ^ principal man among the Lords servants,
and a type and figure of our Savior Christ, so it was most perfectly performed
by our Savior himself the accomplishment of all types and figures, as the
Apostle testifies Heb. 10. For albeit the curse and condemnation that was
laid upon him in respect of our sins was most heavy and grievous unto his
flesh, and caused him to pray again and again, Father if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me: yet for that he knew full well, that he therefore
came into the world to drink most deeply of this bitter cup, and that by
his fathers appointment and will, therefore he did most willingly submit
himself thereto saying, not as I will, but as thou will: not my will, but
thin^ b^ Math. 26. 39.
fulfilled therein. And so have all the lively members of Christ from the
beginning of the world patiently endured the heavy burden of the cross being
moved thereunto upon the same reason. When the Lord had revealed to Samuel his
most grievous judgments that he would execute upon the house of Ely for the
most outrageous sins of his lewd sons, how does old Elie prepare himself
to patience? It is the Lord (says he) that has thus spoken: let him do
what seems good in his own eyes, even what he 1. Sam. 3. 18
himself wills, and what pleases him best, So when wicked Abs^lon had
conspired against his own father David, and had forced him to fly out of
Jerusalem the chief seat and city of his kingdom, how is David furnished
for the patient enduring of this cross* If (says he) I shall find favor in
the sight of the Lord, he 2. Sa^. 15. 26
will b^ing me again: But if he say I have no delight in thee, let him do
what seems good in his own eyes. Likewise Job the pattern of patience when
all manner of losses and crosses came upon him on an heap, what was it that
moved him so patiently to endure the^ all? Naked (says he) came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked must Job. 1. 21.
I return thither again: the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed
be the name of the Lord. By the which onsamples we have to learn to frame our
wills to the Lords will, and to conform our affections to his executions, and
so to square out our works by his law, if we will have our works good, and
our service approved, and our selves accepted as the Lords faithful servants.

All men by nature in the ordering of their lives and works would willingly
serve themselves, by following their own good intentes and meaninges, and by
walking after their own eyes: and the traditions of our elders and fathers,
and the custo^e of the multitude, and the commandments of great and mighty
men, and of such as are seated in high dignity and authority do mightily sway
and prevail with us. And therefore if we will not suffer our selves to be
m^sledde in this matter of the greatest moment of all other, it behooves us to
harken most carefully to the counsel of the wise man: Let thine eyes (says he)
behold the right, and let thine eye liddes direct the way before Thee: ponder
the path of thy feet, and let Prove. 4. 25.
all thy ways be ordered aright. Turn not to the right hand nor to the left,
but r^fraine thy feet from evil: That is, in these so weighty matters that
concern the glory of God, and the salvation of thine own soul, trust not
other men's eyes, nor follow thou other men's ensamples, but look thou thy self
to thine own steps: and be thou assured that thou walk in all those ways
which the Lord thy God has commanded thee to walk in, and see that thou
turn Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
not either to the right hand or to the left, or walk one step out of these
ways. All of us with our great grandfather Adam, since he turned out of the
right way of Gods commandments, have wandered and gone astray in crooked
paths and dangerous ways, and do still run on hastily and speedily
therein, until the Lord of his great mercy does open our eyes, and gives us
wise and understanding hearts to behold and to forsake our own errors, and to
return into the ways of his commandments. The path of the just is
straight, for that the Lord does direct his steps? by taking from his eyes the
veil of folly and by giving him wisdom to walk warely and to forsake his
own blind and perverse ways, and to walk in the ways of understanding and
wisdom. According unto the most wholesome counsel of the Apostle Saint Paul
given to the Ephesians: Take heed (says he) that Ephesians. 5. 15.
ye walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time,
because the days are evil. We are altogether so corrupt and evil, and so is
the whole world besides, and we are yet so puffed up with selfeloue, and so
blinded with our proud follies, that we mistake the broad way that leads to
death, to be the straight way that leads to life, and we are grown so stiff
also in our own most foolish conceits, that we will not willingly take any
advise and counsel to the contrary, or suffer our selves to be broken of our
own wills. Therefore we have great need to be still remembered by the Apostle to
take heed that we walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming
the time, because the da^es are evil. And again, be not v^wise (to follow
still your own foolish brains; but be ye careful) to understand what the
will of the Lord is. And verily Verse. 17.
the Lords ways must be our ways, and his will must be our set prick to
aim at in all our works, if that we have a desire to hit the mark, and
obtain the best game. And therefore that this will of God might only be
respected of us, and might most effectually work in us, it has pleased the
spirit of God in the holy scripture given by divine inspiration to have set
down four principal motives for the better effecting thereof: whereof two
concern the matter it self, and two the author of this will. For Gods will is
only to direct us in all our works, 1 first because it is holy, just, and
perfect: 2 secondly for that it is only acceptable unto God: 3 thirdly because
it is the will of him, that only has sovereign auctority and power to rule
over our consciences and souls: 4 fourthly and lastly for that it is his will
unto who^ we owe our selves, and all that we enjoy, as having received all from
him, and unto whom our whole service is dubble due in respect of his infinite
and unspeakable blessings, most frankely and freely, and yet most largely and
bountifully bestowed upon us.

1 The will of God is to be respected of us in doing good works, for that it
is holy good and perfect. Romans 12. 1.
If then we will be assured to have our works good, we must have our eyes
bent upon the will of God, and that must most carefully be respected of us: yea
the holy, good, and perfect will of God must be the motive and induceme^t unto
us for the most willing and ready performing of the same. The Apostle St. Paul
having set down in the former part of his Epistle to the Romans the
principles and grounds of our Christian faith, being in the latter part
thereof to deliver the doctrine of good works, begins that matter after
this manner. I beseech you (says he) by the mercifulnes of God, that you give
up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable serving of God. And fashion not your selves like unto this world,
but be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
the good will of God, acceptable and perfect. In which words we may observe
these two points: first, in what things the service of God consists, not in
the sacrificeing up of unreasonable beasts but in offering up of our selves:
(for that is our reasonable serving of God:) secondly, who ought to be our
directers and guides in performing our service due unto God, not the customs
or fashions of this world, nor the intents and divices of our own hearts, but
the good will of God, acceptable, and perfect. Whereby we are to learn, that if
we will be the approoved servants of God, and have our service allowed of him,
we must have an intentive eye to the Lords will, and make it the rule of all
our works: yea if we will be citizens with the saints, and of the household
of God, and fellow servants with the Angels themselves, then as they stand
pressed and ready always before God to attend his pleasure, and to perform his
will, so must we also walk continually before God as in his eyes and in his
presence, presenting our selves unto him in our daily prayers, and still
laboring by all means possible that his will may be done here by us on earth,
as it is in heaven Mat. 6. 10.
by his holy Angels. When that kind of serving of God by the sacrificing of
beasts was most in force, Samuel said unto Saul who had transgressed the flat
commandment and will of God to offer, as he pretended, sacrifice to God: Is God
so well pleased with sacrifice as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold
to obey is better 1. Sam. 15. 22.
then sacrifice, and to harken is better then the fat of Rams. It is the
highest degree of wisdom and goodness, of himself to be able to conceive that
which is good: and the second degree is of such as knowing their own wants
betake themselves to be wholly guided and ruled by those in whom dwells
wisdom in all abou^dance. Now perfect wisdom and goodness dwells only in
God, his will is most holy, just, and perfect, yea it is the most perfect rule
of all holiness and of all justice. Neither does God will and command things so
much, for that they are just, lawful, and good: but rather those things are
therefore just, lawful, and good, for that they are willed and commanded of
God. When upon occasion of this holy and comfortable doctrine of the gospel
(that the sins of the faithful do the more evidently set forth the mercy of
God in Christ, in that he is of himself so good and so good unto such, which
Romans 3. 5.
are so and so unworthy in themselves) objection was made: If our
unrighteousness sets forth the glory of Gods goodness, then the Lord may seem
to be unjust in punishing sin, for that his glory is thereby the more
furthered: the Apostle answers by an exclamation or rather by a detestation
saying, God forbid: else how should God judge the world? Seeing he is not a
judge after the manner of mortal men, who being advanced to high estate do many
times corruptly abuse their high authority; but it is not so with God. For his
being judge of the world is not by birth, or election, or suite, or purchase,
but by nature. For in that he is God and creator of all, he is judge of all:
and his most upright and vncorrupt will is the sovereign rule of all
righteousness: and it his is the extraordinary prerogative of this his most
righteous will, that he cannot possibly will or command any thing that is
unjust. So that if he command the Israelites to borrow of the Egyptians Jewels
of silver Exodus 3. 23.
and Jewels of gold, and so to rob the Egyptians, they may boldly do the same,
and keep those Jewels to their own uses as his lawful gifts, and as the
pledges of his fatherly love. If God co^ma^d Levy to Exodus 32. 27
consecrate his hands in blood, if he know not father, nor mother, brother, nor
friend, but execute the Lords vengeance without respect of persons, he shall
receive a blessing for the same. So likewise if Abraham be commanded of God to
kill holy and innocent Isaak Genesis 22. 16
his dear and only son, from whom was to proceed that holy seed in whom all
the nations of the earth should be blessed: if he but intend in all humble
obedience to the will and commandment of GOD to perform the same, GOD will
so ^pproue and like of him for it, that he will in recompense thereof even vow
and swear his everlasting blessedness. Nay if the most holy but secret
counsel of God, wherein he has chosen some to eternal life before they were
borne, yea before the foundation of the world was laid, and refused other, be
called in question and condemned also by the corrupt reason of man, yet this is
a sufficient justification thereof uttered by the Lords own mouth: I Exodus
33. 19 Voluntas beneplacit^ Mat. 11. 26.
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion, on whom
I will have compassion. Whereunto our Savior also subscribeth saying; even so O
father; for so was it thy good pleasure. And the same plea is made likewise by
the Apostle in the same case: he will have Romans 9. 18.
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he harde^eth.

But this secret will of God is mainly improued by the Church Not only the
secret but also the revealed will of God is blasphemously defaced by the church
of Rome. voluntas signi.
of Rome, yea and flatly condemned of cruelty and tyranny. Neither has she
any better regard of the revealed will of God set down in the sacred books of
the canonical scripture. For she has presumed to pluck down out of the
seat of highest judgment the book of God, in that tongue wherein it was penned
by the special direction of Gods vn-erring spirit, and has set up in the
place thereof a translation made without any special or extraordinary
revelatio^, under the pretense of more and greater corruptions crept into the
one, the^ into the other. As if the Lord had not had ^he same care to preserve
the truth in the books penned by his own public registers and notaries, as
in the translation of such an one, whose greatest praise cannot be but this, to
be their faithful disciple and scholar. And as if the Lord had not had the
same regard to keep vnpoll^ted his own divine and heavenly doctrine in the
most pure fountains and springs, as in the impure streams and rivers. And yet
how does she also esteem of the will of God set down by the pen of her
translator? Do not some of her dear children compare it to a nose of wax and
to a shipmans hose, which may be turned and wrested every way, and sit falsehood
as well as truth? And does she not charge it to be shadowed with such
obscu^ities, and ambiguities, that the truth thereby cannot be cleared without
the light of an Interpreter, and the right faith cannot be found out without
the help of the Pope and his councels? Now is this to honor the Lords will,
and to reverence it as holy, pure, and perfect? Were that to be esteemed an
holy, pure, and perfect will and testament of an earthly father, which is
involved with such obscurities and ambiguities, that the children cannot
understand the legacy that is therein bequeathed unto them, nor yet the duty
that is required at their hands, but that they must still fall at variance and
ods among themselves, and be ready still to go to law one with another, or at
the least be driven continually to seek to the lawyers for the opening and
explaning of their manifold doubts? May not such a will be said to be at the
least very unadvisedly penned, and if it were done of set purpose, very
wickedly also? Now the will and testament of our heavenly father was of set
purpose pe^ned by the spirit of god after that very manner as it is set down
in the books of the old and new testament: and therefore in that the Church of
Rome does charge these books with such obscurities and ambiguities, that the
children of God cannot understand that heavenly legacy that is bequeathed unto
them therein, nor yet that duty that is required at their hands, but that they
must needs be at variance and fall out about ^he ^ne continually, unless they
resort continually unto the decision of the Pope, and to the determination of
his approved coun^els for the dissolving of all their doubts and for the
clearing of all their controversies: what else does she herein but most
impiously charge the most holy, pure, and perfect will and testament of our
heavenly father not only to have bin very unadvisedly, but also to have bin
most wickedly? penned? But let God be true, and al men liars, as it is written:
that thou might be justified in thy words, and overcome when thou art
judged. And Romans 3. 4.
let all the most glorious works of the children of pride be utterly condemned,
for that they do them not in most humble obedience to the most holy, pure, and
perfect will of God: or that which is far more heinous and impious, for that
they are not ashamed in their books published in the eyes of all men thus to
defame and slander that most holy, pure, and perfect will of the most holy,
pure, and perfect God.

2 The will of God is to be respected in doing our works for that it is
acceptable and wellpleasing to god. Coll. 3. 20. 1. Tim. 2. 3. Ephesians. 5. 10. Heb.
13. 16.
The second reason, why we should have such a respective regard to the will of
God in doing our works, is for that what is conformable to his will, cannot be
but well-pleasing and acceptable to himself. Children (says the Apostle) obey
your parents in all things: for that is well-pleasing unto the Lord. So to
Timothy: I exhort therefore that first of all prayers, supplications,
intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men, for kings, and for such
as be in authority, that we may lead a quiet life in all godliness and
honesty: for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. So
likewise to the Ephesians: Ye were once darkness, but now ye are light in the
Lord, walk as children of the light, approving that which is wellpleasing unto
the Lord. So also the Apostle to the Hebrews: To do good, and to distribute
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is wellpleased. Now that which God
wills, that no doubt he likes, and that which he himself commands is
assuredly wellpleasing and acceptable in his own eyes. For if it be a
pleasure to a wise man when his counsel is obeyed, and a grief and corrasive
when it is despised, and esteemed vain, and nothing worth: so it cannot be but
wellpleasing unto him, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, when his counsels are obeyed, and he cannot be but highly offended,
when they are trodden under foot and lightly regarded. When blind, blockish
and sottish men shall so lightly esteem of the wisdom of God which he has
made manifest in his own ordinances, that they shall imagine that they
themselves ca^ invent a better, or at the least as good a manner of serving of
God as he himself has ordained in his own word, what can be more odious and
abominable before God? As on the contrary side when men ascribe that perfection
of wisdom to the will and commande^ents of God, as that they fully persuade
themselves that in them are contained his whole and entire worship and service,
and therefore do busy themselves most carefully about the fulfilling of the
same, this their respect and obedience to the law of God cannot be but a most
acceptable sacrifice unto God. For as we can no better please the prince, the^
by being careful to obey the Placita principum.
princes pleasure: so we cannot better please God, nor testify our love better
unto him, then by our careful keeping of his commandments. If ye love me
(says our Savior Christ) keep my commandments. Ioh 14 15. and 21. Our love
to God is best showed in our obedience to his will expressed in his own
commandementes.
And again: he that has my commandments and keeps them, ^he same is he
that loves me: and he that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will
love him, and show my self unto him. And again if any man love me, he will
keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him and dwell
with him: he that loves me not, keeps not my word. By the which so often
repetition of one and the selfsame thing, so easily to be conceaved and to be
born away at the first, our Savior Christ would have it thoroughly settled in our
hearts, that we cannot possibly do any thing that can please him better, the^
when we yield him that service which he himself has commanded. Now every
true and faithful servant of God would most willingly do unto God that
service which is most acceptable unto him: and therefore he ought most
readily to address himself to the careful performance of all duties as are
prescribed in the commandments of God. Subjects and servants ought to perform
their civil duties to their magistrates and masters by yielding obedience to
their lawful commandments: but yet being so done, they are to be esteemed but
civil duties. But if they will have them to be religious duties also, the^ they
must perform them in obedience not so much unto men as unto God, for that he
has most straightly enjoined them to be subject to those whom he has placed
over them. Servants (says the Apostle) be Coll. 3. 22.
obedient unto them which are your masters according to the flesh in all
things, not with eye service, as men pleasers, but with singlenes of heart,
fearing God: and whatsoever ye do, do it hartelie as to the Lord, and not
unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the inheritance: for ye
serve the Lord Christ. By which words we may learn, that servants yielding
their obedience to their bodily masters at the commandment of Christ, do
therein serve Christ: and therefore howsoever they are here oftentimes very
slenderly rewarded by their bodily masters, they shall be sure to be well
rewarded elsewhere by their master Christ. Verily it ought to be a sufficient
motive unto us to be exercised in the commandementes of God, for that it is the
holy and acceptable will of God that we should so do: and yet behold his
great and endless goodness, who applies himself to our frailety and weakness,
not only by promising unto us all manner of blessings both spiritual and
temporal thereby to allure us also to the ready performance of that duty,
which shall be so liberally rewarded both in this life and in the The faithful
in some sort may respect both promises and threatninges, rewards and
punishments the better to stir them up to do their duties: and all many
times little enough; but yet to do the will of their heavenly father and to
please him, is the most principal motive to stir them up to the ready
performance of all good works.
life to come: but also by threatening us with all plagues and punishments, that
so he might force and compel us to that, the omission and neglect whereof shall
in the end be revenged with so great severity. Wherein the Lord deals with us
as a wise and careful father deals with his dear child: who while he is
young and wanterh discretion, sometimes uses the terror yea the sharp blow
of the rod, and sometimes a fig and an apple and the promise of a gay
coat, the better thereby to nurture him and to train him up: but when he
begins to be of years and discretion, then he seeks to make manifest unto
him his fatherly care and kindness toward him, thereby to possess him with the
love of his duty: the which thing when it is once well perceived of the kind
and natural child, then he thinks that he can never be careful enough by all
means to please so careful and kind a father, he is greatly grieved with
himself if any way he offend him, he is very much ashamed of his former
child shnes, in that he was re^dier to he nurtured with a rod and an apple,
then with the due consideration of his fathers love: So deals with us the
father of our spirits, sometimes assaying to win us with his promises, and
sometimes to terrify us with his threats: but when we are come to that
discretion that we are able somewhat to discern that dignity of our high
calling in Christ, and the great honor of our heavenly and caelestial
adoption, the^ nothing does prevail so much with us, as the due consideration
and admiration of the Lords great and endless mercies, which he has already
made manifest vntovs. Then we begin to be ashamed of our too* much
childishnes, that we should still stand in need either to be as it were still
flattered or chidde, and would most willingly persuade our selves; that only
to please so loving and gracious a father ought to be a sufficient motive of it
self to induce us to the careful performance of al duties.

And verily the kind and loving child of God, in doing those works which are
required at his hands, seeks not so much to please men, or to profit
himself, as he intends to serve and please God by being obedient to his will:
and he respects al other things no otherwise, then it stands with the good
likeing and will of God, that he should respect and regard the same: He loves
God principally for Gods sake, and not for his own or any others, to gain any
thing thereby to himself or to any other. The cause (says an ancient father)
of loving God is God, and the measure Bern. lib. de diligendo deo.
of loving him is without measure: God verelie (says he) is not loved without
reward, albeit he be to be loved without respect to the reward. For he loves
God less then he should, that loves any thing besides GOD. Wherefore if in
doing good works we principally respect praise and commendation among men, and
to be honored and magnified of the multitude for the same, or if we
principally regard either the procuring of the Lords temporal blessings
here in this life, or the purchasing of eternal glory in the life to come,
then we serve our selves and not the Lord, and love our selves and not the
Lord. And is he not to be accounted a slave that is forced to his duty for
fear of the whippe, and an hireling that is drawn thereto in respect of his
hire? Verily the sincere servant of Christ embraces godliness for it self, and
honors God for his own sake. If thou be a slave (says Nazianzene) fear
the whippe, and if thou be an Nazianz. de sanct. baptism.
hireling expect thine hire: but if also above these thou art a son,
reverence God as thy Father: do well for that it is an excellent thing to be
obedient to thy father: and albeit there were no other thing to be attained
hereafter, yet this very thing will be a sufficient reward, to have done that
which is well pleasing to thy father. I have applied my mind (says David) to
keep thy commandments even to the end. Some think (says Isidore Clarius)
the word that signifies [to the ende], to signify, for the reward: Psalm. 119.
But (says he) it is to servile a thing and not worthy such a prophet to give
diligence to Gods commandments for the reward and for the hope of
retribution, seeing for this one thing that we ^e created by him we, can never
sati^fie this debt: yea (says he) we are bound to serve him with our whole
mind, though he had decreed to cast us dovv^e into hell fire, both for that
we owe him, and for that our whole life is still sustained by him. What? must
we not forsake father and mother and al other earthly comfortes whatsoever, if
that they hinder us from following Christ? Must we not sacrifice up to God our
dear and only child, if he command us: and not only so, but also wish our
selves rather to be accursed, then God any ways should be dishonored? Surely
we ought to love* God above all, and therefore above our selves: and we ought
to prefer our peace with God before our peace with the world, and the
smallest measure of grace and godliness, before the greatest store of all
earthly treasures. For otherwise when these things begin to be taken from us,
our zeal to Gods service will soon be cooled, as it is set forth unto us
in the parable of the sower. For by the stony and thorny grounds such being
represented unto us that have but a temporary faith, who albeit they rejoice
truly and unfeignedly in the Lord, and go on cheerfully in his service for a
while, yet for that they do not in sincerity embrace the word of God, nor love
the Lord for the Lords sake, but are moved especially upon carnal respects to
make profession of the faith of Christ: therefore they continue not steadfast in
their profession, but being a little assaulted, are soon vanquished. Whereas
the sound and sincere servants of Christ being represented unto us by the good
ground, for that in all sincerity they embrace the word of God, and love the
Lord for the Lords sake, they still finding that in the Lord and in his word,
which does move them more and more to cleave thereunto, therefore are constant
in their holy profession, and can never be clean removed from the service of
God. For these persons, for that with full purpose of heart they cleave to the
Lord, and in all sincerity serve him, therefore his favou^ does cleave fast
unto them, and his constant love and goodness does always assist them and
preserve the^ in his fear. Whereas on the contrary side, al such as in their
works pretending the Lords service, do indeed seek their own and not the
Lords, in the end loose all their own and themselves also, and are most justly
deprived at the last of their pretended show of the Lords service. And so our
Savior Christ told the hypocritical Matthew. 6. 1.
Pharisees, who seemed to be very rich in all good works, that because their
prayers and alms deeds were done to please me^, and to wine fame and glory to
themselves, and not to the Lord, therefore they were to look for no reward at
the Lords hands. As St. Paul does testify also to the whole nation of the
Jews, that because they did perform the works of the whole law, rather to
Rom 10. 3.
justify themselves thereby, then to test^fie their obedience to the good will
and pleasure of God, therefore both themselves and also their works were
rejected of God. Wherefore the Apostle to the Hebrews in the conclusion of his
Epistle could not wish a greater blessing unto them then this, that the God of
peace, which brought again from Heb. 13. 21.
the de^d our Lord Jesus Christ the great shepherd of the sheep by the blood
of the everlasting testament, should make them perfect in all good works to
do his will, working in them that which was pleasant in his sight through
Jesus Christ. whereby we may learn, that the perfection of al good works is
the respect had to the will and pleasure of God in doing the same. Wherefore if
we will be fully assured that our works are good and allowed of God, we must
not therein serve our selves, and seek our own, by entending either our
estimation before men, or our justification before God: but in them we must
seek those things which are Christ's, intending, if not only yet principally
at the least, to serve and please him, and to testify our obedience to his
will. What then may we judge of all the most glorious works of the children of
the Romish synagogue, which are The children of the church of Rome do their
works principally to serve themselves and to procure their own good, and
therefore they are no part of Gods ^r^ice.
done principally to justify themselves before God, to make satisfaction for
their own sins, to merit for themselves the Kingdom of heaven, and to
releive the souls of their dear freindes being most miserably tormented in
purgatory fire? The which merit of their works is in so great an account with
them, and such a principal motive to al holy actions, that because we deny the
same, and ascribe our whole justification first and last only to the merit of
Christ's death, and to the dignity of his passion: therefore they charge us to
deny good works, or at the least greatly to diminish the care and study of
doing good works. Yea some of the^ have not been ashamed to avouch, that if
we be not justified by our good works, it were as good to play for naught as to
work for naught. As if to do good works, to testify our obedience to the
good will of GOD, and to serve and please him were a thing of naught.
Wherefore it cannot otherwise be, but that all their good works, how
glorious in show soever they be, should be disallowed of God and utterly
rejected as things of naught.

3 The will of God is to be respected of us in all our works, for that he is
our only spiritual Lord who has authority to rule over our souls. Exodus 20.
2. Eze. 20. 19.
The third reason why in the performing of all good works we ought to have a
special respect to the will of God is, for that he is our only Lord that has
authority to rule over our consciences, and unto whose supreme and sovereign
will we owe all humble and dutiful obedience. This is one of the reasons that
is alleged by God himself at the promulgation of his own law to procure
obedience to his commandments. I am the Lord thy God, etc. thou shall have
none other Gods before me. So likewise when he would have reclaimed his people
from those superstitions and Idolatries wherinto they were fallen by following
the customs and orders of their forefathers, he proposes unto them the self
same argument. Ye shall not walk in the ordinances of your fathers, nor
observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols: I am the Lord
your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them, and
sanctify my Sabbethes, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that
ye may know that I am the Lord your God. The cause of their falling away
from God was the falling away from his laws, and the embracing of the decrees
and customs of their forefathers: and the means of their recovery is the
acknowledging of the Lords supreme and sovereign authority over them, and
their humble submission unto his statutes and laws. And therefore in the
prophecy of Jeremy the Lord himself does most v^hemently cry out unto this
backesliding generation: O ye disobedient children turn again (says the
Lord) for I am your Ierem. 3. 14
Lord. And verily if it seem unto every man just and reasonable that the eyes
of servantes should look to the hands of their masters, Psalm. 123. 2.
and the eyes of maidens to the hands of their mistrestes, then much more
reason is it, that our eyes should wait and attend upon the LORD our GOD,
if that we will be accepted of him as his faithful servauntes. The
Centurions go Mat. 8. 9.
in the Gospel was enough to his soldiers, and his do this was sufficient
unto his servantes: and shall not the orders and injunctions of the Lord of
Lords and commander of al comm^unders make us pressed and willing to yield to him
al humble and ready obedience? Especially whereas he is our only Lord and
lawmaker, who has authority not only to impose laws upon our consciences, but
also to revenge all contempt and disobedience even with everlasting perdition
both of body and soul. There is Iac. 4. 12. Ephesians. 4. 5.
one lawgiver (says S. James) who is able to save and to destroy. There is one
God (says the Apostle) and one Lord. All other Lord, here among men have no
lawful authority but from him: for they are but his Lieuetenants and deputies,
and therefore must not go beyond their commission in making statuces and
imposing laws no not upon their own subjects. Concerning the safety and
prosperous estate of themselves and of their earthly kingdoms, and concerning
the welfare of their own subjects that are committed to their fidelity and
trust, they have sufficient authority in wisdom, equity, and justice to make
wholesome laws: but as concerning the worship and service of God, they have
none authority to make any new laws of their own, but to provide that the
Lords laws alone be duly put in execution. The which thing if they
religiously perform, then they are to be obeyed in the Lord, and that not
only for fear, but also for conscience: otherwise if they go beyond their
commission, their subjects owe the^ patience, but not obedience. For as they
themselves will not tolerate or endure any such presumption in any of their own
subjects, if they take upon them to make laws to overrule them and their
kingdoms (for that were to suffer the scepter to be wrested out of their own
hands, and the crown to be taken from their own heads): so they themselves
must not presume to make laws for the ordering of the church of God, and for
the administering of his spiritual kingdom, but religiously to provide that
the Lords laws only be carefully observed and kept. And therefore at the day
of the kings coronation the book of the law was delivered into his hand, to
put him in mind that thereby he ought to rule both himself and all his
subjects in all matters concerning the service of God. So likewise the
ecclesiastical officers and governors even they that are the chief builders
of the Lords spiritual temple, must lay no other stones in that building, but
such as are dug out of the Lords own quarries: That is, they must teach no
other points of faith, and precepts of life, then such as they have received
from him, who only has authority to appoint and ordain what we ought to
believe, and how to live: otherwise if they teach any thing* of their own,
we ought to give no ear nor credit unto them. The Scribes and Pharisees
(says our Mat. 23. 2.
Savior Christ) sit in Moses chair: whatsoever therefore they say unto you,
that do ye. For in sitting in Moses chair they teach the law delivered by
Moses, and so God himself teaches by them, unto whom we owe all ready
obedience. But if they do mingle therewith their own leaven, that is, their
own doctrines and inventions, Mat. 16. 6.
we must avoid and shun the same as a most dangerous and deadly poison.

The truth is that in matters of ceremony the church governors have authority
to ordain such things, as belong to edification, comelines, and order: and
yet therein also they are to take heed, that they do not clogge the Lords
people with such burdens as the Lord would not have to be laid upon them, and
also that matters of ceremony and circumstance be not so vehemently pressed and
urged, as if they were matters of substance. When king David not without the
approbation of Nathan the prophet had purposed to build a sumptuous temple for
the arc of the Lords covenant, for the fitter assembling of the people, and
for the more convenient performing of all such things as did belong to the
service of God, (albeit also it was a matter of circumstance and not of
substance, and therefore left in the hands of such as were in authority) yet for
that it was new and strange, and not precisely and particularly commanded by
the Lords own mouth, behold how the Lord seems at the first to take
exception against this so relligious and godly a purpose of his own most
choice and beloved servant: In all the places (says the Lord) wherein I walked
with the children of Israel, spoke I one word to any of the tribes of Israel,
when I commanded the Judges to feed my people Israel, or said 2. Sam. 7. 7.
I, why build ye me not an house of Cedar trees? Yea when those very
sacrifices, and offerings, Sabbothes, new moons, and solemn feasts, with
other the like exercises belonging to the service of God, which were also
precisely command^d by the Lords own express word, were performed by priest
and people but not after that manner as they were ordained by God, how does he
reject them al and cast them of, saying, what have I to do with the multitude
of your sacrifices? when ye come to appear before meo, who bath required Isa
1. 11.
these things at your hands? No marvel then that the Lord does with so great
detestation reject al those kind of services, which the people had sucked
either out of their own b^ainsicke heads, or had received by tradition from
their forefathers, saying: They have done that which I commanded them not,
neither ever entered into Ier. 7. 31.
my heart. So Isay. 29. Because this people comes near unto me with their
mouth, and honors me with their lips, but have removed their heart far
from me, and their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men:
therefore behold again I will do a marvelous work in this people, even am
trvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent shall be hid. Behold how dangerous a matter it
is in those things which concern the service of God to maime or to mingle any
thing with the pure and perfect word of God, to harken but in part to the
precepts of men, and not to resign our selves wholly to the Lord to be guided
and ruled only by his laws? For this people being in outward show and
profession the only people of God in performing the service of God did observe
those things which God himself had commanded, yet because they did ascribe
somewhat to their own wisdom, and did think that they could add something
taken out of their own brains, or delivered to them by tradition from their
fathers, as matters profitable to the serv^ce of God, their wisdom was
condemned for folly, and their honoring of God for the dishonouring of his
holy name, and for the corrupting of his service. And verily is it not extreme
folly and madness to take upon us to be wiser the^ God, and under any pretense
whatsoever to presume against so special and peremptory a decree of the supreme
judge of the whole earth set down in direct terms with his own pen? That
which I command thee, thou shall do that only: thou shall not add ought
thereto, nor take ought therfrom. And again. Deuteronomy. 4. 5. 6
Take beed that you do that which the Lord your Goa has commanded you: ye
shall not turn to the right hand nor to: he left: you shall do that which is
right and good in the sight of the Lord, and not that which is good in your
own eyes. For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his
counselor? Verily St. Paul had many and great revelations, Romans 11. 54
and was rapt up into Paradise even into the third heaven, and heard such words
as cannot be uttered, yet he acknowledged that it did not belong unto him to
bear rule over the faith of the people of God: Nay he denounces a double
curse against himself, 2. Cor. 1. 24. Gal. 1. 8.
and against any Angel who^soever, if that he presume to deliver any other
Gospel or point of faith, then was received from God himself. For we are all
whatsoever we be but fellow scholars in the school of Christ, he is our only
teacher and scholemaster, and his doctrine only is sound and catholic. We
are but fellow servants under one Lord, he only has authority to rule and
reign over our souls, and his commandments must bear the whole sway. In the
earthly kingdom there is Jew and Gentile, In the kingdoms of this world
there is a difference between prince and people, master and servant: but in
the kingdom of Christ all are servants alike under one master. 1 Cor 2. 24.
Heb 1. 14.
bond and free, Lord and servant, prince and subject: but in the spiritual
kingdom of Christ all are one, of the same estate, condition, and calling:
they are al alike the Lords freemen, and they are all the servants and
subjects of Christ. For what is Paul? or what is Apollos? but Ministers by
whom ye have believed. And what are the most glorious Angels themselves? Are
they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes that
shall be heirs of salvation? And what honorable title have the highest in
the church of Christ taken unto themselves to set forth their own dignity
and honor? James a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Simon Peter a
servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Paul a servant of God and an Apostle
of Jesus Christ. And what honorable title have the highest in the earthly
kingdom, as they did belong to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, taken unto
them selves to the setting forth of their dignity and honor? Behold (says
David a great king) I am thy servant I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaide. And what honorable title have the Angels in heaven taken unto
th^selues to the setting forth of their dignity and honor? I am thy fellow
servant (says the Angel to St. John) and one of thy brethren, which have the
testimony of Jesus: worship God. Yea the most blessed virgin Mary the mother
of the Lord, who is called by the children of the church of Rome, their Lady,
and Queen of hoaven, as if she were a mee^e, mate and peer to our Lord,
acknowledges this to be her greatest honor, that God had respect unto the
low estate of his ha^dmaide.

Al then in the spiritual kingdom of Christ are fellow servants, which are not
to make laws in matters concerning the service of God, but to proclaim the
laws of their only Lord, and to propose them unto their fellow servants to be
religiously observed by them al. The which if we could so thoroughly dispatch,
that we should stand as it were idle for lack of work, then we might harken
for a new master, and go as it were about the country to seek more work. Or
if we could perform so much of his work, as were answerable to that allowance
and wages we receive from him, the^ we might seek for some other work also
for the mending of our wages, and for the bettering of our maintenance. Or if
we could have better wages, allowance and and maintenance at another hand,
then we might cast of the Lords livery, and betake our selves to a more
profitable service. But we can never so perfectly perform our duty to God,
but that in many things we shall fail all: neither will our labor, be it never
so great, be ever answerable unto our wages: neither is it possible for any of
v^ to find so good a master as the Lord is: and therefore it is good keeping of
us in his service and continuing in his fear, that his favor may be our
countenance and credit, and his livery our protection and safety: it is good
for us in all our works to have his commandments before our eyes, and to set
before us his sovereign authority, that so in all things we serving him, may
be acknowledged of him as his faithful servants. But unto the children of the
church of Rome the auctority of this our only Lord is no^ so great that he
should rule over their consciences by his own laws alone: unless there be
joined thereto the decrees of their church, the constitutions of their popes,
the Canon of their councels, and the rules of the founders of their religious
orders. Yea their popes power is so great with them, that he can dispense with
the law of our only Lord, and free from obedience to his commandments. He can
alter the substantial points of the Lords service and maime and mangle the
institution of Christ: whereas none of his own Council. Trident. Scss. 7. c. 13.
patches and rags must in any case be neglected and omitted without the
danger of their black curse. Yea the perfect fulfilling of the whole law of
God is so light and easy to these men, that they should stand as it were idle
and vnimployed, if no greater matter were requi^ed at their hands: and
therefore the founders of their religious orders have found out many works of
greater holiness and perfection, which were not commanded, but only counseled
by God, and left to be ordained by their special care. For that belike they
were to be more careful and zealous then God himself, for those things that
did most principally concern his own honor.

For the better clearing of the which matter, let us briefly examine these two
points. First whither it be likely that God would barely advi^e, and not
peremptorely command all such duties as did most p^incipally concern his
own honor. Secondly whether thos^ works, which are enioined by the founders
of the religious orders of the church of Rome, be of greater dignity and
perfection, then those which are required in the law of God. Now concerning the
first of these points let us consider, that if in any There is nothing
essentiallie belonging to the service of god which is barely cou^selled, and
not precisely commanded by god himself.
army noth^ng be done without special charge and commission from the
general, without whose appointment to attempt any thing, how needful soever
it be, and what prosperous success soever it has, yet it is punishable by
marshiall discipline: and if in the government of the family of a wise master
among men, who is able and at leisure to manage his own affairs, there is
nothing done without the commandment of the master of the family, who only
has authority to command in his own house: or if any thing be done without
his commandment, yet al matters of the greatest moment and importance are
straitely and precisely commanded by him, and not lest to the voluntary choice
and good liking of the servants themselves: how then may it be credible and to
be believed, that the Lord of hosts the most sufficient and provident general
of the greatest army, and the wisest master of the most noble family, would
more straightly command the careful performance of mean matters, then of such
as are of greater moment and weight: yea that he would no^ co^m^nde them at all
to any of his soldiers and servants but only give advise and counsel therein,
otherwise leaving them to their own choice? Verily our Savior Christ tells
the hypocritical Pharisees, that were so strict in tything of minte cummin and
annise Mat. 23. 23.
seed, and were so loose in the greater points of the law, mercy, judgment,
and truth, that howsoever they ought not to neglect the due performance of the
least duty that God had commanded, yet they ought to have employed their
greatest care about the fulfilling of the greatest duty, for that that was
more exactly required by God. Now if the Lord has most principally required
the more careful performance of the more principal duties, that are commanded
in his own law, and has appointed a greater punishment for the neglect and
contempt of the same: shall we imagine that he has left altogether vnexacted
greater duties, then are enacted in his own law? Either is it credible that
God himself by the ministry of Moses his greatest serva^t would enact laws
and statutes of meaner importance, yea that he himself would come as it were
in his own person to proclaim the^by the voice of an Angel with thundringes
and lightnings, terrors, and Exodus 20 18
fear, majesty and glory to procure the more reverence and obedience to the
same, and to leave those of the greatest moment to be ordained by Francis,
Dominike, and Layola without any such or the like solemnity? Or was it true
only at the first delivery of the law, that there was no nation so great that
had laws so righteous as was Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
all that law that was then delivered to the people of Israel, and written
into two tables by the Lords own finger? and must there needs now be
exception taken aginst the same in the rules of all the relligious orders of the
church of Rome, which command works of greater holiness and dignity, and such
as tend to a step of Mat. 23. 37.
higher perfection? What has not God commanded us in his law to love him with
all our heart, soul, and strength, and our neighbor as our selves, and to use
all means ordained by him to the stirring up of our selves to the performance
of his love? And was not it a flat commandment of God, before the name of
any Friar was heard of, given to all the servants of God without exception?
That they should Psalm. 1. 2. Coll. 3 16. 1. These. 5. 16
so meditate on the law of God day and night, that it might dwell in them most
plentifully: that they should rejoice evermore, pray continually and in all
things give thanks: that they should deny themselves, and mortify al manner
of corrupt affections which were any way prejudicial to the love of God and
their neighbor: that they should offer up to cod in sacrifice their bodily
members as servants to righteousness, and their souls replenished with faith,
love, fear, obedience, tha^kefulnes and the like, devoting themselves and all that they possess to the most honorable service of the alsufficient God.

Wherefore to come to the second question, what greater duties The works
enjoined to the popish votaries are not of greater perfection then those that
are commanded in the law of God to be observed of all Christians. 1. Tim. 4. 4.
do the rules of our Romish Friars exact, the^ these that are enacted by the
law of God? What? is it a thing of greater perfection to abstain from marriage,
then from whoredom? from meat, then from surfeiting? from riches, then from
pride, covetousnes and oppression? What is it a more acceptable duty to
abstain from Gods creatures, and from the lawful use of such things as are
the blessings of God made and created for the use of his servants, the^ to
abstain from the works of the devil, which are damnable and cursed with the
author of them? Is it a worthier work to abstain from marriage, then to bring
up children in the informatio^ of the Lord, which may be zealous maintainers of
his worship and service, when we our selves cannot continue any longer in
this world to praise the Lord? Is it a matter of greater value to abstain from
meat and riches, then with thy food to feed the hungry, and with thy riches
to releive the needy? yea the^ to build churches to the maintenance of Gods
service, to erect colleges for the increase of learning, to found hospitalls
for the relief of the poor, and to build schools for the educatio^ of youth?
Verily the wise man thought poverty to be a step rather to wretchedness the^
to blessedness, and therefore prayed particularly against the same saying: Give
me not Prove. 30. ^.
poverty. And our Savior himself has taught us that it is an happier thing
to give then to receive, and to help others by our gifts, the^ Act. 20. 35.
to become begging Friars and to seek to be releived by the help of others.
And he shall not say at the last day. Come ye blessed of my father inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the Mat. 25. 34.
world: for ye have vowed virginity and voluntary poverty and the like: but I
was hungry and ye fed me. Moreover it has bin thought by the godly that
lived in the purer ages, not to be a work of any commendation at al, to
abstain from the sober and lawful use of such things, as God himself has
created for our use, and to refuse to drink of those pure streams of GODS
love that he has caused to flow forth unto us for our comfort, and for our
good: as it may appear by the history of Alcibiades a godly and faithful
martyr of Christ Jesus, who being reproved for living with bread and water in
the time of his liberty, and for the refusing of the use of other of the Lords
blessings, because he did thereby minister an occasion of a pernicious ensample,
after that he was cast into prison for the testimony of Christ, when it might
seem that he should have increased, then he altered his former rigorous and
straight diett: and this fact of his Eusebius terms Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Milar. in Psalm. 64.
a good instruction for scrupulous consciences. Hilary likewise reproves in
certain heretics of his time, the living with dry bread, and condemns it
of miserable superstition. And is not the Apostle also most plain in this
case, affirming precisely that this kind of rigorous and straight abstine^ce
shall be o^ of the heresye^ 1. Tim. 4. 3.
of these last times? And does he not as evidently teach that meat and drink
does not commend us to God, and that the spiritual 1. Cor. 8. 8.
kingdom of Christ does not at all consist therein, and therefore that it can
in no case be one of the chiefest works of this spiritual Romans 14. 16.
kingdom? Neither is marriage it self so pernicious a thing, that the
refraining thereof should be a most precious work. Nay Heb 13. 4.
marriage is honorable among all men as says the Apostle; and so precious in
the judgment of Chrysostom, that in it one may ascend to the throne of a
Bishop: yea if he use it moderately he may be chiefest in the kingdom of God:
at the least of it self it is no hindera^ce no not to a Bishop in the
execution of that weighty and worthy work that is required at his hands. For
it was no hinderance to Spiridion, nor yet to Gregory Nissene, who was also the
son of a Bishop: (the laws then allowed the same) and who was not Zoz. l. 1.
c. 11 Praesule patre satus, nam t^c id iura sinebant Mantuan.
inferior to his brother Basil the great, as Nicephorus witnesses, albeit he
lived in the estate of matrimony. The like may be said of living solitarily in
a cloister, or in a cello or in the wilderness; seeing it is contrary to the
doctrine of the Apostle, who reproves such as did forsake the society and
fellowship one with another: yea seeing the spirit of God has denounced an woe
against the Heb. 10, 25. Eccles. 4. 10
same: Woe be to him that is alone, or lives in solitarines, for that he
depriveth himself of the means of his recovery when he slippeth and falls,
in that he seperateth himself from the society of the faithful. And if woe be
to him that lives solitarily, then blessed is not he that lives so, at the
least he is not in the readiest way to the greatest blessedness. The Apostles no
doubt of al other men were the best followers of their master Christ, and
walked in the readiest way to the greatest perefectio^. Who albeit they had
forsaken all to follow Christ, yet they had not forsaken their wives, nor their
houses Mat. 19. 27.
nor the common society of me^. Peter, if we will believe their own Legende,
had by his wife a daughter called Petronilla and therefore after himself was
called Peter. Neither could they forsake their wives by the law of God, seeing
as the woman is bound to the man as long as he lives, so is the man bound to
the woman: and therefore it is not 1. Cor. 7. 39 verse. 11. Math. 19. 6.
Paul's but the Lords commandment in the same place: Let not the husband put
away his wife. For those who^ God has joined together, no man ought to put
asuder. Neither did the Apostles put away their wives, no not in their
laborious iorneying throughout the whole world: Have we no power to lead about
a sister a wife (says St. Paul) as well 1. Cor. 9. 5.
as the residue of the Apostles the Lords brethren and Cephas? Neither did they
forsake their houses and possessions, or the common society to live solitarily
in a cloister, or in a celle, or in the wilderness. For Christ came to Peter's
house, and there cured his wives ^other of a Math. 8. 14. Math. 9. 10.
fever: and he was feasted at Matthew^s house, and there vouchsafed to eat
with Publica^s and sinners: and after the death of Christ John took the
blessed Virgin to his own house, and received and revere^ced her as his own
mother. And yet al these (as I said before) had forsaken al things that were to
be forsaken to follow Christ: and therefore neither wines, nor houses, nor the
common society of men are to be Ioh. 19. 27.
forsaken of such as will most exactly follow Christ. Wherefore to conclude this
point, neither has God permitted to our own voluntary choice the chiefest
duties that belong to his own service, nor left them to be enioined by the
founders of the relligious orders of the Church of Rome, but has precisely
himself commanded them all: Neither are those works of supererogation
performed by our Romish votaries, any way matchable with the works of the law
of God, much less to be extolled and advaunced above them: and therefore seeing
that the children of the church of Rome will not admit God to be their only
Lord, and to have authority alone to rule over their souls by his only laws,
but have given the like power to their Pope, Church, and Friars: yea seeing
they have allowed the Pope power to dispe^ce with the law of God and nature,
and have preferred the ordinances of their church before the institution of
Christ himself, and have adva^ced the works of their votaries above the works
of the law of God, it is to be feared that God will cast the^ down with all
their glorious works into the deep^pit and dungeon of hell: from the which
place of dreadful condemnation if we desire to be delivered withal the
approved servants of God, we must not hale between two opinions: we must not
seek to serve God and Baal: (for we cannot serve two masters) we must not,
after we have vowed our selves in our baptism to the only service of one God,
make another vow of obedience to the rules of Prier Francis. For seeing we are
his servants to whom we ^bey, we must vow our obedience only to God, if that we
will be accepted of him as his most faithful and loyal servants. The which thing
because the children of the church of Rome list not to perform, therefore the
Lord will not be their Lord, not accept of them as of his servantes, nor yet
allow of any of their works as good, and as a part of his worship and service.

4 All obedience is to be yielded by us to the will of god, for that we have
received all from him, and therefore are most straitely bound to yield to him
our whole service.
Neither ought we only to be respective to the Lords good will and pleasure in all our works, for that he of right ought to reign over us ^s being our only
spiritual Lord and king, and for that he will protect and defend us, and impart
unto us the commodities of his kingdom: but much rather for that he has
bestowed upon us already so many favors, and has showed unto us so great
kindness, and has bound us unto himself with such a multitude of his
inestimable and invaluable blessings. For gifts and benefits testifying
kindness and love, do oftentimes much prevail even with the natural and
unregenerate man, yea with the very beasts themselves that want the light of
understanding and reason. The ox^ knows his owner, and the ass his masters
crib: and as the law does allow a ground bird to the owner of the ground, where
the swan is permitted quietly to make her nest, and without disturbance to
hatch and breed up her young: so does mere kindness cause the thankful storke
to perform the same without law and without constraint. But among all other
beasts void of reason strange and wonderful things are reported of the
kindnesses of dogs toward their masters for their simple breeding, and for
the sorry mainetenaunce they have received at their hands. yea the settled
malice of a most ca^kered enemy and of a most spiteful sycophant (who of all
savage and fierce beasts is thought by the Philosopher to be the worst) has
been conquered by kindness and love: and the most violent pertu^bations of
rage and sury have been turned into the most tender affections of pity and
mercy. And therefore it is not without cause that the Apostle exhorts saying:
If thine enemy Rom 12. 2^
hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink^: for in so doing thou shall
heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not evercome of evil, but evercome
evil with good. For oftentimes the streams of kindness and love do quench the
flames of malice and hatred, and kindle the coals of kindness and love. And
therefore we ought not to suffer our selves to be taken prisoners of malice, or
to yield our selves captives to her, to execute herrage, but courageously to
encounter her, and to beat back all her assaults, and to suffer her not to
enter one foot, much less to surprise the castle of our hearts: and not only
so but also to pursue her manfully being entered into the hearts of our
enemies, and by the powerful assistaunce of kindness and love to beat her
out of the plain field, and to dispossess her of her own castles and forte^,
wherein she has been before most strongly seated. For so did Elizeus and 2.
King 6. 23.
David and the residue of the Lords worthies, who have most courageously
fought these spiritual battles, and have most manfully vanquished both their
own of and the Lords enemies. When the bands of the Aramites, that were sent
out to apprehend the Prophet Elizeus and to bring him to their king, being
brought into danger not only to be taken prisoners themselves, but also to have
had their own lives taken from them, were not only rescued out of danger by
means of Elizeus but also kindly and friendly entertained: this kindness so far
prevailed with them, that albe it there was open war between their nation and
Israel, yet after their return into their own la^d they never returned to vex
Israel. But who was ever a more malicious enemy to any man, the^ was wicked
Saul to innocent David* yet astone as he perceived that himself being shut up
by the providence of God into David's hands, he was spared by him and his life
preserved, he was so thoroughly moved therewith, that he did not only presently
withdraw^ his forces from his pursuit, but also most earnestly prayed unto 1.
Sam. 24. 20.
God, and that he would give him a reward for the same. Yea when before having
given a special charge to all his household to kill David, lonathan had
dehorted him from the same, saying: Let not the king sin against his servant
against David, for he has not sinned against thee, but his works toward^s
thee have been very good: for he did put his life in danger and slow the
Phil^stine, and the Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou s^west
it, and thou reioicest: Wherefore will thou then sin against innocent blood,
and slay David without a cause? The only mention and recital of the which
matter did so alter Saules malicious heart, that he did not only recall his
former edict, but also confirmed the revocation thereof with a solemn oath
saying, as the Lord loves he shall not die. Now if kindness received 1. Sam.
19. 6
from our underlings and from such as we have hated, and sought their
destruction, does even upon a sudden alter our affections and compel us to
vow their good and to swear their safety: how much more any pleasure being
done unto us by our superiors will glad and cheer us at the very heart, and
cause us to busy all our thoughts how we may in some measure recompense and
requite the same? What a credit do we think it to be unto us, if the prince
shall but take notice of us, and call us by our name, and show us but some
countenance and favor? Or if a noble man or a man of state shall steed us in
a matter of some moment, how are we ready to cast our selves after a sort
down at his feet, and to make most solemn protestation saying: your honors
to co^mande: yours according to bounden duty for ever: your most obedient
beadesman and servant as long as life lasts? Now the king of kings, and state
of states has not only vouchsafed to have takne notice of us, and to have
provided for our use, service, and comfort, this so glorious and bountiful
world furnished with such variety of all manner of earthly blessings, but also
has prepared for us treasures of far greater price and value in the life to
come: how ought we then to be astonished and amazed at such kindness that
proceeds from so high and worthy a state? how ought our hearts to be even
rapt and ravished beside themselves at the least apprehension of such
invaluable favors? Why even Publican^s and sinners love their lovers, and show
kindness to them of who^ they receive kindness: yea the Devil himself will in
some sort serve them, that serve him, and will be at the commandment of the
meanest witch, that has before bound her self unto him. And he does
extenuate all that service that Job himself had done unto God, for that he was
so sufficiently hired thereto, and paid so well for it, and that before hand?
Does Job (says he) fear Job. 1. 9.
God for naught? Haste thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house,
and about all that he has on every side? Thou have blessed the works of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land: and therefore what great
thing is it that he does so regard thee? has he not very good cause so to do?
Verily if he did not seek to serve thee after the best manner, he were the
wickedst wretch that ever lived. Now if the most envious and malicious wretch
of all other, who by his intolerable ingratitude and unthankfulness had
deprived himself most justly of all the Lords blessings, could yet
notwithstanding reason after this manner, how much more ought the true and
faithful servants of God themselves, which do and for ever shall enjoy the
inestimable favor of his unchangeable love, set the loving kindness of the Lord
always before their eyes, making it a sharp spur to stir them up to walk
on forward in the Lords truth, and even to run the way of his commandments?
And that Psalm. 16. 3.
so much the rather for that the Lord himself has been so careful to
remember them thereof in sundry places of divine scripture, and that after a
most vehement and patheticall manner? Ier. 2. 31.
O ye generation take ye heed unto the word of the Lord: Have I bin unto you
a wilderness, or a land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, we are Lords we will
come no more unto thee? Surely I have not bin as a wilderness but as a most
fruitful land ministering unto you all blessings in all abundance: And
therefore ye ought to have been most fertile in my fear, and most plentiful
in my service.

This most ample beneficence of God toward his people is so apparent, that he
appealeth therein even to themselves: O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of
Judah, judge ye I pray you, between Isa. 5. 3.
me and my vineyard: What could I have done any more unto my vineyard, that I
have not done unto it? So likewise in the Prophet Micah: O my Mich. 6. 3.
people what have I done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee, testify
against me? Sur^ I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants, and I sent before thee Moses, Aron, and Myriam. O
my people remember now what Balaak king of Moab had devised, and what Bal^am
the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgall, that ye may know the
righteous^es of the Lord. The recital of the which so great kindness and love
did so inwardly touch the very heart of the Prophet, and of the residue of the
faithful to who^ it was uttered, that immediately in their person he calls as
it were all the powers of his soul to a consultation, how al d^tiful
thankefulnes may after the best manner be rendered unto God for these his so
large and ample mercies. Wherewithal (says he) shall I come before the Lord,
and bow my self before the most high God? Shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, and with cal^es of an year old? will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of rams, or with te^ thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my first
borne for my transgression, the fi^ite of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has shevved thee o man what is good, and what the Lord requires at thy
hands: Surely to do justly and to love mercy, to humble thy self, and to walk
with thy God. Whereby we may learn what be those sacrifice^ that are best
acceptable to God: first to do justly in giving to God that which is due to
God, and to man that which is due to man: Secondly to she^e mercy to them that
are in misery: and lastly to have Gods goodness always before our eyes and our
own unworthiness, that so we may learn to humble our selves, and to renounce
our own worth, and to cleave unfeignedly unto God: yea to deny and to die unto
our selves, that so we may devote out selves and our whole lives only to God.
And verily when the Lord has once revealed and showed unto us how he has
loved us, and given himself unto us, and has abounded toward us in his
gracious, blessings, and has caused al his creatures to serve to our use, the^
shall we desire in all sincerity to love and please him, and to resign our
selves wholly to his service. When God shall say unto us, ye are my people: then
shall we answer, thou art our GOD. When Christ shall have Hos. 2. 23.
made manifest his tender affection to his spouse, and have taught her to say,
my beloved is mine, and has assured me of his ^idelity: Cant. 2. 16.
then shall she reply, I am his, and am fully resolved to keep true touch and
faith with him: His love is mine, and shall be always before mine eles, and
my service is his, and shall be continually in his sight. If a master among men
should give unto his servant an annuity of 20. nobles by the year, or some
little farm, or other living, if he serve him not therefore at his beck, he
cries out straight ways against his ingratitude: but if he happen to join
against him in any cause or suite, and that with his professed and deadly
enemy, how intolerable an indignity does this seem in his sight? Now we our
selves have received from our grand master and Lord not only some small part
and portion of our liueing and maintenance, but our selves also, and whatsoever
we enjoy: and out lot t^ is fallen out unto us in a good ground, we have a very
goodly hevitage: Psalm. 16. 6.
for the Lord himself is our portion, and he does maintain our lotte. What
unkind and unthankful wretches are we the^, if we surrender not back again
unto him both our selves, and all that we enjoy, to be pressed and ready at his
commandment? If we keep not a continual remembrance of these inestimable
mercies, and set the^ not always before our eyes, we be worthy to be
clean cast out of his sight, and utterly to be put out of his remembrance. If
so full streams flowing from so pure a fountain do not moiste^ the dry and
barre^ soil of our souls, and make us fruitful to al good works, the^ are we
verily but badd ground, ^re to the curse, whose end is to be bur^d. Undoubtedly
as all the rivers flowing out of the sea, return thither again, and so empty
themselves after a sort into their mothers lap: eve^ so the Lords innumerable
blessings issuing from the maine sea of his love unto the use of his faithful
and sincere servants, are tha^kfully returned by them back again, and
faithfully employed in his service.

The bondslaues of Satan seem sometimes to draw nigh unto God, and to seek
the advau^ceme^t of his honor and glory: but it is either affliction that
forces the^ to cry, that they might be delivered Psalm. 78. 34. Hos. 7. 14.
Ioh. 6. 26.
out of the hand of the oppressor: or they howl upon their beds for corn and
wine, and follow Christ for more bread: the gracious gifts of God already
received do not allure them to come in sincerity to God. For they say not in
their hearts, O let us fear the Lord, which gives us rain ^arely and late
in due season, and reserveth Ierem. 5. 24.
for us the appointed weeks of harvest. Neither do they say, where Job. 35.
10.
is the God that made us, that gives us songs in the night: which teaches
us more then the beasts of the earth, and gives us more wisdom then the
fowls of the heavens? But the sincere servantes of Thankfulness for benefits
already received brings the faithful to God: whereas hope of profit to come,
and their own necessities force hypocrites sometimes to fly unto him. 2 Reg.
5. 17 Is. 38. 20. The contemplation of Gods mercies and our own defectes and
unworthiness is the proper cause of all sincere devotion* especially the
manifestation of the endless love of God in Christ is the peculiar cause of
faith, and by faith of all other parts of piety and godliness.
Christ knowing that God has advaunced them with honor above all the residue
of his creatures, seek to advaunce his honor above al other: yea they most
duly weighing with themselves, how deeply they are endebted unto his divine
majesty for his gracious gifts already received, desire rather to discharge
some of the bills of their former debtes, then more and more still to grow in
arearages. Naaman the Syrian being al his life long brought up in most gross
blindness and Idolatry, when he was cured of his leprosy by the goodness of the
God of Israel, that is, by the goodness of the only true God, Now (says he) I
know that there is no God but only in Israel: and therefore will I not he^ceforth
offer any burnt offering or sacrifice to any other God, save to the Lord. So
when Ezechias had obtained of God a great deliverance from his most dangerous
disease, how does he sing unto the Lord, and rejoice in his goodness, and vow
unto God perpetual homage and service? The grave (says he) cannot confess
thee, death cannot praise thee, but the living shall confess thee, as I do
this day: the father to the children shall declare thy truth. The Lord was
ready to save me: therefore will I sing my songs in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. The like may be said of all the residue that have unfeignedly
given themselves unto God. For how were they drawn thereunto, but by the
linkes of his love, and by the chain of his blessings? Devotion (says
Aquinas) is a special act of religion importing nothing else but the devoting
of a man's heart to the prompt service of the almighty God* the cause whereof is
the contemplation and meditation of the Lords benefits, and of our own
defects. For if we would duly weigh and consider with our selves the Lords most
bountiful largess toward us, which are unworthy of the leasts of his mercies,
and deserve nothing but vengeance and wrath: especially if we would religiously
record that one invaluable gift of God, who so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish but have
life everlasting, it would not otherwise be but that we should be wounded and
pricked at the very heart for our former contempts, disloyalties, and
rebellions against so good and gracious a GOD, and should also be made more
careful for the time to come to look better unto our steps, and to be more
respective and serviceable unto our God. For so wrought this heavenly phisike
in Peter and Paul, and with all the residue of the servants of Christ, it
purged a way the putrified humors of corrupted affections, and recovered the^
to spiritual health and life. It is sufficient (says St. Peter) that we have
spent the time past of our life after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in 1.
Pet. 4 2. Our defectes. Gods love. Our duty or devotio^.
vvantonnes, lusts, drunkenness, and in abominable Idolatries: But now seeing
we know that Christ has suffered for sin, we ought also to suffer in the
flesh and to cease from sin, and henceforward to live as much time as
remains in the flesh not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.
So likewise the Apostle St. Paul. We also our selves were in Tit. 3. 3. Our
defectes. Gods love.
times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving d^verse lusts and
v^l^ptuousnes, living in malitiousnes and e^vy, hateful and hating o^ another:
but when the bo^t^fulnes and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, he
not only saved us from the guilte of our sins by giving himself a ransom
for our souls, but also he destroyed the power Our duty or devotio^.
of sin in us, and so raised us up to newnes of life. For albeit the wicked
turn the grace of God into wantonness: saying let us sin, that grace may
abound: yet the saying grace of God teaches the godly another lesson, even to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live Tit. 2. 11.
justly, soberlie, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed
hope and appearing of the mighty God, and of our S^viour Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all ^iquiti^, and purge us
to be a peculiar people to himself zealous of good works. So likewise albeit
the LORDS temporal blessings are to the wicked as thorns choking up the
good seeds of piety and godliness, and as baits to snare them and to draw
their hearts from God, and as chains to bind them fast unto the varities of
this wicked world, yet to the godly they are as sweet sauce to make them
^eede more eagerly upon the food of their souls, and as spurs to make them
run more readily in the way of Gods commandments, and as ladders to lift
them up unto GOD, that so they may come to the fruition of his greater
blessings. For to the pure all things are pure: in so much that their very
sins make them to hate sin the more, and the little taste of the LORDS
mercies causes them more vehemently to thirst after a full cup of the same
mercies: yea the more they see their own wantes and the LORDS fulness, the
more they are stirred up to renounce themselves, and to cleave Ephesians. 5. 8. Our
de. fectes. Gods love. Our duty or devotio^.
unfeignedly unto the Lord. Ye were darkness: (says the Apostle) but now ye
are light in the Lord: Walk as children of the light: as if he should have
said unto them: Remember your wretched estate when ye sat in darkness and in
the shadow of death, and forget not Gods mercy that has translated you out of
darkness into the kingdom of light, and so see that ye walk worthy of God,
and of your high calling in Christ Jesus.

This due consideration of the Lords endless mercy in Christ, and their own
unworthiness has been the only effectual motive from the beginning of the
world to draw the faithful out of the slavery of Satan unto God, and to
confirm and establish them in his fear. The seed of the woman shall break
the serpents head, made Adam who before hid himself from God, afterward with
boldness to come into his presence. In thy seed shall all the ^ations of the
earth be blessed, made Abraham, who before was bred up in Idolatry, to forsake
kindred and country, and to endure many annoyances in a strange land, that so
he might show his humble obedience unto God. Yea by the eyes of this faith all
the holy men of God before the coming of Christ in the flesh, beholding the
great goodness and love of God, (as the Apostle testifies Hebr. 11.) have
offered up their sacrifices acceptable to God, performed all duties, and
endured all crosses for the constant confession of this their holy faith. And
now since the coming of Christ in the flesh, whereby was the whole world
converted from dumb Idols to serve the living God? Was it by the promulgation
of the law of Moses, or by the preaching of the gospel of Christ? Surely the
preaching and publishing of the glad tidings of the gospel, of the year of
Iubile, of the acceptable day, wherein the Lord for his Christ's sake had
granted a free, full, and general pardon and release of all debts,
trespasses, and sins to all such as would willingly accept and faithfully
embrace this unspeakable love, and make it the matter of their daily
meditation and consolation, and the rock and foundation of their faith and
hope, was that warrelike chariot wherein the faith of Christ got the full
victory over falshoode and lies, and trod under foot all infidelity and
Idolatry, and triumphed most gloriously against all the power and puissaunce of
hell it self. By the sound of this doctrine did the servauntes of the great
shepherd and Bishop of our souls call home all his straying and wandering
sheep, and gathered them into the fold of Christ: by this net did the fishers
of men dravve into the arc of Christ's Church all such as were before ready to
be drowned in the sea of their sins, and to be overwhelmed with the most
terrible tempest of the Lords wrath: by this key did the Lords potters open
the door of the kingdom of heaven to them that were before most worthily
driven out and dispossessed of that celestial paradise: With this ensign did
the Lords standard bearers gather together all his companies and bands which
before had revolted and became fugitives fighting under the Devils colors: by
this box of ointme^t powered forth, did the Lords Apothecaries reviue and
quicken the spirits of all the Lords patients, who were before not only in a
sound but also stark dead by the most noisome stincke of their abominable
sins: Lastly by this seed of faith sown in the most dry and barren
wilderness of the peoples hearts by the hand of the Lords painful and
skillful husbandmen, was there raised up a most plentiful and fruitful
harvest unto the Lord. For faith comes by hearing the word of faith.

Neither does this word of faith, revealing the unspeakable love of God
shining in the face of Christ, beget faith only, but by faith love, prayer,
confession, patience, repentance, fear, obedience, thankefulnes, even all
sound and sincere devotion with all the parts and parcels thereof. By faith
we have access to God and are admitted into his Church which is therefore
called the family of Faith. And Baptism the sacrament of our Baptism
cleanses; as it does f^her make manifest unto va and causes us to embrace the
word of faith.
initiation and the seal of faith is added to the word of faith for the
further manifestation of the cause of this our admission into so honorable an
estate and calling, by setting after a sort before our eyes the love of God,
who has given us his son with his own most precious blood to wash and
cleanse our sins, whereby there was before a seperatio^ between v^ and God.
Now from whence (says Austine) has the water of Baptism this virtue, that it
does touch the body and clea^se the soul, but by means of the word whereunto it
is added, that it might together with the same not only represent the washing
away of our sins, by the blood of Christ, but also ^atifie and confirm the
same for the further strengthening of our frail faith? Not (says he) for that
the word is uttered, but for that it is believed: not for that there is such
virtue in the letters and sillables, or in the pronunciation of the very
words, but for that they are the powerful instrument ordained of God so to
open the Lords good and gracious meaning toward us, and to assure us of his
unchangeable love in Christ, that thereby we might attain to a sure faith.
For as long as we remain in our natural blindness and ignorance, either we fly
from God as Adam did, being touched with the prick of a guilty conscience: or
else we embrace an Idol in steed of the true God, being misled by the wrongful
guiding of a blind conscience, as now naturally do all the posterity of Adam.
But when the Lord has once revealed unto us the glory of his endless goodness
in Christ, and has made us to behold the dignity of his death that he endured
for our sins, and the worthiness of his obedience that he performed for our
righteousness, thereby we are made bold to enter Heb. 10. 19.
into the holy place by the new and living way which he has prepared for us
by his flesh, and are encouraged to draw nigh with a true heart in assurance of
faith, being fully persuaded of the perfect purgation of all our sins, and of
our entire and absolute righteousness. I am (says our Savior Christ) the way,
the truth, and the life: no man comes to the father but by me. He then that
is set in this way and walks therein, he undoubtedly walks in the right
way, and he cannot miss, but come directly unto God. He that builds on this
rock builds on a sure foundation: his faith cannot fail, he cannot be
vanquished: his hope is sure, he cannot be confounded. He may be bold to
triumph with the Apostle saying: If God be on our side, who can be against us?
who spared not his own son, but Romans 8. 31.
gave him for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things also? Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies.
Who shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead, or rather that is risen again
who is also at the right hand^ of God, and makes request to God for us. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish or
persecution or ^kednes or peril, or sword? As it is written: for thy sake are
we killed all the day long, and are as sheep appointed for the slaughter.
Nevertheless in all these things we are more then conquerours in him that
loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come are able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. In which
words it is manifest that the apprehension of the love of God in Christ does
breed such a strong faith and confidence in God, that the faithful are
thereby fully persuaded, that they shall be never finally forsaken of God, not
vanquished and clean overthrowen by the force and fury of all their enemies.

Now as this love of God breeds faith in God, so also it engenders 1. Ioh.
4. 19.
love toward God. We love God (says S. John) because he loved us first, and
has revealed this his love unto us, and has made us to apprehend it with the
eyes of our faith, and to be assured and Ignoti nulla cupido. Tantfi diligimus,
quantum credimus. Gre. in Ez. ho. 22.
persuaded of the same. For if God love us and we be ignorant of it, how can we
love him again for the same? For our charity does so depend upon our faith,
that so much we love God, as we know and believe his love and goodness toward
us. A strong faith a strong love, a weak faith a weak love. For God works
not in us as he does in those creatures which are utterly void of al
understanding and reason, and so have no sense and feeling of the Lords working
in them: but in the work of our regeneration first he informs the
understanding with knowledge, and thereby moves the affections and will. Now
faith being the eye of our spiritual understanding, whereby with Abraham the
father of Ioh. 8. 56.
the faithful we behold the day of Christ and rejoice therein, first in him
apprehends the love of God toward us, and then kindles in our hearts our
love toward him. For true faith is not idle 1. Tim. 1. 5. Gal. 5. 6.
and unfruitful, but first works love, and then works by love: she is the
mother of love in that she first breeds it: and then Aug de fide and
operibus c 22. Greg. in Ezekiel. ho. 9. Faith is the life of love, and not love
the soul of faith.
by love bringing forth all good works she is the grandmother of all good
works. And hereof it is that Austine says, that it may rightly be said that
all the commandments of God pertain to faith, if not a dead but a living
faith that works by love, be understood. For as Gregory teaches, Faith is
the door and entrance unto good works, and not good works unto faith.
Neither is love the soul of faith, that quickneth it, and gives it life: but
faith is the very life of love, and makes it lively and industrious in her
work: And therefore the Lord uses to set before the eyes of his faithful
servants his own love testified by his sundry and manifold blessings, and so
causes them to manifest their love toward him by their ready obedience to
all his commandments. And hereof it is that they are called the friends of
God. Abraham the friend of God: Mose^ Iac. 2. 23.
the friend of God. So our loving Savior unto his dear disciples: He^ceforth
call I you not servants, for the serva^t knows not what the master Ioh. 15.
15. The faithful are accepted of God as his friends, and therefore are put in
assurance of his love
does: but I have called you friends, for what soever I have heard of the
father I have made manifest unto you. And what is true and sincere frendshippe,
but a mutual and interchangeable ben evolence and good will not lying hid or
kept secret within the closette of the heart, but breaking forth and manifesting
it self by the effects? And therefore in that the ^aithfull are called the
friends of God, it is evident both that they feel the love of God toward
themselves ^o^finned unto them by his gracious blessings, and that they
likewise are stirred up to love him, and to testify the same by their ready
obedience to his will, yea this is one sure sign of the special love of
Christ toward his, that he does show himself not unto Ioh. 14. 21.
the world, but unto them, and so raises up in them faith and love, and
strengthens them in his fear. If a prince favor his subject, and he knows
it not, he must needs loose a great part of the benefit and comfort that he
might receive thereby, if that he did perfectly understand so much. And verily
that favor ca^^ not be great, that can be altogether concealed and kept
close. A little fire may be covered under ashes, and so preserved for some
time, but if it be kept so long, it will be extinguished and clean put out: but
a great fire will not be covered, but will show it self by heat, smoke,
flame: even so the great fire of the Lords love toward his elect cannot long
be hid, but it will make it self manifest unto them sooner or later by the
effects thereof. Earthly parents conceal in part their love from their
children being in their tender years, least they should wax wanton and be
made the worse for the same: but when they are once come to ripenes of age and
to years of discretion, then they commonly seek to make it manifest unto the^
by all the means that possibly they ca^, and they desire nothing more then that
they should be through. ly persuaded thereof: and he is a bastard and a very
unnatural child worthy to loose both his name and inheritance, which either
will not be persuaded of the kind and tender affection of his parents toward
him, or else is made thereby more careless and negligent to do his duty: Even so
our heavenly father, whose tender love and affection toward his elect so far
exceeds the kindness of al earthly parents as God exceeds man, testifies
his love, kindness, and care toward his continually either by his gifts, or by
his corrections, or by both: and albeit he does not at al times make the^ feel
so much, it is for this end that when he does so, they should be more thoroughly
moved to mislike themselves the more for their formet unkindness, and also to
love the Lord the more for his constant and continual love toward such as
themselves were, who before had so little regard so much as to take notice of
such love. And therefore a^ such as either will not be persuaded of the fatherly
affection of God toward themselves conde^ning the same of pride and
presu^ption, or else abuse it to the hardening of their hearts by hartening
the^selus thereby in their sins, declare the^selus to be bastards and not
sons, being so far of both from the affection and also from the duty of
natural sons. Why? If but a friend, having testified his love toward us ^y
some few favors, should understand that we still stood in doubt either of
his sinceri^y, or co^stancy toward us, and did imagm that either he did but
disse^ble with us, orelfe that he were vsriable and quickly changed, would he
not think himself much wro^ged, seeing he had so well deserved before, and had
give^ us good cause to conceive better of him? And does God bestow any gift
upon any of his faithful servants but in all sincerity and settled co^stancy, and
with a steadfast purpose to do them good? And shall they still doubt, either
whether he ever loved the^ at al, or else whether he will ever continue to love
the^ still? Surely they cannot do him a greaten dishonor: seeing thereby, as much
as in the^ lies, they rob him of ^is sincerity and endlea goodness, and of his
eter^al mercy and love. Wherefore the most sincere serva^tes of God, as they
acknowledge themselves to be most highly honored of God, in that he has
vouchsafed to cast upon them so unworthy wretches the eyes of his love, and to
have testified the same by the manifold gifts of his mercy: eve^ so they are
most^ desirous to magnify GOD by ascribing every good gift unto his most free
and undeserved goodness, and by receiving them al from him as pledges of his
great love, and confirmations of his gracious favor: yea the more they feel
the heat of Gods love cherishing and comforting them with his gracious
blessings, the more is the fire of their love kindled toward God, and the
greater is the flame of their obedience and thankfulness. That debte^ loved
most, which received Luke 7. 43.
the greatest friendship, having his whole debt most freely forgive^ him, albeit
it was never so great: And Mary loved much for that her many sins were
remitted unto her, albeit they had bin before never so grievous: So Peter loved
Christ more the^ his f^llowes, for that he had greater favor to be received
the sooner to grace, and to be stre^gthened in the faith before his fellows,
albeit he had sinned above his fellows. And verily Gods grace revealed Gods
grace revealed is no cause of sin, but Gods grace concealed and so contemned.
1. ^or. 2, 8. Luke 19. 42.
does not cause sin, but Gods grace co^cealed, and so conte^ned. Gods grace
revealed gives grace and soon wins allowance and approbatio^, and so
causes al obedience and thankfulness: but Gods grace unknown is easily
contemned and causes stubbornes and rebellion, that cried out so eagerly,
crucify him, crucify him, if they had known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory: if they had known those things that did belong to
their peace, they would hever have so long stood out, and have showed
themselves such wilful and obstinat recufa^ts against their God and against
their own good. If that supers^itious and carnal woman of Samaria had known
the gift of God; and who it was that the^ co^muned with her Ioh. 4. 10.
she would not have stood pelting with him for a draught of her water, but she
would without delay have asked of him the water of life.

Wherefore the most loving Lord of Abraham Izaak and Jacob, and of all the
faithful of what kindred and country soever, albeit he does not vouch safe to
show this mercy to the world of the reprobat^, as to show himself to the^, yet
he cannot long keep close his love from his chosen, but does manifest the
same more and more unto them, as h^e knows it best for them in his divine and
heavenly wisdom. For if Joseph could not long keep in the tender bowels of
his brotherly love toward his unkind and unnatural brethren, but that it
brake out with streams of tears, and disclosed it self to their great
astonishment: and if David could not conceal his fatherly affection toward
his most undutiful and rebellious son Absalom, no not at that time when he
had behaved himself so lewdely, and had so attempted his utter overthrow, but
that it brake out in his straight charge to Ioab his general, and to the
residue of the captains of the army: O ^e good to the young man for my sake:
the which petition who^ it did not prevail with Ioab, but that he stretched
forth his own hand to take away his life, how does that tender hearted father
take on upon the ^elatio^ thereof, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would God I had died for thee o Absalom my son, my son? And yet
the kindne^ of earthly brethren and parents, and that toward their most kind
and loving brethren and children is but as a spark of the great fire, and as a
drop to the huge sea of the love of Christ our elder brother, and of God our
heave^ly and caelestial father. Ca^ he the^ altogether co^ceale his love from
us, and keep us from that joy unspeakable and glorious which we are to receive
by the revelatio^ thereof? The four leapers that came into the Sirians tents,
who^ God had caused to fly in all have, and to leave their tents full of al
treasure and store, when they had well eaten and drunken and hid also good
store of treasure for themselves, considering and weighing the great necessity
of their prince and people by reason of the extreme famine that was among
them, could reason between themselves and say: We ^ not well, this day is a
day of good tydinges, and we hold our peace: come therefore let us go tell
the kings ^ousholde. They thought 2. King 7. 9.
it an offense to co^ceale from their country being in extreme misery the
remedy that God had appointed for their delivery: And shall we think that
whereas the Lords own dear and chosen children without some sense and
assurance of his favor and love testified by his manifold and gracious
blessings are ready still to be overwhelined with the horrors of despair, the
Lord will not cause the light of his countenance to shine unto them, that so
the clouds of distrust, that keep from them the bright beams of his favor,
may be dispersed, and the tempest of despair aswaged and allayed? In deed
when they begin to wa^e wa^ton with peace and plenty, and to neglect their
duty unto their good GOD, and being at rest here in this world slack their
passage toward their passag^ to words their heavenly country, and being
filled with earthly delights become slow to seek after the true treasure, God
seems for a time to withdraw his favor from them, and after a sort to hide
himself, and to suffer them to be beaten with many rods ^yea he does seem to
be grievously offended and displeased with the^ himself, and ^o correct and
chasten them with his own hands. And this wrathful countenance of God of al
other calamities and crosses is most grievous and burdensome unto them; and
does above al other miseries vex and torment their tender hearts, and casts
the^ down to the gates of hell. Then in anguish of soul and bitterness of
spirit they power forth whole streams of complaine^ crying out and saying:
Will the Lord absent himself forever, and will he be no more entreated? Is his
mercy clean gone for ever, Psalm. 77. 7.
and is his goodness come utterly to an end far evermore ^ has God forgotten to
be gracious, and has he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure? The^, said
I, this is my death again. O Lord how long will thou be angry Psalm. 80. 4.
with thy people that prays? Thou have fed them with the bread of tears, and
have given them plent^snes of tears to drink: thou haste made us to be a very
strife unto our neighbors, and our enemies laugh us to scorn. Turn us again
O God of hosts, show us the light of thy countenance and we shall be safe.

And yet in truth when the Lord most sharply chasteneth his God is nearest to
his servants in their asstictions, albeit he seems to be then farthest of:
and he shows then most of all the effect of his love, allthough they for the
present feel it not. Psa. 119. 71. 75 ver.
own dear children, he is not in wrath offended with them, but in great love
most of all then tendreth their good: his grace and favor is not absent, but
then especially is present with them, albeit they for the very instant feel
not the same. For what is it that in and by their afflictions works in them
humility, repentance, patience, obedience, and an earnest desire to feel the
Lord gracious and favorable unto them, and above all things to behold the
light of his countenance? Are not al these the most evident effects of the
favorable presence of God with the^, and of the most near assistance of his
grace? Does he not herein show the^ the light of his countenance, and make
manifest unto them his love to their great benefit and good? Surely David did
most tha^kfully acknowledge so much saying: It is good for me that I have been
in trouble, that I might learn thy statutes. And again, I know O Lord that
thy judgments are righteous, and that thou (not of wrath) but of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. And therefore Jeremy prayed for the
Ier. 10 24.
same as for a thing beneficial and good: Correct us O Lord, and ye^ in thy
judgment, not in thy fury. For God chastises his children in love, albeit he
punishes the wicked in wrath. And therefore both Job. 5. 17.
Job and David judge not, that the godly, when they are afflicted, are in a
bad, but in a right good and blessed estate. Blessed is the man (say they) whom
thou chastenest O Lord and teach in thy law: that thou may give him
patience in time of adversity until the ^it be dug up for the ungodly.
And therefore the Apostles did rejoice in Romans 5. 3.
tribulations, knowing that tribulations bring forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. The love of God then
apprehended by faith not only engendereth Hope. Patience. Confession.
in us love toward God, but also hope, that makes not ashamed, and patience
that makes us to rejoice in tribulations, and to be courageous and constant in
the confession of his truth, albeit all manner of crosses accompanye the same.
For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and therefore if
with the heart we believe to righteousness, we will be ready with the
mouth to confess unto salvation. I believed (says David) Romans 10. 10 Psalm.
116. 10 2. Cor. 4. 13
and therefore have I spoken: so we also (says the Apostle) believe, and
therefore speak. And verily if we do believe that GOD from everlasting has
acknowledged us, and has written our names in the book of life, how can it
be but that we should thankefully acknowledge him before the great
congregation, and willingly confess him before the whole world? Yea how can
it be but that we should continually make our resort to Prayer.
him by prayer in all our necessities, and crave his gracious aid to assiste
and strengthen us in all those afflictions and crosses which we endure for
his most holy name sake? The unfaithful, who will not be persuaded of the
fatherly love and favor of God toward them cannot come with any cheerefulnes
to make their prayers unto God: (for how can they call upon him Rom* 10. 14
on whom they have not believed?) but the faithful, that believe that God is
become their loving father in Christ, and that by him they have such interest
in God and in all his blessings, must needs come to him with great co^fide^ce
and hope, and power out their whole hearts continually before him, and present
unto him all their petitions and requests. And verily they need not to be
ashamed to come into his presence, seeing they are clothed with the most
precious garments of Christ their elder brother, and have him to be their
continual advocate and solliciter to plead their cause. In deed the more they
behold their own nakedness and shame, and take a true view of the rotten rags
and fained garments of their own righteousness, and the more deeply
therewithal they meditate upon that strange and admirable goodness of God,
that would cast the eyes of his love upon such loathsome wretches, they have
great cause as to be ashamed of their abominable corruption, so to be wail and
lament their intolerable unthankfulness. And so the prophet Ezechiel has
testified that the faithful shall. Eze. 16. 63.
be confounded in themselves, and hang down their heads, and never open their
mouths for shame, when they shall behold the love of God toward them in
Christ, which has freely pardoned all their iniquities and sins, when I say
they shall see on the one side how gracious God is to them, and on the otherside
how grievous they themselves have bin unto God. An ensample whereof In the
prayer of Manasse affixed at the end of the books of the Chronicles.
we have in Manasse king of Judah, unto who^ when the Lord had given a little
taste of his promise of mercy, and had give^ him some assurance of the
remission of his sins, and of his receiving into favor, how does he debase
and cast himself down, as if he were the only offender among all the servants
of God, and all other were as it were no sinners in comparison of him? And how
does he exaggerate and amplify his own transgressions, as if they were more
then the sand of the sea, and together withal so odious and abominable, that
he was not worthy to behold the heavens for the same? I have provoked thy wrath
(says he) and have done evil before thee; I did not thy will, neither kept I
thy commandments: I have set up abominations and multiplied offenses: I have
sinned O Lord, I have sinned, I acknowledge my transgressions, O Lord forgive,
O Lord forgive me, and destroy me not with mine iniquities. And verily until
we have some sight and sense, and assurance of the mercy of God in Christ
pardoning our sins, the ougly sight of our own deformities will drive us more
and more from God, and wrappe us faster and faster in the bands of sin, and
be ready to drown us in the gulf of despair: as it may be seen in Caine,
Judas, and the like. But when Christ shall once look upon us with the eyes of
his mercy, and shall give us some assurance of the remission of our sins, as
he did unto Peter whom he mercifully forewarned not only of his fall, but also
of his pardon, and of his recovery, and of his duty in regard of the same (I
have prayed for thee Peter Luke 22. 31.
that thy faith fail not* and thou being converted strengthen thy brethren)
this favorable aspect of Christ the Sun of righteousness will cause us with
Peter to love him the more, and not only to single out some solitary place,
that we may bewail our unthankfulness with bitter tears, but also to be more
fearful and careful for the time to come, least we be overtaken again with
the like offense. For a reverent regard and fear least we offend so good a
God, Fear.
whom we can never endeavor sufficiently to please, is caused also by the due
apprehension of the Lords mercies. There is mercy Psalm. 130. 4.
with thee O God (says David) therefore shall thou be feared. For as the
natural and kind child reverenceth his father and fears to offend him, not
so much for dread of the rod or for hope of the inheritance, as for that he
has had already manifold experience of his fathers kindness and care for him:
even so the dear children of God having had in former times very good
experience of the Lords love, do reverence and fear him from the very bottom
of their hearts, and are thereby made watchful and wary not to offend. Behold
(says S. John) what love the father has showed us, that 1 Ioh 3. 1.
we should be called the sons of God: Now we are the sons of God, but it
does not appear what we shall be: but this we know that when he does appear
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And he that has this hope
purges himself even as he is pure. In which words it is manifest that hope
rising out of faith, and the expectation of future blessedness out of the
apprehension of former love, does cause the faithful to purge and cleanse their
hearts, least they offend their holy and pure God with their impurities. Though
we sin (say all Sap. 15. 2.
the godly as it were with one voice) that is, though we sin through
infirmity, which cannot be avoided in these days of infirmity, yet we are
thine, for we know thy power: but we sin not, that is, presumptuously, or we
give not over our selves to sin, knowing that we are thine: for to know thee
is perfect righteousness, and to know thy Ioh 3. 14.
power is the root of immortality. For as the children of Is^ael were healed
of the sting of fiery serpents by looking up to the brazen serpent: even so
the faithful looking up unto CHRIST crucified are cured of al their spiritual
maladies, and have their sin slain in them, and are raised up to newne^ of
life. Zache desiring but to see CHRIST was immediately converted and made a
Christian: Old father Simeon beholding Christ desired presently to depart out
of this life, thinking that he had lived long enough, seeing he had lived to
see his Savior with his bodily eyes: All the faithful that have had some true
view of our Our whole conversion to God is wrought by his love in Christ
apprehended by faith. Ioh. 17.
Savior Christ, do more and more desire to behold him still, and that not
without very great cause. For the more they see him, the more they love him,
and the more they feel themselves to live in him and by him. This is
everlasting life (says the auctor thereof) to know the only true God, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. For rightly to know and faithfully to
embrace the endless and unspeakable love of God in Christ, who has consecrated
himself both in his life and death to the working of our deliverance out of
the hands of sin death and damnation, does work in the faithful the death of
sin and life of righteousness, and so lays the foundation of that life here
which shall be made perfect in the world to come. Now (says the Apostle) I live
not, but Christ lives in me: and the life that I now live, I live by the faith
of the son of Ephesians. 6. 15. The love of God revealed in the Gospel is as shoes
whereby we are enabled to walk on readily in the Lords ways be they never so
full of sharp stones and pricking thorns.
God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. The Apostle lived not, he
was dead in himself, but Christ by hi^ spirit and word lived and reigned in
him: and that because he beheld with the eyes of faith that great and endless
love of Christ who both had lived, and died for him. And hereof it is that the
Gospel of Christ, the powerful instrument ordained by God both to begett and
stre^gthen faith, is compared to shoes, and is part of that furniture
wherwithal the soldiers of Christ have need to be armed in their most hard
and dangerous fight against all the powers of the kingdom of darkness. And
verily there are so many thorns and pricks of worldly cares, and so many sharp
stones of crosses and persecutions lying so thick in that straight and narrow
way that leads to life, that the passage of the faithful would be greatly
stayed, if not altogether stopped therein, were they not al well shodde with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, and had not that gladsome and joyful
tidings of their reco^ciliation with God made them most resolute to pass on
along for all those sharp sto^es, and to endure al withal patience. Now then by
these things that have bin delivered it is evident and clear, that not only
faith arises out of the true apprehension of the inestimable love of God in
Christ, but also love, hope, patience, confession, prayer, repentance, fear,
and a religious care both to live and to die unto God, and to devote our selves
wholly to his service.

And yet we must not so conceive hereof, as if this one blessing All the Lords
gracious gifts and blessings are furtherers of faith and obedience in the
godly Ier. 14. 20.
of our redemption wrought by CHRIST did not only begin but also finish our
regeneration and new birth, seeing all the residue of the gracious gifts of
GOD testifying and witnessing his fatherly love are ayders also and assisters
herein, being all of them fit fuel for this heavenly fire, and do cause it
to burn more fervently, and to break out into a greater flame. We
acknowledge, O Lord, (say the penitent Israelites) our wickedness and the
wickedness of our forefathers, for we have sinned against thee: do not abhor
us for thy names sake, cast not down the throne of thy glory, remember and
break not thy covenant with us. Are there any among the vanities of the
Gentiles that can give rain^r can the heavens give showers? It is not thou O
Lord our God? Therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have made al these
things. In which words we may perceive that it was the due consideration of the
covenant of God made unto them in Christ whereby GOD after a sort had bound
himself to be merciful unto them whenever they did repent, that caused this
people to return unto their GOD, and to acknowledge and bewail their own
corruptions and sins: the which also was well forvvarded by the remembrance
of the LORDS smaller blessings, even by the due consideration of this, that
rain and truitfull seasons came only from him, and all other gifts and
blessings whatsoever. So Hos. 14. where the Prophet exhorts the people to
return to the LORD and say: Take away all iniquity and remoove is
graciously, so will we render to thee the calves of our lips. Ashur shall
not Ho. 14. 3.
s^ us, neither will we ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to
the works of our hands, ye are our Gods: for in thee the fatherles finds
mercy. Now they could not truly hope for pardon fot their sins and iniquities
but only in the promise of the the Messiah: it was that then that first led
them unto God, the which was seconded by the due consideration of this, that al
aid and help is also found at his hands, who is the helper of the helples.

And verily we have no right at al unto any of the Lords blessings, as long as
we be at war and at emnity with God: we must be first reconciled unto God,
and made heirs by Christ, before we can lay just claim to a childs part, and
to have our portion in that inheritance, that does descend unto us from our
heavenly father. And therefore when the Lord would give unto Ahaz king of Judah
assurance but of this one temporal blessing, even of his bodily delivera^ce
from his bodily enemies: behold (says he) this shall be your The love of God
in Christ is the fountain and foundation of all other blessings.
sign that I will bring to pass this thing for you: A virgin shall conc^aue
and bear a son, and she shall call his name Immanuel. As if the Lord should
have said: I have bound my self by promise even from the beginning of the
world to give you my son to be a pledge of my love, and to be the conduite of
my mercies: how shall I not the^ with him and by him convey them unto you? and
particularly how shall I not now perform this my promise made in him for your
deliverance from these your bodily enemies? For the cause that moved God to
make this glorious world at the first, and to store it with such variety of al
manner of blessings, was his own most free and undeserved love toward his
elect in Christ, and therefore when they are actually bestowed upon them, the
same proceeds from the very selfsame spring. The which when they The Lords
gracious gifts are blessings to the faith full only: for to the unfaithful
they are turned into curses.
are bestowed upon the unfaithful they are not blessings but curses, for that
they make them more earthly, covetous, licentious, riotous, proud, cruel,
unthankful, and the like, and so increase their most grievous comdemnation:
whereas to the faithful, who are the right heirs unto them, they are not
curses but blessings; for they make them the more to rejoice in the Lord, and
to be more obedient and tha^kfull unto him, and more beneficial and helpful
unto their neighbors, and so further their faith, repentance and love, and
increase in them all sincere devotion. When David was remembered by the Prophet
Nathan of his foul fault committed with Bethshebah the wife of Vrias, and of
the great dishonor that redounded to God by that his most odious and grievous
crime, how that the Lord had not so deserved at his hands, who had advaunced
him from the shepherds crook to the scepter of the king, and had given into
his bosom his masters wives, and could and would have done him more honor, if
that had not bin enough: how did even these smaller blessings work most
effectually in the heart of David, peircing and wounding his most tender soul,
and causing him with many most bitter tears to bewail his former most
grievous unthankfulness? And how did the remembrance of the same mercies cause
him also at another time to rejoice in the Lord and to triumph, and most
vehemently and earnestly to 2. Sam. 7. 18 1. Chro. 17. 16.
pray unto God for an obedient and thankful heart? What am I o Lord (says he)
and what is my fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And what is
this thy people Israel that thou did after a sort muster together al thy
armies for their delivera^ce out of Aegipt? What saw thou in us or in our
progenitors, that thou have thus laden us with thy love, and filled us with
such abundance of thy mercies? O let our hearts therefore be filled with thy
love, and let our hands still be employed in thy service: keep this in the
purpose and thoughts of our hearts for ever, and so prepare our souls to fear
thee. Neither was he himself only thus stirred up to employ himself and al
his authority and wealth to the promoting and furthering of the Lords service,
but also with the self same argument does he endeavor to persuade his
principal subjects and servantes to be helpers to his son Solamon in the same
work. Is not (says he) the Lord your God with you and has given you rest on
every side? For 1. Chro. 22. 18.
he has given the inhabitants of the land into mine hand, and the land is
subdued before the Lord and his people: Now then set your hearts and your souls
to seek the Lord your God, and arise and build the Lords sanctuary. So
likewise when the Lord had brought the children of Israel into the promised
land, and had placed them in the quiette and peaceable possession thereof,
how does godly Iosuah having a great care that after his death they should
be true and faithful to their GOD, who had been so true and faithful to
them, make a large recital of their manifold mercies so lately received, and
then proposes this option and choice unto them, saying: if it seem evil in
your eyes to serve the Lord, then choose ye this day Ios. 24. 15.
whom ye will serve, etc. I and mine house will serve the Lord. Where
unto they answer as it were with one voice: God ^orbid that we should
forsake the Lord to serve other Gods: for the Lord our God has brought us
and our Fathers out of the land of Egypt and out of the house of bondage: and
he did those great miracles in our sight, and preserved us in all the way
that we went, and among all the people through whom we came. And the
LORD did cast out before us all the people, even the Amorites which dvvelte
in the land, therefore will we also serve the Lord, for he is our GOD. In
which words it is evident how these faithful servauntes of GOD well
vveighing with themselves that the Lord was their good and gracious God, who
had ^atified his love toward them by his manifold blessings, do take
themselves thereby to be most straightlye bound to his service, and thereupon
do make a most solemn promise and vow to continue his loyal and obedient
people. The which promise and vow, being made by them upon so just and
sufficient cause, they as faithfully and truly kept and performed. For it is
re^orded of them not only in the same Chapter, but also Judges the second, to
their eternal glory and renown, that they served the Lord all the days of
Iosuah and all the days of the elders that everlived Iud. 2. 7.
Iosuah, which had seen all the great works that the LORD had As the
religious remembrance of the Lords mer^ies is the cause of all sincere
obedience: so the wretchlesse forgetfulness thereof is the cause of al rebellious
ungodliness. ver. 10.
done for Israel. The cause then that kept this people sound and vprighte in
the service of GOD was, for that they religiously kept an holy remembrance
of the Lords manifold and great mercies.

Now on the contrary side if we will behold and see, why the bad children of
so good parents revolted and fell away so quickly from the GOD of their
fathers, and continued not in his service and fear, see what follows in the
same Chapter. When Iosuah was dead, and all that generation was gathered to
their fathers, then there arose another generation after them, which neither
knevve the Lord, nor yet the works that he had done for Israel: then they
did vvickedlie and served Baalim, and forsook the God of their Fathers, which
had brought them out of the land of Egypt. So in the days of the Prophet
Jeremy, the cause also why the badde posterity of this backeslyding people
departed likewise from the Lord and vvalked after vanitye, and became vain is
this, for that none said in their hearts, where is the Lord that brought us
out of the land of Egypt, that sedde us through the Ier. 2. 6.
wilderness, through a des^rte and waste land, and through the shadd^vve of
death, and brought us into a good and plentiful land, and made us eat of the
fruit thereof? So likewise Psalm 78. and the, hundred and sixth, a like
revolte of the same nation and namely of the Ephraemites who descended from
holy Joseph being mentioned, the same cause is added of their revolte: They
forgate God Psalm 78. and 106. 21.
their Savior who had done so great things for them, vvonderfull things in
the land of Ham, and fearful things by the red sea. For as it fared with
the children of Joseph and the residue of the Israelites, when there arose a
nevve king in Egypt which Exodus 1. 8.
knevve not Joseph, nor did remember those great commodities which all
Aegypte enjoyed by his means, then they dealte most unkindly with them, and
used them with all extremity: even so dealte the ungracious and unthankful
posterity of Joseph with the GOD of Joseph, who had advaunced him to be a
father to Pharaoh, and the greatest state in all his kingdom, when they
forgate the great mercies of GOD both toward him and toward themselves
also, then they started aside from his service, and fell away from his fear.
Yea Hos. 2. 5.
when they ascribed their Corn and Wine and Wool to B^alim, and the
fruits of the earth to the host of heaven, and their deliveraunce from their
bodyly enemies to Ashur and Aegypte, and their great plentye to their own
policy, then they forsook God and followed Baalim, and worshipped the host
of heaven, and sent gifts to Ashur and Aegypte, and burnt incense to their
own yarne, highly magnifying and extolling themselves, and leaving of to
magnify God, of whom they had not only received all these things but
themselves also. The which thing also when it was forgotten by the wicked,
Sap. 2. Cap. When they did not believe that GOD was their creator, and that al
manner of commodities which they enioied were his gifts, but imagined that
they were borne at al adventure and left to their own hands to shift for
themselves, then like filthy swine they trod under foot all fear of God, and
gave themselves over to wallowe in the mire of their own sensual and unclean
lusts. Come (said they) let us enioie the pleasures that are present, Sap. 2. 6.
let us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth: let us fill our selves with
costly wine and ointment, and let not the flower of our life pass from us: let
us crown our selves with rose buds before they be withered, and let us leave
some token of our wantonness in every place: for this is our portion, and this
is our lot. So dangerous a thing it is either to forget the Lords mercies, or
not to believe him to be the only fountain of al! good things, but to ascribe'
the^ either to our selves, or to chance and fortune, or to the disposition of
any creature: for it causes God to withdraw his favor wholly from us, and to
give us clean over to a reprobate sense, and to suffer us utterly to fall away
from his fear.

Yea it not only makes the Lord to be most grievously offended with such an
abominable sin, but after a sort to be utterly astonished and amassed, for
that there could come to pass any such impiety. O ye heavens be astonished
at this, be afraid and utterly confounded says the Lord: For my people have
committed two evilles: Ier. 2. 12.
they have forsaken me the founetaine of living waters, to dig to themselves
pits even broken pits that can hold no water. And in the very beginning of
Isay: Hear O heavens, and harken O earth, for the Lord Isa. 1. 1.
has spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib: but my
people has not known, Israel has not understood. The ox and the ass,
albeit they be void of al reason, yet have so much sense as to be serviceable
to them by whom they are fed: yea the very dead and senseless earth yields
forth her increase to the^ by whom it is manured and husbanded: and therefore
all such are more brutish then the very ox and ass, and more vile and base
then the very dead and senseless earth, who having received all from God will
not acknowledge their gracious benefactor, and be thankful unto him for his
great mercies. Verily they which are careless to taste of the Lords love, are
worthy to drink the dregs of his displeasure: they that refuse to love God for
his goodness, and to rejoice in him for his mercy, are worthy to shake and
quake at his justice, and to tremble at his fury: they that neglect to take at
his hands the cup of salvation, are worthy to hear from his mouth the
dreadful sentence of just condemnation: they that will not above all things
esteem of his invaluable favor and always meditate upon that unspeakable
love whereby they are delivered from everlasting fire, are worthy still to be
remembered of their unthankfulness by their continual suffering of those
intolerable torments of hell fire: they which are careless to bless God day
and night most cheerfully for their eternal and everlasting happiness, are
worthy to curse themselves day and night most ruefully for their eternal and
everlasting wretchedness. And verily if David purposed to destroy all that
belonged to Naball, for that, when he had preserved his flocks in the
wilderness, and had been as a wall unto his servants, this his kindness was
requited with currishnes, and his messengers sent back unto him with
reproaches instead of rewards: What cause the^ has God, who causes all his
creatures to attend upon his servants, and makes his glorious angels to be
their guard and to enca^pe! round about them, yea who is himself a brazen wall
unto them to defend them and theirs from all their enemies, most highly to be
offended with his unthankful servants for the contempt of so many and great
favors, and to be revenged of the same withal condign punishment? what? to
forget the kindness of our bodily parents, and to be stubborn against them, was
by the law of Moses adjudged to be worthy of no less punishment then stoning
to death: and but to enter consultation of conspiring against prince and
country deserves by our laws to have the bodies of all such offenders
dismembered, and to be set up upon the tops of our gates as ruefull spectacles
to warn all to beware of the like treacherous unthankfulness: (and yet our
parents, prince, and country are for the most part but the means of some
temporal blessings to be conveied unto us: for it is God that is the author
both of the one and the other, and the ordainer both of al means and of all
blessings also) what an heavy judgment then does it deserve so far to forget
the Lords mercies, as that we should be stubborn and disloyal to him, and
join our selves in conspiracy with that archtraitour Satan?

Verily when the Lord has bin so mindful of us, and we have bin so forgetful
of him, when he has bin so kind to us, and we have bin so unkind to him, it
cannot but highly ince^se him against us, and wrest out of his hands most
grievous plagues, as we may perceive by that dreadful destruction that came
upon the ten tribes, and that direful desolatlo^ upon the nation of the Jews
the whole remnant of Israel especially for their unkind forgetfulness and
contempt of the Lords so sundry and manifold mercies. The first of the which
judgments with the causes thereof is set down unto us by the Prophet Amos:
Thus says the Lord for three transgressious Amo, 52. 6.
of Israel and for four I will not turn to it: because of their oppressio^s,
adulteries, superstitions, and their wicked rejoicing before their Idols, as if
by their means they had bin so enriched and advaunced. Yet (says the Lord) it
was I that destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the Cedar
trees, and he was strong as the oaks: Notwithstanding I destroyed his fruit
from above, and his root from beneath. Also I brought you up from the land of
Egypt, and led you forty years through the wildornes to possess the land
of the Amorite: and I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young
men for Nazarites, is it not even thus o ye children of Israel says the
Lord? But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and commanded the Prophets
saying prophecy not: behold unthankfulness is the principal circumstance, that
most of all aggravateth the greivousnes of sin. Amos. 3. 1.
I am pressed under you as a carte is pressed that is full of sheaves. Behold
then what it was that added such a weight unto their sins, and made them so
grievous and offensive unto God. and so again in the next chapter: Here this
word that the Lord pronounces against you o ye children of Israel, even
against the whole family that I brought out of Egypt, saying: you only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will visit you for all your
iniquities. In both which places it is manifest that the Lord himself
testifies against this unthankful nation, that seeing he had so labored to
win them with his blessings, and yet they would not give place to his
kindness, therefore he himself would make place unto his plagues, and to his
most heavy but just vengeance.

And now concerning that other judgment executed upon Jerusalem and the nation
of the Jews the whole re^nant of Israel, the which was the most strange and
the most dreadful that ever was executed upon any people from the beginning of
the world, was it not for this cause, that as God had at the first in kindness
exceeded toward them above al other nations of the whole earth, and they
again had exceeded toward him in their unthankfulness, therefore at the last
his plagues against the^ did exceed the plagues of al other nations of the
whole earth? As we may gather by that woeful complainte that our Savior took
up over Jerusalem saying: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and Mat. 23. 37.
stonest them, that are sent unto thee, how often vvoulde I have gathered
thy children as the hen gathers her chickens unto her wings and ye vvoulde
not? Therefore is your house left unto you desolate: How often (says our
Savior) have I called you unto me by my manifold blessings corporal and
spiritual? and with what kindness have I succored you in all your necessities
and wantes? and how long have I had patience with you in waiting for your
amendment? Therefore patience so often offended, and kindness so much contemned
must needs at the last be turned into fury. Sin verily is exceeding sinful
because it is a transgression of the most holy, pure, and righteous law of God,
and is a contempt of his majesty unto whom we owe all obedience, if it
were but in respect of his supreme auctority over us: and yet herein it does
exceed all this, and is made most sinful even in the highest degree, for that
it is committed against him, whose mercies have so far exceeded toward us,
and have made us so deeply endebted unto him, that if we should most frankely
and freely give our selves and all that we have to be pressed and ready
continually to do him service, if I say we should do this again and
again, yea ten thousand times more then we are any way able, yet we can no
way match his unspeakable kindness, or be answerable unto his endless love. To
forget him then that has so remembered us, and has given us such cause to
remember him continually casts us down below all manner of ^enceles and
liveles creatures, yea it makes us in some sort worse then the very devils
themselves. For they in sinning forgate God their Creator and sa^ctifier, but
we add also thereunto the forgetting of God our Savior and redeemer. When we
defile our selves with the pollutions of the world, we forgette that we
were ever cleansed from our old sins and former uncleanness, we tredde under
foot the son of God, and count the blood of the covenant 2 Pet. 1. 9. Heb.
10. 29.
as a vile thing and of no price, and after a sort crucify again the Lord of
glory. We contemn and despise this blessing of blessings, and clean set at
naught this mercy of mercies, or else we would not so wretchlesly forgette the
same. We forgett it, for if we did carefully embrace and remember it, it would
not be without fruit. But we contemn and forget it and neglect the means
whereby we should be put in continual remembrance of it: yea by little and
little we are drawn on eve^ to hate and to persecute these means, and so draw
nearer and nearer unto that sin of sins which makes us incapable of all
mercy.

From the which sin and from al other that we might be preserved, The manifold
means that God has ordaned to preserve the remembrance of his endless love in
Christ, and the residue of his manifold mercies: as 1. the word
the Lord has given us his holy word to be always before our eyes, and so to
keep in us a faithful remembrance of all his mercies: wherein we may record his
gracious and merciful covenant in Christ, by the which he has give^ himself
to us to be our God, and has taken us to himself to be his people: wherein we
may read his will and testament, in the which he has adopted us for his
sons in Christ, and made us heirs to all his treasures, and has bequeathed
unto us besides al other gifts, that grand legacy of eternal glory: wherein we
may pervse that authe^tical charter of al these priveledges and immunities
which we presently do, and are hereafter more fully to enjoy, being already
made fellow citizens with the saints and of the household of God, and
incorporated into the heavenly and caelestial Jerusalem: wherein we may take a
true view of the large and plenary pardon of all our trespasles and debtes, and
of that great grant of the free remission of al our sins, signed after a sort
with the Lords own hand, and ratified and confirmed with 2. The Sacraments.
Do this in remembrance of me.
the seal of his sacraments. For they were also ordained for the same
principal end and use: that by the outward resembla^ce of the visible signs
with the invisible grace they might together with the word not only represent
and set before our eyes the Lords spiritual gifts and graces, (for
Sacraments if they had no resemblance they should be no Sacraments) but also
to assure us by the bodily receiving of the outvvard signs, of the inward
participation of the invisible gifts. The Church has also appointed unto us
certain principal feasts, as the feast of the nativity of the LORD, and of
his resurrection, and ascension, and the like, that they might likewise be a
means unto us to 3. Festival days
continue an holy remembrance of his principal mercies: And therefore on those
days there are appointed also to be opened unto the Lords people such
special parcelles of holy Scripture, as do more clearly set forth the same.
And for that these feasts come but once in the year, there is one special day
appointed in 4 The Saboth or the Lords day.
every week, that we should not only call to mind that God made the world
in six days and rested the seventh, and blessed it, and consecrated it to
the holy remembrance of the glorious work of the creation: but much more that
we which are Christians, and have the Jews Saboth translated into the day of
the Lords resurrection, should most carefully record especially on that day,
that he both died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. And
therefore as upon the Jews Sabbath there were certain Psalms appointed to be
read publicly to the people for Read these Psalms and hymns not cursorely
and for fashion, but with relligious and devout attention, and thou shall soon
find the fruit thereof.
the calling to their remembrance of the blessings of the Lord: so in the
churches of the Christians the same have bin continued even to this day, and
other holy hymmes added thereto for the further manifestation of the same
mercies. And for as much as this public meeting of the whole congregation to
record the Lords mercies is appointed by the Lord himself to be but one day in
the week, therefore there is a most strait charg give^ also by the Lord
himself, that every one of the Lords people should privately every day have
their resort to the word of God, and meditate therein day and night, that so
they might keep a continual remembrance of al those things, which never can be
too much remembered. And least any of the more simple and ignorant should plead
either simplicity in understanding or weakness in remembering, the Lord in his
great goodness has provided a remedy also for the same, by causing diverse
short and plain sentences to be set down in his holy word, which are both
easy to be understood, and to be remembered also, These and the like se^tences
may easily be learned without book, and ought to be remembered when we are by
our selves continually. 5. The office of the Lords Ministers. Psalm. 105 1.
that so eve^ they might have no pretense at al to fail in so behovful and
necessary a duty, As Job 35. 10. Ier. 2. 6. and 5. 24. and 14. 20. Ho. 14. 2.
And yet least any of the Lords servants should discontinue in this the Lords
work, he has appointed also the ministers of his word to be his faithful
reme^bra^cers therein, and to call continually unto their remembrance both the
Lords manifold mercies, and their manifold duties, that they owe unto him for
the same. For if all the Lords people ought not only themselves to be employed
diligently about the Lords works, but also to further each one the other
therein: then how much more ought they to do it, which are appointed to be
publik officers for the same purpose? How oug^t they especially most carefully
to put in practice the exhortation of the prophet by calling continually unto
the people and saying? Praise the Lord, and call upon his name, and declare his
works among the people: Sing unto him, sing praises unto him, and let your
talking be of all his wondrous works. Rejoice in his holy name, let the hearts
of them rejoice that se^ke the Lord. Seek the Lord and his strength, se^ke his
face continually. Remember the ma^ve^lous works that he has done, the wonders
and the judgments of his mouth ^h ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye ch^ldren
of Jacob his chosen: he is the Lord our God. ^. The (...) ^ssistance accord^ to
his own covenant.
And yet if all men fail in their duty, the Lord himself will not fail in
that covenant which he h^th made with all his chosen: wherein he has promised
that he himself will write his laws in their hearts, and plant them in
their minds, and that he will do the same so sufficiently, that it shall not
be a matter of absolute necessity for every one to exhort and to admonish his
neighbor saying, know the Lord: for they shall all know me (says the Lord)
even Ier. 31 34.
from the greatest unto the least. So and so beneficial it is unto all the
Lords people to know the Lord and his gracious blessings, and to keep a
continual remembrance of the same: and therefore so and so many means has
the Lord appointed in his unspeakable wisdom and goodness for the stirring
up of every one of his faithful servants to the ready and careful performance
of this so beneficial and necessary a work; So and so careful has the Lord
been that the people devoted unto his service should want no means to
strengthen and further them in the holy exercise of sincere devotion. Now let
us see how the church of Rome (which boasts so highly of her own great
devotions, land of the huge multitude of all manner of good works which so and
so abound among her children) religiously extolleth the Lords mercies and what
a careful remembrance she keeps of his goodness, seeing (as it has been
showed) that is the mother and the nurce of all sound and sincere devotion, and
the fountain and welspring of all good works.

The word of God in setting down the great and gracious blessings of God does
declare unto us these three points. First the cause of them, even his own
goodness and love: secondly the end, which is the manifestation of his goodness
and love: thirdly the effect, which is the working thereby in the hearts of his
chosen of al inward graces and outward duties also both to God and to our
neighbor. The grace, goodness, love, and mercy of God is the full fountain
from whence all his blessings do issue and flow. The great and blessed work
of man's redemption issues from thence as our Savior testifies: So God loved
the world that he gave his only begotten son that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have Ioh. 3. 16.
life everlasting. The great and blessed work of the creation and all the
residue of his gracious blessings, many of the particulars whereof are set down
by the prophet Ps. 136. come also from thence, even because his mercy endu^eth
for ever. This mercy and love of God is not only most ample and large, but also
most free and undeserved. For every good gift and every perfect giving comes
down from Iac. 1. 17.
above from the father of light: and we hold all that we enjoy from this grand
and universal l^ndlord, and therefore we must pay our whole rent to him, and
perform only to his court our suit and service: we are endebted unto him alone
for the loan of all that we possess, and therefore to him alone we must
discharge all our debt. His love also is most free and undeserved; he seeks
therein not to gain any thing to himself, but only to do good, and to benefit
other: and this does farther set forth the greatness of his love, and so does
enlarge the bil of our debt. Secondly the end why God bestows his blessings
is that they might be unto us most plain demo^strations of his love and most
certain testimonies of his goodness. Show me (says St. Iams) thy faith by thy
works: and I will show thee my faith by my works. Iac 2. 18. 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
My children (says St. John) let us not love in word and in tongue, but in
work and in truth. That love the^ is in truth, that is effectual in works: and
that faith is sound and right, that shows it self in the fruits. Wherefore
god who would have his chose^ know and be fully persuaded that he loves the^
in truth. shows it forth to them by his most gracious and manifold blessings
as by the effects and fruits thereof: and this is also a great addition unto his
love. Thirdly the Lord makes his love manifested by his blessings the means
to beget and to increase faith, love, repentance and the like in the hearts of
his elect and chosen children: he puts them not out to use, nor takes any
increase for them: (for his estate cannot be bettered, nor his blessedness
increased) the profit and increase accrueth to us: and therefore by them we
merit nothing at the hands of God, nor make him thereby any way endebted to
us, but we our selves are more and more still in his debt for the free lone
and francke gift of all his blessings. Now then to return again to the first
point.

The love of God is the full fountain of all manner of his blessings both
bodyly and ghostly, and he himself is not only the author, but also the
disposer and bestower of them all: the blessings themselves, and the means are
of him, and the working also of the one and the other. Temporal, means are in
themselves nothing without the special power of God working in them and by
them. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God. And life consiseth not in the great abundance of all such
things a^ do belong to the maintenance of life: The horse is counted but a
vain thing to save a man, neither can he deliver any one by his much strength:
the watchman also waketh but in vain, unless the Lord keep the city. So
spiritual means also are nothing without the effectual power of the almighty
working by them: for that is the very soul and life of all. He that planteth
is nothing, and he that waters is nothing, but God that gives the increase.
John the Baptist can baptize but with water: Austine can but speak to our
bodyly ears: Christ baptiseth only with the holy Ghost: and he that has his
chair in heaven is he only that, can teach the heart. The water in baptism
can but wash the body, and the very word of the promise of it self without
faith is but an ineffectuall and dead letter; yea the bodily presence of
Christ's own flesh profits nothing: it is his spirit that quickneth, and
that works faith and brings life. And therefore when Rachell said unto
Jacob, give me children or else I d^e: Jacob was angry with her and said: Genesis
30. 1.
Am I ^ Gods steed, who has with holden from thee the fruit of thy womb? So
when Naaman the Sirian was sent by his Master to the king of Israel to be
cured of his leprosy: Am I a God (says he) to kill and 2. King 5. 7.
give life, that he has sent unto me to cure a man of his lo profie? So
likewise in that lamentable siege and famme of Samaria, when a woman cried to
the king as he passed by: Help my Lord O king: the 2. Kin. 6. 26. To ascribe
any blessing unto the meanc, is to place the meane^ in the makers room Romans
11. 36.
king answered: how can I help seeing the Lord does not succor us either with
the barn or with the winepresse? If then our bodily blessings depend not upon
the means, but are in the hands, and at the disposition of the author alone,
then much more our ghostly and spiritual: and if both bodily and ghostly, then
all: and then is he to be sought unto only for all: and then is he to be served
and honored only for all. For seeing that of him and for him and by him are all
things: therefore the conclusion follows necessarily, to him be glory for ever
and ever, Amen. And it is a duty belonging to us all to fall down before him
that sits upon the throne and to cast our crowns at his feet and to say:
Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Apoc. 4. 11.
glory, and honor and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy
wills sake they were and are created. For are there any among the vanities of
the Gentiles that can give rain? Or can the heavens give Ier. 14. 20.
showers: Art not thou the Lord our God? Therefore will we wait upon thee:
for thou have made all these things.

The cause then that moves the faithful to cleave sincerely to The ascribing
of all good thigs entirely to God is the cause of true piety and godliness: as
on the c^rt^ary side the ascribing of Gods gifts unto creatures is the cause of
Idolatry and falling away from God.
God, and to continue sted fast in his fear is, for that they believe that
they do receive all good things wholly and solely from him: they seeing that of
him they receive their whole wages and mainetenance, therefore do give
themselves wholly to his service. As on the contrary side the cause of Idolatry
and falling away from God, and maining, mangling, and corrupting his worship
and service, is the ascribing to our selves or to other, either wholly or in
part the glory of many or of any of the Lords blessings. This was the cause of
Idolatry among the Gentiles, of their honoring of themselves, and of their
Idols, and of their unthankfulness unto the true God. For as concerning the
wise, learned, and politic among the heathen, if they yielded unto God the
glory of any blessings at all, it was of such only as were t^mporall and
transi^orie: they were beholding unto themselves only in their own opinions
for their temperance, fortitude, wisdom and all other virtues, and therefore
they honored themselves for these things and not the true and living God. Has
any one (says Cicero) ^ any Cie. l. 3. de not. deoru^.
time given thanks unto God for that he was a good man? Noe: but for that he
was rich, honored and preserved: and therefore (says Det vitam det opes:
aequum mi animum ip se parabo. Hora. ep. 1. ad Lollium.
he) they call Jupiter the best and the greatest, not for that he makes men
just, sober, and wise: but for that he sends riches and safety. So Horace:
Let Jupiter give me life and wealth, and I will provide for my self a good
mind. Yea many of the greatest states among them did ascribe also to
themselves their riches and honor, and to their own wisdom pollecy and
power: as it may appear by the insolent hearts and proud proceedinges of the
king of Isa. 10. 13. Dan. 4. 27. Job. 31. 27.
Ashur and Babylon, and by the like practice of many meaner men in the time of
Job. And as for the multitude they did generally ascribe al to chance and
fortune, to destiny and to the stars, many also of the wisest and greatest
amongst them being not free from this error: in that they commonly called
their wealth and honor the goods of fortune, and had their temples erected
both to fortune and fate. And as for those whom they worshipped for Gods both
privately and publicly, they were either the first founders or the enlargers
of their families, cities and kingdoms, or the inve^tors or furtherers of some
beneficial science and art: as Ceres was worshipped for inventing or
bettering the art of manuring the ground, Bacchus of the vine, Pan of cattle,
Neptune of navigation, Mars of war, Apollo of wisdom, Esculapius of
physic, Iuppiter of governing of countries and kingdoms. All these and many
other were worshipped by the Gentiles as Gods, for that they were thought to be
the inventors or furtherers of many beneficial arts, and the auctors or
disposers of many blessings: and so the worship of the true God the only
auctor and disposer of all good things was generally banished out of the great
and large countries and kingdoms of the whole world, and shut up within the
coasts and borders of one small and mean people: and namely he was excluded
out of the Pantheon of Rome, whereunto were admitted the gods and goddesses of
all other kingdoms and countries which the Romans subdued and made their
tributaries, for that he would be worshipped alone as the one only true God
almighty and alsufficient, the only author and doer of al good things.

Neither was the true worship and service of God for any long continuance
kept pure and unpolluted among this one nation which he had chosen unto
himself to be his own proper and peculiar people. For they ascribed their
wealth and abundance to Baalim, to the host of heaven, and to themselves, and
so fell from God and worshipped Baalim, and burnt incense to the Queen Isa. 48.
5. Ier. 44. 13. Hos. 2. 8. and 12. Hab. 1. 16.
of heaven, and did offer sacrifice unto their own nets: And they ascribed
their preservation to Ashur and Egypt, and therefore sent their gifts to those
places: And they imputed their virtuous works in part to their own free will
and the benesit of eternal life unto the merit of their own works: and
therefore did they boast of their own holiness not only before me^, but also
before God: they Luke 18. 11. Romans 9. 32.
trusted in themselves and in their own righteousness, and rejected the
righteousness of God in Christ, and so caused themselves to be utterly rejected
of God. Whereby it came to pass that the kingdom of God was taken from them,
and was translated unto the Gentiles, and the true worship and service of the
only true God was made common to all the nations of the whole earth.

But it did not with them neither continue pure and incorrupt any long time.
For the Church that was a chaste virgin vvhiles the Apostles lived, began
shortly in many countries to play the adultresse, and to defile her lelfe with
spiritual whordomes and I dolatries. The Apostle Saint Paul testified unto the
Elders of Ephesus, that he knew full well that after his departure there should
enter in among them grievous woluet not sparing the Act 20. 29. 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
flock^. And Saint John that lived longest of all the Apostles testifies that
even in his time many false Prophets were gone out into the world: and that
the spirit of the great Antichrist, that was to come in the latter times,
was already vvorking and laying of the foundation of the great apostasy from
GOD and his truth, and brevving the cup of that deadly poison vvherevvithall
was to be made drunken all the kingdoms of the world, and practicing those
spiritual fornications and adulteries vvherevvithall the whole earth was to
be defiled. And what were those spiritual fornications and adulteries but an
Idolatrous worshipping of the creature in steed of the Creator, a
superstitious serving of the Saints in place of the Savior, and an unchaste
and unshamefast embracing of the freindes of the bridegroom in steed of the
faithful cleaving unto the only bridegroom himself? And how was this brought
to pass but whiles the world was taught that CHRIST the bridegroom of the
Church was not the only mediator and patron of his people, but the saints
also the friends of the bridegroom? that God had after a sort passed away
from himself his interest and right in the bestowing of his own gracious
gifts and blessings, and had delivered them over unto his servantes to be in
their hands and at their disposition, and had made some of them patrones over
one country and some over an other, some over men of this calling and some
over men over of that, some over this kind of cattle, and some over that, some
deliverers from this disease and some from that, and some disposers of this
blessing and some of that. And hereof it came to pass that so many devotions
were done unto the saints, and so few unto Christ: so many churches and
relligious houses founded to the honor of the saints, and so few unto
Christ: so much praying to the saints and so little to God, the very
Ave-Maryes much exceeding the Pater-Nosters, and yet great contention also to
bestow them too upon the saints: such gadding on pilgrimage to offer to the
image of this saint and that saint, and so little regard of the sincere
serving of God in spirit and truth, which is no ways bettered by altering of
places but by changing of our corrupt and sleshly affections: such publishing
of the fabulous legend of the saints miracles, and such debarring of the
people from Gods own book, where the glory of Christ is most set forth:
such buying of pardons wherein the merits of the saints were set out to
s^le, and such evacuating and annihilating of the death of CHRIST whereby our
salvation was only wrought: such magnifying of the rules of their own
relligious orders, and such a mean reckoning made of the Laws of CHRIST.
These honors which were given by the whore of Babylon to her lovers were
part of those spiritual fornications and adulteries vvherevvithall she did
infecte all the nations of the earth: and the great gifts that were
pretended to be given by the saints to such as did most devoutely honor
them, were the means to persuade them to this Idolatry: even as the Gentiles
and Jews had in former ages been drawn a long into the like actions upon
the like motives and persuasions.

Wherefore if we desire to be delivered from such a fall, even from departing
from God to follow after vanity, yea from falling from his service into open
and impious I dolatry, let us beware of this stumbling block which Satan
casts in our way to make us fall, while he parswadeth us to beg for that
blessing at the hand of any creature, which only is in the gift and
disposition of the Creator: and let us acknowledge that GODS most large and
ample love is the only full fountain of all good things, whatsoever be the
conduite to convey them unto us: and that all this water, that thus or thus
serves our use, springs only out of this fountain, and not out of the
conduite: and that the conduite it self is made by this founder, and does
convery unto us such and so much water as he himself does dispose of to our
benefit and good. Neither must we only acknowledge that God is the only
auctor and disposer of his own gifts, but also that he bestows them all
upon us most frankely and freely even of his own mere mercy favor and love.
He did not predestinate us to everlasting life, nor bestow upon us any other
of his blessings, for that he foresawe that we would deserve the same: For he
did not foresee any thing that should proceed from our selves but a flat
conspiracy with sin and Satan and an apostasy and a revolt from God all
goodness. Whatsoever good thing he foresaw in us, he foreappointed both to begin
the same by his own grace, and to continue it and to bring it to a good issue
and end, of his own undeserved favor and love.

And now to come to the second po^nt: All the gracious blessings The end of
all Gods blessings is the manifestation of his love.
of God are bestowed upon the faithful to this end, even that by them he
might make declaration and proof of his love, and give them assurance of his
fatherly affection toward them. And verily as none among men bestows any
gift upon another, but that he will at one time or other give him notice
thereof: neither will he bestow it upon such an one as knows not the use
thereof, nor understands it to be a gift, least it be taken as a mockery,
or returned back without acceptance: much less does God bestow any of his
gracious gifts upon his servaun^es, but that sooner o^ later he gives them
no^ice thereof, and shows them the vles of the same, that so they may receive
benefit thereby: sering otherwise they will do them ^is taken (...) an
vn^ubted ^ritie in ^finite ^aces of ^oly scrip^re, that ^ods love (...)
assuredly ^owen to ^is own people, and ^lt of the^ ^specially (...) those
^essinges which ^re most ^roper and ^eculiar unto them: and there^pon are ^hey
so often and ^arnestly ^rged to show them^elues tha^k^ull and duetifull to God
for those his so well known and manifest mercies. Exodus 20. 2.
no good, but needs must be without al fruit. And especially he will not
enter into covenant and league with any to become their gracious God in
Christ, and to accept them for his peculiar people, to give them remission of
sins and e^ernal life, and the first fruits of the spirit as the pledge of
their caelestial and heavenly inheritance, but that he will make known unto
them this his gracious league and covenant with the articles and conditions
belonging to the same: for otherwise how can they perform the conditions?
And if they know not that they have such and such gifts from God, how can
they be thankful to God for them, and employ them to their own good? If they
believe not that God is their God, how can they honor him as their God? If
they be not persuaded that they are beloved of God, how can they be stirred up
to love God? If they be not assured that God has accepted of them as of his
trusty and faithful servants, what encouragement can they have to demean^
themselves as his trusty and faithful servants?

Surely the spirit of God which knows the deepest mysteries of the Lords own
most privy and secret counsels, and therefore much more searches the hearts and
raines of al men, and understands all their thoughts, takes it as a thing
well known and acknowledged of all the faithsul servants of God, that God
lou^th them, and has manifested the same unto them by his manifold gifts, and
that he has declared himself to be their God, and has taken them to be his
people, and thereupon infers that they should honor him a^ their God, and
walk worthy of their high and heavenly calling, and that they should love him,
and be thankful unto him, and be ready continually to testify the same by
their duetifull regard unto his service, and by their humble obedience to all
his commandments. I am the Lord thy God (says God himself unto his true
and faithful servantes among the whole nation of Israel) That brought you out
of the land of Aegyp^ and out of the house of bondage: and thereupon requires
to be accepted of them as their only GOD and to have humble obedience yielded
to all his commandments: And so the holy posterity of these faithful
servants of God do in most pl^ine words acknowledge los. 24. Even that God is
their God, and has done thus and thus for them, and therefore that they are
bound to se^ue him alone, and to honor him as their only God. The same mo^iue
God urges to Abraham the father of the faithful: I am Genesis 17. 1.
thy God alsufficient: walk before me, and be thou perfect: that is, I am
^ntred into covenant with th^e to be thy God, I have and will supply all thy
wantes, and have and wilsticke unto thee in all thy necessities: the^fore see
that thou thoroughly stick unto me and cleave perfectly unto my service. The
Apostle St. Paul writing to the saints at Ephesus, that is, to the faithful
in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3 1.
begins with, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
presently annexeth the cause thereof, which was, The blessing of them with
all sperituall blessings in CHRIST Jesus, their election, predestination,
redemption, the revelation of the mysteries of the will of God unto them, their
hope, faith, and their sealing with the spirit of promise and these blessings
he remembers not as things doubtful and uncertain, but as things most
manifest and well known unto the^. Likewise he exhorts the Theslalonians to
keep their vessels in holiness and honor, and not to defraud 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2
or oppresle one another; because they knew what commandments were given unto
them in Christ, and that they were not called to uncleanness but to holiness. So
to the Co^nthians, havin^ rem^mbred 1. Cor. 6. 11.
them what they were before their calling even such as were desiled with most
filthy and abominable sins, then he adds as a thing well known and
acknowledged by them all, but ye are vvashed, but ye are senct^fied, but ye
are justified, in the name of our LORD Jesus, and by the spir^te of our GOD:
and thereupon farther urges as things also fully known and confessed, both
the fruit and the benefit of this forms grace, and the duty also that is
to be performed ^or the same. Know ye not (says he) that your bodies are
the members of Christ; Shall I then Ver. 15.
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlette? GOD
forbid. Yea, Ver. 19.
Know ye not that your bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, which is in
you, whom ye have of God, and that ye are not your own, but are bought with a
price? Therefore glorify God in your body and your spirit, which are Gods. So
likewise to the Romans: chiefly considering the season (says the Apostle) and
knowing that the night is passed, and the day is nigh, therefore let us cast
away the works of (...). 13. 11.
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light: let us walk honestly as in
the day time. And again to the faithful among the Thessalonians: Ye are all
the children of the light and of the day: we are not of the night, These. 5. 5.
neither of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as other ^o, but let us watch,
and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that are
dru^ken are drunken in the night: but let us which are of the day be sober,
putting on the brestplate of faith and love, and the hope of salvation as an
helmet. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation in
Christ Jesus: who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one
another even as ye do. And in deed what greater comfort can there come to the
faithful, then to be assured that they are not the children of the night
neither of darkness, but the children of the light and of the day? And what more
availeable for edification in godliness, then to know that they are not
appoin^ed to wrath, but to salvation, and therefore that they ought to be
employed wholly in all such duties as do concern all such as are to be saved.

Neither is this argument proper to S. Paul alone, but common with him to all the Prophets and Apostles, who tasted with him of the sweet blessings of the
same Savior, and were made partakers of the same comfortable spirit. Behold
(says Moses) the heaven, (...). 10. 14.
and the heaven of heavens is the Lords, the earth also and all that is
therein. Notwithstanding he has set his delight on us and has loved us, and
has chosen us to be his people, and has preferred us before many other
nations, that are far greater and mightier then we: that we also might learn
to make choice of him before all other, and to prefer him to be our only God.
So the Prophet David foreseeing by the spirit that God would gather unto him
his elect and chosen out of all nations of the whole earth cries out unto them
and says: O be joyful in the Lord all ye lands, serve the (...). 100. 1.
Lord with gladness and come before his presence with a song. Be ye sure that
the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us and not we our selves, we are
his people and the sheep of his pasture, etc. Be ye sure (says David) and
build upon this, that God is the true God and that he has made us, and taken
us also to be his people: and therefore he exhorts again and again to
rejoice in the Lord, and to be tha^kfull unto him for his great goodness. So S.
Peter: ye are (says he to all the faithful to whom he wrote) a chosen
generation, a royal nation, 1. Pet. 2. 9.
and an holy people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him that has
called you out of darkness into his marveilous light. Likewise Saint John:
Behold (says he) what love the father has showed us, that we 1 Ioh. 3. 1.
should be called the sons of God, etc. Why? He that is but in a play to
bear the person only of the son of an earthly king, and that but for the
space of two or three hours, will in no wise then demean himself like to a
cullian. A son (says Malachy) honors his father, and a servant his
master. If I then (says God himself Mala. 1. 6.
unto his people) be your father, where is my love? and if I be your master,
where is my fear? Now every mean Logitian knows that a Inepta est probatio
obscuri per aeque obscuru^, multo magis per magis obscurum.
thing not known or but meanly apprehended is to receive light and
confirmation not from an argument which is as obscure and doubtful, much less
from that which is more doubtful and obscure. For how can that which is dark
it self drive away darkness? or how can that which is doubtful it self
remove doubtfulnes? Wherefore in that the spirit of God does exhort the
faithful not to serve themselves but the Lord for that ^hey are bought with a
price, and therefore are not their own but the Lords: and to walk soberly
because they are the children of the day: and to do such things as accompany
salvation for that they are ordained to salvation: and to employ themselves not
to base uses but to the most honorable service of the Lord, because they are
vessels of gold prepared to glory, and so forth: it follows necessarily that
it ought to be unto them as evident and as certain at the least that they are
not their own but are bought with a price, that they are the children of the
day, that they are ordained to salvation, and that they are vessels of gold
prepared to glory, as that they should serve not themselves but the Lord, that
they should walk warily as in the day, that they should do such things as
accompany salvation and that they should employ themselves not to base uses,
but to the honorable service of God.

And verily no other argument of it self alone is able to assuage the flames
of self love which are so great, and to cause us to deny our selves, our
friends, pleasures and commodities, be they they never so sweet, and to make
us willingly to bear the disfavours of prince and people, alians and allies,
and to undergo all manner of crosses and afflictions, be they never so
burdensome and bitter, but only that invaluable love of God manifested in that
glorious work of man's redemption, and in the residue of his blessings of
grace. When the Apostles seemed to wordly wise men to be stark madd, for that
they so willingly submitted themselves to so many and great inconveniences that
they might give testimony to the Gospel of Christ, the Apostle St. Paul
sets down the cause that moved them there unto saying: The love of Christ
constrains us: because we thus judge that if one be dead ^. Cor. 5. 14.
Christ's ^oue to^ards his ^aithfull ^ervants ^elt in their hearts, not only
allureth but even compels the^ most willingly to undergo all manner of
burdens in his service for his glory.
for all, then we we^e al dead: And he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them and rose
again. The love of Christ then is the most forcible argument even to compel
and constrain us to do our duties to God, be they never so contrary to our
corrupt affections, yea it makes the yoke of Christ light and easy to the
spirit which otherwise is so burdensome unto the flesh. And hence it is that
those of the faithful which have had greatest revelation of the grace of
Christ, and strongest assurance of his love, have most of all died unto
themselves and lived unto Christ, and have above all other denied their own
sweet selves, and renounced their Jearest pleasures and commodities, and have
with such a burning affection embraced their sweet Savior and redeemer, and
so highly esteemed of his most precious blood, that all other sweet things
have after a sort grown out of taste with them and all other precious things
have become of no price. I am dead (says St. Paul), to the law, and am
crucified with Christ: I live, and yet Gal. 2. 19.
not I now, but Christ lives in me: and in that I live now in the flesh, I
live by he faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself
for me. I see well (says Austine in an Epistle to Dardanus) that thou do
esteem little of me, although I make great account of thee: and it is for
that thou art young and I am old, thou wise and I indiscreet, thou rich and
I poor, thou more virtuous then I am: yet I will deny that thou have a better
God th^n I, or a better law, or a better redeemer the I: for in the matter of
redemption the Lord dealt so equally among all men, that I will not
acknovvledge any advantage in thee, or any superiority in me. O good Jesus
(says he) O the redeemer of my soul, vvherevvithall shall I requite thy
clemency or satisfy thy goodness for not shedding better blood for all
thine elect, then thou did for my sins alone? Now what caused this
man of GOD thus to humble and debase himself in respect of himself, and thus
to advaunce himself in respect of GOD, and to cry out that he knew not how to
be sufficiently thankful unto his gracious redeemer, but a greater revelation
of the grace of CHRIST, and a stronger assurance of his love then ordinarily is
granted to the common sort of the faithful? The which things also stirred up
the like passions in Cyrill and Bernard, and east them into an holy ecstasy,
and carried them after a sort out of themselves, and made them to have little
regard Cyrill. in haec verb^ sanguis ^ius sit super noset filios nostros.
of this present world and of the pomp and glory thereof, which yet are so
glorious in earthly men's eyes. To what end (says Cyrill) should I have
wealth and hope for the inheritance of the goods of this worlds, seeing
already I am made heir of thy most precious blood, and redeemed with thy
most glorious death? Why should I not very much esteem of my self, seeing
thou have shed as much blood for me alone, as thou have done for all the
world? So Bernard: O good Jesus, O the love of my soul, who Bern. in haec
verbai desiderio desideravi etc.
amongst mortal men does so desire to make his life perpetual, as thou did
desire to loose thine for mine? What pleasure vvilte thou take on the world to
come with thine elect, seeing here upon earth thon did call that day
wherein thou did suffer Easter that is a great and solemn feastivall day?
And again: O good Jesus, O the redeemer of my soul, do I not happily owe
thee as much as all the world owes thee, seeing I have cost thee as much
blood as all the world has done? By the which testimonies of these holy
men it is evident and plain, that an holy assurance of the great love of
CHRIST, who has died for our sins in particular, and rose again for our
justification, is the strongest purgation to cleanse our souls from dead
works, and to quicken them up to an heavenly life, and to strengthen us in the
ready preformance of all such duties, as are most grateful and acceptable to
God. And verily all manner of good and virtuous works, seem they never so
glorious in the eyes of mortal men, are most vile and base in the sight of
God, unless the love of Christ be the worker of them al, and unless they are
performed as well deserved duties for his sundry and manifold undeserved
mercies.

How then can there be any true devotion at al in any of the children of the
Church of Rome, if they follow the doctrine ^f the assurance of the love of
God in Christ be the strongest band to bind us to God, then the doubtting
thereof must needs let us loose to run a stray and at random: out of the
Lords ways, as if we were at our own liberty to live as we list. The base
borne bastardes of the church of Rome condemn in the legitimate children of
God the holy assurance of his favor and love. as Sap. 2. their former
brethrren the elder sons of Satan have done before the^ Ephesians. 3. 18.
of their mother, who teaches them to be still in doubt of the love of Christ
in particular toward themselves, and of their effectual calling into the
state of grace, and of the remission of their sins and eternal glory, seeing
the faithful apprehension, sense, and assurance of Christ's love and the fruits
thereof, is the only effectual worker of all true devotion? How can either the
church of Rome be the faithful spouse of Christ, seeing she still stands in
doubt of the love of her bridegroom: or her children be the children of God
our heavenly father, seeing they are, and must be still in doubt, whether he
bears a fatherly affection toward them? Surely a faithful spoufe cannot
still stand in doubt of the love of her most kind and careful husband: neither
can the natural and kind child always fear whether his natural and kind
father bears a loving and a fatherly affection toward him, seeing he has
testified the same by his manifold blessings. And therefore the church of Rome
cannot be the true spouse of Christ, seeing she knows not assuredly whether
she is his beloved: neither can her children be the true children of God our
heave^ly father, seeing they are and must be still uncertain and doubtful of
his kind and fatherly love, and of the most principal effects thereof. Nay in
that they condemn the true children of God of pride and presu^ption, for that
they are not abashed to make a bold confession of their knowledge of God, and
of their assurance of his love, and to glory that he is their father and they
his sons, hereby they declare themselves to belong to the congregation of
them alignant, yea that they are the children of the devil himself, in that
after the very selfsame manner they condemn the holy faith of the children of
God, as their elder brethren have done before the^ in the second chapter of the
book of wisdom.

Wherefore all ye our dear brethren, which are as yet covered with the black
and dark doctrine of the church of Rome, which came out of the bottomless pit
from the very prince of darkness himself, even as many of you as belong to the
number of Gods elect, defraud not your selves any longer of the comfort and
fruit of Christ's love by continuing still doubtful of the same with the
children of unbelief, but rather labor with all saints that ye may comprehend
what is the breadth, depth, length, height, and to know the love of Christ that
passes knowledge, that so ye ma^y be filled with all fulness of God. Be ye not
desirous to continue any longer doubtful of the remission of your sins and of
your election to eternal life according unto the doctrine of the teacher of
infidelity, which yet boasts himself to be the successor of St. Peter., but
strive ye 2. Pet. 1. 10
rather to make your election sure by your works, according unto the most holy
doctrine of St. Peter himself. And as I doubt not but that ye unfeignedly
desire to be fruitful and plentiful in all good works, so labor ye by all
means possible to comprehe^d the love of Christ, and to feel in your hearts
the comfortable fruits thereof, which are the strongest motives not only to
persuade but after a sort to constrain and force unto the ready persorma^ce of
al good works. Be ye not so foolish still to imagine, that your works which
are the fruits of the love of Christ, and the effects of your election and
justification, be the causes of the love of Christ and of your election and
justification: Especially whereas it is God that works in you the will and the
deed, and that of his own mere mercy and good will in Christ, and thereby
makes you more endebtted unto him by the continuance and increase of his
blessings; take ye heed of that grievous and intolerable pride, wherewith the
Devil the defacer of the grace and glory of Christ has hitherto beguiled
you, by making you think that God is endebtted unto you by means of your good
works, and that by them you merit at his hands remission of sins and eternal
glory. For verily if the kissing of our own hands, that is, the ascribing The
ascribing to our own wit and industry of Gods temporal gifts is a denial
of God, and therefore much more the ascribin^ of eternal life to our own
merits.
but of our temporal goods and possessions unto our own industry and wit be
an iniquity to be condemned, because it is a denial of God: then is it a
greater iniquity and more to be condemned, and a more heinous denial of God to
rob him of the glory of his greatest gifts by ascribing them unto our own
merits. But herein is fulfilled the prophecy of Saint Peter 2. Pet. 2. 1.
who has plainly foretold, that as there were then false prophets among the
people, so there should be false teachers among us, who should prively bring
in damnable heresies even denying the Lord that bought them.

The truth is, that the children of the Church of Rome confess in word their
redemption wrought by Christ, but when they the^, selves labor to purchase
heaven by their own merits, do they not plainly disallowe the sufficiency
of the purchase thereof made by Christ? Yea, whereas our Rhemistes are so bold
as to call the justice of God which is residen^ in Christ, and apprehended by
our faith, and so imputed to us, because it was wrought for us, a new no
justice, a phant asticall apprehension of that which is not, a fals^ faith, and
an untrue imputation, and to affirm that there is no righteousness, Rhem in c.
3. ep. ad Romans
whereby we are justified before God, but that which is inherent in us, being
give^ to us of God by Christ, that thereby we might merit for our selves our
justification and salvation: do they not in flat terms deny Christ's own
inhere^t righteousness whereby we are justified and saved, and ascribe the same
to our own inherent righteousness? If a friend should procure of a father some
portion of a stock for his son, by the which being well employed and
increased, the son should in some spate of time purchase a good farm, were the
friend, or the father, or the son to be termed the purchaser thereof? It is
plain and manifest that none but the son. Why then if Christ's own righteousness
inherent in himself and imputed to us be a new no righteousness, and not the
price of our redemption, but our own inherent righteousness procured of God
our heavenly Father by the death of Christ, as by the mediation of our dearest
friend, then we our selves are the purchasers of everlasting life, and so our
own Saviors and redeemers, and are no surther beholding to Christ for the
same, then for that he has procured for us some portion of love, repentance,
obedience, and the like, the which being well employed and increased by our
own free will is the only price that is given for that heavenly purchase. But
far be this bl^sphemous doctrine from the hearts of all true and faithful
Christians: let it be enough for us to enjoy the fruit of our salvation
purchased by Christ, let us give to his own most pure and perfect obedience
this glory, that we esteem it be the only price that is or could be
equivalent unto that so great and worthy a purchase. And whereas the great and
endless love of God our Father electing and justifying us freely in Christ are
the steps whereby God descends to us to finish his work here begun in
us, by bringing us here in this l^e to our sanctification, and to our
glorification in the life to come: and whereas also the Lord in his high and
admirable wisdom has appointed that this his great and endless love in
electing and iustififying us freely in Christ, should be the only effectual
means to work our conversion and sanctification, and the most strong and
forcible motive to in duce us to the ready performaunce of all such holy
works as are the steps and stairs to our glorification, let us not presume
to perverte this order and course ordained by God in his great wisdom by
setting the cart before the horse, by turning all ^opsie turvey, by changing
the effects into the causes, and the causes into the effects, by placing the
highest steps in the lowest rooms, and the lowest in the highest, by altring
the first into the last, and the last into the first: and yet all this is done
by us, if we make our sanctification and good works the merit orious causes
of the love of God and of our election and justification by CHRIST, which are
but the effects and fruits of the same. Nay rather seeing God has not only
loved us but also has made manifest the same unto us by his manifold
blessings, by giving our selves unto our selves, and all this glorious world
to our use and service, by giving us his own dear son to justify us by
his blood, and to sanctify us by his spirit, and to lead us by his word in
the right way to our full and final glorification, how ought we to serve
him that has thus served us, and honor him that has honored us, and love
him that has loved us, and to be most desirous to testify the same by our
careful and continual emploiment in all those works, which he himself has
ordained for us to walk in, and that in most ready and humble obedience unto
his will, not only because it is holy and just, acceptable and welpleasing
unto himself, and the will of him unto whom we owe all obedience in respect of
his supreme auctority over us, but much more for that we are so deeply
endebtted unto him in respect of his infinite and endless mercies. Seeing the^
the will of God must be the rule and squier of al our works, or else they will
grow much out of square, therefore it concerns us most nearely to make most
diligent inquiry, by what means we may attain to the assured knowledge
thereof, that so we may conform our selves wholly thereunto.

The knowledge of the most certain and undoubted will of The sure and certain
^ill of God ^s only to ^e learned ^ut of the Canonical scriptures.
God is now to be found only in the word of God revealed to the Prophets and
Apostles by the spirit of God, and set down by the^ in the Canonical
Scriptures. For as words are given to us of God that thereby we might signify
each to other the se^ce and meaning of our minds: eve^ so has the Lord
himself revealed to us by his written word what is the meaning of his will, and
has commanded us to seek for the same only from thence. This commandment
Deuteronomy. 30. 11.
(says Moses) which I command thee this day is not hid from thee, neither is
it far of: It is not in heaven that thou should say, who shall go up into
heaven, and bring it unto us, and cause us to hear it that we may do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the
sea to bring it to us, to cause us to hear it, that we may do it? But the
word is near unto thee even in thy mouth and in thy heart that thou may do
it. By which words we are to learn, that God in his divine and heavenly
wisdom has not appointed either an Angel from heaven, or a messenger from
beyond the seas to be the instruments whereby his will may be related unto us,
but only his holy word and sacred co^mandeme^ts. In truth such is the pride,
curiosity, superstition, and rebellion of sottish and sinful man, that he
sets light by the means appointed by God for his best instruction, and
would needs have one raised from the dead, or an Angel from heaven, to bring
him tidings of the Lords will, and to make relation thereof, or else he would
receive it by tradition from his ancestors, or by descent from his
forefathers. The rich glutton being in hell is said to have made his petition
to Abraham being in heaven, that he should cause one to come from the dead to
admonish his brethren whom he had left alive behind him, least they also
should come into the same place of tor ments. Not that the damned spirits in
hell are so charitably affected, that they could wish others to be delivered
from those miseries which they themselves endure, whereas on the contrary side
they are so envious and malicious, that they envy at the happy estate of the
blessed, and would have all entangled with them in the same curse. But the
purpose of the parable is to show the vanity of such as are alive, who content
not themselves with the instruction of the word, but needs would be taught by a
messenger from the dead. Now what is Abraham's answer to this petition? They
have (says he) Moses and the Prophets, (that is, the word of Luk 16. 29.
God set down in their writings) let them bear them. For howsoever many
persuade themselves that they should verily believe and amend their lives, if
one should arise from the dead and admonish and warn them of the great danger
they are subject unto in respect of their sins: yet it is a contrary resolution
from the spirit of God by the mouth of Abraham: If they will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they believe though one rose again from the dead.

For if they will not be taught and reformed by such means as God in his
divine wisdom has thought to be best for their instruction and reformation,
then surely al such means must needs be of less force and efficacy, which
blind and foolish man has of himself imagined and conceaved. And therefore
when the vain people in the time of the Prophet Esaias would needs be certified
Esa. 8. 19.
of the Lords will by sorcerers and coniurers, and by informatio^s from the
dead: What (says the Lord) from the living to the dead? Do ye appeal from
the censure of the eternal and everliving Lord unto the sentence of such as
are dead? To the law and to the testimony: for if they which pretend to
certify you of the will of the Lord speak not out of this word, it is
because they have no light in them. And verily if we mean to consult with God
and to have an answer from him concerning his will, we must seek for the
same from the divine Oracles of his sacred word: and if we be desirous Romans 3.
2. Psalm. 119.
to be partakers of the Lords counselles, our counselors must be the Lords
own books. For they are the Lords testimonies and after a sort his sworn
witnesses to testify unto us all the truth and nothing but the truth in all
matters that concern the glory of God and the salvation of our own souls.
They contain the full and whole will and testament of our heavenly father, and
the disposition of all such blessings as he bestows upon his dear loving
children, and the prescription of all such duties as he requires at their
hands. And yet there have bin and still are many who had rather seek for the
manifestation of the will of God in the traditions of their ancestors, and in
the examples of their forefathers, then in the very will and testament of God
himself. Our Fathers Ioh. 4. 10.
(says the woman of Samari^) worshipped in this mount: but ye say tha^
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. The Samaritane^ had
forsaked the most certain and infallible rule of the written word, and
pretended the example of their progenitors, and an old tradition from their
forefathers: Our Fathers worshippe^ in this mount. But what replieth our
blessed Savior unto this so plausible and glorious an allegation? ye
worshippeyee wot not what: we Verse. 22.
know what we worship, and therefore salvation is from us. So the Idolatrous
Jews: The word (say they) that thou have spoken to us ^n Ier. 44. 16.
the name of the Lord, we will not hear it of thee, but will do whatsoever
goes out of our own mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and
to power out our drinke-offrings to her as we have done both we and our
fathers, our kings and our princes in the cities of Judah and in the streets
of Jerusalem: for then bad we plenty of victuals, and were well, and felt
none evil.

So mightily does crooked custom, and the example of carnal progenitors, and
other carnal respects prevail with carnal and sensual men: but the spiritual
man is taught by the spirit of truth to follow no such deceaveable guids. We
followed not (says S. Peter) deceaueable fables, when we opened unto you the
power and coming of our 2. Pet. 1. 16.
Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we saw his glory: for be received of God
the father honor and glory, when there came such a voice unto him from the
excellent glory; This is my well beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. And
this voice we heard when it came from heaven being with him in the holy mount.
We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, unto the which ye do well that
ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. Whereby we learn
that the word of God delivered either by revelation from himself, or else set
down by the pens of the Apostles and Prophets is a most sure and
vndeceavable testimony of the Lords will* whereas that which is delivered by
tradition from hand to hand has oftentimes a mixture of decea veable fables
in steed of pure and sincere truth: as the Jewish Thalmud, and the popish
Legende can testify sufficiently. And therefore for the safer custody and
preservation of the truth, it Luke 1. 4.
pleased the spirit of GOD that the Gospel first preached by the mouth of the
Apostles and Evangelistes should afterward be registered by their own pens,
and set down under their own hands. We have not (says Irene) by any
other known those things that belong to our salvation, but by those by whom
Iren l. 3. c. 1
the Gospel came unto us: the which they at the first published by mouth, and
afterward by the will of God delivered unto us in the holy Scriptures that
is might be the foundation and pillar of our says,

The doctrine then delivered in the Scriptures is a most sure doctrine, and he
that builds his faith thereon, builds upon a most strong foundation: but
he that builds upon any thing else builds upon the slippery sand. If any
thing (says Chrysostom) be spoken without the Scripture, the knowledge of
the Chrys^in Psalm. 95.
bearer halteth, now staggering, now granting, now d^testing the speech
as vain, and now receiving the same as probable: but where the Scripture,
the testimony of GODS voice comes forth it confirms the talk of the
speaker and the mind of the hearer. And verily we may be fully assured that
to be sound and perfect which is delivered in the holy Scripture, the which
whosoever follovveth walks safely: and all other doctrines may be
suspected which the Law and the Prophets with the Gospel do not confirm.
For as for our own narrations and declarations they have no credit at all
without the divine books: and therefore if we will be accounted the teachers
of truth, we must not ^et abroach our own inventions or any manner of
doctrine received from man, but only ^ecite and rehearse out of the scriptures
the doctrine of Christ our only Doctor and teacher. For humane testimonies are
not sufficient and allowable in divine matters, of what force and validity
soever they be in humane affairs: to warrant divine matters they are not of
sufficient auctority, albeit they be the revere^d testimonies of Apostolical
men. For they were apostolical men on both sides in the first age of the
primitive church that contended so eagerly about the observation of Easter, and
pretended both apostolical tradition: and yet even so near the Apostles time,
on the one side at the least there was in all likelihood but a mere pretense.
Wherefore Ier. in 1. Hagg.
Jerome is bold to avouch that the sword of the spirit which is the word of
God does strike through those things which without the auctorities and
testimonies of the scripture men do find out, and feign, as if they had them
by apostolical tradition. Cyprian also thought it to be a sufficient exception
against any apostolical Cyp. ep. 74.
tradition, if it were not written in the books of the Prophets and Apostles,
For the Lord (says he) does testify that those things are to be done which
are registered in writing, as to Iosuah the son of Nu^. Let not the book of
the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou
may observe and do all things that are written therein. In all well ordered
countries and kingdoms there is a common beam or balance or sealed weights
and allowed measures for the preservation of justice and equity, which would
not undoubtedly be so well kept, if every one were permitted to follow what
measure he listed. This common balance among the Lords people Aug. cont.
Donatist. ^2. c. 6.
is the Lords own word: and therefore when any go about to measure their faith
or their works by their own good intentes and meanings or by the opinions and
judgments of men, it is as it were a taking to themselves of new balance, and
that is to be esteemed no better then flatt forgery: and these their measures
are to be broken, and themselves to be punished, for that they presume to
refuse the Lords weights and measures, and to get to themselves other of
their own devising. Wherefore if we desire to be rightly instructed what is the
holy and perfect will of God, and what are the things that belong to his
service, we must not now seek for any new revelation, nor for any information
to be given us by Angels or by any from the dead, we must not follow the
customs of the multitude, nor say a conspiracy to that whereto the people
says a conspiracy, neither must we be over ruled by the examples of our
forefathers, nor yet by the pretense of apostolic traditions, seeing all these
are but false balances and uncertain and deceaveable guides. The books of the
Prophets and Apostles are the only just balances, and the only sure and
infallible teachers that will not mislead us, nor carry us into errors.
Wherefore most wholesome is the counsel of the preacher: When thou go up
(says he) to the Eccl. 4. 17.
house of God take heed to thy foot, and be more ready to hear, then to
offer the sacrifice of fools: for they know not that they do evil. Our
natural light in divine matters is gross darkness, and our fleshly wisdom
1. Cor. 3. 19.
is mere folly: and therefore he that will come to the house of God, and there
offer up to God as part of his service any thing either drawn out of his own
foolish brains, or taken from others like to himself, he does offer to God
the sacrifice of fools: whereas he that is affraide to thrust upon God his own
or other men's follies, and therefore is ready to harke^ most diligently to the
word of the most wise God the full fountain and welspring of all true wisdom,
he is in the ready way to offer to God that service which is most grateful
and acceptable unto him as being most agreeable to his own will. And no doubt
but that hereof it was, that in the ancient church of the Jews every Saboth
day, when the Lords people went up to the Lords house to perform that service
which was acceptable unto him, the books of Moses were read and expounded,
Act. 15. 21.
as it may appear by the history of Nehemiah and by the common practice of
Christ and his Apostles. For this cause in the primitive church all books that
were not Canonical were in Council. Laod. Ca^. ^9.
some Christian churches forbidden to be read in their public asse^bl^es: and
in those churches where there was a tolleration of some books to be read that
were Apocripha, that was done, not as if any point of faith could sufficiently
be confirmed by their auctority, but for the edification of manners by the
ensamples of the servantes of GOD therein remembered, whose lives were framed
according unto the Law of GOD, and according unto the rules of the Canonical
Scriptures. For we ought not to follow the holiest of the Saints, but
with this restriction, as they follow CHRIST. Be followers (says Saint
Paul) of me as I am of CHRIST. So that if the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. 1.
himself in any thing, be it never so little, decline from GOD, and turn out
of the direct way of his commandments, we must turn from him; if he leave
God, we must leave him: only in what things he most uprightly walks with
God, in those things we are bound to walk with him step by step, and to
follow his holy and godly example. But the precepts of a sincere^ faith and of
an holy life delivered in the Ca^onicall scriptures do in all points lead us
directly to GOD, and in the least jot and title thereof they are unerring and
undeceivable teachers, and therefore they are to be embraced and followed
without any limitation or restriction at all. The law of the Lord (says
David) is perfect and converteth the soul, Psalm. 19 7.
and needs no supply to ^e made there unto: He that adds any thing to the
same sets but a rotten patch unto a new and whole garment.

Yea whereas such is our forget fulness and readiness to let slip out of our
hearts holy things, that still we have need to be 2. Pet. 1. 12.
remembered and to be put in mind of the same: and whereas such is our
sl^cknesse and lazinesle in walking on forvvard in the Lords ways, that
still we have need to have the spur in our sides, (the wholesome and
heavenly instructions of the Canonical scriptures being the means appointed
by God both to remember us at all times of our duty toward God, and also to
stir us up continually to the performaunce of the same) The faithful
teaching, hea^ing, and embracing of the word of God is the most principal yea
the only necessary duty of a faithful christian. Luke 10. 40.
therefore the dilligent teaching, hearing, and meditating thereof has been
judged to be the most principal, yea the only necessary duty of a faithful
Christian, and a most certain token of our unfeigned love toward God, and an
evident mark of a true servant of Christ. O Martha Martha (says our blessed
Savior) thou art trou^led about many things, but one thing is necessary:
Mary has chosen the best pars, which shall never be taken from her. Now
Martha was troubled about many things which were provided for the better
entertainmen^ of Christ himself and his disciples; but Mary was busied about
the caroful entertainment and laying up in her heart of the divine
instructions of Christ's heavenly doctrine: and therefore it is a far more
acceptable work to have care that our souls be fed with GODS holy word,
then with our bodily sustenaunce to refresh the bodies of GODS dearest Saints:
yea it is after a sort the only, or at the least the most necessary duty of
all other, from the which we ought in no case to be hinder^d, no not for the
performance of any other duty. When complainte was made to the Apostles for
some disorder that was committed about the providing Act. 6. 1.
for the poor, and as it seems it was required at their hands, that they
themselves setting aside the preaching of the vvo^de for a ^ime should more
thoroughly look into that matter, and redress the abuse, they aunsvvere
peremptorelie, that it was not meet that they should leave the word and
serve tables: and therefore they committing that busines^e of less importance
to men of meaner gifts, themselves possessing the highest rooms in the
Church, and being endued with the greatest gif^es, employed themselves in
continual pra^er and preaching, as being the greatest and chiefest duties.
And verily it is a more glorious work to build the spiritual temple of GOD
in the hearts of the faithful by the preaching of the word, then to ^recte
a sump^uous temple of timber and stones for the out ward exercise of the
service of God: it is a far more excellent work by the seed of the nevve
birth to be get many children to God and so to enlarge the kingdom of heaven,
then by ou^ wealth wisdom and provv^sse to enrich and enlarge any earthly
kingdom: it is a far more excellent work to feed the souls that are
ready to famish, with the bread of life, then to feed the bodies of such as
want, with our temporal sustenaunce: It is a far more excellent work to
bring those that sit in darckenesse and in the shaddowe of death to the vision
of GOD by the light of the vv^orde, then to deliver them out of bodyly bondage
and to enrich them with all earthly and temporal commodities. For our f^ll
vision of GOD is the cause of our perfect blessedn^s^e: so that when 1. Ioh. 3.
2.
we shall see him with open face, themshall we be perfectly blessed, and
the nearer in this life we come to behold him the nearer we come to this our
perfect bleslednes: now here in this life we behold him principally in the
glass o^ his word, espeo^ally in the mirrout of the glorious gospel of
CHRIST, and 1. Cor. 3. 18
therefore the more often and the more reverently we contemplate the same, and
the more serious is ou^ study and meditation therein, the nearer we come to our
perfect blessedness. Wherefore it was not without cause that our Sav^our himself
a little before his ascension unto heaven did so straightly charge Peter a
principal Ioh. 21. 15.
man among his Apostles, that if he did love him more then the rest he should
feed his sheep more then the rest, and by his continual holding ou^ of the
light of the word he should bring the Lords people to the vision of God as to
the ch^efest b^essing of God, and to the cause of all other blessing. And
hereof it is that on the Lords day which is especially dedicated to the
service of God, the Lord especially requires both of P^est and people that
they should principally be employed in the teaching, hearing, and meditating
of the holy word of God as being not only in it self a principal work, but
also the cause of al good works, and of the whole worship and service of God.
And therefore when this so principal and necessary a work began to be neglected
among us Englishmen, when the service of God according unto the order of
Gregory began to be established in our churches, and the people had their
senses satisfied more with sweet soundes and goodly shows, then their souls
fed with the heavenly food of the word, Venerable Bede, ablbeit he bare great
reverence to the Bed l. 4. c. 18. de gest. Anglor.
church of Rome, could not refrain himself, but that he must utter his great
dislike thereof in plain terms: Heretofore (says he) insteede of these
things, the principal service of God consisted in the preaching of the gospel
and in the hearing of the word of God.

Neither must we imagine that there was more need of the dilligent preaching and
hearing of the word of God in former ages, then is now, or shall be to the end
of the world: not only for that, whether we be baptized or unbaptized, and
descend either from faith full or faithless progenitors, we are all without
any difference equally Romans 3. 9.
by nature blind and ignorant of God, and therefore stand in need to have the
lamp of the word always burning in our hands, if we desire to be preserved
from continual stumbling and falling; but also for that the most part of all
that profess themselves Christians content themselnes with an out ward
profession of the faith, albeit they feel no inward conversion, and take
themselves to be hoale when they are sick even to death, and therefore have
need of the more spiritual physic, because this their estate is most
dangerous of all, and such persons of all other are most hardly to be
recovered. For why did Publicanes and harlots Mat. 11. 21. An infidel is
sooner converted then a cou^terfeit chri stian: and a notorious sinner the^ a
dissembling hypocrite. Pro. 26. 12. Mat 9. 12.
sooner enter into the kingdom of God then the Scribes and Pharisees? and why
would Sodom have repented before Capernaum? but for that all such as content
the^s^lues with an outward show of piety and godliness are furthest of indeed
from true piety and godliness. See thou a man (says Solomon) that is wise in
his own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of such an one. So see thou
one that is hoale in his own conceit? there is far more hope of his recovery
who albeit he were more dangerously sick, yet has not so strong an opinion
of his own health. For it is a good step to health to know a man's own sickness:
but he that cannot be persuaded that he is sick, will not be persuaded to take
physic, and therefore is past all hope of recovery: he that will not be
persuaded that he is out of the way, will never be persuaded to seek for a
guide, and therefore will never come into the right way. Wherefore never more
need then now, that the Lord should even force upon us as faithful guides
the doctrine of his holy Apostles and Prophets; and never more need then now
that our heavenly physician should even constrain us oftentimes to receive his
spiritual physic: and not only in respect of those that are Christians only
in show, who are otherwise past all hope of recovery, but also in respect of
those that are true Christians indeed, who yet notwithstanding are so
distempered and crasie, that without the continual administering of this
spiritual physic, they will by one ghostly sickness or other soon fall into
great danger: yea unless these men be still feeding on this food, they will
soon become so weak and feeble, that they will not be able to do the Lords
work: unless they be still moistened with these eaeles^al shewers they will
become fruitless and yield a small ha^vest: unless by this net they are still
drawn out of the sea of their sins, they will sink deeper and deeper, until
they be drowned: unless this light be still in their hands, they will stumble
and fall into the pit of destruction: unless this voice of the great shepherd
does still sound in their ears, they will nothing but wander and go astray:
vnles^e this spur be still in their sides, they will sone be at a stand, and
give over their journey: unless these bellows be still blowing, the fire of
their zeal will soon go out. As may appear by the examples of those renowned
servants of God Zorobabell and Iosuah and the residue of that holy remnant of
the people of God which returned out of the captivity of Babylon; who were
soon moved to give over the building of the temple of God, and to settle
themselves to their own commodities and pleasures, until by the word of the
Lord out of the mouth of the Prophet Haggey they were Hagg. 1. 3.
effectually stirred up unto the finishing of the LORDS work. Wherefore no
marvel that all the faithful servants of God knowing the great necessity of
having continual in their hands and hearts the most wholesome instructions and
admonitions of the word of God, do exhort one another zealously after this
manner saying: Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the Isa.
2. 5. Mich. 4. 1.
house of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his laws, and we will walk
in his paths. They will not walk in the ways of the Psalm. 1. 1.
ungodly, nor stand in the ways of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the
scornful, and why? their delight is in the law of the Lord. and in that law
they do exercise themselves day and night: and thereby they become like erees
planted by the water side, which bring forth their fruit in due season, whose
leaves never wither. And no marvel though they prove such fruitful trees,
seeing they are so plentifully watered with such wholesome dewes: whereas all
such as refuse to drink in continual those wholesome drops, being planted in
the dry wilderness of this barren world, become withered and dead trees good
for nothing, but to be hewn down and cast into the fire.

Seeing then the relligious reading, hearing, and meditating of the word of
GOD is not only in it self a very excellent good work and a principal part
of the service of God which is to be performed as every day so especially upon
the Lords day, but also the meaue to begette and bring forth every good work
and to further the whole service of God, and to lead the people to the
behoulding of God and to their perfect and absolute blessedness: what then may
we judge of the works of the Church of Rome, and of her manner of serving of
GOD, and of her leading of the people to the beholding of GOD and to their
perfect and absolute blessedness, seeing she keeps this word of GOD fast
shut up from the greatest part of them under the lock and key of a strange
tongue, and debarreth them from the continual reading thereof, yea from the
reading thereof altogether: and not only so, but also charge our Church to
lay a stumbling block before the people, and to minister occasion unto them of
falling into heresy, for that we not only allow but also exhort them to
have their continual and daily resort to the same, that so they might be
enabled to know the truth, and to discern it from falsehood and lies, not
receiving any doctrine upon the bare credit of their teachers, but trying it
by this touchstone before they receive it for current and good.

But if hereby we set open a door to error and heresy, the^ did The
doctrine of al teachers is to be tried before it be received. Ioh. 5. 39. Act.
17. 11.
Christ and his Apostles do the same before us, and many also Apostolical men.
For our Savior himself wills the people to search the Scriptures, and no
further to give credit to his own Doctrine, then they should find it
approved by those vvitnesses. And the Beraeans are commended for searching the
Scriptures, and for putting into those balances the very doctrine of the
Apostle Saint Paul, that so they might see whether it would hold weight. For
(as Austine teaches) all other balances are deceitful: and therefore in his
controversies with Aug. cont. Donat. l. 2. cap. 6.
the Donatistes, he appealeth to them, and will have his cause to be weighed
only therein. And is it not the commandment of CHRIST himself given to the
people, Beware of false Math. 7. 15.
Prephets which come to you in sheep clothing, and therefore cannot easily be
discerned, until their cloakes be taken from them, and a due view be taken of
them by their portraitures and resemblances most lively drawn out only by the
pensill of the Prophets and Apostles? Does not S. John also will the Christian
congregation not to believe ever ie spirit, but to try the spirits whether
they be of 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
God or no, seeing even then in his life time many false Prophets were gone out
into the world? For he is a fool that believes every Prove. 14. 15
thing: and the iointes of true wisdom are these two: first to be ^ober in
our own opinions, and secondly not to be to hasty in giving credit to others.
Prove all things (says the Apostle) 1. The. 5. 21
but approve that which is good, even that which is found to be so by
sufficient trial. Yea he was not only contented to have his own doctrine to
be tried, but also gives a strait charge that the same be diligently done:
I speak (says he) as to them that have understanding, judge ye what I say:
and his commandment is 1. Cor 10. 15
that all other teachers be subject also to the same law. Let the Prophets
speak two or three and let the other judge. Wherefore Origin 1. Cor. 14. 29
Orig. in Ios. hom. 2.
speaking unto the people says unto them: Do ye that which is written,
that is, that one speaking all the rest examine: So (says he) vvhiles. I
speak that which I think, do ye discern what is right, and what is
otherwise. And Saint Ambrose Ambr. cp. lib. 5. orat. in Auxen.
does exasperate his auditory against his adversary Auxentius, for that he
refused to have his cause heard and tried by the censure and judgment of the
people. Auxentius (says he speaking to the people) knovving you not to be
ignorant of the faith has shunned your judgment, and has chosen four or
five heathen men. Then in that he has chosen Infidels he is vvorthie to be
condemned of Christians: because he has rejected: she Apostles precepte,
where he says: Dare any of you having ought against another he judged under
the unjust, and not rather under the Saints? Ye see that which he has
offered, is against the Apostles auctority. But what speak I of the Apostle
when the LORD himself proclaims by the Prophet: Hear ye me O my people,
that know what belonges to judgment, in whose heart my Law is. GOD says,
Hear ye me O my people that know judgment: Auxentius says, ye know not
how to judge: ye see that he contemns GOD in you which refuses this
sentence of the heavenly oracle: for the people in whose hearts the law of
God is, does judge. Who then does you vvrong? He that refuses, or he that
refers himself to your audience. Wherefore to be able to discern the
spirits and to distinguish truth from falshoode, and verity from vanity, is
not a special gift proper to a few, but a general grace common to all the Lords
people. For as the natural man is able to discern wholesome food from
unwholesome unless his body be infected with sickness, and his taste
distempered with some corrupt humor: so the spiritual man is able to discern
the food of the soul, and to distingush falshoode from truth, unless his
mind be blinded with error, and his judgment corrupted with some preiudicate
opinion; According as our Savior himself has Ioh. 10. verse. 4.
set it down as a property belonging to all his sheep, that they do
know his voice from the voice of a stranger, and are able to discern the
shepherd from the wolf. And verily how otherwise could they shun the
wolf and follovv the shepherd? How could they fly falsehood that leads to
destruction, and embrace the truth to the salvation of their souls?

Yea but (says the composer of the Ward-vvord) if the The due trial of the
doctrine of our teachers by the touchstone of the scriptures is not the cause
of falling into heresy but of sinding ou^ the truth.
People may judge of the doctrine of their teachers, and if every one may make
choice according to his own private fancy, is not this the high and open way
to error and heresy? It is sufficiently declared before, that the people ought
to try and to discern by the Scriptures the doctrine of their pastors and
teachers, and to approve of that only which is agreeable to that foundation of
truth, but not of that which best fitteth their own private fancies, or the
fanciful opinions of any other. For we must not draw our pastors and teachers
before the consistory of our own hearts, to receive their censure and judgment
from our selves, but before the tribunal seat of the word of God. For as for
our selves we must not presume to pronounce any definitive sentence, but we
must give our esse^t and consent to that se^te^ce which we understand to be
pronounced by that judge. And if we be desirous rightly to understand what is
the sentence of that judge, we must renounce our own judgment which we have
drawn other from the blindness of our corrupt nature, or else from our evil and
badde education, and we must become fools, that is, condemn all our 1. Cor.
3. 18.
own thoughts of extreme folly, if we be desirous to be partakers of that
wisdom, which is to be learned out of the word of God the fountain and
welspring of all wisdom. We must most humbly and devoutly resort in our
prayers to the father of light, that he would cause us to behold our own
blindness and darknes^ and have our continual recourse to his holy word, which
is a lantern to our feet and a light to our paths, that so the eles of our
mind being lightened we may attain to a sound and vncorrupt judgment, and be
^le to dis^rne falshoode from truth. For if thou call for knowledge, and cry
for understanding, and if thou seek for her as for silver, Pro. 2. 3.
and search for her as for treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. A scorner indeed seeks Pro. 14. 6.
knowledge and finds it not; but wisdom is easy to him that will
understand. The word of God (says Origin) is shut up against Orig. in
Exodus hom. 9. Heb. 5. 11.
the negligent: but it is open to them that seek and knock. Many things
(says the Apostle) are hard to them that are dull of hearing, and are
inexpert in the word of righteousness, and have not their vvittes exercised
through long custom to discern betvveene good and evil. But if we have
our continual resort unto GOD by prayer, and be daily exercised in reading
and meditating on the word of GOD, and lay it as our sure groundwork and
foundation of all truth, we shall not long be neglected, neither shall our
labor be in vain in the Lord, but we shall be lightened with the knowledge of
all such things, as shall be necessary to our own salvation.

Marcus Aemilius Seaurus when he was accused to have received money to betray
the common wealth began in his own defense after this manner: It is, O ye
Romans, an hard course, whereas I have lived in one place, to give an
accounte of my life in another, yet I vvil be bold to make unto you this one
demand. VARIVS SVCRONENSIS says that, MARCUS AEMILIVS SCAVRVS being
corrupted with bribes has purposed to betray the people of Rome, MARCUS
AEMILIVS SCAVRVS denies himself to be guilty of any such crime: To which of
us will ye give credit? The plainetise and the defendant being only named;
the people straight-vvaies refused to take notice of any such, accusation. So
may the word of God contained in the Canonical Scriptures complain of great
vvtonge offered unto her by the Church of Rome and say: Oh ye Papists ye
have expelled me in your schools and assemblies out of the seat of judgment
as I was delivered unto you in my originalles, and out of the hands of the
people in their vulgar and known languages and tongues, and have accused me
to be dark and obscure, and full of ambiguities, and hard to be
understood: but I say, that I am a lantern to your feet, and a light
shining in a dark Psalm. 119.
place, and plain and easy to him that will understand: And now 2. p. 1.
Pro. 8.
which of us, I pray you, deserve to be credited the more? Surely he is
most worthy to be deceived, that will give more credit to the slanderous
accusation of the Antichristian Church of Rome then to the most evident and
plain testimonye of the word of God for the clearing and justifying of it
self.

Now then seeing that our doctrine is plain, that we must renounce our
selves and our own fancies, and condemn all our own imagination, of
blindness and folly, and continually resort by our prayer to God, and by our
study unto his word as unto the only unerring teacher of all truth,
allowing of no one point of faith, that is not most evidently set down in
the Canonical Scriptures, therefore we are most unjustly charged to teach the
people to make choice of their faith according unto their own private fancies,
and so to open a door unto heresies whereas in truth the Church of Rome
herself teaching the people in divine matters somevvhat to rely upon the
natural light of their own understandings, and upon the choice of their own
free will, as likewise upon the censures of Popes and canons Aug. l. 2. de
bapt. cap. 3. The doctrine of the word of God is catholic, albeit it be
embraced but by one alone, and the doctrine, of men are private albeit they be
received by never so many 1. Kin. 19 10. Ier. 15. 10. 1. Kin. 22. 8.
of Councels (which may deceive and be deceived, whereof the latter may correct
the former as experience taught Saint Augustine to judge) and upon traditions
and unwritten verities has given them occasion to make choice of such things,
as shall best fit their own fancies, and be most agreeable to the humors
of men, and so has set them in the ready way to embrace error instead of
truth, and to fall from verity into damnable heresy. That doctrine we may be
sure is sound and catholic which has his foundation in the Canonical
scriptures: the which has his authority from the first author, and not from
the professors there of the which is not to be condemned for private and
singular, albeit it be embraced but by one man. For as Panormitan could
avouch, one singular man alleging Scripture is to be preferred before a
general Council: as it was put in practice in the Council of Nice, where
the sentence of Paph^utius was preferred before the general opinion of the
whole assembly. Elias, Ieremias, and other of the prophets, that were raised
up by God in their several times to reform the worship of God that was
generally corrupted, had few and sometimes none at all, to assist them in the
execution of their charge, but were after a fort left alone to contend and
strive with the whole earth: and yet their prophesies and interpretations of
Scriptures were not condemned by any of the faithful for private and singular,
for that (as S. Peter testifies) they proceeded not from the 2. Pet. 1. 20.
will of man, but from the motion of the spirit of God. So in the primitive
church albeit Liberius bishop of Rome stood after a fort alone against the
Arrians in the defense of the most Catholic doctrine of the divine nature of
the coessential and consubstantial son of God, and interpreted the scriptures
for the confirmation of that faith, yet his alonenes made not his
interpretations private, but that they were most catholic and sound. For
whatsoever proceeds from men, be they few or many, that is to be taken for
private and vnfounde, and certainly in the end it shall come to naught:
whereas not one lote or tittle of the law shall Act. 5. 38. Mat. 5. 18.
perish, til al things be fulfilled.

Under the time of the law, for that in the books of Moses all points of faith
were not set down with such perspicuity and plainnes, that they could be so
fully and easily understood then, as they may now under the gospel, therefore
the Lord raised up unto the^ many unerring interpreters for the supplying of
that defect. Yet he did not give any such ordinary and perpetual privilege
to the successors of Aaron, that they should be always maintainers of truth
(albeit they made claim to such a prerogative, as it may appear by their own
vaunts, The law shall not perish from the priest, Ier. 18. 18.
nor counsel from the ancient:) but he raised up Prophets extraordinarily,
when and where he thought good, who were privileged in deed from falling into
heresy, and from the misinterpreting of the law of God, and by them he
reformed al such abuses as were crept into his own worship and service. But
now al revelations are ceased, and the raising up of unerring interpreters is
come to an end, for that in the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists al
points of faith necessary to salvation are set down with all perspiculty and
plainenes, and for that also there is very great abundance of the spirit given
to all the faithful servants of Christ, which reverently and religiously employ
themselves in the zealous study of those holy books. The Apostle Saint John
writing to the 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
church concerning deceivers, tells the faithful, that the means whereby they
must be armed against them, is to hold fast that doctrine which they had heard
from the beginning, the which being thoroughly settled in their hearts by the
effectuell working of the spirit of God, wherewithal they were before anointed
and made christians, they needed not that any man should teach the^. Not that
the continual ministry of pastors and Doctors is not still needful for the
people of God: but the meaning is, that the doctrine first taught by the mouth
of the Apostles, and afterward set down in their Canonical writings is so
plain, evident, and full to the servants of Christ which are endued with his
spirit, that they need not now, at under the law, any unerring teacher ordinary
or extraordinary for the further opening of any necessary point of faith, which
otherwise might be secret and lie hid. And so also the Apostle to the Hebrews
teaches out of the book of the Prophet Jeremy. This is the testament that I
will make with the Heb. 8. 10.
house of Israel after these days, says the Lord: I will put my laws in
their minds, and in their hearts will I write them, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people: and they shall no more teach one another saying,
know the Lord: for they shall all know me from the greatest unto the least. Not
(as I said before) that the ministry of teaching by ordinary pastors should
cease amongst us, which is still most behouefull both to renew the memory of
those things which we know, seeing we are still ready to forget, and to teach
better those things which we know but in part, and also those things which as
yet we know not at al, (for the most skilful may proceed from knowledge to
knowledge): but that there shall be now no need of any unerring interpreter to
open any necessary point of faith which otherwise would be altogether unknown.
For all necessary things are set down so plainly in the books of the Apostles
and Evangelists by him that was best able to write even to the capacity of the
most simple, who caused also those books to be penned not to obscure but to
lighten the truth, that the lamb may wade in them without danger of drowning,
and drink most plentifully of those waters of life: yea the wary of Gods
service is now so plain, that the very fools cannot err therein. The points
of faith contained in these books need neither to beg credit, All things
necessary to salvation are set down so plainly in the books of the new
testament, that all the faithful may understand the same without the help of
an unerring Interpreter, yea without the help of any Interpreter at all.
nor to take light from the writings and expositio^s of men, but have their
credit in themselves, and take their light from themselves, and give light and
credit both to the persons, and also to the books of al other who^soever, that
have any credit or light in them. And the maine grounds of faith contained in
them stand upon their own ground, and have in themselves most manifest
perspicuity, that the mind passing through many forms of opinions being once
lightened therewith, may resolve and settle his full assent and consent upon the^
without the help of any unerring Interpreter, yea without the help of any
Interpreter at all. For what contain the books of the new testament, but the
uncovering of that which was covered in the old? Now if those things be
uncovered already, what need have they of a further uncovering? Unless we
think that the Apostles themselves, which had the greatest measure of the
spirit, and the largest portion of knowledge in the mysteries of God, had
either not so good skill or will to set down plainly in their Canonical
writings all points of faith, as their scholars and successors had in their
writings which are not Canonical. The truth is that all things necessary
unto salvation are now most plainly delivered in the books of the new
testament: and the best Interpreters do not by their expositions bring any new
light at all unto them, but point as it were with the finger to that light
which is in them, that we may turn our eyes upon it, and together with them
behold the same: they bring no grounds and principles of their own, that
thereby they may lighten the doctrine of the scripture: but they hold out the
grounds and principles of the scripture it self, that thereby they may lighten
all that is obscure. For albeit in the divine scriptures there are many places
dark, and obscure, and hard to be understood, and such wherein the best
Interpreters themselves may err and be deceaved, yet (as S. Austine Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 2. cap. 9.
says) all things that belong to faith and good manners, that is to say, to
hope and love are openly delivered and set down in the same: and out of
these plain and open places all necessary doctrines are to be taken, and not
out of the doubtful and obscure. And therefore when the heretic Petilian did
allege mystical and obscure places for the confirmation of his errors, the
same father takes exception against him after this manner saying: these places
Aug. cont. Petil. cap. 16.
are mystical, obscure, and figurative: but we require a manifest place that
needs no Interpreter at all. And such places were alleged by the Catholic
Bishops for the opening and confirming of all controversies and doubts.
Attend (says Iustine Just. Martyr in dialogo cu^^rypho. Chrysostom. in ep. ad Ro^.
hom 19. 2. Pet 3. 16.
Martyr) to these things which I shall rehearse out of the scriptures, which
need not at all to be expounded, but only to be heard. So Chrysostom: Do
these (says he) need any exposition? are they not clear and manifest even to
those that are very dull? And albeit in Saint Paul there are some things hard
to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable pervert as they do also
the other scriptures to their destruction, yet Saint Ambrose is bold Ambr in ep
7. in principio epistolae
to avouch of him that in most things he does so expound himself, that he
which does deliver and teach his doctrine can find nothing that he may add,
or if he will needs say something, he must rather perform the duty of a
grammarian then of a discourser or disputer.

And verily albeit the unbelievers and such as are ignorant of the divine and
heavenly doctrine of the Canonical Scriptures Stap doct. princ. lib. 8. cap.
22. veritas docendo suadet. Tertul. co^t. Vale^t. Aug cont. ep. Funda. cap 14.
The says of the five members of the church of Christ is not settled upon the
auctority of the church, or the judgment of the Interpreter but upon the light
of the divine doctrine it self.
are at the first moved sometimes to embrace the faith of CHRIST by the
auctority of the Church, and by the dignity and worthiness of the Bishops and
teachers: yet when they are once persuaded and settled therein, being lightened
by the spirit of illumination, and by the light of the doctrine it self, then
(as Stapleton himself also has taught) they do not any longer believe for
the voice of the church, but for the divine light it self: they do not any
longer build their faith upon the voice of the Interpreter but upon the light
it self of the divine doctrine, which is now sufficiently manifest unto them,
being duly weighed and considered without the auctority of the Interpreter.
When we believe (says Austine) being now made more strong in the faith, we
understand that which we believe, not now men, but God himself inwardly
strengthening and lightning our mind. And thus do we teach the people of God,
which are already settled in the faith of Christ, not to ground their faith upon
their own private fancies, nor upon the private opinions of any other man, or
men, be they few or many, nor yet upon any humane interpretations of scripture,
but upon the plain sentence of GOD himself deciding and determining what is
falsehood, and what is truth, that is, upon the interpretations of holy
scriptures which are delivered in the scriptures themselves, eve^ upon those
plain and manifest places thereof, which are in themselves so evide^t and
clear, that they stand in need of no interpreter at al: not yet to frame
their lives according unto the decrees of the church, and the special rules of
such as are fou^ders of any private devotio^s, but according unto the general
laws and co^ma^deme^ts of God himself. For the^ will both our faith and life be
acceptable to God, when this is thoroughly fixed and settled in our hearts, and we
can truly and sincerely say: Thus do I believe, and thus do I live, because the
Lord himself, whose serva^t I am, has comanded me thus to believe and thus
to live. For this is not a sufficient warrant and security for us to say: My
conscience judges this or that to be good, and therefore it is good, or my
conscience judges this or that to be evil, and therefore it is evil and to be
avoided: for then should al superstitious and Idolatrous kinds of serving of
God be good, and Christian religion evil, because the consciences of all
Infidels allow of the one and condemn the other, before the eyes of their
minds be lightened and their consciences reformed by the holy and heave^ly rules
of our Christian profession. And verily not our selves and our own consciences
but God only is our Lord and judge, who has authority to enact laws, and to
set the^ out unto us as limits and bounds, the which if we in any wise
tra^sgresse, we do commit iniquity and sin. And therefore, albeit the Apostle
teaches, that he that Romans 14. 23.
eats of things lawful sins, if in conscience he doubt whether he may do
so or no, yet herein he sins not, for that he tra^sgresseth any law of his
own conscience, seeing she has no^e authority to make any, but for that either
doubting in conscience whether God does allow of his fact or no, or else being
parswaded that he does disallow, it, yet he will needs do the same being carried
away with his own headstro^g affections, or by the perswasio^s of oath me^. For
herein he does tredde under foot the authority of God, and set GOD himself
after a sort at naught, in that he resolves to do this or that, albeit he
doubts whether God does allow it, yea albeit he is persuaded that God does
disallow and condemn the same. Our conscience then must not be our canon and
rule in matters belonging to the service of God, but God himself in his
Canonical scriptures. For they are the only sure and infallible witnesses of
the will of God, and our consciences cannot rightly be assured of any thing,
that is not delivered in those books. And therefore seeing that in what thing
soever we do, belonging to the worship and service of God, we must be
assuredly persuaded that it pleases God (for whatsoever is done without Romans
14. 23
this faith and certain persuasio^ is sin) we must not be led therein
either by the uncertain guesses of our own consciences, or by the doubtful
conjectures of other men, but only by the warrant of the Canonical scriptures.
But the church of Rome will have the deciding of all doubts and controversies
to be devolved from Alabaster.
the scripture to the interpreter, that is, from the text to the gloss, from
God to man, from the master to the servant, from the judge to the minister (as
if the judge himself could not set down his own definitive sentence, no
not in writing, as plainly, fully, and sufficiently, as it can be delivered by
the mouth of his messe^ger;) and she commands the people to set their
faith upon the decisions of the Pope, and upon the determinations of his
counselors, upon the books Apochryphs, and upon traditions and unwritten
verities: and to order their lives not according unto the prescription of the
law of God alone, but also according unto her own ordinances and the rules of
the founders of her relligious orders. Wherefore she, which most unjustly
accuses us to misleade the people into error and heresy, may in truth be
most justly charged therewith, seeing the cause of heresy is not the diligent
and humble resort to the word of God the very fountain and welspring of all
heavenly truth, that by this touchstone we may try and discern sound and
current doctrine from unsound and counterfeite: but either the utter rejecting
and forsaking of this holy word, or the mingling of our own fancies and
dreams therewith or the dotages and inventions of other men.

For by this means has truth and faith bin banished, and heresy and Idolatry
brought in even from the beginning of the world unto this day. For how ^ell
Adam and Eve into their Apostasy but by forsaking the commandment of God
delivered unto them by the Lords own mouth? And what was the cause that all the
posterity of Adam, excepting only the family of Abraham, fell by little and
little into al error and heresy, until they came into most gross and
damnable Idolatry, but (as the Apostle testifies) for Act. 14. 18.
that God suffered them all to walk in their own ways? For he had given his
word only to Jacob, and his statutes and ordinances to Psalm. 147. 19
Israel: he had not de^lt so with any other nation, neither had the heathen
knowledge of his laws. And amongst this people of Israel what was the cause
that the ten tribes at once fell away from God? They fell away from the
house of David because of the sins of Solomon and by the folly of Rehoboham
his son: but they fell from God when they vvo^shipped the calves that were
set up by Ieroboham, who made Israel to sin, contrary to the law and
commandment of God: they forsook the vvorshippe of God in Jerusalem ordained
and established by the Lords own word, and set up in Dan and Bethell a
new kind of worship of God according unto their own inventions, and so they
fell away from the living GOD. And when those ten tribes for their
Idolatries and sins were carried out of their own country into captivity by
the king of Ashur, and the Samaritanes were placed in their rooms, the cause
also of their Idolatries was their following of the corrupt customs of their
own countries, and their refusal of the ordinances and 2. Kin. 17. 34
laws of God. And what was the cause that the Jews themselves also, which had
the law and the prophets to direct them in all the ways of God, did so often
fall away from the service of God, and defile themselves with abominable
Idolatries, but that they either utterly forsook the direction of the word of
God, and follovved their own inventions, or the corrupt customs of their
forefathers; or else they mingled their own dreams and the traditions of
their elders together with the worship of God delivered in his word, which
ought to have bin kept pure and sincere without any mixture, and without any
such hotch-potch and mingle ma^gle. The cause of the Idolatries that so much
abou^ded in the time of the Judges was, for that there was no king in Israel
(who was to command Iud. 17. 1.
the careful keeping of the law of God) but every man did that which was good
in his own eyes. And what was the cause of those outrageous dolatries in the
days of the kings, especially in the days of Manasses and Amon his son, but
this that the law of 2. Chro 34. 14.
God was so neglected, that the very authe^tical copy thereof given by the hand
of Moses himself was lost? And if we will know also what was the cause of
those damnable Idolatries that so prevailed in the days of the prophets, we
may hear the same out of their mouths, who were the principal actors or at
the least the chief abetters thereof: The word (say they to the prophet Jeremy)
which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord we will not hear Ier
44. 16.
it of thee, but we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth, as to ^rae
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to power out our drink offerings unto
her, as we have done both we and our Fathers, our kings and our Princes in the
city of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of
victuals, and were well, and felt none evil. Their wilful rejecting of the
word of God, and their obstinate resolution to follow their own customs
and the practice of their forefathers, was the cause of all their abominable
Idolatries.

Neither was the utter rejecting of the word of GOD the cause of so many
corruptions in the Jewish religion, but al^o the mingling therewith of their
own Inventions and of the traditions of their forefathers. For in the Lords
field there ought nothing to be sown but the most pure seed of the word
of God: whatsoever is beside the same it is not good corn, but cockle and
darnell: and they of the Lords family are only to be fed with the wholesome
food of that word which is provided for their sustenaunce by their heavenly
master, whatsoever meat they take beside it is corrupt leaven, yea deadly
poison. And therefore both GOD himself did most sharply reprove the
hypocritical Jews in the time of the Prophet Isay, and our Savior CHRIST
the Scribes and Pha^isies in his days, not foc that they did utterly reject
the service of GOD prescribed in his own word, (for it is clear and manifest
that they did not so) but for that they did corrupt the same with the mingling
of their own leaven: and they condemn that worship for Isa. 20. 14. Mat. 1^.
9.
vain, which is prescribed either wholly or in part by the precepts and
doctrines of men. And verily as in the bodies of men either want of good and
wholesome food, or the receiving of corrupt and bad either wholly or but in
part, is the cause of many bodily dis^ases: even so either the want of the
wholesome food of the word of God, or the receiving of the corrupt food of
humane doctrins either wholly or in part, does breed many sins and corruptions
in our souls, and make them sick even to death. Yea this has bred al manner
of errors, heresies, and Idolatries in all ages, and at all times. This was
the cause of error under the law and that among the Lords own people. They
erred in their hearts (says the Lord Psa. 95. 10.
himself) because they have not known my ways. And why erred the Sadducies
at the time of our Saviors appearing in the flesh so grossly and that in the
chiefest grounds and principles of the faith? Mark. 12. 23 Aug. in psa. 131.
Cyp. de simpl. praelatorum. Chrysostom. hom 3. de Laza,
Ye err (says our Savior unto them) not knowing the scriptures nor the
power of God. This is the cause of all evil (says Austine) that the
scriptures are not known. Hence (says Cyprian) proceed errors, for that
menreturne not to the head, nor seek to the spring of truth, nor keep the
doctrine of our heavenly Master. The reading of the scriptures (says
Chrysostom) is a strong fortress against sin, and the ignorance of them is
a great downefull, and a deep hell: to know nothing of ^he divine laws is a
great loss of salvation: this thing has bred heresies and brought in a
corrupt life, and has turned al topsie turvy. For how can it otherwise be, but
that health must needs decay and sickness grow, where either wholesome food
is not received at all, or else is not received alone without the mixture of
that which is corrupt? And how can it otherwise be but that weeds must needs
spring up, where either good seed is not sown at al, or else not without the
mixture of cockle and darnell? And how can it otherwise be but that such must
needs be misledde, which either will not at all follow those are unerring
guides, or else will not be guided by them alone, but by such also as may be
deceived?

Wherefore in that the church of Rome does not only keep the greatest part of
the people from the liberty of reading the holy scriptures, but also does
mingle with the pure food thereof the corrupt leaven of humane doctrines, it
cannot otherwise be, but that spiritual sicknesses must grow in her apace, and
ghostly health and strength greatly decay? And seeing that she sows in the
hearts of the people not the sincere seed of the word of God alone, but also
the darnell of men's inventions, it cannot be but that weeds must ne^des mount
up and overgrowe the good corn. And seeing she will have her followers led
by books Apocripha, unwritten verities, ordinances of the Church, decrees of
Popes, canons of Councels, rules of Friars, customs of the multitude,
traditions of forefathers, and the like, and not by the books alone of the
Canonical scriptures, who are the only sure and undeceivable guides: it is no
marvel that she has been so misledde out of the way of truth, and has
wandered in the by-pathes of heresies and Idolatries: even as the Idolatrous
Jews and Gentiles have bin before her, for that they followed the same guides.
Yea what cause of heresy observed and noted by her own children has she not
embraced, that so she might defile her self with all manner of spiritual
abominations? If to make choice of religion according unto the dark light of
our own natural reason, and the servile liberty of our own free will, be to
follow such guides as must needs lead into error: she has taught her
children to do the same; If to think basely of the common duties generally
belonging to all christians, and to make choice of singular and private
devotions be the cause of heresy, she has persuaded her children thereto; If
the overmuch admiring of men, and the addicting of our selves to our particular
masters be not only the beginning of schism, but the cause of heresy: she
has made her sectaries and followers not only schismatikes but also heretics.
For where may we find more admiring and magnifying of men, of their supreme
power and authority, of their great privileges and prerogatives, of the
holiness of their rules and orders, canons and constitutions, and of the
worthiness, perfection, and merit of their works, then is to be found in the
Church of Rome? Lastly if he be an heretic which is an other-wise teacher, or
an after reacher, and he a superstitious person, that does any Rhom. in 1. cp.
ad Tim. c. 1.
thing supra statutu^ more then is commanded, how can the church of Rome be
free from the note of superstition and heresy, seeing she performs her
devotions otherwise then they were ordained to be done by the Apostles of
Christ, and most rigorously exacteth many duties which were not commanded by
them at all, and has coined many after-doctrines which were not heard of in
their times. For was not the word and the sacraments otherwise delivered unto
the people by the Apostles of Christ, then now Otherwise devotions.
they are by the church of Rome? Was the word either publicly read by them
unto the people in a strange tongue, or kept from their own private reading in
a unknown language, and they sent to learn their devotions from senceles,
dombe and dead images? did they not pen it in a most vulgar tongue and after
a most plain and familiar manner, and that for the^ learning and instruction
of Luke 1. 4. Romans 15. 4.
the people? Neither was the Sacrament of the Lords supper ordained by them to
be ministered to the people in one kind, nor baptism with such a number of
ceremonies, as it is by the church of Rome disguised and cast after a sort into
a new form: much less was the observation of any outward ceremony and rite
more rigorously exacted by them then the precise keeping of Christ's
institution, or urged under the pain of a more grievous curse. Did the
Apostles ordain the solemn observing of so many festival days After.
doctrines and works supra statutu^
and eves, or the building of churches in the honor of the saints, or the
running on pilgrimage to offer before their images, or the set times of
fasting and abstinence, or secret confession of all sins in the Priests ear,
or the vow of single life, and voluntary poverty? Francis Dominike and Layola
were not borne in their times, not the holy rules made of any of their
relligious orders: but all vvillworships were condemned by the^, which
afterward were not only Coll. 2. 23.
allowed, but also preferred before the works required in the law of God.
Lastly the supreme auctority and jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome was not
ordained by the Apostles, neither was he appointed by them to be a universal
Bishop and to have dominion over the whole church, and to be the unerring
and infallible judge, unto whom appeal should be made in all controversies:
much less was he placed by them above all kings and Emperors, to depose them
and to set them up at his own pleasure; neither was any such auctority
practiced by S. Peter himself, or by his successors long after him, which yet
had most skill and best courage to maintain all doctrine belonging to their
most Christian profession: neither did they approve the books Apocriphs for
Canonical scripture, nor their lawful successors long after them alleged the
auctority of those books to confirm any doctrine or point of faith: much
less preferred they any translation before the authentical text of the
scripture, as it is now done by the church of Rome, and justified openly by her
auctority in her last general council of Trent, Whereby she has made it
manifest to the whole world, that she is not in some points only, but wholly
and altogether fallen away from the word of GOD, seeing she refuses to
receive it for the foundation of her faith, as it was penned in the originalles
by the special direction of GODS unerring spirit, and admits it only as it
is expounded by her translator, which was not therein directed by any
revelation, nor had any priveledge of not falling into error. And verily if it
be a good reason against us (as it has been set forth not long since by
one of her Pamphleters) that the unlearned among us have no faith at all but a
mere fancy because they do build it upon our bare translations, being not
able to examine the truth of them by the originalles: then much more may we
avouch, that neither the unlearned, nor yet the learned themselves among them
have any faith at all, seeing they all must, will they will they, settle
their faith upon the words and meaning of their transslator, albeit he
differ never so much from the original. Wherefore to conclude, seeing the
Church of Rome has embraced all manner of means of falling away from GOD
and his truth, we may be boulde to affirm that she has revolted and
played the Apostata, and so is become not only heretical but also
apostaticall, yea that she has brought in that great apostasy, that was
foretold by the Apostle.

Thus have thou gentle Reader delivered unto thee the maine foundation of all
good works, and the four principal motives so often urged in the divine
scripture to stir up the faithful to the right and approved manner that is
to be kept in the due performing of all holy actions. And herein thou have on
the one side set down the true fountain of sincere devotion, and of all
the parts thereof, wherein consists the true worship and service of God and his
spiritual and heavenly kingdom: and on the other side not only the causes of
error and heresy, but also of superstition and of all manner of Idolatry. Now
it remains that thou carefully put in practice these holy precepts and
sanctified rules, when thou art moved to the performance of any good work, and
that thou stir up the gift of God in thee by these or the like holy
meditations, thus reasoning with thy self and saying: This good work God
himself in his holy word commands me to perform, unto whose will I owe all
obedience, for that it is holy, pure, and perfect, and grateful and acceptable
to himself, and also for that it is his will unto who^ I am ten thousand times
bound to yield al dutiful submissio^ and obedience both in respect of his
sovereign auctority, that he only has to rule over my conscience and soul,
and also in regard of his infinite blessings, which he of his own unspeakable
goodness in Christ has most freely and fully bestowed upon me. And verily our
obedience performed to the will of God in these respects is a sweet incense
and a most acceptable sacrifice to God, wherewith we after a sort gratify God
and grieve the Devil, and are as an heaven to all holy Angels, and a very hell
unto al unclean spirits. So like wise when we are tempted to any wicked work,
we must thus reason with ourselves and say: this work ought in no wise to be
done by me, no not the least desire to accomplish the same ought once to have
any entrance into my heart, because it is contrary to the holy, pure, and
perfect will of God, and agreeable unto the impure will of the Devil: because
it is most offensive and grievous to God, and most grateful and acceptable
unto the Devil: because it is a great dishonor to him, to who^ all honor is
double due, both in respect of his sovereign auctority over me, and also in
regard of his manifold mercies collated upon me: and it is a great honor unto
that most cruel and infamous tyrant the Devil, who presses upon me thereby
to take me captive, to the utter destruction both of my body and soul. We are
debtors (as says the Apostle) yea very great debtors, and as great as great
may be, but not to the flesh, nor to our selves, nor Romans 8. 12.
to the devil (unless it be that we owe to these al manner of evils and miseries
whatsoever) but we are debtters to God, and that for the love of a thousand
talents, and for the gift of ten thousand more: and yet if we have but a
sincere desire to discharge this our debt, our most gracious creditour will not
only straitwaies forgive it all, but also will give unto us ten thousand times
more. Yea the sincere desire of being obedient to the will of God upon the
former respects, and the true care according as God has enabled us in some
measure to discharge this our debt is a very great mercy and a very gracious
favor, whereby we are more and more endebtted unto him. And verily this is all the discharge of our debt that he requires at our hands, that we willingly
and gladly acknowledge him of who^ we have received all, and that we so highly
esteem of his gifts, and presume of his good will, that we are still desirous
to been debtted unto him more and more, and by all relligious hearing, reading,
and meditating upon his holy and sacred word, and by all servent and devout
prayer be continually begging and craving for more, and after a sort extorting
it out of his hands. For his desire is not to be benifited by us, but that we
should still more and more be benefited by him: and he would have us to
acknowledge his love, and to grovve into a steadfast assurance thereof, that
thereby we might be more effectually stirred up to rejoice in his goodness, and
to be thankful unto him for his manifold mercies: especially he would have us
most midfully to record that unmatchable blessing of our redemption wrought by
Christ, and his inestimable love made manifest therein, that thereby our hearts
might be renewed and our affections sanctified, dying to our selves, and living
to God, and employing our selves to every good work. And hereof it is that the
spirit of God especially in the books of the new testament does so often make
mention of Christ, and of our redemption wrought by him, and of his great love
manifested therein, as being the matter and subject of those books: a ^a^st
whereof I will give unto thee in some sentences of one of those books penned
by Saint John, as they be pointed unto by that learned preacher of the word
Mr. Robert Rolloc in his commentaries upon the same book.

No man has soon God at any time: the only begotten son of God who is in
the bosom of the father, he has revealed him. Ioh, 1. 18. The Philosophers
in all ages have most painfully searched after truth in their Physikes,
Ethikes, Mathematikes, and the rest. But the knowledge of the Father in the
Son does only deserve the name of truth. For to what purpose is it to
comprehend in mind heaven and earth and all other things, if a sinner does
not know God in Christ the redeemer? That is, unless he feel God favorable
unto him, and forgiving him all his sins in Christ, which only does pacify
the troubled conscience, he can have little true comfort in all his
knowledge of all other things, be it never so great, and small courage to come
unto God, and to rest in him, and so to take hold of everlasting blessedness.
Therefore our Savior himself, after that he had said, no man knows the
father but the son, and he to whom the son has revealed him, Math. 11.
28. immediately adds: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will refresh you. Whereby he signifies, that God being revealed in
Christ, there does follow peace of conscience and unspeakable joy in all
those that do cast their sins upon him.

The next day John stood, and two of his disciples, and beholding Jesus
vvalking he said: behold that lamb of GOD. John 1. Chap. verse 36. As John
oftentimes gave witness to Christ, so it is no less necessary at this time
that the sacrifice and death of Christ be repeated and reiterated again and
again. For as the Jews were ignorant that Christ the lamb of God should
be offered up in sacrifice, so we after a sort have forgotten that he
has been sacrificed, and has already suffered for our sins. For what
mean these sins which so every where abound, adulteries, murders, rapines,
sacriledges, even so many sins of all sorts, what, say I, do they mean
but that we have forgotten that our Savior Christ has suffered for vs^ For
ifit did come into our minds that we were once boughte with so great a
price, vvoulde we so sell our selves, and become captives to so many sins?
If we did remember that we were washed with the most precious bloodof
CHRIST, vvoulde we again so defile our selves with the filthy mire of this
unclean world? After that Saint Peter had commended unto the faithful
certain necessary virtues, 2. Peter 1. 9. He that has not these (says he)
is blood and sees nothing a far of, but has forgotten that he was purged
from his old sins. For let all be sure of this, that who edomes, murders,
and the like, to them that make profession of the faith of Christ are not
therefore sins only, for that they are contrary to the law of God, but
especially for that they are after a sort committed in a mocka^e of the blood
of Christ, and do proceed from the forgetfulness of his death. The which if
it be so, then we must hold this for a sure thing, that we ought not to be
grieved so much for that we have broken the commandment of God, as for that
we have forgotten that we were redeemed by the blood of Christ, and have
contemned the great price of our most glorious redemption. Wherefore that we
may be brought the sooner to repentance, and to acknowledge the greatness of
our sin we must all our whole life be busied about this, that we may
understand how great is that price of our redemption, and that we may so
worthyly esteem of the blood of the new testament as we ought to do.

It follows in the next verse. And the two disciples heard him so speaking,
and they follovved Jesus, Ioh. 1. 37. That testimony which John the Baptist
gave of Christ, that he was the lamb of God, before two of his disciples,
causes them to come to Christ and to follow him. Whereby we learn how
effectual is the preaching of Christ, yea how powerful is one word or two
concerning. Christ and his cross, to alter and change the very hearts of men.
Verily there is no other speech whereby a stony heart may be made flesh, and an
unfaithful man may be made faithful. Speak as much as thou list of the most
famous factes of all the Kings and Emperors that ever have been and of their
goodly virtues and great glory, these things may delight the minds of men, but
they will not renew them. But speak thou of the man crucified, a thing in
show base and foolish, this word of the cross, which is foolishnes to them
that perish, is the wisdom and power of God to the^ that are saved: Nay that
we may let pass these profane persons with their deeds, teach again and
again the very law of God, eve^ this law is weak by reason of the flesh. Romans
8. 3.
But that which the law cannot, the word of the cross can. Now what is the
cause of this great efficacy? The Lord which is the matter and subject of this
word is a spirit, which is able to set our hearts at liberty: in so much that if
they be once fixed upon him, the veil of corruption, which before did so
cleave unto us, will soon be taken away: and if we do duly look into that
glory of his, which does shine in the gospel as in a glass we shall be changed
into the same image from glory to glory as by the spirit of God.

Before Phillip called thee I saw thee, when thou wast under the fig tree
Ioh. 1. 48. The more any one does search into the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and the greater revelation he has of the same, the more is his faith
and love also increased, and the more unspeakable and glorious is his joy. 1.
p. 1. 8. Wherefore this ought to be our continual labor day and night, by
prayer and by reading and meditating upon the scriptures to seek after the
mystery of Christ, that so at the length there may be opened unto us the
treasures of all knowledge and understanding that are hid in him, and so al
other things may be unto us as trash in comparison of that inestimable
treasure. It is strange to see how the Apostle that looked most into that
excellent mystery, could never satisfy himself in setting forth and
amplifying the greatness thereof. God (says he) which is rich in mercy of his
great love wherewith he loved us. Ephesians. 2. 4. Has given unto us so worthy a
Savior, in whom are bid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coll. 2.
3. Have care therefore (says he) that ye may be able to comprehend what are
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. Ephesians. 1. 18. He saw
much, and believed much, and magnified much this great mystery.

Verily verily I say unto you, from hence forth ye shall see the heavens open,
and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man. Ioh. 1.
51. The opening of the mysteries of faith engenders faith, and the revealing
of Christ makes a Christian. Speak to men of heaven, and of everlasting life,
and of al manner of blessings both bodily and ghostly, and yet they cannot
believe until they see Christ, by whom and for whom are all these things. For
if we be thoroughly touched with the sense of sin, and of the wrath of God
most justly provoked to punish us for the same, we must first find him that
has satisfied the justice of God for our sins, before we can hope for
eternal life. Yea if I do not behold Christ and have him present before the
eyes of my mind, it is so far of that I should see heaven and heavenly glory,
that I shall feel nothing but terrors and fears, and extreme anguish and
bitterness of soul. But when Christ does once shine unto me, then is there sure
hope of eternal life. They then that desire to be partakers of all manner of
blessings, and to be assured of life everlasting, must seek Christ, and set him
before their eyes, and behold him true God and true man, who died for their
sins, and rose again for their justification: and thence will issue and
proceed a full trust and confidence of obtaining al such benefits and
blessings, which he has thereby purchased for them.

That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
spirit is spirit. Ioh. 3. 6. The only presence of Christ by faith is the
means whereby the spirit works our regeneration. Now Christ's presence is
imperfectly apprehended in this life by faith, but perfectly by sight in the
life to come. And hereof it is that our regeneration, which is but imperfect in
this life, shall be most perfect in the life to come. This we know (says S.
John) that when Christ does appear we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Yea that presence of Christ shall be so glorious and
so effectual in us, that it shall transform even our vile body, and make it
like to his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. For we must know that the presence of
Christ is not like the presence of earthly princes, the which if thou beholdest
a thousand times, thon shall be made thereby never a whit the more glorious:
but if thou once truly behold the glorious presence of Christ, thou shall
straitwaies be changed and transformed into the same.

As Moses left up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man
be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have life
everlasting. Ioh. 3. 14. As they which beheld the brazen serpent were healed of
the sting of the fiery serpents, which otherwise could not be cured: So the^
beholding of Christ lifted up upon the cross does cure us of the most deadly
sting of the spiritual serpent the Devil. It may seem strange that the
beholding of a dead man should have such virtue and efficacy as to give life
to the behoulders: and yet so it is, for that this dead body is a quickening
spirit, and the word of his cross is the power of God to salvation to all that
believe. And indeed you cannot duly think upon this shameful and
ignominious cross, but that ye shall be moved thereby to call to mind the
most glorious and admirable love of God, who so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but
have life everlasting. Now if God love us, and be on our side, who can be
against us? if he has confirmed his love toward us, in that he spared not his
only begotten son, but gave him for us all, how may we be most fully assured
that he will with him give us al things also? Hereby (says S. John) have we
perceived love, in that he laid down his life for us. 1. Ioh. 3. 16. So S.
Paul's Herein (says he) Christ sets out his love toward us, that while we
were sinners, and therefore not worthy of the least mercy, he died for us,
and so showed us the greatest mercy. Romans 3. 8.

If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee give me
drink, thou would have asked of him and he would have given unto thee the
water of life. Ioh. 4. 10. In teaching the ignorant we must labor especially
to work in them a thirst of the water of life: the sweetness whereof if we had
once tasted, al other things would grow out of taste with us, and we would after
a sort thirst only after this water. This water of life then above al other
things is to be made known to the people of God, and the virtue thereof is
continually to be set forth, seeing it is not condemned, but where it is
unknown. And hereof it is that Christ himself, his spirit, his spouse and all
his faithful members bestow so much labor in pointing, to this full fountain
of the water of life, and in commending the virtues thereof. I am the living
bread (says our Savior Christ) that Ioh. 6. 51.
came down from heaven: he that eats of this bread shall live for ever. And
again: If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: he that believes
Ioh. 7. 37.
in me (as says the Scripture) out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of
life. And again: I am the door, if any man enter by me, he Ioh. 10. 9.
shall be saved, and go in and out and find pasture, And again: I am the
Vine, ye are the branches: every branch that bears fruit in me my Ioh. 15.
2.
father purgoth, that it may bear more fruit. And again: I am the way, the
truth, and the life: no man comes to the father but by me. By all which
figurative speeches one and the selfsame thing is set forth unto us: even
that Christ is the door, whereby we have entrance to God, in the enjoying of
whose favor and presence consists life: that he is the way to the
caelestiall Jerusalem where true life is to be enjoyed in the greatest
perfection: that he is the true propitiatory sacrifice, whereby the wrath of God
is thoroughly pacified, all other in respect thereof being either mere
shadows or false counterfeites: that he is the bread, water, meat and food of
life whereby life is not only bredde at the first, but also still maintained
and preserved for ever. Likewise our Savior testifies of the spirit of God,
that he shall testify of him, and shall receive Ioh. 15. 26. Ioh. 16. 14.
of his, and shall glorify him, by giving testimony unto the holiness of his
doctrine, and unto the dignity of his death: and the Angel sets down the
same as a sure note of the spirit of a true Prophet: The Apoc. 19. 10. Ioh. 5.
39.
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, that is, is a sure mark of
the spirit of prophecy. Yea what is the scope and end of all the scriptures,
but to give testimony unto Christ? What is the continual exercise of the
spouse of Christ and all her legitimate children but to have their eyes fast
bent upon Christ, and their mouth continually open in his praise? The whole
book of the Canticles is principally spente in the extolling of the
excellencies of the bridegroom by his loving spouse, under diverse semblances
and similitudes. And wherein especially labored John the Baptist the friend of
the Bridegroom but in preparing the peoples hearts to embrace Christ? Behoulde
the Lamb of God (says he) that takes Ioh. 1. 29. and 26.
away the sins of the world: I baptize with water unto repentance: but
there is one among you, who albeit he came after me, yet he was before me,
whose shoe-latchet I am unworthy to unloose; he shall baptize with the holy
Ghost and with fire. And again: He must increase but I must Ioh. 3. 30.
decrease. Lastly what did all the Apostles teach? They preached Jesus, and in
him and by him the resurrection of the dead, and all other benefits and
blessings whatsoever: they preached Jesus to be the Lord, and themselves the
servants of all men for Jesus sake. And verily al other waters are but draffe
and durte, in respect of the most pure waters of this fountain: all other
riches are but (...) of this inestimable and invaluable treasures (...) dishes
are but as the scrappes of a beggars (...) of the most sweet and comfortable
both taste (...) Manna^ and bread of life: the feeding (...), to ^ke the best of
it, is but the Iuglers feast, (...) by feeding on Christ. The children of (...)
Synagogue howsoever they pretend that they care (...) they have never indeed
fed upon him truly: (...) should have had by him health, strength, and life
to (...); that they would never have fed upon masses and (...), and upon
their own or other men's merits for the fur^ ^ing of everlasting life. But if
these me^ will by no means (...) ^ded to come together with us to feed only
upon (...) bread of life at the Lords table: let them feed still at the (...)
upon that deadly poison which is set before them (...) ^mous serpent. But let
us feed upon Christ: Io^. (...)
for his flesh (...), and his blood is drink indeed: His patience is the only
price whereby our souls are fully ransomed, and his righteousness the only
roabes whereby our nakedness is wholly covered, and whereby we are presented most
perfectly, pure, righteous, and holy (...) before the tribunal seat of the
Lords justice. His death is only able to kill sin in us, and his resurrection
is only of force to raise us up to newnes of life. They that being moved by
other reason seem to abstain from sin, and to work righteousness, do the same
but outwardly in show, and not in truth. Only the spirit of Christ, that so
greatly sanctified his death, and so mightily wrought his resurrection, being
received by the due consideration, and medi^tion, and by the religious
embracing of his death and resurrection is able to destroy sin indeed, and to
raise us up to newnes of life* (...) is only of sufficient might to withstand
Satan and all the powers of the kingdom of darkness, and to work in us faith,
and love, and all the residue of the fruits of the spirit. And if by this ^nes
(...) ^ned to God, then are we indeed truly converted; Ioh. 12. 32.
for Christ is the only loadstone that has sufficient virtue at (...) to draw
up to himself our hearts of iron. And if by this (...) be slain, and the life
of righteousness be wroughte in us, then have we part in Christ's death and
fellowship in his resurrection: but if by any other means sin be put to
flight, it is but in show and not in truth: it is but a retire made by Satan,
that he may draw us further and further into his snares.

Thus have I, Gentle Reader, according unto the direction of my skillful guide
set down some few places of the first Chapters of the gospel of S. John,
wherein this food of our souls is commended unto us. There be many other also
observed by the same author upon the same book, but these may suffice to teach
those that are the Lords stewardes what manner of food they ought especially
to set before the residue of the Lords family, and what they also ought
principally to feed upon, if that they desire to have their spiritual health
and strength increased, and to be further and further enabled to do the Lords
work. Now it ^ineth that both in our public and private prayers we most in^ly
beseech the Lord both with the woman of Samaria saying Lord give me of this
water that I may not thirst: and with the Jews: Ioh 4. 15. Ioh. 6. 34.
Lord give us ever more this bread; Lord make this heavenly food to taste
better and better unto us, that we may more and more hunger after the same, and
hasten our passage more readily and swiftly unto that great and glorious
banqueting house, where we shall feed thereupon even to the full. The which
the Lord for his own mercies sake grant unto us. Now unto this our most
gracious and glorious Lord and God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost be
rendered all honor and glory, praise and power, majesty and might for ever
more, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in printing the first part.
Leave out (and) in the preface f. 1. l. 3. read conversation for conversion,
f. 5. v. 32 In the principal uses of the treatise put in (my) v. 31. in the
treatise it self read members for number f. 4. l. 13. speaks for seeks f.
10. l. 26. right for might, f. 20. l. 36. put in (not) f. 33. l. 6. omnipote^t
for omniscient, f. 35. l. 11. Justifies for Instilleth, f. 38. l. 14 the
revelation for relation, f. 41. l. 14. sufficient for alsufficient f. 49 l. 11.
speak for seek, f. 53 l. 3. impossible for invisible, f 65. l 16. offerings for
sufferings, f. 64. l. 19. also for else. f. 87. l. 11. put in (his) f 117. l.
26. speaking for seeking f. 123. l. 23. will for well, f. 147. l. 18. put in 666.
f. 159. l. 24.

Faults escaped in this second part.
Page 36. lin. 27 for then allowed read, then allowing. in the marg. for Romans
14. 26. read 24. 27. item p. 41. in the marg. for pf. 26. 3. read. 26. 3.


