TEXEDA Retextus: OR THE SPANISH MONK His Bill of Divorce against the Church
of ROME: Together with other remarkable Occurrances.

woodcut image of a circle of clouds, with six heads including a pope, a
cardinal, friars, and a devil, surrounding and blowing against the world, which
is labelled "IMMOTA" IMMOTA



LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the great South door of Paul's, 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND worthy Knight, Sir Edward Conway, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and his Majesty's SECRETARY.
SIR:
THe sin of Ingratitude has ever been ranked by men of ingenious and
liberal education in, the first place amongst the of-scouring and scum of
vices, whose judgment and opinion herein, I profess I always approved. To
wipe off then, and clear my self from the aspersion of this foul enormitie,
I have, on advised deliberation presumed to consecrate and offer up unto your
memory this small Treatise concerning my unfeigned conversion unto Christ, as a
pledge and token of my thankfulness for many benefits and favors plentifully
conferred on me. For your most eminent and conspicuous virtues, whereof I often
have had experience, especially your wisdom, bountifulness, courtesy, your
fervent zeal to the reformed religion and piety, which so attend and guard
your person, that you can hardly be severed or abstracted from them, promise
and assure me, that this small Treatise given and consecrated on the Altar of
an honest and sincere heart, will be most grateful and acceptable to your
Honor.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, Ferdinando Texeda, through the mercy of God,
a Converted Spaniard, V.D.M.

To the Christian Reader.
SAint Jerome relating Jacobs Vision, Epist. ad Ager. 11.
in which he saw Angels ascending and descending on a Ladder reaching from the
earth to heaven; gathers these profitable and comfortable lessons from thence,
That no man should despair of grace to recover him from sin, for Jacob saw
Angels ascending; nor yet any presume of his own strength, for Jacob saw
Angels descending, as well as ascending; his own words are, Videbat scalam per
quam ascendebant Angeli et descendebant, vt nec peccator desperet salutem, nec
iustus de sua virtute fecurus sit. The Church of Christ in this respect
resembles the Sea, which, what it loses in one place, it always gains in
another. And therefore let no weak Christian be scandalized at the revolt of
so many now a days to Popish errors and superstitions. For the spirit speaks
expressly, That in the latter times, 1 Timothy 4.1.
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and
doctrines of Devils; yea, that many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom, the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. 2 Pet. 2.2.
When therefore we see the truth of these Prophecies fulfilled, in the falling
away of many from the truth, even this their falling away from the truth, ought
to confirm us in the truth; the rather because we find by experience, that
the Apples that fall from the tree with the least shog, De simplicitate
praelatorum.
or smallest puff of wind, are rotten at the core. This was Saint Cyprians
observation, long ago; Nemo aestimet bonos de Ecclesia posse discedere;
triticum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice fundatam procella
subuertit: inanes paleae tempestate iactantur, inualidae arbores turbinis
incursione euertuntur: Let no man imagine that good men can depart from the
Church; The wind blows not away the Corn, neither does a storm throw down
a tree that has sure rooting in the earth; it is but light chafe which the
wind scatters abroad, and they are but hollow and rotten trees which are
ouerturned with a blustering wind. And Saint Austen and Saint Gregory make good
this observation of Saint Cyprian, by excluding all those from the number of
Christ's Disciples, and the true Sons of God, whose revolt and apostacy
evidently proves their hypocrisy. Saint Austen speaks definitiuely,
Decorrept. et (...). 9.
Qui non habent perseuerantiam, sicut non vere discipuli Christi, ita nec vere
filij dei fuerunt, etiam quando esse videbantur, et ita vocabantur: Those who
persevere not in the truth, as they were never the true Disciples of Christ, so
neither were they ever truly the Children of God, no, not when they seemed so
to be, and were so called also: And Saint Gregory is as peremptory; It may
trouble, says he, a weak Christian, Moralium in ob l. 34. cap. 13.
that this Leuiathan has such power, vt aurum, hoc est, viros sanctitatis
claritate fulgentes, quasi lutum sibi vitijs inquinandum subijciat: That he can
trample Gold under his feet like dirt; that is, men shining with a bright
luster of sanctity, by defiling them with viciousness: Sed citius
respondemus, quia aurum quod prauis Diaboli persuasionibus sterni sicut lutum
potuerit, aurum ante oculos dei nunquam fuit; et qui seduci quandoque non
reuersuri, possunt, quasi habitu^ sanctitatisante oculos hominu^ videantur
amittere, sed eam ante oculos dei nunquam habuerunt: But we readily answer,
That that gold which by the wicked persuasions of the Devil, could be thus
trodden under foot by him like dirt, was never gold in the sight of God; and
whosoever may so be led away from the true Church, that they never return
thither back again, well they may seem to lose an habit and show of
sanctity before men, but the truth is, in the eyes of God they were never
endued with any sanctity at all.

If this suffice not to keep the weak from stumbling at this rock of
offense, I mean the Apostacy of seeming Saints, and revolt of outward
professors of the truth, let them consider in the last place, that this loss
of the Church (if it be any) is in some measure repaired by the daily access
of new conuerts. Not to go far for instances at this present, for an Italian
Apostata, we have a Spanish Convert; for a loose Bishop, we have a strict
Augustine Monk; the former lately left Christ, to follow his preferments in
the Court of Antichrist; the latter has left all his hope of preferments in
this world, and stripped himself of all his temporal means, to follow Christ
naked: whose solid motives set down in this short and pithy relation, if thou
weigh diligently, thou can not but afford this treatise a like commendation,
to that which Homer gives Diomedes, (...): A little Man, but a great Soldier.
For thou shall find in it arrows taken out of the Romish Quiver, drawn to
the head against the Romish faith; besides, diverse rarities touching the
fopperies and ridiculous superstitions of that Church. There are not many
leaves in this Treatise, but there is much fruit, yet this is but a taste: The
Author has furnished already a Table richly with such kind of fruit, to which
he will shortly inuit thee: In the mean while, let this stay thy stomach, and
if any thing herein please thy appetite, bless God for the Author; if any
thing distaste thee, pardon the Author for Gods cause; for which the more loss
he has, and does sustain, the more he deserves to gain thy love and
charitable opinion of him.

Thine in Christ, D.F.

Ferdinand Texeda has by his religious conference and carriage, approved
himself unto us, to be sound in Faith, and honest in Life, and one that
deserves respect amongst all good Christians.

Daniel Feately, Doctor of Divinity. Richard Sibs, Preacher at Grayes Inn.
William Crashaw, Preacher at White-Chappell. William Boswell, Preacher at Saint
Laurence Iewrie. John Squire, Preacher, at Leonard Shore-ditch. Thomas Wood,
Preacher at Michaels Crooked-lane. Timothy Suite, Preacher at Andrew Hubbard.
John Regius, Pastors of the Dutch Church in London. Ambrose Regemorterus,
Pastors of the Dutch Church in London. Nathaniel Marius, Pastors of the French
Church in London. Abraham Aurelius, Pastors of the French Church in London.


THE SPANISH CONVERT, OR, FERDINANDVS TEXEDA his Conversion to the Reformed
Church, with the cause moving him thereunto.
IT will not seem strange to those whose minds God has illightened with the
knowledge of Christian truth, that I a Spaniard and a Monk, trained up and
grounded in the errors of Popery, and sometime a most sharp and vehement
prosecutor and maintainer of them; should now embrace and profess the true
religion, since the sacred Scripture informs them that there is no respect of
persons with God: Acts 10.
Notwithstanding it will be a very hard task for any to undertake to persuade
such as are enemies to this truth, that it was the finger of God that wrought
this work of my conversion: for since they with the uttermost of their
endeavor, teach and maintain, that the reformed religion is most odious and
execrable to his divine Majesty, without all doubt they will never ascribe and
give unto him the glory of my conversion hereunto; for God tempts not, nor
solicits any man to perpetrate any evil: yet nevertheless, to the intent that
I may farther establish, and build up in Christ such Christians as are truly
called, and re-call such Catholics (falsely so called,) as wander from the
truth; I have thought good to produce and publish some of the motives and
reasons that prevailed with me, to the utter abandoning and renouncing of
Popery, which he that shall but seriously and advisedly weigh and consider,
unless he wilfully be blinder then a Mole, I doubt not but he will freely
and ingeniously acknowledge this truth, that it was only a tender regard of my
souls health that induced me to shake hands with Popery: But omitting these
circumstances, as not so pertinent, i will now buckle my self to the matter in
hand.

A Principle, and an especial motive exciting me to abandon Popery, was
their celebrating of divine service in an unknown tongue: For, as Saint Paul
teaches us, he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men but
unto God: 1 Cor. 14.
Therefore when we speak unto men, it is requisite and necessary we express
our conceits in such notions and language as they best understand unto whom we
speak: But the Papists setting light by Saint Paul's Doctrine, teach and exhort
the rude and barbarous people in Lattine, which tongue they understand not, as
it is apparent to any that shall be pleased to peruse their Mass for the dead,
where the Subdeacon sings after this manner, Fratres ecce mysterium vobis
dico: Brethren, behold I tell you a mystery; he pretends he speaks unto his
Brethren, but he speaks a notorious untruth, because according to the
determination of the Apostle in the place before cited, he that speaks in an
unknown tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God. I may press this reason
yet further, because the Priest before the preface, says (orate and me
fratres) Brethren pray for me: the Papists themselves will not deny that these
words are directed to the common people, and therefore neither can they
gainsay that they most shamefully oppugn the Apostles Cannon in the
rpractise; for, intending and directing their speech unto their Brethren, they
speak unto them in an unknown tongue: but the very simple, and illiterate
people daily reproues, and sufficiently discouers this their gross error, in
that immediately after the delivery of these words (orate and me fratres) all
of them in their assemblies for Mass, irreuerently sit still and chat until
the Priest begins service, as if in stead of Brethren pray for me, he had said
unto them, Brethren sit ye still and discourse together: And it is worth the
noting, that whilst they thus talk, the Priest mumbles to himself certain
short Orisons which they term secret prayers, with a very soft and low voice,
and afterward lifts up his voice and says, per omnia saecula saeculorum; from
generation to generation, and the common people they answer Amen: Now if it
should so happen, as it is very credible it has, especially when as the Moors
inhabited Spain, amongst whom there were very many Priests, that in outward
show seemed to profess and countenance Popery, but indeed were Mahumitans in
heart, if I say it should so fall out (which God forbid) that one of these
saying Mass, instead of these short Orisons, should in his prayers utter
blasphemy against, Christ, and afterward should say aloud, per omnia saecula
saeculorum, should not the vulgar people in replying Amen, even join with him
in that his most execrable prayer? Wherefore it behoues them to remember that
of the Apostle, to him that blesses only with the spirit. How shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at the giving of thanks, since
he understands not what thou say? This their absurd error is yet more
apparent in their Nuns, whilst they both at Mattens and Euensong, sing and
rehearse certain Homilies of Pope Gregory's venerable Beads, of Thomas
Aquinas in Latin, whereof they understand, no not a syllable; I would feign
know of them, to whom those excellent Sermons are rehearsed, to God, he needs
them not; to the people, they are above their sphere and capacity: What will
the Papists reply hereunto, or what can they say to this ensuing argument?

All those that deliver words that are not intelligible, do but beat the air.

All the Prayers and Sermons of the whole Corabble of Romish Priests are of
this nature.

So the whole rabble of Romish Priests in their Prayers and Sermons, do but as
it were beat the air.

The proposition is, Saint Paul's experience proves the assumption, therefore
certainly no man will except against the conclusion, unless some barbarous
and illiterate rusticke not versed in his Moodes and Figures.

A second motive enforcing me to forsake Popery, was their doctrine of humane
satisfactions, because it is most injurious and derogatorie to the meritorious
and all-sufficient sufferings and satisfactions of our blessed Lord and Savior,
and directly thwarts and crosses the whole stream and current of the sacred
Scriptures: By that one oblation of himself, once offered, Heb. 10.
as the Author to the Hebrews has it, he has perfected for ever those that
are sanctified; and he evidently and plainly teaches elsewhere, that we are
perfect and complete in him: but that which in every respect is perfect, needs
not ought to make it more absolute.

Neither will I pass over in silence that I have oftentimes-ruminated with my
self; viz. that this their doctrine of humane satisfaction, utterly overthrows
their Indulgences and Masses, together with their Churches treasury as they so
call it: for the bolsterers and maintainers of this opinion teach, that of
necessity, satisfaction must be made to the divine justice of Almighty God,
even to the utmost farthing, and hereupon they would feign ground their
Purgatory, where insufferable flames of fire are provided, and attend for all
that depart this life, according to their doctrine, from whence there is no
redemption until Gods wrath be fully appeased by their condign punishments.
On this foundation I erect this edifice; If of necessity satisfaction must be
made to the justice of Almighty God in deserved punishments, even to the
uttermost farthing, then it is impossible to shun or avoid these, but of
necessity they must be undergone, even to the uttermost farthing: If this
inference be true, that we must needs satisfy the justice of God in condign
punishments, to the uttermost farthing, how then can Masses, Indulgences, and
the merits of Saints have any virtue in them to extinguish the flames of
Purgatory? But the very truth is, howsoever the Papists deny in words that
there is a necessity imposed on us to suffer condign punishments as well in
this life, as the next, for our demerits; yet they make it good in their
practices: For, according to the Cannons of the Church of Rome, all those
penances imposed by a confessor on petenciaries, may be exchanged and converted
into pecuniarie mulcts, yea, as Tolet: in his sums auerres, these penances
may be deferred and put over hear, to be undergone in Purgatory; yea, they
may purchase their deliverance from thence also for money: For, although a man
deserve to remain in that same fiery furnace until the day of the Lord, that
last general Audit, yet at one only Mass said at any allowed and privileged
Altar (which may be purchased for two or at the most three groates) has power
and virtue enough to set the prisoner at liberty, and to transport and carry
him into heaven: yea, in that instant, when he is rendering up his body, as due
debt to nature, having a pasport which they call, bulla cruciata, which is sold
in Spain for two groates, any petty Priest has power not only to absolve him
from the guilt, but a so to free him from the punishment he has deserved: What
are become then of Popish satisfactions, when the most heinous offender may be
discharged and acquitted for two groates? Where we may note by the way, how
that ever in the Church of Rome, retribution is not made to any to his works
as he has done in this life (as the tenor of the Scripture runs) but
according to his estate in the goods of this life: For, put the case that it
should so fall out, that two men of equal merit and desert (to speak in their
own language) so that if they were waighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
they would euenly poise, should in one instant of time surrender up their
interest and title in this life, and both of them should be adjudged to remain
in the fire of Purgatory until doomes-day; if so in the behalf of one of
them, one only Mass be celebrated at a privileged and allowed Altar, his
partner that cannot be so befriended as to have one said for him, he poor
soul must lie still by it there to receive the recompense of his sins,
without the least hope of remission, until the general Iayle-deliuery;
whereas the former is forthwith loosed from his Fetters, and carried by Angels
into Abraham's bosom, always provided, the Priest have his money for the
Mass, for otherwise it has not any virtue at all.

A third motive persuading me to abandon Popery, was their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, affirming that the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is
really converted and transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ:
First, because it is not grounded on the Word of God, as in a manner Thomas
Auio, sometimes a Cardinal in the Church of Rome, the Popes Legate and
President at one of their Councels ingeniously acknowledges in these words,
Caictan super 3. partem. S. Thomae in quaest. 75. and art. 50.
Alterum autem quod Euangelium non explicauit ab ecclesia express accepimus
scilicet conuersionem panis in corpus Christi: but the other point is not
plainly set down in the Gospel, but we have received it by tradition,
expressly from the Church, to wit, the conversion of the bread in the Sacrament
into the very body of Christ. Johannes Douns-Scotus favors this opinion; Super
l. 4. sentent. quaest. 11.
Fides, says he, de hoc Sacramento est propter solam ecclesiae
determinationem: The ground of our belief concerning this Sacrament, is only
the sentence and determination of the Church. Occanus and Durandus de Sancto
Porciano, who was sometimes the Popes Penitentiarius Priest, the Bishop of
Melda, and Prior general of the order of Preachers, all concur herein in
their judgments, as also some of the learned Doctors of the Romish Church
adhere unto them. Secondly, also it implies a contradiction, that the body of
Christ should be at one and the same instant of time both in heaven and in the
consecrated host, which these reasons I shall now produce, seem to me
impregnably to prove.

First, The Heavens contain our Lord and Savior.
Christ's body is in heaven circumscriptiuely, therefore he cannot be in any
place without the heaven. The Antecedent needs no proof, the inference is
thus strengthened, because as Thomas Aquinas, Bonauentura, Capreolus, teach, to
whose opinion Vasquez also subscribes concerning the definition of
circumscription, Apud Suarem. tom. 3. part. 3.
viz. Circumscribi loco est corpus ita esse in hoc loco vt non sit extra illum:
To be circumscribed in place, is for a body to be so in his place that it
cannot be without his place; Therefore it is impossible that the Body of
Christ should be circumscribed or contained in heaven, and be also without the
heaven. The antecedent is acknowledged of all Thomists, and is a principle in
philosophy; only the Jesuits exccept against it, who had rather oppugn and
even wage war with truth it self, then not humor the Pope: but since there
is no contending with such as deny principles, I have done with those glosing
parasites of Antichrist, and come to the Thomists, who that they may not fall
into the danger of the Inquisition, invent certain shifts to avoid the
consequence, affirming that circumscription or circumscriptiue being in place,
does imply a denial of any other circumscription or circumscriptiue being in
place, Circumscription in one place, does as well exclude definitive being in
any other place at the same time, as a circumscriptiue being; for that that is
circumscribed in a place, can no way be without that place nor definitiuely nor
circumscriptiuely, as the Schools speak.
but not of a definition or definitive being in place; and therefore that
Christ may be in heaven circumscriptiuely, and yet in the host definitiuely.
But thus I reply, this answer is altogether groundless: for what reason can
be given, why one circumscriptiue being in place, should be more repugnant to
another circumscriptiue being in place, then to a definitive? And therefore
this answer of the Thomists, as Suarez says, is a very poor shift, and
cosen German to a petitio principij, or begging the point in question; Nay its
a harder thing to conceive how a body should be in one place definitiuely, in
another circumscriptiuely at the same time, then to be in two places
circumscriptiuely, because to be definitiuely in place, is a manner of
existence in place, no way agreeing to a body.

Secondly, it implies a contradiction, that the body should be distant and
severed from it self; But should it be in many places at once, it must needs
be severed and distant from it self; Therefore it cannot possibly exist in
many places at once. The proposition is infallible, because distance
necessarily implies a distinction, but no body is distinguished from it self;
The assumption is thus strengthened, The distance of bodies is taken from the
distance of the places wherein they exist; therefore if the places are distant
wherein Christ's body exists, Christ's body necessarily must needs be distant
from it self. Neither could I ever admit or approve of the answer of the
Papists hereunto, viz. that indeed the body of Christ is not distant or severed
from it self, but only that it has distant vbities or different being in
place, from the which the body is not simply denominated distant, but only it
is said as it exists in the place to be distant from it self, as being
existant elsewhere: For, who perceiues not apparently that this answer of them
is a meare illusion and cavil? As for example, Peter is not distant from John,
but as John exists in another place, and yet nevertheless he is absolutely and
simply said to be distant from him; Nay, he cannot be distant and severed from
him, but only in this consideration, as John exists in another place, and
existing or having his being elsewhere, he cannot but be distant from John;
neither can Christ's body have distant vbities or a different being in place and
not be distant from it self.

Thirdly, if Christ's body should in one instant of time be both in heaven and
in the consecrated Host, then it might be questionless in innumerable places
at once, and so by consequence should be infinite. All of them grant the first
consequence, but deny the second; because, as they define immensitie, it is,
praesentiam natura sua constituentem rem in omnibus spatijs possibilibus, etc.
A present setting or placing a thing of its own nature in all possible places:
But admitting Christ's body should be placed or set in all such places, yet it
has not this property from its essence. But to wound them with their own
weapon, I retort their answer back upon them. Immensitie is a present setting
or placing a thing of its own nature, in all possible places; Therefore only
that thing that is infinite may be in all possible places; The inference is
evident, because the proper passion of any thing cannot agree to any other
thing, unless the thing it self also agree thereunto; therefore if Immensitie
be repugnant to the nature of a body, it must also be repugnant to it to be in
innumerable places at once.

Moreover, that which they affirm, viz. that a body is not to be accounted
infinite, although it be set or exist in infinite places, because it has not
this from its own nature, is very ridiculous. For, thus I argue, that if God
therefore cannot possibly be contained in any bounds, because by reason of his
greatness and immensitie he is every where, and in every thing most inwardly
present; therefore by the self same reason it follows, that neither may a
body be present in all places, because it is his nature to be circumscribed and
contained within the limits of place, because as Gods infinite greatness makes
him incapable of circumscription, so likewise the finite nature of a body,
makes it incapable of vbiquitie.

To conclude, this was always my faith, that the Bread in the Sacrament, after
consecration, remains still pure Bread; for I my self have seen worms
ingendered in the consecrated host, which could not have been if the
substance of bread after the delivery of the words of benediction vanished
away: for then there would not be any pre-existent matter, For every
substantial form necessarily requires some substantial matter pre-existent,
out of which by the virtue of the agent, the form is educed.
out of which the forms of worms might be drawn. Neither like I that answer
of the Papists hereunto, who affirm that God miraculously supplies there the
first matter; for Christ's existencie in the host, is most pleasing and
acceptable unto him, as they teach: wherefore then would he by working
miraculously above nature, leaving the accidents, fly into heaven? and
especially since the accidents of bread have no contrary to expel and expose
them to corruption. Besides, all men know that there are many vestments amongst
the Papists, that for many generations, (if it be not impiety to believe them)
are preserved incorrupted, and that only because they have touched the bodies
of some of the Saints: what probable reason then can they render why the body
of Christ should not exempt these accidents from corruption, with which he is
actually covered? This argument is further urged and pressed, because the
ingendering of these vermin, redounds to the dishonor of Christ, and the
condemnation of the faithful; for all that enter into the Church, adore and
do obeisance to the consecrated host included in the Pyxe; which if it should
be transubstantiated into worms, they should attribute divine worship unto
them. From hence then we may infallibly conclude, that this Doctrine,
concerning the carnal and corporal presence of Christ in the Eucharist, which
Papists so stiffly maintain, is a mere figment of their own brain. Neither
ever would it enter into my mind, that our blessed Lord and Savior should by
working miraculously above the ordinary course of nature, administer matter
for the generation of worms (no second cause requiring their production) and
thereby cause that those accidents having no cause to corrupt them, should yet
be corrupted; neither have we reason to believe, that Christ for no cause
should relinquish a place so grateful and beloved of him, as they say; and so
deprive the faithful of his healthful and loving presence, especially since
he must needs foresee, that his absence must needs be manifest and apparent
detriment to the faithful.

I have also observed very many places in the ancient Fathers, expressly
crossing and oppugning this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, some whereof I will
here produce. In the first place, Saint Augustine, (in whose name, the Order of
which sometime I was, much glories) confutes this error, saying, Contra Adim.
cap. 12.
Non dubitauit dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui: He
doubted not to say, This is my body, when he delivered only, the sign of his
body: and in another place, Sicutergo secundum que^dam modum sacramentum
corporis Christi, corpus Christi est; sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis
Christi est: ita sacramentum fidei fides est: Ep. 22. ad Bonifacium.
Therefore even as the sacrament of Christ's body is after a sort (or after a
kind of manner) his body; and the sacrament of his blood, is his blood, even
so the sacrament of faith, is faith: Saint Austen uses the like speech of both.
From which place I collect this Argument; The sacrament of faith is not
transubstantiated into faith, therefore neither is the symbol of Christ's body,
converted into his body: and Tertullian in his book against Marcion, in the
19. Chap. says, Panem suum corpus appellat, vt iam inde eum corporis sui
figuram pani dedisse intelligas: He calls Bread his body, that from thence thou
might understand that he gave the figure of his body to the bread, (that is,
made bread a figure of his body;) and Gelasius in his Book of two natures,
Tamen, inquit, esse non desinit substantia vel natura panis et vini, et certe
imago et similitudo corporis et sanguinis Christi in mysteriorum action
celebrantur: yet says he, the substance, or the essence of the bread cease not
to be, and truly the image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries in the sacrament.

Moreover, I abandoned and renounced Popery, for that it commands prayer and
invocation of Saints, that has neither promise, nor precept, nor president in
the sacred Scriptures for its warrant and allowance, for we ought to be assured
and persuaded in our consciences by some testimonies from the word of God (the
rule and square of our actions) that Almighty God will be pleased to hear and
accept of our prayers, through him, and for his sake, in whose name they are
tendered unto him, because that prayer that is not of faith, is not pleasing or
acceptable to him; but we have no such promise concerning any of the Saints,
but only concerning that holy and just one, Jesus Christ the righteous: Ioh.
16. ver. 23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Neither
yet is there any precept extant in sacred writ, inioyning us any such duty, but
we are excited and commanded to fly unto Christ, by prayer, in time of
distress, according unto that, Come unto me al ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you: Math. 11.
Neither can any examples be produced out of the Book of God, whose practice
might at the least seem to favor or countenance this Doctrine concerning the
invocation of Saints; there are very many places that expressly teach, or
necessarily imply, that we owe the devout affection of our minds only to
God. Their comparison drawn from the manner and fashion in Princes Courts, is
not of any moment; For, should the King constitute and appoint one only Master
of Requests, doubtless he would never admit or grant any suits preferred unto
him by any other; since then our blessed Lord and Savior is appointed by his
Father to be our only Mediator and Intercessor, why then have we recourse to
any other? why rely we upon, and prefer a most doubtful and incertaine
course, to a most certain and infallible means? How are we assured that the
Saints hear and understand our grieuances? and admit they do, that God
approues and accepts of our petitions tendered unto him in this sort; nay, we
are certainly assured, and expressly taught the contrary, for our Lord and
Savior says of himself, I am the way, the truth, Ioh. 14. ver. 6.
and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me; If it be his pleasure
that we should use no other means unto the Father but himself, doubtless it
is not his will that we should use the mediation of Saints. Aug. tract. 22.
super Joan.
This was Austens opinion when as he said in the person of Christ, Non est quo
eas nisi ad me; non est qua eas nisi per me: Thou have no whither to go but to
me, no way but by me: Hereunto also Saint Ambrose assents, saying, Sedtamen
Domine tu solus inuocandus es; But thou O Lord, only art to be called upon.
Moreover, I detested this their invocation of Saints, because they not only
pray unto them, but equalize and rank them in an equal degree of honor with
Christ; I charge them not falsely, the thing it self is too apparent; for when
as not only the vulgar sort, but even their learned Rabbis have poynted out,
and as it were given in commission, especial charges of administration and
government to every several Saint: Christ is not once thought of; they all
imagine Christ to be more hard, and the Saints of a more benign disposition,
and easier to be entreated: and had rather trust to, and throw themselves into
the arms of their mercy, then rely and depend on him for help; and leaving
Christ, they fly unto the Saints, they apprehend and apply unto themselves the
merits of the Saints for the pardon of their sins. And in the Romish
Breuiarie, every where God is entreated that he would be pleased to bring men
into his Kingdom in heaven, and that for the merits of his Saints; as it is
apparent in this Collect, appointed for the feast of Saint Martha: Almighty and
most merciful God, whose Son vouchsafed to be feasted in the house of
blessed Martha; grant we beseech thee for her merits that so friendly and
lovingly entertained him, we may be mercifully received and entertained in thy
Kingdom of glory. There are many such curtaild Prayers in their forenamed
Breuiarie, which evidently declare, that the Papists make their Saints not
only their Intercessors, but also their Reconcilers and pacifiers of Gods
wrath: and Gabriell, the interpreter of the Cannon of the Mass, blusheth not
to affirm that we ought even by the prescription and appointment of God
himself, to fly unto the Saints for succor, that we may through their
prayers and merits obtain salvation: Hereunto Pope Innocent the third assents,
saying, Necessarium nobis esse in via sanctorum suffragium: Whilst we are yet
in the way to our Country, we need the suffrages of the Saints: and Thomas
Aquinas peremptorily affirms, 1.2. quest. 178. art. 1.
opera miraculosa quae fiunt a Sanctis non solum intercedendo pro nobis ad deum
praestari abillis, sed etiam cum imperio et potestate orta ex quadam virtute
ipsis a deo communicata; that is, That the miracles that are done by the
Saints, are performed not only by praying for us to God, but with a kind of
command and power, arising from a kind of virtue communicated to them from
God: And in a certain Spanish Book, composed by a Doctor of Divinity, and a
Monk, of the order of Saint Marie de Mercede, and approved of by the
Archbishop of Valentia, and of the Judge of Sancta Cruciata, and committed to
the Press with license from the Deputy of the kingdom of Valentia; the title
whereof is, Breue historia de la orden de la Merced; the Author thereof
affirms, that the hope of our salvation is fastened with to Ankers, viz.
Christ, and the Virgin Mary, and that none but may fear to be rejected of God,
if he be not clothed with the merits of Mary; but I had rather deliver it in
his own words, Quiso dios estribasse el bien del hombre en dor ancoras esto es
en Christo y en Maria benditissima, su Madre, Porque Como no avia elhombre por
si solo sin el apoyo y arrimo delos nurecimientos desta esclarecida reyna de
recelar le auia de desechar dios? To this purpose I might allege that same
most detestable Picture which represents Austen between Christ and Mary;
turning toward Mary, he is made to speak these words, I suck out of these
Teats, looking toward Christ, these, I am fed of these words, whereunto is
added in the midst, Earradius in concord. in euang. tom. 1. l. 8. cap. 11.
I know not whether to turn me, and that of Barradius the Jesuit, who demands
of Christ, wherefore ascending into heaven, he would not take his Mother along
with him? and he himself answers himself thus, peradventure O Lord, thy
heavenly Courtiers would be at a stand whether first to greet and entertain
thee their Lord, or her their Lady: and that the cursed and bitter fruits of
their invocation of Saints, may be the better perceived and discerned, In lib.
hisp. supra allegato, fol. 180.
let us hear the Papists themselves in one breath, inuocating Mary and
blaspheming God.

Here follows their Letanie.
HOly Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God, Pray for us. Holy Virgin of
Virgins, Pray for us. Thou that art the living Temple of the blessed Trinity,
Pray for us. Thou that art the Lady of Angels, Pray for us. Thou that art the
offspring and honor of the Patriarchs, Pray for us. Thou that art the desire of
the Prophets, Pray for us. Thou that art the Mistress of the Apostles, Pray
for us. Thou that art the Comfortresse of Martyrs, Pray for us. Thou that art
the instructresse of the learned, Pray for us. Thou that art the hope of
Eremites, Pray for us. Thou that art the Standard Bearer of Virgins, Pray for
us. Thou that art a pattern for the married, Pray for us. Thou that are the
comfort of Widows, Pray for us. Thou that art the joy of holy men and women,
Pray for us. Thou that art the Paradise of pleasure, Pray for us. Thou that art
the tree of life, Pray for us. Thou that art the only parcel of earth, free
from the curse of Adam, Pray for us. Thou that art the Dove, carrying an Olive
branch, Pray for us. Thou that art Iacabs ladder, Pray for us. Thou that art
the Bush of Moses, that burned, and consumed nor, Pray for us. Thou that art
the Arc of the covenant, Pray for us. Thou that art the Rod of Aaron Pray for
us. Thou that art the golden pot of heavenly Manna, Pray for us. Thou that art
the Altar of sweet perfume, Pray for us. Thou that art a City of refuge. Pray
for us. Thou that art Gedeons Fleece. Pray for us. Thou that art a Lilly
amongst thorns. Pray for us. Thou that art a Garden enclosed, Pray for us.
Thou that art a Fountain sealed up, Pray for us. Thou that art the Pit of
living waters, Pray for us. Thou that art the Tower of David, Pray for us. Thou
that art the Palm exalted, Pray for us. Thou that art the precious Myrrh,
Pray for us. Thou that art the Rose of Sharon, Pray for us. Thou that art the
Cedar of Libanus, Pray for us. Thou that art the Cypress of mount Sion, Pray
for us. Thou that art the Sprigg of Iesse, Pray for us. Thou that art the
beautiful Olive, Pray for us. Thou that art the living Altar, Pray for us.
Thou that art the Torch of the faithful, Pray for us. Thou that art the rising
Sun that never sets, Pray for us. Thou that art the Moon always at the
full. Pray for us. Thou that art the Kings Court, Pray for us. Thou that art
the fragrant Meadow of the holy Ghost, Pray for us. Thou that art a Sanctuary
always holy, Pray for us. Thou that art the mirror of all virtues, Pray for
us. Thou that art the bright morning-Starre, Pray for us. Thou that art the
throne, and seat of God, Pray for us. Thou that art the Castle of Iesse, Pray
for us. Thou that art the safe harbor of Seafaringmen, Pray for us. Thou that
art the Seastarre that rejoices the hearts of Mariners, Pray for us. Thou who
alone art a Virgin, and a Mother, Pray for us. Thou who alone art a fruitful
Virgin, Pray for us. Thou that art lovely to heaven, terrible to hell, Pray for
us. Thou that art the confidence of the godly, the terror of the wicked, Pray
for us. Thou that art privy to all the secrets of God, Pray for us. Thou that
inlightnest the highest Seraphins, Pray for us. Thou that art the glory of the
people of Israel, Pray for us. Thou that art all fair throughout, Pray for
us. Thou that art beautiful as the Moon, precious as the Sun, Pray for us.
Thou that art the Mother of our Creator, Redeemer, and Savior, Pray for us.
Thou that art the true Mother of the Sons of Adam, Pray for us. Thou that art
the Queen of Kings, and Lady of Lords, Pray for us. Thou that art most humble
in Majesty, Pray for us. Thou that dispensest the graces of the holy spirit,
Pray for us. Thou that art the Mother of dear love, Pray for us. Thou that
were foretold by the Prophets, adored by Angels, Pray for us. Thou that art
espoused, yet ignorant of the marriage bed, Pray for us. Thou that art the
Nurse of him that nurseth all things, Pray for us. Thou that containedst him
that contains all things, Pray for us. Thou that art the fairest among the
Daughters of Jerusalem, Pray for us. Thou which wast only free from the sin
of Adam, Pray for us. Thou which wast ouershadowed by the power of the most
high from above, Pray for us. Thou that first embraced the word of God, Pray
for us. Thou which inclosedst him in thy womb, whom the heavens could not
contain, Pray for us. Thou which only did bring forth without sorrow, Pray
for us. Thou which did break the head of the crafty Serpent, Pray for us.
Thou who firmly did retain faith in his passion, Pray for us. Thou whose
body saw no corruption, Pray for us. Thou who art assumed into heaven in thy
glorified body, Pray for us. Thou that art exalted above the quire of Angels,
Pray for us. Thou that sit at the right hand of the Son of God, Pray for
us. Thou that reconcilest unto us God angry with us, Pray for us. Thou that art
called on by a thousand attributes and titles, Pray for us. Be thou favorable
unto us, Hear us Lady. From evil and the danger of evil, Defend us Lady. We
beseech thee by thy immaculate conception, Defend us Lady. We beseech thee by
thy holy Nativity, Defend us Lady. We beseech thee by thy comfortable
Annunciation, Defend us Lady. We beseech thee by thy joyful visitation, Defend
us Lady. We beseech thee by thy most pure purification, Defend us. By thy
glorious Ascension, Defend us. By thy triumphant Coronation, Defend us. and
afterward, That thou would be pleased to grant concord and peace to thy
whole Church, We beseech thee to hear us. And beneath, O Daughter of the high
God, Defend us. Thou that art the Mother of the Lamb, that takes away the
sins of the world, We beseech thee to hear us. Thou that art the Spouse of
the Holy Ghost, We beseech thee to help us.
An Encomiasticall Letanie to the blessed Virgin, the Mother of GOD, gathered
out of the sacred Scriptures and holy Authors. First of all sung in the great
Church of the City Valentia, when as the holy Image of that Virgin, named Del
Puig, famous and renowned for her frequent miracles both on Land and Sea, in
the time of War and Peace, was brought in great state into Valentia, at that
time when as the invincible Armada was sent to invade England, which was on the
17. day of July, being Sunday, in the year of our Lord God. 1588.
We beseech thee to hear us sinners, that thou would obtain true
repentance for us.

We beseech thee that thou would take care to preserve the Apostolic See,
and all the orders of the Clergy in the true Religion.

We beseech thee that allaying all storms, thou would conduct What success
and effect this prayer had, ^ide, the Christmas hangings in the great Chamber
at Thue-hall.
safely the Catholic Fleet of the Catholic King, to the much desired and
wishedfor Haven.

We beseech thee that thou would grant victofry to the Catholic Fleet of
the Catholic King, over most barbarous and savage heretics.

We beseech thee to enlarge those Christians that are still oppressed with the
yoke and tyranny of the English, that they may freely profess their faith and
conscience.

We beseech thee that thou would astonish and smite the hearts of the
stubborn and obstinate heretics of England, with fear and trembling.

We beseech thee that thou would give wisdom and courage to those
faithful soldiers that fight for the Catholic faith.

We beseech thee that thou would cause those holy Churches which are either
utterly ruinated or impiously profaned, to be re-edified and restored to the
honor of God, and to the honor of holy men and women.

That thou would be instant with God by prayer, that the kingdom of England
(the darkness of blindness being dispeld) may be reduced to the ancient and
Catholic faith, and to the obedience of the Church of Rome.

We beseech thee to hear us.

That thou would be pleased to preserve all Spain from the contagion of
evil, especially this City most devoted to thy service.

We beseech thee to hear us.

That thou would be pleased to obtain peace in love for thy whole Church.

We beseech thee to hear us.

Moreover: This likewise excited me to detest Popery, that it presumptuously
dares, contrary to the express commandment of God, set before the people all
sorts of Images to be worshipped and adored; The ground of my dislike hereof,
was not only because God has prohibited it, but because I very well knew, and
was certainly persuaded, that this their adoring and reuerencing of such
images, is the Lacquy and Page of the grossest Idolatry; wherefore I thought it
most meet, that these Images of Popery should be handled, as we read the
Brazen Serpent was by Hezekiah; for if Moses erected that Serpent in the
Wilderness, not without his especial warrant from God; yet nevertheless
because the people in long tract of time, fell to the worshipping of this
Image, King Hezekiah detesting and abhorring this their Idolatry, commanded it
to be taken down and cut in pieces; with far better reason should the Images
of Popery, set up contrary to Gods commandment, be removed and cut in pieces,
who have for their author and maintainer, not Moses the servant of God, but the
Pope, who is Christ's enemy. And experience shows, and their writings give me
evidence, that they have degenerated so far, as not only to adore these
Images, but also to have forsaken their Creator, that they might settle and
fix their hope and confidence wholly on them, as this ensuing Eglogue, taken
out of the forecited Spanish Book will make it most plain to the Reader.

A gratulation of this Sacred house, to the blessed Virgin, the Mother of God
for her return.
I Lay comfortless, being destitute of thee my light, and most glorious
ornament, as a dead body deuoyd of life and motion, me thought I heard every
one saying unto me; Where is that precious gold which Princely hands have laid
up in thee? Where are these infinite riches? Where is that bottomless depth
of graces? Where is the Ocean of miraculous cures? Where is that lovely Image
of the blessed Virgin the Mother of God? To whom I replied, she is gone, she is
gone that imparted wonderful holiness unto me, that has made me a most
renowned Church; she is gone, guarded, and attended with Angels and Saints;
she I say, who has made me an ever flowing fountain of miraculous cures, a
remedy against devils, the only refuge to all that fly unto me; but she who
seemed to be absent from me in body, was present with me by her wonderful
miracles, for she which was manifested to our ancestors, as with star
lights, now by miraculous lights sent from heaven unto me, has testified how
much she loves me: All hail therefore, my life, light, honor and ornament,
now coming unto me, for in this thy most happy and fortunate return, there
is sprung up a new light to all the inhabitants of this City, honor, joy, and
exaltation; Welcome thou that art full of grace; Welcome thou Sea of joy;
Welcome thou only ease in troubles; Welcome thou that art the only salve for all the hearts sore; Welcome holy Virgin, through whose means alone, we see the
Kingdom of Valentia is brought and united to the Kingdom of Christ, and we
hope many others will be.

All this they utter to a stone, being indeed more senseless and stupid then
it, and yet they would needs bear us in hand that they worship not the Image
but God in the Image: Certainly if this were true, those ouer-blessed Monks
in their Cloisters, that have Christ, who is life it self, enclosed in a box,
should not so plainly acknowledge, that by reason of the absence of the Image,
they were even dead, deuoide of life and motion: for if Christ were their life,
those that have him in their custody cannot be said to be dead, yet these men
brag that they have him, and yet live not; therefore Christ is not that life
whereof they speak, but the Image of blessed Mary, as neither is Christ their
treasure, but the lovely Image of the blessed Virgin, the mother of our Lord;
for these Monks suppose not that they enjoy their treasure, because they have
Christ presentin the consecrated host, but they esteemed that they had lost
it, because they wanted the Image of the Virgin Mary: In like manner, it was
not Christ that communicated and imparted his holiness to those most sacred
houses, for Christ is there present, but the party is absent that has endued
them with wonderful holiness, and has made it a most famous and renowned
Church; and truly, if Christ did dwell in their hearts, as he does in the
hearts of Christians, they should not lie comfortless, for he is the true
light that illightneth every one that comes into the world, but because he is
far from them (I speak not of their meal God, but of our Savior) it is not
his light, but the Images that shines before them; neither is it to be wondered
at, if that same new light be sprung up to the Papists, that forsaking the true
God, who is a, and o, the first and the last, they forge new corruptible Gods,
between whom, and those the ancient heathen worshipped, I find this
remarkable difference, Those ancient Gods had feet and walked not, these
walk, yet have no feet; Those had ears and heard not, these hear and have
no ears; Those had eyes and saw not, these discern and discover the most
remotest objects, yet have no eyes. That these and far more remarkable
matters are done by Popish Idols, evidently appears by this ensuing narration.

That is, Bartholomew de Billaro saw a certain body going on fore-right
through the air, toward the Altar of the Image, accompanied with twelve white
Tapors; he could not certainly discern whither it were that very Image or
some other; but he testified before a public notarie, that he did verily
believe, that it was the very same Image, which without all doubt, returned
from visiting some sick person, that implored its help, which is very
probable, for in the Legend of Miracles you may read, that she has performed
this courteous office, and that very often.

The writings of the Papists are fraught with these, and far groser lies, to
the intent, that they might persuade men, that these images are to be called
upon, and their aid implored in imminent dangers; and to this purpose they
teach, that they ought to make vows unto them, and in brief, to offer gifts
unto them; for it is unto this mark that their legend of lying miracles aims
and leuelleth, viz. that the knowledge of Christ be wholly supplanted and
subverted, and the affiance we ought to have in God, to be transferd and set
only on the image; whereof this is an evident and infallible sign and token,
Psalm. 144. The Author of the fore alleged Spanish Book. Elque de lexos
inuecare est a imagen sera participante de sus fauores.
that when as they know that God is near unto all those that call upon him,
yet they forsaking Christ, not only pray themselves unto Images that are far
distant, but also teach and persuade men so to do in a set form; and whereas
they should know that the Lord stands at the door and knocks, that he might
sup with him that opens unto him, and freely and liberally feeds him with
heavenly food, yet these contemning him, forsaking their houses and families,
go in pilgrimages to the Images of Saints; whereby they are so far from being
refreshed, that on the contrary, they deprive themselves of those goods whereby
they should maintain their Children and Families, and contrary to natures law,
heap them on those Images, not that the Images should receive any fruit or
benefit by those gifts that are offered, but that the slow-bellies of the
Monks might be filled and stuffed: Besides, when as they hear Christ so
lovingly inuiting them, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
Math. 11.
and I will refresh you: they fly from him and have recourse unto Images, and
ask counsel of them.

I will touch, by the way, what I have often thought on with my self, viz.
that the Idolatry of the Papists herein, is more manifestly discerned by making
a supposition, which they labor for with might and maine, as for their life,
viz. that Christ is present in the consecrated host, which enclosed in a box
is perpetually preserved in every Popish house: If they have their Savior
Christ present with them, whom they assuredly know both can and will help
them, wherefore then is it that they betake themselves to Images that are not
present perhaps far remote from them? How comes it to pass that they set
light by him who is the express Image of his Fathers substance, Heb. 1.
that gouernes all things by the Word of his power, 1 Timothy 2.
and gave himself for the redemption of all and who (if we may believe the
Papists) is well pleased to remain here on earth under the accidents of bread,
that by his gracious presence, he might comfort his distressed Church, and
ease her of her affliction? How comes it to pass, I say, that they setting so
light by him, they place him on an abject and mean alter, with one only lamp
burning before him, where he is visited of very few, and very seldom saluted,
whilst that the Image of Mary his Mother, I speak not of all Images, but of
those that are most famous, as our Lady of Lauretto in Italy, and our Lady of
Monserat in Cataluania, and our Lady De Attocha, et de Guadalupe in Casteele.
indeed but his handmaide, also, is set on an altar of gold, or Iuorie,
curiously carved and polished, richly set forth with gemmes and precious
stones, clothed with Princely garments, having not one only, but forty or
fifty tapers shining gloriously before her? Very many, being struck with
blindness, by reason of these lights fall down on their knees trembling
before her, spend whole days and nights in pouring forth doleful prayers unto
the Image; they lament, they make their complaints, lift up their hands in
pitiful manner, earnestly beg of her remission of their sins, and to
conclude, with the welfare of the Popes Kitchen and Monks bellies, they offer
liberally to her with a full hand.

Verily since the truth of these things have been ratified and confirmed by
long experience, when I my self have been an eye witness, none can deny that
such as do such things as these are stricken both with blindness and
madness, for mine own particular, I freely confess that this absurd error
of theirs, amongst others of the like nature, was my first motive to the
abiuring and abandoning of Popery; and were the Church of Rome in all other
articles of belief orthodoxall and conformable to the Christian truth, yet
this only rock in my way would utterly have driven me from the profession
thereof. But it is to be lamented with tears, that as in part I have evidently
and clearly showed unto you, the Church of Rome has swarued from the rules of
the Apostles in many tenants of faith, and have brought in an innumerable
company of Pestilent errors and diabolical superstitions; therefore let no
man marvel that I have utterly forsaken and a-abandoned Popery: I heard the
voice of the Lord calling me, and not willing to harden my heart, I came forth
of Babylon, lest pertaking longer with her in her sins, I might also partake
in her punishments. Although these things were so as has been related, for
which I bless and praise God; yet there were many Remoraes or hindrances that
detained me in Spain, and diuerted my mind from seeking the means of my
salvation by Christ; insomuch that almost for the space of two years, my
conscience struggled with me, and endured many a bitter conflict: For, first,
the world and the flesh objected unto my eyes, and whispered in my ears, that
if I forsake Babylon, and cleave to Christ, I must make account to take my
farewell of all the pleasures and allurements of this life; of my noble
Parents, of my Riches, Brethren and Sisters, of my Friends, Country, Patrimony
and Pleasures, which here I inioyed; together, with Honors and promotions; for
I was a Monk of the famous Order of Saint Augustine, a Priest, a Preacher, a
Professor of Philosophy, and Bachelor in Divinity; all which assuredly
promised, as years increased, to advance and raise me to higher dignity and
preferment. Again, I seriously and advisedly pondered with my self, that
hitherto I was both an honor and a comfort to my Parents, that hereafter the
news of this my conversion would set a public and eternal mark of infamy
on them. I cast also daily in my mind, the poverty, nakedness, perpetual
exile, hatred of Parents, Country, Friends, and in brief, the want and
deprivation of all necessary things toward the preservation of this life,
which I must needs endure if I quite my former religion; but all these carnal
respects I slightly regarded and past-by, when I seriously considered, That we
must through many tribulations, Acts 14.
enter into the Kingdom of God; 2 Timothy 2.
And that all that desire to live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution: and therefore, about some two years and a half since, I left
Spain, that I might settle my self in this flourishing Kingdom, where every
man praises God in the Sunshine of the Gospel: It is near about two
years since I first made my abode in this City, wherein by the means and
favor of God, I have professed publicly the reformed Christian Religion, and
have vowed and sworn solemnly to continue in it to my lives end. Neither
shall my great want, wherewithal I am much perplexed, I trust in God, ever
alter my purpose and resolution, but that God that has begun this good work
in me, will perfect it; to the praise of his blessed and glorious name, to my
eternal salvation, to the edification of all my Brethren, and to the confusion
of the adversary, for which I bow my knees to Almighty God the Fountain of
all goodness, with my whole heart beseeching him to establish and confirm me
more and more in his truth.

Laus Deo, Amen.
Errata.
PAge 3. l. 8. lege pro, ibid. l. 18. lege pro, p. 4. l. 25. lege rabble, ibid.
l. 27. lege Ergo, p. 6. l. 21. dele at, p. 7. l. 2. dele ever, ibid. l. 3. add
according, ibid. l. 13 add be that, p. 8. l. 4. add with, ibid. l. 12. lege
Occamus, ibid. l. 14. lege Penitentiarie, ibid. l. 32. lege this, p. 10. l. 15.
lege vbieties, ibid. l. lege beings, ibid. l. 17. lege this, ibid. l. 27. lege
vbieties, ibid. l. dele a. ibid. l. lege beings, p. 11. l. 3. dele it is, ibid.
l. 5. lege presens, ibid. l. 11. lege presens, ibid. l. 28. lege its, p. 12. l.
4. lege true, p. 13. l. 25. dele only, p. 17. l. 25. lege Judges, p. 18. l.
12. lege with, ibid. l. lege wounds, p. 21. l. 14. lege Jesus.

FINIS.

