(...) receive by faylynge Fortune.
WHy does the world carke and care, for glory that is vain
Whose wealth departs for evermore, and will not come again
Whose power so sone is overthrown, and falls in decay
As does the pot which we se made, of brittell moulde and claye.
Do sooner trust the letters written, upon the meltynge yse
Then flattering chance of worldly gifts, inconstant as the dyse
Which forgeth vice in virtues place, much myschiefe to procure
Who can be certain here to live, one mynute of an hour.
Tell, where is noble Solomon, in wit which did excel
Or Absalon the beawtyfull, of whom old storres tell.
Or where is Sampson great and strong, unable to be won
Or Ionathas the pleasauntst man, that raygned under the sun.
Where is Caesar that mighty Prince, which ruled East and weste
Or Dyues that belly God, which spent both fyshe and beast
What is become of Cicero, that could so well declame
Or where is learned Aristotle that now does bear the name
Thus noble me^ and rulers both, thus time which passes away
Thus kings which had their holds full strong to keep them night and day
Thus princes once which were of might, and with great power did florishe
In the twinkling of an eye, for evermore does perish
In how short space does slyppe away, these worldly pleasures all
Like shadows or soch vanities, which sone does slide and fall
Seducynge us from heavenly gifts, which does for us remain
And lead us to things, which are ungodly vile and vain
O meat for worms, O dew sone melted, O clotte of bryttle claye
Why do thou trust still to possess, that which will sone decay
Thou can not tell what shall become, of the to morrow next
Therefore do good by thy life time, let none of the be vexte.
For as the leaf which with the wind, we see driven to and fro
So shall thy pride and gorglous fare, be put away also
Where is become thy proud carcas, which you thoughtest fresh and gaye
In scripture lykened to the flower, that springs in the may.
Think nothing thine that thou may lose, nor trust to keep it still
For that thou have by worldly chance, it fails when it will
Wherefore to search immortal things, se that thou do deuyse
The man is bleste that can and will, these worldly gifts despise.
Quod (...)

(...)

