A new Interlude called Thersytes

This Interlude Following Does Declare how that the greatest boesters are not
the greatest doers.

The names of the players
Thersites A boster. Mulciber A smyth. Matter A mother. Miles A knight.
Telemachus A child.
Thersites comes in first having a clubbe upon his neck
Have in a ruffler forth of the greek land
Called Thersites, if ye will me know
abacke, give me room, in my way do ye not stand
For if ye do, I will soon lay you low
In Homere of my acts ye have red I trow
Neither Agamenon nor Ulysses, I spared to check
They could not bring me to be at their beck
Of late from the sege of Troy I returned
Where all my harnes except this clubbe I lost
In an old house there it was quyte burned
While I was preparinge vytayles for the host
I must needs get me new, what so euerit cost
I Will go seek adventures, for I cannot be idle
I will hamper some of the knaves in a bridle
It greueth me to hear how the knaves do brag
But by supreme Jupiter, when I am harnessed well
I shall make the dasters to run in to a bag
To hyde them fro me, as from the devil of hell
I doubt not but hereafter, of me ye shall hear tell
How I have made the knaves for to play cowch quail
But now to the shop of Mulciber, to go I will not fail
Mulciber must have a shop made in the place and
Thersites co^methe before it saying a loud
Mulciber, whom the Poets does call the god of fire
Smith unto Jupiter king over all
Come forth, of thy office I the desire
and grant me my petiction, I ask a thing but small
I will none of thy lightning, that thou art wont to make
for the gods supernall for ire when they do shake
With which they thruste the gyauntes down to hell
That were at a conuention heaven to bye and sell
But I would have some help of Lemnos and Ilua
That of their stele, by thy craft, condatur nuhi galea.
Mulciber. What fellow Thersites, do ye speak latin now?
Nay, then farewell, I make god a vow
I do not you understand, no latin is in my palet
And then he must do as he would go away.

Thersites. I say abide good Mulciber, I pray you make me a sallet

Mulciber. Why Thersites have thou any wit in thy head?
Would thou have a sallet now, all the herbs are dead
Beside that it is not mete for a smyth
To gether herbs and sallettes to meddle with
Go get the to my lover venus
She has sallettes enough for all us
I eat none such sallettes for now I wax old
and for my stomach they are very could

Thersites. Now I pray to Jupiter that thou dye a cuckolde
I mean a sallet with which men do fight

Mulciber. It is a small tastinge of a man's might
That he should for any matter
Fight with a few herbs in a platter
No great laud should follow that victory

Thersites. Gods passion Mulciber where is thy wit and memory
I would have a sallet made of stele

Mulciber. Why sir* in your stomach long you shall it feel
For stele is hard for to digest

Thersites. Man's bones and sides he is worse then a be
I would have a sallet to were on my head
Which under my chyn with a thonge red
Buckeled shall be
Do thou yet parceyue me

Mulciber. your mind now I se
Why thou peuysshe ladde
Art thou almost mad
Or well in thy wit
Get the a wallette
Would thou have a sallette
What would thou do with it

Thersites. I pray the good Mulciber make no mo bones
But let me have a sallet made at ones.

Mulciber. I must do somewhat for this knave
What manner of fallet sir would ye have.

Thersites. I would have such a one that another might nor main
should perse it through, or part it in twain
Which another gonst one, nor sharp spear
Should be able other to hurt or tear
I would have it also for to save my head
if Jupiter him self would have me dead
And if he in a fume, would cast at me his fire
This sallet I would have to keep me from his ire.

Mulciber. I perceive your mind.
ye shall find me kind
I will for you prepare
And then he goes in to his shop, and makes a sallet for him at the last he
says. Here Thersites do this sallet wear
And on thy head it bear
And none shall work the care
Then Mulciber goes into his shop, until he is called again.
Thersites. Now would I not fear with any bull to fight
Or with a raumpinge lion another by day nor night
O What great strength is in my body so lusty
Which for lack of exercise, is now almost rustye
Hercules in comparison to me was but a boy
When the bandogge Cerberus from hell he bare away
When he killed the lions, hydra, and the bear so wild
Compare him to me and he was but a child
Why Sampson I say, have thou no more wit
would you be as strong as I? come suck thy mothers tytte
Wene you that David that little eluyshe boy
Should with his slinge have take my life away
Nay ywys Golyath, for all his five stones
I would have quashed his little boysshe bones
O how it would do my heart much good
To se some of the giauntes before Noes flood
I would make the knaves to cryecreke
Or else with my clubbe their brains I will break
But Mulciber, yet I have not with the do
My head is armed, my neck I would have to
And also my shoulders with some good habergyn
That the devil if he shote at me could not enter in
For I am determined great battle to make
Except my fumishenes, by some means may assake.

Mulciber. Bokell on this habergyn as fast as thou can
And fear for the metinge of another beast nor manne
if it were possible for one too shote an oak
This habergyn will defend thee from the stroke
Let them throw mylstones at the as thick as hail
yet the to kill they shall their purpose fail
if Maluerue hills should on thy shoulders light
They shall not hurt the, nor suppress thy might
If Beues of Hampton, Colburne and Guy
Will the assaye, set not by them a fly
To be brief, this habergyn shall the save
Both by land and water, now play the lustye knave
Then he goes in to his shop again
Thersites. When I consider my shoulders that so broad be
When the other parts of my body I do behold
I verily think that none in chrystente
With me to medele dare be so bold
Now have at the lions on cotsolde
I will neither spare for heat nor for cold
Where art thou king Arthur, and the knights of the round table
Come, bring forth your horses out of the stable
Lo with me to mete they be not able
By the mass they had rather were a babble
Where art thou Gawyn the curtesse and Cay the crabed
Here be a couple of knights cowardishe and scabbed
Appear in thy likeness sir Libeus disconius
If thou will have my clubbe light onthy hedibus
Lo ye may see he hears not the face
With me to try a blow in this place
How syrray, approthe sir Lancelot de lake
What? run ye away and for fear quake
Now he that did the a knight make
Thought never that thou any battle should take
if you wilt not come thy self, some other of thy fellows send
To battle I provoke them, them self let them defend
To, for all the good that ever they se
They will not ones set hand to fight with me
O good lord how broad is my breast
And strong with all for hole is my chest
He that should meddle with me shall have shrewde rest
Behold you my hands, my legs and my feet
Every part is strong proportionable and mete
Think you that I am not feared in field and street
Yes yes god wot, they give me the wall
Or else with my clubbe, I make them to fall
Back knaves I say to them, then for fear they quake
And take me then to the tavern and good chere me make
The proctoure and his men I made to run their ways
And some went to hide them in broken heys
I tell you at a word
I set not a torde
By none of them al
Early and late I will walk
And London streets stalk
Spyte of them great and small
For I think verily
That none in heaven so hye
Nor yet in hell so low
While I have this clubbe in my hand
Can be able me to withstand
Or me to overthrow
But Mulciber, yet I must the desire
To make me briggen yrons for mine arms
And then I will love the as mine own sire
For without them, I can not be safe from all harms
Those once had, I will not set a straw
by all the world, for then I will by awe
Have all my mind, or else by the holy roode
I will make them think, the devil caryeth them to the wood
if no man will with me battle take
A vyage to hell quickly I will make.
And there I will beat the devil and his dame
And bring the souls away, I fullye entende the same
After that in hell I have ruffled so
Sreyghte to old purgatory will I go
I will clean that so purge round about
That we shall need no pardons to help them out
if I have not fight enough this ways
I will clymbe to heaven and fet away Peter's kayes
I will keep them my self, and let in a great route
What should such a fysher keep good fellows out

Mulciber. Have here Thersites briggen yrons bright
and fear thou no man manly to fight
Though he be stronger then Hercules or Sampson
Be thou pressed and bold to set him upon
Another Amazon nor xerxes with their hole rabble
the to assail shall find it profitable
I warrante the they will fle fro thy face
as does an Hare from the dogs in a chase
Would not thy black and rustye grym berde
Now thou art so armed, make any man aferde
Surely if Jupiter did see the in this gere
He would run away and hyde him for fear
He would think that Typhoeus the gyaunt were alive
And his brother Enceladus, again with him to strive
If that Mars of battle the god stout and bold
In this array should chance the to behold
He would yield up his sword unto the
And god of battle (he would say) thou should be
Now fare thou well go the world through
And seek aduenturus thou art man good enough.

Thersites. Mulciber, while the stars shall shine in the sky
And Phaetons horses with the sons charret shall fly
While the morning shall go before none
And cause the darkennesse to vanysshe away soon
While that the cat shall love well milk
And while that women shalloue to go in sylke
While beggars have lyce
And cockneys are nyce
While pardoners can lie
Merchants can by
And children cry
While all these last and more
Which I keep in store
I do me faithfully bind
Thy kyndnes to bear in mind
but yet Mulciber one thing I ask more
Haste thou ever a sword now in store?
I would have such a one that would cut stones
And pare a great oak down at once
That were a sword lo, even for the nones.

Mulciber. Truly I have such a one in my shop
that will pare iron as it were a rope
have, here it is, gyrde it to thy side
Now fare thou well, Jupiter be thy guide

Thersites. Gramercye Mulciber with my hole heart
Give me thy hand and let us depart
Mulciber goes in to his shop again, and Thersites says forth Now I go
hence, and put my self in prease
I will seek adventures, yea and that I will not cease
If there be any present here this night
that will take upon them with me to fight
Let them come quickly, and the battle shall be pyghte
Where is Cacus that knave? not worth a grote
that was wont to blow clouds out of his throat
Which stale Hercules kine and hyd them in his cave
Come hither Cacus, thou lubber and false knave
I will teach all wretches by the to beware
If thou come hither I trappe the in a snare
thou shall have knocked bread and ill fare
how say you good godfather that look so stale
ye seem a man to be borne in the vale
Dare ye adventure with me a stripe or two
Go coward go hide the as thou wast wont to do
What a sort of dasterdes have we here
None of you to battle with me dare appear
What say you heart of gold, of countenance so demure?
Will you fight with me? no, I am right sure
Fie blusshe not woman, I will do you no harm
Except I had you sooner to keep my back warm
Alas little pums why are ye so sore afraid?
I pray you show how long it is? sense ye were a maid
Tell me in mine ear, syrs, she has me told
That gone was her mydenhead, at thrustene year old
Byr lady she was loathe to keep it to long
And I were a maid again, now may be here song
Do after my connsel of maidens the hoole beuye
Quickly red your maydehed, for they are ve^geau^ce heavy
Well, let all go, why? will none come in
With me to fight that I may pare his skyn
The matter comes in.
Matter What say you my son will ye fight? god it defend
For what cause to war do you now pretend
Will ye commit to battayles dangerous
your life that is to me so precious.

Thersites. I will go, I will go. stop not my way
Hold me not good mother I heartily you pray
If there be any lions, or other wild be
That will not suffer the husband man in rest
I will go seeche them and bid them to afeest
They shall abye bytterlye the coming of such a gest
I will search for them both in busshe and shrubbe
And lay on a lode with this lustye clubbe

Matter. O my sweet son, I am thy mother
Wylt thou kill me and thou have none other

Thersites. No mother no, I am not of such iniquitye
That I will defyle my hands upon the.
But be content mother, for I will not rest
Till I have fought with some man or wild beast
Truly my son if that ye take this way
This shall be the conclusion, mark what I shall say
Other I will drown my self for sorrow
And feed fyshes with my body before to morrow
Or with a sharp sword, surely I will me kill
Now thou may save me, if it be thy will
I will also cut my pappes away
That gave the suck so many a day
And so in all the world it shall be known
That by my own son I was overthrown
Therefore if my life be to the pleasant
That which I desire good son do me grant

Thersites Mother thou spendest thy wind but in wast
The gods of battle her fury on me has cast
I am fullye fyxed battle for to taste
O how many to death I shall drive in haste
I will ruffle this clubbe about my hedde
Or else I pray god I never dye in my bed
There shall never a stroke be stricken with my hand
But they shall think yt Jupiter does thonder in ye land

Matter. My own sweet son I knelynge on my knee
And both my hands holdinge up to the
Desire the to cease and no battle make
Call to the patience and Better ways take

Thersites. Tusshe mother, I am deaf I will the not hear
No no, if Jupiter here him self now were
And all the gods, and Juno his wife
And louinge Minerua that abhors all strife
if all these I say, would desire me to be content
They did their wind but in vain spente
I will have battle in wayles or in kente
and some of the kuaues I will all to rent
where is the valiant knighte sir Isenbrase?
Appear sir I pray you, dare ye not show your face
where is Robin John and little hode
approach hither quickly if ye think it good
I will teach such outlawes with Christ's curses
How they take hereafter away abbottes purses
why will no adventure appear in this place
where is Hercules with his great mase
where is Buspris, that fed his horses
Full like a tyraunte, with dead men's corses
Come any of you both
And I make an oath
That yer I eat any bread
I will drive a wayne
ye for need twain
Between your body and your head
Thus passes my brains
will none take the pains
To try with me a blow?
O what a fellow am I
whom every man does fly
That does me but once know

Matter. Son all do you fear
That be present here
They will not with you fight
you, as you be worthy
Have now the victory
without tastynge of your might
Here is none I trow
that profereth you a blow
Man woman nor child
Do not set your mind
To fight with the wind
be not so mad nor wild

Thersites. I say arise who so ever will fight
I am to battle here ready dyghte
Come hither other swayne or knight
Let me see who dare present him to my syghte
Here with my clubbe ready I stand
if any will come to take them in hand

Matter. There is no hope left in my breast
To bring my son unto better rest
He will do nothing at my request
He regards me no more the^ a best
I see no remedy, but still I will pray
To god, my son to gyde in his way
That he may have a prasperous iournynge
And to be save at his returning
Son, god above grant this my oration
That when in battle thou shall have concertacion
with your ennemies, other fare or nere
No wound in them nor in you may appear
So that ye another kill nor be killed

Thersites Mother thy peticion I pray god be fulfilled
For then no knaves blood shall be spilled
Fellows keep my counsel, by the mass I do but crake
I will be gentle enoughe and no busenesse make
But yet I will make her believe that I am a man
think you that I will fight? no no but with the can
Except I find my enemy on this wise
that he be a sleep or else can not arise
If his arms and his fete be not fast bound
I will not profer a stripe for a thousand pound
Fare well mother and tarrye here no longer
For after proves of chiualry I do both thyrste and honger
I will hear the knaves as flat as a conger
Then the mother goes in the place which is prepares for her. What how long
shall I tarry? be your hearts in your hose
will there none of you in battayl me appose
Come prove me why stand you so in doubt
have you any wild blood, that ye would have let out
A lack that a man's strength can not be knwen
Because that he lacks ennemies to be ouerthowen
Here a snaile must appear unto him, and he must look fearfully upon the
snaile saienge But what a monster do I see now
Coming hetherwarde with an armed browe
what is it? ah it is a sow
No by gods body it is but a grestle
And on the back it has never a brystle
It is not a cow, ah there I fail
For then it should have a long tail.
What the devil I was blind, it is but a snayle
I was never so afraid in east nor in south
My heart at the first sight was at my mouth
Mary sir fie, fie, fie, I do sweat for fear
I thought I had craked but to tymely here
Hens thou be and pluck in thy horns
Or I swear by him that crowned was with thorns
I will make the drink worse than good ale in yt corns
Haste thou nothing else to do
But come with horns and face me so
How, how my servants, get you shield and spear
And let us werye and kill this monster here
here Miles comes in.
Miles. Is not this a worthy knight
that with a snayle dares not fight
Except he have his servants aid
Is this the chaumpyon that makes al me^ afraid
I am a pore soldier come of late from Calice
I trust or I go to debate some of his malice
I will tarrye my time tell I do see
Betwixt him and the snayle what the end will be

Thersites. Why ye horeson knauys, regard ye not my calling
why do ye not come and with you weapons bring
why shall this monster so escape kyllinge
No that he shall not and god be wyllinge

Miles. I promise you, this is as worthy a knight
as ever shall bread out of a bottell byte
I think he be Dares of whom Uirgyll does write
That would not let entellus alone
But ever provoked and ever called on
But yet at the last he took a fall
And so within a while, I trow I make the shall

Thersites. By Gods passion knaves, if I come I will you fetter
Regard ye my calling and cryinge no better
why horesons I say, will ye not come
By the mass the knaves be all from home
They had better have fette me an etrande at Rome

Miles. By my trothe, I think that very skante
This lubber dare adventure to fight with an ant

Thersites. Well saying my servants come to me will not
I must take heed that this monster me spyll not
I will ioparde with it a ioynte
And other with my clubbe or my sweardes point
I will reche it such wounds
As I would not have for. xl. M. pounds
Pluck in thy horns thou unhappy beast
what facest thou me? will not thou be in rest
Why? will not thou thy horns in hold
Think thou that I am a cocklode
Gods arms the monster comes toward me still
Except I fight manfully, it will me surely kill
Then he must syghte against the snayle with his club
Miles. O Jupiter Lord do thou not see and hear
How he fears the snayle as it were a bear

Thersites. Well with my clubbe I have had good-lucke
Now with my sword have at the a pluck
And he must cast his club away. I will make the or I go, for to ducke
And thou were as tale a man as friar suck
I say yet again thy horns in draw
Or else I will make the to have wounds raw
Art not thou a ferde
To have thy bearde
Pared with my swearde
Here he must fight then with his sword against the snayle, and the snayle
draws her horns in Ah well, now no more
Thou might have done so before
I laid at it so sore
That it thought it should have be lore
And it had not drawn in his horns again
Surely I would the monstet have slain
But now farewell, I will work the no more pain
Now my fume is paste
And does no longer last
That I did to the monster cast
Now in other countries both far and near
Mo deeds of chyualtye I will go inquere

Miles. Thou needs not seek any further for ready I am here
I will debate anon I trow thy bragginge chere

Thersites. Now where is any mo that will me assail
I will turn him and toss him both top and tail
if he be stronger then Sampson was
who with his bare hands kylde lions apas

Miles. What needs this booste? I am here at hand
That with the will fight keep the head and stand
Surely for all thy hye words I will not fear
To assaye the a towche till some blood apeare
I will give the somewhat for the gift of a new year
And he begynth to fight with him, but Thersites must ren away, and hyde him
behind his mothers back saying.
Thersites. O mother mother I pray the me hyde
Throw some thing over me and cover me every side

Matter. O my son what thing eldyth the?

Thersites Mother a thousand horsemen do persecute me

Matter. Marye son then it was time to fly
I blame the not then, though afraid thou be
A deadlye wound thou might there sone catch
One against so many, is no indyfferente match

Thersites. No mother but if they had bent but ten to one
I would not have avoided but set them upon
But saying they be so many I ran away
Hyde me mother hyde me, I heartily the pray
For if they come hither and here me find
To their horses tails they will me bind
And after that fasshyon hall me and kill me
And though I were never so bold and stout
To fight against so many, I should stand in doubt

Miles. Thou that do seek giauntes to conquer
Come forth if thou dare, and in this place appear
Fie for shame do thou so sone take flighte
Come forth and show somewhat of thy might

Thersites. Hyde me mother, hyde me, and never word say

Miles. Thou old trotte, seyst thou any man come this way
well armed and weaponed and ready to fight

Matter. No forsothe Master, there came none in my sight

Miles. He did avoid in time, for without doubts
I would have set on his back some clowtes
Yt I may take him I will make all slowches
To beware by him, that they come not in my clowches
Then he goes out, and the mother says
Matter. Come forth my son, your enemy is gone
Be not afraid for hurt thou can have none
Then he looks about if he be gone or not, at the last he says.
Thersites. ywys thou did wisely who so ever thou be
To tarrye no longer to fight with me
For with my clubbe I would have broken thy skull
if thou were as big as Hercules bull
why thou cowardely knave, no stronger then a ducke
Dare thou try maystries with me a pluck
which fere another giauntes nor Jupiters fire bolte
Nor Beelzebub the master devil as ragged as a colte
I would thou would come hither ones again
I think thou had rather alive to be flayne
Come again and I swear by my mothers womb
I will pull the in pieces no more then my thombe
and thy brains abroad, I will so scatter
That all knaves shall fear, against me to clatter
Then comes in Telemachus bringinge a letter from his father Ulisses, and
Thersites says. what? little Telemachus
what make thou here among us?

Telemachus. Sir my father Ulysses does him commend
To you most heartily, and here he has you send
Of his mind a letter
which show you better
Every thing shall
Then I can make rehersall
Here he must deliver him the letter
Thersites. Lo friends ye may see
what great men write to me
Here he must read the letter. As entyrely as heart can thyncke
Or scryuener can write with yucke
I send you loving gretynge
Thersytes mine own swetynge
I am very sorye
when I cast in memory
The great unkindness
And also the blyndnes
That has be in my breast
Against you ever pressed
I have be prompt and dylygent
Ever to make you shent
To appale your good name
And To mynysshe your fame
In that I was to blame
But well all this is gone
And remedy there is none
But only repentance
Of all my old greuaunce
with which I did you moleste
And gave you sorye reast
The cause was thereof truly
Nothing but very envy
wherefore now gentle esquier
Forgive me I you desire
And help I you beseech
Telemachus to a leche
That him may wyselye charm
From the worms that do him harm
In that ye may do me pleasure
For he is my chyefe treasure
I have heard men say
That come by the way
That better charmer is no other
then is your own dear mother
I pray you of her obtain
To charm away his pain
Fare ye well, and come to my house
To drink wine and eat a piece of sowse
And we will have minstrelsy
that shall pype hankyn boby
My wife penelobe
Does great you well by me
wrytinge at my house on Candelmasse day
Mydsomer month, the calenders of may
By me Ulissed being very glad
That the victory of late of the monster ye had
Ah syrraye quod he? how say you friends all
Ulisses is glad for my favor to call
well, though we often have swerued
And he small love deserved
Yet I am well content
Saying he does repent
To let old matters go
And to take him no more so
As I have do hither to
For my mortal fo
Come go with me Telemachus, I will the bring
Unto my mother to have her cherminge
I doubt not, but by that time that she has done
Thou shalt be the better seven years agone
Then Thersytes goes to his mother saying Mother Christ thee save and see
Ulysses has send his son to thee
That thou should him charm
From the worms that him harm

Matter. Son ye be wife keep ye warm
why should I for Ulysses do
That never was kind us to
He was ready in war
Ever the, son, to mar
Then had been all my joy
Exiled cleave away

Thersites. Well mother all that is past
Wroth may not always last
And saying we be mortal all
Let not our wroth be immortal

Matter Charm that charm will, he shall not be charmed of me

Thersites. Charm or by the mass with my club I will charm the

Matter. why son art thou so wicked to beat thy mother

Thersites. ye that I will, by gods dear brother
Charm old witch in the devils name
Or I will send the to him, to be his dame

Matter. Alas what a son have I
That thus does order me spitefullye
Cursed be the time that ever I him fed
I would in my belly he had be dead

Thersites. Cursest thou old hoar? bless me again
Or I will bless the, that shall be to thy pain
Then he must take her by the arms, and she cries out as follows.
Matter. He will kill me
He will spyll me
He will brose me
He will lose me
He will prick me
He will stycke me

Thersites. The devil stycke the old wytherde witch
For I will stick another the, nor none such.
But come of give me thy blessinge again
I say let me have it, or else certain
With my clubbe I will lay the on the brain

Matter. Well saying thou threatenest to me affliction
Spite of my heart have now my benediction
Now christ's sweet blessinge and mine
Light above and beneath the body of thine
And I beseech with all my devotion
That thou may come to A man's promotion
He that forgive Mary Mawdalene her sin
Make the highest of all thy kynne

Thersites. In this words is double intellimente
Would thou have me hanged mother veramente

Matter. No son no, but too have you hye
In promotion, is my mind verelye

Thersites. Well then mother let all this goo
and charm this child that you is send to
and look hereafter to curse ye be not gredye
Curse me no more, I am cursed enough all ready

Matter. Well son I will curse you no more
Except ye provoke me to to sore
But I marvel why ye do me move
To do for Ulisses that does not us love

Thersites. Mother by his son he has send me a letter
Promising heareafter to be to us better
And you and I with my great clubbe
Must walk to him and eat a solybubbe
and we shall make merye
and sing tyrle on the berye
With Simkyn sydnam somner
that kylde a catte at comner
There the tryflinge tabborer trowbler of tunys
Will pyke Peter pybaker a penyworth of prunes
Nycholl never good a net and a night cappe
Knytte will for kyt whose knee cawghte a knappe
David dowghtye dyghter of datys
Gren with godfrey goodale will gretely at the gates
Thom tombler of tewxbury turninge at a tryce
will wype wylliam waterman if he be not wise
Simon sadler of sudeley that served the sow
Hytte will Henrye hartlesse he hard not yet how
Iynkyn Iaton that iabbed iolye Ione
Grynde will gromellede until he groan
Proud perts pykethancke, that pykid pernels purse
Cut will the cakes though Cate do cry and curse
Roughe Robyn rouer rufflinge in right rate
balde Bernarde braynles will beat and Benet bate
Folyshe frederycke furburer of a farte
Dynge daniell deintye to death will with a darte
Mercolfe mouylts moreninge for mad Marye
Tyncke will the tables though he there not tarry
Andrewe all knave alderman of Andwarpe
Hoppe will with holy hockes and harken humfreys harp
It is to to mother the pastyme and good chere
That we shall see and have, when that we come there
Wherefore gentle mother I the heartily pray
That thou will charm for worms this pretye boy

Matter. Well son, saying the case and matter stands so
I am content all thy request to do
Come hither pretye child
I will the charm from the worms wild
but first do thou me thy name tell

Telemachus. I am called Telemachus there as I dwell

Matter. Telemachus lie down vprighte on the ground
And stir not ones for a thousand pound

Telemachus. I am ready here priest
To do all your request
Then he must lay him down with his belly upward and she must bless him from
above too beneath saying a feloweth.
Matter. The cowherd of Comertowne with his crooked spade
Cause from the, the worms soon to vade
And iolye Jack iumbler that iuggleth with a horn
Grant that thy worms soon be all to torn
Good graundsyre Abraham godmother to Eve
Grant that this worms no longer this child grieve
All the court of conscience in cockoldst yres
Tynckers and tabberets typplers tauerners
Tyttyfylles, tryfullers, turners and trumpers
Tempters, traytoures, trauaylers and thumpers
Thryftlesse, theuyshe, thycke and thereto thynne
the maladye of this worms cause for too blynne
The virtue of the tail of Isaackes cow
That before Adam in paradyse did low
Also the ioyste of Moses rod
In the mount of caluarye that spoke with God
Facie ad faciem, turninge tail to tail
Cause all these worms quickly to fail
The bottom of the ship of Noe
And also the leg of ye horse of Troe
The piece of the tongue of Balaams ass
the chawbone of the Ox that at Christ's birth was
the eye to the of the dog that went on pylgremage
with young Thobye, these worms sone may swage
the butterflye of Bromemycham yt was borne blind
The blaste of the bottell that blowed Aelous wind
The buttocke of the bitter boughte at Buckyngame
the body of the bear that with Beuis came
the backster of Balockburye with her bakinge pele
Child fro thy worms I pray, may sone the hele
The tapper of tauyestocke and the tapsters pot
The tothe of the tytmus, the torde of the got
In the tower of tenysballes tostyd by the fire
the table of Tantalus turned trym in mire
yt tomb of Tom thredbare yt thrusle tyb through yt smock
Make al thy worms child, to come forth at thy docke
Sem Came and Iaphat and coll the myllars mare
the five stones of Dauyd: that made goliath stare
the wing with which seit Mychaell did fly to his mount
the counters wherewith cherubyn, did cheristones count
The hawke with which Issuerus kylde she wild bore
Help that these worms my child, hurt the no more
the mawe of the morecocke that made mawd to mow
when martylmas at moreton morened for the snow
the spear of spanysshe spylbery sprente with spiteful spots
the lyghtes of the lauerocke laid at London lottes
the shynbon of saint Samuel shyninge so as the sun
Grant child of the worms that sone thy pains be don
Mother bryce of oxforde and great Gyb of hynxey
Also mawde of thrutton and mable of chartesey
And all other wytches that walk in dymminges dale
Clytteringe and clatteringe there your pottes with ale
Inclyne your ears, and hear this my peticion
and grant this child, of health to have fruition
the blessinge that Jorden to his Godsonne gave
Light on my child and from the worms him save
Now stand up little Telemachus anon
I warrante the by to morrow, thy worms will be gone

Telemachus. I thank you mother in my most hartelye wise
will ye sir to my father command me any service

Thersites. No pretye boy, but do thou us two commend
to thy father and mother, tell them that we entende
Both my mother and I
to see them shortelye

Telemachus Ye shall be hartelye welcome to them I dare well say
Fare ye well, by your leave, now I will depart away

Thersites. Son, give me thy hand, fare well

Matter. I pray god keep the from parell
Telemachus goes out, and the mother says. Ywys it is a proper child
and in behauioure nothing wild
Ye may see what is good education
I would every man after this fasshion
Had their children up brought
then many of them would not have been so nonghte
A child is better unborn then vntaughte

Thersites. Ye say truth mother, well let all this go
and make you ready Ulisses to go to
with me anon, be ye so content

Matter. I am well pleased to your will I assente
For all though that I love him but very evil
It is good to set a candell before the devil
Of most part of great men I swear by this fire
Light is the thancke but heavy is the ire
Fare well son, I will go me to prepare

Thersites. Mother God be with you and keep you from care
The mother goes out, and Thersites says forth What someuer I say syrs, I
thyncke ill might she care
I care not if the old wytche were dead
It were an almoys deed to knock byr in the head
And say on the worms that she did dye
For there be many that my lands would bye
By gods blessed brother
If I were not seek of the mother
this totheles trotte keep the me hard
And suffers no money in my ward
But by the blessed trinitye
If she will no sooner ded be
I will with a coyshiou stop her breath
till she have forgotte new marketh heth
Ill might I fare
If that I care
Nyr to spare
About the house she hoppeth
and her nose often droppeth
When the wortes she choppeth
When that she does brewe
I may say to you
I am ready to spew
the drops to see down run
By all Christen men
From her nose to her knen
Fie Gods body, it makes me to spitte
to remember how that she does sytte
By the fire brallynge
Scratchinge and scrallynge
and in every place
Leyenge oysters apase
She does but lack shelles
the devil have they whytte, else
At night when to bed she goys
and pluicketh of her hose
She knappeth me in the nose
with typpe, tappe
Flyppe, flappe
that an ill hap
Come to that tappe
that venteth so
Where so ever she go
So much she daily dryncketh
That her breath at both ends styncketh
That a horsecombe and an halter
Her soon up talter
till I say Dauydes psalter
That shall be at neuermas
Which never shall be, nor never was
By this ten bones
She served me ones
A touch for the nones
I was sick and lay in my bed
She brought me a kerchyfe to wrappe on my head
And I pray God that I be dead
If that I lie any whytte
when she was about the kerchefe to knytte
Break did one of the forms fete
that she did stand on
And down fell she anon
And forth withal
As she did fall
She gyrded out a farte
That me made to starte
I thyncke her buttockes did smarte
Except it badde be a mare in a carte
I have not hard such a blast
I cried and bid her hold fast
with that she nothing aghast
said to me yt no woman in this land
Could hold fast that which was not in her hand
Now syrs, in that hole pitche and fire brande
Of that bag so fustye
So stale and so mustye
So cankered and so rustye
So stinckynge and so dustye
God send her as much joy
as my nose has always
Of her unsavory spice
If that I be not wise
and stop my nose quickelye
When she lets goo merelye
But let all this go, I had almost forget
The knave that here yerewhyles did iet
Before that Telemachus did come in
I will go seeche him, I will not blynne
Untyll that I have him
Then so god save him
I will so be knave him
That I will make to rave him
With this swearde I will shave him
And strypes when I have gave him
Better I will deprave him
That you shall know for a slave him
Then Miles comes in saying
Miles. will thou so in deed?
Hye the make good speed
I am at hand here pressed
Put away tongue shaking
and this folysshe crakynge
Let us try for the best
Cowardes make speak a pase
Srypes prouethe manne
Have now at thy face
Keep of if thou can
And then he must stryke at him, and Thersytes must run away and leave his
clubbe and sword behind. Why thou lubber runnest thou away
and leauest thy swearde and thy clubbe thee behind
Now this is a sure card, now I may well say
That a cowarde crakinge here I did find
Masters ye may see by this play in sight
That great barking dogs, do not most byte
And often it is seen that the best men in the host
Be not such, that use to brag most
If ye will avoid the danger of confusion
Printe my words in heart and mark this conclusion
Such gifts of god that ye excelle in most
Use them with soberness and your self never bow
Seek the laud of God in all that ye do
So shall virtue and honor come you too
But if you give your minds, to the sin of pride
Uanisshe shall your virtue, your honor away will slide
For pride is hated of God above
And meekness sonest obtains his love
to your rulers and parents, be you obediente
Never transgressinge their lawefull commandment
Be ye merye and joyful at board and at bed
Imagine no traitourye against your prince and head
Love God and fear him and after him your king
Which is as victorious as any is lyuinge
Pray for his grace, with hearts that does not feign
that long he may rule us without grefe or pain
beseech ye also that God may save his queen
Lovely Lady Jane, and the prince that he has send them between
to augment their joy and the commons felicity
Fare ye well sweet audience, god grant you al prosperity

Amen.
Imprinted at London, by John Tysdale and are to be sold at his shop in the
upper end of Lombard street, in Alhallowes church yard near unto grace
church.


