

A full devout and gostely treatise of the Imytacyon and following the blessed
life of our most merciful Savior christ: compyled in Laten by the right
worshypful Doctor Master John^ Gerson: and translate into Englisshe The year
of owre Lord M. d. ii. By master William Atkynson Doctor of divinity: at ye
special request and commandment of the full excellent Pryncesse Margarete
mother to our sovereign lord King Henry the.vii. and Countess of Rychemount
and Derby.



Here begins the book of John^ Gerso^ chau^celer of Paris conteyni^g y^ holy
doctrine of crist how ^e should follow him and conte^pne all wordly vanites.
The first Chaptre.
WHo so folo with me says crist our savior walks not i^ derkenes: These be
the words of iesucrist whereby we be exorted to follow his lore and doctrine if
we will truly be lightened and avoided from all bli^nes of ignorance of mind.
Let our full affeccion be to have our study and meditacion i^ y^ doctrine and
life of iesucrist which excels the doctrine of all seyntes. And who so may
have the iey of their soul sequestrate in wordly things in this scripture of
our lord may find swear manna spiritual fode of the soul. But there be many
often times heri^ge the word of god that has litell swetnes or devotion therein
for their inward affeccyons and desires be rather of bodyly things than of
gostly. Therefore if we will have true and perfyte understanding of y^ words
of god we must dylygently study to conform our life to his preceptis. what
auaylethe a man to have subtle reasons or argumentys of the Trinite? curious
and subtle reasons garnissed with elygance makes not a man holy: but
obedyence and virtuous life makes a man dear to god. It is more expedyent to
feel the inly compunccion of here than to know the diffinycion thereof. If a man
have the knowledge of all scripture: also the seyiges of all philosophers
without grace and charity avails not. For all thing that is in this world
is vanyte except the love of god: and his service or to this end ordered. The
most excellent wisdom in any creature is by comtempte of this mutable and
transetorye world to promote them self to the world perdurable. it is vanite
to labor inordinatly for coruptible cyches: transetorious honors: false and
flesshely delites: or to desire any inordinate pleasure temporal yt shall
bring a man to perpetual pryne. How vain thing is it to desire long life:
and little to fors of a good life to give head to things present and to
co^tempne things that be to come. Also to fix our love on that which shortly
vanessheth away: and to do no diligence to come thider / where be innumerable
and perpetual joys Have mind how in this world another our iye is
sufficyently satisfied with sei^ge ne our eris with herynge and therefore study
we to wtdrawe our heart fro the love of things visible and fading and to
apply it to the desires of goods i^uisible and perpetual for them that
follow senssuall pleasure without restraining of reason theyspot their
conscience and lose the grace of god.

The second Chaptre of the humble knowelege of mannesselfe.
EVery man naturally desires to have knowledge. But what avails science
without the dread of god a pore homely laboring man dredi^ge god is more
acceptable in his feythe / than a curyous Philosopher that labor the more to
know the mo^^ge of heaven than to order the mocio^s of his body and soul to
the pleasure of god. He yt surely knows and co^sidereth himself and
understands his own wisdom has little delight in the vain laud of the
world. If man had knowledge of all things in the world without charity what
should it avail him in the sight of god that iugeth man after his deeds
Refrain thyn appetite of i^ordinate desire of curyous knowledge of those
things that rather shall disease thy soul and withdraw it from the unity and
charity of god / than excyte it thereto. As wese many of this manner of / learned
men desire to be reputed and holden wise in multiplyinge words which if they
delight the herynge / they refresshe and feed not ye soul but litell. But a
good life and pure conscience refressheth the mind and enduceth man to have
ferme confidence in god. The more knowledge that man has: and works not
conformable: the more shall be his pain at the day of dome: and therefore exalte
not thy self of any craft or cunning. but rather fere that thou displease not
god i^ abusion thereof. Remember if thou know many things and excedest other
in cunni^ge yet consider that there be many mothynges that thou art ignorant
of / and many that be more wytty and excellent and cunni^ge than thou: If thou
wylt profitably know and learn: desire to be unknown: and of small
reputacion: This is the most expedient and profitable lesson: the very
knowledge and co^tempte of thyn own self. It is a great wisdom and
perfeccion to have of thy self little confidence: and estymate well of other.
If thou seyst any persons openly sin or commytt any great crime: yet thou
should not judge thyselfe better than them: for thou know not how long
thou shall persevere in goodness or fro the same crime we be all frail and thou
should Judge no man more frail than thy self.

The.iii. Chaptre of the doctrine of truth.
THat person is happy whom truth diligently informs not by fygures or
voices faylynge but by inward inspiracion. Our opinion / and understanding
many times dsceyueth us. what avails it us for to labor bysely for the
knowledge of those things / which shall nouther help us if we know them: ne
disauauntage us if we therein be ignorant at the day of judgment. It is great
folly to dispice things profitable / and necessary / and to labor for those
things that be curious and dampnable. Blessed is that person whom god
techeth for in him be all good things that man may will or desire. A good
lord: in thy gracious presencelet other doctors and all other creatures keep
silence and thou only speak to my soul: for the more man is i^oyned to him in
inward mekenes: the more he receives of spiritual light of grace. whereby he
knowethe many secret mysteries hyd from other people The pure simple and
stable mind is not over come or febled / for it refers every labor to the
honor of god and i^forceth it self to cesse fro al other things that be not
in the sight of god acceptable: who resists and lets a man more than his
own sensual affeccion? we read of many Emperors and co^querours / that
conquered kyndoms and empyres and yet never overcame ne subdued theymselfe /
for that is one of the most victorious conquest^ / where man perfytely
ouercometh himself. This should be our daily datayle to strive with our
self / and the more vyctoryes the soul has of the body the more strong it
is: and more apt to encrese and to grow in grace. Every perfeccyon in this
life has some perfeccion annxid to it. And there is no knowledge in this
world: but it is myxt with some derkenesse of ignorance. The humble knowelege
of thy self is more sure wey to heaven / than the curious i^quisicion of
profounde knowledge of things un profitable: the science of every thing well
ordered is good but a clear conscience and a good life is much better. And
there be diverse that study rather for excellence of cunning than good living:
therefore they fall in error and bring for the litell fruit or none. O would
god they would endeavor themself as dylygently to avoid vice and plant virtue
in their sowles / as they be to move curious questions and multiply superfluus
langage: than there should not be so much occasion of sine showed to the
people ne so much dyssolute lyui^ge i^ religion. At y^ day of judgment it
shall not be laid to our charge what we have red or learned or how pleasau^tly
we have lived: but what we have done and how religiously we have lived / where
be now all y^ royal poets with their crafty co^ucied poemes and elegant
orators with their oracio^s garnisshed with eligancy: the philosophers with
their pregnaunt reasons and se^tences. Diverse of these manner of clerks we have
known in our days now their curiosite is passed and other me^ occupy their
prebendes and promocions that they possed: If they were here now again I
suppose they would never labor so bysily for curiosite in knowledge ne
te^porall promocions. Now they had lever thann all this world that their
intent had been according to the holy doctrine of scripture than the study had
be^ happy. O how many in manner of every state perisshith in this world by
vain glory that more desire to please princes and prelates and other patrons
for a temporal promocion than truly and in wardly to serve god for the
promocions eternal. These desire rather by pomp and pride to be great in the
world: tha^ by mekenes and charity to be in favor with god / and therefore
they vanissh i^ their thaughtis and desires as the smoke that ever the more it
asce^deth the more yt fades and fails That person may be named great in
grace that is incended with charity and is perfytly obedient by humylyte
contempnynge the inordinat desire of preemynens or of dignite. And he is
prudent that reputeth all worldely pleasures and goods as vile dunge in
comparison of the celestial goodis which we shall have in the perfect
possession of the love of jesus crist. And y^ person is verily well thaught that
ever inforceth him self to forsake his own will and follows the will of god.

The forth Chaptre is of credence in byleuynge.
IT is not expedient ne wysdom to believe every word or inly mocio^ of our
mind: but we must consider that it is according to the scripture of god and
in no wise contrary thereto. But I lament for sorrow the light and frail
disposicion of the i^perfite people that be swifte to believe and specially
those things that be the hurt of their own souls / and the det^ment of their
neighbor. But the wise / and perfyte men knowing the fraylte of man more
prone to evil than to good be not so light to believe every word that they
here. It is great wisdom and also discrescion to be sober in judgment and other
delynge and not to have ouermoche confidence in our propre deeds ne to rehearse
other things lightly belened and herd and ever to give head to take council
of a wise and a well conscience man and ever gladder to be instruct of a
another than to follow thy propre intencyon or mind. A good life makes the to
be reputed wise in the sight of god and to have in many things experience.
Ever the more meke and obedient a man be to god the more wise and quyete shall
he be.

The.v. Chaptre is of ye redi^ge of holy scripture
The principal thing yt we shall i^quyre i^ scipture is charity and not
elygance in speech and we should endeavor ourselfe to read the scripture with
as great fervor of sprete as it was received first And wisdom would we
should follow those autores and books where we may have most sweet and
profitable fedynge for owre soul. The fame of sotell philosophers the knowledge
of poets and reforike as asmoke or fume vanissheth awey: but the truth of god
abides without end. And as our lord speaks to us without excepcion of
person most expe: diently to us so we shall without any excepcion of
feithfull person or work study / and read those works that most we think
should please god and to us most profitable If thou would draw the spiritual
water of wisdom out of the well of scripture i^cline ye vessel of thy soul by
mekenes and confidence without desire of curiosite or name of excellence
Inquyre dilygently and quietly receive the holy sentensis of seintis let not
the proverbs and holy wise similytudes of blissed faders displese y^ for they
were not spoken without cause

The.vi. Chaptre of affecco^ns i^ordynate
When someuer a man has inordinate desire to any thing than he is made
inq^ete in him self the proud man and the couetouse be never quiet in their
minds. But a meke and a poor man in spyryte be conseruaunt in great quyetnes
of mi^de That person that is not mortyfyed perfytly is sone overcome in little
and vile temptacions and sone inclined to sensible pleasures. And if he shall
withdraw his mind fro erthly things it is with great difficulte. And
therefore they have great heaviness i^ heart and sone be misco^tent if they be
resisted. And if they follow their sensual appetite anon they be greued^ with
rumors of conscience in as much as they have followed the sensual passions yt
rather dispose to inquietnes of mind tha^ rest in resisti^ge sensual passions
plesours we shall come to perfyte rest and infolowynge them to great
iniquietnes There may not be contained rest in the heart of man that gives him
self to execute his carnal desires or much is conuersaunt with outward
things but in the soul that has most delight to god and in inly godys of thy
soul may be found true rest.

The.vii. chaptre of vanite and elacio^ to be avoided
THat person may be called vain that putthe his hope in any man or creature
Tak it not for no repreue to do service to other or to be reputed pore for the
love of Ihesu Christ have little confydence in thy self but that thy hole hope
and trust be in god / Do that is in the to plese his grace and god with his
gracious assistence shall be with the in thy will and dyrecte thy works: Have
never confidence in thine own runnynge ne in any worldly subtilte of any
living creature: but in the merciful grace of god that never suffers
creature finally to be without comfort that hade thyr full confidence in him
and those that have full affyaunce or hope in thyr self he makes or suffers
to fall and so subdueth them Auaunce not thy self i^ the abu^dau^ce of riches
ne of great powere of thy temporal fri^des but alonely in god: in whom is all
abundaunce of riches and puyssannce of might. And he above all thing desires
to give his own self to those that dyspose them self to receive him by
grace. Exalte not thy self of any bodyly virtue for all such sone he corrupt
and vanisshe awey by a little infirmyte Inhaunce not thy self of any natural
habilite lest god of nature be myscontente with the. Repute not thy self
better than other: list that thou be found worse in the sight of god: that
beholds the enlye dyposicyon of every soul. and diverse times dysco^mendeth
those things that men in this world commends. And therefore if thy works
please men fere list they displease god. And if there be any goodness or virtue
in the: believe that there is more in other. And ever desire of god that the
virtue of mekenes may abide in the. It shall never hurt the if thou judge thy
self the least and most vile of all other and in preferrynge of thy self
before other thou may lightly offend. There is true and sure pease in a meke
soul. And in aproude heart contynuall envy and indignacyon.

The.viii. Chaptre of much famyliarite to be avoided.
Show not thy secret counselle to every man but to him that is wise secret
and dredeth god. Inhaunt not much the company of young persons and strangers.
Use no adulacyon for to come to any temporal promocion nor for that
consyderacyon exercise not much the company of mighty / and great men yt be
contynually besy in worldly things Be desirous to be accompaned with meke and
charytable men: and with those that be of good manners: and ^tuous: and trete
with them of those things that mayedifye and strength thy soul and be not
familier with any person whereby thou may lightly be tempted or in famed. It
is necessary to have charity with every person: but not familiarite but with
those that may help to promote the to the famyliarite of god / and of his
angels. Sometime we se that some men being of great fame: and yet their bodyly
presence is not much profitable: and there be some that with their bodily
presence wene to profit other. when they by their indiscression and evil
manners rather discomfort / and hurt those that they wene to help and comfort.

The.ix. Chaptre of meke subiecco^n and obedience
IT is full great merit to stand in obedience and forsake thy propre will and
perfectly to obey to the will of a another. It is much more sure to stand in
the way of obedience: than in p^lacy. But there be many that be rather in
subieccyon of necessyte than of charity: and they have therein pain / and
lightly gruges and have not liberte of mind without they for the love of god
submit them self. Re^ne hider or thither: or where thou will: but it shall be
hard for the to find perfect rest but under make subieccion of a discrete
Prelate. The ymaginacion and ymytacions of diuersytees of habitacions and
places has ^^sceyued many a religyous person. Every body in manner is glade to
do that / that their mind shows them. It should be more to their profit to
forsake their appetite than if they condiscende thereto. But if we wolle that
god shall abide with us / we must forsake our propre will for the example and
psesure of god and the profitable peace of our neighbor. Sy then no man has
all cunning therefore it is sitting that no body have to much confidence in
their own council. And if thy understanding be good and sufficient. yet if
thou wylt by example of our sauy^ure leave thy propre council or direccion and
follow a noder for thy mekenes thou shall more profyt than if thou followed thy
ne own will. As we here the comone proverb. It is much more sure the wise
and discrete counsel of a another / than to give them counsel yt will not
follow it. It is a sin of pertynacite and pride any person inportunly to
offer their counsel and specially where they can little profit.

The.x. Chaptre of superfluous words to be auoyed.
THat soul that desires inli perfeccio^ of their mind must specially avoid
the tumultuus behauyour of wordly people. The besines of wordly acts thought
they be done with a good entente yet they let and hyndereth the mind of his
great perfeccion. Now I repent my superfluous langage / and frequent
inhauntynge of wordely company for* by these.ii. means we be often times hurt
in our conscience. If it be expedye^t and also you be disposed to speak let it
be profitable other to the honor of god y^ edificacion of thy soul / or thy
neighbor Also consider that all our good words be written of y^ angels of
god: and our evil words of our enemy y^ devil to our accusacion. And
therefore it is much more profitable when good folks be assembled of
onemynde to the mouynge of goodness. As the hole colys unite to gyder each of
them receyuethe of other influence of hete. So good souls assemblede together
for the increase of virtue echone of them receyuethe of other influence of
grace and increase of virtue and goodness.

The.xi. Chaptre of the desire to profit spiritually and pease to be purchased.
IT is one special mean to acquire pease not to intermytt us of the words
and works of those that atteyne not to us. How may that person be in
gostely quietness that much intermytteth him self of those things that he
has no cure of: Or syketh occasyons outward and has but litell recourse to
inlye habytacyon of his conscience Blessede be the true simple fowls without
any dysceyueable mind that in all their life and labors truly entendeth for
they shall come to the rest of mind / and conscience. The holy seyntes by
mortyfiynge / and subduynge their sensualyte to reason all erthely things
set a part they with all their inly delectable desyresfrely have had their
hole meditacyon in our lord. But we be besy much in things transetorye /
and follow our passions that we may not overcome in manner perfytly one vice.
And therefore we be not accended in the daily profit and devotion and therefore
we remain remysse and void of devotion. The most pryncipal cause why we have
no inly delectacyon or desire of heavenly contemplacyon is: for we be not fre or
delivered from our senssuall passions and co^cupisce^sis ne enforce not our
self into the holy way that the blyssed faders have gone before us. when a
litell aduersite comes to us we besone overcome and ready to return to the
consolacyons of man. Where if we would mightily stand in bataile for the love
of our lord we should se the goodness of his gracius help sent toward us. His
grace is ever ready to gyde / and help those that in spiritual battle have
full confidence in him. And he procurith occasions of batel to the end that we
should increase the crown of perpetual joy by the mean of victory. Than
let us cut away our inordinate affeccions / and passions that be the
rotes of all iniquyetnes and than we may possess a peasable mind in god. If
we would every year endeavor our self to overcome perfectly one vice: we
should in short space come to great perfeccyon. But I fere it be contrary
both in riligion and worldly people that after long co^tynuau^ce in living
they perceive that the state going before has be more virtuous and pure than
the present state that they be in. The more we increase in age / and draw to
our death the more dilygently nor should labor for the perpetual reward* that
be ordained for those that order their lives / and labors thereto The virtuous
life peynfull in the beginige by custom returns to great perfect pleasure
It is hard to leave customs in pleasure. But it is more pain without mesure
to leave the eternal peasure that for da^pnable custom shall be lost. Eeuer
strive might^^ly against the first mocions that incyteth us to ^^nne and
resist the evil customs for the longer they continue the more hard it shall be
to resist the^. If thou would consider how great inly peace thou should
cause in thy self and in other ineshewynge outward pleasurs and i subduynge
inordynat affeccions and desires contrary to reason. I suppose thou woldeste
be much more diligent to come to spiritual increase of life.

The.xii. Chaptre is of the profit of aduersyte.
IT is expedient to us to suffer aduersite: where by man retourneth him to the
consyderacion of his present state: wherein he reputeth him self as a pilgrim:
and therefore he has no affiau^ce i^ this wordle. Also it is expedient that we
suffer contradiccyo^ and be co^tempned of the lovers of the world whereby we
shall be induced to mekenes: and avoid vain glory when we perceive our own
frailte and be co^te^pned of the world: we be compelled to leave our self and
the world and holy to return us to god: in whom if we would fervently infixe
our self it should not be gre^^nede to syke outward co^solacions. The more a
good soul be troubled bodily or gostly: the more it knows god necessary to
it: and labourethe to have him by assistence of his grace. Also than it
lame^the and soroweth for the sins y^ it has done. and more her tely prays
to be delivered of his i^quietnes and mysery. also tribulacio^ makes a man
weary of this wordle and to desire blessedly to be deperted therfro and be with
crist. For he co^sidereth that he shall never have perfect peace before that we be
with him which by the price of his precius blood has purchased perpetual
pleasure and peace for him self and his seruau^tis that a litell space will
strive against sin and wikednes.

The.xiii. chaptre of resiste^ce against te^ptacions.
AS we read i^ scripture and the words of Job. The life of man upon earth: is
temptacion. Therefore it is expedyent that every person prude^tly give head to
watch in prayer believe not the devil that never slepeth but with a thousand
snaris / and subtilties i^portunably assaylynge us: finally i^tendinge to
deceive us. There be none so holy in this world but they have te^ptacion: and
if it be for the time grievous / yet if it be resisted it is very profitable:
for thereby man is mekende / pourged and infourmede by experience The seyntes
that be now crownede in heaven obtained their victory by tribulacion and
temptation. And those that were as cowardis in tribulacion and te^ptacion
finally overcome / be taken perpetually prisoners i^ hell. And there is no
religion nor state so perfect ne no place so holy in this world without
aduersite and te^ptacion. And therefore there is another order ne place here in
this life. where man may be fully assured to avoid al peril of te^ptacion for
in this corrupt body of ours we bear the matter of inordynate concupiscence and
te^ptacion. One te^ptacion or tribulacion departinge. another coming to us.
therefore it is expedient that we be alweye armed with patience and exercysed
i^ virtue. There be many entendynge to fle temptacion: that fall therein the
more / for by bodily fleing a man shall not be made su^e: but by perfect
patience and mekenes we shall be made strong to overcome all our enemies and
te^ptacyons. Tho that labor to avoid the outward occasions and not cut away
the inly inordinate desires: their trouble and iniquyetnes shall more and more
increase. And thou shalt more lightly by pacyence and feythfull confidence in
our lord and sauyoure overcome thy tribulacion / than by thyn own propre
virtue or strength. And in great te^ptacion use the counsel of a wise and
discrete person / and be not rygours to the person tempted: but ever be glad
to conforte him as thou would desire for to be done to / if thou were in like
trouble. The beginning of alleuyll te^ptacion is inconstaunce of mind and
little confidence in god. For as a ship without a directour is moved with every
wind: so a soul that is ^at stabled in god: as the fire proves gold: so
te^ptacyon the ryghtwyse man: as a bell untouched is not perfytely known
whether it be hole and of perfect ^ounde or dyscrased: So man thouched by
tribula^^on is known whether he be hole in the virtue of ^^cience or nay. And
ever look dyly gentely that the temptacyon in the beginning be resysted: for
thanne the enemy is soon overcome when he at his first entering
fyndiethe the gate of ow^e soul shyte against him. That sykenesse that by
contynuaunce is in manner incurabylle in the beginning might have been
recoueryde with a small / and an easy medycyne. And this subtle disceyuer
assayleth man's soul first with thought only and then with strong
ymaginacio^ / which folowith evil delectacion: and unclean mocion / and so at
the last the enemy enters into the mind with dedly consent to sine. and for
there was no resistance against him in the beginning / he holy enters in the
conclusyon. And ever the more remysse a soul be in resistynge the more
vnmyghty is made to resyst: and the enemy more strong and cruelle, There be
some y^ in the beginning of their conversion suffered great tenptacion: some in
the end of their life. And some by the space of all their life. And some that
in the process of all their life have but small tenptacion and all this comes
of the great wisdom / and equite of god: that passes the state and the
merits of every soul: and ordreth all the trouble and tenptacion in this
world / to the perpetual health of his elect children. and there fore we
should of no wise desire when we be te^ptid but the more mekely return to our
lord with devout prayer and besiche him for his faderly mercy / and pity to
direct and preserve us i^ all te^ptacion. And af^ thapostel Paul that it
would plese him so ever to p^uent us with his grace ye we be not overcome with
the might of te^ptacion. And among all the allectiues whereby we may enduce our
lord to assist us i^ our trouble is perfect mekens: for as (Dauidsaith) he
shall save and exalte those that be meke in spirit in te^ptacio^ and
tribulacion man is proved how much he profits and his virtue is more
manifest. It is no great m^uell if a devout man without te^ptacio^ have feruor
of spirit. But they that in time of aduersite can aplye theymselfe to have
fervor of spirit it is a sign of stablenes and grace for to come. There be
some that be kept fro great te^ptacion: and yet i^ small and daily te^ptacions
they be oftymes overcome with little te^ptacion Therefore in great te^ptacio^
they ever fere to be overcome.

The.xiiii. Chaptre of indiscreet judgment to be avoided.
Give head that thou consider well thy propre warkes and be not ready to judge
the deeds of another that perteynethe not to the ne for whom thou shall give
none account at thy death. Man laboreth in vain oftymes in iugeynge other men
and sone offends: but in searching his own defautes and considering them he
ever laboreth frutfully. And we commonly be ready to judge after our affeccion
and many times we err from the truth in judgment for our pride and synguler
love. And good were our intent and desire we should not be so greatly troubled
in the resistance of our sensual desires. But there is some inward
inclynacion or outward affection that withdraws us fro the very affeccion
and desire that we should have. There be many that in things that they do
rather seche their own lucre than the pleasure of god or the common profit of
many other. and they think their mind is set and patyfyed if they obtain
their purpose and if the contrary fortune they be moved with ^pacie^ce and be
misco^te^t. And for diuer sites of affeccions: desires: and opinions yt be
among the people oftymes be some dissencions / and debatys among friends
cytezins and devout religious people It is hard to leave a custom of long
continuau^ce and no man is glade to forsake his propre appetite: understanding
and desire. And thou be more ready to apply to thine own reason and
understanding than to the holy doctrine of servant* of iesy crist. It shall be
long or thou be gostly lyghtned for our lord sends not the great
habundau^ce of spiritual light but to them that forsake their own propre
appetites and resons and follow him by mekenes.

The.xv. chapt^ of y^ profit of warkis o^de i^ charity
THou should not do a mortal sin for love and favor of any creature: ne
for no erthly creture or worldly promocion. For thereby thou should put thy
self out of the love of our lord and ieopderdy of the loss of everlasting
promocyon. And sometime it is expedient to leave a good deed for the great
necessite of our neighbor or else for a better deed to be done: whereby we be
not hyndered in virtue but rather promoted. The outward operacyon be yt never
so commendable in the sight of the people without charity it auaylethe not in
the syghte of god. which accepts more the faithful intent and fervor of
mind: than the many fold multipliynge of great warkes or of words. Tho
persons done much that ordreth their life to the honor of god and rather to
the profit of the common well than to their own synguler profit. There be
many worldly people that think they do many things of charity but they be
rather done of carnalyte as all tho that do their works by the mean of
carnal affection propre will: hope of promocion: and alwey have an iye to
their own synguler avail. But charity ever i^clyneth to do that: that
princypally may do honor to god: and obtain the goods goostly rather than
temporal: and in bodily goods it preserves the comone well before a private
and synguler well: and the charitable man enuyeth no man for any pryuate joy
or pleasure: ne he lyketh not to magnify him self but to magnyfie and
glorify god / and in him to be blessed. He commands no man by adulacyon but
he refers al co^mendacion honor and goodness to god finally of whom comes
al grace and in whom al blessed creatures rests perpetual and in final
felicite O he that had but one sparkle of charity would repute al wordly
plesures and love but vanyte.

The.xvi. Chaptre how a man should suffer the defautes of his neighbor.
THose fautes that we may not amend in our self nor in other we must
pacie^tly sussre till that we se what our lord will work or order therein: and
think that it is ordained of our lord for to prove our pacyence without
which our merytes be little to be pondered. And it is expedient for us to pray
to owre lord that we by his grace may pacientely suffer owre necessary
defautes. If thou monisshe by broderly correccyon thy brother / or suster ones
or twyse of their defaute If they receive not thy monicion strive not with
them: but commyte it to god: that his will and honor be done in all his
servants there is no evil in this world but he knowith how he shall order it
to some well and goodness and study patiently to suffer the defautes and
i^firmites of other for thou have many imperfeccions in thy self which other
suffer in the If thou canste not make thy self as thou would be i^ every
condition how than should thou desire to have an other to thy pleasure we
would gladly have other perfect and yet we labor not to amend our own
offencis we would that other that offends should be straightly correct and our
self more coulpable vncorrecte It displesithe us to see other have great
liberte and priuelege disirig that they should be restreyned by law and statut
and we desire our self to be at liberte without law or statute and so it
appears that we full seldo^e praise our neighbor as our self the which we
should do if we were perfect. Our lord has so ordained that we shall learn
echone of other to bear patiently the burden of an other for i this world
there is no man without defaute no man without burden no man sufficient of him
self in wisdom or prudence and therefore must echone of us help to bear the
burden of other echone to comfort other help other istructe them and monisshe
them. And who is of more virtue it aperith by ye occasions af aduersite
Occasions makith not a person frail but they show whether he be virtuous or
vycyous.

The.xvii. chaptre how a person should order him
IF thou wylt have peace (self to come to pease and concord with other thou
must make a restraynige in many things of thine own will ^ys no little
virtue to continue in a company with out dissencion or debate and so to
continue. Blessed be tho persons that whether they be religious or seculer that
fereth to offend god and in their co^uersacion hurts no soul and so ends
their life in the love of god and of their neighbor. And thou wylt surely
stand in virtue repute the as an outlawe and a pilgrim upon earth and repute
thy self vile for the love of criste if thou wylt be his disciple and follow
him who so ever sekith in this world any thing but god and ye health of their
souls they shall find nothi^ge but tribulacion and sorrow that person can not
long stand i^ ^etnes that laboreth not to meke him self i^ his propre
reputacion and to be subject to other remember that thou camist to this world
to serve and not to rule aft thy propre pleasure and know thou that god of his
goodness has called the to ye relygion of cristis feythe yt by patience and
vertuus labor thou may be made apt to reign in joy and rest. For as gold
is proved in the fournes so man by tribulacion i^ the which no man may long
continue without he meke himself with all his heart by the example of our sauy
our rote of all mekenes.

The.xviii. chaptre of the examples of holy seitis
Thou dulle soul behold the quike examples of the holy seyntes that have be^
before us in whom florysshed the perfeccyon of relygyon and fey the / and
consider now little thou ^oeste in the respect of them and thou may repute*
thy life in vain. These saints and lovers of our lord have served god in
great abstine^ce hunger / thyrst / cold / in pore array / in labor and
fatigacio^ in watchinge / restinge / holy medytacion persecucion great
oppression and many repreues. O how great and grievous tribulacions suffered the
holy appostyls martyrs / co^fessours and virgyns / and all other holy souls
that have followed the stepis of our savior they have hated the impedimentes of
the life of grace this world that they might possess the fruit of
everlasting life for to come. O how strait and abiecte life led the holy
faders in wyldernes how long and grievous temptacions suffered they. And how
fersly have they be assailed with the gostly enemy / and how many continued
fervent prayer have they offered to our lord. O to consider the great rigours
abstynence that they have taken what zele / and fervor they had to spiritual
profit how great and continual batel they had to overcome vice / and in all
their life and labor how pure and rightwis was their intent ever to god. On
the day they labored and i^ the night they rested in prayer and if they in the
day ladoured bodyly yet they prayed in their mind devoutly: and so spent they
al their time profitably and had so great pleasure in the service of god that
they thought every hour was short and hade litell mind or none oftymes of
their bodily reffeccion.

The.xix. Chaptre of the good relygious exercise of a religiou and soul.
LIke as a person of honor is more preciusly besene in bodily vesturs that
apereth to man outwardly so they should ideuour them self according to excede
other with virtue in their souls and conscience wherein almighty god lokethe
and deliteth when it is endued with fair virtues and specially spyrituall men
and women which should study to endeavor their selse to appear in the sight
of our lord pure as angels. And every day we should inforse our self to
devotion and feruoure of feith as if we were newly converted to the law and
feithe of jesus crist / and for as much as we of our self may another do well
ne yet begin to do well / than let us every day with all our inly
strength and might beseech our lord that we may so devoutly begin the
service of him that thereby we may continue to his pleasure and our perpetual
salvation. we be many times in mind to do well and by a little occasion we be
let. The purpose of rightwismen depends more of the grace / and dyreccyon
of god / than in their ^^ne prouydence. For man entendeth but god disposethe.
Let us inforse owre self in that we may to the contynuaunce of our good
purpose / and yet we be lightly lettyde thereof. And though we may not
contynually be in the fervent love and medytacyon of god: yet let us determe
owre self to use it at the least ones or twyse in the day / and apply us to
virtue. And annexe to this purpose a fervent in ^ocacion and prayer to god for
his natural pite and fader ly compacion to give us grace to co^plenisshe and
fulfill this purpose. And at night goinge to rest: than let us discuss the
dedis that we have done that dai in words / works / and thought / wherein we
commonly offend god and if we find that we have made tra^sgression in any
offense ask we mercy with all our heart. As it is great ieoperdy an enemy or
traitor to a prince: or to a king that knows the crime: for if that man
should sleep in the kings palayes among the true servants of the king he
should rest in great ieopardye. So that person that in this world rests in
si^ne among the servants of god of the which if some be charitably disposed
as good angels and virtuous men: yet there be many evil as fedes and evil
people: that ever be ready to do ve^geau^ce and evil / and therefore against
these we must co^tynually be armed with virtue and meke restreyninge against
glotony: and thou shall overcome all other vices. and in any wise beware of
over much ocyosyte but other be exercysed with redi^ge wryttynge praiynge or
amendynge some profitable thing for ye comone well. And spiritual labors be
more surely done in secret place than in common: and be we not slow i^ those
things that should redonde to ye houour of god / and common profit of man: and
ready to those things that return to our si^guler and propre aua^tage. And it
is not expedient to continue alwey in one labor / but in one manner on the holy
day and another on the feriall day one the time of tribulacion and te^ptacion
another i^ the time of pease. And of the festyual day we ought to sole^pnyse it
according to the sole^pnite / so that ye more high fest and solemn the more
inly devotion by right should we have. And when one feeste is ^^ne we should
order our self to another feeste as the figure of the everlasting feast of
heaven which as for a time is delaide till we be more ready and anourned with
charity and other virtues and our merits complenisshed for the which our
lord has p^fixed a time in the which we ought to be cyrcu^specte and
watchynge i^ virtuous labor of y^ which speaks our savior i^ the gospel of
Luke / Blessed be y^ servant that is found waki^ge in the comi^ge of our
lord I say surely to you says the euangelyst that our lord shall promote him
to the place of eternalle felycite where he shall have all pleasure and goodness
that any creature may of reason desire.

The.xxi. Chaptre is much convenient for religious people how they should keep
their solytary life and syle^ce.
ANd thou will withdraw thyselfe from curyous and super fluous words from
ociosite and unprofitable langage than thou shall find time sufficient and
apt to have good meditacions / and to remember the great benefits that god
has done for the. The most holy men and women that ever were audydynge all
worldly company have chosen to serve god in secret placis and one holy man
said I come never among company but I deperte with less virtue as it seems
me as we may see by experyence yt is more dyffyculte to keep silence in
company than to ^e so cyrcumspecte that we offend not in no circu^staunce of
speech: It is much more sure for a religious person to bide at whom in
solitarye contemplacyon / than to be abroad in the world where he may lightly
be brought in many fold temptacyo^s Therefore they that entende to come to
spiritual perfeccion they must with our savior avoid the tumultuous company
of people and there be no religious people that with suerte apere to the world
but they be glad to be dymysshed from worldly occupacion And there is no man
sure in prelacy but he that is redye to be subject. And none that surely
commands but they that be redye to be obedyent. And no man surely ioyeth but
he that has testymony of a good conscience. None speaks surely but they yt be
glad in time to keep syle^ce. And ever the suerte of blissed people is full of
the dread of god and ever the more grace and vectuous their souls were
anowrned with the more meke and obedyent they were both to god / and man. The
suerty of evil people risith of pride / and presu^pcion and in the conclusion
it disceyueth them. and if thou be monk of the cherterhouse anchor / or ankeres
as long as thou lyuest in this life ever beware of presumed suerty and think
that many holyer than thou in the syghte of the world for their inward
elacion and presumcion have perisshed and therefore to avoid this inward vain
glory and presu^cion it is expedient that we be exersysed with temptacio^ O
that religious soul that would and it might contempne all transytory joy and
nether would ne it mystred to dele with the world. How pure a conscience
might it preserve. O that soul that would put aweye all worldly besynes and
would labor allonly for godly things and gostly goodys and put all their
confidence i^ god how great pese and ^etnes should that soul have ^here is no
person worthy to have heavenly consolacion but if they exercise their self in
holy co^punccio^ and penance. Co^punccion is remembrance of our si^nes with
great displeasure which must be done i^ secret place as (David says) Let
thy inly sorrow for thysi^nes be done i^ thy secret chamber. O thou religius
person thou may find that grace in thy celle which thou may lightly lose
without in the world And thy celle well inhaunted shall wax sweet. And if thou
inhaunte it not well. It shall i^duce the i^ to we rynes and displeasure. If
thou will in the begynni^ge of thy couersacion endeavor thy self to bring
the into a custom to abide in thy celle with remembrance that for a little
time ocupyinge thy self well there thou should thereby come to everlasting
liberte and the abidinge that should be full plesau^te to the. The devout
soul in silence and ^etnes much profits and there comith to thy
vnderstandi^ge the knowledge of the hydd scipture of god. There it may find ye
water of contricion and teris whereby it may wasshe and cle^se it self from
si^ne. And ever the more it withdraw it self fro all worldly tumultuus
besines the more famyliar and dear it shall be to god. And tho persons y^ wtdrawe
them from their worldly friends and knowle^^^ our lord with his angels shall
draw nere and a^^^^ with them. It is full expedient for a religius sou^^ to
avoid y^ un profitable pleasure of worldly sight ^^ther to desire to see the
world ne there to be seen (...) would you see yt thing that by right you
may not have. And if thou myghtest have it yet thou should have little
continuance therwithe for the world passes with all his plesaunt delites.
The se^suall desires draws and moves a religius person to go abroad but
when short re^nynge or pleasure is past what remains but remorse of
conscience and ini^etnes of heart. It is oftymes seen yt a glad goinge out
follows a sorry returning. And a merry cue^tyde follows a sorry morrow tide /
for all carnal and se^suall joy enters with delight dobely but i^co^clusion it
displesith and hurts. what may thouse without thy cloister yt thou maiste
not se within. Behold there heaven and the eleme^tis whereof all erthly
substance be fourmed what can thou see under the son that may any space
abide. If all wordly plesurs and bodily were present what should it be but a
vain sight lift up thy iyen to heaven and pray out lord of mercy for thy
sins and neclige^ce leave y^ vain things to those y^ be vain and atte^de to
those things that our lord commands and shet the door of thy soul and
call thy lord Jesus to ye and abide with him i^ thy cell. for thou shall not
find so great peace in no other place. And thou would not go fourth ne give
attendau^ce to things un profitable you should rest i more ^etnes. But if
thou have delight to here noueltise thou must sometime thereof suffer trybulacyon
of heart.

The.xxi. chaptre is of y^ co^punccio^ of ma^nis heart
ANd thou will proffyte spyrytuallly preserve the in the dread of god / and
stand rather under obedyence / than in thy propre will resraine all thy
sensual parts with the brydell of reason and te^perau^ce. Have perfect
co^punccion of heart and thou shall find inly devotion. Co^punccyon and sorrow
for our sins shows many things to us that a dissolute behavior hides and
leseth. It is merueylc that any person in this world consideringe his exile
and great ieopardise can be merry in any worldly thing For the unstableness of
heart and necligence of our defautes we perceive not the sorrow of our soul
and therefore we oftymes laughe vainly at those things whereat we should rather
weep. There is no perfect liberte ne true joy but in in the good conscience
and the dread of god. That person is happy that has grace to avoid the
impedimentes of holiness of mind and can assemble all the virtues of their
soul in very true co^punccion and meditacion of god. That person is happy that
auoydeth every thing that may of reason offend his conscience. Than they
that be overcome of customable sin let them strive mightily ogeynst their
custom. For evil custom may be overcome by good custom. Have thy
co^sideracion first of thy self: and monisshe thy self before al other
friends. It is not expedient that man i^ this life have many consolations
wordly and if we have not deuyne consolacyons: it is for that we have not true
compunccyon of heart: or else that we refuse not vain consolacyons of the
world we should repute our self vain and unworthy to have divine
consolations / but rather we deserve much trybulacion. The virtuous soul
wheder it consider it self or another it fyndeth matter of compunccion and
sorrow: for it knows that none lives in this world without tribulacion. The
matter of true co^tricion / and compuncion ever be our sins / and vices whereby
we be so disposed that we may seldom behold perfitly heavenly things. And
thou woldeste as besily remember thy death as thou do y^ length of thy life
thou should more ferue^tly apply thyselfe to amend the. And if thou would
perfitely remember the outrageous peynes of hell and pourgatory. I suppose thou
would be glad to suffer tribulacyon pain / and labor: here in this world
with that thou might avoid those outrageous peynes of everlasting
damnacyon. But for those things be not i^ our consideracion: and for we apply
ourselfe for wordly pleasure therefore we continue remysse / and cold for lack
of grace and inly devotion. And for the mi^de of man is not constant in virtue:
therefore the body is more frail and lightly offe^deth. Therefore pray
devoutly and mekely to our lord: that it would plese him of his grace to give
us the spirit of co^punccion / and say with the pro^hite. Good lord feed me
with ye bread of co^tricio^ and with ye habu^dau^ce of teris for my dri^ke

The.xxii. chaptre of the consideracyon of the mysery of man.
w Here soever thou be or where soever thou co^uerte the: thou art but a
wretch without thou convert thy self unto almighty god. where fore art thou
troubled: if that any thing happene not to thy pleasure. what creature in all
this world has all his pleasure. Se not we that almighty god suffered many
injuries and wrongs. and that person has most advantage in hope that most
suffers patiently for the love of our lord. The frail worldly people
beholdynge only outward things say thus Behold how good a life this man
has how rich: how great possessions: how mighty power how strong and
fair a nature. But those goods be of little certente ever in moui^ge and they
be possssed ever with labor and feere. Therefore behold the heavenly goods
that shall be possessed with all pleasure and never fade. The felicite of man
stands not in the habundaunce of wordly goods: but it requires things
necessary for this world. Ever ye more spiritual a man desires to be / the
more byttnes he perceyueth in this world and more clearly perceyueth the
fautes of our corruptible kind. and therefore the prophite David desired of our
lord to be delivered from all such necessary defautes that i^ manner let men
to come to perfeccion. But woe be to them that know not their myserie / and woe
be to them that have their greatest pleasure in this misery and corruptyble
life: for and such might ever live here they were rtent dispysynge in manner
the true felicyte to come: where every man that comes is most perfytly
suffysed. O how unhappy and vnfeithfull creature that by inordinate desire of
transetory and erthly thi^gdes art so blind that thou have no spiritual
taste: but of car ^all things. But at the hour of thy death thyn iyen shall be
opened with peynes and than thou shall know how vile and litell of reputacion
these things were wherein thou dydest put thyn unhappy felicite. But the holy
saints and the devout lovers of god have not pryncypally attended to those
things that were pleasant to the flesh / or those things that have
temporally florysshed in this world: but all their hope / and intent was in
this world to possess the goods eternal. All their desire was exalted to
the most hye and inuysible good lest it should be drawn to erthely things
by the mean of things vysible. O thou dulle soul that perseuereste in out
ward trybulacyon / or inly temptacion and in both overcome remember that in
time of trybulacion or temptacion is the most fruitful time of merit For thou
must go throught fire and water before thou come in to the place of fynall
consolacyion and rest. And thou shalt never overcome vice but by vyolence: we
may not long be without sin / tideousnes / or sorrow: as long as we bear
this frail body oboute with us: we would be glad to have quyetnes from all
sin and mysere: but for asmoche as we have looste innocencye by sin we be
not worthy to have here the place of joy and felycite. Therefore we must by
pacyence abide the mercy of our lord: unto the time that our miserable
mortalyte be perfitly changed in to the life perdurable / and immortalle. O
how frail is our humayne lynage ever prone and ready to vice. This day thou
art confessed of thy sins: the next day thou retornest unkindly to the same
sin. Now thou pourposest to cesse fro thy sin and within the space of an
hour thou fallest unto the same: as though thou had made no promise ne
purpose contrary. and therefore we have sufficient occasion of humiliaco^n
whereby we may manifestly perceive our own i^firmites and unstableness. And that
virtue that we long time labored for and by grace obtained is sone lost by
necligence. And we be remysse and necligent now when we be most mighty to
labor. what shall we do when we wax dull in wit and feeble in body. O how
unhappy be those that repute them self sure cessynge to labor against vice as
they were sure i^ good life. and yet there is no token in manner of perfeccion
in their life: and they that think themself perfect as I have rehersyd it
were expedient that they were i^structe as Nouices begynners to grow in more
perfyte virtues.

The.xxiii. Chaptre of the meditacion of death.
Provide for thy self whiles thou art here: for thou see that this day a
man is: and the morrow he apperethe not. And when he is wythdrawen from the
bodily sight / he is sone forgote^ gostely. O the great dulnes / and hardness of
manes heart that more myndeth and prouydeth for transetory things present:
than eternal things for to come. If thou would in every word / warke / and
thought remember as thou should sone dye than thou having a good conscience
should not so inordynatly fere death. It is more profitable to avoid sin
than to flee death. If thou be not ready this day to dye by the same reason thou
shall not be ready to morrow. For to morrow is a day uncertain and thou knoeste
not whether thou shalt continue thereto or nay. What avails yt to live long
and thy life to be little or nothing amended. A long life encreseth not
alweye virtue: but diverse times sin and vice. Would god we might be
conuersaunt eueriday in this world without any offense. There be many that
count many years of conversation: but full few of frutfull living. O it is
ferefull to dye but perauenture it is more ieoperdyous to live longer. Blessed
be tho persons that contynually have the hour of death before their sight: and
that every day dispose them self to dye. Reduce to thy remembrance some
person that thou haste seen depart. and think that like wise thou must
needs depart When thou rysest in the morning doubt whether thou shalt
continue in bodily health unto night And therefore ever dispose thy self to be
redye that death never may find the unready ne a slepar / and remember how
many do depart sodaynlye. and when they leest have believed they have gone. The
son of man both god and man our Judge shall come that time when we leest wene
as he says him self. When thy last hour comethe than shalt thou repent
full sore of thy remysse / and neclygente life: How gracyous / and happy is
that soul that now in his life laboreth to be in that state that it desires
to be found in his death. To contempne the world perfytely: is a great
desire to profyttein virtue. love of dysciplene / labor / in penance / a
prompte will to obedience / ready to forsake their own will the supportacion of
every trybulacyon for the love of our lord these shall enduce us to have a
great confydence to depart happyly out of this world It is much better by
time to provide for thy self and find thy goods before the / than to trust
to other that perauenture shall uought or little provide for the. And thou
labor not now besily for thy self who shall be besy for the in time to come.
Now the time is very precious: But it is lamentable to spend that time
unprofitably where we might de serve goods of the which we should live and
joy eternally the time shall come that thou woldeste be glad to have one day
or hour to amend thyselfe in / but I know not whether thou shall obtain yt
ornaye. O thou vncircu^specte soul of how great peril and fere myghtest
thou deliver thyselfe of now if thou would now fere to offend god and
suspecte yt coming of death. Study now to live so that i^ the hour of thy
death thou may rather joy than fere. Learn now to dye from the world
that thann thou may begin to live with criste. Learn now to contempne all
wordly things that than ^u may freely without any impediment goo to criste.
Chasti s^thy body now by penance and than thou may have certain confidence
of reward. O thou unwise ma^^^hy makist thou so great and sure prouysio^ for
the ^^me to come / when thou art not sure that thou ^^alte not live o one
day to the end. How many have be deceived thinking to live long and
suddenly have decessed. How of times have thou herd of those that be departed:
how some have be slain with sword: some drowned: some falling fro hie place
have broken their neck: some etynge have be stra^gled: some with: fire: some
with iron: some with the ues have be distroyed and so the end of every man in
this world is death: and the life of man in this world as a shadow vanisshe
aweye. Who shall remember or pray for the after thy death thou know not
Therefore now instore thy self of riches i^mortall that shall continue after
thy death. Ever labor for that thing that may honor god and help thy soul
and attend thereto: study to make the saints of heaven and the friends of god
thy friends: and they shall receive the into everlasting tabernacles: Thou
religious soul behave thy self upon earth as a pylgrim and a stranger: For
it perteyneth no thing to the to intermyt of the besines of this world.
Preserve thy heart fre and direct it to our lord for thou have no cite here
abidynge and therefore direct thy daily mourning and prayer upward: that
after thy spirit deperte fro thy body it may be worthy to be graciously
translated into that celestial and perpetual Cite.

The.xxiiii. Chaptre is of the last iugenent and peynes deputed for sin.
IN all thy labors behold the end and how you shall stand before y^ judge to
whom no thing can be hyd. he that day shall another be moved with rewards nor
prayer nor any other cause that may be alegid but he shall judge that is
rightwis. O thou myeserable unwise sinner what shall thou answer that day to
that lord knowi^ge all that ever thou haste done. If thou fere sometime in this
world the face of a mortal man which thou haste dyspleased how much more
shuldeste thou feere the face of this thy eternal Judge. why prouydest thou not
forth day of judgment. when there may no man be accepted or defended by
another. But every man shall answer for his own self. Now thy well ordered
labor is fruitful thy weeping acceptable / thy morning worthy to be herd
/ thy sorrow purgethe / and is satisfactorye. The pacyent man that more
lamentethe for the malice of sinners. Than for his own iniurye has an wholesome
pourgatory And likewise they that pray fore their enemies and in their heart
forgive their offenses and they that tarry not to ask forgyuenes of other for
their offenses. And be more redye to remytte thanne to be wroth. And they
that by vyolence restrain their self fro sin / and ever be besy to make the
body obedyent to the soul. All those have an holsomme pourgatory in this
life. It is much more profitable now to pourge our sin / and kytte it
away than to abide the pourgacion thereof with the fire of Pourgatory. Verily
we deceive our self by inordynat love that we have to owre self. what shall
the fire come to devour but thy si^ne. Ever the mo^^e thou sparyste thy self
now / And so folowyste the sensual appetite more greuouse shall be thy pain
afterward and more greuouse the fire. And therefore look what thing man more
grievously offends in / and therein shall be his more pain. The flouthfull
person shall be punysshed with brenni^ge broundes. The glottone that has
consumed metys / and drynkes superfluously to the detryment of their body / and
the injury of the pore that famysshed for hunger / than shall they famysshe
for hunger in so much that if they would desire a drope of water to mytage
that exceeding ardore / that they shall suffer / than it shall not be possible
to them to obtain it. The lecherous people / and the inordynat lovers of
their lustys shall be compelled to drink the stynkynge / and abhomynable
inflamed pyche / and brymstone. And the enuyous people shall wayle / and howl
as wode hundes. And so every sine shall have his propre torment / and pain
corespondynge to him. And the obstinate proud / and couetife persons shall be
replenysshed with all confusion / and penury. There shall be one hour more
peynful and grievous / than here a hundred year in bitter penance. There shall
never be consolacion ne rest to those that be dampened / or shall be dampened: but
here the troubled persons have sometime aleuiaunce of their peynes / and
consolacion of their friends. Be now besie and sorye for thy sin that in y^
day of judgment thou maiste have suerty with holy saints wheche than shall
stand in great constaunce against those that have vnryghtously vexed them.
And look as they be now iuged of other men so than shall they ^^ge other. Than
the pore obedient soul shall have great confidence / and the obstinate proud
man shall quake / and fere on every side. Than shall they be reputed wise that
have learned in this world of our lord to be abiecte / and despised. Than
shall all tribulacy on pacyently suffered be full profitable / and every
iniquyte shall trouble the auctor thereof. Tha^ shall every devout soul joy
and every wiked creature shall wayle and mourn / than shall the flesh that
has been with reason chastised be more glad than if it had been alweye in
delectacion and pleasure than the vile vesture shall shene and the glisteri^ge
gar mentis shall be derke and vile / and the pore cotage more of price than the
great glorious palys edified for pomp / and pride than shall be more allowable a
constant patience than allvsurped power than shall the true obedience of a meke
religious soul be more exalted than any worldly cautelous prudence than shall
a clear conscience be more joyful than the arrogance of poetis / or
philosophers / than the contempt of riches be more of price / than the
treasoure of all the earth. Than thou shall have more delectacion in devout
prayer than in the delectable fedi^ge And thou shall more rejoice of the
silence that thou haste kept than of thy long superfluous spech. Than shall
thy holy werk is be much more of price than the fair and plesaunt words.
Than shall a strayte life and peynfull be more profitable than al wordly
delectaco^n. learn now to suffer small tribulacyons yt than thou may be
delivered from great tribulations. It thou will in any wise by continuance
of thy sin order thyselfe to the fire make experience Put thy hand in the
fire: If thou may not suffer this little pain: how shalt thou endure to
suffer thy hole body perpetually to be put in the fire If now a little
possyon make the so pacye^t what shall the intolerable peynes of hell do to
the. Than give head thou may not have the full pleasure bodily here / and in
the life to come the habundaunce of spyrytuall joy. Therefore if thou will
afterward regne with Christ in perpetual pleasure follow him here in this
life with penance. It thou had lived from the beginning of the world to
this day in all honor and pleasure that were possible to be had in this
life they should now be al paste: as a dreme that shortly apperethe / and
soon is forgotten. And if thou shuldeste live now likewise to the worlds
end / and than depart what should remain of these pleasures nothing. Than
we may conclude that all wordly pleasure is but vanyte / and all other thing
in this world is vanyte saving the love of god / and his service or a thing
ordered to these. That soul that loves god with all his heart / nouther fereth
death inordynatly torments / judgment / ne hell. For persyte love has sure
passage to owre lord. who someuer has delight to offend it is no marvel if
they dread death / and their Judgment. yet if the love of god may not
wythdrawe the from sin / than yt is good and expedient that thou cesse of
sin for the fere of the peynes of hell. And that person that p^ferreth any
wordly love before the love of god can not long stand in the state of grace:
but he shall sone be tied in the snare of the devil.

The.xxv. chaptre of the fervent emandacyon of all the life of man.
Look that thou be waking and dilygent i^ the service of god and thou
relygious soul remember bysely whether thou art come / and why thou have
forsaken the world. was it not for that intent that you should become a
spiritual man / or woman / and to love / and serve god only. Therefore incyte
thy self to have feruoure to spiritual profit. For thou shalt shortly
receive thy reward for all thy labors and in that heavenly inheritance shall be
nouther sorrow ne fere. Now labor a little / and than thou shall fide great
rest / and perpetual gladness / if thou wylt feithfully / and fervently abide
in virtuous labor thou shall find without dowte that our lord shall
feythfully and habundauntly reward the and have hope that you shall come to
victory. But it is expedient that thou therein have not to great suerty: lest
thou be neclige^t or exalted thereby in thy mind. There was a certain person
that was oftymes following in his mind between fere and hope / and on a time
being full of anguysshe and sorrow in a church fell prostrat to the ground
seyinge these words. O if I might know whether I shall persevere / and
overcome this great temptacion that I am in. he herd anon the answer of our
lord showed to him in his soul saiynge. What woldeste thou do if thou
kneweste that Do now that / as thou would do than: and thereby thou may
have suerte. And so anon he was reconforted: and committed him self to the
will of god / and of his flowynge and unsteadfast mind was paysed / and would
no more by curious inquysicy on desire to know what should befalle to him in
time to come: but rather he studied to know the will of god / he studied to
conferme his will to the will of god: as well in the beginning as in the
ending of every deed that he should do. The prophet David exortynge every man
to virtue says. Do well and hope in god Inhabyte the earth and thou shalt be
fed with fruits thereof. The contynuall gruge and labor of temptacy on and
trybulacion wythdra weth right many from profit and fervent emendacy on.
Verily they that enforce their self with mighty apply cacyon to overcome
those things that be grievous and contrary to the health of their souls: they
profit in exceeding other / and man in mortyfiynge of his sensual parts and
ouercomynge of himself therein specially he profyteteh and comes to more
habundaunce of grace but every man has not in like to overcome or to mortyfie.
A fervent lover of god if he have mo and greati passions or lettynge shall more
spyritually profit than ye virtuous person yt has less fervor to virtue
There betwo things that specially help a soul to come to virtue to withdraw
it self violently fro those things that corrupt nature is enclyned to and
^eruently to labor for that grace or virtue that we per^eyue we have. most
need to. Give head in any wise that thou avoid those vices in thyselfe that
thou art most grieved or myscontent within other me^: and be glade to gether
virtue of every virtuous creature as the honey Be gadrethe his honey of diverse
flowers so consider all those that thou art co^uersa^t with. Chese of echone
of them some virtue refusige their vice take the fair flower from the
brambell and hurt not thy hand of the thorn. And it happen the to be hurt
endeavor thy self to be recouerede without delay. as thyn iye considers
the warkes of other / so thou art noted of other. O how iocunde / and merry is
it to be conuersaunt with company of honest name and fame / feythfull / and
ferue^ in the love of god. And contrary wise it is gr^^ous to be accompanied
with tho that be disordered both to god and man: that nouther as louer^ ^^
feithfull subjects have complenisshed those (...) that they be called to. How
inconvenient (...) is a person to be neclygent in those things that he is
called to of our lord: and to give head to those things that he is not bound
to. Reduce to thy remembrance the state of thy perfeccion yt thou ^^t called
to the ymitacion of jesus criste or service: Consider well his life and how
far thy life discordeth therfro and you shall fide thy self no good dyscyple
nor scoler hut rather a ^^uynde or a postata. That relygious soul that
devoutly exercyseth it self i^ the lyse and passion of our lord shall find
therein all things perfitable and necessary for it and habundauntly and shall
not need to seche any better thing / than in this life is contained O that
soul that might alweye have the remembrance of Jesus crucified: how sone and
sufficiently should yt be enfourmed with knowledge necessary: A fervent rely
gius soul patiently suffers and observes those things that be commanded to
it / And a necligente and a remysse religious soul has tribulacy on upon
trybulacion / and suffers anguy sshe and tribulacy on on every party / and
that is for it lacks inly co^solvcyon / and is cestrayned from ourwarde
comfort. That relyyious person that lyuethe without discyplene is ready to fall
to ruin. And that man that ever seeks more large manner ane liberte in his
life: shall be alwey in anguyss he and trouble / and euershal dysplese him
outher that life / that he has begone or else for he has left a better.
Take heed how many religious people for the love of god and euerlasti^ge joy
and liberte now obediently lives under the rule of strayte religion. They be
withdrawn from ye world / and desire not to be greatly conuersaunte with the
world they be porely fed / content with vile / and gross clochynge: they
labor much and speak but little superfluously / they watch long and sone
rise: long in prayer / and holy redynge of frutfull doctrine / and yt they may
come to everlasting liberte. They keep their self fro the space of this
short life under obedience and in prison. Consider the holy orders of relygyon
both of men and women as those of the charterhouse / obseruauntis / minors
^^minores holy ankours and ankeres how besily they ^bou^ night and day to plese
and serve our lord. These quick examples of so great multitude should induce
the to be a shamed to be so indeuoute and remysse in the service of god. O how
iocunde and plesaunt a life should it be to a soul that had no wordly thing
to do but love god contynually with all his heart in warkes and words. O if we
might continue in this life without bodily refeccion as etynge and drin
^yngeslepynge / or any other bodily necessires and give head only to holy
medytacion and gostly fedi^ge and ce^eccion of o^re soul / than we should be
much happy than we be now in serving / and attendynge more for bodily
things than gostly pro^ite. whann man comes ones to that perfeccion that he
secheth consolacion of no creature / than begineth he to have a spiritual
tallage in god. and when he is content with every fortune as well with
aduersite as prosperyte conformynge and referrynge al his warkis to god to
serve and obey to his will. Ever remember the end of every thing that thou
begynnest and also that time lost can not be recovered and thou shall never
obtain virtue without labor and diligence and when thou begynnest to be
remysse in spiritual labors than thou begynneste to wax evil. If thou
apply thy self spiritually to more virtue thou shall find great pease and
than by grace of god and love that thou have to virtue thou shall fi^de the
spiritual exercise in virtue evermore delectable / and lyghter A fervent and
loving soul is ever ready to all things that be expedient to the pleasure of
god and spiritual profit of it self. It is more labor to resist vice and
iordinate passions / than to be occupied in bobely labors and if thou will not
give head to avoid ye less sin thou shalt sone be enduced to the more. And
when thou have brought the day to the euyntyde in virtuous occupacion without
any great displesure to to our lord than thou maiste be glad and suerlyetake
thy rest in him. And ever before all other souls give head to thyn owue soul
excite and move thy self to virtue / and what so ever thou do be neruer
neclyge^ti those things that be necessary for thy soul and look how much
thou desire to profit / and so much aplie thy self vyolently to gostly and
spiritual labors. and thus ends the first book of John^ Gerson of the
Imytacion of Criste.

Here begins the.ii. book of John^ Gerson of the inward and devout
conversation of the soul of man.
AFter the sentence of our savior Jesus crist the inward regne of god is in
the soul of man. Return thy self with all thy heart to our lord and forsake
ye inordi not love of the world and thy soul shall find rest learn to
conte^pne outward thi^g^ and aplie thy mi^de to inward things and thou shall
perceive that the kingdom of god shall come to the wherwithe comith peace and
joy in the holy ghost that is not granted to no wicked man. If y^ will
prepare i^ thy soul a condynge mansion criste shall come and abide there to
thy inly consolacyon. All the pryncipall joy and delight that god has in man /
is in the obedyence / and virtue of the soul: there he is customeably with
merueylous swetnesse / and great famyliaryte comfortably fedynge it with
goostely speech and doctrine. O thou feythefull soul prepare thy heart to
Criste thy spouse that he may come thereto: and by his goodness make therein a
mansyon. For he says in the gospel of John^: who so loves me he shall
observe my commandments and my fader and I with the holy ghost shall come to
him and make with him inhabitacio^ by grace until we bri^ge him to y^
celestial habitacion of glory. Make ready a place i^ thy soul to him that
create it / andlette nothing have interesse therein that may offend him. If
he abide with the that is lord of all richesse how may thou ^e poor he
shall be a sufficient / and a feythefull prouysoure for the in all thing
expedient for the i^ who me thou must more constauntly hope / and believe than
in every creature: for all creatures mortal be mutable: for though they
promise never so suerlye ^et they may besone changed. But crist that is the
^^ete firmament ever in one abiding may uat of ^^y wise break his absolute
promise. Be a friend that is mortal never so feythefull / or beloved: yet in
^^at / that he is mortal / and frail he may be changed They that this day be
thy friends to morrow may be thine enemies: and therefore put no sure
confidence but in god whom thou shalt love / and fere above all thing. Here
we have no certain habytacyon: but wheresoever we be in this world we be as
pilgryms and strangers and shall never have rest without we be unity to crist.
Fyxe thine iye of thy soul of the present things in this world of the
pylgris that goone by the way which be not tarried by the beauty of those
things that been in their way: but their mind run most of the end of
their journey. So let the iye of your soul be fixed perfitly in heaven where
be true iyes and than shall we be less tarried in the use of erthely things.
Beware that thou enclyne not so much unto erthly things that thin appetite be
not therewith attached and thou made subject to the great enemy the world and
so spiritually perisshe. Let thy medifacion be alwey of him that is most high
and direct thy co^tynuall prayer to crist if thou can not occupy thy mi^de i^
the high contemplacion of god rest than in the possession of our savior and
let thy contemplacion rest in his blessed wounds and there thou shall
perceive si^guler comfort in all tribulacions bodily and gostly. And feere not
much of the detraccion of evil speech of the worldely people if thou give no
cause thereto. For we have example of our master crist that was most vile
reputed / and in his most necessite forsaken of his friends and a queyntaunce.
Criste our leder would suffer and be despised / and we desire to be magnifyed
and loath to suffer iniure or wrong. Criste had adversaries and detractours /
and we would have all to be our fre^des and benefactours. How shulne thy
pa^^ence be crowned without aduersite. And you will suffer none aduersite how
shuldeste thou be the lover of criste. If thou wylt regne with him in
perpetual pleasure suffer with him here temporal tribulacyons. If thou my
ghtest ones perfitely enter i^ the ^^ly devotion of jesus christ / and perceive
a litell of his fervent love / than thou should but litell force all wordly
advantage or disauantage but should rather joy i^ i^iuries and conte^ptes
showed to the. For the perfect love of god incyteth man to co^tynue him self
in the inly love of god that is free from all inordynate affeccions and may
without defaute holy convert him self to criste and in him have perfyte rest
and fruycion. He that praysethe the good of the world not as they be extemed
of the wordly people but as they be of price in their self that person is very
wise and rather instructed of god than of man That soul that has at lyberte
the inward mocions of virtue and pondereth but little the outward things he
abidethe another place nor time to have virtuous exercise in good life. The inly
man may so^e unite and call to geder his inly powers and virtues of his soul
/ for they be never holy occupied with outward things. The outward labor or
exercise is ^ecessarye for a time it lets his soul but little of ^^s
perfeccions for every thing yt beha^ppith to him ^heter it be aduersite or
prosperyte he refers yt to the will of god. Look how much more a man
loves any wordly thing than it should be loved so much his mind is
distracte and let fro the true ordinate love of god. If thy soul were perfytly
pourged from all inordynate affeccions every adventure and fortune coming to
the should be ye augmentacion of virtue and grace to thy soul. The cause why
many things displease or trouble the is that thou art not yet perfitly
mortified in thy self ne pourged from all i^ordinate love of erthly things.
There is nothi^ge that disordreth or fyleth the soul of man as in pure and
disordred love of creatures. If thou would syke no worly consolacion outward
thou might have thy meditacion and heavenly co^solacion i^ thy soul the
which excedeth all wordly and tra^setory comfort as heaven excedeth earth.

The second chaptre of the humble subieccyon of the subject to the prelate.
wHo so ever be with y^ or contrary to the labor with all thy might to have
thy lord god with ye in every viage or thing that thou doeste / and than thou
may say with David the profit / god is my helper I shall not fere the
enemy of man. The most immediate mean to god with the / is to have a good
clean conscience. And look to who so ever god puts forth his hand to help
there can no aduersite hurt him. And if thou can keep scylence / and pacyence
thou shall without doubt perceive the help of god in thy need. He knowethe the
time / and the ways of delyueraunce and therefore refrain and commit thy
self to him. It pertains to him to help and deliver y^ feythfull obedient
souls fro peril and ieopardie. It is expedyent for our humylyacion and meryie
that sometime other people know our defautes and sins yt they may correct
and repreue us. when man for his own defautes humyleth him self tha^ he has
more compassyon of the fraylte of other and reconsylethe him self to those
that have offended him and co^trariwese he reconsileth them to him. Almighty
god protecteth and defends the meke man obedye^t and him he knows and
counsels and enclineth him self to him and sends great habundaunce of
grace to him and she weth his secret counsel to him. Also he inuiteth hi^ and
draws him by grace benigly and after his humyliacion and depression he
enhaunteth him to glory The meke obedyent soul proved by injury and confusyon
may rest in peace. For in asmoche it is co^te^pned of the world it is in manner
constrained to fle and rest in god and never estimate thy self to have
perfect profit without thou repute thy self most vile of all other.

The.iii. chaptre of ye restfull and quiet person.
Took thou first be quiet thy self and than thou may the better pacify
other. A pacye^t man more commendable and profitable than a great lettred
^ipacyent A person that is passionate lightely ^eueth the worst party commonly
in every thing. ^^at person that is content applies every thing ^t / and
that soul that is not well content is inq^et by diverse suspicions and another
quite in himself ne yet suffers other to be in pease / and speaks oftimes
those things that be not sitting / and omyttethe to speak of those things
that were expedient to be spoken of. He considers what other be bound to do
and is necligent in that / that perteyneth to him self. Have first a zele and
a respect to thy self / and than thou may better attend to the deeds of
other. Thou art ready to excuse thy propre error and defautes / and will not
consider the fraylte of thy neighbor. But it were more accordi^ge to equite to
excuse thy neighbor and to accuse thyselfe: If thou wylt that other support
and suffer the thou must sometime charitably support and suffer other me^ how
far art thou from perfect humylyte and charity / by the which man should be
most wroth with his own offenses it is no great matter of patience to be
co^uersau^t with meke tractable / or charitable company for with such persons
every body deliteth naturally to be acco^paned: but it is a sign of great
virtue and patience to be conversant patiently with froward wrathful and
evil manered people ye be ready to prove our patience with co^tradiccions
injuries and wro^ges. Blessed be those that among this people be pacient for
to them by their patience perteyneth the kingdom of heaven. And that person ye
by grace can apply himself more to suffer pacie^tly shall obtain more peace
and may be called a co^querour of himself / and over the world a lord a
friend of crist and the inheritour of heaven.

The.iiii. chapt^ of pure mi^de and a true intent.
MAn is eleuate and lift up from erthely things unto spiritual things by
feithe / and clenesse ^f mind as by the mean of two wings. Thy en ^ent must
be simple without any duplycite / and thy affeccion or desire pure from all
disordinau^ce. The simple and true intent beholds god: but the pure mind
apprehends and takes taste of his ineffable swetnes. If thou be fre from
all inly and i^ordinat affeccion there shall no good operacyon let the from
the wey of perfeccion. That person that ente^deth both the pleasure of god /
and the profit of his neighbor may have true and inly lyberte of mind if
thy heart were perfitly ordered / every creature should be ^ mirror of life /
and a book of holy doctrine to the. There is no creature so imperfect or vile
but i^ some manner it shows the goodness of god / if thy soul were pure from
al inordynate affeccio^s you should see and praise every thing in due order.
A pure and cle^e heart perceyueth heaven and hell commonly The i^war^e
disposicion of man is shewede by his outward conversation there is no joy in
this world to the ^ye of a clean conscience. And contrariwise there is no
trouble or iniq^etacion in comparison of the trowble of the mind disco^tent of
evil conscience / As y^ ^ron put in the fire is cleansed from the rust and made
^ere and sheni^ge / so the obedyent soul made hot in the fire of tribulacion
is pourged from the rust of si ^e and made clear i^ conscience and made arde^t
i^ the love of god / and so he is changed into a new man when a soul
begins to be remysse in virtuous labor / than it fereth a litell labor and
receives gladly the outward co^solacion. But when it beginethe perfitl^ to
overcome it self: and to walk mightyly in yt way^ ^f god than it extemeth the
labors / or trowbles but light: y^ which before were gr^uous / and ^portable.

The.v. chapt of the propre co^sideracion of man.
THere should novertuous persons have great confidence in their self. For many
times by the mean of our presu^pcion or te^ptacion we lack both grace and
wisdom of true judgment. y^ spiritual light that we have is but little / and
yet we lose it sone by our neclygence. And diverse times we be so far
ouersene: that we will not or can not perceive our propre bli^dnes. Diverse
times we be evil in our dedis and in defense or excusacision of them we be
worse. There be diverse that estymate / and think their deeds be done of zele /
and charity the which they do by i^moderate passion and carnalyte we be redye
to repreue small offenses iu our neighbor and to excuse our propre great
offenses: we be redye to note the injuries that be done to us: but we consider
not what other suffers of us. If we would consider well our propre offenses we
should more pacie^tly suffer and judge the defautes of other. The virtuous
person co^sideringe how he shall give account of his propre offenses:
co^sidereth but litell the offenses of other for whom he shall not answer.
Thou shall never be inly devout without thou keep syle^ce of other me^ nes
warkes and words / and dylygently behold thine own. If thou give thine
attendaunce to god and to thy self only: the outward conuersacyon of other
shall the less move the / where art thou when thou art not present to thy
self. If thou consider al other things thy self not considered what shall it
avail the? Thou shall profit specially i^ gostley lyui^ge if y^ preserve thy
self fro tumultuous wordly occupacion and that religious soul may not greatly
profit gostly that much applies it self to seculer occupacyons Let
nothi^ge be so derely accept to the as thy lord god or thing ordered to him:
and estymate all delectacion or pleasure of any creature not ordered to him but
vain a soul yt perfitly loves god / and reputeth all thing under god and
his seint^ but small of price. God of his inco^prehe^sible goodness
replenissheth ye world and is y^ pertite solace of soul and gladness of heart.

The.vi. chapt of ye gladness of a good conscience.
THe consolacion of a good soul is in co^syderacion of a good and clear
conscience. Labor ever to have a good conscience / and than thou shall be
contynually in gladness: and mighty to bear pacyently aduersitees. For a good
conscience is ever glad among aduersitees / and contrary wise an evil
conscience is ever ferefull / impacyent / and inquiete. Thou may rest suerly
if thy heart being right repreue the not. Be notyme glade but when thou do
well The evil people have never true or perfect rest: ^e perceyueth not the
inly peace of mind: for as owre lord says by his prophet Isaie. there is no
sure peace to wecked people: and if they think they he sure ^e doubt not
aduersyte having so great confydence in their self that they think no thing
may remove them from their estate. Have no confydence in such manner of
people: for without they be returned from their iniquite thou shall se y^
wrath of god fall upon them / and their subtylyte / and false way shall be made
vain: and their thought is shall perisshe / and they also. It is not grievous
for a perfyte lover of god to joy in tribulacio^: for that is none other but to
joy in the cross of Jesus christ. The honor or joy that is given to man of
man is but of small quantite: and there follows that joy for the most part
heaviness. The joy of good people is in the conscience of them / and not in
the vain commendacion of men. and the gladness of them is of god and in him
and their joy in virtue and of good life Tho that desire the true and eternal
joy forces little of temporal felicite. That person has tranquilite and
rest of heart that another desires wordly co^mendacion ne forces not of
temporal commendacyon Thou art not more holy if thou be commended ne less
virtuous if thou be dispreised: and when soever y^ be commended or dispraysed /
thou art as thou art and as our lord y^ sercher of secret minds knows y^
so thou art virtuous orvicious and if thou consider well what thou art
withiforth thou shalt litell force of y^ outward la^gage of ye people. man
beholds y^ outward perte of the / but god beholds ye heart. man co^sidereth
the warkes but god the intent of every deed It is a good sign of a meke soul:
that ever does and yet extemeth it self to do but litel or naught. That soul
that inquireth not nor desires not outward testymony for it self: it is a
sigue that it has commit it self holy to god. the probacio^ of a virtuous
soul stands not in the co^mendacion of their self but of god. The state of
the inly virtuous man is princypally to order his myude to god by obedience and
love and be at liberte from all outward i^ordinate affeccions and desires.

The.vii. chapt of y^ love of Jesus above al things
BLessed is that soul that perfitly knowinge Jesus crist loves him above all
thing and for his love contempneth itself / as it is sytti^ge that a king be
most princypall in his own reame So it is according that Jesus be ordered as
princypall in the soul of man the which is his reame as he says him self in
the gospel of Luke. The kingdom of god is within you: that is to say in the
soul of a feythfull lover of Jesus. The love of a creature is vain and
unstable / but the love of jesus is feythfull and perseueraunt. That person
that will rest / or be supported of a disceyuable or roton staff must of
necessite fall therewith. and contrary wise be a soul never so feeble / or
frail if it will rest or apply it self with all spiritual strength thereof
to Jesus criste yt shall be perfitly stablisshed and made strong in him Love him
and keep him before all other. For if al other fre^des forsake the / he will
not leave the ne suffer the finally to perisshe. And thou must sometime of
necessyte be departed from all thy friends of this world But endeavor thy self
to keep this great trend jesus and thou shall not be separated from him neither
living nor diynge and thou shall find him so feithful to the that when all
other fail ofsocour and help toward the he shall never fail. And if thou
wylt avoid all iordinate love of creatures Jesus will gladly i^habite and abide
with the. What so ever thou do to man or receive of him not ordered to icsus is
asvaine and lost. Be not adherent ne put not thy confidence in that thing
that is as an holowe stock or a read having no substance to sustain the:
every man living in a mortal body: says our lord is resembled to hay. And
all his bodily pleasure shall sone fade and fall as does the flowers in the
medowe* If thou attend and give head to outward appearance of man thou shall
sone be disceyued. If thou wylt besily seche solace and lucre / thou shall
find many times displeasure and detryment. If thou seche thy lord jesus i^
every thing thou shall truly find him. And i like wise if thou seche thy
self / thou shall find thyselfe but to thy distruccyon. For he that laboreth
to have all other things and jesus co^te^pne is more enemy to himself than
al his adversaries over al ye world may

The.viii. chaptre of the famylyer amyte (be and love of Jesus criste.
WHat soul that has the gracious presence of jesus has all thing that is
good without any difficultes prone and ready to every virtuous operacion and
where jesus is not present by his grace / there is every deed of virtue i manner
peynfull There is no perfect inly and goostely consolacyon but when jesus
speaks in the religius soul Did not mary Mawdeleyne arise sone when Martha
had showed her that her master christ jesus was nyghe and cleped her. That may
be called an happy hour when criste calls a soul from lamentacyon / and
weeping and specially of mind. O thou soul how hard and undevout art thou
when jesus is not with the by assistence of his grace. It is not more damage to
lose his grace / than all the world what may the world avail the without
the grace of the maker thereof: It is in manner a pain of hell to be separate
fro jesus / and it is a plesaunt paradise to be vnytte and knitte with him by
grace. And there shall none aduersite neo there enemy overcome the / as long as
Jesus is with the / and that soul that syketh him and fyndeth him has found
the tresour of all tresoures: and if thou lose him thou haste more damage: than
though thon shuldeste lose all the world / That person may be called most
poor that has not jesus / and he is most rich that has him by grace / it
is great wisdom and cunning to be conuersaunt with jesus / to keep him with
the. Labor to have perfect mekenes and to be quiet / and devout / and jesus
shall abide with the. If thou apply thy desires inordinatly to outward
things / thou reiectis the inward grace of jesus. and than thou shalt be
full disolate of true amite and frenhshyp / for without his grace and gostely
conforte / thou shalt never have perfytly gostely gladness in him before all
other / And also we should rather will to have all the world contrary to us:
than to offend him Among all thy de re and special friends chese jesus as
most dear feithful and special whom thou should love for him self / and
all other in order to him. For there is none other but he that has all degrees
of goods and amyte but he alone and therefore in him and for him love both thy
friends and also thyn enemies: and pray for them that they may know god and
perfitly love him. Never coueit to be commended and loved singulerly. For that
of right belongs to our lord to whom none may be compared. Mix never thy
love with any inordinat love of creatures if thou will know how sweet Jesus is.
But none may taste of his swetenes without he be p^uente with grace: and
specially called of our lord all other callynges set aparte: so that thou
si^glerly abide with him alone. When the grace of our lord comes to a soul /
than it is made strong to every thing that virtue reqreth. and when grace
deperteth fro the soul it is faint and frail unapt to do or to suffer that
virtue commands: but it be with great difficulte and pain: but yet leave not
those ded^ of virtue and despair not: but conform thy will to the pleasure of
Jesus criste. For after winter folowethe somer / after the night the day: after
the tempest the fair wether.

The.ix. Chaptre of the dysolacyon of wordly co^solacyon.
IT is no great maistry to contempne the co^solacyon of man when that the soul
is prevent with heavenly comfort: but sothely that soul is full herd bested
that is disolate of conforte both of god and man / and yet if it can pacyently
suffer this for the love of our lord it deseruethe to be conforted of him.
what great mysterye is it to be merry / and devout. When thou perceyueste the
grace of god in thy soul ready to help the. That soul rydeth full pleasauntly
whom the grace of our lord supportethe / and bears up. What marvel is if
that soul be not over charged with trybulacyon that is supported of him that
is omnypotente / and is conveyed by his infynyte wisdom we be glad to have
consolacion and supportacion in all our life and labors and sorry to be without
them or to forsake our own propre appetyte / and pleasure. The holy martyr
saint Laurens was so fervent in the love of our lord that he gladly forsook
not alonly the world and his special beloved friend and priest Sixtus: but
also his mortal life by passion most terryble and ferefull he over came the
love of man by the love of his maker and he made co^mutacion of transetory
consolacion and life for euerlasti^ge and solacyous life. Here we may learn to
co^fourme our will to ye will and pleasure of god when he of his grace takes to
his mercy any of our friends be they never so dear and specyal to us. For like
as we come to the world by his will and commandment so we must deperte fro
this mortal life and te^porall cohabitacio^. It is no little ne short battle
a man to overcome him self and to order all his affeccions to the pleasure of
god. The very true lover of god / and studyus desire of virtue is not besy to
acquyre wordly consolacion or sensual pleasurs ne bodily delectacions: but
rather glad for the love of god to exercise their self in hard and payntfull
labors when the spiritual and deuyne consolacio^ is granted to y^ for a time
repute that of his goodness and not of thy deseruynge: be not thereof joyful to
much ne p^sume thereof vaynly but be thereof meke and circu^specte and timorous
i^ all thy actis / for that hour shall pass and te^ptacion and tribulacion
shall come. And when they come take not i^moderate thought or sorrow ne in no
wise dispeyre not / but mekely and pacie^tly abide the divine co^solacion: for
he is of power to grant to the more habu^dau^ce and co^tynuau^ce of spiritual
consolacion and swetnes than thou hadest before. And merueyle not of such
altercacion in thy mide for thou art not the first that has had experiens of
these / for the holy seyntes prophets / pr^iarkes and appostels have had like
altercacions of mind sometime merry by deuyne consolations and somtymes proved
by withdrawi^ge of co^solacion and belapped with tribulacion and vexacion. The
prophet David (hauig y^ co^solacious ^sence of the deuyne grace) said he
should never be removed therfro without end and anon when he had experience
of y^ abse^ce of this grace he said to our lord thou have withdrawn thy
delectable chere of thy presence and I am made disolate and troabled between
those.ii. extremites of joy and trybulacion take we no defense but rather prai
we with David sayi^ge I shalnat cesse to cry to y^ form^ey and I shall mekeli
pray to y^ my lord god: so finally he procurid ^ fruit and effect of his
prayer as he testifies saying Our lord has hard me and has mercy of me /
and is made my helper and after says. Good lord thou have turned my sorrow
i^to joy and you have belapped me with joy. If almighty god has in this wise
dealt with ye great excellent seyntes we that be of small reputacion may take
thereof confidence in god: though we have sometime fervor of spirit and
sometime lack of devotion and spiritual co^solacion / for his spirit of holy
co^solacion comes and deperteth at his pleasure as y^ holy man Job says. Thou
graciously visetest him in the morowtyde: and shortly afterward thou
prouydest him by matter of patience. And therefore where in shall I trust or in
whom shall I have confidence but in the great mercy of god / and hope of the
heavenly help. If I might have the assistence of good devout men / the help
of holy books / and the royal and noble process of scripture / also incited
to devotion by the mean of sweet melodyous so^ge. all those things may little
avail / when I am lafte to my frailte and pouerte without grace / than there
is no bet^ remedy but by patience to remove owre own will and conform us to
the will of god. John^ Gerson the auctour of this treatese says: he never had
knowe^ege of religious person but he had at sometime subtraccion and demynucion
of gostly swetnes: feruoure and devotion. There was never religious soul so
ilumined orso rauisshed in y^ vision of our lord but it was proved by
te^ptacio^ other before or afterward. For there be none worthy to have y^ hye
divine conte^placio^ but if be they be exercised first with some tribulacion
for the love god. it is provided by the great wisdom of god to the elect
souls to have temptacio^s as a sign or token of co^solacion to come. For to
those that be provided pacyently by tribulacions be promised of our lord
heavenly reward and co^solaco^n as it appears by the sentence of the holy ghost
showed by ye mouth of the holy euangeliste John^ seyi^ge who souer ouercometh
tribulacio^ by patience vice and sin by resiste^ce shall be fed with the fruit
of y^ tree of life y^ is with the clear divine vision and unspeakable fruicion
of y^ blessed godhed. and also the divine consolacion is granted unto man for
to make him more strong to suffer aduersite. And anon folo with te^ptacio^
list yt man take any elacion of y^ gostly consolacio^. The devil slepith not ne
y^ flesshely appetitis be not yet morfied / and therefore p^pare thyselfe to
batell for you have ennemies on every side he yt never sesith to assail y^.

The.x. chaptre of yeldi^ge thanks to god for his graces.
wHy secheste thou rest when thou art ordained in this life to labor Apply
thyselfe more to patience than to consolacyon / or pleasure / to the cross of
penance rather than to temporal joy / and pleasure. There is none so seculer
or wordly: but if they might have co^tinuaunce of spiritual co^solaco^n they
would gladly accept yt. For the spyrytuall joys excede all other wordly
co^solacioos and bodily pleasures. All wordly and bobely plesurs be transetori
and mixte with somdele of uncleanness. But the spitritual plesurs and desires be
pure honest and joyful procedynge of virtues and granted of our lord alonlye
to pure and clean minds. But this tranquylyte of gostely co^solacions is many
times overflowed by the outrageous te^pestis of te^ptacion. The false lyberte
of living and great confidence in our owneselfe be two things much contrary
to heavenly visitacion and consolacion: Our lord shewith his goodness to man
grauntinge to him y^ grace of gostely consolacion. But man shows his unwise
neclygence / when he withdraws co^digne thank ne i^puteth not this grace
only to our lord and therefore we be not worthy to have his merciful grace
to abide with us. Grace is ever granted to the meke souls that ever be read
to yield thanks to god for his merciful benefaites. and contrariwise grace is
withdrawn fro the unkind and the elate person. I desire not to have that
consolaco^n by the which the compunccion of heart may be minysshed or removed /
ne that desire or love that with drawyth co^te^placion and inciteth my frail
soul to elacyon Every excellency is not holy: ne every desire pure ne enery
swetnes good and wholesome. There be diverse things full dear to man / that be
not accept to god we should accept gladly the grace whereby we may be made
humble / and tymerous to god / and more prompte to forsake our propre appetites
/ and wylles That soul that is perfytelye enfourmed with the reward of grace
and learned with the rod of subtracc^on of grace has none audacite to ascribe
any virtue or grace to it self: but rather it reputeth / and confesses it
self pore and naked / yield thou to god that is his and to thy self that is
thine: that is to say thank our lord for his graces and thy self for thy
sin / for the which judge thy self worthy for to have peine and sub traccion
of grace. There may no soul attaye this high degree of grace or perfeccion ne
stand theri^ without it ground it self in humilyte and obedyence Tho that be
most precious and high in the sight of god be most vile and low in their
propre consideracion. and the more precious that they be in grace ye more meke
they be / full of truth of heavenly glory not auidious of wordly vanite. Tho
that be roted and perfitly fixed in the dread and love of god: may not of no
wise be obstynate or proud. And tho that ascribe all the goods that they
receive to almighty god they be not desirous of the vain co^mendacyon of man
but they rather desire the glory and co^me^dacion which is of god alone: and
they labor that god be honored and loved of all his saints: and they refarre
all their labors to the same end. Be thou ki^de i^ yeldynge thanks to god
for the small benefaytes that thereby thou maiste deserve more great and
profitable graces. Repute the lest gifts of god great and the natural
dyfformytees and special tokyns of love: for they be medicines / and means to
meke oureselfe. If we would consider perfitly the honor and dignite of the
lord that grau^teth us those gifts we should exsteme no gift little ne vile.
How may we Judge that thing little in acceptacion that is given of y^ great
ki^ge maker and gouerner of y^ world without whose will and providence there
fallethe no lefe ^to the tree. And therefore he gives to diverse of his elect
people: peynes: tribulacions bodily and gostly as me anes of everlasting
promocion. who soever desire to retain the grace of god let him be diligent i^
yel dynge thanks for the graces that he has received And ever apply thyselfe
to wisdom and mekenes list yt thou lose the grace that thou haste received If
yt fortune by te^ptacio^ or frailte to be withdra wen from the. say inly in thy
soul that thou haste deserved y^ subtraccion thereof: and patiently and humbly
pray for y^ recoueringe thereof: thou may not by thy propre merits be
restored to the mercy and grace lost by sin but by the mean of faderly pity
and most merciful passion of Jesus criste.

The.xi. chaptre of the small noumbre of the lovers of the cross of Jesus.
IHesus the heavenly king has many lovers of his heavenly kingdom: but there
be few that will take his cross and follow him. There be many desirers of his
consolacion: not of his trybulacion: he has many ready to be parteners of his
table and repaste: but none of his abstinence and penance All men would be
glad to have joy with him: but there be not many that desire pain / and
tribulacion for his love. Many follows him to be parteners of the fraccyon of
his bread: but there be few that will patiently dri^ke with him of his chalice
of trybulacion. And many meruelously commend him for his great meracles: but
many of them be loathe to follow the shame and vilete of his cross. There be
many that follow him in prosperity and love and bless him as long as they
receive of him prosperity and consolacion. And if he withdraw him self for a
season fro them by showing no tokyns of pleasure or consolacion they fall
soon to lamentable co^playnynge and desperacion. Tho that love that lord not
for prosperity ne co^solacion of mind alonly but principally for him self
they bless him as hertly i^ te^ptacion and tribulacio^ or any other necessite
as they do in their perfect prosperity. And if he should give to them ever in
this world aduersite: yet they should ever love and thank him. O how mighty
is the pure love of Jesus not permixed with any inordinau^s of favor or
affeccion. Tho that seche of god pryncipally by prayer or any other virtuous
pleasure bodily or gostly may be called rather couetouse merchants / than
liberal lovers the reason hereof we may perceive for tho persons apply their
service / and love to our lord for his benefaites and they serve and love ye
benefaites before god / and they love the benefait* and gifts in that they be
profitable to their self / and so sui^gly they may ryghtfully be called lovers
of their self rather tha^ of god. It is full hard to fi^de any person so
spiritual yt is perfitly fre from all inordinate affeccions. That person
should not be profitable or desirer only of those that be nere him: but of ye
far extremites of y^ world. If a person were so virtuous yt he would leave all
the worlds substance and do great penance and had all knowledge: and were
fervent in devotion yet he should not atteyne the most excellent and great
perfeccion in living to the which he may not aproche without al other things
forsaken he utterly renounce his own self and holy forsake his own will and
living and being at liberte and fre from all private and several affeccions
and desires. and when thou have done all that thou know to be done exteme
and judge thy self as thou hadest of thy self no thing done and as the
auctour of truth our savior says: when we have done that is possible to be
done: yet we be of ourselfe unprofitable servants and not worthi to be
rewarded but of his grace. than we being pore and frail in body and soul
void of all meritorious virtue may conveniently say with the prophet David I
am disolate and pore. There is none more rich none more fre ne at liberte nor
more of power than yt soul that knows itself: and will be ready to forsake
not all worly things: but also itself and repute and judge itself most vile
of al other.

The.xii. chaptre is of the royal and victorious way of the holy cross.
THere be many that repute y^ words of our savior hard and peynefull when he
says we may not be his disciples without we deny and reuounce our own will
and take the cross and follow him. But it shall be more peynefull and sorrowful
without comparison for to here the words of mouth in the extreme and last
judgment / when he shall pronownce the wordee of perpetual dampnacyon saying
to the reprobate creatures: Go ye fro me for ever to be perpetual fire that is
ordained for the devil and his angels: Tho that now here the word of god and
be glad to follow it / than they shall not be astonyed of their own party
herynge the words of dampnacion of the reproved people wha^ our Lord shall
come to deem all the world ye sign of the cross shall be heaven and so those
that be true servants of the lord that was crucified / and at that day
having his conisaunce or sign that is to say the cross of penance. than
may they have full sure access to him their master and Judge. Why fereste you
to take the cross of short penance whereby you may comesuerly to the
perpetual joyful kingdom. in yt virtue of the cross is spu^all health and
life proteccion from our enemy. and infusion of heavenly swetnes. the strength
of mind ye joy of the spirit. there is profitable and excellent virtue with
perfeccio^ of holiness of liui^ge There is no health of the soul ne hope of
heavenly life / but by te virtue of the cross and therefore take y^ cross of
penance and follow Jesus thy leder into ever lasting bliss. He has gone
before the beringe the cross / and thereupon for thy love suffered death. than
take the cross of tribulacion sikenes or other disases and desire to suffer
death for his love / if thou wylt be assembled to him in patiently sufferynge
pain trybulacion and death. than thou shall be pertener of his pleasure
co^solacion and perpetual life and joy. Than behold what virtue comes by the
holy cross. and what habundau^ce of grace by ye arde^t desire to suffer death
for yt love of our lord. There is none other way to come to life and inly
peace. but by the way of the cross of penance and co^tynuall mortificaco^n of
our rebellious sensual partis. Go whether soever thou wylt and inquire
whatsoever thou desire: but thou shall nener abowe the under the fend a more
excellent and sure way than by the way of imitacio^ of the holy cross Dispose
thy self and order every thing after thy propre will and desire / and thou
shall find thou must ever suffer other freely and by thy will or violently and
against thy will and so thou shall not avoid the cross outher sikenes and
peynein thy body / orellis by tribulacyon in thy soul. Sometime our lord
deleth with yt as he would forsake the / and sometime by his wisdom he suffer
the to be injured and vexed of thy neighbor and sometime of thyn own self and
there is no remedy ne alienation but thou must patiently suffer till it plese
the great physician to send alegians and remedy to the. For he will that thou
learn to suffer trybulacion that thereby thou may be made more humble and holy
convert thy self to him. There be none that perceyueth or inly or hertly
follows y^ gloryus passion of crist as tho that for his love or the profit of
their souls has had comfortable pain. This cross of tribulacio^ is ever ready
and abides the in every place and therefore thou may not avoid it i^ any
place. for if thou were secluded fro all the world. yet thou shul dest have
experience of this cross of tribulacion in thyselfe Co^uerte thyselfe to those
above ye / orellis to those yt ben under y^ / and about ye and look within
the. And in all those / thou shalt find the cross of temptacyon ad
tribulacion / and therefore it is expedyent to the ever to arm thy self with
patience: if thou wylthaue inly peace and the crown of perpetual tryumphe and
joy. Endeavor thyselfe to bear this cross of tribulacion pacyently / and it
shall sustain the myghtyly and led the to a joyful end where thou shall
never bear the burden of any ki^de of tribulacio^ or te^ptacion. If thou bear
this cross against thy will / than thou berest a burden yt more charge thy
self / and therefore in asmoche as you must of necessite bear it / apply thy
self that thou pacie^tly sustain it. and doubt the not if thou abiecte it /
and put it away: but thou shall have another and peraue^ture a more heavy and
grievous to sustain thynkest thou to avoid that never mortal creature yet
might escape. What saint fro the beginning of the world to this day has
come to heaven without this cross of trybulacion. No not the son of god our
savior: the which from his first coming i^to this world: unto his
departing was not ye space of one hour alyenate from the pain of the cross
and trybulacion. It was behouable that crist should suffer death and arise
again / and so to enter i^to, his glory. How should thou sinful creature
think that thou shuldeste go to heaven by any other way than by the plain /
right and high kings way that is to say the way of the cross. Desyreste
thou to come to heaven by pleasure and joy. Now sith the ledar of life with
all his martyrs have paste by the way of trybulacion and the cross. Who so
ever intend to come to heaven without the way of trybulacion and the cross
they err from the right way for all the way of this mortal life is full of
meseres and crosses of tribulacion. And ever the more a soul profits in
virtue the more peinfull crosses and grievous tribyulacions it shall find
pertly for the fend assayleth more fersly those persons whom he sees encrese
more in virtue. The second cause is / for the more strongly a soul increases
in virtue the more desire it has to be eleuate from the incommoditees of this
temporal exyle: and to be at lyberte in the perpetual joy and propre
country. But the soul thus vexed with many fold affeccions may syngulerlye
be reco^forted when it perceyueth that for every trybulacyon pacye^tly and by
grace overcome it shall be rewarded with the fruit of everlasting life. And ever
ye body is punysshed with pain and tribulaciou: the more shall the soul
receive of spiritual strength and consolacion. And sometime the soul is so
reconforted in aduersite and tribulacion that it would not be without them
considering that thereby it is made coformable to our sauyoure christ. And
also it consyderethe well that the more pain and tribulacyon it may suffer for
his love / the more acceptable it shall be in his sight. How may this be that
man by patience suffers and desires that nature fleethe / and hates not by
no virtue in man but by the synguler grace of Jesus criste. It is not the
natural appetite of man to love / and suffer a peynefull cross to chaslyse
the body / and subdue it to the service of the spirit to flee honors / and
gladly accept repreues and injuries: to despise himself: and desire to be
despised / patiently to suffer all aduersitees with shames and repreues / and
to desire no prosperity in this world. Behold thy self well / and thou shall
well perceive that if thou have those things aforsaid thou have not them of thy
self: but if thou wylt apply thy self and have confidence in god: he shall
send the fro heaven that thou shall have these virtues and also thy sensual
part* with the world shall be made subjects to the / and if thou wylt arm thy
self with y^ quycke feith and the cross of jesus christ: thou shall not need to
fere the envious subtylte of the fyende. than prepare thy self as a feithfull
servant of jesus criste to bear his cross co^sta^tly / co^sideringe how he
thy lord did bear it for the peinfully and mercifully: order thy self to
suffer mani aduersitees / i^iuries and wro^ges i^ this miserable life: and so
thou shall have him with the where so ever thou be also thou shall fynbe him
where so ever thou hide y^. Than if thou desire to be dear and a friend to thy
redemer and have perte of his co^solacion / desire affectually to dri^ke with him
of his chalys of trybulacion desire no co^solacion ne prosperity but at the
will of god and order thy self to suffer tribulacions / and repute them as the
most special consolacyons / for they be y^ ready means to come tho the
heavenly and perpetual co^solacions. when thou come to that degree of pacye^ce
that tribulacion is sweet and pleasant to the for y^ love of god / than exteme
thy self in good state / and that thou have found paradise in earth And as
long as it is grievous to the to suffer and enforces thy selse to fle
tribulacion: so long thou art not in the perfect state of patience: and
whersoeuer thou fleest thou shall find trybulacion nere and folowethe. If thou
order thy self ever to suffer patiently and to have remembrance of thy death /
than thou shall perceive thy self i^ good state and also in q^etnes and rest.
If thou were so perfect yt thou were rauysshed spiritually with Paul into y^
third heaven: thou shuldeste not be sure therbye to be without aduersyte. For
owre sauy our spekyng of Paul says: I shall show him how many things he
shall suffer for my name. Than if thou will serve and love thy lord
perpetually thou must now suffer and say many times to thy self: would to
god I were able for to suffer for the name of my sw^te lord Jesus. For thereby
thou should give occasion of special edificacion of thy neighbor great
glory to thy self and exaltacion of gladness to ye holy angels. All people in
manner reco^mende patience: but there be few yt will use it. Thou that take
great labors and suffereste much for the love of the world / and wordly
things by great reason thou shuldeste be glad to suffer a little for the love
of the most true lover criste. And ever the more thou mortify discretly thy
self the more thou begi^nest to live in the sight of god. There is no person
apt to co^prehende heavenly things withuot they submit their self to suffer
aduersite for the love of criste. There is no thing more profitable for thy
self and acceptable to god tha^ to be pacient and glad to suffer for the love
of him. And if prosperity and aduersite were put in thy eleccion thou should
rather chese aduersite / than desire to be recreate with many co^solacions: For
by aduersite thou art made conformable unto christ and all his seyntes. Our
merit and perfeccion of state stands not in great plesaunt and delectable
co^solacions but rather i^ grievous te^ptacions and tribulacions and penalyte of
life. If there had be any more expedient mean to the health of man / than to
suffer pain / and tribulacion our lord criste would have showed it by words
and examples. But he exorted his disciples and all other that would follow him
to heaven to take y^ cross as the most mediate mean to follow him saying who
that will follow me to heaven they must deny their own self forsaki^ge their
propre will and take the cross of peuaunce and follow me. Af^ all these things
read and perfitly serched it follows as a fynall conclusion that it is
behouable to us ta enter into the kingdom of heaven by wany tribulacions.

Here begins the.iii. book.
The first chaptre co^teyneth the inward spekeynge of our lord Jesus criste to
ma^nis soul that he has specially chosen.
Oo says such a feithful soul I shall atte^de / and here what our lord shall
speak i^ me. blessed is y^ soul which herith our lord god speak i^ it / and
that conceyueth of his mouth a word of rsolacio^ Blessed be the eris / that
here the still speaking: or rownynge of almighty god / and pondereth not y^
disceytefull calling or prive mouynge of ye world blessed be the eres that
rest not in the flaterynge / or wordly voice outward flowynge. But rather
heringe truth / that speaks and enformeth ma^nis soul in wardlye. Blessed
be the iyen that be shytt to the delectable sight of outward or wordly things
and that give head devoutly to gostely things. Blessed be they that by grace
and by the light of soul perceive the true inly intent of scripture: and that
^pare them daily by exercise os soul to conceive the celestial priuetees.
Blessed be they that labor besilye i^ soul to behold and love god almighty
and his pleasure i^ all things and for that avoid from them al wordly besines
or desires that let such deuocio^. O thou my soul attend and give head to
the premysses and shyt thy senses or sensual parts: that thou may here
gostely what thy lord speaks in the in ward inspiracion. The lord and lover
says to the I am thy health and peace and life everlasting Join and knytte
the suerly to me / and thou shall find rest and peace of conscience: and after
this euerlassynge peace and life. Forsake the love of foul and transetory and
erthly things: and dilygently seche euerlasti^ge things. what be all
temporal things but disceiuable / and what may any creature help the if thy
lord god that made the forsake the / wharfore refusest thou al wordli things
and join and cleue by clean and stidfast love and service to almighty god thy
redemer that thou may hereafter attain the eternal felicite i heaven.

The second chaptre how treuthe spekerhe inwardly to man's soul without
noise.
A Devout soul after that it has herd the sweet instyllaunt speaking of
his lord god as a man inflamed with love desires more longer speech with our
lord saying with the Prophet Samuel thus / Speak good lord for thy
servant is ready to here the / I am thy servant give me vuderstandynge to
know thy co^maundme^tes and sayings. Bow and make my heart and soul to feel
and follow thy words and instyll in to my soul thy holy techige and words as
the dew droppethe upon the grass I say not as the children of Israel said to
Moses. Speak thou to us and we shall here the gladly: let not our lord speak
to us list we dye for dread. So be it not with me good lord. But rather I
beseech the humbly and desirously with the prophet Samuel yt thou vouchesaue to
speak to me thy self I shall here the. Let another Moises ne none other prophet
but thou good lord the inward inspirour of al prophets speak to me and in me
For thou only without them may perfitly teache me. They without thy goodness
can not profit me. They may well profer and utter thy words: but they can not
give the spirit of understanding they profer fair words: but if thou work
not with them they make none ardour inward they show fair letters and
writtiges: but thou alone openest their sense: they profer great mysteries: but
thou alone openest the clear vnderstandige of them They show thy
commandments to be fulfilled: but thou alon helpest us by thy grace to
perform them. They show us the way that we should walk i: but thou alone
do comfort us to go theri They work only without forth: but thou only
illumynest within forth: They only water outwardely / but you gyuest us the
fruit of grace and good works. They cry and speak to is in outward words /
but you give understanding of that we here wherefore I beseech the / that I may
here the speak to me / and not moses list I die and be void of the fruit of
good living if I be only outwarly monisshed and not iflamed i^wardly that not
thy word be only herd / and not fulfilled in deed / knowyn / and not loved /
byleued and not kept / and so be to me da^pnacio^. speak thou good lord to me
and thy servant shall be ready to here the: for you haste the words of eternal
life shyt in the Speak to me I beseech the y^ words of rsolacion and comfort
to my soul and to the amendment of my life to thy everlasting laud and
praysinge in heaven.

The.iii. chaptre how the words of god should be wekely herd / and how many
ponder them not in their conscience.
OUr lord spketh to his devout servant saiynge thous / My sone give head to
my words they be full sweet pcellige alwisdome and cu^nige of philosophers and
wise men of this world. Mi words be spu^al and gostly life / and not paisible
in man's mind / they be not to be applied ne drawed as vain complacens / but
to be herd stydfastly in silence and peace of soul and to be taken with all
humslyte and desire of the soul. The devout servant of god answers his
lord god thus saying to him Blessed is that man that thou do enfourme and
teache good lord to understand thy laws and co^maundementis yt thou may so
spare him in the day of thy wrath fro thy indignacion yt he be not lost
without comfort in the land of dampnacion. Our lord say the again. I have
taught prophets with other fro the begynnige of the world hitherto: and yet I
cesse not to inform men / but many there be that be hard and defete to here
my words. Many here more gladly the wordly speaking / than godly or gostly
speaking. Many follow gladly their flesshely appetites of their body / than the
pleasure or co^mau^d meant of god. The world promitteth and sometime gives us
temporal things and little of valor for the which we serve it with great
desire. But god almighty promytteth and gives us hye things and eternal and
yet men be dulle and low to his service and to at tayne such rewards as he
promytteth. Who so serves and obeys god almighty in observing his
co^maundmentis: as it is obeyed to wordly princes: and masters? Almost none /
for a little fee or prebende great iourneys and hard labors be take an hand
for such wordly lords and for y^ etnallyfe skarsly we may any labor or any
hardness suffer. So a vile price is besily sought: and an excellent reward is
put under. For a penny to be gotten or won we will lightly put our body and soul
i^ ieo^dy and aue^ture and for a vain thing and a little promise we give often
our self day and night to great fatygacyon / but alas for god almighty that is
everlasting goodness and reward of right wise people / for the vnspectable and
iestymable Joy in heaven / or for the hye honor and glory intermynable for to
be had in reward in heaven / we dysdeyne and be slow to suffer a little faty
gacio^ / Be thou ashamed says our lord god to slow folk and repreuyth them
with their service that worldly folk be found more dylyge^t to their
perdycio^ / tha^ be to everlasting life / they joy more in vanyte than other in
trothe or steadfast things / and yet they be often frustrate of that that they
trust upon / but the promise of our Lord god deceyueth no man / for he is
true and faithful all his words and behestys to such folk specyallye that
serve him unto their end / I am says he the rewarder of all good folk and ye
prouer and helper of all devout men / write my words says he in thy heart
and think upon them / they shall be to the right necessary in time of
trybulacyon / Thou shall understand i^ time of my vysytacyon these things
that you redyst before and understand not / I am wont to vysyt says our lord
my seruauntis in two manner wise / that is to say by probacyon and co^solacyon
I prove them daily by rebukynke their vices and defautes / and I comfort them
again by exortacyon to virtue and to the encrese of grace / He that hereth my
words and dispyseth them / has yt shall judge him i^ the last day.

The.iiii. chapter how by prayer we may opteyn to devotion.
THou good lord art all goodness / I am not worthy to speak to the thy
excellence is such I am thy most poor servant and most abiecte worm most
poor and co^temptyble of all other for I am very naught / nothing having ne
nothing of valor / thou alone good lord art god ryghtwyse and holy thou
art almighty / thou geuest all thing thou fulfyllest all things / leuynge all
only the sinful void of grace / have mind good Lord of thy merytes and
fulfill my heart with thy grace for thy workynge is never void / How may I
live without great anguysshe and perplyxyte in this wretchyd life but if thy
grace and mercy comfort me / wherefore I beseech ye that thou turn not thy
gracious face of help from me / tarry not thy vysytacio^ from me with draw not
thy sweet consolacio^ fro me / that not my soul be aryfyed and be made as dry
earth without the moystoure of grace / good lord teache me to know and
fulfill thy will teache me to live humbly and worthily in thy pleasure for thou
art all wysdom i^ the which thou knew me before the world was and before I
was brought into this life by natural birth.

The.v. chapter how we ought to believe truth and hu^ilite before god here.
SOn says our lord walk before me always i^ truth and symplicite of heart and
all doublenes avoid from the in such wise do always seek me / He that walks
before me and alwey in troth / shall be safe from all perellys / and Ieo berdyes
/ and troth shall deliver him from deceyuours and from the detraccyon of ill
men / And if truth deliver the thou shall be very fre from the vain words
of men in this world and shall not set by them / It is true says a devout
soul to god that thou sayste be it done after thy saying / thy truth teache
me / keep me and bring me to saluacyo^ and good end and deliver me from all
evil affeccyo^ / from all inordynate love so yt I may walk with ye good lord
in lyberte and fredome of heart / Truth says again to such a soul I shall
teache the things that be rightwyse and plesau^te before me / Remember thy
sins past with great dyspleasure and heaviness and repute the not any thing of
valor for any good deed that thou haste done / Think verily thou art a
sinner by wrapped and bound i^ many passions and sins think yt of thine
own self thou art naught and soon turnest to that that naught is you art
soon overcome with sin / you art soon trobled and often broken with passyo^s of
syn you haste nothing of thy self that thou may magnyfy thy self of / but
many things thou have / wherefore thou ought to vylype^de the / for thou art
more feeble tha^ thou know thy self / Therefore let nothing that thou doste
seem to the great of price / of all things yt thou do esteem nothing
p^cious or in valor or i^ reputacyo^ and laudable / but that thing yt is
eternal so yt the everlasting troth be pleasant to ye before any thing
else / and yt allvylyte or syn^e specially thine own sin and foulenes
dysplease ye so yt nothing be to the so odyous / as sin and wyckednes the
which ought to displease the more tha^ the damage or loss of any other
worldly thing / Some there be that walk not clerey before me / but they be
led by pride and curyosyte to search and know my secretys and the hye things
of my godhede / and so they be neclygent about themself to know their sins
and gostly health / such persons fall often times into te^ptacyo^s and grievous
sins left to the^ self for their pride and curiosite yt they follow / dread
thou therefore the iugeme^tes of God and the i^portable wrath of god almighty /
Dyscusse not ne enserche the meruaylous works of god but consider thou well
thy sins and wyckednes how often and in how many great things thou have
offe^dyd and trespassyd against god / and how many good things thou have left
undone of rechelesnes / some folk there be yt bear their devotion all in books
/ some in Images and some in outward tokens and fygures / some there be that
bear me in mouth often namynge me in word but little in heart / and some other
there be / that have their intelleccyon or reason clearly illumyned with the
light of understanding and their affecte so pour ged of erthely things that
they always aspyre to eternal things grievously berynge to here co^menyng of
erthely things / taking but scarsly of such things as be necessaryly
required to natural life / such know what the spyryte of truth speaks in
them the which techeth them to despise erthely things and to love heavenly
goods / and to despise the world and worldly things and to desire ever heaven
and celestyall things.

The.vi. chapyter of the marvelous desire and affecte of the love of God.
O Thou fader celestial the eternal fader of my lord jesus criste I love the
and bless the for thou have vouchesaue to remember and behold me loui^gely
with thy gracious consolacion. O thou fader of mercy and god of consolacion I
thank the that thou co^fortest me unworthy to have any consolacion. I bless
and praise the alwey with thy only begote^ sone and ye holy ghost whithout
end. when thou good lord my lover as thou art of al man kind shall come into
my heart all my inward pertes shall joy. Thou art my joy / thou art my hope /
and refuge i^ the time of my tribulacion but for asmoche as I am i^perfite of
virtue and feeble in love. Therefore I have need to be comforted and helped of
the. Wherefore I beseech thy endeles goodness to vysete me oftymes / and
i^structe me with thy holy disciplenes and techynges. Deliver me from passions
/ and hele my heart fro all inordinat desires and affeccyons. Se that I
inwardely be purged and eleuate from wordly affeccions and may be made apt /
and able to love the good lord spiritually: strong in patience to suffer for
the / and stable by perseueraunce in goodness. Love is a great thing and an
excellent virtue / that makes every grievous and hard thing light / sweet /
importyble thing easy to bear / and bitter things sweet and sauorable. The
love of jesus perfyghtly imprynted in man's soul makethe a man to do great
things and exortethe him thereafter alweye to desire more and more perfight
things. Goostly love desires ever to ascend to heavenly goods and vily
pendeth al erthly things his necessaries saved. Such gostely love coueteth to
be fre and alyenate from all wordly occupacio^s list that his inward syghte
of soul be derked / or let: ne his affeccion to gostely and heuenlye
things be let from his liberte by wordly things: Nothing is more sweet
than is love / no thing is more strong than love: no thing higher / larger
meryer / fuller / ne better in heaven / or earth. For love comes of god: ne it
may not rest finally i^ any creature lower than god / It makes a man renew /
and joy. It makes a man fre in his soul without any retaininge of sin. It
makes a man set naught by wordly goods: but to depart with all that he has
to relyue the indignes / and myserye of other folk. Also it makes a man
content with that little that god sends him: and noughttd desire that
pertains to other: for he rests above all thing erthely in one perfect
goodness: that is to say / i^ god almighty: of whom all other goodness flows
and proceeds Such a person beholds not only the gifts yt be given to him:
but he attends above al things with love and dread unto god the giver. Love
knows no measure: but it incendethe the lover out of measure. Love makethe
man to feel no hardness ne other burden laid upon him. and it makes a ma^nat
repute any labor that is impute to him it makes any man to desire over his
power / and might It complaynethe not of impotencye any time: For it makethe a
man to think all thynhes possible to him and lefull Love therefore does and
may do great things: where the lover lies not nor defayleth not. It makes a
man gladly to wake when he is dulle and disposed to sleep / When a man is weary
it makes him not to account it. When a man is arted or troubled / it
chassethe aweye all trouble and feere inward. For as a quycke bronde or flame
of fire if it be moved: or blown it flamethe upward so a gostely lover in
troubles is lift up by fervor of love to god. and so by the help of god
almighty he ouerpassethe all such peynes and trybulacions He that is a gostely
lover knows that the ardent desire of man's soul is a great cry in the
ere of almighty god / the which cry says inwardly to almighty god. Thou good
lord art my love thou art al my desire / and I am thy creature / delate my
heart in thy love that I may learn to taste by the inward mouche of my soul
how sweet thou art in love / and what is to man to be lyquyfyed and molten in
love or to swymme therein. I am holden / and bound in love so that I go above
my self for great marvel and fervor of lone I beseech ye good lord that I
may sing the song of love / and follow the my lover by virtuous lyuinge ever
to ascend to y^ in perfitnes oflyui^ge / so that my soul may be stre^gthed in
praysynge of thy majesty by ioyfyll love of thy goodness. I besyke the alwey
that I may love the more than my self and that I may ever love my self and
all other that love the: for the and in the as y^ law of love that thou
comanded monissheth love is swifte / clear / pyteous / merry / and iocounde /
it is strong pacient / wise / feithfull / long abiding / manlye and never
hyd but alwey ready. Whereso a man sekethe himself / there he falls fro love
/ for love is circumspecte very meke and religious / not light ne gyuinge head
to vain things. Very love is sobre / chaste / stable / quiet / and kept in
his bonds. Also love makes a man subject and obedient to his prelate. It
makes a man ferme / and stable in virtuous life and to seem vile and despecte
or un worthy in his own sight. Also it makes a man devout to god and kind
and always to believe and trust in him though he have not souche sauoure or
approximacion to his goodness that perfighte folk have. For noman here living
may in love without langour and heaviness. He that is not alwey ready to suffer
and to apply himself to ye will of god almighty his lover / he is not worthy
to be called a lover / for it perteynethe to a lover to suffer gladly al hard
and bitter things for his lover and not to decline fro him for any co^trarious
thing.

The.viii. chaptre how a true lover is proved.
HE that leueth or forsakes the love or the virtue that he has begone with
for a little aduersyte or trouble / or that in such time seeks lightly wordly
consolacion / he is not prudent ne strong lover: for a strong lover stands
stably in te^ptacion / and he gives not head ne place to the deceytfull
persuasions of the enemy he is not broken by i^pacyence / by aduersitees ne
illuded or disceyued by prosperous things. A wise and a prudent lover
ponderith not the gift that is given: so much as the love of the gyuer He
conceyueth rather the love of the gyuer / than the gift that is given and
prepondereth the gyuer before all things given: A noble and very lover
rests not in the gift that god almighty gives but in god that is the gyuer
of all goods: that man is not all disordred that sometime less co^ceiueth or
pondereth god almighty or his sayntis tha^ he would do For that good and sweet
desire that a man sometime perceyueth in his soul is the effect of grace given
to man in this present life and a taste and savor of heavenly glory: to the
which we may not rest ouermoche by confidence or trust of soul: for it goethe
/ and co^eth mouable / and is natpermanent A man to fight or strive against the
evil mocio^s of his soul and to overcome the suggestions of the devil is a
token of virtue and of great merit. See therefore what soever you art that no
strong fantasies of any matter trouble the. Keep still thy purpose and right
intencion of soul to god and thou shall not fall. Think not that it is
illusion that thou art sometime rauisshed in ecstasy or excess of mind and so
returned again to customable lightness of heart. For thou suffer rather such
discens against thy will than wylfully. As long as such co^trarious disordred
or vain thoughts disple se ye and thou striueste against them when they rise
i^ y^ it is to thy merit and no loss or hinderau^ce. I know says our lord
jesus to his lover that the old enemy to man does alwey his power to let thy
will and desire i^ goodness and to hinder and let the from all good and devout
exersise: as fro the worship yt thou art bound to honor me with and my saints
and fro the meditacyon or remembrance of my passion fro the rememberaunce of
sins with bitterness of soul fro the p^seruacion of thy berte fro evil:
and from will to profit i^ goodness and virtue. Many ydell and evil thaught is
he suggesteth to ma^nis soul: to make him both loathe and weary with prayer and
other virtuous exercises low co^fessyon displeseth him greatly / and if he may
he will let a man of his communion. Set not by him ne believe him not: for he ley
the before the many snares of disceyte. When he she weth to thy soul evil
things or unclean Dispiteously say to him go fro me thou foul wicked spirit.
Thowe works that bringist such foul things to entyse me. Be thou ashamed
for thou art foul of thy self: go fro me thou false disceyuer of mankind /
thou shall have no part in me. For my savior jesus shall stand with me i^ my
defense as a strong warrior to thy confusion I had lever dye and suffer
almaner pain than to consent to y^ Hold peace and cese of thy te^ptacions: I
will no more here ne give head to the though thou vex me never so much: For
almighty god is my helper whom I dread. He is the defender of my life upon
whom I trust. ye if the strength of castles withstand me I shall not dread:
For our lord is my helper / and redemer. Fight and strive ageynste such
intiseme^tes as a good knight: if thou sometime be overcome by thy feebleness or
frailte: take tha^ more comfort and stre^gthe of soul than you did before:
trustige thereby to have the more large grace and comfort of god and beware the
after of pride and vain glory for thereby be many led into erroneous ways and
fall ito incurable blidnes of soul. So yt thou therefore beware and humble the
against the presu^pcion ot such persons.

The.viii. chaptre how grace is to be hyd under the palle of humylyte.
Son says the wise man / it is more sure / and profitable to the to hyde the
grace of devotion given to the: than to show it out wordly. Auaunce not the of
it / ne speak not of such grace to other nor magnify thy self thereby: but
thou should rather despise thy self and dread list thou be unworthy to have
it or sone by thy neclygence to lose it. Man should not cleue or trust to much
to such affeccio^ which may sone be turned to the contrary. Consider well
when thou have such grace how wretched and nedy thou were before thou hadest
grace / nor the profit or increase of spu^al life is not only when thou have
the co^solacion of grace: but when thou with humylyte suffer the subtraccion
of the same: so yt thou leave not thy prayer ne other good deeds: but with al
thy understanding and dylyge^ce do thy best wha^ thou felest such subtraccion
or dulnes in the to recover the consolacion of grace. Many there be that be
very dulle and i^pacient when aduersyte fallethe to them the way and life of
fortune of man is not ever in his power and eleccion but of the goodness of god
is all that we have: the which does conforte when we will and asmoche as he
will / and whom he will as his pleasure is and no more. sompersons have distroyed
themself by indiscrete desire of grace of deuocio^ for they have disordred
their strength of soul over much not ponderinge their exyle and pore lymytes
of reason but rather followed the desire of heart / and therefore for asmoche as
they presumed higher things tha^ gods pleasure was that they should attain
to therefore they lost their grace before had And so they be made and left nedy
and vile that presumed to enter the secrets of heaven / yt they may learn not
to presume upon themself: but alweye with true humylyte to trust to god
almighty. Such persons as be beginners and be not yet perfect in ye way of
virtue and in our lord god / may lightly err and be deceived but if they
follow the counsel of discrescion: or discrete persons Such persons as lene
to their own wytt and so follow it: and refuse the discrete ways of such as
have long exersised the ways of virtue. fall into great i^co^uenientis
finally. Such persons as be wise i^ their own sight will seldom be ruled
humbly by other. Better it is to a man to have little wisdom or cunning with
humylyte than to have great cu^nynge with pride or vain glory. Better it is to
the to have little than to have much with pride and da^pnacyon: He lives not
discretly that gives him al to lightness and vain gladness forgetynge him self
and y^ dred of god: not dredynge to lose grace. Also he is not wise ne virtuous
/ that in time of aduersyte: or other hardness dispayreth and trusts not
stidfastly in god He that in time of pease will live to sykerlye without dread
of all paryles / he shall be found to dreadful and unready in time of battle /
and man would always abide humble and little in his own sight and dyly ge^tly a
wait on himself / he should not so soon fall to sin and offense of god /
good and holsom cou^ceyll is a man after that he has rceyued the spyryt of
deuocio^ and charity to think how should he do and what should fall to him
in the absens of such devotion when such a case happeth let a man gader that
such grace and light may return again to him by the honor of god which
withdre we fro his co^solacyo^ a season to show his power and for man's well /
it is more profitable to man sometime to be left to him self and to lack
such grace and comfort / than always to have such prosperous things at his
will / For a man is not reputed to be of more merit or virtue in they sight of
god / if he have many vysyons or consolations given him / or if he have clear
understanding of scripture / or if he be auau^sed by great and hye promocyon /
but than he is of great merit and greatly in the favor of god almighty if he
be perfyte i^ mekenes and filled with charity always seeking the honor of god
in his deeds / with co^te^pte and despysynge of himself as well i^ the syghte
of other men as in his own coveting more in humyliacio^ tha^ to be honored.

The.ix. chapter how a man should not repute himself of any valor but
vylypende him.
GOod lord I speak to the of my pressipcio^ not withsta^dynge that I am but
puluer and ashes if I repute my self any better / thou and thy words a
gaynsta^de me / Also my sins bear true testymony again me ne I can not again
say them / and if I will vylypende and despise my self and not repute me any
thing worth as troth apereth in me tha^ the grace of my lord god shall be to
me merciful and his light nere me and my humyly acyon and obedience shall be
turned after this life into everlasting exaltacyon and auauncement / There
good lord thou shall show me to my self verily what I am what I was and
whereof I came / For I was I am naught and know it not if I be left to my
self without thy help good lord / tha^ I know my self to be naught and full
of infyrmyte / and if thou good lord will behold me with thy grace and
consolacyo^ anon I shall be made strong and be fulfyllyd with a new Joy and
great marueyle it is yt I a wretch that always of my self fall down ward
and may not rise again and by thy grace so suddenly araysed again and so be
nygnely lift up and halsed of the / This is thy charity and grace which
p^uenteth and helps me i^ many ne cessytes and keeps me busyly from grievous
peryls and many euyllys / I lost my self by inordynate love of my self and in
seeking the again and in loving the again I have both found the and me /
and of thy clean profounde and deep love I am lyquyfyed and know verily my
self naught / For thou sweet lord do to me over my merytes and over all
that I could hope to have of the / blessed be thou good lord for though I be
unworthy to any goods / yet thy i^fynyte goodness cesseth never of well doing
ye to such persons as be vnkynge and far fro the / make us to be holy
converted to the good lord that we may be kind / humble / meke / and devout
to the / for thou alone art our health / virtue and strength.

The.x. chapter / all that we have or do is to be referred to god / as to the
end of every thing.
SOne says our lord to us I ought to be thy last and souerayn end / if thou
desire to be blessed / and by this intencyon shall be purged thyn affeccion that
is often times evil bowed down to it self and to other creatures / if thou
seek thy self i^ any thing / anon thou faylest i^ thy self and waxest dry
where fore to me refarre all things / for I am he that have given all things
/ consider all things as wellyng and sprigynge out of the highest and most
sovereign god and therefore they to be reduced to me as to their orygynall
beginning / of me little and great / pore and rich draw quycke water as of
the well of life and who seruith me wellynglye shall receive grace for grace /
But who that has glory without me / or has delectacyon in any pryuate good /
shall never be stablysshid invery Joy ne delyted in heart / but shall be let in
many manner of wise and anguysshed wherefore thou oughtist to ascryue to thy
self no waner of good / Thou should not commend nor more repute thy self for
any goodness that thou have / who ever thou be but refarre all goodness that thou
have to god almighty without whom we have nothing / god of his goodenes gave
us what we have and therefore he requires the same to be considered of us with
thanks to be given again unto him / This is the very way to exchew from us
the sin of vaynglorye / if so be that true charity and heavenly grace enter
into man / no enuyne dysdayne of any person / nor pryuate of man's self shall
have place i^ him / For grace and very charity ouercometh all such byces and
it dylateth and enflameth man's soul to god and to our neighbor if we
perceive and understand well we should only joy and hope in our lord god and
in no wise in our self / for no man is good of him self but god alone which
is to be loved and blessed over all.

The.xi. chapter how it is full sweet to serve god to him that forsakes the
world truly.
Now good lord I shall repete my speech to the and not cesse / I shall speak
in the erys of my lord god and king that is in heaven / how great is the
multitude of thy swetnes which thou haste hyd and hydest good lord for the
time from them that lives here under thy dread / and to thy perfyte lovers and
servants thou show the Ineffable co^templatyue swetnes of thy godhede / in
this thou good lord have showed thy great charity that wha^ I was not thou
made me / and when I erryd and went out of the way thou broughtest me again
co^maundynge me to serve and to love the / O well of perpetual love what
shall I say of the how may I forgette the / which so louyngely doste remember
me / and where I have perysshed thou good Lord have showed thy mercy to me
over my hope and rewarded me above my merit / what thanks shall I give to the
for this grace given me / It is not given to all men to forsake the world and
to take upon them a solytary life / It is no great thing me to serve y^ good
lord to whom al thy creatures be bound to serve and plese. But rather this is
to me a great thing and marvelous yt it pleseth thy goodness to receive me to
thy service / and to join so pore and unworthy as I am to thy well-beloved
servants. Lo all thing yt I have and yt I may do the service of is thyn. and
therefore I can give the nothi^ge but thyn own / Heaven and earth with their
co^tentes that thou have ordained to help man does daily fulfill thy
co^maundment after the order and form yt thou have ordained them to Also thou
have ordained angels to help and confort man But above all this thy self have
vouchesaue to serve man promittynge to give the to man. What shall I give
again to the for those and for a thousandefolde benefaites that thou of thy
grace and goodness have given to. me Grant me help and grace to serve the good
lord all the days of my life and at the least that I may one day serve the
worthyly. Thou art worthy to have all service / all honor / and eternal
laud and praysige. Thou art my very lord god / and I am unworthy and pore
servant. I am bound to serve ye with all my strengthes and never to be weary
of thy service and praysynge so I desire and would it should be. Thou good
lord fulfill that I want of my party. Great honor and glory is to serve the
and to forsake al erthli things for the. They that gladlye and wyllyngly do
submytte the^ to thy service shall have great grace and they that forsake all
wordly besynes / and do chese the hard and strayte way for thy love: shall be
refresshed with the sweet co^solacion of the holy ghost shall have great liberte
of soul. O thou thankful and joyful subieccion and service of god whereby man
is made fre from sin and holy in the sight of god. O thou holy and hye state
of religion which makes a man egall to angels / pleasant to almighty god and
dreadful to dyuels and honorable to all feytheful folk. O thou service
worthy always to be desired and halsed whereby almighty god is gotten and
everlasting joy and gladness gotten.

The.xii. chaptre The desire of heart is to be examined and modered.
Son says our lord to his lover thou must yet learn many things y^ thou
have not yet well lerued / yt is to say that thou order thy desire / and
affeccion always after my pleasure so that thou love not thyn own desire or
profit but yt thou i^ al things a covetous lover and a follower of my will
thou haste many desirous risinge and mouynge the: but consider well whither you
art moved in them for mine honor only or more for thy own avail or profit.
if. I be the cause of thy mouinge thou shall be well content what so ever I
send unto the. and if any thing be hyd in thy desire of thyn own will or
sechynge: so that thing is it that anoyeth and greueth the outwardely and
within forth both / beware thereof that thou lene not to much to thine own
desire / me not counseled y^ same thing that before pleased the / displeseth
the afterward. Every thing that man desires is not to be followed shortly /
ne every co^trarious affeccion y^ man lotheth or hates is to be fled at the
first. It is expedient sometime to use a bridell restraining in good
affeccions and cu^nynge or other besinesses and of idiscrete behavior follow
the distraccio^ or breki^ge of ma^nis mind / that thou by thy i^discrecio^ be
not an occasion or sklaunder to other. Also that thou be not suddenly troubled
or inquyete by other me^nes resistance. It is sometime behofull to a man that he
use violence and resist his sensual appetite / and not to give he de what it
desires and what not: but rather i^deuor him that it be subject by vyolence
to the soul. this sensual appetite is to be subdued by disciplene to y^ soul
unto it be made ready to obey in all things to reason unto it have learned to
be content with few things and necessary without al grutchi^ge agei^ste any
inco^uenyent thing.

The.xiii. chap^ of the informacion of patience and of strife against
sensualite.
Lord god says the devout soul unto god as I feel and understand patience
is full necessary unto me / for many co^trarious chau^ces fall i^ this life:
how soever I order my self for pease to be had. I can not have it without
battle ne my life can not be without sorrow and trouble whereto our lord says
/ Son thou say truly I will not that thou seek such peace as wants
te^ptacion and trowble or co^tradiccion: but count the than to have found
peace / wha^ y^ art exercised with diverse trowbles / and proved with diverse
aduersitees / and if thou say that thou may not suffer such peynes. How
may thou suffer the fell peynes of Purgatory of.ii. evils the less is alweye
to be suffered and chosen. wherefore suffer thou patiently the aduersitees and
euyls of this world or life that thou may avoid the peynes euerlasti^ge
folowi^ge hereafter for syne. Trowest you that wordly men y^ be in welthe and
wordly business suffer no aduersite thou shalt not find one such ye if thou
present the most delycate person yt you caust find: but thou say to me
again. They have delectable things and pleasures. and they follow ever their
own will / and therefore they ponder not their trowbles: But how be it that
they have their desire / and in riches / and wordly pleasures that they
besacyatte with how long trowest thou it shall last? Sothly such folk as
abondeth in wordly goods and plesurs shall soon fail and euanysshe as does
the smoke of fire. No remembrance left of their joys before had. which also
when they lived was not finally without great anguysshe / tydyousnes / and
dread often time they receive great troubles / and pain of such things as
they have great solace and pleasure in before for of right wisnes it follows
to such persons y^ they fulfill not without great confusion and pain the
delectacions and wordly pleasurs yt they have before sought and followed with
great i^ordinate delight and pleasure how short / how vile / and falls is the
wordly glory and pleasurs. Suerly they be very falls and fikil and yet they be
not perceived / for the blyndnes of man's soul / so that man as a be
unreasonable for a litel pleasure or co^modite of this transetory life renneth
into everlasting death of soul. wherefore son fle to follow thyn own will
always and follow not thy pleasure and desire. Put thy delight and fix thy love
in god / and he will grant the thy peticion and desire of heart. Fle all wordly
inordinate pleasures and delectacions and thou shall have aboundau^t and
heavenly co^solacion. and the more thou preseruest the from the solace of erthly
creatures: the more sweet co^solacions thou shalt find in almighty god. But
first thou must come to such gostly co^solacions with great heaviness / and
lamentacion and with great labor and strife i^ thy self ageynste thy sensual
perties. Thy old sinful custom will agaynstande the in such goostely labor
but he shall be vanisshed and overcome with a bet^ custom. The flesh will
murmoure and grutch agei^st such labors: bur the fervor of the mi^de may
refrain him. The old euemye to man's soul will let the but thou may chase
him away by prayer and by profitable occupacion he and his ways shall be let.

The.xiiii. chaptre how an humble subject ought to be obedient after the
example of criste.
Son he that labors to withdraw him fro obedience he withdraw him fro
grace and who seeks to attain pryuate things leseth common graces and gifts
and he yt does not obey to his superyor: it is a toke^ that his flesh or
body is not subdued yet perfitly to his soul: but it often grutcheth and
rebelleth ageynste it. Therefore if thou will that thy body be no rebel: but
subdued to thy soul learn thou to obey gladly to thy superior. Sooner is thy
outward enemy ouertome if thy inward man be not distroyed or overcome. There
is no worse nor more grievous enemy to man than his body if it be not
according or consenting to his soul you must utterly despise thy self. if
thou wylt prevail ageist thy body. But thou love thy self yet inordinatly
and therefore thou dredest to leave thy self and to subdewe the fully to other
men's will. What great thing is it to the that art but earth and naught to
subdue the to man for godessake. When I god almighty that made al thing of
naught did subdue and submit me humbly to man for thy sake. I was made humble
that thou should learn to overcome thy pride by my mekenes. Learn thou asches
to obey. Learn thou earth and slyme to humble the and to prostrate the under
every ma^nesfete by true humylite nothing ep^sumynge of thy self. Learn to
brake thyn own will and to apply to other me^nes will. Rise ageynste thy self
and suffer not pride to rain in the / but she we the so meke that al men may
walk upon the and trede upon the as upon clay in the way. What haste thou
vain man and vile sinner to complain or to gain say them that myssayethe the
or vexes the: which haste so often offended thy lord god and have so often
deserved hell by thy sinful living: but my merciful iye and sight has
spared the for love that I have to thy soul: that thou myghtest know how
well I love the: and that thou should is it be kind and give the to true humylyte
and subieccio^ for my sake pacie^ty sufferynge thy propre contempt and despytes.

The.xv. chaptre: of the hyd iugementes of god to be considered for you
repressyon of vain glory and magnyfiynge of man in graces received.
THou good lord says the devout soul castiste terrybly thy iugementis upon
me so that with great fere thou alterest all my body and bonis to gyder and my
soul is troubled with great fere and dred I stand astonished and rsider that
heaviness be not clean in thy sight / if thou found thy angels defectyue and
impure: and therefore thou did not spare them what shall fall upon me that
am dust and ashes y^ angels fell from heaven: what than may I presume? Such
people as in semynge had works of commendacion have fall full low: and such
as were feed with the mete of angels I have seen be glad of swines mete. There
is therefore no holiness in man if you lord withdraw thy hand. No wisdom may
avail if thou withdraw thy hand of governance. No sure chastity is if thou
defend it not / ne proprecustodie may profit man: if that the help of god be
not there. For if we be forsaken of god almighty we be drowned and we perisshe.
And if we be viseted and helped we be raised up to life. Of our self we be
unstable: but by the good lord we be confermed: and made steadfast we be cold
of our self: but by y^ we be accended and kyndled i^ goodness. O how mekely
and object ought I to consider my self / how si^ple / and litell be my good
deeds if I have any How profou^dely ought I to submytte me to thy hy^ and
depeiugementis good lord wherein I find my self nothing vale^t and naught. O
thou i^mesurable weght. O thou i^passable see wherein I can not find me but al
perisshed and adnichilat / where now is become al wordly glory what co^fidende
may I have of al vain glory y^ I have be exalted by before. Lo al vain wordly
glory is vanisshed by the depnesse of thy hyd iugementis yt thou have showed
upon me what is any man in thy sight good lord: but cley or earth. and what may
clay or earth have any gloriacion or pride against his maker he that has his
heart truly roted by love and humbles in god may uat be extolled by no vain
flateri^ge against his pleasure ne he shall not be moved by any flaterynge that
puts his hole hope in god they that use such flaterynge be naught and
euanissheth at the last with the sound of worbes: but y^ truth of our lord
shall alwey abide and also they with him that cleueth to him.

The.xvi. chaptre how a man should make his peticion to god.
GOod lord say every man in peticion maki^g if this thing that I ask be to
thy pleasure if it bd to thy honor and if it be to me expedient / and
profitable than grant me it and to use it to thy honor and if thou good
lord know it noyous to me and un profitable to my soul than take fro me
such desire I besyke the every desire comethe not of the holy ghost and though
it seem to man good and rightwise: yet it is hard to Judge trewlye in such
things whether good spyryt or evil / or else man's own soul move him to
desire this thing or y^ / for many be dysceyuyd in the later end that seemed
to be induced and led by a good spyryt into such desires wherefore we ought to
desire every thing that we ask or desire / with dread of god and humblenes of
heart / and that / for man in all works and desires should committee him holly
to god with resygnacyon of his proper will saying / Good lord thou know what
thing is to me most profitable / do with me in every thing after thy pleasure
and most honor / give me what thou wylt and when thou will / put me good
lord where thou will / and do with me things as thou wylt / I am thy
creature always in thy hands / and thy servant ready to thy behest I desire not
to live to my self but to the good lord my god and life / I beseke y^ that I
may live worthily to the.

The.xvii. chapter A prayer and desire always to live and do the pleasour of god.
O Thou most benygne Jesus grant me I beseke the of thy grace that it ever be
with me and work with me unto my end and give me grace ever to desire that
thing that is most accept to the thy will be my will / and my will always
follow thy will and ever acorde therewith / and never discord fro it / so that
I may ever afferme me to thy will / give me grace to dye to the world and to
all thing / that be in the world / and to love to be unknown in the world
for thy sake / Grant me above all desires to rest i^ the by holy peace of
heart / For thou good lord art the very peace and rest of man's heart / and
without the all things be hard and inquyete / wherefore I beseke the that I
may ever rest in the.

Amen.
The.xviii. chapter very solace and conforte is alonly to be sought in god.
WHat so ever thing I may think or desire to my solace and comfort I look not
for it here but I hope to have it here after / For if I alone had all the
goods and solaces of the world / and might Joy in all delytes and pleasours
worldly I am ascertayned that they may not long endure / ne I with them
wherefore I know that my soul may not fullye be reconforted ne perfytely
satysfyed / but alonly i^ god almighty / the which is the conforter of poor
men and the embraser of meke persons / Abide therefore thou my soul abide the
promise of god almyghtye by good living and heavenly desire / and thou shalt
have the abu^dace of all goodness in heaven / for if thou to inordynatly desire
or love the goods of this present life / thou shalt lose the heavenly things
eternal Temporal things be to the in usage / and heavenly in desire / thou
may not be sacyat with things te^porall / for thou art not ordained to joy
and rest in them finally / if thou hadest in possessyon all things create in
earth thou canste not be blessed in them / but alonlye in god almyghtye the
maker of all things stands thy felycite and beatytude not such bliss which
is seen and co^me^dyd of the lovers of the world but such joy and felycyte
that good christian folk a bide and hope to have / which spu^all persons and
they ye be clean i^ heart some time tastes whose conuersacio^ is heavenly and
not erthely / all worldly solace and comfort of man is vain and short / but
that confort that is perceived i^wardly in man's soul truly is blessed here
in hope / A devout person bears always about with him i^ mind his comfort
Jesus / saying to him busyly by inward speaking / My lord Jesus assyst and be
nere me in every place and time I beseke the and that I may be content and
conforted in the absens and wa^tynge of all man's solace for joy of thine /
and if thy co^solacyo^ be abse^t fro me for any time / thy will tha^ and
ryghtwyse probacyon be to me a hole solace / be thou not always wroth with me I
pray the.

The.xix. chapter / how all busynes of our soul is to be put in God.
SOne says our lord to his lover / suffer me to do with the what pleases me
/ For I know what thing is expedyent to the / Thou thynkest as a man / thou
felest in many things after man's desire and affection / Good lord says
the loving soul to god / it is truth that thou have said Thy business for
me is more than all my charge may be for my self / He stondeth casually and
vnstably that castith not all his busynes in the / whiles my will is stable and
right wise do with me as it pleases the It may not be ill that thou doste or
will have done about me / if thou wylt that I be i^ derkenes or light blessed
be thou / or if thou wylt have me to be i^ wealth or else in trybulacyon / thy
will be done / and blessed be thou / Sone says our lord so thou must stand
if thou wylt walk with me thou must be as ready to suffer as to joy: thou must
as gladly suffer pouerte and aduersyte as prosperyte / and to have riches and
welthe Lord says the lover of God / I am ready to take of thy hand what so
ever thou sendest me / and as gladly shall I take by thy grace ill as good /
bitter things as sweet / and heavy things as glad and to thank thy goodness
for every chance that thou shall se^de me / keep me I beseke the from all
sin / and than I shall neither dread death ne hell / And cast me not fynallye
out of the bowels of thy mercy / ne do me not out of the book of life / and
nothing shall noy me what so ever hardenes or trouble fall to me.

The.xx. chapter temporal myseryes we ought to suffer with Christ.
SOne says our lord to his lover / I descended fro heaven for thy health and
salvation / I took upon me thy myseryes of my faderly love and charity (and not
of necessyte) that thou might learn paciens at me and not grutche / ne bear
heuely temporal myseryes / For from the hour of my birth unto my death upon
y^ cross / I never cessed of suffrau^ce of peynes / I suffered great penury and
defaute of te^porall things / I herd great grutchynge and complayntes made of
me / suffered benygnely confusyo^s and repreues / I received for my bn^faytis
unkindness again / and for my miracles showed I received blasphemes / for my
doctrine I had repreues / good lord says the devout soul to God / For as
much as thou waste found so pacyent in all thy life fullfylli^ge in y^ virtue
with other the commandment of thy fader. it is worthy that I unworthy wretch
bear me patiently after thy will in all things I shall bear the burden of this
corruptible life as long as thou wylt for the health of my soul: for tough
this present life be tedious / yet it is made meritorious and easy by the
grace: and the more tolerable and dear by thy blessed exaumple of holy living
/ and of thy holy saltes. Also this present life is more lyghtsome and
comfortable than it was to the faders of y^ old law to whom the gate of
heaven was shitte so so that none might enter were they nuer so right wise:
unto the sufferaunce of thy holy passion and death whereby thou made man fre
fro euerlasti^ge death and gave them that they served truly here i^ this
mortal life fre enter in to the kyngedome of heaven O good lord what thanks
and grace am I bound to give the which have showed unto to me andes to all
feythefull people the very good and rightwis way to thy everlasting kingdom
of heaven. For thy holy life that thou led is a way to us to follow And by holy
patience we walk to the that art our crown. For if thou hadest not gone before
us and had showed unto us the ways of patience and virtue who should have
followed the? Alas how many should have stand abacke far fro such
virtues: if they had not seen and behold thy virtuous exau^ples: we be yet
slow not withstanding that we here thy great techinges and meruels. And what
shuldes we do if such light of exaumple were not.

The.xxi. chaptre of suffraunce of injuries and who
GOd almighty says (is proved very pacient to his servant tedious and weary of
te^ptacyon: what spekest thou sone. Cesse of thy complaynt consider mine (with
other saints) grievous passion Thou have not yet resisted in sufferau^ce of thy
troubles to the effusion of thy blod as we did thou have litel suffered in
comparison of them that suffered so many things for me. some in war strong
te^ptaco^ns some in grievous tribulacions with other things whereby they have be
proved and examyned. thou must therefore remember the great things yt other
have suffered before that thou may bear thy little grefes more esely and if
thy troubles and other greues seem to yt right great beware yt thy i^pacience
mary it not and whether they be little or great se thou bear all pacyently
without any gurtchinge for the more you disposest the to suffer: the more wisely
thou do and ye esylier thou shall suffer. and the more merit shall be to yt
say not in thy excuse. I may not suffer this thing of such a person he has
done me great harm and he disclau^dreth me with such things as. I neu^
thought But I may well suffer other persons and other things as I ought to do
such thoughts and obstacles yt co^sidereth not the virtue of patience ne the
reward thereof but more the persons and offenses done to him. He is not very
pacient that will nothing suffer but as far as it is saien to him and of
such as he call suffer. A very pacyente parsone ponderethe not of whom / or
of what person good nor evil prelate or fellow he be proved to suffer any
hardness or injury: but whansoeuer aduersyte or wrong fallethe to him.
howesoeuer and of whom it comes a true pacyent person takes it pacyently
and with thanks as of ye hand of god and so doing he wins to him great
merit. for no thing be it never so little yt man suffers for god: can not
pass without great merit be thou therefore ready to suffer patiently aduersites
and to fight against thy impacie^t proud heart. if thou wylt have victory.
Thou may not get ye well of patience without fight. if thou wylt not suffer
aduersitees thou refusist to be crowned: wherefore if you will be crowned thou
must fight and strive with thy self strongly and suffer patiently such
euyls. For without labor no man may come to rest. ne without fight no man may
have victory. wherefore good lord I besike the to make possible by thy grace to
me and in me yt / that is seen i^possible to me by nature. you knoweste yt I am
evil to suffer and yt I am sone cast down by litel adu^site araised again me
I besike ye good lord that al manner of trowble or aduersite yt thou shall
send me: may be commendable and desired for thy holy name for to suffer
aduersytees for the is very helthfull and merit to mysoule.

The.xxii. chapt of the co^fessyon of man's infyrmitees and of wordly myseries.
I Knowledge mine iniquite ageynste me I am right feeble and vnstydfaste: good
lord thou know the thing ye I am discharged and cast dou^e by often: is
but of little valor or weight I purpose me strongly to stand in well doing:
But when a litell te^ptacion assayleth me I am greatly anguysshed. the thing
that I am moved and tempted by greuoussly is but vile / and when I think my
self a little siker of little rest that I sometime have / I find me soon after
overcome of a little blaste of te^ptacyon. Behold therefore good lord my
fraylte known to the in all things that I am proved by. have mercy of me I
besyke the and deliver me from the filth of sin that I be not fastined theri^
ne ouecrom thereby I have great remorse and often I am confounded before the and
that I am so vnstydfaste and frail to gaynstande my passions. And though they
draw me not to the consent of sin. yet their persecucyon and contynual
insuynge is to me right grievous and heavy. and it is to me right tideous to live
in battle and strife. Thereby I know the better mine infyrmyte For wicked and
abhomynable fantasies do rise in me to my trouble sooner than they go or pass
from me Wherefore I besike the god almighty and lover of feithefull souls to
behold with thy gracious co^syderacion the labor and affliccio^ of me thy
servant and asiste me with thy merciful help in all needs and strength me
with heavenly stre^gthe yt the te^ptar of man: or my wretched flesh not yet
fully subdued to my spirit have not dominaco^n upon my spirit agei^st whom I
must figh co^tynually whiles that I live i^ this miserable life Alas what manner
a life is this: where trybulacions and miseries habou^deth where al places be
full of enemies and snares to overcome and cache man For when one te^ptacion or
trouble cesseth* another comes. Also the first conflycte or trouble yet
during / many other sodaynlye rise. How may this life be beloved that has so
many bytternes and is so full of myseryes: how may it be called a life that
gendreth so many dethes and gostely infeccions and yet it is beloved and with
great gladness delyted and idyed in. The world is often reproved for yt it is
disceytfull and vain. And yet it is not soon forfake while the co^cupysce^ce
of the flesh reygneth: some things i^ the world induces man to love the
world and some other to despise it: the co^cupisce^ce of man's flesh / ye
desire of man's eye / and pride of y^ heart But the peynes and the myseryes
following gendre hate and co^tempte of the world yet for all such myseryes
the evil delectacion of mind that is given to the worldly pleasure ouercometh
the heavenly desire / and such carnal delight reputeth felycyte to bevnder such
sensual pleasure. For such neither sauer ne taste the swetnes of god / ne y^
inward joy of virtue. They that despise the world and study to live and serve
god under holy discyplyne they taste y^ savor of heavenly things promised to
such gostly lyuers they also se verily y^ error and dysceyte of y^ world.

The.xxiii. chapter how man should rest in god above all gifts and goods
erthely.
O Thou my soul rest thou above all thing in our lord God for he is ye
eternal rest of saints. Give me sweet Jesus most louable of all other grace
for to rest in the above all other creatures / a boue all health and beawte /
above all glory / honor power and dygnyte: above all ryces cu^nyng subtylite
or crafts / above all gladness / joy / fame / or laud: above all swetnes /
co^solacion / hope / or promise: above all merit / desire / or gifts: that
thou may give to me body or soul / above all joy or iubylacyon that mannys
mind may feel and compryse. And above all heavenly spyrytes with all other
things vysible and i^uysible that is not thy self for thou good lord among
all things art best / highest / most mighty and most suffycie^t: thou art
most sweet / fairest most louable most noble and glorious above all i^ whom
all other gods be perfytely / have be and shall be. And therefore what ever hit
be that thou gyuest me (thy self except) it is insuffycient: For my heart may
not verily rest ne holly be content: but in the that surmou^test every creature
or thing. O my most amyable spouse christ jesus most pure lover: and lord of
every creature: grant me I pray the wings of very lyberte that I may fle and
rest in the my fervent love and desire O wha^ shall it be given to me fully to
understand and se how sweet and good my lord God is? when shall I fully
gader me in the / so that for thy love I shall not feel my self: but y^ alonly
that excedest all knowledge and mesure. Now I often sorrow and morn and bear me
in felycite: and lamentable myserye y^ I am in with great heaviness. For many
euyls assail me in this vale of mysery they sore trouble me and also often
blind me / dystroyeth and lets me: that I may not have fre access to the:
ne have thy sweet enbrasynge that the blessed spyrytes have contynually with
all iocu^dyte and joy. I pray y^ that my syghes and inly desires with my
manyfolde desolacyo^s may move thy goodness to enclyne to my desires. o jesus the
light and clertye of everlasting glory the solace and conforte of wayfarynge
souls: my soul speaks to the with still desire: and my mouth without voice
How long taryeth my lord god to come* I beseke him to come to me his pore
servant to my co^solacyon and gladness. Send he his hand and power to deliver
me from all anguysshe. Come good lord for with out the I can have no glad day
or hour thou art my joy and without the my mind and board is void I am a
wretch and as a prisoner fetred without all confort agreued till time that I
may be refresshid with thy presens and so restored to lyberte / show me
therefore I beseke the thy favor and gracious p^sens / Let other seek for y^
what so ever they will no thing pleases me ne shall do but thou my lord god
y^ art my hope and eternal health I shall not cesse to pray and call to y^ till
thou return to me by thy grace and speak to me inwardly saying / lo I am here
come to the for thou called me / thy terys and the desire of thy soul thy
hu^yliacio^ and contricion of heart has made me enclyne and brought me to the.
And I again to my lord good lord I called the and have desired to joy in the
all other things left and forsaken for the. Thou lord did first excyte me to
seek the / blessed be thou that have wrought such goodness with thy servant after
thy great mercy / what should thy servant more do or say before the goodlorde:
but to humble him to thy mageste always myndefull of his proper fraylte and
wyekednes. None is like to the good lord in all y^ marvelous creatures i^
heaven and earth / all thy works that thou have wrought be very god / and thy
domes right wise and true / and by thy prouyde^s all things be governed.
Laud and glory be to the that art the wisdom of the fader celestyall. My
soul / my mouth / with all parties may love the and praise the with all other
creatures without end.

Amen.
The.xxiiii. chapter / a remembrance or repetynge of ye bn^faytes of god.
GOodlorde open my heart in thy law and in thy p^ceptes make me to walk. Make
me al way to understand thy will and pleasure and dylygently to consider with
reverence thy bn^faites both in general and in special y^ I may dewly thank
the / I know and confess for trothe that I may not give to the due thanks
for the least benefyte that thou gyuest and am unworthy thereof wha^ I consider
thy excellence and nobleness my spyryte fails in me for the great magnytude
thereof. All things yt we have in body or soul within or without naturallye or
supernaturally we have of thy gift and all they commend the of whom all
goodness comes / and though some perceive of thy larges mo graces or bn^faites
and some fewer: yet all that we have comes of the / and the leest gift may not
be had without the / he that receives more bounteously of thy graces may not
toy therein as he had them of his own merytes nor he may not very worthily
exalte him self above other ne vylypende his infery our or the pour / for he
that ascrybeth not to him self ne to his merytes but only to the goodness of
god is more meke and in gyuynge thanks unto god more devout / and he that for
all such prerogatyues repreueth him self most vile and unworthy of other: he
is more apt to perceive of the hand of almighty God more larger gifts / and
he that perceyueth fewer gifts of god ought not therefore to be heavy ne wroth /
ne enuyous against his rycher: but he ought rather thank y^ goodness of god that
so freely and so abu^da^tly gives to his creatures without any personal
co^cepcio^ all things come of y^ / and therefore thou art to be magny fyed and
praised in all things / thou know good lord what thing is expedyent to be
given unto every man / and why this person receives of thy larges more / and
an other less / it perteygneth not unto us but to the to discern the which
alonly know every mannys merytes I repute it for a great benefyte given to
me of thy goodness yt I have not great gyftis whereby I should have any vain
laud or praysynge outwardlye of the people / so if man consider well his
vylite pouerte and great indygence / he would not be heavy and troubled in him
self / but he would rather take thereof great consolacyon and gladness of soul
/ for thou good lord chose and do contynuallye chose poor and humble and such
as the world dispyseth to thy service and famy lyaryte / as is showed
manyfestly by ye apostles syngulerly chosen of y^ whom thou made princes of all
the world / that not withsta^dynge their conuersacio^ and living was without
reprefe among men of humble and simple without deceyte and malice that they
suffered gladly for thy name rep^uynge and scourgynges and grievous peynes with
death at ye last the which all be horrible and dispytfull to worldly folk /
wherefore there ought nothing so glad thy lover and knower of thy bn^fytes as
thy will to be fulfilled in him and the pleasure of thy eternal disposycion /
whereof he ought to be so well conte^te and pleased as at the ordinance of god
it is to him as lefe to be y^ lest and lowest as an other desires to be highest
and most repute and to be content and pleased with the lowest place as an other
with the highest and to be as gladly abiecte / and dyspycable as other does desire
to be hye and above other in the world / for thy love and will good lord
ought to p^cell all other things and more to please man tha^ all other
bn^fytes given or to be given to man.

The.xxv. chapyter / how.iiii. things bring pease to man.
^Oure things sone therbe that make a man to be in great pease and lyberte of
soul / first is yt a man shall study rather to do and follow an other mannys
will than his own / an other is to chose to have less of te^porall goods or
worshyppes rather tha^ more: the third is to chose ever ye lower sete or place
and to bevnder always and not above / the.iiii. is to desire that he will of god
be holy done in the / such a person enters the endis of pease and rest /
lord says the devout soul / thy word foresaid is short and co^teyner of
great perfeccyon on it is little and short in pronunciacio^ and full in sense
and virtue / If I could well keep it I should not be so soon troubled as I am
for as often as I am grieved and dyspleasyd / I find in me that I goo so often
from this doctrine but thou good lord yt all may / and also loves well and
profit of man's soul encreace thy grace in me yt I may acco^plysshe thy
word unto my salvation.

The.xxvi. chapyter / a prayer again evil thoughts.
Lord god I beseke the not to be long absent fro me / but give always head to
me i^ helping me / vain thoughts have risen again me with many terrous that
have troubled me / how shall I pass unhurt / and how shall I break them and
escape but if thou help / thou say to thy servant I shall go before the /
and I shall humble them that Joy and trust in erthely glory I shall open to
the the gatys of darkness and I shall show the my secretis do good lord as
thou promyses dwell in me and chase fro me all wicked and evil thoughts my
hope and refuge siguler is to fle to the in every trybulacion and to call upon
the with inward co^fyde^ce to be helped pacye^tly abydi^ge thy consolacyon.

The.xxvii. chapter a devout prayer for the illumynacyon of man's mind.
O Thou good thesu claryfy me with the clerete of everlasting light and chase
fro mine heart all manner darkness / stablysshe the great vagacions of my mind
that I suffer / break and destroy the vyole^t te^ptacyo^s that I am aco^bred
with fight strongly for me and fere away the evil bestes that is to say my
lecherous co^cupyssens yt I am moved and tempted by / y^ peace may be i^ me by
thy virtue and might / so that laud may sou^de to the in the hall of my soul
command the wyndys and te^pestis of trouble and te^ptacio^ and the sea full
of mo^stres and parellys to cease / and say to the north wind that it blow
not / and than shall be a great tra^quilite / send out thy light of truth
that it may shine upon earth / for I am as the earth vain and bare^ unto thou
illumyne me / send out thy grace from a boue / anoynte my heart with thy grace
celesty all / send in to me the terys of devotion to make moist and wete my
dry soul yt it may bring for the good fruit and the fruit of god warkynge /
raise up my mind the which is opp^ssyd with the burden of syn and suspe^de my
desire holy to heavenly things so that ye swetnes of heavenly felycyte tasted /
I may loathe to think of erthely things / rauysshe me from ye unsteadfast
co^solacio^ of all creatures / for no creat thing may fully satysfye mine
appetyte Join me good lord to the with the ba^de of in seperable love / for
thou alone suffy syst to thy lover / and without the all other things be vain
and of no valor.

The.xxviii. chapter / how a man should eschew to inquire busyly of an other
man's deeds.
SOne says God to his lover / be thou not curious to seek vanites or evil
questions of other mennys co^uersacyon in word or deed / follow thou me what
perteyneth to ye this or yt / or what this man is or that / or else what this
man does or says / and what yt / thou shall not give account for other me^nys
dedys but for thyn own self / wherefore tha^ doste you wrap the in suchevayne
questyons / I know every man with his co^uersacyon / and I se every thing under
the son^e I know every man what he th^keth wills says or does / and to
what end he entendeth his work / thou should therefore commit all tkynges to me
and to my judgment / and to keep thy self in good pease let him that wa^dreth
wander and drive as he will At the last shall fall unto him yt he has deserved
in word or deed for he may not deceive me. Desire thou not great fame outward
ne great famylyary te with folk no pryuate love of any person for these thin ges
ge^drith distracco^s of man's soul and great erours and derknes of man's
heart. I would speak to the gladly my words and my cou^ceyles and secrets I
would she we y^ if thou would dylyge^tly ob^ue my co^mi^g opening ye door of
thy heart to me / be thou prouydent and waking in prayers / humblynge the i^
all things.

The.xxix. chapter / In what things stands very peace and profit of man.
SOne I said ones to my dyscyples I leave peace with you and give you my pease /
I give you my peace not as ye world does yt now gives peace / now troubles
and war / all folk desire peace but all does not seek the very things y^
per^ayne to peace. My peace is with humble persons and innocent thy peace shall
be i^ much pacie^s / if thou wylt here me and folowemy word thou shall have
much peace i^ all thy works take heed what thou do say or int^d^g alwey to
please me only / and nothing without me to desire or seek / also be thou not
curious or besy to discerue or judge other me^nys words or deeds ne mell not of
things that be not perteynynge to the / and thus doing thou shall little or
seldom be troubled never to suffer any heaviness or perturbacyon of body or
soul longs not to this life: but to the estate of the life to come / where
ever quyetnes and peace is / suppose not therefore y^ thou have found very
peace for y^ thou felest no heaviness ne grauyte / ne think not that all is well
about the / if thou have no adversary / ne suffer co^tradyccyon / nor repute
not the therefore perfyte / for y^ all things be done after thy mind and
desire / nor thou shall not repute the to be beloved / or to be in the favor
or grace with almighty God if thou have any gift of swetnes or devotion for a
true lover of virtue is not known in such things nor the profit or
perfeccion of man stands not in such but in that rather yt thou offredest
thy self with all thyn heart unto the will of god / not seeking thy goodys or
thine own will to be done in little or much so that thou take euenly with
thanks prosperous things and aduersytees / weyinge all in a like balaunce /
if thou be so strong in hope yt when thou lackest in ward consolacyon / than
thou prepayrest thy heart to suffer gretter things than before / not reputing
thy self rightwyse or holy: the^ thou walk in the true and right way of
peace / and without doubt then thou shalt se my face in ever lasting joy and
if thou come to the full contempt of thy self then thou shalt have the
habu^daunce o^ pese after thy possyb^lyte as a ^ay^erer may have.

The.xxx. Chapter of the preemynence of a fre mind and how prayers
precellyth lesson.
Lord this is the warke of a perfyte man never to lose his soul from the
speculacyon or of the sight of heavenly things and to go among many busynesses
as without all busynes not as an ydell man but by a pre^ogatyue offer mind not
living by i^ordynate affeccyo^ to any creature I beseke ye most good and
almighty god p^serue me from ye busynes of this life / y^ I be not wrapped
ouermoche by the manyfolde necessaryes of my body that I be not caught by lust
of body deliver me I beseke the from all manner of i^pedyme^tes and enemies to
my soul to save me yt I be not cast down and broke by outragyous heaviness not
by such vanites as ye world busyly desires / but by such myseries as of y^
common male diccio^ of mankind does grieve peynfully thy ^uau^tes yt they may
not have lyberte of soul to be joined to y^ as they would / good lord turn
all carnal ^solacio^ i^ me into bytternes yt should entyse and draw me by falls
p^tens of goodness from y^ co^te^placio^ and love of everlasting things let me
not be overcome of flesshly lust. Let me not be dysceyued by ye world or by
the short glory and pomp thereof / nor let me be supplanted or be bygyled by
the cawtels and deceytes of the devil / give me I beseke the strength to
resyst all evil / pacye^s to suffer aduersytes and stablenes of perseuerau^ce
/ grant me for all worldly consolacyons the sweet gracyous vnccyon of the holy
ghost and for all carnal love / yet into my soul the love of thine holy name.
Mete and drink and clothe and other necessaries to the body / be peynfull and
onerous to a fervent spyryte grant me good lord to use such bodily co^fortes
te^peratly / so yt I be not wrapped in outragyous desire of such things / to
forsake all such bodily necessytes I may not lefully / for nature must be
sustained but to seek such things in superfluyte or such things as be more
delectable tha^ profitable / ye holy law forbedeth it / for else the flesh
of man should rebel against the soul / among all such things good lord I
beseke the that thy hand of grace may teache and govern me ever / that I admyt
no such things in superfluyte.

The.xxxi. chapter the love of pryuat things and of mannys self lets the
perfyte goodness of mannys soul.
SOne if thou wylt possess god almyghtye to dwell i^ thy soul / thou must
eschew and forsake all thy will for him / so y^ only thou give thy will holy
unto his will / for the propre love of thy self is more dysauau^tage to y^
than any erthly thing after thine affeccio^ and love y^ enclynest to every
thing more or less if thy love be pure simple and well ordered thou shalt not
be ouercomen by inordynate desire of such erthely things. Covet not such
things as it is unlawful the to have. Nor yet have thou not indede nor in
desire that thing that shall let the or thy inwardly lyberte of thy soul I
have marvel says God to his lover that man gives not himself to me with
all his heart to gether / withal other things that he has or desires to
have why art thou fatygate with superfluous busynes or desyer / why is man
wasted by vain heaviness / Let him stand to my pleasure and will: and than he
shall feel no heaviness ne harm / if thou seek this thing or that / or to be
here or there for thy profit or co^modyte thou shall never be quyte ne fre
from busynes of mind / For in every thing beside me is some defaute of
goodness: and no place is void of all aduersyte / wherefore seth transytory and
worldly things / rychesses or worshyppes multiplied in deed or in desire:
does not help man's soul but rather the contempt and hate of such things
profyteth in the acceptacion against god / for all such shall pass with the
world / The place that a man desires shall little help him: if the spyryte
of charity and grace be not with him: and such peace as man seeks without
forth shall not long stand if it lack the very foundament of stabylnes that
is to say if man stand not in god almighty which is ground of all stablenes /
he may well change his place but he shall not be auau^taged i^ soul for
whyther so ever a man fleyth he shall find such occasyon as he fleyth.

The.xxxii. chapyter / an oreson for ye pourgynge of man's soul and for grace.
COnferme me good lord by thy grace and make me sad in virtue inwardly in
soul / make my heart void of all unprofitable besynes / and not to be drawn
or led by ye unstable desire of any thing what ever it be vile or p^cious: but
to conceive al things togeder with my self as transytory / nothing under the
sone is stable and permane^t but all is vanyte and afflyccyon to man's soul /
how wise is he that so understands and perceyueth / grant me good lord
heavenly wisdom y^ I may learn to seek and to find the above all other thing
to co^ceyue and love the above all things / and to understand all other
things as they be after the order of thy wisdom give me grace to bear
prudently the prosperyte and pleasure of ye world / and pacie^tly to suffer
aduersyte / for it is great wisdom not to be moved with any blast of wind ne
to entende to any flaterynge tale.

The.xxxiii. chapt how a man should behave hi^ against detraccio^.
SOne says our lord to his lover / thou shalt not be heavy if a man say ill
or have an ill opinion of the that thou would not gladlye here / for thou ought
to judge thy self to be worse and more vile of co^dycion than other people be /
if thou gader thy self so i^wardly thou shall not greatly po^der fleyng words
/ it is not a little argument prude^s or wysdo^ a man to keep scylens in time
of ill said or done to him and to convert him self i^wardly to god and not to
be inquyete of man's judgment / let not thy peace be in man's word whether
they say well of y^ or ill thou art one and not changed by their words /
where is true peace and true glory but in god / he that desires neither to
please men nor dread the not to dysplease them / he shall finally have great
peace / for of i^ordy not love and vain dread comes all in^etnes of heart and
dystruccyon of soul.

The.xxxiiii. chapter / god almighty is to be inwardly called and blessed in
time of tribulacyon.
THy holy name good lord ^e alwa^ blessed that have wylled this trouble ^^
te^ptacyo^ to fall upon me^ I may not ^^e ^^ ^^che ^s it / but I have need to
fle to thy goodness for help and socoure that thou may turn it to my well /
good lord I am now in trowble and ^^ acordeth not to well to my heart / for I
am greatly vered ^f this present passyo^ what shall I say that am tached thus
with trybulacions / save me good lord in this hour I come to the in this
hour of trowble that thy goodness may be known when I shall be delivered by
the of my great humylyacyon and trowble that I am in / please it thy goodness
lord god to del^uerme thereof / for I know not what may do to my dyscharge and
well and whyther I may go without the / grant me pacye^s good lord / also now
help me good lord and I shall not dread what ever fall tome / what shall I
say i^ all my aduersytes / but that thy will be done i^ me / I have well
deserved to be troubled and vexed wherefore I must suffer / and would god I
might so do with pacye^ce till the tempest be past / and better fortune follow /
god almighty thou may take fro me this te^ptacion / if it be thy pleasure /
that I be not overcome thereof as thou have often done* for the more hard it
seems to me to suffer such temptacyon the more nere is thy right hand to
change it.

The.xxxv. chapter how man should ask the help of God trusting in him to
recover grace lost by devout prayer.
SOne says our Lord to his lover I am thy lord god: that do conforte my
setuauntes in the day of trouble / come therefore to me when it is not well
with the / it does let ye to have co^solacyon from above: that thou slowly
fallest to prayer for a remedy / for before thon prayest to me devoutly for
help and consolacyon / thou sekest many inward consolacyons for thy
refresshynge which all avails the little unto thou conceive in wardlye that
I alonly deliver and help in need them that trust in me / and without me there
is novaylable or profitable cou^ceyll ne remedy durable and abiding / but
resume thy spyryt and be reco^forted i^ the light of my mercyes for I am ^ere
and ready to repair all things yt be ruynous / not only to the state that
they were of before / but also to their perfercio^ / no thing is to me hard or
impossyble / I am not like to the yt sayste more than thou doste i deed / for
my word and deed is alone / where is thy faith? stand fermely and
perseuera^tly i^ thy faith and my service / be stro^gely abiding in me / and
thou shall have comfort i^ time co^uenye^t / abide me and I shall come sone and
hele the / it is a little te^ptacyon that does vere the / and a vain dread
that does fere the / why art thou busy about things or chances not yet
being but for to come the which increases thy heaviness / it is suffycyent to
the day his wyckednes / it is but vanyte or Idleness to be troubled or to be
glad at y^ aue^ture of things to come which perauenture shall never fall /
but manys co^dycyon is to be disceyued by such Imagynacio^s / and it is a toke^
of an unstable soul / that is so soon led fro god by suggestion of the enemy
for he po^derith not wheder he deceive by true suggestyons or falls: wheder he
throw down by the blind love of things p^sent or by dread of things for to
come / be you not aferde ne trowbled in soul / trust in my mercy when thou
trowest to be far fro me / I am often more nere the / when you wenest to be
holly lost: than thou most deseruest reward / all this is not lost wha^ thou
felest contrariousnes in thy mind / thou should not judge after thy se^suall
feeling ne take every veracyo^ hoping never to escape it / repute the not all
forsake wha^ I se^de ye any trybulacio^ / for by such trybulacyo^ it is come to
the kyngedome of heaven / it is more expedye^t to the / and to my other
servants for to be proved in aduersitees than to have each thing after their
will / I know the hyd thoughts of man / it is expedye^t to thy health and
salvation to be left some time to thy self wtoute gostly sauer / that thou be
not inflate by pride and lift up above thy self thi^kyng the to be better tha^
thou art in deed / I may take away wha^ my list that I give to any man / and
restore it to them when I will / wha^ I give any gift or grace to any person it
is mine that I give / and when I withdra we it I take but mine own / for all
goods and every perfyte gift is mine if I send y^ any trouble bodily or gostly
dysdeyne not thereof ne let not thyn heart fall thereby into great heaviness / for I
may sone lift the up again and change thy heaviness into joy / nevertheless I am
rightwyse and much to be reco^me^ded and loved when I send ye such aduersyte
or scourges / if thou wyltvndersta^de you ought never to be heavy for ye
aduersytes yt I se^de the: but rather to thank me / and to repute it a
synguler joy that I spare the not in such peynfull afflyccio^s that I send
the / for I said to my dyscyples / I love you as my father did me / though I
se^de you i^to the world not to have joys of the world but great batayles /
not to have worldly honors but despytes not to be Idle but to labor / not to
have rest but to gader much fruit of saved people into the barn or church of
god like as I was sent to also / have mi^de sone also of these words.

The.xxxvii. chapt how all creaturis should beset a side yt we may find god.
Lord god says a devout soul to our lord I have need to have more grace
tha^ I have yet if I should come thither where no man ne creature shall let me /
for as long as any creature reteyneth me by lokynge of thy love I may not fle
to the freely He desired to fle freely that said these words who shall give me
wings as a dove yt I may fle and rest where perfyte rest is / what thing is
more quyete and restfull tha^ is a simple iye / and who fleyth more frelye into
the knowelege and love of God / tha^ he that desires nothing here in earth /
he therefore that will stand in eleuacyon of mind / and so behold the good
lord maker of all thing he must over pass every creature and forsake him
self with other consyderyng his lord to have nothing like him / but yt he
p^cell all creatures in thy love / and but if a man be fre and lowsed from
mordynate love of all creatures he may not freely lift hymvp by co^te^placio^
and love of heavenly things / therefore few folk be found co^templatyue / for
few be found that fully sequestrate them self fro erthly things that be
but tra^sytory / to conte^placio^ is great grace required / for by grace a man
must i^ the deed of co^te^placyon be lift above him self / and but if he be
lift up in spyryte above all creatures erthelye and be holly unity to god
almyghtye / what so ever he can or has of virtue is but of little price before
god / he shall long be little in virtue / and lie long in earth that reputyth
or prayseth any thing but only eternal goods which he had of god almyghtye
/ and what so ever thing is not god almighty or to him referred is naught /
and to be acou^ted for naught / great differens is between the wysdom of a
devout and illumyned person of god / and the cu^nynge of a lettred clerk or a
student / for that doctrine is more worthy and better yt comes by the
influence of god than it that comes by the labor of mannys wit / many desire
to come to conte^placio^ but few study for such things as be req^red thereto
i^ erercyse / and a great i^pedyment thereto is that we stand i^ signs and in
se^syble things and labor not to mortyfye us fro them / ne to despise them
parfytely before as we should do / how is it and with what spyryt be we led /
I wot not that be reputed spu^all persons / and yet we labor more about vile
and transytory things / tha^ about spu^all / about the which scarsly at any
time we labor or think inwardly with suspe^synge of our outward sensys so
that we wey not our warkes straytlye or euenlye as we ought to do / for
whereupon our affection rests we do not attend / ne we lament not our vile
and unclean deeds / and thereupon follows that when our inward affection is
corrupt that the deed following and procedynge thereof is necessaryly corrupt
for of a clean heart comes good dedys and virtuous living / every man seeks
the deed of what and how much he may do or does / but how virtuous a man is
it? that is not so dyly gentlye sought / for a rich man / or a strong man /
for a good labourer / a good writer / a good synger / a fair man or woman / or
for an able person every man dyly gentlye seeks / but how meke in soul is
such a person / how pacyent how devout / or well idsposed inwardly is he no
questyon is made / nature shows the outward goodness of man / but grace
torneth itself to the inward virtues of man / nature with gifts natural is
often dysceyued / but the soul trusts in God that he be not disceyued.

The.xxxvii. chapter how man should forsake him self and all couetyse.
SOne says our lord thou may not have perfyte lyberte but if thou utterly
forsake thy self all proprietaries and lovers of them self be fetered and not
fre / as covetous folk / curious and vaynglorious that seek always riches
honors and delectable things and not such as perteyne to jesus christ / such
folk often feyne and co^pou^de such things as be not stable but faylynge for
all thing shall perysshe yt is not begone and caused of god / hold well this
short word / forsake all things for god and thou shall find all things
forsake couetyse and thou shall find rest / degest this thing in thy mind
busyly and thou shall understand all things / lord this is not one days
work nor a light thing to attain / for all perfeccyon of relygyo^ is
co^prysed therein / sone thou should not soon be aduerted ne cast down by
despair wha^ thou herest y^ ways of perfyte folk / but rather to be provoked
to hyer things / and at the leest to enforce the by devout desire to them I
would thou come there to yt thou loved not carnally thy self / but that thou
would follow my cou^ceyll in all things than thou should be as I said and all
thy life should be led with joy and peace thou have yet many things to be
forsake and left the which but if thou holy leave and resygne to me / thou
shalt not attain that thou desyrest / I cou^ceyll the to bye of my bright
gold / ye is to say heavenly wisdom the which despyseth all erthely things yt
thou may be very rich / lay thou a side all erthelye wysdom and all inordynate
pleasure of thy self or any other and thou shall have heavenly wisdom therefore
/ ye which wisdom though it be reputed little worth i^ earth and of erthly
folk / yet it is a p^cyous margarete hid fro many and greatly desired of
many.

The.xxxviii. chapyter of the unstableness of the heart of man / and how man
should finally lift up and order his heart and mind to god.
SOne says our Lord trust not to much to thyn own wit and affeccion the
which is now here now there soon chau^gid from one thing to an other / for as
long as thou lyuest thou shall be chau^geable and subject of mutabylyte
against thy will / now shall thou be glad now heavy / now well pleasyd and
content and soon disco^te^t / now devout and soon undevout now busy in mind
and work and now sleuthfull / now thou art light and merry and soon after
sad and troubled but a wise man and well taught in soul stands stable in all
such mutacyons / not attedynge what he felyth in him self / or of what party
the wind of thy stablenes blows / but rather that all the intent of his
soul and mind may come and profit to the due and best end / and in this
wise may a man always one a bide holy as long as the simple intent of his soul
among all such varyacyons is not vndered but dyrecte to me co^tynually / the
more pure and clean the inte^cio^ of ma^nys soul is y^ more steadfastly he goth
among such storms and troubles / but i^ many things is the pure iye of
man's soul made dark / a man lyghtely beholds a delectable obiecte yt is
p^sented to him and anon the soul is infecte by unlawful defyre / for seldom
such persons be all fre and vnfecte of the venym of their own seeking / as
we read by exaumple of the Jews the which came in to betanie to Marcha / and
Mary / and not to John^ only / but for to se Lazar / wherefore the iye of ma^nys
intencion is to be cleansed so that it be rightwys and above allvary ant meanys
derecte to me.

The.xxxix. chapter how god almighty sauoureth to his lover above all things.
Behold my lord god and behold all things what thing may I more graciously
and better to my beatytude desire / o thou sauery and sweet wode to thy lovers
my lord god and all things / I say not that he is the world ne the
tra^sytory goods of the world which is not to beloved / but god i^ all thing
the which word often repeted gives a great gladness to the lover of god / when
thou art present good lord all things be plesau^t to man / and if thou absent
the from him / things be tedyous to him / thou good lord alone make a
peasyble heart and also a great gladness and sole^pne ioyfulnes i^ ma^nis
soul thou make a man feel well of all things and to love the in all tynge /
and without thy goodness nothing may long please man / but if any thing shall
be thankful and well sauory to man / thy grace must be present and wisdom if
thou good lord savor plesau^tly to any man / what thing shall not be
delectable to him / and if thy goodness savor not to man what may be joyful to
him / sothely nothing: but world lie wysemen fawteth in thy wisdom good lord
/ and they like wise that sauoureth flesshly desires / for in such wisdom and
noughty ways be many vanytes and spyrytuell death follows / And they that
follow the sweet and blessed lord by conte^pte of the world / and by
mortyfyinge of their body or bodily lustys be known to bevery wise for they be
tra^sfourmed from vanyte to troth / and from carnalyte to spiritualte / to
such persons does almighty God swetely savor / and what some ever goodness
or delectacio^ they find i^ any creature they refer all to ye laud and
praysynge of the creature of al Great dyffere^ce and dyssymylytude is betwyxt
the savor and swetnes of alinyghty god the maker of all and the sauoure of the
thing that is made of him as is also betwyxt eternyte and time and betwyxt
light increate and light illumined of god / o thou light e^nal p^cellynge and
tra^sce^dynge all lights create perse the toward parts of mine heart with thy
joyful shynyng puryfye glad / claryfy and quyken my spyryte with his powers to
enclyne and be joined to y^ from vnpro fytable excesses / o when shall that
blessed hour come most to be desired wha^ I shall be sacyat and reple nysshed
with thy blesfull p^se^ce / that thou may be to me i^ all pleasures possible to
be desired / for as long as that gift is not given to me / my full Joy shall
not be / it is mine old man that is to say my body living in me by his
venomous concupiscence not fully crucyfyed or mortyfyed in me as yet my body
couetyth strongly against my soul it moves inward batayles and sufferyth not
y^ reygne of my soul to be i^ rest but thou good lord yt have d^iacyon upon
the sea / and do mytty gate his mouynges and flowi^ges arise and help me
que^che and destroy these outrageous me uynges of my flesh * wherewith I am
sore troubled destroy them i^ thy virtue and might / show I beseke the thy
power and declare y^ right hand upon me for I have no other hope but the that
art my lord and sauyoure.

The.xl. chapter how no man may be sure from temptacyon whiles he lives here.
SOne says our lord God to his lover thou shall never be syker or surer i^
this life but as long as thou shall live here / spu^all armor shall be
necessary to the thou art co^uersau^t among thy ene myes and on every side
thou art troubled and vexed / and therefore if thou use not on every hand the
shylde of pacye^ce / thou shall not be long un wounded / more over if thou put
not thy heart stable in me and to suffer with good and devout will all manner of
things for the love of me thou may not suffer this ardoure nor come unto
the crown and reward of blessed sou les / thou must therefore pass manlye
over all such things and use a mighty hand against things contrary to the /
for to a co^querour is promised and granted in reward angels fode / and to a
sleuthfull and an Idell man is ordeygned great mysery / if you seek here rest
how shall thou come to everlasting rest and q^etacio^ i^ heaven give the not
here i^ the world to great rest but rather to great pacye^ce against aduersytes
contynually insuynge / seek not therefore true peace here i^ earth but in heaven
where it is / not in man nor in other creatures but i^ god alone / thou
ought for the love of god suffer gladly all labors and sorrows te^ptacyo^s
and vexacyo^s aduersytes and necessytes infyrmytes and in iurye oblyq^es and
rep^ues / all tokens of mekenes and co^fusyons / correccyons and despytes /
these things help to purches virtues these things proves the knight of
christ and makes him worthy the celesty all crown / I shall says our lord
god yield to my servant y^ serves me in such wise as is spoken everlasting
reward for a little and short labor / and glory infynyte for a little
confusyo^ / trowest thou says our lord to his servant that thou shall have
always spu^all co^solacio^s at thy will / my saints had not such consolations
contynuall / but many diverse te^ptacio^s and great persecucio^s / but with
paciens they overcame all such troubles / trusting more in me than in them
self in such peynes / knowing with the apostle yt the peynys of this present
life be not worthy to deserve the glory of heaven / would thou have that anon
that many before have scarsly opteyned after many weeping terys and great labor
/ abide pacye^tly the gracyous coming of our lord / labor ma^ly i^
hisvyneyarde the works of right wysenes / put thy confort i^ god mys trust
him not / but stand strongly in faith and go not fro his service yt he has
called the to and expou^de thy body and soul stable and stro^gely for the love
of god / and I shall be with the i^ all thy troubles and shall fully reward all
that suffer or do for me.

The.xli. chapter against the vain iugementes of men.
SOn says our lord to his lover cast thy heart and love upon thy lord god
steadfastly and dredre not what man iugeth in the / where thy conscience yeldeth
the devout and innocent / it is good and blessed to suffer and to be heavy to an
humble person that trusts more in god than in him self / many folk say
many things / and therefore little feyth is to be given but to satysfye all men
it is i^possyble / and though saint Powle y^ apostell labored to please all
folk i^ god / making him self mete and apt to all me^nys condicio^s for
their salvation and lucre / yet he set little by me^nes iu geme^t / that is to
say me^nys dysco^me^dacio^ or co^me^dacyon against him / he did labor
dylygetlye for other men's edyficacion and salvation / but he suffered other
men to judge or despise him / he could not let / and therefore he committed him
self and all his labors to god almighty that knows all thing and what is
best for man / and he defendyd him self by pacyence and humylyte against all
his adversaries and lesynge makers / he answered sometime by word and writing
against his detractours that he should not be sclau^der to other / what art thou
that dredest a mortal man which is to day and the morrow apereth not / dread
god and thou shalt not dread man's terrors wha^ may any man work i^ the by
words or iniuryes / heshall rather noy him self than the / ne heshall not
eschew the iugementes of god / who ever he be have thou god always before the
and strive not again such co^playnyng words / and though thou seem for the
time overthrown and suffer confusyon contrary to thy deservings disdayn not
therewith lest thou my nysshe the crown of glory by i^pacie^s / but rather be
hold me that may deliver every man fro co^fusyon and iniurye and reward every
man after his merytys and trauayles.

The.xlii. chapter / if man will opteyn fredom of heart he must holy forsake
himself.
OUr lord god says to his servant / sone forsake thy self / and thoushalt
find me stand thou without the ellec^yo^ of thy fre will / and without all
propryete and thou shalt always wyn / for if thou leave thy self utterly /
without p^su^pcio^ of the same more abu^dau^ce of grace than thou had / shall
be given to the Lord says the dyscyple to his lord god. how often and in what
things shall I forsake my self / I say to the sone that thou shall every
hour and in every thing great and small forsake and make thy self naked /
else How may thou be mine and I* thine / but if thou for sake thy proper will
i^ all things within and without / the sooner thou so do the better it shall be
with the / the more fully thou forsakest thy self with all other things / the
better thou shall please me and the more thou shall wyn / some relygyous folk
with other forsake them self not fully / but with some excepcyon such trust
not to god almighty / and therefore they endeuer them to provide for them self
in some things some other at the first does offer them self and all theyrs to
god / but at a te^ptacion soon after arysynge they retur^e to their own will
the which they had forsake / and therefore they profit not in virtue: such
persons shall not come to very cle^nes of heart ne to ye grace of my joyful
famylyaryte / but if they make a hole resygnacio^ and a daily oblacyo^ of them
self and all theyrs first / without which thevnyo^ that longs to my
fruycion may not be had / I have said often to the forsake thy self and resyne
the perfytely and thou shall enjoy inward peace / give all for ask ne seek
nothing again of them that thou have forsake for me / but stand holy and
fermelye in me not doutynge any thing / and thou shall have me / thou shall be
fre i^ soul / derkenes shall not possess y^ ne any spyryt of derkenes shall
have power of the / endeavor the to this / pray and study with all thy desire
that thou may be delivered fro all manner of properte and with nakydnes of all
ambicio^ and possessyon follow naked jesus christ thy savior / and that thou dye
to thy self and the world and live to me eternally / tha^ all vain fantasyes
wicked troubles and superfluous busynes shall fail / Also tha^ shall all
i^moderate dread / and love i^ordynate dye.

The.xliii. Chapyter how man should govern him in outward things and run
to god for help and socour in parels and dangers.
SOne says our lord to his lover / you ought with all dylygence give head
that i^ every occupacio^ and outward deed thou be fre wtinforth i^ thy soul
having power of thy self / so yt all things be under the and thou not under
them / that you be lord and leder of thy works and not servant / but as a
true hebrew or criste^ man going i^to the sort and lyberte of children of god
the which stand upon the p^sent things of the world and behold ye eternal
gods of heaven / y^ which also behold the tra^sytory things of the world with
their left iye and heavenly things with their right iye / such folk be not
drawn by worldly goods to inordynate love of them / but rather they draw
such te^porall goods as god sends them and order the^ to good deeds like as
god almighty y^ hye artyfycer has ordeygned the^ y^ left nothing vnordred i^
all the world / also if thou ^ every aue^ture or chance stand not i^ the
outward apparau^ce yt is to say if you stand not to the judgment of thy bodyly
iye or ere / but a none as thou perceyuest such things / if thou enter with
moses i^to the table of thy soul by devout prayer to counsel our lord / y^
shalt here sometime ye sweet answer of god almighty / and thou shall return
again to thy self i^structe of many things both p^sent and for to come /
moses ever had a recours to the tabernacle of god for doubtis and q^styons to
be assoyled and he fled to the subsydye of prayer for perelles and the
unreasonable vyol^cis and sautis of men to be fled / so thou should fle into
the secret tabernacle of thy soul in such doutis or parels there calling on
the help of god by devout prayer / we read y^ Iosue with the children of
israel was deceived of the Gabaonytis because they gave light credens to their
sweet words and did not cou^ceyll with our lord by oracle as they should have
don before they had granted them any thing.

The.xliiii. chapter / a man should not be importune in his ways or nedys
SOne says our lord to his lover / commit thy cause to me alwey / and I shall
well dyspose for the when time behouable shall be / abide mine ordydynau^ce and
thou shalt find profit thereby / my lord god says he / I gladly committee to
thy goodness my self and all my desires and necessytes / for my prouyde^ce may
little avail / I beseke the y^ I cleue not much to aue^tures here after
ensuynge / but yt I may shortly i^ all such offer my self to thy pleasure /
sone says god / man often prosecuteth the thing yt he desires and when he
comes thereto / he begins otherwise to feel therein / for ma^nys affeccyons
and desires about one thing be not durable and abiding / but now upon this
thing set / and now upon that / the very profit of man is to forsake him
self and to commit him holy to God / for such a man is very fre and syker /
But our enemy and contrary to all goodness cesseth not of his te^ptacyons / but
day and night he makes grievous sautes to us / to catch us at unawares by his
deceytfull snares / wake therefore and pray dylygently that thou enter not into
te^ptacio^.

The.xlv. chapt^ man has no goodness of him self / ne any thing yt he may have
any glory or pride of but all of ye goodness of god.
Lord what is man that thou have such mind of or the sone of man who^ do
vysyte with thy grace / what merit was or is in man y^ to gyuest thy grace to
/ what may I complain if thou forsake me / or what may I ryghtwysly say
again the / if thou grant me not that I ask of the / seth you gyuest all
goodness of thy own goodness and lyberalyte and without the deseruynge of man /
Surely this I may think and say of my self / that I am nothing of valor
that I have no goodness of my self / but that I am in suffycye^t and frail
in all things and go to naught ever / and but I be helped of the good lord
and infourmed within i^ soul by the I shall be made all dyssolute / thou good
lord abydest alwey one being and every where good rightwys and holy /
werkynge all things well right wysly and holyly / and dysposynge all thy
werkys i^ wisdom but I wretch that am alwey more prone and ready to fail than
to profit in virtue and goodness / am not abiding ever in one state / for
seven times in the day the rightwis man is troubled of sin / Ne the less it
shall be sone well with me again if it please thy goodness to help me / for thou
alone good lord may without man help in all nedys / and make meso ferine
and stable / yt I shall not be changed hyder and thither / or fro this thing to
that / but y^ my heart may be turned and rest in the alonly / and if I would
cast away all man's consolacion either for deuocio^ for to be had or else to
seek thy socoure and goodness / for such needs as fall to me that I am co^pellyd
by to seek the / for no man may help or comfort me as thou may / than I
might well trust to thy grace and to joy of the gift of thy new
consolacyo^ / I thank y^ good lord the auctour and ground of all goodness /
as often as any good chance happeth toward me / I am but vanyte and nothing
in thy sight an unstable man and seek / whereof may I than be proud or should
repute me any thing profitable / wheder not of naught the which is most
vanyte / truly vain glory is an ifectyue pestyle^s and most vanyte / for it
draws a man fro very glory and remeueth grace spyrytall / whiles a man has a
complacens in him self / he dyspleaseth god / and when he desires ma^nys
laud and vain praysynge / he forgoth very virtues very glory and holy joy to
man is to joy I god and not in him self / to joy in the name of god almighty /
and not in his proper virtue or strength / nor to have delectacyon in any
creature but for God / thy holy name good lord be praised and blessid and not
mine / thy werk be magnyfyed and not mine / no laud ne praysynge be given to
me by man's mouth for any thing that I do but all be unto thy pleasure thou
art my glory and the inward joy of my heart / I shall by thy grace ever joy
in the and in nothing perteynyng to me but in my infyrmytes / let Jews with
other vain lovers of the world seek glory of themself and in other I shall
only seek the glory and praysyng of god / for all man's glory and praysynge with
worship te^porall and also worldly hight and promocyo^ co^paryd to thy eternal
glory good lord is but vanyte and folly / o thou blessed trynyte my god / my
mercy and very truth to the alone be laud / virtue / honor / and glory for
ever.

Amen.
The.xlvi. chapter how all te^porall honor is to be despised.
SOne says our lord to his lover be thou not confounded ne heavy when thou
see other honored and auau^ced / and thy self despised and humyled / raise
up thyn heart to me in to heaven and thou shalt not be heavy though thou be
despised of man here in earth / Lord says the dyscyple we be here in dark
blyndenes lacking the very light and therefore we be soon deceived by vanytes
as far as I can understand I never yet suffered any iniurye of any creature /
wherefore I can not rightwysely complain again the / but for as much as I
have oftesyn^ed again the / therefore every creature is worthyly armed against me
i punyssheme^t of my sins wherefore confusyon and shame to me is dew with
co^te^pte to the good lord be laud honor and glory / and but if I prepare
my will to be despised and forsake gladly of every man and utterly to be
reputed naught I can not be stablysshed ne pacyfyed wtinforth / nor spu^ally
to be illumyned / ne may not be fully knytte and joined to thy goodness.

The.xlvii. chapt / how no man ought to put his peace finally in man.
SOne if thou put thy peace with any person for thy feeling and for that they
accord with the y^ shall be unstable and vnpeased / but if thou have thy
recours to god that is permanent and everlasting truth thy friend going awey
or decessynge fro the shall not make the inordynatly heavy / thou ought to
love all thy friends in me / and for me to love every person that thou
accomptyst with good and dear to the in this life / for I am the begynner and
the end of all goodness / and without me all fre^shyp is not valent or durable
/ nor no worldly frendshyppe may endure / where I joy not / thou ought to be
mortyfyed to such carnal affeccyo^s of thy lovers / that as much as thou
may thou should desire to be without al man's company / for the more a man
wtdraweth him fro all worldly solace / the more he draws nere to god almighty
/ and the more hye that he ascends in love and spu^all conte^placio^: the
more profou^dly and iwardly he desce^deth in humble consyderacio^ of himself
and vyly pe^dynge him self / he that ascrybeth or gives any goodness to him
self / he gaynsta^deth the grace of god and lets it to enter into him / for
ye grace of god alwey requires an humble heart / if thou man says our lord
would perfytelye dysprase thy self / and would empte clean thy heart fro all
erthely love tha^ would I says he dystyll and enter into the with abu^dau^t
grace but the more atte^dau^ce and affection thou have to my creatures / the
more is theconsyderacyon and love of thy creature take fro the / look that thou
learn to overcome thy self i all things / for the possessyon of thy creature
/ and than thou may come to the knowledge of thy lord god / what so ever
thing thou love in ordiatly be it never so little yet it defoylith thy soul
and lets the to come to the knowledge and love of god.

The.xlviii. chapt ageynevayne and seculerscye^ce.
SOne says our lord to his lover beware yt thou be not moved by the fair
and subtle words or sayings of men / the reygne of god stands not in word
but in virtue / attend my words for they illumyne man's mind and i^flameth
with the ardure of love ma^nys heart / they make co^pu^ccyon i^ man to be sorry
for his sins / and with that they bring to ma^nys soul great consolacio^ /
give the not to lecture or study for that thou would be seen cunning / or
wise before other / but study thereby to mortyfye thy vices and vicious living
i the and other / for yt shall more profit the tha^ the knowledge of many
q^stions / for wha^ thou haste red and known many things / thou must at last
come to one pryncypall and begyn^yng of all other / I am he that techeth man
cu^nynge and I give more clerevndersta^dige to humble persons tha^ any man
techith / look whom I speak to he shall be wise and profit i soul / who shall
be them that seek of men curyous things and little ponder the wey how they
should serve and please me / the time shall come wha^ that Christ the master of
all masters / and Lord of angels shall apere ready to here every man's
lesson that is to say to examyne every man's co^scye^s / than shall Iherusale^
be lyghtened and enserched with lanternes and lyghtes / and the hyd warke and
cogitacyons of men / shall be manyfestly opened / and all vain excuses shall be
fordone and laid a side / I am he says god that suddenly rise up and
illumyneth an humble mind / that he may take and perceive mo reasons of
eternal troth sooner tha^ he that studyeth.x. year in the scolys / I teache
without sou^de of words without confusyon of opynyons / without pride of
worship / and without fight of argume^tacyo^ / I teache to dispyse erthely
things and things present / I make my lovers to seek and to sauoure things
eternal / to fle honors and patiently to suffer sclaunders and aduersytes
nothing without me to desire but all their hope to put in me and to love me
ardently above all things / some in loving me inwardlye have dyuyne and godle
things and cu^nyng to speak marvelous things such has more profyted i^
forsa king all things / tha^ i^ studyinge about subtyle thiges / but I speak
to some common things and to other special things I appear to some swetely in
hyd synes and fyguers / and to other I show great mysteryes with great light of
understanding / there is onevoyce and one letter in the books that they
behold / but that voice or letter informs not all in like / for I am y^
inward techer of truth / serchar of man's heart / y^ understander of man's
thought promoter of his dedis gyuynge to every man as I think worthy.

The.xlix. chapter / how we should despise and not greatly desire outward
worldly things.
SOne thou must be ignorant and unknowing many things / thou must acco^pte thy
self as deed upon earth / and seek one that all the world is crucyfyed to /
thou must over pass many things yt thou shall parauenture ayenste the or thy
friend with a deffe ere not answering to such / but to such rather those
things that be to thy peace / it is better a man to turn a way his iyen fro
things of dyspleasure / and to let every man to think and look as he will.
Also to withdraw thyn erys fro unprofitable fables tha^ to deserne to
contencious words / if thou wylt stand and enclyne to god / and dylygently
behold his judgment and the meke answers in his reproues / thou should
suffer the more easily to be overcome / o lord God what be we / lo we weep and
lament greatly for a little te^porall harm or loss / we run against might
and labor bodily for a little te^porall advantage / but our spu^all losses
and detryme^tis yt we suffer be soon forgote withvs / and scarsly we return
again thereto any time after our loss / to that thing that is little or
naught worth we give great attendaunce / and that thing that is of great
price and most necessary to us we set not by it / for all mankind in manner
re^neth toward outward things / and but they soon arise fro such
dysposycyon / they shall gladly lie and delight ever in outward things.

The.l. chapyter how every tale or word is not to be believed / and how
man's word soon slydeth.
GOod lord give and grant me help of my trouble that I suffer / for man's
help is but vain and vnuaylable in such nedis / I have often failed of help
and socoure / where I trusted to have found it / and often have I found
faythfulnes / where I trusted leest to have found it / wherefore I say that man
labors invayne yt puts his hope in man thou good lord art the very hope
and health of man blessed be thou i^ all things and for all things that
happeth to us / we be sick and unstable of our self / we be soon changed
fro goodness and disceyued / who is he that can so warely and wisely keep him
self in all things that he fall not sometime into a snare of dysceyte of some
perplexite / but he that trusts in the good lord and seeks the with simple
heart does not so soon remeue from the / and if it hap him to fall into any
tribulacyon / how so ever he be wrapped therein / he shall soon be delivered
thereof by y^ / or else soon receive comfort of thy goodness / for thou good
lord forsakest them never yt truly trust in the / it is hard to find a
faithful and a trusty friend / that so perseueryth in all the trybulacyons of
his friend / thou good lord art most faithful i^ all such nedys / and like
unto ye none is / nor may be found / o full well felt and sauoured yt soul
in god / the which said my mind is grounded and stablysshed i^ my lord god /
if it were so with me I should not so soon dread man / ne be moved at his
words / who may provide all things for to come / or who may eschew y^
perelles or euyls here after ensuynge / if chau^ces or things before seen often
anoyeth and hurts man / what shall I say than of things unprovided / but
that they more grievously hurt / but wherefore have not I wretch better provided
or purueyed? why gave I so soon crede^s to other men's saying? but we be men
/ ye though we be reputed and extemed angels of many folk to whom shall I
give crede^s / but to the good lord for thou art very truth that another
dysceyuest ne may be disceyued / and every other man is a lyervn stable / and
soon dysceyuyng most in words so that uneath it can or may be believed that
seems ryghtwyse / wha^ he proferith it / how prudently have thou good lord
given warning to us to be ware of men and how the most famylyer fre^des of
man be enemies to him / also a man should not believe if man should say to him /
lo christ is here or there / showing him that is not christ / but rather
antecryst as has be said and hereafter shall be said I am taught by harm that
I have suffered and seen other suffer / And pray God that I may be taught to
be more ware and not to my folly / a man says to me / sone be ware and keep
this pryuey to thy self that I say / and whiles I keep pryuey such as he
committed to me / he can not keep pryuey that thing that he desired me to keep
pryuey / but anon he betrayeth and dyscloseth both him and me and so goth his
way good lord defend me from such talys and unware men that I fall not into
their hands / nor take upon me to do such things / good lord grant me to
have stablenes of word and never to have dysceytfull tongue but remove all
such dysceytes fer fro me / I ought in all wise eschew that thing that I
would not suffer my self / o how good and peasyble is it a man to keep
scylence of other me^nys deeds / and not lightly to believe every ma^nis tale /
ne lightly to tell out such talys / to show brefely i^ few words the intent
of his mind not to be led or moved with any bostyng or flaterynge words / and
always to seek god almighty the beholder of man's soul in his dedys ever
desyryng that all the ente^cion of his soul inward togeder with his outward
deeds may be dyrecte and performed after his gracyous pleasure / how sure is
it for the conseruacion of heavenly grace / a man to fle utter apparau^ce of
goodness and not to desire outward flatery or vaynglory / but rather to follow
those things which give and procure the amendynge of life with the fervor of
good living / known virtue and openly co^mendyd has hurt many persons where
grace pryuelye used and hyd has and does profit / and avail many in this
frail life / the which after scripture is all te^ptacyon and malice.

The.li. chapter / how a man should put his confydence in God when sharp
words touch him.
Stand sone fermely and trust i^ me when you art vexed with troubles and
malycyous words / what be words but wind yt flees in the air without hurt
of any stone / if thou be gyltye of such words or worthy of them or such
repreues / than think thou will gladlye amend the / and if thou be not
glytye think yet thou will suffer gladlye such rep^ues for goddis sake / It
is but an easy thing to suffer sharp words sometime where it is so that thou
may not suffer hard flagellacyons / or betynges with christ and for him /
and why is it that so small things be so bitter and odyous to the / but for
that thou art yet carnal and not spu^all in thy affeccyons / geuynge more head
to man than to god / for that thou dredest to be despised / thou wolt not be
repreued for thy excessis / but sekest for thy defense derke and synyster
excuses / but behold thy self better and thou shall se well that the world
and vein glory / or man's pleasure lives yet in the / when thou refusest to
be humbled and confou^dyd for thy defautis / it is certain that thou art not
very humble ne truly deed / or mortyfyed to the world / nor have not the world
crucified to the / but here thou my words and thou shalt not dread a
thousand mennys wordys / lo if all the words yt might be feyned were
maliciously said again the / what should they noy the / if thou would let them
pass and not po^der them greatly / thou know they may not mayme the ne hurt
one here of thy head / but he that has not i^ ward sight to his soul health /
nor god before his sight is soon moved and trobled at a sharp word / he that
trusts in me says our lord and woll not stand to his own judgment shall be
without man's terror / I am the judge and knower of all secretis / I know how
every thing is done / I know both him yt does the i^iury and him that
suffers it / for by my suffrau^ce such i^iuryes be done / that many me^nys
thought is may be known I shall judge both the i^noce^t / and him that is
gylty? but I have decreed to prove them both by my hyd judgment / the testymony
and judgment of man often time deceyueth / but my judgment is true / it shall
stand stable / and it shall not be subverted though it be hyd and not apere /
yet it never does err though it apere not right wys to some / wherefore in
every judgment man should run to me / and not to lene to his own reason A
right wis man woll never be troubled what thing so ever hap to him of god /
yet and if any wrong be laid unto him he woll not much recke / ne he shall
not be exalted by vain glory if he be reasonably excused by other / for such
a person consydereth well yt I am the very sercher of ma^nys heart and inward
parties and not iugynge after the face and the outward aperau^ce of man: but
after the inward demeanyng of ma^nys soul / for often I judge and find
culpable many things yt ma^nys judgment demeth to be laudable wherefore I
beseke the my lord God the true iugege strong and pacyent that know the
fraylte of the malice of man / be you my strength and trust i^ all nedys mine
own co^cye^ce / for thou good lord know in me that I know not my self /
and therefore i^ every rep^ue I should humble my self and beni^gely suffer / but
for asmoch as I have not pacie^tly and mekely suffered all such co^dycyon /
relece and forgive me good lord I beseke the / and give me more large grace of
sufferau^ce / thy plenteuous mercy is better to me by the which I may opteyne
perdone of my mysbehaueour / than the proper opynyo^ of my justice for the
defense of my hyd co^cience / for though I suppose my co^cye^ce to be clean and
not spotted with any sin / yet I may not iustifye me in yt / for if thy mercy
be remeued fro us no man here living may be rightwyse i^ thy sight.

The.lii. chapter / how man should suffer all greuys and aduersytes for the
life everlasting that we all hope and abide here.
SOnse you be not broke by i^pacie^s of y^ labors that thou have take upon the
for my sake / also se thou be not cast down by dyspayre or unreasonable
heaviness in any trouble that shall hap unto the but be thou reco^forted / and
strengthed in every such chance by my promyses / for I am suffycye^t to
reward and give to my seruauntis above all mesure / thou shall not labor
long here ne alwey be grieved with heaviness / abide a short time in pacyens /
and thou shall soon have an end of thy troubles / one hour shall come when
all thy labors / and troubles shall ceace / all things is mesurid and passes
with time is both little and short / do therefore as thou doste and labor
feythfully i^ my vyneyarde that is to say in my church after the degree that
thou art called to and I shall be thy reward / write thou / read / sing / sorrow
for thy sins / keep thy mouth fro ill and vein wordis / pray thou and be
pacient i^ aduersites / such exercyses with such other virtuous labors be the
very wey and merytes of euerlastyge life / peace shall come one day yt is
known to our lord and hyd fro man / yt day shall not be as ye day or night of
this life / but it shall be light and ever endurynge clerenes / steadfast peace /
and infynnyte rest infallyble and sure / Thou shall not than say with the
apostle / who shall deliver me fro the perellys and the ieoperdy of my mortal
body / ne thou shall not than cry with the prophet with desire to be desolued
and say these words / woe is me that mine abydyng here in this mortal body is
prolo^ged / and why for than shall death that before had dn^acion in man / be
overthrown and destroyed / and health of body and soul shall tha^ ever be
without end / none anoye shall tha^ be to man / but a blessed joy and mirth /
and a sweet / and fair company / O if thou saw the perpetuell crowns of
saints in heaven / and in what manner of glory they live and joy in now / that
were before despised i^ their living and reputed unworthy to live / sothely
thou would humble the in the most lowlye wise / and thou would sooner desire to
be subject to every man / tha^ to have governance of any man / nor thou would
not desire the glad days of this world / but thou would rather desire to be in
trybulacion for god / and thou would desire also to be vylypendyd and set at
naught among men for christ and with christ thy saueour / o if these things
were sauery to the and should profoundely perse thy heart / thou weldest not
ones compain the at such troubles and aduersytees / and why? for we ought
each of us to suffer all labors / and hardness: for the life eternal that is
so precious / it is no little thing to win or to lose the kyngedome of heaven
/ lift up thy soul into heaven and behold me and my saints all that has had
and suffered great conflyctes / and batayles with me in this world / now they
joy with me / now they be comforted / now they surely rest after their
labors and shall euerlastynglye abide and reygne with me i^ the everlasting
reygne of my fader.

The.liii. chapter / of the day of eternyte / and of the anguysshe of this
present life.
THe mansyon of the high cite of heaven is all full of bliss and joy infynyte /
o thou day eternal most clear y^ which art not made derke by any night / but
it shyneth ever by the hye truth of almighty god / this day is ever joyful
and most merry ever sure and steadfast and never chau^gynge his state into
co^modyousnes / would god that day should shine to us / and all te^porall
things were endyd / this day of eternyte gives light to the saints in heaven
with perpetual clerte and shynynge / but to trauaylers here in earth it is
far and as by ye mean of a myrrour / the Cytezins of heaven know how joyful
that day is / and we which be the children of Eve and outlawes from heaven
sorrow for tedyousnes and bytternes of this our temporal day / the days of
this time beshorte / evil / full of sorrows and anguysshes where man is
defoyled with many sins and is feblysshed and destroyed often by passions he
is contracte and dystrayned with many dredes and with many busynesses is he
occupied / he is wrappyd in many vanytes / and with many errors he is intriked
and broke with many labors / he is moved with many temptacyons / he is
overcome with delytes and he is crucyate and turmentyd with penury and need / o
when shall all these labors be ended / and when shall I be delivered fro the
mysery / and thraldom of vices / when shall I think of the alone good lord
all other things left / and wha^ shall I joy in the fully / when shall I be
without all Impedyment / or lettynge / and in very lyberte without all
greuaunce of body and mind / wha^ shall I possess sad peace without trouble
/ sure peace within and without and sure on every side / o good jesus when shall
I stand to behold the / when shall I have sight / and co^templacyo^ of the
eternal glory of thy kyngedome wha^ shall thou be to me all in all / o when
shall I be with the in thy kyngedome / the which thou have of thy goodness
preparate to thy lovers at the beginning lo I am left here a poor outlawe in
the Land of mine enemies where daily batayles and in fortunes be full great /
comfort me good lord in my exyle / mytygate my sorrow for I syghe unto the with
all desire / for all that the world offreth unto me for my solace is but a
burden to me / I desire inwardely to be knytte and cleue to the good lord but
I may not come thereto / I desire to be converted and atteyn the heavenly things
/ but worldly things and possessions vnmortyfyed in me let me / and where in
my mind I would and desire to be above all te^porall thing / I am co^pellyd
against my will by my dull body to be under all / and so I unhappy man am ^
contynuall fight with my self / and I am made grievous to my self whiles my
spyryte desires to be above and my flessh to be down / o what is my
suffrau^ce with inforthe that when I treat of heavenly things by dylygence of
my mind / anon a multitude of carnal thoughts met and let me / good
lord be thounat by thy grace far fro me / nor declyne thou not in wrath fro
thy servant / send down the lyghtnynge of thy grace and consume such vain
and troblous thoughts / send down thy arowes of dread and chase away all the
fantasyes of the ennemy / gather together all my sensys to the / and make me
forget all worldly things and give me grace soon to avoid fro me and to
despise the fantasmes or Images of sin / Socoure thou me eternal truth that
no vanytes meue me / O thou heavenly swetnes come and enter into me / and chase
fro me all uncleanness / forgive me I beseke the and mercyfully perdon as often as
I consider ^ my mind any thing in time of prayer except thy goodness I
knowledge the good lord that I have be wont to behave me very distractely i^
prayer and other things for I am not often there / but absent where I stand
or sytte bodyly / but I am more there whether I am borne by such thoughtis /
for I am there where my desires be / and there my thought and desire is where
yt thing is yt I love / for yt thing does mete me ano^ in thought that
naturally pleases or delyteth wherefore thou truth have openly said where
thy treasour is / there is thy heart / if I love heaven I think gladly on
heavenly things / If I love the world I joy of hit and in the fortunes of the
world / and I am heavy to here of the worldly aduersytees / if I love my body
or flesshely desires / than I often Imagyn and think of them / if I love my
soul / or spyryte / I delight to think upon spyrytuell things / so what so
ever thing I love I gladly speak / and of the same I bear the Images of such
busyly i^ my mind / but blessed is that man y^ for god forgets all manner of
creatures and that does vyole^ce to nature / and that does crucyfy or que^che
ye foul lustys or concupyssens of the flesh by fervor of spyryte / so that
with a clear conscience he may offer his prayers purely to god / and so be
worthy the company of angels / all erthely things within and without him
excludyd fro him.

The.liiii. chapter / of the desire of everlasting life and what goods be
promised to the knyghtys of god that fight against sin.
SOne wha^ thou felyst that the desire of everlasting beatytude or bliss is
infu^dyd in to the by grace / and with that thou desyrest to depart out of thy
body y^ thou may se my clerenes euerlastyngly / than open thyn heart and
receive this holy inspiracion with all devotion and desire / give dygne and
most large graces to the hye goodness of god that does to the so worthily / so
gracyously vysyteth y^ / so ardently excyteth the / and so myghtely does raise
the / that thou fall not to erthely things by thine own nature and burden /
thou doste not receive that grace by thyn own thinking or labor / but all
only by the goodness of heavenly grace and the respect of God for that thou
should profit more and more in virtuous living and in humylyte / and that
thou should p^pare the against batayles for to come / and also that thou
should cleue to god almyghtye with affection of with a feruonr of devotion
and steadfast will / sone the fire does often bren but the flame thereof does not
ascend without fume or smoke / right so the desire of some men is in heavenly
things but their affeccyons be not fre fro temptacions of the flesh / and
therefore they do not alwey purely for the honor of god that which they ask
so effectuously of god / such is often times thy desire which thou said was so
importune / for that desire is not pure and perfyte / the which is infecte with
man's proper commodyte / ask thou therefore not such things as be delectable
/ or profitable to the / but such as be worshypfull to me / for if thou judge
right you ought to profer mine or denau^ce before thy desire and all other
things to be desired / and to follow my will and ordenaunce I know thy desire
/ and have herd thy manyfolde syghynges and wepi^ges / thou would now be in
the lyberte of the glory of the children of god / it delyteth the now to be
in the eternal house of god that is to say in the heavenly country where full
joy is but thour is not yet come / thou must yet have labor and battle against
thyn enemies / and so have the time of probacion here before thou come to
everlasting glory / and rest: thou would be fulfilled with that hye goodness /
but thou may not have it yet / I am the essency all goodness of man / abide me
says our lord unto I call the to my kingdom / Thou must be proved and
exercysed here in earth before you come to me thou shalt have consolacion some
time given the / but the full plente that saints has in heaven shalt thou
not have while thou lyuest here / be thou therefore reconforted and strong
both in thy doings and in thy suffra^ce the contraryousnes of nature / thou
must do on the clothing of grace and i^nocencye and be changed into a new
man / thou must often do that thou would not and that thing that thou would do
thou must leave that please the other men shall proceed and come to effect and
that thing that thou haste a pleasure in shall not come to effect perauenture
/ also what other men say shall be herd and what thou say is set at naught /
other men shall ask and they shall have their asking but thou shall ask and
not speed / other men shall be co^me^ded in me^nys mouths / and of the no man
shall speak / other persons shall have this office / or that commit to them /
and thou shall be demed unprofitable / for such things is man often naturally
heavy and a great thing it is if thou bear such with still mouth and mind in
such things with other like is man proved / whether he be the true servant of
god / how he can deny him self and break him in aduersytees scarsly thou
shall find any thing enjoined or laid unto the to do / for the which thou
nedyst to suffer death as thou shall find things contrary to thy will which
thou must suffer most wha^ things dyscordynge to thy mind which appears to
the less profitable i^ execucyo^ / be commanded to the / and for asmoch as
thou art under the domynyon and power of other to whom thou dare not resyst
therefore it is seen hard to the to follow alwey the will of other / and always
to leave thy proper will / but behold sone and consider well the end of thy
labors which is not far fro the Also give head to the fruit of them together
with ye infynyte rewards of the same / and thou shall have no greuaunce in
such labors / but a great comfort of thy patience / for as for that little
pleasure that thou wylfully forsakest now in this life / thou shall ever have
thy will done in heaven / for thou shall have there all y^ thou will or can
desire / thou shalt have there power of all goodness without any dread to lose
it / there thy will one ever with me shall coueyte or desire no strange /
pryuate or worldly things / there shall no man resyst the / ne none complain
on the / none shall let the or withsta^de the / but all that thou desyrest
shall be presentyd to the / and they shall fulfill all thine affection or desire
unto the fulness of the same / there shall glory be given in reward for
repreues here pacie^tly suffered / and the pall of laud for heuines and for the
lowest or last place that thou have be content with / thou shall there receive
everlasting reygne / there shall apere the fruit of obedye^s here kept for god
/ the labor of penance shall be rewarded with joy / and humble subieccyon
shall be crowned with glory / bow the therefore under every man's hand / and
forse thou not who commands the for to do this thing or that / but study
thou with great dylygence that whether it be thy prelate thy felawe / or lower
than thou / that intendyth to do any thing that thou take all such things
well and with pacyence / and that thou fulfill them with very good and devout
will / let this person seek this thing and he that thing / be he glad of
this thing / and he of that / or he commendyd in this / and he in that / be
they never so p^cyous or multyplyed / joy thou neither in this thing nor i^
that / but alonly to be vylype^ded or despised and i^ my pleasure and honor /
and over all desire that whether thou live or dye / god alwey be gloryfyed i^
the or by the.

The.lv. chapt a man being in heaviness and desolacio^ should committee him into
the hands of god / and to his grace saying.
Lord god holy fader blessed be thou now and ever / for after thy holy
pleasure / so thou have done to me / and all that thou do is good I beseech
the good lord that thy servant may joy in the and not in my self / ne in
none other thing but in the / or ordered to the / for thou alone art very
gladness / thou art my hope my crown of reward / thou good lord art my joy
and honor / what have I / or any of thy seruau^tis yt we have not received of
thy goodness / ye without our merit / all be thine that thou haste given and
made / I am but pore and have be in travail fro my youth / and often my soul
is heavy un to weeping and some time it is troubled again it self for passyo^s
fersly inrysynge / I desire good lord ye joy of peace / I ask y^ peace of thy
chosen children ye which be norysshed and fed of the i^ the light of i^ ward
and eternal consolacyo^ / if you good lord grant me peace / if thou grant me
in wardly holy joy / than shall the soul of thy servant be full of loving
and devout praysynge of thy infynyte goodness / and if thou withdraw the fro
me / as thou haste often wont to do / than I may not ren the way of thy
commaundeme^tys that is to say fulfill them / but more thy servant is then
arted to knock his breast and to knele for grace / and consolacyon before had
for that it is not with him now as yesterday and the day before when thy
lantern of light shone upon him and illumyned his soul / and was defended
fro the inward temptacyons under ye shadow and shylde of thy wings right
wise fader and ever worthy to be most loved the hour is come that thy servant
should be proved in / it is worthy father that thy servant suffer this hour
some what for the / Thou knew in thy eternal presens an hour for to come in
the which for a little time thy servant should outwardly be overcome and yet
withinforth be ever living against the / that he should be vy lypended /
cente^pned / and despised for a time in the sight of men / by sorys / peynes /
and passion / that he a rise again with the in the morn of a new light of
grace and after that be gloryfyed in heaven / for allsuch humylyacions holy
father thou haste so ordained and wylled and after thy commandment so be it
fulfilled i^ me / This is thy grace y^ thou good lord show to thy friend to
suffer troubles here in this world for thy love as often / wha^ so ever / and
in what so ever wise thou dysposest or suffrest it to fall / without thy
counceyle and prouydence / And also without cause nothing is done here in
earth / It is good to me good lord / that thou have humbled me that I may
thex by learn the ryghtwyse iugementes / and thereby cast fro me all pride and
presumpcyon of heart / It is very profitable to me that I have suffered or had
such co^fusyon / that I by the erudycyon of it should rather seek thy
consolacyon than man's in such aduersy te / I have learned also thereby to dread
thy inscrutable iugeme^tes / whereby thou prouest and scourgest the right wise
man and the wicked / and that not with out equity and rightwysnes / I thank
the that thou haste not spared my sins but punysshed me with scourges of love
/ ye both within and without with sores and anguysshes / no creature under
heaven may comfort me in mine aduersytes but thou good lord the very and
heavenly leche of man's soul that smytest and helyst again / Thou ledest us
into sharp peynes of body and suffrest us to be led into dedely sin
sometime / and thou bryngest us out thereof again by thy great grace / Thy
dyscyplyne be upon me / and thy scourge shall teache me the ways of virtue and
mekenes / Lo fader I am here in and under thy hands / and I enclyne me under
thy rod of correccyon / smite my back and my neck that I may bow and
refourme my crokydnes unto thy will / Make me meke and lowly that I may live
always at thy will / I commyt me to the good lord with all mine for to be
correct / For better it is to be punysshed and correct here / than after this
life / thou know all things and nothing is hid in man's soul or
concyens fro the / before any things be made / thy wisdom knows them for to
be / it is not needful yt any man teache or warn the of any thing that is done
here in earth / Thou know what profit or pain is expedyent to me and much
trybula cyon avails to pourge the fylthe and ruste of my horrible Sin and
vices / therefore do thou with me after thy pleasure and despise not I beseke
thy grace my sinful life for thou know it best / grant me good lord grace
to know that I am bound to know and to love that I ought to love / to praise
y^ thou would I should praise / and to repute that is p^ cyous i^ thy sight /
and to refuse all that is vile before the / give me grace good lord not to Judge
things after mine outward syghte ne after the herynge or the relacyon of
vncunnynge folk / but truly to dyscerne of vysyble things and spyrituall /
and above all things to inquire and follow thy will and pleasure / man's
wits be often dysceyued in judgment / also the lovers of the world be often
dysceyued in loving all only things vysyble / what is a man the better that
men repute him more or better tha^ he is i^ deed / a deceyuer deceyueth another
one vain man another / one blind man another / and one sick person another
/ while he so exalts him / And yet in truth he more confounds him than
auaunceth whiles he so vaynly does laud / or praise him for how great
commendable and holy every man is in thy sight so worthy and great he is and no
more.

The.lvi. chapter / A man should give him to humble warkes when he is not
inclyned or dysposed to hye warkes.
SOne thou may not always stand in fervent desire of virtue / nor in the
high degree of co^temptacion / but it is needful to the sometime for ye first
corrupcion of mankind to descend to lower things / and to bear the burden of
this corruptyble life with tedyousnes and against thy will for as long as thou
berest thy mortal body thou shall feel werynes and heaviness of thy heart / thou
must therefore whiles thou lyuest in this mortal life often mourn and sorrow of
the burden and contradyccyon of thy body to thy soul for that thou may not
contynually and without cessynge give head and cleue to spu^all studyes and to
godly co^te^placyon / then it is expedyent to the to fle to low and outward
warkes / and to take thy recreacyon in the exercise of good dedis and so to
abide fermely my coming and heavenly vysytacyon / and with that pacyenlye to
suffer exyle and dryness of mind / unto that I vysyte the again and deliver
the from all tedyousnes / for I shall make the forgete all such anoyes and
labors and to joy in inward quyetacion of soul / I shall lay before the
consolacio^s of scripture that with glad heart thou may begin to walk in my
co^mau^dem^tes and say the peynes and passions of this world be not worthy to
ye glory of heaven / the which shall be manyfested and showed in us after this
life.

The* lvii. chapter / a man should not repute him self worthy to have
co^solacyon / but rather worthy indygnacyon saying.
Lord I am not worthy to have thy consolacyon nor any spiritual vysytacio^
and therefore thou good lord doste nothing again ryghtwys^nes / when thou
leuest me in penurye / need / and desolacion / if I might yet out fro me teris
of contricion to the symylytude of the Sea yet am I not worthy thy co^solacion
/ I am not worthy but to be scourged and punysshed / I have so greuouslyh / and
manyfoldely sinned / and offended the in truth / I am not worthy thy leest
co^solacyo^ / but thou good lord benygne and merciful that will not thy
works should perysshe to show the riches of thy excellent goodness into the
vessel of thy mercy / ye without my proper merit / thou with save to comfort
me thy servant above all man's mesure / for thy consolacyons be not after
man's fables / what have I done my good Lord that thou should give me any
celestyall co^solacyon / for I know not that I have done any good / but always
prone to vice and slow to amend me / true it is that I say I can not say
nay / if I should any otherwise say thou should stand again me / and no
man should defend me again the / what have I deserved for my sins but hell
and fire eternal / In truth I confess that I am worthy all derysyon and
contempt / it seems me not to dwell among devout persons / and though I
here such things impacyentlye / yet shall I lay and reprove my sins again
me that I may the sooner opteyne thy mercy / what may I say that am so gyltye
and full of all co^fusyon / I have nothing to say but only this word / Lord
god* I have evil inclynacyons / and grievously have sinned / Have mercy on me
and forgive me I beseke the / suffer me a little that I may sorrow and bewail
my sins before I pass hens unto the country of darkness covered with the
darkness of death / and what do thou ask most of a wretchyd sinner / but
that he be sorofulll and made meke of his sins / in very co^tricio^ / and
humyliacion of man's heart / is very hope of forgyuenesse / mannys concience
so troubled with contrycyon is reconsyled to god / also grace lost by sin is
repared / and thereby man is defendyd fro the wrath of god / and there meteth
together in holy kyssyng and halsynge of god almighty and the penyte^t soul /
the humble co^tricio^ of sinners is an acceptable sacryfyce to the good lord /
gyuynge a more sweet odor unto thy goodness than incense by fire / it is also
the p^cyous and acceptable oyntme^t that thou good lord would to be mynystred
to thy fete / for you never did ne doste despise but gladlye receyuest unto thy
grace a co^tryte and an humble heart / there is the place of rufuge fro the
face of wrath of the enemy / there is clensyd and amendyd what so ever fylthe
is otherwise done.

The.lviii. chapter / grace is not myxt with folk that delyteth in erthely
things.
SOne my grace is a p^cious thing / it woll not be myxt with strange things
nor with erthely co^solacions / thou must therefore avoid from the all the
^pedym^tis of grace if thou wylt receive it / ask a secret place to thy
co^te^placion / love to dwell with thy self alone / seek not vein speaking
with other / but rather be thou occupied with devout prayer to god that thou
may have a co^pu^cte mind and a pure co^cye^ce / se thou acco^pte all the
world of little price / in thy estymacyo^ / and before all worldly things
prefarre thou the honor and medytacio^ of god / for thou may louyngly think
on me / and with that delight in worldly and transytory things / thou must
separate and withdraw thy self fro the knowledge and dear fre^dys and thy
mind fro all bodily solace / as saint peter the apostyll cou^ceyleth in his
epystyll / all cryste^ folk yt they as strangers and pilgrims absteyne from
all such flesshely and worldly things or pleasures / o what sure passing and
trust shall he have in his decesse / that is not than overcome with any
worldly affeccio^ / but has his heart sadly fixte i^ god almighty and losed
fro all erthely things / a bestely man knows not the fredome of man's soul
/ yet if he desire to be spu^all / he must refuse as well his nigh fre^dys as
such as be far fro him in consanguynyte / and also he must be most ware of
him self / if man perfytely overcome him self / he shall ye sooner subdue
other enemies to him / perfyte vyctory is a man to over come first him self
/ he that holds him self subject so that sensualyte obey to reason / and
reason obey to God in all things / Such a man is the very co^querour of him
self and lord of the world if so be that thou fullye desire to atteyne that
degree / and heyght / thou must manlye enforse thy self and begin and to put
thine axe to the rote of thy soul / so that thou may pluck up by the rotis
and destroy the hid and the inordynate Inclynacyon to thy self and to all
pryuate and worldly goodys / of this vice that a man loves him to
Inordynatelye all most all comes that is ill in man which love therefore if it
be overcome we shall have consequently i^ us great peace and tra^quyllyte / But
for as much as few folk laboreth to dye to themself / that is to say to
mortyfye such contrariousnes in themself / nor goes not out of them self by
contemplacyon or exercise of virtue / therefore they lie wrapped i^ themself
and may not be lift above themself spu^ally in soul but he that desires
freely to walk with me / it is needful that he mortyfye in him self all ill
and inordynate affeccyo^s / so that he do not enclyne ne cleue to any creature
by pryuate love of concupysce^s.

The lix. chapt / of diverse mouynges of nature and grace.
SOne se thou give head dylygentlye unto the mouynges of nature and grace / for
their moui^ges be very subtle and contraryous / and scarcely they may be
perceived but if a man be in wardlye illumyned / every man loves and desires
that thing that is / or seems good / and every man pretedeth in his words
and sayings some goodness and therefore many be deceived under the prete^s / and
symylytude of goodness / nature is wyly and therefore it draws / snareth / and
disceyueth many weyes and it has ever it self for his end / but grace
walks and makes man walk simple without color or deceyte / it makes man
to declyne and fle from all ill / it pretends no snarys of deceyte / and it
makes man do his werkys all purely for god / in whom also he finally does rest
/ nature does dye against his will he will not gladly be oppressyd or overcome
/ ne he will gladly be obedyent or subdued under other but with vyolence / grace
does the contrary / for it makes man to stodye to mortyfye him self / Also it
resysteth to sensualyte / and so brydeleth her that she rebel not / grace
makes a man to be subject to other / It makes him to desire to be overcome /
It will natsuffer man to use his own lyberte / It makes man willing to be
ever under dyscyplyne / It makes man not to coueyte domynacyon upon other but
always to be on live and stand under God / and for God to how humbly to every
man / Nature labors and studyeth ever to and for his own profit and gives
head what lucre and a^auntage he may get by other / but grace attends not
to his own profit / but rather he attends what is good and profitable to
many / nature desires gladlye honor and reverence / and grace gives all
honor and glory feythfully to god / nature dredeth co^fusyon and co^te^pte /
and grace joins to suffer co^tynually repreues / and turment for the name of
Jesus / Nature loves Idleness and bodyly rest / and grace can not be Idell / but
seeks gladly some profitable labor / Nature seeks fair things and curyous
and aborreth vile things and gros / and grace delyteth in simple and humble
things / it despyseth not hard things nor to be idued with old garme^tis /
Nature beholds te^porall things / and ioyeth at erthely lucres / It is heavy
at harm and anon i^paci ent and wrathful at an injurious word / but grace
be holds things eternal it does not i^clyne ne cleue to te^porall things /
wherefore it is not troubled i^ loss of worldly goods / nevexed at sharp and
hard words for he has put his treasoure and joy i^ heaven where nothing may
perysshe / nature is covetous and it sooner and gladlyer receives than gives /
Also it loves properte and pryuate things / but grace is pyteous and large to
the poor and nedy / it escheweth syngularyte / it is content with few things /
and it Iugeth that it is better and more blessed to give than take Nature
enclyneth a man to the love of creatures as to his own body / to vain syghte
and mouynges and to such other things / but grace draws to god and to
virtues / it forsakes the world and creatures thereof with allvanytes / it
has carnal defyres and it restrayneth wauerynge or wandrynge about and it
makes man asshamed to be in open place / Nature has soon outward solace
wherein his sensys delight / grace seeks solace in god only / and it delyteth in
ce lestyall things above things vysyble / nature moves man to do all his
deeds / and warkes for proper avail it will do nothing freely but trusts for
his good deed either as good a deed or a better or at ye favor or laud of man
/ therefore it sets much by them be they never so exyle / but grace seeks
not any temporal thing / nor it asks none other thing but alone for toward
/ nor it asks no more of temporal things / but that he may be the help of
them ^om^ to things eternal / Nature ioyeth of the multitude of carnal
frendys and kynnes folk he has pride of noble kyn^e or of the noble place yt
he is borne in / it gladdeth to be with mighty men and with his peris / but
grace makes man to love his enemies / nor he is not proud of the multitude of
fre^dys ne it reputeth not nobylyte of fre^des or of place that he comes of /
but if more virtue be there than with other it favors more the pore tha^ y^
rich it has sooner compassyo^ upon an i^nocent than upon a mighty man / it
ioyeth ever in trothe and not in falshede / and it exorteth good folk to
increase of virtue and goodness and to be assymylate to the sone of God by ^tu /
nature soon co^playneth of defaut or heaviness that he suffers / but grace
suffers pacie^tly all euylles / nature makes all things bow to him / it
fyghtethe for him self and reproves / but grace refers all his cause to
God / it makes man to ascrybe no goods that he has to him self / but to god
only of whom all goodness comes orygynally / it makes man humble and not to
boste* him self presu^ptuously it stryues not nor ^ferreth not his reason or
se^te^ce before another / but i^ every cause or fortune he submyttith himself
to the eternal wisdom and judgment of god / nature desires to know and to
here novelties / he will also apere forth ward and have the syghte and
experyens of many things by his outward senses / he desires to do such
things y^ laud and great pray sing comes of / but grace does not desire to
know and perceive new or curyous things / For all such vain desires comes
of the old corrupcyon of sin / sith n^ new thing and durable is upon earth
/ gra^e techeth the senses of man for to contrayn and let the vay^e glory ^^t
pleasour of man / and to eschew all outward auau^tage / and to hyde mekely
such things as be laudable and marvelous in him / and to seek the laud and
honor of god and a profitable frutfulnes of every thing and cu^nynge that man
has / it will not that man co^mede him self / ne exalte his virtue but it
will y^ god be blessed in his gifts / the which gives every thing after his
fre charity and without our deservings / This is a supernatural light and a
special gift of God and it is a proper sign and token of elect / and chosen
persons and an ernes of everlasting salvation / which lyfteth up man fro
theyse erthely things to love things celestial and it makes a spu^all
person of a carnal / the more therefore that nature is overcome the more grace
is yette in man and daily is inward man that is to say the soulevysyted and
renewed with inward graces and vysytacyo^ after the Image of God.

The.lx. chapter / of the corrupcyon of nature and the workynge of grace.
Lord god that have made me to thy Image and lykenes / grant me thy grace /
the which as thou have before showed / is so great and necessary to my
salvation y^ I may thereby vaynquyssh my right bad nature that draws me to
syn^e and perdicio^ I feel in my flesh a law of Sin that Impugneth the
law of my mind and makes me thrall to sin / and to obey to sensualyte in
many things nor I may not resyst the passions or mocions thereof / but if thy
holy grace infounded ardently to my heart assyst me Thy great and abu^daunt
grace is needful to me that nature thereby may be overcome in me which is
alwey prone to ill appetyte and thought / for that nature lynyally descendynge
fro our first fader Adam into his succession after that it was vycyat and
defoyled by his sin the pain thereof desce^did i^to every man so that that
nature the which was good / and rightwys when it was made of the good lord /
is now for the vylyte and infyrmyte therofso corrupt man that the mouynge of
it left to man draws ever to ill / and low things / hye and heavenly
things left / For the little virtue and strength of that nature the which
remains / there is as who says a little spark of fire wrapped and hyd in
ashes / This is the natural reason of man belapped with great darkness / yet
having discrecion of good and ill / of truth and falsenesse though it be
unable to fulfill all that he approves nor may not use yet the full light of
truth / nor his affeccyo^s helthfully / wherefore it follows good lord that I
delight i^ thy law after mine inward man knowing thy commandment to be good
/ right wise and holy / arguing also / and finding all ill and Sin to be
exchued and fled / and yet in mine outward man / that is to say my body I
do serve to the law of sin / whiles I obey more to sensualyte than to reason
in his mocyons / whereof comes that I woll that which is good / but I am of
vnpower to perform it I purpose i^ my mind often times many good dedys or
werkis / but for that grace wa^teth that should help my infyrmyte and febylnes
/ therefore I go aside and cesse of good doing / for a little resystens /
Thereof comes that though I know the wey of perfeccyon / and how I ought to
do / yet I arise not by deuocyo^ of soul to such perfytenes I am so oppressyd
and lettyd by my dull and corrupt body thy grace good lord is to me
theragayne full necessary to begin goodness and to profit therein and to
fynysshe the same i^ perfytenes / for without that grace I can nothing do /
and with the help of it I may do all things necessary to me / o thou heavenly
grace without the which no man may be of any merit or valor before God / nor
any natural gift is profitable neither crafts ne richesse / neither beautye
ne strength / wit or eloquence be any thing worth before the good lord and
grace want / For gifts of nature be given Indyfferentlye to good folk and
evil / But the gift of elect and good persons is grace and love of charity
whereby they be noble and made worthy everlasting life / that Grace is of such
worthynes that without it / neither the gift of prophesy / ne the workynge of
miracles and signs nor hye speculacion or cu^nynge avails any thing Also
neither feyth ne hope / nor other virtues be accept of God without grace and
charity / o thou blessed grace that make him that is poor in Soul rich in
virtues / and him that is meke abundaunt of goods spyrytuall / come and
dyscende in me / replenysshe me soon with thy consalacyon / that my soul
fail not for werynes / and drynes of mind I beseech the good lord that I may
find grace and mercy i^ thy sight / for thy grace is Enough to me if other
things want that nature asks / if I be vexed / or troubled with many
trybulacyons I shall dread none evil while thy grace is with me / that grace
is my strength for it gives couceyll and help to him that has it / It has
power upon all iugementes / and wisdom upon all wise men / It is the maistres
of troth and the techar of dyscyplyne the light of the soul the confort of
pressures the chaser away of heaviness / the auoyder of dread / the norys of
devotion the brynger forth of terys what am I without grace but as a dry tree
without moisture and an unprofitable stock to spyrytuall beleuynge / wherefore
I pray the good lord that thy grace may ever p^uent me / and make me busyly
given to good works by the help of Christ Jesus.

The.lxi. chapter we ought to forsake our self and follow Christ with our
cross.
SOne as far as you may forsake and love thy self so much more thou shall
pass into me / for like as the inward peace of man's soul is to desire
nothing without forth so a man forsakynge him self inwadly conioyneth him to
God / I will that thou learn to forsake or deny thy self perfytely in my will
with all contradyccyon or complaynt / follow thou me for I am the way / I am
troth and life / without way no man may go / and without truth there is no
knowledge / And without life no man may live I am the way that thou ought to
follow / troth to whom thou ought to give crede^s / and am life that you
ought to hope in to have / I am the way vnmeuable and most right / I am
truth infallyble and most hye / and am life without end increat and in the
which stondeth the very life and bliss of spyrytes and blessed souls / If
thou abide in my way thou shall know the very troth and truth shall deliver
the / and thou shall finally come to everlasting life / If thou will come to
that life as it is written thou must observe my commandments If thou have
knowledge of troth trust to me / and to my words / If thou wylt be my dyscyple
deny and forsake thy self and follow me if thou wylt be perfyte sell all that
thou have and give it to the poor folk if thou wylt possess everlasting
life despise this present life / If thou wylt be auau^ced in heaven humble the
here in this world / If thou wylt reygne with me in heaven bear thy cross here
with me in earth / For only the servants of ye cross fyndeth verily y^ way
of light and eternal bliss / lord Ihesu for asmoch as thy way is the way of
straytnes and of hardenes the which is odious to worldly folk / therefore I
beseke the to give me with the contempt of the world that I may hate it
verily as thou did / It is not acordyng that a servant be preferred before his
lord / ne a discyple above his master / Thy servant therefore ought to be
exercysed in thy ways / for therein is health and very holiness / what ever I
read or here beside it I am not refresshed / ne I take not full delectacy on
thereby sone for that thou haste red and know these things happy art thou /
and thou shall be blessed if thou fulfill them / it is written he that has my
commandments in mind and executes them in his conversation he is he that
loves me and I shall love him and I shall show and open my self to him and I
shall do him to sit with me in the kyngedome of my father good lord as thou
have said and promised so be it done to me I have take the cross of thy hand
I shall bear it by thy help and grace as thou laid it upon me whiles I live /
for truly the life of a good man is the cross of penance / the which is the
very wey to paradyse / the which wey I with other have begon^e / it is not
lefull to go back and to leave it / have do brethren go we together the wey
begone / Jesus be with us: For his love we take upon us this cross of
hardenesse / and therefore let us abide therein for his sake / for he shall be
our helper that is our leder / behold our king goth before us / he shall
feyghte for us / follow we him strongely / dread we no parels / be we ready to
dye with him goostly i^ the battle of vices and hardness / ne let us not fle
from such exercise yt we confound not our self.

The.lxii. capter / a man should not be dyscomforted when he falls in any
aduersyte or defaute.
SOne paciens and humylyte in aduersytes does please me more than much
consolacyon / and devotion in prosperyte had / why art thou heavy at a little
word / or deed done or said agyne the / if more had be said or don to the /
thou ought not to have be moved at it / But let it now over pass / This
thing that thou haste suffered is not the first nor shall be the last trouble
or evil that thou shalt suffer if thou live / Thou art strong and manfull
Inoughe where none aduersyte is resystynge again the / thou do well counceyll
and can well strength other with thy words / But when sodeyn trybulacy on
comes to thy door / thou faylest than both in cou^ceyll and strength / give
head to thy great fraylte the which thou have experyence of in little things
obiecte against the / And for thy health wha^ such things fall / lift up thy
heart to our Lord as thou best can / and if it touch the yet let it not
throw the down ne long vnbelappe the / Suffer such things pacyently / if
thou can not gladlye / and if thon here not gladly such but thou felest
parauenture indygnacy on in the / repress the within thy self / and suffer
none inordinate word pass from yt / whereby other should be sclaundered / A
passion areysed in a man shall soon be apesyd and inward sorrow shall be made
sweet if grace return to man again / yet I live says our Lord / I am redye to
help the and to comfort the more than I did before if thou wylt trust unto
me and devoutly callvpo^ me / Be thou more quyete and pacyent tha^ thou have
ben / It is not for naught thou art often times troubled and tempted greuousely
thou art a man and not God / thou art a flasshely creature and none angel /
how may thou tha^ think always to abide in one state of virtue / when that
was not granted to Angel in heaven / ne unto the first man in paradyse / the
which both fell and stood not long in the state of their creacyon y^ they
were create and set in / I am he that arayses them that sorrow for their
Sins / or that otherwise suffers with pacyence aduersyte / I auaunce them
that know their infyrmyte / into my dyuynyte / Lord God thy holy word be
blessed / it is swetter to me tha^ the honey come / what should I do in many and
great trybulacyons and anguysshes / were not yt thou comforted me with thy holy
and sweet words / whiles I shall come to the port of health ever lasting by
pacient suffraunce of aduersytes / what needs me force what and how great or
many trybulacyons I suffer / grant me good lord I beseech the good end and
an happy passing from this world / have mind of me good Lord and dyrecte
my life and me in the way of right wysenesse to come to thy kyngedome.

The.lxiii. chapter / how a man should not search hye things / ne seek
auentures the which God works here in his hyd Judgment.
SOne beware that thou dispute not of hye matters or of the hyd iugeme^tes of
God / as why this man is damned or forsake and he lift up to so great and hye
grace / Also why this man is so great lie punysshed with Syckenesse / pouerte /
and such other / And this other man so greatly auaunsyd to richesse and
dygnytees / Theyse things with such other excodeth all man's consyderacyon or
knowledge / for no mannys reason or dysputacy on may search or compass the
Iugementys of God / Therefore when thyn enemy suffers temptacyon to the in
any such things / or if other curyous persons enquyreth such knowelege of
the / answer again unto them this saying of the prophet / thou always
blessed lord art ever rightwyse and thy domys are always true and rightwyse /
And also this saying of the same prophet / the iugeme^tis of our lord are
true and iustyfyed in them self / My iugementes says our Lord are to be
dred and not to be dyscussed by man's reason / for no man's reason may
co^pryse them / also thou shall not inquire and despute of the merytes of
saints which are hyer in merytes or bliss / Such vain busynes gendreth
debates and stryfes / they also norysshe pride and vaynglory / also envy
aryseth of the same whiles he his saint and another his labors to p^ferre /
to desire / to know / or to search such things is but vanyte without all fruit
/ and it dyspleaseth the saints such opinion For I am not God of dyscencyon
but of unity and peace / the which peace is found more in true hu mylyacyon
of man / than in his exaltacyon: Some man has more devotion to this saint /
and some to other Saints / but that is more of devotion of man's affection
than of godly or gostelye zele or love / I am he that made all saints / I
gave them grace and I have received them to my glory / I ever knew any
mannys merytes preue^tynge them with my sweet blessings / I have known before
my lovers and chosen servants from the beginning whom I have elect and
called by my grace from the reprobate and damnable co^uersacyon of the worldly
people / I have chosen them and not they me / and I have drawn them to me by
my mercy / I have led them in temptacyons / and safely brought them out
thereof / I have vysyted them with many and great consolations / I have given
them perseuerau^ce in goodness / and I have crowned their pacyence / I know the
first man and the last that shall be / and so of every other thing / I halse all
my chosen seruau^ rys with mestymable love / I am to be loved in all my saints
and to be honored and blessed over all in each of them / the which I have so
gloriously magny fyed and predestynde without any merytes going before of their
party / He therefore that despyseth one of my leest sayntis or elect persons
/ he worshyppeth not the most / for I made both small and great / and he that
blasphemeth detracteth / or desprayseth any saint detracteth me / and all my
saints in heaven / all they be one by the band of charity / all they consider
and feel one thing / they woll one thing / and each of them loves other /
and that is more they love me above them self and their own merytes / for
they be rapte often above them self / and drawn out of their proper love and
gives them holy unto my love in the which love they rest by entyer fruycyon
and gladness / nothing may change or depresse them For they be full of
eternal truth / and they brenne in soul with the ardoure of inextynguyble
charity / such folk as be carnal cesse to speak or tell of the state and
glory of saints / for they can not but love pryuate Joy / They do away and
put to as they favor / and not after the pleasure of the hye truth of our
Lord christ jesus / In many folk is Ignorance but most in them that have
but little understanding and therefore they but seldom love any person
perfytly or ghostly / many men be drawn by naturell affeccion and love now to
this saint or man / now to that and some to this / some to that / and as they
behave them in these erthely things here / so they Imagen to be of heavenly
things / But great dyffere^ce is betwyxt the things that Imperfyte folk do
Imagyn or consider / and these things that devout and illumynyd persons sees
by heavenly illustracyon / therefore sone be ware to treat upon such things
curiously that excedeth thy knowledge / but labor thou rather / and endeavor
thy self that thou may be sorted with the leest or lowest that is in heaven
through the merytes of good life / what avails it a man to know which Saint
is more worthy in heaven than other / but if he would humble him self the more
/ or would give more laud and praysynge unto God therefore / He pleasyth god
more that thinks busyly with repentance of the greatness / and grefe of his
sins / and of the want of virtue that he has whereby he dyffereth from the
holiness of saints / than he that dysputeth of their degree in heaven more or
less / Better it is a man with devout prayers and wepynges to pray to
saints / and with humylyte of soul to adquyre and purchase their help / than
to inquire by vain inquysycyon their secrets / They be well content every
chone with his joy / If men here living were content and would refrain their
vain speaking / and conteucyon a boute them / They have no glory or
exaltacyon in their own merytes / for they assygne no manner of goodness unto
their own self / but to God all only the which has given them all things
of his infynyte grace and charity / they be replenysshed with so great love of
God and with so abundaunt and following Joy there upon / that no glory
norfelycyte may decreace / or fail them / All the Saints in heaven the hyer
they be in glory / the more humble / and low they be in their own sight /
and more nere / and dear to me in love / It is written in the apocalypse that the
Sayntys in heaven of humblenes did submytte their crowns before God / and they
fell on their faces before the humble lamb Christ Ihesu / adhowrynge and
worshyppynge him as their lord God evermore living withouten end / Many
folk inquire busylye which Saint is more preferred in the kyngedome of
almyghtye God / that know not if their self shall be worthy to be accounted
with the leest Saint in that kyngedome / It is not a little but a great thing
and grace to be in the leest sort in heaven / where all that be there are
greatly magnyfyed of God / For all that be there be called and are the
children of god almyghtye / when the apostellys of God questyoned among them
/ which of them should be more preferryd in the kyngedome of Heaven / They
herd again the answer of our Lord / But if ye be conuertyd / and made meke
/ pure / and without malice as children be / ye shall not enter the kyngedome
of everlasting life / and he that hu^ bleth him as this child / he is more
worthy i^ y^ kyngedome of heaven / woe be to them that dysdayne to humble
themself with children / for they for their presu^pcio^ and pride shall not be
suffered to enter the humble yate of heaven / the which admyttyth none but humble
and meke folk / woe also be to rich folk the which be ouercomen by Inordynate
love of their riches / For such rich folk have here their consolacyons and
Joy / And therefore at the last poor folk that be here humble of heart and
content with their poor degree shall enter into the glory of God for such
penury and hardenes / wrongs and other ylles as they have suffered here living
in this vale of myserye / where rich folk living here in welthe and
pleasoure shall be shyt out with great sorrow and lamencion / for that they have
lost so Inestymable a Joy for a short worldly delectacyon that they had here
living / joy therefore ye humble folk and also poor for ye shall enheryte
the everlasting joy and king dome of God / if ye live well here in this
mortal life with perseueraunce.

The.lxiiii. chapter / All hope and trust that man has is to be fyxed in God
all only.
Lord god what is my trust y^ I have i^ this life? and what is my most
solace / and comfort of all things vysyble y^ I se under heaven / Is it not
thou? whose mercy is i^numerable / yes sothely / wha^ has it be well with me
at any time without the? or when might any ill hap or come to me you being
present? Sothely never / I had lever be poor with the / than to be rich
without thy presens / I had lever be a pilgrim here in earth with thy presens /
tha^ to possess heaven without the / For where thou art there is heaven / and
where thou art not there is death and also hell / Thou art all my desire /
and therefore I have need to lament / to pray / and cry contynually after the /
I may trust fully in none but in the for there may be no help in cases of need
/ but in the only my lord god / thou art my hope / my trust / and my most
faithful conforte and help in all thyng^ / all other persons seek their own
profit and avail / but thou alonly p^tendest and sekest my profit and health
eternal / also thou turnest all things to my well / ye and when thou sendest
me troubles / afflyccio^s and temptacyo^s all such thou good lord ordeynest
for my well and profit / that by a thousand ways art wont to prove thy
chosen and beloved servants / in which probacio^s thou art not less to be
pray sed / than if thou had replenysshed us with heavenly co^solacions / In the
good lord I put all my hope and so cour / I set all my trybulacyons and
anguysshe in the / for all that I behold and se without the I have proved it
infyrme and unstable / The multitude of carnal frendys avails not / nor
strong helpers shall not may help / ne wise cou^ceylers may give any
profitable answer or counceyll / ne the books of doctoures may confort ne any
p^cyous substance may deliver fro thy hand ne any secret place may defend
man / but if thou lord god will assyst / help / comfort cou^ceyl / instruct
/ and keep him all things that ^eme for to be ordained to man's pease and
felycyte / If thou be absent they be not worthy / ne they have or give any
true felycyte to any crature / thou my lord god therefore art the end of all
goodness / the hye life of all the profou^de spekyng of all eloquence and the
most strong hope and solace of thy servants / Myniyen intending into the /
I trust fullye in the my lord god father of mercyes / Bless and sa^ctyfy my
soul with heuenlye blessing / that it may be made thy holy tabernacle and
dwelling place / and the s^te of thy eternal glory / No thing be found in
me at any time that should offend thy hye majesty after the greatness of thy
goodness and thy manyfolde mercyes behold me / and here gracyosly the prayer of
me thy poor servant being far exyled i^ the regyon of the shadow of death
/ defend / and conserve the soul of me thy servant good lord while I
labor among the manyfolde perels of this corruptyble life / and dyrecte it
by thy grace co^tynuallye in this life unto y^ fynall country of everlasting
peace and claryte.

Amen.
Here ends the third book of Ihon^ Gerson / Emprynted in London by Richard
Pynson / in Fleet street at the Sign of the george / at the commandment and
instaunce of the right noble and excellent princes Margarete mother to our
soueraygne lord King Henry the.vii. and countess of Rychmou^t and Derby / the
year of our lord god.M.CCCCC. and, xvii. The.vii. day of October.

Here beginethe the forth book of the following Jesus christ and of the
conte^pni^ge of the world. In prynted at the commandment of the most
excellent prices Margarete: mother unto our souereine lord: king Henry
the.vii. Countes of Rychemou^t and Derby And by the same Princes it was
translated out of french into English in form and manner ensuynge The year
of our lord god M. D. iiii.
Prologus.
COme to me says our merciful lord / all that laboreth and be charged / and
I shall give unto you refeccyon. And the bredde that I shall give unto you:
shall be my flesh for the life of y^ world. Take and ete it for it is my body
that for you shall be given ^ sacryfice. Do ye this in remembrance of me. For
who soeteth my flesse / and drynketh my blood: he shall dwell in me and ^ in
him. These words that I have said unto you belyfe^ and spirit of health.

In what great reverence and fervent desire we ought to receive our lord Jesus
crist. Capitulo primo.
O My lord Jesus crist eternal truth / these words beforesayde be thy
words. Albeit they have not ben said in one self time: nor written i one
self place. yet for yt they be thy words I ought feythefully / and agreably
to understand them / They be thy words / and thou have proferred them. And
they be now mine for thou have said them for my health: I will gladly
receythem of thy mouth: to the end they may be the better so wen and planted in
my heart. Thy words of so great pity full of love / swetnes and dileccion
greatly excyteth me: but lord my proper synes fereth and draws back my
conscience / not pure to receive so great a mystery. The swetnes of thy words
inciteth and prouokethe me: but the multitude of my sins charge the and sore
greueth me. Thou co^mau^dest that I shall come un to the feythfully: if I will
have part with the to the end I may receive the norysshynge of imortalyte if
I desire to opteyne the Joy and life eternal. Thou say lord come ye to me
that labor and be charged / and I shall refresshe you. O how sweet and amyable
a word is that in the Gre of a sinner: that thou my lord and my god lysleth
of thy benygne grace to bid me that am so pore and have so much need of the
holy co^muny on of thy precious body. O good lord what am I to presume to
desire y^: that the heaven / and earth may not co^prehende and thou say com ye
all to me. who asks and wylleth this right meke worthynesse / and amyable
bidding. How shall I dare come unto the: which feel not that I have done
any good. How shall I enterteine y^ into my hows: which so often have offended
before thy glorious / and right benygne face The angels / arkas^gels honor
the: the holy / and just creatures dread the. and thou say good lord yet
come ye allvnto me Lord who should believe this thing to be true: if thy self
said it not. And who is he that durst approach there unto: If thou dydest not
command it. Noe that just man labored by an hundredth year to make the arc /
to the end be might be saved with a few of his people. How may I preprayre
me than in an hour: to receyne the with due reverence co^posour and creator
of all this world. Moses thy great famylier and special friend made tharke
of timber: not corruptyble which he covered with right pure gold and put in ye
tables of the law / and I a corrupt creature how shall I now dare receive
the that art conditour of the Law / and gyuer of grace and life unto all
creatures. The right wise Salamankynge of Israeledifyed a rich Temple to the
praysig of thy name by the space of.vii. year / and by.viii. days hallowed the
feast of the dedicaco^n of the same / he offered a thousand hostys to pacifye
thy goodness with / and put the arc of alyaunce in the place made ready for the
same with the sou^ / de of claryons / and trumpettys. How dare I than cursed /
and right pore among other creatures receive the into my house: which uneath
can know that I have well passed and enployed one hour of time / nouther to
my knowelege that I have deuoutely passed one half hour. Do my god how many
have there ben before me / that have studyede to do any thing that might
please the. Alas how little thing is that I do / albe it the time is short.
And yet when I despose me to receive thy holy co^munyon / I am but losely
gadred to gether and full coldly purged from all distraccio^s of mind. And
certainly no cogitacions unprofitable ought to come into the holy presence of
thy deyte. Also I ought not to occupye me with any creature: for I shall not
receive an au^gel but the lord of angels in to the secret of my heart.

For there is a great dyfference between the Arc of alyaunce with his
relyques / and the right pure / and precious body with his virtues not
faylynge: but evermore during And between y^ sacryfyce of the prefyguratyue
law that was to come / and the true hostye of thy precious body that is
thaccomplesshement of all the old sacryfyce.

Wherefore than should not I be more inflamed in thy venerable presence: and by
more solycytude prepayre me to receive the sacred and holy gifts / and
benyfyttes of the. In so much the holy ancient patryarkes and prophettes /
kings and princes with all the people: has shewedeso great affeccion
toward thine honor and dyuyne service ityme passed.

The right devout king David inclyned to the ark of god with all his
strength knowlegeynge / and reme^berynge y^ benefytes don unto his faders: he
made orgayns of diverse manners / and he composed psalms and instytute that they
should be songen / and he him self sange them with gladness / and of ten times
with the harp of the holy ghost. This king inspired with the grace of hod:
has taught the people of Israel to praise god with all their hertes. blessing
honourynge and prechynge daily his holy name. If so great deuoco^n and
remembrance was done with dyuyne service / and praysynges before tharke of his
testament / how great reverence and devotion ought we thanne to have in the
presence of the sacrament / and en the sumpco^n of the right excellent body of*
our lord Iesucrist. Also all christian people use for to run to diverse places:
for to vysyte the relyques of saints / and merueyleth to here the merueylous
deeds / and works of them They behold the great edyfyces /.or byldynges of
temples and kesses the sacrefyed bones ofsayntes wrapped ^ clothes ofsylke and
gold. and thou my lord god saint of all saints: creature of all things /
lord of all angels: thou art here present on this altar before me. Often
times the curyosyte of men and noueltyes of things not seen be of little*
fruit and less to be setby: pryncypally where there is so light recours and
great wauerynge without any contricyon* but my god thou art all present in
this blessed sacrament of the altar very god and man jesus christ / in the
which the fruit eternal of health aboundethe / and is perceived all the times
that thou art worthily received. And to this here draws not any lyghtnes of
sensual cu^yosyte: but ferme feith devout hope / and pure charity. O god
inuysyble: creator of all the world. How merueylously doeste thou with us:
how feythfull do thou with them: that purposes to receive thy self in
this blessed sacrament. Certeynly it su^ mounteth all understanding: and
draws specially the hertes of devout people to dyuocion / and enbraceth
their affeccion. For thy true and feythfull fre^des that disposes al their
life to amend them: receives often great grace of devotion and virtue of
that most worthyest sacrament. O marvelous hid grace which the feythfull
christian people of our lord only knows. But the infideles / and subgettes
unto sin may thereof have no experyence. In that sacrament y^ spirytuall
graces be confermed: and the virtue that was lost in the soul is repaired: and
beautye by sin wasted / is recovered. Sometime this grace: that often with the
pleny / tude of devotion given: not only unto the thought: but also unto the
feeble body the might / and strength is augmented. wherefore it behooves us to
have sorrow and pity of our slouthe and ne^lygence that we be not drawn with
so great desire and affection to receive our lord jesus crist in whom is all
hope / and the merit of them that ought to be sauede For he is our health /
and redempcyo^ / and the consolacion of vyatours / and the eternal fruycyon of
saints. Also we ought to have sorrow of that so many understands / sauereth
/ and reuerenceth so little this holy sacrament: which Ioyeth the heaven / and
kepethe all the world. Alas this blyndnes / and hardness of men's hertes: that
will not consydre so syngule^ and inestymable a gift as is given unto us: but
falls inaduertence by daily usage. For if the sacryfyce of this holy
sacrament were done only but in one place / and but of one priest in all the
world: with how great desire weneye the people would go to that plase / and
to that prrest to here the godly mysteryes done of him. But no we be made many
preestys: and in many places this holy sacrament* is ofofred to the end that the
grace and love of god to man may the more appear: and for so much as this holy
communion is sprede thorough out the world. Thankynges be unto the good
pastor eternal that have vouchedsaue to refressh and feed us pore banysshed
creatures with thy right precious body and blood: and also by thy words of thy
propre mouth / have desired us to receive this holy mysterye: saying com ye
all unto me that be charged / and I shall refressh you.

How the great charity / and bounte of god is shewede unto man in the holy
sacrament. Cap^.ii.
OMy god I come unto the putting my confidence in thy mercy and bountye. I
syke and. come unto my savior I hungry and thursty unto the fountain of life
pore and nedy unto the king of heaven: the servant unto his lord: the
creature unto his maker: a person desolate unto his pyteous comforter. But
whereof is this that thou thus come unto me. who am I that thou will give
thus thine own self to. How dare I a sinner behold to appear before the.
And how may it please the to come unto such a wretch. Thou know thy
servant / and well vnderstandeste that no thing good is in him. wherefore thou
shuldeste do this grace unto me. Than I confess mine unworthiness and
knowledge thy bountye and prayseth thy pity and give unto the thanks for thine
so much great charity.

Thou do this for thy* self good lord / and not for my me ryte: to the
end that thy bountye may the more be known unto me. Thy charity is more
largely verifyed / and thy meekness commended more perfetely: sythen that it
thus pleases the / and so thou have commanded it to be done: this thy
pleasure contenteth me: and with my will my wyckednes shall not resyste the. O
sweet and beny^^e Ihesu how great reverence and gynynge thanks with
perpetual praysynges be due unto the my good Lord Jesus Crist that by thy
pleasure and will I may receive thy blessed body: whose worthynes no man is
found able to declare or exp^sse. But what shall I think of this communion
whane I shall come unto the my lord god which I can not duly honor / and
yet I desire devoutly to receive the. what may I think better and more
profitable for me: thane to meke my self holy before the: and to praise thine
infynyte bounte above all thing. I praise the me lord god everlastingly and
dysprayse my self and submytte me unto the depnesse of my wretchydnes. O my
god thou art saint of all saints / and I the fylthe of all sinners yet thou
inclynest thy self unto me that am not worthy to behold the.

Alas my sweet creature that so mekely come unto me / and wylleth to be with
me / and desyrest me unto thy dinner and gives unto me the mete of heaven and
the bread of angels which is bread of life: and no less thing than thyselfe
which is descended from heaven and give life unto y^ world. Let us se here
what great love proceeds from the / and what gentylnes does shine* upon us.

How great yeldynges of thanks / and louynges be due unto the of us sinners.
O how profitable and how health full was thy council when thou instytute /
and ordained this gracious gift. O how sweet / and Joyous is that feste
wherein thou haste gynen unto us the fedynge of thy p^cyons body. O good lord
how merueylous be thy operacyons / and how mighty is thy virtue / and thy
truth unable be told. Thou have said and all things were don and all that
thou haste commanded: has taken effect. A merueylous thing to be believed /
and far above y^ understandynge of man that thou my Lord god very god and
man art holy contained under a little likeness of bred and wine / and thou art
hole received without consumynge of him that so receives the.

Thou Lord of all that haste no need of any thing / yet thou haste wyllede to
inhabyte within us by this thy holy sacrament. Lord keep my heart and my body
undefiled to the end: that with a pure and a Joyous conscience I may often
receive the to my everlasting health.

Thise holy mysteryes which be institute / and ordained chyefly unto thy
honor and perpetual remembrance.

O my soul rejoice the / and give thankynges unto thy god for his noble gift
/ and synguler comforth that it list him here in this vale of teres thus to
comfort the. For as often times as thou remembrest this mystery / and
receyueste this blessed body of our lord: so often thou receiuest the work of
thy redempcyon / and art made partener of all the merytes of our lord Jesus
christ. For his charity is never mynisshed. and the greatness of his mercy is
never consumed. wherefore thou ought to dispose the always with a new
reuoluynge of thy thought and ought to consider this great mysterye of thy
health by attentyue reysynge of thy soul.

And this work ought to be unto the as greatly new and joyous when thou
receyuest it. as if that same day our lord had first descended in to the womb
of the virgyn mari to be made man / orelles he that day had suffered death for
the health of man upon the cross.

What great profit it is often to receive the body of our lord Jesus christ.
C.iii.a
Lord I come unto the to the end that welthe may come unto me of thy gift /
and that I may Joy at the holy feast that thou have made ready unto me pore
wretch by thy sweet benygnyte: in the which my sauyoure is all that I may or
ought to desire: for thou art my health my redemption / my strength / honor /
and joy. Alas my lord god make me thy daily servant Joyous. For my lord
Jesus I have raised my soul unto the / and now desyrethe deuowtly and
reverently to receive the in to my hows / to the end I may deserve with zachee
to be blessid of the / and to be accounted among the children af Abraham / My
soul desires thy body / my heart desyrethe to be vnyght with the. Give thy
self unto me good lord / and than I suffised: for without the no consolacyon
/ nor comfort is good: without the I may not be / and without thy vysytacyon
I may not live. wherefore it be houeth me often times to come / and approach to
thy high p^sence to receive the for the remedy of my health to the entente I
fail not in the way of this mortal life if I were defrauded from thy
sprytuall noryshynge.

Also my right mercy full lord Jesus when thou have preched unto the people /
and heled them of diverse sykenes thou have said I will not leave them fasting
/ and without refeccion lest peranenture they might fail in their way. Do with
me than good lord in that manner: sith thou have left this holy sacrament for
the comfort offeythfull people: for thou art the sweet refeccion of the
sowles of them that haworthely received and eten the / and they shall be
perteners and inherytours of the eternal joy. Certain ytys unto me necessary
that so often sins and so sone keles and at every hour fayles to come unto
the: to the end that by contynuall orysons and confessions / and by the
receyuynge of thy holy body I may puryfye / and renew the heete of my
refeccyon For perauenture in absteynonge me to long to receive the: I may leave
/ forgete / and run from my good purpos. For the wit of man and woman from
their chyldhod be inclyned unto evil. And if this dyuyne and godly medycyne
help us not: incontinent we fall unto worse. Than this holy co^munyon draws
men from evil / and comfort them again in goodness: for I am many times
neclygent / and often keled when I commune / or worship my god. what should I
thanne do if I took not that medecyne / and ask of him grace and help. And
albe it I am not always well disposed to receive my creature. yet shall I put
me unto pain to receive these sacrede mysteryes in time conuenable: so y^ I
may be made a partener of so great grace. For ytys one of the most
pryncypall consolacyons unto a feythefull soul: for the time they shall make
their pylgrimage toward in this mortal body / and to the intent we may have
the more mind of thy benefytes. My lord god I shall more often receive y^: my
louige Lord with a devout thought O merueylous gentylnesse of thine
unspeakable pytye towardys us: that thou lord god creator and gyuer of life
unto all spirytes / has wylled to come to one so pore asoule with the deite /
and humanyte. and my pore lene and dryesoule has lysted to be made fat with
thy grace and thy holy vnccyon of thy sweet spirit. O happy thought and well
happy soul that deserves deuoutely to receive his god his lord and creature:
and in that receyuynge to be fulfilled with joy and spirytuall gladness. O
what great lord receyuest thou O what and how great and host enterteynest
thou into thy lodging. How joyous a fellow take thou into thy hows How
feythefull a friend thou admyttest unto the. O how good / noble / and sweet
espouse enbraceste thou which ought to be byloued and desired above all
things. O right sweet beloved lord / the heaven and earth and all the
ornamentis of them holds scylence in the presence of thy face. For what
praysynge honor / and beautye they have it is of thy mercy and largenes / and
can not be like unto thonour and beauty of thy holy name: of thy sapience:
whereof there is no noumbre another end.

How many commodities be given unto them that devoutly receives this holy
sacrament C iiii.
^ I lord god I humbly beseech the to prevent me thy servant in the
blessings of thy sweet mekenes So that I may deserve to cum worthily / and
devoutly to the holy sacrament most to be magnyfied. Stere my heart and lose
it from the dull heaviness of my mortal body. Uysite me with the messa^ger of
health / and give me to taste thy swetnes spiritual which is hid fully in the
sacrament as in a fou^tayne of all swetnesse. Illmyne mine iyen to behold this
great mysterye / and strongly conferme me to believe ye feithe vndoutable for
it is thy work and not the power of man it is thy holy ordinance and not by
mannys deuyse. For there is no man foundeable of him self to conceive and
understand these holy mysteryes which passes the subtylte of angels. Than
How may I pore unworthy sinner which am but earth and ashes search and
conceive so high and holy secrysye / lord I come unto the in symplenes of
heart / and in ferme feythe / and by thy commandment / and with meke hope /
an reverence. And truly I belyue that thou art here present in this holy
sacrament very god and man. And thou will I shall receive the / and Join me
unto the by charity. wherefore I humbly pray / and require that it may plese the
to gyuevnto me thy specy all grace: so that I may be all relented / and flow
in thy love in such wise that I shall not desire any other consolacyon. For
this high worthy sacrament is the health of soul / and body. It is the
medycyne of all spyrytuall sekenes: in the which my sins be heyleed:
passions be refrayned: temptacio^s be overcome / and mynysshed: more great
graces be gyuyn the virtue begone increased / faith is enestabysshed / hope
is made strong and fortyfyed: charity is brannynge and spread abroad O my god
the defender of my soul / and the repayrer of the weykenesse of man / and the
sender of all Inward comfort, Thou have given / and daily gives unto thy
well beloved friends in this holy sacrament devoutly receyuynge it many
commodites. For thou infusest into their souls great comfort against diverse
trybulacions: and from the depnesse of their own ouerthrowynge: thou areysyst
them to the hope of thy dyuyne help. And with a new grace thou inwardely
renewest / and lyghtnest them in such wise as they that feel them before the
receyuynge of the Sacrament heavy / and dull / and overthrown / and without
affection / and moyster of devotion. After that they have been fed with this
heavenly mete / and brynke: they have found them self changed into a
merueylous Joy: which things thou do unto thy chosen people by
dispensacion of thy pure bounte: so that they mayeveryly know by open
experyence / that nothing they have nor may have of them self / and what
grace / or goodness they have it comes of the. For of them self they be cold
hard and undevout: but of the they be made fervent Joyous and devout. For
who is he that comes mykely unto the fount^yne of swetnes: and shall not
bring some litell quantite of swetnes therfrom. I shall alwey put my mouth
unto the hole of the heavenly pype of that founteyne: that I may at the lest
take a little drop to satysfie my thyrste: so that I be not all dry. And
though I may not be heavenly enflamed as y^ cherubi^s and ceraphyns yet will I
enforce me to deuocio^ and prepare my heart mykely to receive this holy loving
sacrament and shall desire to be enbraced with a little flame of that goodly
love. O good Jesus holy and right pyteous savior what so ever virtue / or
goodness y^ fails in me: I benigly beseech the graciously of thy pity to
supplye it by thy great mercy. Thou that have called all feithfull creatures
i^sayi^ge unto them* come ye all unto me that labor and be charged: and I
shall refresshe you. But alas good lord I pore synnerlabour in theswette of my
vysage / and am tormented with sorrow of my heart. I am charged with si^nes and
travailed with te^p tacyons / entryked and oppressed with many yuell passions
And lord there is none that may deliver me or make me safe. but thou my only
god and savior to whom I commytt me and all my causes: to the end thou keep me
and led me to the life eternal: Receive me unto the praisynges of thy name
that have made ready unto me thy precious body / and blood to mete and drink.
My lord god and savior grant unto me by thy great bounte that in
customable receyuynge of thy holy mysterye: the affetcyon and desire of my
devotion may be increased.

Of the dygnite of the sacrament of the altar and of thordre of presthod.
Cap^.v.
IF thou had the puryte of angels and the holiness ofsaynt John^ Baptyst:
thou should not be worthy to receive / or trete of that holy sacrament: for
that is not due to the merits of men / that a man should consecrate and treat
of the sacrament of this blessed body of Jesus crist / and take in mete the
bread of angels. O great mysterye and the marvelous dignyte of prestys: unto
whom is given that: that is not granted unto the angels. For the prestis
only duly ordered in the church of crist have power to do and to consecrate
the holy dody of Jesus criste. Certeynly the priest is the mynyster of god:
using the word of god: by the commandment and ordinance of god. But god is
the pryncipall and i^uysible werker: to whom be submytted all creatures to be
ordered after his will / and all to obey unto his commandment Than thou
ought more to believe in almighty god and i y^ right excellent sacrament:
than to thy propre will or any othervisible toke^. And therefore to this holy
work thou ought to come with great dread and reverence. Take heed than and
se from whom this mysterye is gyuenvnto the: and that is by the putting to of
the hands of the Bishop thou art admyttede unto that hye comes. Behold
now thou art made a priest / and sacreyd to do this holy mystery. Se than
that feithfully and devoutly / and in due time thou offer thy sacryfice unto
god / and show thy self irreprouable and with out defaute. Thou have not
loused thy charge of living: but have bound the with a more strayte bond of
discyplyne and art holden to a more great parfeccyon of holiness The preeste
ought to be adnowrded with all virtues: and give all their example of good /
and holy life. His conuersacyon ought not to be with common people / or the
weyes of common men: but with the aungelles in heaven: or with the perfight men
in the earth. The preeste clothede with holy vestymentes: occupyeth the comes
of Jesus criste / to the end that he may humbly pray unto god for him self /
and for all other. For he has both before him / and behind him the sign of
the cross: that he may contynually remember the passion of our lord jesus
crist. Before him he bears the cross to the end that he dilygently behold
the traces and the examples of our lord Jesus criste: and that he fervently
study to follow them. Behind him also is signed with the cross to the intent
he shuldesuffre for the honor of god all aduersytyes / Injuries done unto him
of other. Before him he bears the cross for that he should be wayle propre
his sines. And behi^de him like wise by great compassyon to sorrow the sins
of other / and to know himself that he is a man between god and the sinner.
And that he depart not from oryson / and from y^ holy oblacion to the time ye
he deserve to purchase the grace of god. when the priest says mass he
honors god / he gives joy unto the angels: he edyfieth the church / he
hell: peth the loui^ge people / he gives rest to them chat be passed and makes
him self partyner of all good works.

A inward remembrance and excercyse that a man ought to have before the
receyui^ge of the body of our lord Jesus crist. Cap^.vi.
Lord when I think of thy worthynesse and of my great fylthynes / I tremble
strongly and am confounded in my self. For if I receive the not I fle the
eternal life and if I unworthily receive the I run in to thy wrath what
shall I thanne do my good lord my helper / ptectour / comforter / and
ryghtsure counceller in all mine infyrmytes / and necessities. Teache me good
lord thy right weye / and purpose unto me some excercyse co^uenable to the
receyuynge of this holy mystery. For it is necessary unto me and greatly
profitable to know how devoutly and reverently I ought to prepayre my heart
to receive this holy sacrament or to make so goodly sacryfyce.

The reme^brynge of his propre conscience with purpose of amendment. Cap^.vii.
THe priest above al things ought to desire with sovereign reverence and
profounde mykenesse of heart full / and ferme fey the / humble hoope / and
pyteous entente to the honor af god to celebrate take / and receive this
worthy sacament: examyne dylygently / and make clear / and open the conscience
by true contrycion / and meke confession as far as he has power: so that thou
know no thing that greuethe or byte thy said conscience / orlete the freely
to come unto the same daily. To have displeasure of all thy sins in general
and for thy excesses and sins thou ought to have syghinge and sorrow more
speciull. And if the time suffer it confess unto god in secret of thy heart
the myseryes of all thy passions: weep and have sorrow that thou art yet so
carnal and worldely / and so evil mortyfyede from thy passions so full of
mocyons and concupiscences / so evil composed / and ordered in thy outward
wits so often appliede unto vain fantasies: so much enclyned unto outward
things: so necligent in the in ward spiritual things so ready to laugh and
to all dissolucion: so hard to weep and to co^punccyon: so ready to follow the
lose mauer and the pleasures of the flesh: and so slow and dull to the
fervor of virtue: so curious to behol de / and to here new fair things: so
neclygent / and loathe to learn and desire things that be meke and abiecte: So
covetous to receive and possed many goodis. and so scarce to give them / and
glad to hold and reteyne them: so evil auy sed in speaking / and so
incontinent to be still: So vnordred in manners: so inportune in thy deeds: so
gredy / and so quycke in thy mete: so deffe unto the word of god: so ready to
rest so unlusty to labor: so waking to fables: so slepy to holy vygillys: so
neclygent unto the service of god: so spedy to then de thereof: so wauerynge to
take heed: so cold in devotion in the time of the mass^: so dry in receyuynge
of the sacrament so soon withdrawn / so seldom well gadred unto thyselfe so
suddenly moved unto wrath / so easily stired: to the disple asure of other / so
hasty to judge / so roughe in rep^uynge / so joy ous in prosperity / so weyke in
aduersite / so often pourposynge many good things / and little brings to
good effect These and other thy defautes with sorrow / and great dyspleasure
of thy propre fragylyte confessed and sorowfully be wept, Set the than with
full purpose alweyes to amend thy self and to profit from better unto better
/ and after offer thy self with plain resignacion and entyer will to the
hononre of my name perpetual sacryfyce withyn the altar of thine heart. Teat
is to know thy soul and body co^myttynge feythfully unto me / that thon so
may deserve worthily to come and offer thy sacryfyce to god and to receive the
sacrament of my body helthefully. For no oblacion is more worthy nor no
satysfaccion can be so great for to deface the sins of man: as to offer him
self to god purely / and entyerly with the oblacyon of the holy body of Christ
Jesus in the mass and the holy communyon. And they who someuer shall do as
much as lies in them and have very repentance of thyr offenses passed: as
often as they shall come unto me they shall recover pardon and grace. I am life
and will not the deith of a sinner: but rather will that he return and live
again. And than will I no more remember his sins and tresspaces: but all
shall be forgyuen and pardoned unto him.

Of ye oblacion of Jesus Crist in the cross of ye propre resignaco^n that man
should make of himself. Ca.viii.
OMan as I did offer my self / and my free will unto god my fader my hands
sprede on the cross / and my naked body forthy sins. In somoche that no
thing remained in me / but all passed in sacryfyce to apease his wrath: in
like wise thou ought to offer unto me wyllyngly thy self in pure oblacion
daily in the mass with all thy affec^yons / and strengthes as profoundely /
and fervently: as thou may. what ask I of the more but that thou study to
resygne thy self unto me enterely. what thing so ever else thou gyuest unto
me: I have no cure. For I demand not thy gifts: but only thy self. As no
thing should suffyce unto the without me. Like wise no thing may please
unto me what so ever thou shalt give thou offer not thy self unto me. Offer
the than give the holly unto me. and that oblacyon shall be acceptable. Behold I
did offer my self holy unto my fader for the / and for the I did give all my
body and blood to the end that I should be all hole thine / and thou mine
also. But and thou rest in thy self and with good will present the naught unto
me: thane there is no full oblacy on nouther entyer parfyte union between us.
For the fre oblacyo^ of thy self in to the hands of almighty god: ought to go
before al thy works if thou will opteyne lybertye and grace. And the lack of
this is the cause that so few folk be illumyned and have inwarly lybertye.
For they can not renounce them self My sentence is ferme / and stable: that
none may be my disciple without he renounceth all that he has. Than if thou
desire to be my dysyple offer thy self unto me with all thine affection.

That we ought to offer unto god all that we have / and to pray for all
people. Cap^.ix.
Lord all things that be in heaven and in earth be thine / and my willing
desire is to offer me unto the perpetually in oblacyon: So that I may be thine
euerlastyngly. And this day good lord I offer unto the my self perpetually
to be thy servant with my heart and soul fully to continue. I beseech the
receive this holy oblacyon of me that am unworthy to offer me unto thy
precious body in the presence of angels assystynge inuysyble to the end:
that it may be to the health of me / and all thy people. Lord I also offer
unto the all my sins which I have committed before the and thy holy angels:
sith the first day that I began or in any wise might sin unto this present
day. And I beseech the to inflame me with the brennynge fire of charity: and
to deface / and put awey all the condysyons of my sins. Cleanse my conscience
from all sin / and restore it unto thy grace: that by sin I have lost. And
perfectly pardone me of all mine offenses: that I may receive perfightly the
sweet kissing of peace. what may I do more for me sin: but mekely confess
them with sorrowful wepig. and incessauntly prayinge the of thy pity ous mercy.

I beseech the lord exalte me: and be unto me ready when I am before the. O my
good lord soueraynly all my sins dyspleasith me. and by thy grace I will
never begi^ne them again: but ever shall have sorrow for them as long as I
shall live: and shall be ready to do penance / and make satisfaccyon of the best
of my little power. Wherefore now good lord pardon me of my great and
abhomynable sins and for honor of thy holy name save my soul which thou
have derely bought with thy most precious blood. And I commytte me good lord
unto thy great mercy / and resign me holy unto thy hands. Do with me Lord
after thy bou^te and not after my malice / and iniquite.

Also I offer unto the all my deeds that I have done: albe it they be full few
/ and vnperfight: that thou may sanctyfye and amend them as they be
agreeable / and acceptable unto the. And alweyes good lord draw me from better
to better / and conduyte and led me slothful and unworthy sinner unto good
and laufull end.

In like wise I offer unto the: the desires of all deuowte persons: the
necessytes of all good deeds of my kynsefolke and friends / and of all them
that have done me good / or be dear unto me / and all other for thy love / and
they that have desired / or required me to make sacryfyce for their friends
living / or passed the world: So as they may sele help / Consolacyon /
Defense / And Preseruacyon from all parels by thy grace / and delyuerau^ce of
peynes so as they may yield unto the Joy and gladness with magnyfyinge and
praisi^ge of their delyueraunce.

I offer unto the also prayers and holy oblacions for all them specially that
has caused unto me heuyues / hurt / or any manner of damage. And like wise for
them that I have troubled / grieved / vexed / or sclaundred in words / or
deeds knowyngly / ignorau^tly to the end blessed lord that we all may be
pardoned of our offe^sis don the one against y^ other And good lord Jesus take
from our hertis all suspecio^ / wrath and indignacion / and all that may break
/ or let charity or dimynysshe us from thy eternal love. O lord have pity,
blessed Jesus have pity: and give thy mercy unto all them that asks it: and
thy grace unto them that have need. And make us so worthy to have that grace
that we may go unto the life eternal.

Amen.
That the holy sacrament ought not lyghtely to be forborne. Cap^.x.
IT behooves the often to tetourne unto the fountain of / grace mercy /
bountye / pity / and puryte: that thou may be cleansed from thy vices and
passions: so as thou may be made more strong / and waking against all
temptacions and subtle crafts of the fend. For thy enemy knowing the
great fruit / and remedy of receui^ge of this holy sacrament enforcethe him
by allmaner of accasyons that he may to draw the unto him again / and lets
the feythfull and devout people when any dysposethe them to the receyuynge of
this holy co^munyon. The enemy Satan puts unto them the most grievous
temptacions that he may. Also it is written in the hystorye of Job. this yuell
spirit comes among the children of god to the end that by his cursed custom
/ he perturbeth / perplexeth / and makes them dreadful dymynysshynge their
affection / and inpugnynge them of their feythe: so that perauenture, they
leave their good purpose of that holy body that they at that time come for to
receive: but we should take no thought nor fear of the crafty cautiellesof
that false enemy y^ be so foul and horrible: but all such fantesyes we
saulde cast again at the head of that wicked spirit. it is a pore myschyuous
spirit that so lets and mockety us. And for any assaults or co^moco^ns
that he excyteth. this holy sacrament ought not to be left. Also often times
to great solicytude for devotion to be had lets and sometime ceryousnes of
confession to be made: But do after the council of the wise / and take away
this anxietye and stryple: for it lets the grace of god / and destroys
devotion And leave not the holy receyuynge of Jesus christ for little tribulaco^n.
or deieccion / pusyllanymyte: but with good will go unto the confessor / and
pardon all other that have offended the: and if thou yaue offended any other
mekely ask for gyuenesse. And thanne dread not: but god will pardon the. what
profits it long to tarry from confession / or to defer the receyuynge of
thy blessed savior. First pourge the and cast out the venym / and than haste
the to take the remedy And thou shalt feel the much better: thann if tyou
had deferred it. For if thou this day live the holy receyui^ge for coldness
of devotion and feebleness of mind: parauenture to morrow thou shalt find thy
self more slack: and so long wythdrawe that thou shall find thy self much
worse / and more unable. Than as soon as thou may: take awey this feblenesse
of mind and the spyce of slowth. For alwey only to be in anguysshe and
heaviness of thy sin: passing the time in trybulacyon / and for daily
obstacles i^perfeccions to with draw the from these dyuyne mysteryes: without
tourni^ge unto the pytyous merit of our savior christ Jesus. it helps the
naught: But greatly the long taryinge to receive thy saueour / anoeyth / and
taryethe the / and shall bring daily unto the a more slothfulness. But alas
for sorrow: some cold / and desolate persons gladely seek causes of taryinge
from confession / and from the receyuynge of this holy sacra meant / and for
that they couete many delays: lest they shall be bound to give them self
to a straytter manner in the order of their life. Alas how little charity and
how sklender devotion have they that puts aweye so easily the receyuinge of
this holy sacrament. O how happy be they and agreeable unto almighty god that
ledeth so holy a life: that they may keep their conscience in clean and pure
dread: so as they may daily dispose and make them ready / and with great
affeccion desire to receive that holy sacrament: if it were lefull at all
times. Nevertheless sometime by mekenes to absteyne / or for other lefull causes
that may let with reverence is to be praised: But if slouthe / or neclygence
hold him: he ought to endeavor him as far as in him is / and our lord shall
be p^sent at his desire: which will specially behold his good will. but when
he is lawfully let / and if ye have a good will / and pyteous mind to receive
his maker: yet he shall not fail to have the fruit of that blessed sacrament.
For every person with perfect devotion may every day receive that holy
sacrament spu^ally to his health and without denyinge. and in certain times
and days establyssed: he ought to receive the body of his saueour with
effectual reverence sacramentally. And that to seche and to do it more to the
praisynge and the honor of god almighty than to his own consolaco^n. For as
often as he spu^ally is comuned and refressed i^uysibly: so often he reme^breth
devoutly the mysterye of the i^carnaco^n of criste / and his peinfull passion
and is kindled in the love of him: he that otherwise not p^payreth him self
but at the time of a great feast or else by custom he is compelled. he shall
often times be full unready. Blessed is he that offres him self unto almighty
god as often as he does mass or ellis receives this honorable sacrament. And in
doing this mysterye / not taryi^ge / nor to hasty: but keep the common manner
with such as thou leuest among. Thou ought not to do that the herers
thereof take grieve / or Irksomnes: but keep the common way after thordynau^ces of
the holy faders. And do rather co^ferme the / to the profit of other than to
thine own devotion or pryuate pleasure.

How the blessed body of our lord Jesus criste is greatly necessary for the
health of mannys soul. Ca.xi.
O Ryghtswete Jesus how great consolacyon and swetnes is it to a devout Soul
to ete with the at thy dinner where none other mete is given but thy self
which art the only lover and ought to be desired above all desires of
mannys heart. and howeswete a thing should it be in thy presence from the
bottom of the heart to send out teris: to dew / and wesshe thy p^cyous fete
with the pyteous Mowdeleyne. But where is that devotion / or the plenteous
effusion of holy terys: certainly in beholdynge the with thy holy angels. All
my heart ought to brenne and weep with joy: for I have verily the p^se^t be
though thou hyd under a strange lykenes. for mine iyen might notsuffice to
behold the in thipropre and godly clernes / nor all the world might not abide
to behold the clerens of thy joy and majesty. wherefore good lord thou helpest
my weykenes / in that it pleases the to cover thyselfe under the form of y^
holy sacrament. I verily worship the whom the angels worship in heaven. but in
me it is as yet but i^ feith: and the angels worship the there i^ thin own
likeness without couerture. I must be content with true feythe and so walk till
the day come of eternal clernes when the shadow of fygures shall fynysshe. For
when that perfect day shall come the usage of this holy sacrament shall ceas.
For they that be blessed in the heavenly joy / shall have no need of any
sacrame^tall medycyne: for they shall joy without end i^ the presence of god
seeing him i^ his glory face to face / and shall be tra^sfourmed from clernes
unto clernes with the godhed i^comp^hensible. they shall taste the sone of god
made man: as he was fro the beginning / and shall be euerlastyngly. I than
remembrynge me of the great meruels and solace thou ghit be spu^all: it is to
me grievous when I remember those meruels. For all things that I here / or
see in this world I compte as no thing so long as I se not my lord god in
his glory. Lord god thou art my wytnes that no thing can give unto me
comfort / nor no creature may give unto me rest: but thou my lord god whom I
desire eternally to behold. But that is a thing to me not possible: while I
am in this mortal life. wherefore it behooves me with great pacyence to order
my self / and mykely to submytte me to the in all my desires. Good Lord thy
saints that now joy with the in the kingdom of heaven: abode the coming of
thy joy with great feythe and pacyence as long as they lived. I believe the
same that they believed / and hope as they have hoped: and trust by the mean of
thy grace to come theder as they now be. In the mean while I shall in good
and fast feythe be comforted by examples of holy saints. Also I have full
virtuous and holy books for the consolacion and myrrour of my life and above
all these things thy right sacred body for my singular refuge and remedy. I
feel that two things be unto me right necessary: without whom this miserable
life should be unto me inportable: For as long as I shall be holden in this
present body: I confess me to have need of two things that is to know of
mete and light. But therefore thou have given unto me which am pore and syke
thy holy body to the refresshinge of my soul and bodl. Also thou have put
before my feythe the light of thy holy word. And without these two things I
might not well live spu^tually. For thy word my lord and god is the light of
my soul / and the holy sacrament is the bread of my life. These two things so
necessary may also be called the tables set on either side in the tresorye of
holy church: the one table is of the holy altar having this lovely bread:
that is to say the precious body of Jesus christ the other is the law of god
^onteynynge the holy doctrine and shows the right feyth and surely gydynge
unto the in ward secrysies where as the holy iuelys called Scta^ sco^rum I
yield unto the thanks lord Jesus christ: which art the clernes of eternal
light. For this table of holy doctrine which thou have mynystred unto us by
thy servants / prophets / aposteles / and other doctors. And I yeld^ unto
ye thankynges again creator and redemer of mankind which have declared thy
great charity unto all the world: and has^e prepared this royalsouper in the
which thou have not purposed to be eten the fyguratyue lamb: but thy most
holy body and precious blood reioisynge all thy creatures by that hoolest and
swetly fulfyllynge them with that helthfull chaleys wherein behyd all the
delytes and joys of paradyse: and the holy anu^gels be fed with us with
swetnesse much plentuous. O how great and honorable is the office of
prestes: to whom is given power to consecrate by dyuyne words to bless with
their lyppes to hold with their hands receive with their mouths / and to
mynyster unto other the lord / and god of all majesty. O how elene ought to
be the hands: how pure the mouth how holy the body / and how vndefylede the
heart or a pressed. unto whom so often enters the auctour of all puryte.
Certainly from the mouth of a pressed ought no word to proceed: but that / that
were honest and profitable that so often receives the sacrament of the holy
dody of jesus crist. his iyen ought to be simple and shamefast that so
customably beholds the holy body. The hands pure to lift up unto heaven:
which handeleth the creature of heaven / and earth For specially a pressed it is
said in the law. be ye holy for I your lord god am holy. O god omnipotent
thy grace be un to us helping so that we which have taken the office of p^st
hode may reverently and devoutly serve the with all puryte / and good
conscience. and if we may not live i^ so great innocence of life as we ought to
do: give us grace at the leest that we may we pe and sorrow the euylles that we
have committed: and don so that in spiritual mekenes / and purpose of good
will we may from hensforth strongly serve the with fervent courage.

With how great diligence he ought to prepayre him self that should receive
the sacrament of jesus crist. Ca.xii.
OVre lord says I the lover of puryte and the liberal gyuer of all holiness: I
search the pure clean heart and there will I rest. Make ready than for me thy
heart / and I shall be with the than: as I was with my discyples. At Ester I shall
come and dwell with the if thou will: but thanne it behouethe the to mu^difye
and cleanse the habitaco^n of thy heart fro all sins: leave all brute and noise
of the world with all thy vices and enclose and shet the in thy chamber as
does a solytary bird under the euesynges of an house. and remember all the
excesses and all thy defauttes committed: with all thy soul and bitterness of
heart. For a good friend will make ready to his well-beloved friend a good and a
plesau^t place to dwell in / and in yt doing is well known with what good
affeccion he receyuethe his said friend. It is for truth that thou oughteste
to understand that thou may not satyfye by any merit or labor of thy
self: not and thou dydest labor with the best of thy power by a hole year
thought thou hadest none other thing to do. But thou shall understand that by
my only power and grace: is permytted / and granted unto the to come unto my
table. and if a poor man were called unto the table of a rich lord: and the
poor man had none other thing to give again for ye benefytes of that rich
man / but swetely / and mekely to thank him he would do it. so ought thou
to do diligently as much as is in the: and not by custom / or necestite: But
with all dread / reverence / and affection. Thou ought to take ye blessed
body of our lord god: sithe that it list the him to come unto the. Certeynly
I am he that callethe the: and I have commanded it so to be done / and I shall
supplye that faylethe in the wherefore come and receive me. and when in that
doi^ge I give unto the the grace of deuoco^n: yield thou thanks unto me
thi^god. Not thinking that thou art worthy thereof of thyselfe but that I have
had mercy of the. and if thou have not that grace when thou would: but feel
thy self dry / and unlusty: yet continue thy orysou with sorrowful weeping /
and smite at my door without ceasynge unto the time thou may receive alytell
crome or drope of helthefull grace. and know it of troth thou have much need
of me: and I have none of the. Thou come not to sanctifye me: but I am he
that shall santyfye the / and make the better to the end that thou may be
vnight with me to receive new grace and purpose ame^deme^t Be not in will to
defer me grace: but with all dilygence p^prayre thy heart to receive within
the thy loving lord. and not only this prepayre the before thy co^munyon /
but also maynteyne and keep the after the receyuynge of thy said holy sacrament
i^ that same deuocio^ i^ as much as thou may. For thou ought to have no
less dylyge^ce than thou had before. For the good and dilygent keeping of
thy soul after the receiuynge of the blessed sacrament is a good p^paraco^n to
obtain the more great grace. And they that so donat: show the^ self greatly
evil disposed / when they habandowne them self so soon and so largely to
outward solace / and in ward pleasures wherefore keep the from great brute and
spekinge / and abide in ye secret graces and fruits of thy god. for thou have
him yt all the world may not take awey / and I am he to whom thou ought to
give the by such manner that from hensforth thou live no more in thy self: but
in me only.

How the devout soul ought effectuously with all his heart to be vnight unto
Jesus crist. Ca.xiii.
O Lord who shall yield unto me that I may find the sole / and that I may
open to the all my heart / and joy with y^ as my pore soul desires / and that
here be no creature to behold me: but thou alone to speak to me / and I to the
good lord as of custom one friend speaks to a another secretly: here of I
desire and pray y^ lord jesus to the end yt I may fully be vnyght unto y^ and
withdraw my heart fro all other creat things that I may ye sooner learn ye
et^nall and heavenly things by y^ mean of the receiui^ge of this holy
sacrament. Alas my good lord wha^ shall I be vnight and gadred all hole i^ y^ /
and utterly forgete my self. you art i^ me and I with the. and thus assembled
make us dwell togeder I prai ye truly thou art my chosen and beloved lord /
and it has pleased thy benygne grace to be inhabited in my soul all the days
of my life. Thou art my peseable well: in whom is souereyne peace and true
rest: without the there is no thing but labor / sorrow / and infinyte mysery.
Thou my god art closed and hyd in council of thy famyliars: which be not
comune to the evil folks. But thy familiar speaking is with the meke and
simple folks. O lord how good benygne / and sweet is thy spirit which to
the end thou maiste she we unto y^ sons and children thy swetnes: have
vouchedsaue to refressh them again and gyues to them refeccion of thy right
sweet bread descended from heaven. Certeynly there is none other so great a
nation lacking cristis feithe that has their goddis so nere unto them as thou
art our god / and lord to all thy feithfull christian people: to whom thou
gyuest thy blesed body to ete for their daily comfort / and to reyse their
hertes to high celestial things. O what other folks be there so noble as be
the christian people. or what creature is there so strongly beloved under heaven
as is the devout soul i^ whom god enters and gives fedynge with his own
glorious flesh and blood. O grace inestymable and merueylous worthynesse O
love without mesure syngulerly shewede unto man: But what shall I yield unto
god / and wherewith shall I recompense this so great grace and charity. Truly
there is no thing I may give more agreeable to his mercy than to join my heart
perfytely unto him. And when my soul shall be perfitely vnight with him:
Thanshall my inward parties joy. And thanne my lord will say unto me / If
thou wylt be with me I will be with the. And I shall answer him: blessed
lord I beseech the dwell with me for all the desire of my heart is to be with
the inseparable without departing.

Of the bre^nynge desire that some creatures have in y^ blessed body of our
lord jesus crist. Ca.xiiii.
O Lord how great is the multitude of thy swetnesse / which thou have hyd
for them that dread the. when I remember me of many devout persons: that have
come to this thy holy sacrament with so great fervent affecco^n / and devotion.
I am than many times i^ myself co^fused / a have great shame that I go unto
the altar and table of that holy communyon so rudely with so cold devotion /
and am so dry without affeccion of heart. I am abashed that I am not all hole
i^flamed i^ thy p^se^ce / and so strongly drawn / and establesshed as many
good devout persons have been. which by the great desire of this holy
sacrament and sensible love of heart might not co^teyne ne witholde them from
weeping. But effectuously with mouth / heart / and body came unto that good
lord: as to the living fountain of all bountye / and may not attain to
fulfill their hungre: but if they take thy holy body which they so de
siorously / affecco^nally / and spiritually may receive. O true / and benygne
feythe of them that p^uably shows the ornament of thy holy p^sence. To them
is verily kno wen their god in brekynge of bread / which brenneth and broileth
so strongly the herter of them in the love of Jesus Crist. Certeynly such
affeccion / deuoco^n / and vehement brennynge love is far^ from me. O good
sweet and benygne Jesus be unto me pyteous / and ready to give and grant to thy
pore beggar sometime to feel a little of that hertely love and affeccion in the
receyuinge of thy holy body: to the end that my feythe may be more ferme and
my hope more perfight in thy bountye / and my charity sometime so perfightly
inflamed that I may experiently have the heavenly mannat hat never may fail. I
know certainly the might of thy mercy may le^de me thy grace so much desired
and vysete me benygly with a brennynge spyryte when the day of thy good
pleasure shall come. And* though I be not i^flamed with so great desire of thy
specy all devout things yet have I desire by thy grace to be i^flamed with
that brennynge love. Prayinge the good lord that I may be made ^ tyner with
all such thy fervent lovers: and that I may be nou^bred in their devout
company.

Amen.
How mekely thou ought to beseech the grace of devotion and to renounce thy
self. Cap.xv.
IT behooves the instauntly to seche the grace of devotion / and to ask
incessau^tly to abide it patiently feithfully / ioyously to receive it / and
mekely to conserve. and with that studiously to remytt unto god the time and
the manner of his so uerayne vysitaco^n / unto the time his pleasure be to come
unto the. and pri^cipally thou ought to meke the / when thou felyst but
litell devotion within the. and for all that thou ought not to late thy
self to fall / or sorrow to much i^ordinatly. For full often our blessed
lord in a short moment gives the which be fore he has long time denied.
Also sometime he gyuethe at the end of praiours that he did defer at y^
begynni^ge of y^ same. If alwey grace were so sone given y^ a man might have it
at his will or wysche / it should not be easily borne of a weyk and inperfect
soul. And therefore in good hope and meke patience the grace of devotion ought
to be abyden and you oughteste to i^pute it unto thy self and to thy sins
when it is not given unto the or when it is secretly take awey from the
sometime a litell thing it is that may let or hyde thy grace if that may be
called litell yt lets so great a veil. But be it litel or great if thou
take that same awey and perfectly overcome it thou shall obtain that thou
desyrest or inco^tyne^t that thou with all thy heart have given thy self to
god. And therefore seche not this nor y^ at thy pleasure: but put the hole in
the hands of god Thou shall certainly find thy self vnyght unto him / and in
great peace of thy soul. For there is no thing / y^ ought to be so sauery and
pleasant / as is the pleasure and deuyne will of god Than who someuer lift up
his intent unto god with a simple perfect heart / so void him and make him
naked from all disordinat love or pleasure to any creat things of al y^ world
he is most mete to receive the gift of devotion. Forowre lord gave his
blessing there where he found the vessels clean and void. And the more
perfectly that any renounce mortify despise / and contempne theymselfe and all
the low things / the sooner grace shall enter and copiously abou^d so that he
shall feel his heart lift up as though it were set in a fredom and the^ he
shall se his heart largely habounde / and meruelously Joy with in him self for
that the hand of god shall be over wym and he shall submytte him perpetually into
his holy hands. And so shall the man be blessed that secheth god with all his
heart and his soul shall be taken in vain works. But such one certeynly in
the receyuynge the holy body of Jesus Criste meryteth and deserves the grace of
deuyne union unto god.

For he beholds not only his propre devotion / and co^solacyon: but the great
honor and glory of god.

How we ought to she we our necessites unto jesus crist and ask him benygne
grace. Cap.xvi.
O Right sweet and most beloved lord / which I now desire to receive. Thou
good lord know the sikenes of soul and necessyte that I suffer. In what
euylles / and vices I slepynge am put. How often grieved / temptyd / troubled
and dyssolute. I come unto the lord to have consolacyon and comfort. I speak
to the lord thou know all my secret and inward thoughts / which be*
manyfeste / and open unto the. It is thou only that perfectly mayeste help me
for thou knoweste what unto me necessary: and of what goods above all other I
have moostenede.

Albeit I am poor in virtue: alas yet merciful lord behold me being here
before the pore and naked: demanding pyteously thy sweet grace and mercy. And
give thy pore beggar that dies for hunger / some of thy heavenly refecco^n and
chafe my cold heart with the brenninge flame of thy love. And illumyne me that
amblyndede / and may not see: with that clerenes of thy presence. Take away
from my thought: all the erthely and inwardelye things: and turn them unto me
and make me think them foul and bitter and all grievous and contrary things
unto me.

And they that may please the: I may take also in pleasure. And all erthely
creat things to have in oblyuyon / and redress my heart toward is the into
heaven. And late me not waver nor err upon earth: but thou only to be my
swetnesse and consolaco^n: my mete and drink: my love and all my joy: so that
my will be changed. enflamed and brenne allvnto the So that I may be made a
spirit and inwardly vnight unto y^ by grace / and brennynge love. and suffer
me not blessed savior to deperte from the fasting and dry with hunger and
thurst: but do with me mercyfully: as often: as thou have done meruelously in
thy holy servants. what meruele is it unto me that am not all enflamed in
the: seeing that thou art the bre^nynge fire alwey illumynynge and lyghtnynge
the understanding of thy creatures.

Of the bre^nynge love and great affeccion that we should have to receive our
savior crist jesus. Cap^.xvii.
O Lord god i^ sovereign deuoco^n brennynge love / and all fervent offeccion
of heart: I desire as many other holy / and devout persons have desired to
receive which has been greatly pleasant unto the holiness of their life by
great devotion. O my god and eternal love and my eternal felicyte. I by right
great desire wysshe to receive the as worthily / and as reverently as ever did
any of thy holy servants. All be it that I am not worthy to have so great
felynges of devotion: yet offer I unto the thaffeccions of my heart asverely as
though I had all the brennynge and flamynge desires that they had. Also I give
and offer unto the insoueraine reverence / and veneraco^n: all that a good
debonayer heart may conteyne. And will not nor couete to reserve any thing to
myself: but offer and make sacryfice unto the with fre / and perfyght will
myself with all my good is. Lord god my cre:+ature and redemer this day I
desire to receive the with such affeccion / reverence / praisynge / honor
worthynes / and love and such feith hope / and puryte as thy right holy mother
and glorious virgyn Marye conceived the: when she answerede mekely and
devoutly unto thau^gell y^ shewede unto her the holy mystery of the incarnacion
of the: the son of god. Se here the hand maid of god / so be it done as
thou have said And the right excellent precursor saint John^ Baptyste that with
great Joy sprange in thy presence by inspiracion of y^ holy ghost thanne being
within the womb of his mother. And afterward beholdynge the Jesus walking
mekely among men he greatly mekinge himself to the same with a devout mind
said. The friend of the spouse stands and harkeneth and with comfort Joys
for to here the voice of the spouce. And so I wische to be enflamed with great
and holy desire / and with all my heart present me unto the: and for that I
give and offer unto the for me / and for all them that be reco^mended unto my
prayers: all the Iubylaco^ns of devout hertis with brennynge affeccions: that
excessyue thoughtis: the hye and spu^all illumynaco^ns / and the heavenly
vico^ns with all the virtues / and praisynges as well celebrate as to be
celebrate of all y^ creatures of heaven and earth: to the end that thou lord be
worthily praised and perpetually gloryfyed of all creatures besecheynge the
lord to receive my prayers and desires of thy infinite benediccions and
praysynges without end: which right wisly be due unto the after the great
habu^daunce and multitude of thy inestymable magnyficence. And so my desire is
to yield unto the at all hours and all momentis of time / and so I desire and
beseech all the heavenly spirits with all feithfull christian creatures for to
yield unto the praisynges. with effectuous prayers: all the universal people
praise the. All generacyons / and kinds magnyfie the holy / and sweet name in
great Joy / and brennynge devotion. and that they that celebratys that right
hye and holy sacrament / and receives it in plain feythe / and great
reverence and devotion: may merit towardis the / and find grace and mercy.
And for me wretchede sinner I mekely beseech the when I shall have a taste of
that sweet union / and deuoco^n so much wysshed and desired: that I may be
fulfilled and fed so meruelously at that heavenly and holy table: that at my
depertinge from thens: thou good lord will have me pore siner in thy pyteous
remembrance.

That a man should not be to curious a i^quisitor of y^ holy sacrament: but a
meke follower of crist jesus in submittynge his reason and feeling to the holy
feyth. Ca.xviii.
IT behoues the to keep the from to curyous i^quysicyon of the right profounde
sacrament if thou will not be co^fou^ded in thy proprevyce / and drowned in
the deppeth of opinyons. For he that will inquire of the hye majesty of god:
he shall anon be oppressed and thrust down from ye glory of the same. God may
open more than man may understand. The devout / and meke inquisicyon of
truth is alwey ready to be doctryned and taught. And if thou study to god by
the holy / true and entyer se^tences of holy faders: it is not reprouable: but
well to be praised. And that symplenesse is well to be praised: that leuethe
the ways of dyfficultyes / and questions / and goes by the plain / and ferme
pathe of the commandments of god. Many have lost their devotion: in sechynge
so besily the hye inspekeable things. It is enough to demand of the fast
feythe. pure / and clean life and not the hye and subtle profounde mysteryes
of god. for if thou may not comprehend and understand that / that is within
the: how may thou thanne understand things that be above the. Submytte
the thanne mekely unto god and all thy understanding to the feythe of holy
church / and ye light of true science shall be given unto the as shall be to the
most necessary and profitable. Some be greatly tempted with the feythe of
that holy sacrament: but that is not to be reputede unto them: but rather unto
that cursed enemy the fend. And for that let not thy good will / nor
dyspute not in thy thowghtes: nor answer not to the doubts that the enemy
of hell brings before the / but fermely trust in the words of god. and
believe in saints: and holy prophettes: and than shall that cursed enemy
soon ^^e from the. It is often profitable that the servants of god suffer /
and sustain such assaults. For the ennemy tenpteth not the mys creauntes /
and vnfeythfull people: nor also the great sinners that he surely holds and
possedeth: but he tempts / trayuaileth / and tormenteth in diverse manners the
good feythefull and christian creatures. And therefore keep the alweyes with meke
true feythe. and doubt the naught: but come unto this holy sacrament with
lowly reverence. And that thou may not understand: committee it unto almighty
god / for he shall not disceyue the: But he shall be dysceyued: that to much
trusts in him self. God walked with the simple people and showed him self
openly unto the meke. He gave understanding unto them that were pore in
spyrite. And he hyd his grace and secrets from them that were proud / high
and curious. For the humayne reason may lightly err and be disceyued: but the
true feyth may never dysceyue nor fail. All reason and naturail inquysicion
ought to follow feythe: without farther reasonynge. Fast feyth and true love
surmo^teth all curious inquysicion: pryncypally in this matter. and meruelously
opens to understanding in secret manner of this holy and right excellent
sacrament. O eterdall god and without mesure of might: and bounte: which have
made the infinite great and wounderfull things in the heaven and earth which
none is sufficyent to inquire / understand or find the secrets of thy so
marvelous works. and therefore they be called in estymable: for mannis reason
no wther may / nor can comprehend thy works. To whom god lord almighty: be
given laud / and praysynge wytheouten end.

Amen.
Thus endethe the forth book folowinge Jesus Christ and the co^tempnynge of y^
world.
This book Inprinted at london in Fletestrete at the sign of the George by
Richard Pynson Prynter unto the Kings noble grace.

Richard Pynson



Deo gracias.


